Ioannis Miltoni Effigies Aetat: 62. 1670.
G^l. Faithorne ad Vivum Delin. et sculpsit.


THE HISTORY OF BRITAIN, That part especially now called ENGLAND. From the
first Traditional Beginning, continued to the NORMAN CONQVEST. Collected out of
the antientest and best Authors thereof by JOHN MILTON.

LONDON, Printed by J. M. for James Allestry, at the Rose and Crown in St.
Paul's Churchyard, MDCLXX.

THE HISTORY OF BRITAIN, That Part especially now called England; Continued to
the Norman Conquest. BOOK I.
THe beginning of Nations, those excepted of whom sacred Books have spok'n, is
to this day unknown. Nor only the beginning, but the deeds also of many
succeeding Ages, yea periods of Ages, either wholly unknown, or obscured and
blemished with Fables. Whether it were that the use of Letters came in long
after, or were it the violence of barbarous inundations, or they themselves at
certain revolutions of time, fatally decaying, and degenerating into Sloth and
Ignorance; whereby the monuments of more ancient civility have bin some
destroyed, some lost. Perhaps dis-esteem and contempt of the public affairs then
present, as not worth recording, might partly be in cause. Certainly oft-times
we see that wise men, and of best ability have forborne to write the Acts of
their own days, while they beheld with a just loathing and disdain, not only
how unworthy, how pervers, how corrupt, but often how ignoble, how petty, how
below all History the persons and their actions were; who either by fortune, or
some rude election had attained as a sore judgment, and ignominy upon the Land,
to have chief sway in managing the Commonwealth. But that any law, or
superstition of our old Philosophers the Druids forbad the Britains to write
their memorable deeds, I know not why any out of Caesar should allege: he indeed
says, that their doctrine they thought not lawful to commit to Letters; Cas. l.
6.
but in most matters else, both private, and public, among which well may
History be reck'nd, they used the Greek Tongue: and that the British Druids who
taught those in Gaul would be ignorant of any Language known and used by their
Disciples, or so frequently writing other things, and so inquisitive into
highest, would for want of recording be ever Children in the Knowledge of Times
and Ages, is not likely. What ever might be the reason, this we find, that of
British affairs, from the first peopling of the Island to the coming of Julius
Caesar, nothing certain, either by Tradition, History, or Ancient Fame has
hitherto bin left us. That which we have of oldest seeming, has by the greater
part of judicious Antiquaries bin long rejected for a modern Fable.

Nevertheless there being others besides the first supposed Author, men not
unread, nor unlerned in Antiquity, who admit that for approved story, which
the former explode for fiction, and seeing that oft-times relations heertofore
accounted fabulous have bin after found to contain in them many footsteps, and
relics of something true, as what we read in Poets of the Flood, and Giants
little believed, till undoubted witnesses taught us, that all was not feigned; I
have therefore determined to bestow the telling over even of these reputed
Tales; be it for nothing else but in favor of our English Poets, and
Rhetoricians, who by their Art will know, how to use them judiciously.

I might also produce example, as Diodorus among the Greeks, Livie and others
of the Latins, Polydore and Virunnius accounted among our own Writers. But I
intend not with controversies and quotations to delay or interrupt the smooth
course of History; much less to argue and debate long who were the first
Inhabitants, with what probabilities, what authorities each opinion has bin
upheld, but shall endevor that which hitherto has bin needed most, with plain,
and lightsom brevity, to relate well and orderly things worth the nothing, so
as may best instruct and benefit them that read. Which, imploring divine
assistance, that it may redound to his glory, and the good of the British
Nation, I now begin.

That the whole Earth was inhabited before the Flood, and to the utmost point
of habitable ground, from those effectual words of God in the Creation, may be
more then conjectured. Hence that this Island also had her dwellers, her
affairs, and perhaps her stories, eev'n in that old World those many hunderd
years, with much reason we may infer. After the Flood, and the dispersing of
Nations, as they journey'd leasurely from the East, Gomer the eldest Son of
Japhet, and his offspring, as by Authorities, Arguments, and Affinity of
diverse names is generally believed, were the first that peopled all these West
and Northren Climes. But they of our own Writers, who thought they had don
nothing, unless with all circumstance they tell us when, and who first set foot
upon this Island, presume to name out of fabulous and counterfeit Authors a
certain Samothes or Dis, a fowrth or sixth Son of Japhet, whom they make about
200 years after the Flood, to have planted with Colonies; first the Continent
of Celtica, or Gaul, and next this Island; Thence to have named it Samothea, to
have reigned here, and after him lineally fowr Kings, Magus, Saron, Druis, and
Bardus. But the forged Berosus, whom only they have to cite, no where mentions
that either he, or any of those whom they bring, did ever pass into Britain,
or send their people hither. So that this outlandish figment may easily excuse
our not allowing it the room here so much as of a British Fable.

That which follows, perhaps as wide from truth, though seeming less
impertinent, is, that these Samotheans under the Reign of Bardus were subdued
by Albion a Giant, Son of Neptune: who called the Island after his own name, and
ruled it 44 years. Till at length passing over into Gaul, in aid of his Brother
Lestrygon, against whom Hercules was hasting out of Spain into Italy, he was
there slain in fight, and Bergion also his Brother.

Sure anough we are, that Britan has bin anciently termed Albion, both by the
Greeks and Romans. And Mela the Geographer makes mention of a stony shore in
Languedoc, where by report such a Battle was fought. The rest, as his giving
name to the I Will, or ever landing here, depends altogether upon late surmises.
But too absurd, and too unconscionably gross is that fond invention that wafted
hither the fifty daughters of a strange Dioclesian King of Syria; brought in
doubtless by some illiterat pretender to something mistak'n in the Common Poetical
Story of Danaus King of Argos, while his vanity, not pleased with the obscure
beginning which truest Antiquity affords the Nation, labored to contrive us a
Pedigree, as he thought, more noble. These Daughters by appointment of Danaus
on the mariage-night having murdered all their Husbands, except Linceus, whom
his Wives loialty saved, were by him at the suit of his Wife their Sister, not
put to death, but turned out to Sea in a Ship unmann'd; of which whole Sex they
had incurred the hate: and as the Tale goes, were driven on this Island. Where
the Inhabitants, none but Devils, as some write, or as others, a lawless crew
left here by Albion without Head or Governor, both entertained them, and had
issue by them a second breed of Giants, who tyrannized the I Will, till Brutus
came.

The Eldest of these Dames in their Legend they call Albina; and from thence,
for which cause the whole scene was framed, will have the name Albion derived.
Incredible it may seem so sluggish a conceit should prove so ancient, as to be
authorized by the Elder Ninnius, reputed to have lived above a thousand years
ago. This I find not in him; but that Histion Holinshed.
sprung of Japhet, had four Sons; Francus, Romanus, Alemannus, and Britto, of
whom the Britans; as true, I believe, as that those other Nations whose names
are resembl'd, came of the other three; if these Dreams give not just occasion
to call in doubt the Book it self, which bears that title.

Hitherto the things themselves have given us a warrantable dispatch to run
them soon over. But now of Brutus and his Line, with the whole Progeny of
Kings, to the entrance of Julius Caesar, we cannot so easily be discharged;
Descents of Ancestry, long continued, laws and exploits not plainly seeming to
be borrowed, or devised, which on the common belief have wrought no small
impression: defended by many, denied utterly by few. For what though Brutus,
and the whole Trojan pretense were yielded up, seeing they who first devised to
bring us from some noble Ancestor were content at first with Brutus the Consul;
till better invention, although not willing to forgo the name, taught them to
remove it higher into a more fabulous Age, by the same remove lighting on the
Trojan Tales in affectation to make the Britan of one Original with the Roman,
pitched there, yet those old and inborn names of successive Kings, never any to
have bin real persons, or don in their lives at least some part of what so long
has bin remembered, cannot be thought without too strict an incredulity.

For these, and those causes above mentioned, that which has received
approbation from so many, I have chos'n not to omit. Certain or uncertain, be
that upon the credit of those whom I must follow; so far as keeps alooff from
impossible and absurd, attested by ancient Writers from Books more ancient I
refuse not, as the due and proper subject of Story. The principal Author is
well known to be Geoffrey of Monmouth; what he was, and whence his authority,
who in his age or before him have delivered the same matter, and such like
general discourses, will better stand in a Treatise by themselves. All of them
agree Henry of Hunting don. Matthew of Westminster.
in this, that Brutus was the Son of Silvius; he of Ascanius; whose Father was
Aeneas a Trojan Prince, who at the burning of that City, with his Son Ascanius,
and a collected number that escaped, after long wandering on the Sea, arrived in
Italy. Where at length by the assistance of Latinus King of Latium, who had
given him his Daughter Lavinia, he obtained to succeed in that Kingdom, and
left it to Ascanius, whose Son Silvius (though Roman Histories deny Silvius to
be Son of Ascanius) had married secretly a Niece of Lavinia.

She being with Child, the matter became known to Ascanius. Who commanding his
Magicians to enquire by Art, what sex the Maid had conceived, had answer, that
it was one who should be the death of both his Parents; and banished for the
fact, should after all in a far Country attain to highest honor. The
prediction failed not, for intravel the Mother di'd. And Brutus (the Child was
so called) at fifteen years of Age, attending his Father to the Chase, with an
arrow unfortunately killed him.

Banished therefore by his kindred he retires into Greece. Where meeting with
the race of Helenus King Priams Son, held there in servile condition by
Pandrasus then King, with them he abides. For Pirrhus in revenge of his Father
slain at Troy had brought thither with him Helenus, and many others into
servitude. There Brutus among his own stock so thrives in virtue and in Arms,
as renders him beloved to Kings, and great Captains above all the Youth of that
Land. Whereby the Trojans not only beginn to hope, but secretly to move him,
that he would lead them the way to liberty. They allege their numbers, and the
promised help of Assaracus a Noble Greekish Youth, by the Mothers side a
Trojan; whom for that cause his Brother went about to dispossess of certain
Castles bequeathed him by his Father. Brutus considering both the Forces
offered him, and the strength of those Holds, not unwillingly consents.

First therefore having fortified those Castles, he with Assaracus and the whole
multitude betake them to the Woods and Hills; as the safest place from whence
to expostulate; and in the name of all sends to Pandrasus this Message; That
the Trojans holding it unworthy their Ancestors to serve in a Foren Kingdom, had
retreated to the Woods; choosing rather a Savage life then a slavish; If that
displeased him, that then with his leave they might depart to some other soil.

As this may pass with good allowance, that the Trojans might be many in these
parts, for Helenus was by Pirrhus made King of the Chaouians, and the Sons of
Pirrhus by Andromache Hectors Wise could not but be powerful through all
Epirus, so much the more it may be doubted, how these Trojans could be thus in
bondage, where they had Friends and Countrymen so Potent. But to examine these
things with diligence, were but to confute the Fables of Britan with the Fables
of Greece or Italy; for of this Age, what we have to say, as well concerning
most other Countries, as this Island, is equally under Question. Be It how it
will, Pandrasus not expecting so bold a message from the Sons of Captives,
gathers an Army. And marching toward the Woods, Brutus who had notice of his
approach nigh to a Town called Sparatinum, (I know not what Town, but certain
of no Greek name) over night planting himself there with good part of his men,
suddenly sets upon him, and with slaughter of the Greeks pursues him to the
passage of a River, which mine Author names Akalon, meaning perhaps Achelous,
or Acheron: where at the Ford he overlaies them afresh. This victory obtained,
and a sufficient strength left in Sparatinum, Brutus with Antigonus, the Kings
Brother and his Friend Anacletus, whom he had taken in the fight, returns to
the residue of his friends in the thick Woods. While Pandrasus with all speed
recollecting, beseiges the Town. Brutus to relieve his men beseig'd, who
earnestly called him, distrusting the sufficiency of his force, bethinks
himself of this Policy. Calls to him Anacletus, and threatening instant death
else, both to him and his friend Antigonus, enjoins him, that he should go at
the second howr of night to the Greekish Leagre, and tell the Guards he had
brought Antigonus by stealth out of Prison to a certain woody Vale; unable
through the weight of his Fetters to move further: entreating them to come
speedily and fetch him in. Anacletus to save both himself and his friend
Antigonus, swears this; and at fit howr setts on alone toward the Camp: is
met, examined, and at last unquestionably known. To whom, great profession of
fidelity first made, he frames his Tale, as had bin taught him: and they now
fully assured, with a credulous rashness leaving their Stations, fared
accordingly by the ambush that there awaited them. Forthwith Brutus dividing
his men into three parts, leads on in silence to the Camp; commanding first
each part at a several place to enter, and forbear Execution, till he with his
Squadron possessed of the Kings Tent, gave Signal to them by Trumpet. The sound
whereof no sooner heard, but huge havoc begins upon the sleeping, and
unguarded Enemy; whom the beseiged also now sallying forth, on the other side
assail. Brutus the while had special care to seize and secure the Kings
Person; whose life still within his Custody, he knew was the surest pledge to
obtain what he should demand. Day appearing, he enters the Town, there
distributes the Kings Treasury, and leaving the place better fortified, returns
with the King his Prisner to the Woods. Strait the ancient and grave men he
summons to Counsel, what they should now demand of the King.

After long debate Mempricius, one of the gravest, utterly dissuading them from
thought of longer stay in Greece, unless they meant to be deluded with a
subtle peace, and the awaited revenge of those whose friends they had slain,
advises them to demand first the Kings Eldest Daughter Innogen in marriage to
their Leader Brutus, with a rich dowry, next shipping, money, and fit provision
for them all to depart the Land.

This resolution pleasing best, the King now brought in, and placed in a high
Seat, is briefly told, that on these conditions granted, he might be free, not
granted, he must prepare to die.

Pressed with fear of death the King readily yields: especially to bestow his
Daughter on whom he confessed so Noble and so Valiant: offers them also the
third part of his Kingdom, if they like to stay; if not, to be their Hostage
himself, till he had made good his word.

The Marriage therefore solemnized, and shipping from all parts got together, the
Trojans in a Fleet, no less writt'n then three hunderd fowr and twenty Sail,
betake them to the wide Sea; where with a prosperous course two days and a
night bring them on a certain Island long before dispeopl'd and left wast by
Sea-Roavers; the name whereof was then Leogecia, now unknow'n. They who were
sent out to discover, came at length to a ruined City; where was a Temple and
Image of Diana that gave Oracles: but not meeting first or last save wild
Beasts, they return with this notice to their Ships: Wishing their General would
enquire of that Oracle what voyage to pursue.

Consultation had, Brutus taking with him Geriou his Diviner, and twely of the
ancientest, with wonted Ceremonies before the inward shrine of the Goddess, in
Verse, as it seems the manner was, utters his request, Diva potens nemorum, etc.

Goddess of Shades, and Huntress, who at will
Walk'st on the rolling Sphere, and through the deep,
On thy third Reign the Earth look now, and tell
What Land, what Seat of rest thou bidst me seek,
What certain Seat, where I may worship thee
For aye, with Temples vowed, and Virgin quires.
To whom sleeping before the Altar, Diana in a Vision that night thus answered,
Brute sub occasum Solis, etc.

Brutus far to the West, in the Ocean wide
Beyond the Realm of Gaul, a Land there lies,
Sea-girt it lies, where Giants dwelt of old,
Now void, it fits thy people; thither bend
Thy course, there shall thou find a lasting seat,
There to thy Sons another Troy shall rise,
And Kings be born of thee, whose dredded might
Shall aw the World, and Conquer Nations bold.
These Verses Originally Greek, were put in Latin, says Virunnius, by Gildas a
British Poet, and him to have lived under Claudius. Which granted true, adds
much to the Antiquity of this Fable; and indeed the Latin Verses are much
better, then for the Age of Geoffrey ap- Arthur, unless perhaps Joseph of
Exeter, the only smooth Poet of those times, befreinded him; in this Diana
overshot her Oracle thus ending, Ipsis totiusterrae subditus orbis erit, That
to the race of Brute Kings of this Island, the whole Earth shall be subject.

But Brutus guided now, as he thought, by divine conduct, speeds him toward
the West; and after some encounters on the Afric side, arrives at a place on the
Tyrrhen Sea; where he happ'ns to find the Race of those Trojans who with
Antenor came into Italy; and Corineus a man much famed, was their Chief: though
by surer Authors it be reported, that those Trojans with Antenor, were seated
on the other side of Italy, on the Adriatic, not the Tyrrhen shore. But these
joining Company, and past the Herculean Pillars, at the mouth of Ligeris in
Aquitania cast Anchor, Where after some discovery made of the place, Corineus
Hunting nigh the shore with his Men, is by Messengers of the King Goffarius
Pictus met, and questioned about his Errand there. Who not answering to their
mind, Imbertus, one of them, lets fly an Arrow at Corineus, which he avoiding,
slaies him: and the Pictavian himself heerupon levying his whole Force, is
over-thrown by Brutus, and Corineus; who with the Battle Ax which he was wont
to manage against the Tyrrhen Giants is said to have done marvells. But
Goffarius having draw'n to his aid the whole Country of Gaul, at that time
governed by twelv Kings, puts his Fortune to a second Trial, Wherein the Trojans
overborn by multitude, are driven back, and beseigd in their own Camp, which by
good foresight was strongly situate. Whence Brutus unexpectedly issuing out,
and Corineus in the mean while, whose device it was, assaulting them behind
from a Wood, where he had convayd his men the night before: The Trojans are
again Victors, but with the loss of Turon a Valiant Nefew of Brutus; whose
Ashes left in that place, gave name to the City of Tours, built there by the
Trojans. Brutus finding now his powers much lessn'd, and this yet not the place
foretold him, leaves Aquitain, and with an easy course, arriving at Totness in
Dev'nshire, quickly perceivs here to be the promised end of his labors.

The Island not yet Britain but Albion, was in a manner desert and inhospitable;
kept only by a remnant of Giants; whose excessive Force and Tyranie had
consumed the rest. Them Brutus destroies, and to his people divides the Land,
which with some reference to his own name he thenceforth calls Britain. To
Corineus, Cornwall, as now we call it, fell by Lot; the rather by him liked, for
that the hugest Giants, in Rocks and Caves were said to lurk still there; which
kind of Monsters to deal with was his old exercise.

And here, with leave be-spok'n to recite a grand Fable, though dignified by
our best Poets; while Brutus on a certain Festival day solemnly kept on that
shore, where he first landed, was with the people in great jollity and mirth, a
crew of these Savages breaking in upon them, began on the sudden another sort
of Game then at such a meeting was expected. But at length by many hands
overcome, Goemagog the hugest, in higth twelv Cubits, is reserved alive; that
with him Corineus, who desired nothing more, might try his strength; Whom in a
Wrestle the Giant catching aloft, with a terrible hugg broke three of his Ribs:
nevertheless Corineus enraged, heaving him up by main force, and on his
Shoulders bearing him to the next high Rock, threw him headlong all shattered
into the Sea, and left his name on the Cliff, called ever since Langoemagog,
which is to say, the Giants leap.

After this, Brutus in a chosen place builds Troia nova, changed in time to
Trinovantum, now London: and began to enact Laws; Heli being then high Priest
in Judaea: and having governed the whole I Will 24 Years, died, and was buried in
his new Troy. His three Sons Locrine, Albanact, and Camber divide the Land by
consent. Locrine had the middle part Loegria; Camber possessed Cambria or
Wales; Albanact Albania, now Scotland. But he in the end by Humber King of the
Hunns, who with a Fleet invaded that Land, was slain in fight, and his people
driven back into Loegria. Locrine and his Brother go out against Humber; who
now marching onward, was by them defeated, and in a River drowned, which to
this day retains his name. Among the spoils of his Camp and Navy, were found
certain young Maids, and Estrildis, above the rest, passing fair; the Daughter
of a King in Germany; from whence Humber, as he went wasting the Seacoast, had
led her Captive: whom Locrine, though before contracted to the Daughter of
Corineus, resolvs to marry. But being forced and threatened by Corineus, whose
Authority, and power he feared, Guendolen the Daughter he yields to marry, but
in secret loves the other: and oft-times retiring as to some private Sacrifice,
through Vaults and passages made under ground; and seven years thus enjoying
her, had by her a Daughter equally fair, whose name was Sabra. But when once
his fear was off by the Death of Corineus, not content with secret enjoyment,
divorcing Guendolen, he makes Estrildis now his Queen. Guendolen all in rage
departs into Cornwall; where Madan, the Son she had by Locrine, was hitherto
brought up by Corineus his Grandfather. And gathering an Army of her Fathers
Friends and Subjects, gives Battle to her Husband by the River Sture; wherein
Locrine shot with an Arrow ends his life. But not so ends the fury of
Guendolen; for Estrildis and her Daughter Sabra, she throws into a River: and
to leave a Monument of revenge, proclaims, that the stream be thenceforth
called after the Damsels name; which by length of time is changed now to
Sabrina, or Severn.

Fifteen Years she governs in behalf of her Son; then resigning to him at Age,
retires to her Fathers Dominion. This says my Author, was in the days of
Samuel. Madan has the praise to have well and peacefully ruled the space of 40
years; leaving behind him two Sons, Memprioius, and Malim. Mempricius had first
to do with the ambition of his Brother, aspiring to share with him in the
Kingdom; whom therefore at a meeting to compose matters, with a treachery which
his cause needed not, he slew.

Nor was he better in the sole possession, whereof so ill he could endure a
Partner, killing his Nobles, and those especially next to succeed him; till
lastly given over to unnatural lust, in the twentieth of his Reign, hunting in
a Forest, he was devowr'd by Wolves.

His Son Ebranc a man of mighty strength and stature, Reigned 40 Years. He
first after Brutus wasted Gaul; and returning rich and prosperous, builded
Caerebranc, now York; in Albania Alclud, Mount Agned, or the Castle of Maidens,
now Edinburgh. He had 20 Sons and 30 Daughters by 20 Wives. His Daughters he
sent to Silvius Alba into Italy, who bestowed them on his Peers of the Trojan
Line. His Sons under the leading of Assaracus their Brother, won them Lands and
Signories in Germany; thence called, from these Brethren Germania: a derivation
too hastily supposed, perhaps before the word Germannus or the Latin Tongue was
in use. Some who have described Henault, as Jacobus ^ergomas, and Lessabeus, are
cited to affirm that Ebr^^ (...) his War there, was by Brunchildis Lord of
(...) put to the worse.

Brutus therefore surnamed Greenshield succeeding, to repair his Fathers losses,
as the sam, Lessabeus reports, fought a second Battle in Henault with
Brunchild at the mouth of Scaldis, and Encamped on the River Hania. Of which
our Spencer also thus Sings.

Let Scaldis tell, and let tell Hania,
And let the Marsh of Esthambruges tell
What color were their Waters that same day,
And all the Moar twixt Elversham and Dell,
With blood of Henalois which therein fell;
How often that day did sad Brunchildis see
The Greenshield died in dolorous Vermeil, etc.
But Henault, and Brunchild, and Greenesheild, seem newer names then for a
Story pretended thus Ancient.

Him succeeded Leil, a maintainer of Peace and Equity; but slackn'd in his
latter end, whence arose some civil discord. He built in the North Cairleil; and
in the days of Solomon.

Rudhuddibras, or Hudibras appeasing the commotions which his Father could not,
fownded Caerkeynt or Canturbury, Caerguent, or Winchester, and Mount Paladur,
now Septonia or Shaftsbury: but this by others is contradicted.

Bladud his Son built Caerbadus or Bathe, and those medcinable Waters he
dedicated to Minerva, in whose Temple there he kept fire continually burning.
He was a man of great invention, and taught Necromancie: till having made him
Wings to fly, he fell down upon the Temple of Apollo in Trinovant, and so died
after twenty years Reign.

Hitherto from Father to Son the direct Line has run on: but Leir who next
Reigned, had only three Daughters, and no Male Issue: governed laudably, and
built Caer-Leir, now Leicestre, on the Bank of Sora. But at last, failing
through Age, he determines to bestow his Daughters, and so among them to divide
his Kingdom. Yet first to try which of them loved him best (a Trial that might
have made him, had he known as wisely how to try, as he seemed to know how much
the trying behoov'd him) he resolves a simple resolution, to ask them solemly
in order; and which of them should profess largest, her to beleev. Gonorill the
Eldest apprehending too well her Fathers weakness, makes answer invoking
Heaven, That she loved him above her Soul. Therefore, quoth the old man
overjoyed, since thou so honourst my declined Age, to thee and the Husband whom
thou shall choose, I give the third part of my Realm. So fair a speeding for a
few words soon uttered, was to Regan the second, ample instruction what to say.
She on the same demand spares no protesting, and the Gods must witness, that
otherwise to express her thoughts she knew not, but that she loved him above
all Creatures; and so receavs an equal reward with her Sister. But Cordelia the
youngest, though hitherto best beloved, and now before her Eyes the rich and
present hire of a little easy soothing, the danger also, and the loss likely
to betide plain dealing, yet moves not from the solid purpose of a sincere and
virtuous answer. Father, says she, my love toward you, is as my duty bids;
what should a Father seek, what can a Child promise more? they who pretend
beyond this, flatter. When the old man, sorry to hear this, and wishing her to
recall those words, persisted asking, with a loiall sadness at her Fathers
infirmity, but something on the sudden, harsh, and glancing rather at her
Sisters, then speaking her own mind, Two ways only, says she, I have to
answer what you require me; the former, Your command is, I should recant;
accept then this other which is lest me; look how much you have, so much is
your value, and so much I love you. Then hear thou, quoth Leir now all in
passion, what thy ingratitude has gained thee; because thou have not
reverenced thy aged Father equal to thy Sisters, part in my Kingdom, or what
else is mine reck'n to have none. And without delay gives in marriage his other
Daughters, Gonorill to Maglaunus Duke of Albania, Regan to Henninus Duke of
Cornwall; with them in present half his Kingdom; the rest to follow at his
Death. In the mean while Fame was not sparing to divulge the wisdom, and other
Graces of Cordeilla, insomuch that Aganippus a great King in Gaul (however he
came by his Greek name) seeks her to Wife, and nothing altered at the loss of
her Dowry, receavs her gladly in such manner as she was sent him. After this
King Leir, more and more drooping with Years, became an easy prey to his
Daughters and their Husbands; who now by daily encroachment had feis'd the whole
Kingdom into their hands: and the old King is put to sojorn with his Eldest
Daughter, attended only by threescore Knights. But they in a short while
grudged at, as too numerous and disorderly for continual Guests, are reduced
to thirty. Not brooking that affront, the old King betakes him to his second
Daughter: but there also discord soon arising between the Servants of differing
Masters in one Family, five only are suffered to attend him. Then back again he
returns to the other; hoping that she his Eldest could not but have more pity
on his Gray Hairs: but she now refuses to admit him, unless he be content with
one only of his followers. At last the remembrance of his youngest Cordeilla
comes to his thoughts; and now acknowledging how true her words had bin, though
with little hope from whom he had so injured, be it but to pay her the last
recompense she can have from him, his confession of her wise forewarning, that
so perhaps his misery, the prooff and experiment of her Wisdom, might something
soft'n her, he takes his Journey into France. Now might be seen a difference
between the silent, or downright spok'n affection of some Children to their
Parents, and the talkative obsequiousness of others; while the hope of
Inheritance over-acts them, and on the Tongues end enlarges their duty.
Cordeilla out of mere love, without the suspicion of expected reward, at the
message only of her Father in distress, powrs forth true filial tears. And not
enduring either that her own, or any other Eye should see him in such forlorn
condition as his Messenger declared, discreetly appoints one of her trusted
Servants, first to convay him privately toward some good Sea Town, there to
array him, bathe him, cherish him, furnish him with such Attendance and State,
as beseemd his Dignity. That then, as from his first Landing, he might send
word of his Arrival to her Husband Aganippus. Which don with all mature, and
requisite contrivance, Cordelia with the King her Husband, and all the Barony
of his Realm, who then first had news of his passing the Sea, go out to meet
him; and after all honorable and joyful entertainment, Aganippus, as to his
Wives Father, and his Royal Guest, surrenders him, during his abode there, the
power, and disposal of his whole Dominion: permitting his Wife Cordeilla to go
with an Army, and set her Father upon his Throne. Wherein her piety so
prosper'd, as that she vanquished her impious Sisters with those Dukes, and
Leir again, as says the story, three years obtained the Crown. To whom dying,
Cordeilla with all regal Solemnities gave Burial in the Town of Leicestre. And
then as right Heir succeeding, and her Husband dead, ruled the Land five years
in Peace. Until Marganus and Cunedagius her two Sisters Sons, not bearing that
a Kingdom should be governed by a Woman, in the unseasonablest time to raise
that quarrel against a Woman so worthy, make War against her, depose her, and
imprison her; of which impatient, and now long unexercis'd to suffer, she
there, as is related, killd her self. The Victors between them part the Land:
but Marganus the Eldest Sisters Son, who held by agreement from the North-side
of Humber to Cathness, incited by those about him, to invade all as his own
right, wars on Cunedagius; who soon met him, overcame, and overtook him in a
Town of Wales, where he left his life, and ever since his name to the place.

Cuncdagius was now sole King, and governed with much praise many years; about
the time when Rome was built.

Him succeeded Rivallo his Son, wise also and fortunat; save what they tell us
of three days raining blood, and swarms of stinging Flies, whereof men died.
In order then Gurgustius, Jago or Lago, his Nefew; Sisillius, Kinmarcus. Then
Gorbogudo, whom others name Gorbodego, and Gorbodion, who had two Sons, Ferrex,
and Porrex. They in the old Age of their Father falling to contend who should
succeed, Porrex attempting by treachery his Brothers life, drives him into
France; and in his return though aided with the force of that Country, defeats
and slaies him. But by his Mother Videna who less loved him, is himself, with
the assistance of her Women, soon after slain in his Bed: With whom ended, as
is thought, the Line of Brutus. Whereupon, the whole Land with civil broils was
rent into five Kingdoms, long time waging War each on other; and some say 50
Years. At length Dunwallo Molmutius the Son of Cloten King of Cornwall, one of
the foresaid five, excelling in valor, and goodliness of person, after his
Fathers decease found means to reduce again the whole Island into a Monarchy:
subduing the rest at opportunities. First Y^^ner King of Loegria whom he slew;
then Rudaucus of Cambria, Staterius of Albania, confederat together. In which
fight Dunwallo is reported, while the Victory hung doubtful, to have used this
Art. He takes with him 600 Stout men, bids them put on the Armor of their slain
Enemies; and so unexpectedly approaching the Squadron, where those two Kings
had placed themselves in fight, from that part which they thought securest,
assaults, and dispatches them. Then displaying his own Ensigns which before he
had concealed, and sending notice to the other part of his Army what was don,
adds to them new courage, and gains a final Victory. This Dunwallo was the
first in Britain that wore a Crown of Gold; and therefore by some reputed the
first King. He established the Molmutine Laws, famous among the English to this
day; writt'n long after in Latin by Gildas, and in Saxon by King Alfred: so
says Geofrey, but Gildas denies to have known aught of the Britans before
Caesar; much less knew Alfred. These Laws, whoever made them, bestowed on
Temples the privilege of Sanctuary; to Cities also, and the ways thither
leading, yea to Plows granted a kind of like refuge: and made such riddance of
Thieves and Robbers, that all passages were safe. Forty Years he Governed
alone, and was buried nigh to the Temple of Concord; which he, to the memory of
peace restored, had built in Trinovant.

His two Sons Belinus and Brennus contending about the Crown, by decision of
Friends came at length to an accord; Brennus to have the North of Humber,
Belinus the Sovrantie of all. But the younger not long so contented, that he,
as they whispered to him, whose valor had so often repelled the invasions of
Ceulphus the Morine Duke, should now be subject to his Brother, upon new
Design fails into Norway; enters League and Affinity with Elsing that King;
which Belinus perceaving, in his absence disposseses him of all the North.
Brennus with a Fleet of Norwegians makes toward Britain; but encountered by
Guithlac the Danish King, who laying claim to his Bride, pursued him on the
Sea, his have was retarded, and he berest of his Spouse: who from the fight by
a sudden Tempest, was by the Danish King driven on Northumberland, and brought
to Belinus. Brennus nevertheless recollecting his Navy, lands in Albania, and
gives Battle to his Brother in the Wood Calaterium; but loosing the day,
escapes with one single Ship into Gaul. Mean while the Dane upon his own offer
to become tributary, sent home with his new prise, Belinus returns his thoughts
to the administering of Justice, and the perfeting of his Fathers Laws; and to
explain what Highways might enjoy the foresaid privileges, he caused to be
drawn out and paved fowr main Roades to the utmost length and breadth of the
Island; and two others athwart; which are since attributed to the Romans.
Bren-Brennus on the other side soliciting to his aid the Kings of Gaul,
happ'ns at last on Seginus Duke of the Allobreges; where his worth, and
comeliness of person wan him the Dukes Daughter and Heir. In whose right he
shortly succeeding, and by obtained leave passing with a great Host through the
length of Gaul, gets footing once again in Britain. Nor was Belinus unprepared,
and now the Battle ready to join, Conuvenna the Mother of them both all in a
fright, throws her self between; and calling earnestly to Brennus her Son,
whose absence had so long deprived her of his sight, after imbracements and
tears, assails him with such a motherly power, and the mention of things so
dear and reverend, as irresistibly wrung from him all his enmity against
Belinus.

Then are hands joined, reconciliation made firm, and Counsel held to turn their
united preparations on Foren parts. Thence that by these two all Gallia was
overrun, the story tells; and what they did in Italy, and at Rome, if these be
they, and not Gauls, who took that City, the Roman Authors can best relate. So
far from home I undertake not for the Monmouth Chronicle; which here against
the stream of History carries up and down these Brethren, now into Germany,
then again to Rome, pursuing Gabius and Porsena, two unheard of Consuls. Thus
much is more generally believed, that both this Brennus, and another famous
Captain, Britomarus, whom the Epitomist Florus and others mention, were not
Gauls but Britans; the name of the first in that Tongue signifying a King, and
of the other a Great Britan. However Belinus after a while returning home, the
rest of his days ruled in Peace, Wealth, and Honor above all his
Predecessors; building some Cities, of which one was Caerose upon Osca, since
Caerlegion; beautifying others, as Trinovant with a Gate, a Hav'n, and a Towr,
on the Thames, retaining yet his name; on the top whereof his Ashes are said to
have bin laid up in a Golden Urne.

After him Gurguntius Barbirus was King, mild and just, but yet inheriting his
Fathers Courage, he subdued the Dacian, or Dane, who refused to pay the Tribute
Covnanted to Belinus for his enlargement. In his return finding about the
Orkneies 30 Ships of Spain, or Biscay, fraught with Men and Women for a
Plantation, whose Captain also Bartholinus wrongfully banished, as he pleaded,
besaught him that some part of his Territory might be assigned them to dwell in,
he sent with them certain of his own men to Ireland, which then lay unpeopl'd;
and gave them that Island to hold of him as in Homage. He was buried in
Caerlegion, a City which he had walled about.

Guitheline his Son, is also remembered, as a just and good Prince, and his
Wife Martia to have excelled so much in wisdom, as to venture upon a new
Institution of Laws. Which King Alfred translating called Marchen Leage, but
more truly thereby is meant, the Mertian Law; not translated by Alfred, but
digested or incorporated with the West Saxon. In the minority of her Son she
had the rule, and then, as may be supposed, brought forth these Laws, not her
self, for Laws are Masculin Births, but by the advice of her sagest Counselors;
and therein she might do virtuously, since it befell her to supply the nonage
of her Son: else nothing more awry from the Law of God and Nature, then that a
Woman should give Laws to Men.

Her Son Sisilius coming to Years received the Rule; then in order Kimarus,
then Danius or Elanius his Brother. Then Morindus, his Son by Tanguestela a
Concubine, who is recorded a man of excessive Strength, Valiant, Liberal, and
fair of Aspect, but immanely Cruel; not sparing in his Anger, Enemy, or
Friend, if any Weapon were in his hand. A certain King of the Morines, or
Picards invaded Northumberland; whose Army this King, though not wanting
sufficient numbers, chiefly by his own prowess overcame: But dishonored his
Victory by the cruel usage of his Prisners, whom his own hands, or others in
his presence put all to several Deaths: well fitted to such a bestiall Cruelty
was his end; for hearing of a huge Monster that from the Irish Sea infested the
Coast, and in the Pride of his Strength foolishly attempting to set manly
valor against a Brute vastness, when his Weapons were all in vain, by that
horrible mouth he was caught up and devoured.

Gorbonian the Eldest of his five Sons, then whom a Juster man lived not in his
Age, was a great builder of Temples, and gave to all what was their due; to his
Gods devout Worship, to men of desert honor and preferment, to the Commons
encouragement in their Labors, and Trades, defense and protection from injuries
and oppressions, so that the Land florish'd above her Neighbors, Violence and
Wrong seldom was heard of: his Death was a general loss: he was buried in
Trinovant.

Archigallo the second Brother followed not his Example; but depressed the
ancient Nobility, and by peeling the wealthier sort, stuffed his Treasury, and
took the right way to be deposed.

Elidure the next Brother, surnamed the Pious, was set up in his place; a mind
so noble, and so moderat, as almost is incredible to have bin ever found. For
having held the Scepter five Years, hunting one day in the Forest of Calater,
he chanced to meet his deposed Brother, wandering in mean condition: who had bin
long in vain beyond the Seas, importuning Foren aides to his Restorement: and
was now in a poor Habit, with only ten followers, privately returned to find
subsistence among his secret friends. At the unexpected sight of him, Elidure
himself also then but thinly accompanied, runns to him with open Arms; and
after many dear and sincere welcomings, convaines him to the City Alclud;
there hides him in his own Bedchamber. Afterward faining himself sick,
summons all his Peers as about greatest affairs; where admitting them one by
one, as if his weakness endured not the disturbance of more at once, causes
them willing, or unwilling, once more to swear Allegiance to Archigallo. Whom
after reconciliation made on all sides, he leads to York; and from his own
Head, places the Crown on the Head of his Brother. Who thenceforth, Vice it
self dissolving in him, and forgetting her firmest hold with the admiration of
a deed so Heroic, became a true converted man; ruled worthily 10 Years; died,
and was Buried in Caerleir. Thus was a Brother saved by a Brother, to whom love
of a Crown, the thing that so often dazles, and vitiats mortal men, for which,
thousands of nearest blood have destroyed each other, was in respect of
Brotherly dearness, a contemptible thing.

Elidure now in his own behalf re-assumes the Government, and did as was worthy
such a man to do. When providence, that so great virtue might want no sort of
trial to make it more illustrious, stirs up Vigenius, and Peredure his youngest
Brethren, against him who had deserved so nobly of that relation, as lest of
all by a Brother to be injured. Yet him they defeat, him they Imprison in the
Towr of Trinovant, and divide his Kingdom; the North to Peredure, the South to
Vigenius. After whose Death Peredure obtaining all, so much the better used his
power, by how much the worse he got it. So that Elidure now is hardly miss't.
But yet in all right owing to his Elder the due place whereof he had deprived
him, Fate would that he should die first: and Elidure after many years
Imprisonment, is now the third time seated on the Throne; which at last he
enjoyed long in Peace; finishing the interrupted course of his mild, and just
Reign, as full of virtuous deeds, as days to his end.

After these five Sons of Morindus, succeeded also their Sons in Order. Matthew
Westmin.
Regin of Gorbonian, Marganus of Archigallo, both good Kings. But Enniaunus his
Brother taking other courses, was after six years deposed. Then Idwallo taught
by a near Example, Governed soberly. Then Runno, then Geruntius, He of
Peredure, this last the Son of Elidure. From whose Loins (for that likely is
the durable, and surviving Race that springs of just Progenitors) issued a long
descent of Kings, whose names only for many successions without other memory
stand thus registered, Catellus, Coillus, Porrex, Cherin, and his three Sons,
Fulgenius, Eldadus, and Andragius, his Son Vrianus; Eliud, Eledaueus, Clotenus,
Gurguntius, Merianus, Bleduno, Capis, Oenus, Sisillius, twenty Kings in a
continued row, that either did nothing, or lived in Ages that wrote nothing, at
least a foul pretermission in the Author of this, whether Story or Fable;
himself weary, as seems, of his own tedious Tale.

But to make amends for this Silence, Blegabredus next succeeding, is recorded
to have excelled all before him in the Art of Music; oppertunely, had he but
left us one Song of his 20 Predecessors doings.

Yet after him nine more succeeded in name; His Brother Archimailus, Eldol,
Redion, Rederchius, Samulius, Penissel, Pir, Capoirus, but Cliguellius, with
the addition of Modest, Wise, and Just.

His Son Heli Reigned 40 Years, and had three Sons, Lud, Cassibelaun, and
Nennius. This Heli seems to be the same whom Ninnius in his fragment calls
Minocan; for him he writes to be the Father of Cassibelan. Lud was he that
enlarged, and walled about Trinovant, there kept his Court, made it the prime
City, and called it from his own name Caer-lud, or Luds Town, now London.
Which, as is alleged out of Gildas, became matter of great dissension betwixt
him, and his Brother Nennius; who took it hainously that the name of Troy their
ancient Country should be abolished for any new one. Lud was hardy, and bold in
War, in Peace a jolly Feaster. He conquered many Islands of the Sea, says
Huntingdon, and Huntingd. L. 1.
was buried by the Gate which from thence we call Ludgate. His two Sons
Androgeus, and Tenuantius, were left unto the tuition of Cassibelan; whose
bounty, and high demeanor so wraught with the common people, as got him easily
the Kingdom transferred upon himself. He nevertheless continuing to favor and
support his Nefews, conferrs freely upon Androgeus, London with Kent, upon
Tenuantius, Cornwall: reserving a superiority both over them, and all the other
Princes to himself; till the Romans for a while circumscribed his power. Thus
far, though leaning only on the cre^^t of Geffrey Monmouth, and his assertors,
I yet for the specified causes have thought it not beneath my purpose, to
relate what I found. Whereto I neither oblige the belief of other person, nor
over-hastily subscribe mine own. Nor have I stood with others computing, or
collating years and Chronologies, lest I should be vainly curious about the
time and circumstance of things whereof the substance is so much in doubt. By
this time, like one who had set out on his way by night, and travailed through
a Region of smooth or idle Dreams, our History now arrivs on the Confines,
where daylight and truth meet us with a clear dawn, representing to our view,
though at a far distance, true colors and shapes. For albeit, Caesar, whose
Authority we are now first to follow, wanted not who taxed him of mis-reporting
in his Commentaries, yea in his Civil Wars against Pompey, much more, may we
think, in the British affairs, of whose little skill in writing he did not
easily hope to be contradicted, yet now in such variety of good Authors, we
hardly can miss from one hand or other to be sufficiently informed as of things
past so long ago. But this will better be referred to a second discourse.

The End of the first Book.
THE HISTORY OF BRITAIN. The Second Book.
I Am now to write of what befell the Britans from fifty and three years before
the Birth of our Savior, when first the Romans came in, till the decay and
ceasing of that Empire; a story of much truth, and for the first hunderd years
and somewhat more, collected without much labor. So many and so prudent were
the Writers, which those two, the civilest, and the wisest of European Nations,
both Italy and Greece, afforded to the actions of that Puissant City. For
worthy deeds are not often destitute of worthy relaters: as by a certain Fate
great Acts and great Eloquence have most commonly gone hand in hand, equalling
and honoring each other in the same Ages. It Is true that in obscurest times,
by shallow and unskilful Writers, the indistinct noise of many Battles, and
devastations, of many Kingdoms overrun and lost, has come to our Ears. For
what wonder, if in all Ages, Ambition and the love of rapine has stirred up
greedy and violent men to bold attempts in wasting and ruining Wars, which to
posterity have left the work of Wild Beasts and Destroyers, rather then the
Deeds and Monuments of men and Conquerours. But he whose just and true valor
uses the necessity of War and Dominion, not to destroy but to prevent
destruction, to bring in liberty against Tyrants, Law and Civility among
barbarous Nations, knowing that when he Conquers all things else, he cannot
Conquer Time, or Detraction, wisely conscious of this his want as well as of
his worth not to be forgott'n or concealed, honors and has recourse to the
aid of Eloquence, his freindliest and best supply; by whose immortal Record his
noble deeds, which else were transitory, becoming fixed and durable against the
force of Years and Generations, he fails not to continue through all
Posterity, over Envy, Death, and Time, also victorious. Therefore when the
esteem of Science, and liberal study waxes low in the Commonwealth, we may
presume that also there all civil Virtue, and worthy action is grown as low to
a decline: and then Eloquence, as it were consorted in the same destiny, with
the decrease and fall of virtue corrupts also and fades; at least resignes her
office of relating to illiterat and frivolous Historians; such as the persons
themselves both deserv, and are best pleased with; whilst they want either the
understanding to choose better, or the innocence to dare invite the examining,
and searching style of an intelligent, and faithful Writer to the survay of
their unsound exploits, better befreinded by obscurity then Fame. As for these,
the only Authors we have of British matters, while the power of Rome reached
hither, (for Gildas affirms that of the Roman times noe British Writer was in
his days extant, or if any ever were, either burnt by Enemies, or transported
with such as fled the Pictish and Saxon invasions) these therefore only Roman
Authors there be who in the English Tongue have laid together, as much, and
perhaps more then was requisite to a History of Britain. So that were it not
for leaving an unsightly gap so near to the beginning, I should have judged
this labor, wherein so little seems to be required above transcription, almost
superfluous. Notwithstanding since I must through it, if ought by diligence may
be added, or omitted, or by other disposing may be more explained, or more
expressed, I shall assay.

Julius Caesar (of whom, and of the Roman Free State, more then what
appertains, is not here to be discoursed) having subdued most part of Gallia,
which by a potent faction, he had obtained of the Senate as his Province for
many years, stirred up with a desire of adding still more glory to his name,
and the whole Roman Empire to his ambition, some say, with a far Suetonius vit.
Caes.
meaner and ignobler, the desire of British Pearls, whose bigness he delighted
to balance in his hand, determins, and that upon no unjust pretended occasion,
to try his Force in the Conquest also of Britain. For he understood that the
Britans in most of his Gallian Wars had sent supplies against him, had
received fugitives of the Bellovaci his Enemies, and were called over to aid
the Cities of Armorica, which had the year before conspired all in a new
Rebellion. Therefore Caesar, though now the Summer well nigh I Will, knowledge of
the men, the places, the ports, the accesses; which then, it seems, were eev'n
to the Gauls their Neighbors almost unknown. For except Merchants and Traders,
it is not often, says he, that any use to Travel thither; and to those that do,
besides the Sea Coast, and the Ports next to Gallia, nothing else is known. But
here I must require, as Pollio did, the diligence, Suetonius. Caesar Com. L. 1.
at least the memory of Caesar: for if it were true, as they of Rhemes told
him, that Divitiacus, not long before, a Puissant King of the Soissons, had
Britain also under his Command, besides the Belgian Colonies which he affirms
to have named and peopled many Provinces there, if also the Britans had so
frequently given them aid in all their Wars, if lastly the Druid learning
honored so much among them, were at first taught them out of Britain, and they
who soonest would attain that Discipline, sent hither to learn; it appears not
how Britain at that time should be so utterly unknow'n in Gallia, or only
Caesar Com. L. 4.
known to Merchants, yea to them so little, that being called together from
all parts, none could be found to inform Caesar of what bigness the I Will, what
Nations, how great, what use of War they had, what Laws, or so much as what
commodious Havens for bigger Vessels. Of all which things as it were then first
to make discovery, he sends Caius Volusenus, in a long Galley, with command to
return as soon as this could be effected. He in the mean time with his whole
power draws nigh to the Morine Coast, whence the shortest passage was into
Britain. Hither his Navy which he used against the Armoricans, and what else of
Shipping can be provided, he draws together. This known in Britain, Ambassadors
are sent from many of the States there, who promise Hostages, and Obedience to
the Roman Empire. Them, after Audience given, Caesar as largely promising, and
exhorting to continue in that mind, sends home, and with them Comius of Arras,
whom he had made King of that Country, and now secretly employed to gain a
Roman party among the Britans, in as many Cities as he found inclinable, and
to tell them, that he himself was speeding thither. Volusenus with what
discovery of the Island he could make from aboard his Ship, not daring to
venture on the shore, within five days returns to Caesar. Who soon after, with
two Legions, ordnarily amounting, of Romans and their Allies, to about 25000
Foot, and 4500 Horse, the Foot in 80 Ships of burden, the Horse in 18, besides
what Galleys were appointed for his chief Commanders, setts off about the third
watch of night with a good Gale to Sea; leaving behind him Sulpitius Rufus to
make good the Port with a sufficient strength. But the Horse whose appointed
Shipping lay Wind-bound 8 mile upward in another Hav'n, had much trouble to
Imbark. Caesar now within sight of Britain beholds on every Hill multitudes of
armed men, ready to forbid his landing; and Cicero writes to his friend
Atticus, that Cic. At. L. 4. Ep. 17.
the accesses of the Island were wondrously fortified with strong works or
moles. Here from the fowrth to the ninth hour of day he awaits at Anchor the
coming up of his whole Fleet. Mean while with his Legatts and Tribuns
consulting, and giving order to fit all things for what might happ'n in such a
various, and floating water-fight as was to be expected. This place, which was
a narrow Bay-close, environed with Hills, appearing no way commodious, he
removes to a plain and open shore 8 Mile distant; commonly supposed about Deal
in Kent. Which when Camden.
the Britans perceav'd, their Horse and Chariots, as then they us'din fight,
scowring before, their main power speeding after, some thick upon the shore,
others not tarrying to be assailed, ride in among the Waves to encounter, and
assault the Romans eev'n under their Ships; with such a bold, and free
hardihood, that Caesar himself between confessing and excusing that his
Soldiers were to come down from their Ships, to stand in water heavy armed, and
to fight at once, denies not but that the terror of such new and resolute
opposition made them forget their wonted valor. To succor which, he commands
his Galleys, a sight unusual to the Britans, and more apt for motion, drawn
from the bigger Vessels, to row against the open side of the Enemy, and thence
with Slings, Engines, and Darts, to beat them back. But neither yet, though
amazed at the strangeness of those new Sea Castles, bearing up so near, and so
swiftly as almost to overwhelm them, the hurtling of Oars, the battring of
feirce Engines against their bodies barely exposed, did the Britans give much
ground, or the Romans gain; till he who bore the Eagle of the Tenth Legion, yet
in the Galleys, first beseeching his gods, said thus alowd, leap down
Soldiers, unless ye mean to betray your Ensign; I for my part will perform
what I ow to the Commonwealth and my General. This uttered, overboard he
leaps, and with his Eagle feircly advanced runs upon the Enemy; the rest
hartning one another not to admit the dishonor of so nigh loosing their chief
Standard, follow him resolutely. Now was fought eagerly on both sides. Ours who
well knew their own advantages, and expertly used them, now in the shallows, now
on the Sand, still as the Romans went trooping to their Ensigns, received
them, dispatched them, and with the help of their Horse, put them every where to
great disorder. But Caesar causing all his Boats and Shallops to be filled with
Soldiers, commanded to ply up and down continually with releif where they saw
need; Whereby at length all the Foot now dis-imbark't, and got together in some
order on firm ground, with a more steady charge put the Britans to flight: but
wanting all their Horse, whom the winds yet with held from Sailing, they were
not able to make poursuit. In this confused fight Scaeva a Valor. Max. Plutarch.
Roman Soldier, having pressed too far among the Britans, and besett round,
after incredible valor shown, single against a multitude, swom back safe to
his General; and in the place that rung with his praises, earnestly besought
pardon for his rash adventure against Discipline: which modest confessing after
no bad event, for such a deed wherein valor, and ingenuity so much out-weigh'd
transgression, easily made amends and preferred him to be a Centurion. Caesar
also is brought in by Julian, In Caesarib.
attributing to himself the honor (if it were at all an honor to that person
which he sustained) of being the first that left his Ship, and took Land: but
this were to make Caesar less understand what became him then Scaeva. The
Britans finding themselves maister'd in fight, forthwith send Ambassadors to
treat of peace; promising to give Hostages, and to be at command. With them
Comius of Arras also returned; whom hitherto since his first coming from
Caesar, they had detained in Prison as a spy: the blame whereof they lay on the
common people; for whose violence, and their own imprudence they crave pardon.
Caesar complaining they had first sought peace, and then without cause had
begun War, yet content to pardon them, commands Hostages: whereof part they
bring in strait, others far up in the Country to be sent for, they promise in
a few days. Mean while the people disbanded and sent home, many Princes, and
chief men from all parts of the I Will submit themselves and their Cities to the
dispose of Caesar, who lay then encamped, as is thought, on Baram down. Thus
had the Britans made their peace; when suddenly an accident unlooked for put new
counsels into their minds. Fowr days after the coming of Caesar, those 18 Ships
of burden, which from the upper hav'n had taken in all the Roman Horse, born
with a soft wind to the very Coast, in sight of the Roman Camp, were by a
sudden tempest scattered, and driven back, some to the Port from whence they
loosed, others down into the West Country; who finding there no safety either
to land, or to cast Anchor, chose rather to commit themselves again to the
troubled Sea; and as Orosius reports, were most of them cast away. The same
night, it being full Moon, the Galleys left upon dry Land, were unaware to the
Romans, covered with a Springtide, and the greater Ships that lay off at
Anchor, torn and beat'n with Waves, to the great perplexity of Caesar, and his
whole Army; who now had neither Shipping left to convay them back, nor any
provision made to stay here, intending to have wintered in Gallia. All this the
Britans well perceaving, and by the compass of his Camp, which without baggage
appeared the smaller, guessing at his numbers, consult together, and one by one
slily withdrawing from the Camp, where they were waiting the conclusion of a
peace, resolve to stop all provisions, and to draw out the business till
Winter. Caesar though ignorant of what they intended, yet from the condition
wherein he was, and their other hostages not sent, suspecting what was likely,
begins to provide apace, all that might be, against what might happ'n: lays in
Corn, and with materials fetched from the Continent, and what was left of those
Ships which were past help, he repairs the rest. So that now by the incessant
labor of his Soldiers, all but twelv were again made serviceable. While these
things are doing, one of the Legions being sent out to forage, as was
accustomed, and no suspicion of War, while some of the Britans were remaining
in the Country about, others also going and coming freely to the Roman
Quarters, they who were in station at the Camp Gates sent speedy word to
Caesar, that from that part of the Country, to which the Legion went, a greater
dust then usual was seen to rise. Caesar guessing the matter, commands the
Cohorts of Guard to follow him thither, two others to succeed in their stead,
the rest all to arm and follow. They had not marched long, when Caesar discerns
his Legion sore overcharged: for the Britans not doubting but that their Enemies
on the morrow, would be in that place which only they had left unreap'd of all
their Harvest, had placed an Ambush; and while they were dispersed and busiest at
their labor, set upon them, killed some, and routed the rest. The manner of their
fight was from a kind of Chariots; wherein riding about, and throwing Darts,
with the clutter of their Horse, and of their Wheels, they oft-times broke the
rank of their Enemies; then retreating among the Horse, and quitting their
Chariots, they fought on Foot. The Charioters in the mean while somewhat aside
from the Battle, set themselves in such order, that their Masters at any time
oppressed with odds, might retire safely thither, having performed with one
person both the nimble service of a Horseman, and the steadfast duty of a Foot
Soldier. So much they could with their Chariots by use, and exercise, as riding
on the speed down a steep Hill, to stop suddenly, and with a short rein turn
swiftly, now running on the beam, now on the Yoke, then in the Seat. With this
sort of new skirmishing, the Romans now overmatch'd, and terrified, Caesar with
opportune aid appears; for then the Britans make a stand: but he considering
that now was not fit time to offer Battle, while his men were scarce
recovered of so late a fear, only keeps his ground, and soon after leads back
his Legions to the Camp. Further action for many days following was hindered on
both sides by foul weather; in which time the Britans dispatching Messengers
round about, to how few the Romans were reduced, what hope of prise and booty,
and now if ever of freeing themselves from the fear of like invasions hereafter
by making these an example, if they could but now uncamp their Enemies, at this
intimation multitudes of Horse and Foot coming down from all parts make toward
the Romans. Caesar foreseeing that the Britans though beat'n and put to flight
would easily evade his Foot, yet with no more than 30 Horse, which Comius had
brought over, draws out his men to Battle, puts again the Britans to flight,
poursues with slaughter, and returning burns and lays waste all about.
Whereupon Ambassadors the same day being sent from the Britans to desire peace,
Caesar, as his affairs at present stood, for so great a breach of Faith, only
imposes on them double the former hostages, to be sent after him into Gallia:
And because September was nigh half spent, a season not fit to tempt the Sea
with his weather-beat'n Fleet, the same night with a fair wind he departs
toward Belgia; whether two only of the Britan Cities sent Hostages, as they
promised, the rest neglected. But at Rome when the news came of Caesar's acts
here, whether it were esteemed a Conquest, or a fair Escape, supplication of 20
days is decreed by the Senate, as either for an exploit done, or a discovery
made, wherein both Caesar and the Romans gloried not a little, though it brought
no benefit either to him, or the Commonwealth.

The Winter following, Caesar, as his custom was, Dion.
going into Italy, when as he saw that most of the Britans regarded not to send
their Hostages, appoints Caesar Com. 5.
his Legates whom he left in Belgia, to provide what possible Shipping they
could either build, or repair. Low built they were to be, as thereby easier
both to fraught, and to hale ashore; nor needed to be higher, because the Tide
so often changing, was observed to make the Billows less in our Sea then those
in the Mediterranean: broader likewise they were made, for the better
transporting of Horses, and all other fraughtage, being intended chiefly to
that end. These all about 600. in a readiness, with 28 Ships of burden, and
what with adventurers, and other hulks above 200, Cotta one of the Legates
wrote them, as Athaeneus affirms, in all 1000, Caesar from Port Iccius, a
passage of some 30 mile over, leaving behind him Labienus to guard the hav'n,
and for other supply at need, with five Legions, though but 2000 Horse, about
sun set hoysing sail with a slack South-West, at midnight was becalmed. And
finding when it was light, that the whole Navy lying on the current, had fallen
of from the I Will, which now they could descry on their left hand, by the
unwearied labor of his Soldiers, who refused not to tugg the Oar, and kept
course with Ships under sail, he bore up as near as might be, to the same
place where he had landed the year before; where about noon arriving, Britans,
which in great number, as was after known, had bin there, at sight of so huge
a Fleet durst not abide. Caesar forthwith landing his Army, and encamping to
his best advantage, some notice being given him by those he took, where to find
the Enemy, with his whole power, save only ten cohorts, and 300 Horse, left to
Quintus Atrius for the guard of his Ships, about the third watch of the same
night marches up twelv mile into the Country. And at length by a River commonly
thought the Stowre in Kent, espies embattail'd the British Forces. They with
their Horses and Chariots advancing to the higher Banks, oppose the Romans in
their March, and begin the fight; but repuls't by the Roman Cavalrie give back
into the Woods to a place notably made strong both by Art and Nature; which, it
seems, had bin a Fort, or Hold of strength raised heertofore in time of Wars
among themselves. For entrance, and access on all sides, by the felling of huge
Trees overthwart one another, was quite barred up; and within these the Britans
did their utmost to keep out the Enemy. But the Soldiers of the seventh Legion
locking all their Sheilds together like a rooff close over head, and others
raising a Mount, without much loss of blood took the place, and drove them all
to forsake the Woods. Pursuit they made not long, as being through ways
unknow'n; and now evening came on, which they more wisely spent, in choosing
out where to pitch and fortify their Camp that night. The next Morning Caesar
had but newly sent out his men in three bodies to poursue, and the last no
further gone then yet in sight, when Horsemen all in Post from Quintus Artrius
bring word to Caesar, that almost all his Ships in a Tempest that night had
suffered wrack, and lay brok'n upon the shore. Caesar at this news recalls his
Legions, himself in all have riding back to the Seaside, beheld with his own
Eyes the ruinous prospect. About forty Vessels were sunk and lost, the residue
so torn, and shak'n as not to be new rigged without much labor. Strait he
assembles what number of Ship-wrights either in his own Legions or from beyond
Sea, could be summoned; appoints Labienus on the Belgian side to build more;
and with a dreadful industry of ten days, not respiting his Soldiers day or
night, drew up all his Ships, and entrenched them round within the circuit of
his Camp. This don, and leaving to their defense the same strength as before, he
returns with his whole Forces to the same Wood, where he had defeated the
Britans: who preventing him with greater powers then before, had now
repossess'd themselves of that place, under Cassibelan their chief Leader. Whose
Territory from the States bordering on the Sea was divided by the River Thames
about 80 mile inward. With him formerly other Cities had continual War; but
now in the common danger had all made choice of him to be their General. Here
the British Horse and Charioters meeting with the Roman Cavalrie fought
stoutly; and at first, something overmatch'd they retreat to the near advantage
of their Woods and Hills, but still followed by the Romans, make head again, cut
of the forwardest among them, and after some pause, while Caesar, who thought
the days work had bin don, was busied about the entrenching of his Camp, march
out again, give feirce assault to the very Stations of his Guards and
Senteries, and while the main cohorts of two Legions that were sent to the
Alarm, stood within a small distance of each other terrified at the newness
and the boldness of their fight, charged back again through the midst, without
loss of a man. Of the Romans that day was slain Quintus Laberius Durus a
Tribune: the Britans having fought their fill at the very entrance of Caesar's
Camp, and sustained the resistance of his whole Army entrenched, gave over the
assault. Caesar here acknowledges that the Roman way both of arming, and of
fighting, was not so well fitted against this kind of Enemy; for that the Foot
in heavy Armor could not follow their cunning flight, and durst not by ancient
Discipline stir from their Ensign; and the Horse alone, disjoined from the
Legions, against a foe that turned suddenly upon them with a mixed encounter
both of Horse and Foot, were in equal danger both following and retiring.
Besides their fashion was, not in great bodies, and close order, but in small
divisions, and open distances to make their onset; appointing others at certain
spaces, now to releev and bring of the weary, now to succeed and renew the
conflict; which argued no small experience, and use of Arms. Next day the
Britans afarr off upon the Hills begin to show themselves here and there, and
though less boldly then before, to skirmish with the Roman Horse. But at Noon
Caesar having sent out 3 Legions, and all his Horse with Trebonius the Legate,
to seek fodder, suddenly on all sides they set upon the Forragers, and charge
up after them to the very Legions, and their Standards. The Romans with great
courage beat them back, and in the chase, being well seconded by the Legions,
not giving them time either to rally, to stand, or to descend from their
Chariots as they were wont, slew many. From this overthrow, the Britans, that
dwelt farther off, betook them home; and came no more after that time with so
great a power against Caesar. Whereof advertised he marches onward to the
Frontiers of Cassibelan, which on this side were bounded by the Thames, not
passable except in one place and that Camden.
difficult, about Coway stakes near Oatlands, as is conjectured. Hither coming
he descries on the other side great Forces of the Enemy, placed in good Array;
the bank set all with sharp stakes, others in the bottom, covered with water;
whereof the marks in Beda's time, were to be seen, as he relates. This having
learnt by such as were taken, or had run to him, he first commands his Horse to
pass over; then his Foot, who wadeing up to the neck went on so resolutely, and
so fast, that they on the further side not enduring the violence, retreated and
fled. Cassibelan noe more now in hope to contend for Victory, dismissing all
but 4000. of those Charioters, through Woods, and intricate ways attends their
motion; where the Romans are to pass, drives all before him; and with
continual sallies upon the Horse, where they least expected, cutting off some
and terrifying others, compells them so close together, as gave them no leave
to fetch in prey or booty without ill success. Whereupon Caesar strictly
commanding all not to part from the Legions, had nothing left him in his way
but empty Fields and Houses, which he spoiled and burnt. Mean while the
Trinobantes a State, or Kingdom, and perhaps the greatest then among the
Britans, less favoring Cassibelan send Ambassadors, and yield to Caesar upon
this reason. Immanuentius had bin their King: him Cassibelan had slain, and
purposed the like to Mandubratius his Son, whom Orosius calls Androgorius, Beda
Androgius; but the youth escaping by flight into Gallia, put himself under the
protection of Caesar. These entreat that Mandubratius may be still defended;
and sent home to succeed in his Fathers right. Caesar sends him, demands 40
Hostages and provision for his Army, which they immediately bring in, and have
their Confines protected from the Soldier. By their example the Cenimagni,
Segontiaci, Ancalites, Bibroci, Cassi (so I write them for the modern names are
but guessed) on like terms make their peace. By them he learns that the Town of
Cassibelan, supposed to be Verulam, was not far distant; fenc't about with
Woods and Marshes, well stuff't with men and much Cattle. For Towns then in
Britain were only Woody places Ditch't round and with a Mud Wall encompassed
against the inrodes of Enemies. Thither goes Caesar with his Legions, and
though a place of great strength both by art and nature, assaults it in two
places. The Britans after some defense fled out all at another end of the Town;
in the flight many were taken, many slain, and great store of Cattle found
there. Cassibelan for all these losses yet deserts not himself; nor was yet his
authority so much impaired, but that in Kent, though in a manner possessed by
the Enemy, his Messengers and commands find obedience anough to raise all the
people. By his direction Cingetorix, Carvilius, Taximagulus and Segonax, fowr
Kings Reigning in those Countries which ly upon the Sea, lead them on to
assault that Camp wherein the Romans had entrenched their Shipping: but they
whom Caesar left there, issuing out slew many, and took Prisners Cingetorix a
noted Leader, without loss of their own. Cassibelan after so many defeats, moved
especially by revolt of the Cities from him, their inconstancy and falsehood
one to another, uses mediation by Comius of Arras to send Ambassadors about
treaty of yiedling. Caesar who had determined to Winter in the Continent, by
reason that Gallia was unsettl'd and not much of the Summer now behind,
commands him only Hostages, and what yearly Tribute the Island should pay to
Rome, forbidds him to molest the Trinobants, or Mandubratius; and with his
Hostages, and great number of Captives he puts to Sea, having at twice
embark't his whole Army. At his return to Rome, as from a glorious enterprise,
he Pliny.
offers to Venus the Patroness of his Family, a Corslet of British Pearls.

Howbeit other ancient writers have spok'n more doubtfully of Caesar's Victories
here; and that in plain terms he fled from hence; for which the common verse
in Lucan with diverse passages here and there in Tacitus is alleged. Paulus
Orofius, who took Oros. Lib. 6. c. 7. and 9.
what he wrote from a History of Suetonius now lost, writes that Caesar in his
first journey entertained with a sharp fight lost no small number of his Foot,
and by tempest nigh all his Horse. Dion affirms that once in the second
expedition all his Foot were routed, Orosius that another time all his Horse.
The British Author, whom I use only then when others are all silent, has many
trivial discourses of Caesar's being here, which are best omitted. Nor have we
more of Cassibelan, then what the same story tells, how he warred soon after
with Androgeus, about his Nefew slain by Evelinus Nefew to the other; which
business at length composed, Cassibelan dies and was buried in York, if the
Monmouth Book Fable not. But at Caesar's coming hither, such likeliest were the
Britans, as the Writers of those times, and their own actions represent them; in
courage and warlike readiness to take advantage by ambush or sudden onset, not
inferior to the Romans, nor Cassibelan to Caesar, in Weapons, Arms, and the
skill of Encamping, Dion.
Embattailing, Fortifying, overmatch't; their Weapons Mela. Caesar.
were a short Spear and light Target, a Sword also by their side, their fight
sometimes in Chariots phang'd at the Axle with Iron Sithes, their bodies most
part naked, only painted with woad in sundry figures to seem terrible as they
thought, but poursu'd by Herodian.
Enemies, not nice of their painting to run into Bogs, worse then wild Irish up
to the Neck, and there to stay many days holding a certain morsel in their
mouths no bigger then a bean, to suffice hunger; but Dion.
that receipt, and the temperance it taught, is long since unknown among us:
their Towns and strong holds were spaces of ground fenc't about with a Ditch and
great Trees felled overthwart each other, Caesar. Strabo.
their buildings within were thatch't Houses for themselves and their Cattle: in
peace the Upland Inhabitants besides hunting tended their flocks and herds,
Dion.
but with little skill of Country affairs; the making of Cheese they
commonly knew not, Woole or Flax they spun not, gard'ning and planting many of
Strabo.
them knew not; clothing they had none, but what the skins of Beasts afforded
them, and that not always; Herodian.
yet gallantrie they had, painting their own skins with several Portratures of
Beast, Bird, or Solinus.
Flower, a Vanity which has not yet left us, removed only from the skin to
the skirt behung now with as many colored Ribands and gewgawes; toward the
Sea side they tilled the ground and lived much after Caesar.
the manner of Caules their Neighbors, or first Planters: their money was brazen
pieces or Iron Rings, Tacitus, Diodor. Strabo.
their best Merchandise Tin, the rest trifles of Glass, Ivorie and such like;
yet Gemms and Pearls they had, says Mela, in some Rivers: their Ships of light
Lucan.
timber wickerd with Oysier between, and coverd over with Leather, served not
therefore to tranceport them far, and their commodities were fetched away by
Foren Merchants: their dealing, says Diodorus, plain and simple without
fraud; their civil Government under many Princes and States, not Tacitus.
confederate or consulting in common, but mistrustfull, and oft-times warring
one with the other, which Mela.
gave them up one by one an easy Conquest to the Romans: their Religion was
governd by a sort of Priests or Magicians called Druides from the Greek name of
an Oak, which Tree they had in great reverence, and the Missleto especially
growing thereon; Pliny writes them skilled in Magic no less then those of
Persia: by their abstaining from a Hen, a Hare, and Dion.
a Goose, from Fish also, says Dion, and their opinion of the Souls passing
after Death into other Bodies, Caesar.
they may be thought to have studied Pythagoras; yet Philosophers I cannot call
them, reported men factious and ambitious, contending sometimes about the
archpriesthood not without civil War Caesar.
and slaughter; nor restrein'd they the people under them from a lewd
adulterous and incestuous life, ten or twelve men absurdly against nature,
possessing one woman as their common Wife, though of nearest Kin, Mother,
Daughter, or Sister; Progenitors not to be glori'd in. But the Gospel, not long
after preached here, abolished such impurities, and of the Romans we have cause
not to say much worse, then that they beat us into some civilitie; likely else
to have continued longer in a barbarous and savage manner of life. After Julius
(for Julius before his Death tyrannously had made himself Emperor of the Roman
Commonwealth, and was slain in the Senate for so doing) he who next obtained
the Empire, Octavianus Caesar Augustus, either contemning the Strabo L. 2.
Island, as Strabo would have us think, whose neither benefit was worth the
having, nor enmity worth the fearing; or out of a wholesome state maxim, as
some say, to moderate and bound the Empire from growing vast and unweildie,
made no attempt against the Britans. But the truer cause was partly civil War
among the Romans, partly other affairs more Britans had lived at their own
dispose, Augustus in imitation of his Uncle Julius, either intending or Dion.
L. 49. Year before the Birth of Christ, 25.
seeming to intend an expedition hither, was com into Gallia, when the news of
a revolt in Pannonia diverted him: about 7 year after in the same resolution,
what with the unsettl'dness of Gallia, and Dion. L. 53. 24.
what with Ambassadors from Britain which met him there, he proceeded not. The
next year, difference arrising about Covnants, he was again prevented by other
new commotions in Spain. Nevertheless some of the British Potentates omitted
not to seek his friendship by gifts offered in the Capitol, and other
obsequious addresses. Insomuch that the whole Island became eev'n in those days
well known to the Strabo L. 4.
Romans; too well perhaps for them, who from the knowledge of us were so like
to prove Enemies. But as for Tribute, the Britans paid none to Augustus, except
what easy customs were levied on the slight commodities wherewith they traded
into Gallia.

After Cassibelan, Tenantius the younger Son of Lud, according to the Monmouth
Story was made King. For Androgeus the Elder, conceaving himself generally
hated, for sideing with the Romans, forsook his claim here, and followed
Caesar's Fortune. This King is recorded Just and Warlike.

His Son Kymbeline or Cunobeline succeeding, was brought up, as is said, in the
Court of Augustus, and with him held friendly correspondences to the end; was a
warlike Prince; his chief seat Camalodunum, or Maldon, as by certain of his
coins, yet to be seen, appears. Tiberius the next Emperor, adhering always to
the advice of Augustus, and of himself less careing to extend the bounds of his
Empire, sought not the Britans; and they as little to incite him, sent home
courteously the Soldiers of Germanicus, that by Shipwreck had bin cast on the
Britan shore. But Tacit. an. L. 2. Year after the Birth of Christ, 16.
Caligula his Successor, a wild and dissolute Tyrant, having past the Alps
with intent to rob and spoil those Provinces, and stirred up by Adminius the
Son of Cunobeline; who by his Father banished, with a small number fled thither
to him, he made semblance Dion. Sueton. Call.
of marching toward Britain; but being come to the Ocean, and there behaveing
himself madly, and ridiculously, Britain had bin yielded him. Cunobeline now
dead, Adminius the Eldest by his Father banished from his Country, and by his
own practice against it, from the Crown, though by an old coin seeming to have
also reigned; Togodumnus, and Caractacus the two younger, uncertain whether
equal or subordinat in power, were advanced into his place. But through Dion.
civil discord, Bericus (what he was further, is not known) with others of his
party flying to Rome, persuaded Claudius the Emperor to an invasion. Claudius
now Consul the third time, and desirous to do something, whence he might gain
the honor of a Triumph, at the persuasion of these fugitives, Sueton.
whom the Britans demanding, he had denied to render, and they for that cause
had denied further amity with Rome, makes choice of this Island for his Province:
and sends before him Aulus Plautius the Praetor, with this command, if the
business grew difficult to give him notice. Plautius with much ado persuaded
the Legions to move out of Gallia, murmuring that now they must be put to make
War beyond the Worlds End; for so they counted Britain; and what welcome Julius
the Dictator found there, doubtless they had heard. At last prevailed with, and
hoyssing sail from three several Ports, lest their landing should in any one
place be resisted, meeting cross winds, they were cast back and disheartn'd:
till in the night a meteor shooting flames from the East, and, as they fansi'd,
directing their course, they took heart again to try the Sea, and without
opposition landed. For the Britans having heard of their unwillingness to come,
had bin negligent to provide against them; and retireing to the Woods and
Moares, intended to frustrate, and wear them out with delays, as they had
served Caesar before. Plautius after much trouble to find them out, encountering
first with Caractacus, then with Togodumnus, overthrew them; and receaving into
conditions part of the Boduni, who then were subject to the Catuellani, and
leaving there a Garrison, went on toward a River; where the Britans not
imagining that Plautius without a bridge could pass, lay on the further side
careless and secure. But he sending first the Germans, whose custom was, armed
as they were, to swim with ease the strongest current, commands them to strike
especially at the Horses, whereby the Chariots, wherein consisted their chief
art of fight, became unserviceable. To second them he sent Vespatian, who in
his later days obtained the Empire, and Sabinus his Brother; who unexpectedly
assailing those who were least aware, did much execution. Yet not for this were
the Britans dismayed; but reuniteing the next day fought with such a courage, as
made it hard to decide which way hung the Victory: till Caius Sidius Geta, at
point to have bin taken, recovered himself so valiantly, as brought the day on
his side; for which at Rome he received high honors. After this the Britans
drew back toward the mouth of Thames, and acquainted with those places, crossed
over; where the Romans following them through bogs and dangerous flats,
hazarded the loss of all. Yet the Germans getting over, and others by a bridge
at some place above, fell on them again with sundry Alarmes and great
slaughter; but in the heat of pursuit running themselves again into Bogs and
Mires, lost as many of their own. Upon which ill success, and seeing the Britans
more enraged at the Death of Togodumnus, who in one of these Battles had bin
slain, Plautius fearing the worst, and glad that he could hold what he held, as
was enjoined him, sends to Claudius. He who waited ready with a huge
preparation, as if not safe anough amidst the flowr of all his Romans, like a
great Eastern King, with armed Elephants marches through Gallia. So full of
peril was this enterprise esteemed, as not without all this Equipage, and
stranger terrors then Roman Armies to meet the native and the naked British
valor defending their Country. Joined with Plautius who encamping on the Bank
of Thames attended him, he passes the River. The Britans, who had the courage,
but not the wise conduct of old Cassibelan, laying all Stratagem aside, in down
right manhood scrupled not to affront in open field almost the whole power of
the Roman Empire. But overcome and vanquished, part by force, others by treaty
com in and yield. Claudius therefore who took Camalodunum, the Royal Seat of
Canobeline, was oft'n by his Army saluted Imperator; a Military Title which
usually they gave their General after any notable exploit; but to others not
above once in the same War; as if Claudius by these acts had deservd more then
the Laws of Rome had provided honor to reward. Having therefore disarmed the
Britans, Dion. L. 62.
but remitted the confiscation of their goods, for which they worshipped him with
Sacrifice and Temple as a God, Tacit. an. 14.
leaving Plautius to subdue what remained; Rome, from whence he had bin absent
only six months, and in Britain but 16 days; sending the news before him of
his Victories, though in a small part of the Island. To whom the Senate, as for
atchievments of highest merit, decreed excessive honors; Arches, Triumphs,
annual Solemnities, and the Surname of Britannicus both to him and his Son.

Suetonius writes that Claudius found here no resistance, and that all was done
without stroke: but this seems not probable. The Monmouth Writer names these
two Sons of Cunobeline, Guiderius, and Arviragus; that Guiderius being slain
in fight, Arviragus to conceal it, put on his Brothers Habillements, and in
his person held up the Battle to a Victory; the rest, as of Hamo the Roman
Captain, Genuissa the Emperors Daughter, and such like stuff, is too palpably
untrue to be worth rehersing in the midst of Truth. Plautius after this,
employing his fresh Forces to Conquer on, and quiet the rebelling Countries,
found work anough to deserve at his return a kind of Tryumphant riding into
the Capitol side by side with the Emperor. Sueton. Claud. 5. 24.
Vespatian also under Plautius had thirty conflicts with the Enemy; in one of
which encompassed and in great danger, Sueton. Vesp. Dio. L. 60.
he was valiantly and piously rescued by his Son Titus: two powerful Nations
he subdued here, the I Will of Wight; for which he received at Rome Tryumphal
Ornaments, and other great dignities. For that City in reward of virtue was
ever magnificent: and long after when true merit was ceas't among them, lest
any thing resembling virtue should want honor, the same rewards were yet
allowed to the very shadow and ostentation of merit. in the room of Plautius
Vice-praetor, Tacit. an. 12.
met with turbulent affairs; the Britans not ceasing to vex with inrodes all
those Countries that, were yielded to the Romans; and now the more eagerly,
supposing that the new General unacquainted with his Army, and on the edge of
Winter, would not hastily oppose them. But he waighing that first events were
most available to breed fear or contempt, with such cohorts as were next at
hand sets out against them: whom having routed, so close he follows, as one
who meant not to be every day molested with the cavils of a slight peace, or
an emboldn'd Enemy. Lest they should make head again, he disarmes whom he
suspects; and to surround them, places many Garrisons upon the Rivers of Antona
and Sabrina. But the Icenians, a stout people untouched yet by these Wars, as
having before sought alliance with the Romans, were the first that brook'd not
this. By their example others rise; and in a chosen place, fenc't with high
Banks of Earth, and narrow Lanes to prevent the Horse, warily Encampe.
Ostorius, though yet not strengthn'd with his Legions, causes the auxiliar
Bands, his Troops also allighting, to assault the rampart. They within though
pestered with their own number, stood to it like men resolved, and in a narrow
compass did remarkable deeds. But overpowerd at last, and others by their
success quieted, who till then waverd, Ostorius next bends his Force upon the
Cangians, wasting all eeven to the Sea of Ireland, without foe in his way, or
them, who durst, ill handled; when the Brigantes attempting new matters, drew
him back to settle first what was unsecure behind him. They, of whom the chief
were punished, the rest forgiven, soon gave over, but the Silures no way
tractable were not to be repressed without a set War. To further this,
Camalodunum was planted with a Colony of Veteran Soldiers; to be a firm and
ready aid against revolts, and a means to teach the Natives Roman Law and
Civilitie. Cogidunus also a British King, their fast friend, had to the same
intent certain Cities given Tacit. vit. Agric.
him: a haughty craft, which the Romans used, to make Kings also the servile
agents of enslaving others. But the Silures hardy of themselves, relied more
on the valor of Caractacus; whom many doubtful, many prosperous successes
had made eminent above all that ruled in Britain. He adding to his courage
Policy, and knowing himself to be of strength inferior, in other advantages
the better; makes the Seat of his War among the Ordovices; a Country wherein
all the odds were to his own party, all the difficulties to his Enemy. The
Hills and every access he fortified with heaps of Stones, and guards of men;
to com at whom a River of unsafe passage must be first waded. The place, as
Camden conjectures, had thence the name of Caer-Caradcc on the West edge of
Shropshire. He himself continually went up and down, animating his Officers and
Leaders, that this was the day, this the field either to defend their Liberty,
or to die free; calling to mind the names of his glorious Ancestors, who drove
Caesar the Dictator out of Britain, whose valor hitherto had preserved them
from bondage, their Wives and Children from dishonor. Inflamed with these
words, they all vow their utmost, with such undaunted resolution as amazed the
Roman General; but the Soldier less waighing, because less knowing, clamourd
to be led on against any danger. Ostorius after wary circumspection bidds them
pass the River: the Britans no sooner had them within reach of their Arrows,
Darts, and Stones, but slew and wounded largly of the Romans. They on the other
side closeing their ranks, and over head closeing their Targetts, threw down the
loose rampires of the Britans, and pursue them up the Hills both light armed
and Legions; till what with gauling Darts and heavy strokes, the Britans who
wore neither Helmet nor Cuirass to defend them, were at last overcome. This the
Romans thought a famous Victory; wherein the Wife and Daughter of Caractacus
were taken, his Brothers also reduced to obedience; himself escapeing to
Cartismandua Queen of the Brigantes, against faith given was to the Victors
deliverd bound: having held out against the Romans nine year, says Tacitus,
but by truer computation, Seven. Whereby his name was up through all the
adjoining Provinces, eev'n to Italy and Rome: many desiring to see who he was,
that could withstand so many years the Roman Puissance: and Caesar to extol
his own Victory, extolled the man whom he had vanquished. Being brought to
Rome, the people as to a Solemn spectacle were called together, the Emperors
Guard stood in Arms. In order came first the Kings Servants, bearing his
Trophies won in other Wars, next, his Brothers, Wife, and Daughter, last
himself. The behavior of others through fear was low and degenerate: he only
neither in countenance, word, or action, submissive standing at the Tribunal of
Claudius, briefly spoke to this purpose. If my mind, Caesar, had bin as
moderate in the highth of Fortune, as my Birth and Dignity was eminent, I
might have come a friend rather then a Captive into this City. Nor could
thou have disliked him for a confederate, so noble of descent, and ruling so
many Nations. My present estate to me disgraceful, to thee is glorious. I had
Riches, Horses, Arms, and men; no wonder then if I contended, not to loose
them. But if by Fate, yours only must be Empire, then of necessity ours among
the rest must be subjection. If I sooner had bin brought to yield, my
misfortune had bin less notorious, your Conquest had bin less renowned; and in
your severest determining of me, both will be soon forgott'n. But if you grant
that I shall live, by me will live to you for ever that praise which is so near
divine, the clemency of a Conqueror. Caesar moved at such a spectacle of
Fortune, but especially at the nobleness of his bearing it, gave him pardon,
and to all the rest. They all unbound, submissely thank him, and did like
reverence to Agrippina the Emperors Wife, who sat by in State: a new and
disdained sight to the manly Eyes of Romans, a Woeman sitting public in her
Female pride among Ensigns and Armed Cohorts. To Ostorius Triumph is decreed;
and his acts esteemed equal to theirs, that brought in Bonds to Rome famousest
Kings. But the same prosperity attended not his later actions here. For the
Silures, whether to reveng their loss of Caractacus, or that they saw Ostorius,
as if now all were done, less earnest to restrain them, besett the Prefect of
his Camp, left there with Legionarie Bands to appoint Garrisons: and had not
speedy aid com in from the neighboring Holds and Castles, had cut them all
off; notwithstanding which, the Prefect with 8 Centurions, and many their
stoubtest men were slain: and upon the neck of this, meeting first with Roman
Forragers, then with other Troops hasting to their relief, utterly foiled and
broke them also. Ostorius sending more after, could hardly stay their flight;
till the weighty Legions coming on, at first poys'd the Battle, at length
turned the Scale: to the Britans without much loss; for by that time it grew
night. Then was the War shiverd as it were into small frayes and bickerings;
not unlike sometimes to so many robberies, in Woods, at Waters, as chance or
valor, advice or rashness led them on, commanded or without command. That
which most exasperated the Silures, was a report of certain words cast out by
the Emperor, that he would root them out to the very name. Therefore two
Cohorts more of Auxiliars, by the avarice of their Leaders too securely
pillageing, they quite intercepted: and bestowing liberally the Spoils and
Captives, whereof they took plenty; drew other Countries to join with them.
These losses falling so thick upon the Romans, Ostorius with the thought, and
anguish thereof ended his days: the Britans rejoicing, although no Battle,
that yet adverse War had worn out so great a Soldier. Caesar in his place
ordaines Aulus Didius: but ere his coming, though much hastn'd, that the
Province might not want a Governor; the Silures had given an overthrow to
Manlius Valens with his Legion, rumor'd on both sides greater then was true, by
the Silures to amate the new General; by him in a double respect, of the more
praise if he queld them, or the more excuse if he failed. Mean time the
Silures forgett not to infest the Roman pale with wide excursions; till Didius
marching out, kept them somewhat more within bounds. Nor were they long to seek,
who after Caractacus should lead them; for next to him in worth and skill of
War, Venutius a Prince of the Brigantes merited to be their chief. He at first
faithful to the Romans, and by them protected, was the Husband of Cartismandua
Q. of the Brigantes, himself perhaps reigning elsewhere. She who had betrayed
Caractacus and her Country to adorn the Triumph of Claudius, thereby grown
powerful and gracious with the Romans, presuming on the hire of her treason,
deserted her Husband; and marrying Vellocatus one of his Squires, conferrs on
him the Kingdom also. This deed so odious and full of infamy, disturbed the
whole State: Venutius with other Forces, and the help of her own Subjects, who
detested the example of so foul a fact, and with all the uncomeliness of their
Subjection to the Monarchy of a Woeman, a piece of manhood not every day to be
found among Britans, though she had got by subtle train his Brother with many
of his kindred into her hands, brought her soon below the confidence of being
able to resist longer. When imploring the Roman aid, with much ado, and after
many a hard encounter she escaped the punishment which was ready to have
seized her. Venutius thus debarred the authority of ruling his own Household,
justly turns his anger against the Romans themselves; whose magnanimity not
wont to undertake dishonorable causes, had arrogantly intermeddl'd in his
domestic affairs, to uphold the Rebelion of an adultress against her Husband.
And the Kingdom he retained against their utmost opposition; and of War gave
them their fill: first in a sharp conflict of uncertain event, then against
the Legion of Caesius Nasica. Insomuch that Didius growing old and mannageing
the War by Deputies, had work anough to stand on his defense, with the
gaining now and then of a small Castle. And Tacit. vit. Agrio. Tacit. Hist. 3.
Sueton.
Nero (for in that part of the I Will things continued in the same plight to the
Reign of Vespatian) was minded but for shame to have withdrawn the Roman
Forces out of Britain: In other parts whereof, about the same time, other
things befell. Verannius, whom Nero sent hither to succeed Didius, dying in his
first Year, save a few inrodes upon the Silures, left only a great boast behind
him, that in two years, had he lived, he would have Conquered all. But Suetonius
Paulinus, who next was sent hither, esteemed a Soldier equal to the best in
that age, for two years together went on prosperously; both confirming what was
got, and subdueing onward. At last over-confident of his present actions, and
aemulating others, of whose deeds he heard from abroad, marches up as far as
Mona, the I Will of Anglesey, a populous place. For they it seems had both
entertained fugitives, and given good assistance to the rest that withstood
him. He makes him Boats with flat bottoms, fitted to the Shallows which he
expected in that narrow frith: his Foot so passed over, his Horse waded or
swom. Thick upon the shore stood several gross bands of men well weapn'd many
women like furies running to and fro in dismal habit with hair loose about their
shoulders, held Torches in their hands. The Druids, those were their Priests, of
whom more in another place, with hands lift up to Heaven uttering direful
prayers, astonished the Romans; who at so strange a sight stood in a-maze
though wounded: at length awaked and encouraged by their General, not to fear
a barbarous and lunatic rout, fall on, and beat them down scorch't and rouling
in their own fire. Then were they yoked with Garrisons, and the places
consecrate to their bloody superstitions destroi'd. For whom they took in War
they held it lawful to Sacrifice; and by the entrails of men used divination.
While thus Paulinus had his thought still fixed before, to go on winning, his
back lay broad open to occasion of loosing more behind. For the Britans urged
and oppressed with many unsufferable injuries, had all banded themselves to a
general revolt. The particular causes are not all writt'n by one Author;
Tacitus who lived next those times of any to us extant, writes that Prasutagus
King of the Icenians abounding in wealth had left Caesar Coheir with his two
Daughters; thereby hopeing to have secured from all wrong both his Kingdom and
his House; which fell out far otherwise. For under color to oversee and take
possession of the Emperors new Inheritance, his Kingdom became a prey to
Centurions, his House to rav'ning Officers, his Wife Boadicea violated with
stripes, his Daughters with Rape, the wealthiest of his Subjects, as it were by
the will and testament of their King thrown out of their Estates, his kindred
made little better then slaves. The new Colony also at Camalodunum took House
or Land from whom they pleased; terming them Slaves and Vassals; the Soldiers
complying with the Colony, out of hope hereafter to use the same license
themselves. Moreover the Temple erected to Claudius as a badge of their eternal
slaverie, stood a great Eye sore; the Priests whereof under pretext of what was
due to the religious service, wasted and imbezl'd each man's substance upon
themselves. And Catus Decianus the Procurator endeavored to Dion.
bring all their goods within the compass of a new confiscation, by disavowing
the remittment of Claudius. Lastly, Seneca in his Books a Philosopher, having
drawn the Britans unwillingly to borrow of him vast sums upon fair promises
of easy loan, and for repayment to take their own time, on a sudden compells
them to pay in all at once with great extortion. Thus provock't by heaviest
sufferings, and thus invited by opportunities in the absence of Paulinus, the
Icenians, and by their Example the Trinobantes, and as many else as hated
servitude, rise up in Arms. Of these ensueing troubles many foregoing signs
appeared: the image of Victory at Camalodunum fell down of it self with her
face turned as it were to the Britans; certain women in a kind of ecstasie
foretold of calamities to come; in the Counsel-House were heard by night
barbarous noises, in the Theater hideous howlings, in the Creek horrid sights
betok'ning the destruction of that Colony; heerto the Ocean seeming of a bloody
hew, and human shapes at a low ebb, left imprinted on the sand, wrought in the
Britans new courage, in the Romans unwonted fears. Camalodunum, where the
Romans had seated themselves to dwell pleasantly, rather then defensively, was
not fortified: against that therefore the Britans make first assault. The
Soldiers with in were not very many. Decianus the Procurator could send them
but 200, those ill armed: and through the treachery of some among them, who
secretly favored the insurrection, they had deferred both to entrench, and to
send out such as bore not Arms; such as did, flying to the Temple, which on
the second day was forcibly taken, were put all to the Sword, the Temple made a
heap, the ^est rifl'd and burnt. Petilius Cerealis coming to his succor, is in
his way met, and overthrown, his whole Legion cut to pieces; he with his Horse
hardly escaping to the Roman Camp. Decianus, whose rapine was the cause of all
this, fled into Callia. But Suetonius at these tideings not dismayed, through
the midst of his Enemies Country marches to London (though not termed a
Colony, yet full of Roman Inhabitants, and for the frequency of trade and other
commodities, a Town eev'n then of principal note) with purpose to have made
there the seat of War. But considering the smallness of his numbers, and the
late rashness of Petilius, he chooses rather with the loss of one Town to save
the rest. Nor was he flexible to any prayers or weeping of them that besought
him to tarry there; but taking with him such as were willing, gave signal to
depart; they who through weakness of Sex or Age, or love of the place went not
along, perished by the Enemy; so did Verulam a Roman free Town. For the
Britans omitting Forts and Castles, flew thither first where richest booty,
and the hope of pillageing toald them on. In this massacre, about 70 thousand
Romans and their associats in the places abovementioned, of a certain, lost
their lives. None might be spared, none ransomed, but tasted all either a
present or a lingering Death; no cruelty that either outrage or the insolence
of success put into their heads, was left unacted. The Dion. L. 62.
Roman Wives and Virgins hanged up all naked, had their Breasts cut off, and
sowed to their mouths; that in the grimness of Death they might seem to eat
their own flesh; while the Britans fell to feasting and carousing in the Temple
of Andate their Goddess of Victory. Suetonius adding to his Legion other old
Officers, and Soldiers thereabout, which gatherd to him, were near upon ten
thousand; and purposing with those not to deferr Battle, had chos'n a place
narrow, and not to be overwing'd, on his rear a Wood; being well informed that
his Enemies were all in Front on a plain unapt for ambush: the Legionaries
stood thic in order, impaled with light armed; the Horse on either Wing. The
Britans in Companies and Squadrons were every where shouting and swarming, such
a multitude as at other time never; no less reckoned then 200 and 30 thousand,
so feirce and confident of Victory, that their Wives also came in Wagons to
sit and behold the sport, as they made full account, of killing Romans: a folly
doubtless for the serious Romans to smile at, as a sure tok'n of prospering
that day: a Woeman also was their Commander in Chief. For Boadicea and her
Daughters ride about in a Chariot, telling the tall Champions as a great
encouragement, that with the Britans it was usual for Women to be their
Leaders. A deal of other fondness they put into her mouth, not worth recital;
how she was lashed, how her Daughters were handled, things worthier silence,
retirment, and a Vail, then for a Woeman to repeat, as don to her own person,
or to hear repeated before an host of men. The Greek Historian setts her in the
Dion.
field on a high heap of Turves, in a loose-bodied Gown declaming, a Spear in
her hand, a Hare in her bosom, which after a long circumlocution she was to
let slip among them for lucks sake, then praying to Andate the British Goddess,
to talk again as fondly as before. And this they do out of a vanity, hoping to
embellish and set out their History with the strangness of our manners, not
careing in the mean while to brand us with the rankest note of Barbarism, as if
in Britain Women were Men, and Men Women. I affect not set speeches in a
History, unless known for certain to have bin so spok'n in effect as they are
writ'n, nor then, unless worth rehearsal; and to invent such, though
eloquently, as some Historians have done, is an abuse of posterity, raising,
in them that read, other conceptions of those times and persons then were true.
Much less therefore do I purpose here or elsewhere to Copy out tedious
Orations without decorum, though in their Authors composed ready to my hand.
Hitherto what we have heard of Cassibelan, Togadumnus, Venusius, and Caractacus
has bin full of magnanimity, soberness, and martial skill: but the truth is,
that in this Battle, and whole business, the Britans never more plainly
manifested themselves to be right Barbarians; no rule, no foresight, no
forecast, experience or estimation, either of themselves or of their Enemies;
such confusion, such impotence, as seemed likest not to a War, but to the wild
hurrey of a distracted Woeman, with as mad a Crew at her heels. Therefore
Suetonius contemning their unruly noises, and fierce looks, heart'ns his men but
to stand close a while, and strike manfully this headless rabble that stood
nearest, the rest would be a purchase, rather then a toil. And so it fell out;
for the Legion, when they saw their time, bursting out like a violent wedge,
quickly broke and dissipated what opposed them; all else held only out their
necks to the slayer, for their own Carts and Wagons were so placed by
themselves, as left them but little room to escape between. The Roman slew all;
men, women, and the very drawing Horses lay heaped along the Field in a gory
mixture of slaughter. About fowrscore thousand Britans are said to have bin
slain on the place; of the Enemy scarce 400 and not many more wounded. Boadicea
poysond her self, or, as others say, sick'n'd and died. She was of Stature big
and tall, of visage grim and Dion.
stern, harsh of voice, her hair of bright color flowing down to her hipps;
she wore a plighted Garment of diverse colors, with a great gold'n Chain;
buttoned over all a thick robe. Gildas calls her the crafty lioness, and
leaves an ill fame upon her doeings. Dion sets down otherwise the order of this
fight, and that the field was not won without much difficulty, nor without
intention of the Britans to give another Battle, had not the Death of Boadicea
come between. Howbeit Suetonius to preserve Discipline, and to dispatch the
relics of War, lodged with all his Army in the open field; which was
supplied out of Germany with 1000 Horse, and 10000 Foot; thence dispersed to
Winter, and with incursions to wast those Countries that stood out. But to the
Britans famine was a worse affliction; having left off dureing this uproar, to
till the ground, and made reckoning to serve themselves on the provisions of
their Enemy. Nevertheless those Nations that were yet untaimd, hearing of some
discord risen between Suetonius, and the new Procurator Classicianus, were
brought but slowly to terms of peace; and the rigor used by Suetonius on them
that yielded, taught them the better course to stand on their defense. For it is
certain, that Suetonius, Tacit. vit. Agric.
though else a worthieman, over-proud of his Victory, gave too much way to his
anger against the Britans. Classician therefore sending such word to Rome, that
these severe proceedings would beget an endless War, Polycletus, no Roman but
a Courtier, was sent by Nero to examine how things went. He admonishing
Suetonius to use more mildness, awed the Army, and to the Britans gave matter
of Laughter. Who so much eeven till then were nursed up in their native
liberty, as to wonder that so great a General with his whole Army should be
at the rebuke and ordering of a Court Servitor. Suetonius a while after having
lost a few Galleys on the shore, was bid resign his command to Petronius
Turpilianus, who not provoking the Britans, nor by them provoked, was thought
to have pretended the love of peace to what indeed was his love of ease and
sloth. Trebellius Maximus followed his steps, usurping the name of gentle
Government to any remisness or neglect of Discipline; which brought in first
license, next disobedience into his Camp; incensed against him partly for his
covetousness, partly by the incitement of Roscius Caelius Legate of a Legion;
with whom formerly disagreeing, now that civil War began in the Empire, he
fell to open discord; Tacit. Hist. 8. 1. and vit. Agric.
charging him with disorder, and sedition, and him Caelius with peeling and
defrauding the Legions of their pay; insomuch that Trebellius hated, and
deserted of the Soldiers, was content a while to govern by base entreaty, and
forced at length to fly the Land. Which notwithstanding remained in good
quiet, governed by Caelius and the other Legate of a Legion, both faithful to
Vitellius then Emperor; who sent hither Vectius Bolanus; Tacit. Hist. 2. and
vit. Agric.
against the Britans nothing was done, nor in their own Discipline reformed.
Petilius Cerealis by appointment of Vespasian succeeding, Brigantes in many
Battails, and some of those, not unbloodie. Venusius who eeven to these times
held them tack, Calvis. Tacit. Hist. 3. and vit. Agric.
both himself remaining to the end unvanquish'd, and some part of his Country
not so much as reached. It appears also by several passages in the Histories
of Tacitus, that no small number of British Forces were commanded over Sea the
year before to serve in those bloody Wars between Otho and Vitellius,
Vitellius and Vespasian contending for the Empire. To Cerealis succeeded Julius
Frontinus in the Government of Britain, who by tameing the Silures, a people
warlike and strongly inhabiting, augmented much his reputation. Julius
Agricola, whom Vespatiau in his last year sent hither, trained up from his
youth in the British Wars, extended with victories the Roman Limit beyond all
his Predecessors. His coming was in the midst of Summer; and the Ordovices to
welcome the new General, had hew'n in pieces a whole Squadron of Horse, which
lay upon their bounds, few escapeing. Agricola, who perceav'd that the noise of
this defeat had also in the Province desirous of novelty, stirred up new
expectations, resolves to be beforehand with the danger: and drawing together
the choice of his Legions with a competent number of Auxiliars, not being met
by the Ordovices, who kept the Hills, himself in the head of his men hunts them
up and down through difficult places, almost to the final extirpating of that
whole Nation. With the same current of success, what Paulinus had left
unfinished he Conquers in the I Will of Mona: for the Ilanders altogether fearless
of his approach, whom they knew to have no Shipping, when they saw themselves
invaded on a sudden by the Auxiliars, whose Country use had taught them to
swimm over with Horse and Arms, were compelled to yield. This gained Agricola
much opinion; who at his very entrance, a time which others bestowed of course
in hearing complements and gratulations, had made such early progress into
laborious and hardest enterprises. But by far not so famous was Agricola in
bringing War to a speedy end, as in cutting off the causes from whence War
arises. For he knowing that the end of War was not to make way for injuries in
peace, began reformation from his own house; permitted not his attendants and
followers to sway, or have to do at all in public affairs: lays on with
equallitie the proportions of corn and tribute that were imposed; takes off
exactions, and the Fees of encroaching Officers, heavier then the tribute it
self. For the Countries had bin compelled before, to sit and wait the opening
of public Granaries, and both to sell and to buy their Corn at what rate the
Publicans thought fit; the Pourveyers also commanding when they pleased to
bring it in, not to the nearest, but still to the remotest places, either by
the compounding of such as would be excused, or by causing a Dearth, where none
was, made a particular gain. These greevances and the like, he in the time of
peace removing, brought peace into some credit; which before, since the Romans
coming, had as ill a name as War. Titus then Emperor, he so continually with
inroads disquieted the Enemy over all the I Will, and after terror so allured
them with his gentle demeanor, that many Cities which till that time would
not bend, gave Hostages, admitted Garrisons, and came in voluntarily. The
Winter he spent all in worthy actions; teaching and promoting like a public
Father the institutes and customs of civil life. The Inhabitants rude and
scattered, and by that the proner to War, he so persuaded as to build Houses,
Temples, and Seats of Justice; and by praising the forward, quickening the
slow, assisting all, turned the name of necessity into an emulation. He caused
moreover the Noblemens Sons to be bred up in liberal Arts; and by preferring
the Wits of Britain, before the Studies of Gallia, brought them to affect the
Latin Eloquence, who before hated the Language. Then were the Roman fashions
imitated, and the Gown; after a while the incitements also and materials of
Vice, and voluptuous life, proud Buildings, Baths, and the elegance of
Banqueting; which the foolisher sort called civilitie, but was indeed a secret
Art to prepare them for bondage. Taus all that obeyed not; with such a terror,
as he went, that the Roman Army, though much hinderd by tempestuous weather,
had the leisure to build Forts and Castles where they pleased, none dareing to
oppose them. Besides, Agricola had this excellence in him, so providently to
choose his places where to fortify, as not another General then alive. No
sconce, or fortress of his raising was ever known either to have bin forced, or
yielded up, or quitted. Out of these impregnable by seige, or in that case
duly releev'd, with continual irruptions he so prevailed, that the Enemy,
whose manner was in Winter to regain, what in Summer he had lost, was now alike
in both seasons kept short, and streit'n'd. For these exploits then ex'steem'd
so great, and honorable, Titus in whose Dion. L. 66.
Reign they were atcheev'd, was the fifteenth time saluted Imperator; and of
him Agricola received triumphal honors. Domitian then ruleing the Empire, he
spent in settling and confirming what the year before he had travailed over
with a running Conquest. And had the valor of his Soldiers bin answerable, he
had reached that year, as was thought, the utmost bounds of Britain. For Glota,
and Bodotria, now Dunbritton, and the Frith of Edinburrow; two opposite Arms
of the Sea, divided only by a neck of Land, and all the Creeks and Inlets on
this side, were held by the Romans, and the Enemy driven as it were into
another Island. Orcades, as we may probably guess, and other Scotch Isles;
discovering and subdueing Nations till then unknown. He gained also with his
Forces that part of Britain which faces Ireland, as aiming also to conquer that
Island; where one of the Irish Kings driven out by civil Wars, coming to him,
he both gladly received, and retained him as against a fit time. Bodotria
would generally rise, and forelay the passages by land, he caused his Fleet,
making a great show, to bear along the Coast, and up the Friths and Harbors;
joining most commonly at night on the same shore both Land and Sea Forces, with
mutual shouts and loud greetings. At sight whereof the Britans, not wont to see
their Sea so ridd'n, were much daunted. Howbeit the Caledonians with great
preparation, and by rumor, as of things unknown much greater, taking Arms, and
of their own accord beginning War by the assault of sundry Castles, sent back
some of their fear to the Romans themselves: and there were of the Commanders,
who cloaking their fear under show of sage advice, counseled the General to
retreat back on this side Bodotria. He in the mean while having intelligence,
that the Enemy would fall on in many Bodies, divided also his Army into three
parts. Which advantage the Britans quickly spying, and on a sudden uniting what
before they had disjoined, assail by night with all their Forces that part of
the Roman Army, which they knew to be the weakest; and breaking in upon the
Camp surprised between sleep and fear, had begun some Execution. When Agricola,
who had learnt what way the Enemies took, and followed them with all speed,
sending before him the lightest of his Horse and Foot to charge them behind,
the rest as they came on to affright them with clamor, so plied them without
respite, that by approach of day the Roman Ensigns glittering all about, had
encompassed the Britans: who now after a sharp fight in the very Ports of the
Camp, betook them to their wonted refuge, the Woods and Fens, poursu'd a while
by the Romans, that day else in all appearance had ended the War. The Legions
reincourag'd by this event, they also now boasting, who but lately trembled,
cry all to be led on as far as there was British ground. The Britans also not
acknowledging the loss of that day to Roman valor, but to the policy of their
Captain, abated nothing of their stoutness; but arming their youth, conveying
their Wives and Children to places of safty, in frequent assemblies, and by
solemn covnants bound themselves to mutual assistance against the common Enemy.
About the same time a Cohort of Germans having slain their Centurion with other
Roman Officers in a mutiny, and for fear of punishment fled a Shipboard,
launched forth in three light Galleys without Pilot: and by tide or weather
Dion. L. 66.
carried round about the Coast, using Piracy where they landed, while their
Ships held out, and as their skill served them, with various fortune, were the
first discoverers to the Romans that Britain was an Island. Agricola having
before sent his Navy to hover on the Coast, and with sundry and uncertain
landings to divert and disunite the Britans, himself with a power best
appointed for expedition, wherein also were many Britans, whom he had long
tried both valiant and faithful, marches onward to the Mountain Grampius,
where the British, above 30 thousand, were now lodged, and still increasing:
for neither would their old men, so many as were yet vigorous and lusty, be left
at home, long practiced in War, and every one adorned with some badge, or
cognizance of his warlike deeds long ago. Of whom Galgacus, both by birth and
merit the prime Leader, to their courage, though of it self hot and violent, is
by his rough Oratory, in detestation of servitude and the Roman yoke, said to
have added much more eagerness of fight; testified by their shouts and barbarous
applauses. As much did on the others side Agricola exhort his Soldiers to
Victory and Glory; as much the Soldiers by his firm and well grounded
Exhortations were all on a fire to the onset. But first he orders them in this
sort. Of 8000 Auxiliar Foot he makes his middle ward, on the wings 3000 Horse,
the Legions as a reserve, stood in array before the Camp; either to seize the
Victory won without their own hazard, or to keep up the Battle if it should
need. The British powers on the Hill side, as might best serve for show and
terror, stood in their Battalions; the first on eeven ground, the next rising
behind, as the Hill ascended. The field between rung with the noise of
Horsemen and Chariots ranging up and down. Agricola doubting to be over
winged, stretches out his front, though somewhat with the thinest, insomuch that
many advised to bring up the Legions: yet he not altering, alights from his
Horse, and stands on foot before the Ensigns. The fight began aloof, and the
Britans had a certain skill with their broad swashing Swords and short Bucklers
either to strike aside, or to bear off the Darts of their Enemies; and withal
to send back showers of their own. Until Agricola discerning that those little
Targets and unweildie Glaves ill pointed, would soon become ridiculous against
the thrust and close, commanded three Batavian Cohorts, and two of the
Tungrians exercised and armed for close fight, to draw up, and come to
handystrokes. The Batavians, as they were commanded, running in upon them, now
with their long Tucks thrusting at the face, now with their piked Targets
bearing them down, had made good riddance of them that stood below; and for
have omitting further Execution, began apace to advance up Hill, seconded now by
all the other Cohorts. Mean while the Horsemen fly, the Charioters mix
themselves to fight among the Foot; where many of their Horse also fallen in
disorderly, were now more a mischief to their own, then before a terror to their
Enemies. The Battle was a confused heap; the ground unequal; men, horses,
Chariots crowded pelmel; sometimes in little room, by and by in large,
fighting, rushing, felling, over-bearing, over-turning. They on the Hill, which
were not yet come to blows, perceaving the fewness of their Enemies, came down
amain; and had enclosed the Romans unawares behind, but that Agricola with a
strong Body of Horse, which he reserved for such a purpose, repelled them back
as fast: and others drawn off the front, were commanded to wheel about and
charge them on the backs. Then were the Romans clearly Masters; they follow,
they wound, they take, and to take more, kill whom they take: the Britans in
whole Troops with weapons in their hands, one while flying the pursuer, anon
without weapons desperately running upon the slayer. But all of them, when once
they got the Woods to their shelter, with fresh boldness made head again, and
the forwardest on a sudden they turned and slew, the rest so hampered, as had
not Agricola, who was every where at hand, sent out his readiest Cohorts, with
part of his Horse to alight and scowr the Woods, they had received a foil in
the midst of Victory; but following with a close and orderly poursuit, the
Britans fled again, and were totally scattered; till night and weariness ended
the chase. And of them that day 10 thousand fell; of the Romans 340, among whom
Aulus Atti^us the Leader of a Cohort; carried with heat of youth and the
firceness of his Horse too far on. The Romans jocond of this Victory, and the
spoil they got, spent the night; the vanquished wandering about the field, both
men and women, some lamenting, some calling their lost friends, or carrying off
their wounded; others forsaking, some burning their own Houses; and it was
certain enough, that there were who with a stern compassion laid violent hands
on their Wives and Children to prevent the more violent hands of hostile
injury. Next day appearing manifested more plainly the greatness of their loss
received; every where silence, desolation, houses burning afar off, not a man
seen, all fled, and doubtful whether: such word the scouts bringing in from all
parts, and the Summer now spent, no fit season to disperse a War, the Roman
General leads his Army among the Horestians; by whom Hostages being given, he
commands his Admiral with a sufficient Navy to sail round the Coast of
Britain: himself with slow marches, that his delay in passing might serve to
awe those new conquered Nations, bestows his Army in their Winter Quarters.
The Fleet also having fetched a prosperous and speedy compass about the I Will,
put in at the Haven Trutulensis, now Richborrow near Camden. Juvenal, sat. 2.
Sandwich, from whence it first set out: and now likeliest, if not two years
before, as was mentioned, the Romans might discover and subdue the Isles of of
Orkney; which others with less reason following Eutrop. L. 7.
Eusebius and Orosius, attribute to the deeds of Claudius. These perpetual
exploits abroad won him wide fame; with Domitian, under whom great virtue was
as punishable as open crime, won him hatred. Dion. L. 66.
For he maligning the renown of these his acts, in show decreed him honors, in
secret devised his ruin. Agricola therefore commanded home for doing too much,
of what he was sent to do, left the Province to his Successor quiet and
secure. Whether he, as is conjectured, were Salustius Lucullus, or before him
some other, for Suetonius only names him Legate of Britain under Domitian; but
further of him, or ought else done here until the time of Hadrian, is no where
plainly to be found. Some gather by a Preface in Tacitus to the Book of his
Histories, that what Agricola won here, was soon after by Domitian either
through want of valor lost, or through envy neglected. And Juvenal the Poet
speaks of Arviragus in these days, and not before, King of Britain: who stood
so well in his resistance, as not only to be talked of at Rome, but to be held
matter of a glorious Triumph, if Domitian could take him Captive, or overcome
him. Then also Claudia Rufina the Daughter of a Britain, and Wife of Pudence a
Roman Senator, lived at Rome; famous by the Verse of Martial for beauty, wit,
and learning. The next we hear of Britain, is that when Trajan was Emperor, it
revolted, and was subdued. Under Adrian, Julius Severus, says Dion, governed
the Island, a prime Spartianus in vit. Hidrian.
Soldier of that Age, but he being called away to suppress the Jews then in
tumult, left things at such pass, as caused the Emperor in person to take a
journey hither; Augustus, and Tiberius counseled to gird the Empire Spartianus
ibid.
within moderate bounds; he raised a Wall with great stakes driven in deep, and
fastn'd together, in manner of a strong mound, fourscore mile in length, to
devide what was Roman from Barbarian: no ancient Author names the place, but
old inscriptions, and ruin it self yet testifies where it went along between
Solway Frith by Carlisle, and the mouth of Tine. Hadrian having quieted the
Island, took it for honor Camden.
to be titl'd on his Coin, the Restorer of Britain. In his time also Prisous
Licinius, as appears by an old inscription, was Lieutenant here. Antoninus Pius
reigning, the Brigantes ever least patient of Foren Pausan archad.
servitude, breaking in upon Genounia (which Camden guesses to be Guinethia or
North Wales) part of the Roman Province, were with the loss of much territory
driven back by Lollius Vrbious, who drew another Capitolin. vit. Anton.
Wall of Turves; in likelihood much beyond the former, Camden proves, between
the Frith of Dunbritton, Capitolin. Marc. Ant. Philos.
and of Edinborrow; to hedge out incursions from the North. And Seius
Saturninus, as is collected from the digests, Roman Navy. Digest. L. 36.
With like success did Marcus Aurelius next Emperor by his Legate Calphurnius
Agricola finish here a new War: Commodus after him obteining the Empire. In
his time, as among so many different accounts may seem most probable, Lucius a
supposed King in some part of Britain, the first of Beda.
any King in Europe, that we read of, received the Christian Faith, and this
Nation the first by public Authority professed it: a high and singular grace
from above, if sincerity and perseverance went along, otherwise an empty
boast, and to be feared the verifying of that true sentence, the first shall be
last. And indeed the praise of this action is more proper to King Lucius than
common to the Nation; whose first professing by public Authority was no real
commendation of their true faith; which had appeared more sincere and
praiseworthy, whether in this or other Nation, first professed without public
Authority or against it, might else have bin but outward conformity. Lucius in
our Monmouth Story is made the second by descent from Marius, Marius the Son
of Arviragus is there said to have overthrown the Picts then first coming out
of Scythia, slain Roderic their King; and in sign of Victory to have set up a
monument of Stone in the Country since called Westmaria; but these things have
no foundation. Coilus the Son of Marius, all his reign, which was just and
peaceable, holding great amity with the Romans, left it hereditary to Lucius.
He (if Beda err not, living near 500 years after, yet our antientest Author of
this report) sent to Eleutherius then Bishop of Rome, an improbable Letter, as
some of the Contents discover, Faganus and Deruvianus, forthwith sent, are said
to have converted and baptized well nigh the whole Nation: Nennius.
thence Lucius to have had the surname of Levermaur, that is to say, great
light. Nor yet then first was the Christian Faith here known, but eev'n from
the later days of Tiberius, as Gildas confidently affirms, taught and
propagated, and that as some say by Simon Zelotes, as others by Joseph of
Arimathaea, Barnabas, Paul, Peter, and their prime Disciples. But of these
matters, variously written and believed, Ecclesiastic Historians can best
determine: as the best of them do, with little credit given to the particulars
of such uncertain relations. As for Lucius, they write, that after a long
reign he was buried at Gloucester; but dying without issue left the Kingdom in
great commotion. Geff. Mon.
By truer testimony we find that the greatest War which in those days busied
Commodus, Dion. L. 72.
was in this Island. For the Nations Northward, notwithstanding the Wall raised
to keep them out, breaking in upon the Roman Province, wasted wide; and both
the Army and the Leader that came against them wholly routed, and destroyed;
which put the Emperor in such a fear, as to dispatch hither one of his best
Commanders, Vlpius Marcellus. He a man endu'd with all nobleness of mind,
frugal, temperate, mild, and magnanimous, Roman Legions fell to sedition among
themselves; Lamprid. in comm.
15 hundred of them went to Rome in name of the rest, Commodus himself, as that
to please them he put to death Perennis the Captain of his Guard.
Notwithstanding which compliance they endeavored here to set up another
Emperor against him; and Helvius Pertinax who succeeded Governor, found it a
work so difficult to appease them, that once in a mutiny he was left for dead
among many slain; Capitolin. in Pert.
and was fain at length to seek a dismission from his charge. After him Clodius
Albinus took the Government; Capitolin. is Alb.
but he, for having to the Soldiers made an Oration against Monarchy, by the
appointment of Commodus was bid resign to Junius Severus. Albinus in those
troublesome times ensuing under the short reign of Pertinax and Didius
Julianus, Dion. Did. Jul. Spartian. in Sever. Herod. L. 3.
found means to keep in his hands the Government of Britain; although Septimius
Severus who next held the Empire, sent hither Heraclitus to displace him; but
in vain, for Albinus with all the British powers and those of Gallia met
Severus about Lions in France, and fought a bloody Battle with him for the
Empire, Herod. L. 3.
though at last vanquished and slain. The Government of Britain, Severus
divided between two Deputies; Digest. L. 28. tit. 6.
till then one Legate was thought sufficient; the North he committed to Virius
Lupus. Where the Meatae rising in Arms, and the Caledonians, though they had
promised the contrary to Lupus, Dion.
preparing to defend them, so hard beset, he was compelled to buy his peace,
and a few of Prisoners with great Sums of money. But hearing that Severus had
now brought to an end his other Wars, Herod. L. 3.
he writes him plainly the state of things here, that the Britans of the North
made War upon him, broke into the Province, and harrass'd all the Countries
nigh them, that there needed suddenly either more aid, or himself in person.
Severus though now much weak'nd with Age and the Gout, yet desirous to leav some
memorial of his warlike acheevements here, as he had don in other places, and
besides to withdraw by this means his two Sons from the pleasures of Rome, and
his Soldiers from idleness, with a mighty power far sooner than could be
expected, arrives in Britain. Britannicus, delays his answer and quick'ns his
preparations; till in the end, when all things were in readiness to follow
them, they are dismiss't without effect. His principal care was to have many
Bridges laid over Bogs and rott'n Moars, that his Soldiers might have to fight
on sure footing. For it seems through lack of tillage, the Northern parts were
then, as Ireland is at this day; and the inhabitants in like manner wonted to
retire, and defend themselves in such watrie places half naked. Adrians wall,
cut down Woods, made way through Hills, fast'nd and filled up unsound and
plashy Fens. Notwithstanding all this industry used, the Enemy kept himself
so cunningly within his best advantages, and seldom appearing, so opportunely
found his times to make irruption upon the Romans, when they were most in
straits and difficulties, sometimes training them on with a few Cattle
turn'dout, and drawn within ambush cruelly handling them, that many a time
enclosed in the midst of sloughs and quagmires, Dion.
they chose rather themselves to kill such as were faint and could not shift
away, than leave them there a prey to the Caledonians. Thus lost Severus, and
by sickness in those noisome places, no less than 50 thousand men: and yet
desisted not, though for weakness carried in a Litter, till he had marched
through with his Army to the utmost Northern verge of the I Will: and the Britans
offering peace were compelled to lose much of their Country not before subject to
the Romans. on the Frontiers of what he had firmly conquered builds a Wall
cross the Island from Sea to Sea; Spartianus in Sever.
which one Author judges the most magnificent of all his other deeds; and that
he thence received the style of Britannicus; in length 132 Miles. Eutropii
Pean. Oros. l. 7. Cassidor. chro. Buchanan.
Orosius adds it fortified with a deep Trench, and between certain spaces many
Towers, or Battlements. The place whereof some will have to be in Scotland, the
same which Lollius Vrbicus had walled before. Others affirm it only Hadrians
work re-edifi'd; both plead Authorities and the ancient tract yet visible: but
this I leave among the studious of these Antiquities to be discuss't more at
large. While Peace held, the Empress Julia meeting on a time certain British
Ladies, and discoursing with the Wife of Argentocoxus a Caledonian, cast out a
scoff against the looseness of our Island Women; whose manner then was to use
promiscuously the company of diverse men. Whom straight the British Woman boldly
thus answered: Much better do we Britans fulfill the work of Nature than you
Romans; we with the best men accustom op'nly; you with the basest commit
private adulteries. Whether she thought this answer might serve to justify the
practice of her Country, as when vices are compared, the greater seems to
justify the less, or whether the law and custom wherein she was bred, had
wiped out of her conscience the better dictate of Nature, and not convinced her
of the shame; certain it is that whereas other Nations used a liberty not
unnatural for one man to have many Wives, the Britans altogether as licentious,
Caesar.
but more absurd and preposterous in their license, had one or many Wives in
common among ten or twelve Husbands; and those for the most part incestuously.
But no sooner was Severus returned into the Province, then the Britans take
Arms again. Against whom Severus worn out with labors and infirmity, sends
Antoninus his eldest Son; expressly commanding him to spare neither Sex nor Age.
But Antoninus who had his wicked thoughts taken up with the contriving of his
Fathers death, a safer Enemy then a Son, did the Britans not much detriment.
Whereat Severus more overcom with grief than any other malady, ended his life
at York. Antoninus Caracalla his impious Son concluding peace with the Britans,
Spartianus in Sever.
took Hostages and departed to Rome. The Conductor of all this Northern War
Scottish Writers name Donaldus, he of Monmouth Fulgenius, in the rest of his
relation nothing worth. From hence the Roman Empire declining apace, good
Historians growing scarce, or lost, have left us little else but fragments for
many years ensuing. Gordian the Emperor we find by the Inscription of an Altar
stone, Camd. Cumber.
that Nonius Philippus governed here. Under Galienus we read there was a strong
and general revolt from the Roman Legate. Eumen. Paneg. Constable.
Of the 30 Tyrants which not long after took upon them the style of Emperor,
Lollianus, Victorinus, Posthumus, Camden.
the Tetrici and Marius are conjectured to have risen or born great sway in
this Island. Whence Porphyrius a Philosopher then living, Gildas.
said that Britain was a soil fruitful of Tyrants; Hieronym.
and is noted to be the first Author that makes mention of the Scottish Nation.
Frobus was Emperor, Bonosus the Son of a Rhetorician, Vapisc. in Bonos.
bred up a Spanyard, though by descent a Britan, and a matchless drinker, nor
much to be blamed, if, as they write, he were still wisest in his cups, having
attained in warfare to high honors, and lastly in his charge over the German
shipping, willingly, as was thought, miscarried, trusting on his power with the
Western Armies, and joined with Proculus, bore himself a while for Emperor; but
after a long and bloody fight at Cullen, vanquished by Probus he hanged
himself, and gave occasion of a ready jest made on him for his much drinking;
Here hangs a Tankard, not a man. Zozim. l. 1.
After this, Probus with much wisdom prevented a new rising here in Britain by
the severe loyalty of Victorinus a Moor, at whose entreatie he had placed here
that Governor which rebelled. For the Emperor upbraiding him with the
disloyalty of whom he had commended, Victorinus undertaking to set all right
again, hastes hither, and finding indeed the Governor to intend sedition, by
some contrivance not mentioned in the story, show him, whose name some imagine to
be Cornelius Lelianus. Camd.
They write also that Probus gave leave to the Spaniards, Gauls, and Britans to
plant Vines, and to make Wine; and having subdued the Vandals, and Burgundians
in a great Battle, Zozimus.
sent over many of them hither to inhabit, where they did good service to the
Romans when any insurrection happened in the I Will. Carus Emperor going against
the Persians, Vopisc. in Carin.
left Carinus one of his Sons to govern among other Western Provinces this
Island with imperial authority; but him Dioclesian saluted Emperor by the
Eastern Armies overcame and slew. Carausius a man of low parentage, born in
Menapia, Aurel. victor. de Caesar.
about the parts of Cleves and Juliers, who through all military degrees was
made at length Admiral of the Belgi^* and Armoric Seas, then much infested by
the Franks and Saxons, Eutrop. Oros.
nor accounting to the Public, but enriching himself, and yet not scowring the
Seas, but conniving rather at those Sea Robbers, was grown at length too great
a Delinquent to be less than an Emperor: for fear and guiltiness in those days
made Emperors ofter than merit: And understanding that Maximianus Herculius,
Dioclesians adopted Son, was com against him into Gallia, passed over with the
Navy which he had made his own, Eumen. Paneg. 2.
into Britain, and possessed the Island. Roman fashion, got into his power the
Legion that was left here in Garrison, other outlandish Cohorts detained,
listed the very Merchants and Factors of Gallia, and with the allurement of
spoil invited great numbers of other barbarous Nations to his part, and
trained them to Sea service, wherein the Romans at that time were grown so out
of skill, that Carausius with his Navy did at Sea what he listed, robbing on
every Coast; whereby Maximian, able to come no nearer than the shore of
Boloigne, was forced to conclude a Peace with Carausius, Victor. Eutrop.
and yield him Britain; as one fittest to guard the Province there against
inroads from the North. Constantius Chlorus to the dignity of Caesar, sent him
against Carausius; who in the mean while had made himself strong both within
the Land and without. Buchanan.
Galfred of Monmouth writes that he made the Ticts his confederates; to whom
lately com out of Scythia he gave Albany to dwell in: and it is observed that
before his time the Picts are not known to have bin any where mentioned, and
then first by Eumenius a Rhetorician. Paneg. 2.
He repaired and fortified the Wall of Severus with 7 Castles, and a round
House of smooth stone on the Bank of Carron, which River, says Ninnius, was of
his Name so called; he built also a Triumphal Arch in remembrance of some
Victory there obtained. In France he held Gessoriacum, or Boloigne; and all the
Franks which had by his permission seated themselves in Belgia, were at his
devotion. Paneg. Sigonius.
But Constantius hasting into Gallia, besieges Boloigne, and with Stones and
Timber obstructing the Port, keeps out all relief that could be sent in by
Carausius. Who ere Constantius with the great Fleet which he had prepared,
could arrive hither, was slain treacherously by Alectus one of his Friends, who
longed to step into his place; Constantius prosecute that opportunity, Camd. ex
Nin. Eumen. Pan. 3.
before Alectus could well strengthen his Affairs: and though in ill weather,
putting to Sea with all urgency from several Hav'ns to spread the terror of his
landing, and the doubt where to expect him, in a Mist passing the British Fleet
unseen, that lay scouting near the I Will of Wight, no sooner got a shore, but
fires his own Ships, to leave no hope of refuge but in Victory. Alectus also,
though now much dismayed, transfers his fortune to a Battle on the shore; but
encountered by Asclepiodotus Captain of the Praetorian Bands, and desperately
rushing on, unmindful both of ordering his men, or bringing them all to fight,
save the accessories of his Treason, and his outlandish hirelings, is
overthrown, and slain with little or no loss to the Romans, but great execution
on the Franks. His Body was found almost naked in the field, for his Purple
Robe he had thrown aside, lest it should descry him, unwilling to be found. The
rest taking flight to London, and purposing with the pillage of that City to
escape by Sea, are met by another part of the Roman Army, whom the Mist at Sea
disjoining had by chance brought thither, and with a new slaughter chased
through all the Streets. The Britans, their Wives also and Children, with great
joy go out to meet Constantius, as one whom they acknowledge their deliverer
from bondage and insolence. All this seems by Eumenius, who then lived, and was
of Constantius household, to have bin don in the course of one continued action;
so also thinks Sigonius a learned Writer: though all others allow three years
to the tyranny of Alectus. Eumen.
In these days were great store of Workmen, and excellent Builders in this
Island, whom after the alteration of things here, the Aeduans in Burgundy
entertained to build their Temples and public Edifices. Dioclesian having
hitherto successfully used his valor against the Enemies of his Empire, uses
now his rage in a bloody persecution against his obedient and harmless
Christian Subjects: Gildas.
from the feeling whereof neither was this Island, though most remote, far
anough removed. Among them here who suffered gloriously, Aron, and Julius of
Caer leon upon Vsk, but chiefly Alban of Verulam, were most renowned: The story
of whose Martyrdom soiled, and worse martyred with the fabling zeal of some
idle fancies, more fond of Miracles, than apprehensive of Truth, deserves not
longer digression. Constantius after Dioclesian, dividing the Empire with
Galerius, had Britain among his other Provinces; where either preparing or
returning with victory from an expedition against the Caledonians, he di'd at
York. Author ignot-post Marcellin. vales^i
His Son Constantine, who happily came Post from Rome to Boloigne just about
the time, Eumenius, that his Father was setting sail his last time hither,
Eutrop. Eumen. idem Auth. ignot.
and not long before his death, was by him on his deathbed named, and after his
Funeral, by the whole Army saluted Emperor. There goes a fame, and that
seconded by most of our own Historians, though not those the ancientest, that
Constantine was born in this Island, his Mother Helena the Daughter of Coilus a
British Prince, not sure the Father of King Lucius, whose Sister she must then
be, for that would detect her too old by an hunderd years to be the Mother of
Constantine. But to salve this incoherence, another Coilus is feigned to be
then Earl of Colchester. To this therefore the Roman Authors give no testimony,
except a passage or two in the Panegyrics, about the sense whereof much is
argued: others nearest to those times clear the doubt, and write him certainly
Idem vit. Auth. ignot. Eusebius. Constable.
born of Helena, a mean Woman at Naisus in Dardania. Howbeit, ere his departure
hence he seems to have had some bickerings in the North, which by reason of
more urgent affairs composed, he passes into Gallia; Sigon.
and after 4 years returns either to settle or to alter the state of things
here; Maxentius called him back, Camd.
leaving Pacatianus his Vicegerent. He deceasing, Constantine his eldest Son
enjoyed for his part of the Empire, with all the Provinces that lay on this
side the Alps, this Island also. Ammian. L. 20. and in eum Valesius.
But falling to Civil War with Constans his Brother, was by him slain; who
with his third Brother Constantius coming into Britain, seized it as Victor.
Magnentius, Libanius in Basilico.
one of his chief Commanders, by some affirmed the Son of a Britan, Camd. ex
Firmico.
contested with Constantius in many Battles for the sole Empire; but
vanquished, in the end slew himself. Somewhat before this time Gratianus
Funarius, Valentinian, Camden.
afterward Emperor, command of those Armies which the Romans kept here. Ammian.
And the Arrian Doctrine which then divided Christendom, wrought also in this
Island no small disturbance: a Land, says Gildas, greedy of every thing new,
steadfast in nothing. Constantius appointeda Synod of more than 400 Bishops to
assemble at Ariminum on the Emperors charges, which the rest all refusing,
three only of the British, poverty constreining them, accepted; though the
other Bishops among them offered to have born their charges: esteeming it more
honorable to live on the public, than to be obnoxious to any private Purse.
Doubtless an ingenuous mind, and far above the Presbyters of our Age; who like
well to sit in Assembly on the public stipend, but liked not the poverty that
caused these to do so. After this Martinus was Deputy of the Province; who
being offended with the cruelty which Paulus, an inquisitor sent from
Constantius, exercised in his enquiry after those Military Officers who had
conspired with Magnentius, was himself laid hold on as an accessory; at which
enraged he runs at Paulus with his drawnSword; but failing to kill him, turns
it on himself. Next to whom, as may be guessed, Alipius was made Deputy. In the
mean time Julian, whom Constantius had made Caesar, having recovered much
Territory about Rhine, where the German inrodes before had long insulted, to
releeve those Countries almost ruined, Liban. Orat. 10. Zozim. L. 3. Marcel. l.
18
causes 800 Pinaces to be built; and with them by frequent Voyages, plenty of
Corn to be fetched in from Britain; which eev'n then was the usual bounty of
this Soil to those parts, Amm. l. 23.
as often as French and Saxon Pirates hinderd not the transportation. Constantius
yet reigned, the Scots and Picts breaking in upon the Northern confines,
Julian, being at Paris, sends over Lupicinus, a well tried Soldier, but a Amm.
L. 20.
proud and covetous man; who with a power of light armed Herulians, Batavians,
and Maesians, in the midst of Winter sailing from Boloigne, arrives at Rutupiae
seated on the opposite shore, and comes to London, to consult there about the
War; but soon after was recalled by Julian then chosen Emperor. Under whom we
read not of ought happing here; only that Palladius one of his great Officers
was hither banished. This year Valentinian being Emperor, Attacots, Picts, Amm.
L. 26. 27.
and Scots roaving up and down, and last the Saxons with perpetual landings and
invasions harryed the South Coast of Britain; slew Nectaridius who governed the
Sea Borders, and Bulchobaudes with his Forces by an ambush. With which news
Valentinian not a little perplexed, sends first Severus high Steward of his
House, and soon recalls him, then Jovinus, who intimating the necessity of
greater supplies, he sends at length Theodosius, a man of tried valor, and
experience, father to the first Emperor of that Name. He with selected numbers
out of the Legions, and Cohorts, Boloigne to Rutupiae; from whence with the
Batavians, Herulians, and other Legions that arrived soon after, he marches to
London; and dividing his Forces into several Bodies, sets upon the dispersed
and plundring Enemy, lad'n with spoil; from whom recovering the booty which
they led away, and were forced to leave there with their lives, herestores all
to the right owners, save a small portion to his wearied Soldiers, and enters
London victoriously; which before in many straits and difficulties, was now
revived as with a great deliverance. The numerous Enemy with whom he had to
deal, was of different Nations, and the War scattered: which Theodosius,
getting daily some intelligence from fugitives and prisoners, resolves to carry
on by sudden parties and surprisals rather than set Battles; nor omits he to
proclaim indemnity to such as would lay down Arms, and accept of peace, which
brought in many. Yet all this not ending the work, he requires that Civilis, a
man of much uprightness, might be sent him, to be as Deputy of the Island, and
Dulcitius a famous Captain. Thus was Theodosius busied, besetting with ambushes
the roaving Enemy, repressing his Rodes, restoring Cities and Castles to their
former safety and defense, laying every where the firm foundation of a long
peace, Valentinus a Pannonian for some great offense banished into Britain,
Amm. L. 28. Zozim. L. 4.
conspiring with certain Exiles and Soldiers against Theodosius, whose worth
he dreaded as the only obstacle to his greater design of gaining the I Will into
his power, is discovered, and with his chief accomplices delivered over to
condign punishment: against the rest, Theodosius with a wise lenity suffered
not inquisition to proceed too rigorously, lest the fear thereof appertaining
to so many, occasion might arise of new trouble in a time so unsettl'd. This
don, he applies himself to reform things out of order, raises on the confines
many strong holds; and in them appoints due and diligent watches; and so
reduced all things out of danger, that the Province which but lately was under
command of the Enemy, became now wholly Roman, new named Valentia of
Valentinian, and the City of London Augusta. Thus Theodosius nobly acquitting
himself in all Affairs, with general applause of the whole Province,
accompanied to the Seaside, returns to Valentinian. Who about 5 years after
sent hither Fraomarius, Almans, with authority of a Tribune over his own
Country Forces, Amm. L. 29.
which then both for number and good service were in high esteem. Against
Gratian who succeeded in the Western Empire, Maximus a Spanyard, and one who
had served in the British Wars with younger Theodosius (for he also, Zozim.
L. 4. Sigon.
either with his Father, or not long after him, seems to have done something in
this Island) and now General of the Roman Armies here, either discontented that
Theodosius was preferred before him to the Empire, or constrained by the
Soldiers who hated Gratian, assumes the imperial Purple, Prosper. Aquitanic.
chron.
and having attained Victory against the Scots and Picts, with the flowr and
strength of Britain, passes into France; there slays Gratian, Gildas.
overthrown at length and slain by Theodosius. Beda. Ninn.
or not returning out of Armorioa, which Maximus had given them to possess, the
South of Britain by this means exhausted of her youth, and what there was of
Roman Soldiers on the Confines drawn off, became a prey to savage Invasions;
Scots from the Irish Seas, of Saxons from the German, of Picts from the North.
Against them, first Chrysanthus the Son of Marcian a Bishop, Soerat. L. 7.
made Deputy of Britain by Theodosius, demeaned himself worthily: then Stilicho
a man of great power, whom Theodosius, dying, left Protector of his Son
Honorius, either came in person, or sending over sufficient aid, Claudian. de
land. still. l. 2. and de bello Get.
repressed them, and as it seems new fortified the Wall against them. But that
Legion being called away, when the Roman Armies from all parts hasted to
relieve Honorius then besieged in Asta of Piemont, Alaric the Goth, Britain was
left exposed as before, to those Barbarous Robbers. Lest any wonder how the
Scots came to infest Britain from the Irish Sea, it must be understood, that
the Scots not many years before had been driven all out of Britain by Maximus;
and their King Eugenius slain in fight; as their own Annals report: whereby, it
seems, wandering up and down, without certain seat, they lived by scumming those
Seas and shoars as Pirates. But more authentic Writers confirm us Ethelwerd.
Sax. an. Bid Epit. in the year 565 and Bid, L. 2. c. 4.
, that the Scots, whoever they be originally, came first into Ireland, and
dwelt there, and named it Scotia long before the North of Britain took that
name. About this time, though troublesome, Pelagius a Britan found the leisure
to bring new and dangerous Opinions into the Church, Austin. But the Roman
powers which were called into Italy, when once the fear of Alaric was over,
made return into several Provinces: and perhaps Victorinus of Tolosa, whom
Rutilius the Poet much commends, might be then Prefect of the Island: if it were
not he whom Stilicho sent hither. Buchanan writes, that endeavoring to reduce
the Picts into a Province, he gave the occasion of their calling back Fergusins
and the Scots, whom Maximus with their help had quite driven out of the Island:
and indeed the Verses of that Poet speak him to have bin active in those parts.
But the time which is assigned him later by Buchanan after Gratianus Municeps,
by Camden, after Constantine the Tyrant, accords not with that which follows in
the plain course of History. Vandals having broke in and wasted all Belgia,
Zozim. L. 6.
eev'n to those places from whence easiest passage is into Britain, the Roman
Forces here, doubting to be suddenly invaded, were all in uproar, and in
tumultuous manner set up Marcus, who it may seem was then Deputy. Sozom. L. 9.
But him not found agreeable to their heady courses, they as hastily kill: for
the giddy favor of a mutining rout is as dangerous as their fury. The like
they do by Gratian a British Roman, in four Months advanced, adored, and
destroyed. Oros. L. 7.
There was among them a common Soldier whose name was Constantine, with him on
a sudden so taken they are, upon the conceit put in them of a luckiness in his
name, as without other visible merit to create him Emperor. It fortuned that
the man had not his name for naught; so well he knew to lay hold, and make good
use of an unexpected offer. He therefore with a wak'n'd spirit, to the extent
of his Fortune dilating his mind, which in his mean condition before lay
contracted and shrunk up, orders with good advice his military affairs: and
with the whole force of the Province, and what of British was able to bear
Arms, he passes into France, aspiring at least to an equal share with Honorius
in the Empire. Where by the valor of Edobecus a Frank, and Gerontius a Britan,
and partly by persuasion gaining all in his way, he comes to Arles. Constans,
whom of a Monk he had made a Caesar, and by the conduct of Gerontius he reduces
all Spain to his obedience. But Constans after this displacing Gerontius, the
affairs of Constantine soon went to wrack: for he by this means alienated,
Miximus one of his friends against him in Spain; and passing into France, took
Vienna by assault, and having slain Constans in that City, calls on the Vandals
against Constantine; who by him incited, as by him before they had bin
repress't, breaking forward, overrun most part of France. But when Constantius
Comes, the Emperors General, with a strong power came out of Italy, Sozom. L. 9.
Gerontius deserted by his own Forces, retires into Spain; where also growing
into contempt with the Soldiers, after his flight out of France,
Olympiodorapud Photium.
by whom his House in the night was beset, having first with a few of his
Servants defended himself valiantly, and slain above 300, though when his Darts
and other Weapons were spent, he might have escaped at a private door, as all
his Servants did, not enduring to leave his Wife Nonnichia, whom he loved, to
the violence of an enraged crew, he first cuts off the head of his friend
Alanus, as was agreed; next his Wife, though loath and delaying, yet by her
entreated and importuned, refusing to outlive her Husband, he dispatches: for
which her resolution Sozomenus an Ecclesiastic Writer gives her high praise,
both as a Wife, and as a Christian. Last of all against himself he turns his
Sword; but missing the mortal place, with his poinard finishes the work. Thus
far is poursu'd the story of a famous Britan, related negligently by our other
Historians. As for Constantinc, his ending was not answerable to his setting
out: for he with his other Son Julian beseig'd by Constantius in Arles, and
mistrusting the change of his wonted success, to save his head, poorly turns
Priest; but that not availing him, is carried into Italy, and there put to
death; having 4 years acted the Emperor. While these things were doing, the
Britans at home destitute of Roman aid, Gildas. Beda.
and the chief strength of their own youth, that went first with Maximus, then
with Constantine, not returning home, vexed, and harras'd by their wonted
Enemies, had sent messages to Honorius; Zozim. L. 6.
but he at that time not being able to defend Rome it self, which the same year
was taken by Alaric, advises them by his Letter to consult how best they might
for their own safety, and acquits them of the Roman jurisdiction. They
therefore thus relinquish't, Procopius vandalic.
and by all right the Government relapsing into their own hands, thenceforth
betook themselves to live after their own Laws, defending their bounds as well as
they were able, and the Armoricans, who not long after were called the Britans
of France, followed their Example. Thus expired this great Empire of the Romans;
first in Britain, soon after in Italy it self: having born chief sway in this
Island, though never thoroughly subdued, or all at once in subjection, if we
reck'n from the coming in of Julius to the taking of Rome by Alaric, in which
year Honorius wrote those Letters of discharge into Britain, the space of 462
years. Calvis. Sigon.
And with the Empire fell also what before in this Western World was chiefly
Roman; Learning, Valor, Eloquence, History, Civility, and eev'n Language it
self, all these together, as it were, with equal pace diminishing, and
decaying. Henceforth we are to stear by another sort of Authors; near anough to
the things they write, as in their own Country, if that would serve; in time
not much belated, some of equal age; in expression barbarous; and to say how
judicious, I suspend a while: this we must expect; in civil matters to find
them dubious Relaters, and still to the best advantage of what they term holy
Church, meaning indeed themselves: in most other matters of Religion, blind,
astonished, and struck with superstition as with a Planet; in one word, Monks.
Yet these Guides, where can be had no better, must be followed; in gross, it
may be true anough; in circumstance each man as his judgment gives him, may
reserve his Faith, or bestow it. But so different a state of things requires a
several relation.

THE HISTORY OF BRITAIN. The Third Book.
THis third Book having to tell of accidents as various and exemplary, as the
intermission or change of Government has any where brought forth, may deserve
attention more than common, and repay it with like benefit to them who can
judiciously read: considering especially that the late civil broils had cast us
into a condition not much unlike to what the Britans then were in, when the
imperial jurisdiction departing hence left them to the sway of their own
Councils; which times by comparing seriously with these later, and that
confused Anarchy with this intereign, we may be able from two such remarkable
turns of State, producing like events among us, to raise a knowledge of our
selves both great and weighty, by judging hence what kind of men the Britans
generally are in matters of so high enterprise, how by nature, industry, or
custom fitted to attempt or undergo matters of so main consequence: for if it
be a high point of wisdom in every private man, much more is it in a Nation to
know it self; rather than puffed up with vulgar flatteries, and encomiums, for
want of self knowledge, to enterprise rashly and come off miserably in great
undertakings. The Britans thus as we heard being left without protection from
the Empire, and the Land in a manner emptied of all her youth, consumed in
Wars abroad, or not caring to return home, themselves through long subjection,
servile in mind, Gild. Bid. Malins.
sloathful of body, and with the use of Arms unacquainted, sustained but ill
for many years the violence of those barbarous Invaders, who now daily grew
upon them. For although at first greedy of change, Zozim. L. 6.
and to be thought the leading Nation to freedom from the Empire, they seemed a
while to bestirr them with a show of diligence in their new affairs, some
secretly aspiring to rule, others adoring the name of liberty, yet so soon as
they felt by proof the weight of what it was to govern well themselves, and
what was wanting within them, not stomach or the love of license, but the
wisdom, the virtue, the labor, to use and maintain true liberty, they soon
remitted their heat, and shrunk more wretchedly under the burden of their own
liberty, than before under a foren yoke. Insomuch that the residue of those
Romans which had planted themselves here, despairing of their ill deportment at
home, and weak resistance in the field by those few who had the courage, or the
strength to bear Arms, nine years after the sacking of Rome removed out of
Britain into France, Ethelwerd. annal. Sax.
which was never after found. And now again the Britans, no longer able to
support themselves against the prevailing Enemy, solicit Honorius to their aid,
with mournful Letters, Gildas.
Embassages and vows of perpetual subjection to Rome if the Northern Foe were
but repuls't. Diaconus. L. 14.
which with great slaughter of the Scots and Picts drove them beyond the
Borders, rescued the Britans, and advised them to build a Wall cross the Island,
between Sea and Sea, from the place where Edinburg now stands to the Frith of
Dunbritton, Bid. L. 1. c. 2.
by the City Alcluith. But the material being only Turf, and by the rude
multitude unartificially built up without better direction, availed them
little. For no sooner was the Legion departed, Gildas.
but the greedy spoilers returning, land in great numbers from their Boats and
Pinaces, wasting, slaying, and treading down all before them. Then are
messengers again posted to Rome in lamentable sort, beseeching that they would
not suffer a whole Province to be destroyed, and the Roman name, so honorable
yet among them, to become the subject of barbarian scorn and insolence. Romans
who came not now to rule, but charitably to aid, declaring that it stood not
longer with the ease of their Affairs to make such labourious voyages in pursuit
of so base and vagabond robbers, of whom neither glory was to be got, nor gain,
exhorted them to manage their own warfare; and to defend like men their Country,
their Wives, their Children, and what was to be dearer than life, their liberty,
against an Enemy not stronger than themselves, if their own sloth and cowardice
had not made them so; if they would but only find hands to grasp defensive
Arms, rather than basely stretch them out to receave bonds. Bid ibid.
They gave them also their help to build a new Wall, not of earth as the former,
but of stone (both at the public cost, Gildas.
and by particular contributions) traversing the I Will in direct line from East
to West between certain Cities placed there as Frontiers to bear off the Enemy,
where Severus had walled once before. They raised it 12 Foot high, 8 broad.
Along the South shore, because from thence also like hostility was feared, they
place Towers by the Sea side at certain distances, for safety of the Coast.
Withal they instruct them in the art of War, leaving Patterns of their Arms
and Weapons behind them; and with animating words, and many lessons of valor
to a faint-hearted audience, bid them finally farewell, without purpose to
return. And these two friendly Expeditions, the last of any hither by the
Romans, were performed, as may be gathered out of Beda, and Diaconus, the two
last years of Honorius. Their Leader, as some modernly write, was Gallio of
Ravenna; Blond.
Buchanan, who departs not much from the Fables of his Predecessor Boethius,
Sabellic.
names him Maximianus, and brings against him to this Battle Fergus first King
of Scots after their second supposed coming into Scotland, Dursius King of
Picts, both there slain, and Dioneth an imaginary King of Britain, or Duke of
Cornwall, who improbablie sided. with them against his own Country, hardly
escaping. With no less exactness of particular circumstances, Buch. L. 5.
he takes upon him to relate all those tumultuarie inrodes of the Scots and
Picts into Britain, as if they had but yesterday happened, their order of
Battle, manner of fight, number of slain, Articles of Peace, things whereof
Gildas and Beda are utterly silent, Authors to whom the Scotch Writers have
none to cite comparable in Antiquity; no more therefore to be believed for bare
assertions, however quaintlie dressed, than our Geofry of Monmouth when he varies
most from authentic story. But either the inbred vanity of some, in that
respect unworthily called Historians, or the fond zeal of praising their Nations
above truth has so far transported them, that where they find nothing
faithfully to relate, they fall confidently to invent what they think may
either best set off their History, or magnify their Country.

The Scots and Picts in manners differing somewhat from each other, but still
unanimous to rob and spoil, hearing that the Romans intended not to return,
from their Gorroghs, or Leathern Frigates pour out themselves in swarms upon the
Land, Gildas. Bid.
more confident than ever: and from the North end of the I Will to the very wall
side, then first took possession as inhabitants; while the Britans with idle
Weapons in their hands stand trembling on the Battlements, till the half-naked
Barbarians with their long and formidable Iron hooks pull them down headlong.
The rest not only quitting the Wall but Towns and Cities, leave them to the
bloody pursuer, who follows killing, wasting, and destroying all in his way.
From these confusions arose a Famine, and from thence discord and civil
commotion among the Britans: each man living by what he robbed or took violently
from his Neighbor. When all stores were consumed and spent where men
inhabited, they betook them to the Woods, and lived by hunting, which was their
only sustainment. Bid. Constantius.
To the heaps of these evils from without, were added new divisions within the
Church. For Agricola the Son of Severianus a Pelagian Bishop had spread his
Doctrine wide among the Britans not uninfected before. The sounder part neither
willing to embrace his opinion to the overthrow of divine grace, nor able to
refute him, crave assistance from the Churches of France: who send them
Germanus Bishop of Auxerre, Lupus of Troyes. They by continual preaching in
Churches, Prosp. Aquit.
in Streets, in Fields, and not without miracles, as is writt'n, confirmed some,
regained others, Math. West. ad ann. 446.
and at Verulam in a public disputation put to silence their chief adversaries.
This reformation in the Church was believed to be the cause of their success a
while after in the field. Saxons and Picts with joint force, which was no new
thing before the Saxons at least had any dwelling in this Island, during the
abode of Germanus here, had made a strong impression from the North. Constant.
vit. German.
The Britans marching out against them, and mistrusting their own power, send to
Germanus and his Colleague, reposing more in the spiritual strength of those two
men, than in their own thousands armed. They came, and their presence in the Camp
was not less than if a whole Army had com to second them. It was then the time
of Lent, and the people instructed by the daily Sermons of these two Pastors,
came flocking to receave Baptism. There was a place in the Camp set apart as a
Church, and tricked up with boughs upon Easter Day. The Enemy understanding
this, and that the Britans were taken up with Religions more than with feats of
Arms, advances, after the Paschal Feast, as to a certain Victory. German who
also had intelligence of their approach, undertakes to be Captain that day; and
riding out with selected Troops to discover what advantages the place might
offer, lights on a Valley compass't about with Hills, by which the Enemy was to
pass. And placing there his ambush, warns them that what word they heard him
pronounce aloud, the same they should repeat with universal shout. The Enemy
passes on securely, and German thrice aloud cries Halleluia; which answered by
the Soldiers with a sudd'n burst of clamor, is from the Hills and Valleys
redoubled. The Saxons and Picts on a sudden supposing it the noise of a huge
Host, throw themselves into flight, casting down their Arms, and great numbers
of them are drowned in the River which they had newly passed. This Victory,
thus won without hands, left to the Britans plenty of spoil, and to the person
and the preaching of German greater authority and reverence than before. And
the exploit might pass for current, if Constantius, the Writer of his life in
the next age, had resolved us how the British Army came to want baptizing; for
of any Paganism at that time, or long before, in the Land we read not, or that
Pelagianism was re-baptiz'd. The place of this Victory, as is reported, Vsser.
Primord p. 333.
was in Flintshire by a Town called Guid-cruc, and the River Allen, where a
field retains the name of Maes German to this day. German was returned home,
the Scots and Picts, Prosp. Aquit.
though now so many of them Christians, that Palladius a Deacon was ordained
and sent by Celestine the Pope to be a Bishop over them, were not so well
reclaimed, Ethelwerd. Florent. Gild. Bid.
or not so many of them as to cease from doing mischief to their Neighbors,
where they found no impeachment to fall in yearly as they were wont. They
therefore of the Britans who perhaps were not yet wholly ruined, in the
strongest and South-west parts of the I Will, send Letters to Aetius, then third
time Consul of Rome, with this superscription; Malmsbury L. 1. c. 1. p. 8.
To Aetius thrice Consul, the groans of the Britans. And after a few words
thus: The barbarians drive us to the Sea, the Sea drives us back to the
barbarians; thus bandied up and down between two deaths we perish, either by
the Sword or by the Sea. But the Empire at that time overspread with Hunns and
Vandals, was not in condition to lend them aid. Thus rejected and wearied out
with continual flying from place to place, but more afflicted with Famine,
which then grew outrageous among them, many for hunger yielded to the Enemy,
others either more resolute, or less exposed to wants, keeping within Woods,
and Mountainous places, not only defended themselves, but sallying out at
length gave a stop to the insulting Foe with many seasonable defeats; led by
some eminent person, as may be thought, who exhorted them not to trust in their
own strength, but in Divine assistance. And perhaps no other here is meant than
the foresaid deliverance by German, if computation would permit, which Gildas
either not much regarded, or might mistake; but that he tarried so long here,
the Writers of his life assent not. Gildas.
Finding therefore such opposition, the Scots or Irish Robbers, for so they are
indifferently termed, without delay get them home. The Picts, as before was
mentioned, then first began to settle in the utmost parts of the Island, using
now and then to make inrodes upon the Britans. But they in the mean while thus
ridd of their Enemies, begin afresh to till the ground; which after cessation
yields her fruit in such abundance, as had not formerly bin known for many
Ages. But wantonness and luxury, the wonted companions of plenty, grow up as
fast, and with them, if Gildas deserve belief, all other vices incident to
human corruption. That which he notes especially to be the chief perverting of
all good in the Land, and so continued in his days, was the hatred of truth,
and all such as durst appear to vindicate and maintain it. Against them, as
against the only disturbers, all the malice of the Land was bent. Lies and
falsities, and such as could best invent them, were only in request. Evil was
embraced for good, wickedness honored and esteemed as virtue. And this quality
their valor had, against a foren Enemy to be ever backward and heartless; to
civil broils eager and prompt. In matters of Government, and the search of
truth, weak and shallow, in falsehood and wicked deeds pregnant and industrious.
Pleasing to God, or not pleasing, with them weighed alike; and the worse most
an end was the weightier. All things were done contrary to public welfare and
safety; nor only by secular men, for the Clergy also, whose Example should have
guided others, were as vicious and corrupt. Many of them besotted with
continual drunkenness; or swollen with pride and willfulness, full of contention,
full of envy, indiscreet, incompetent Judges to determine what in the practice
of life is good or evil, what lawful or unlawful. Thus furnished with judgment,
and for manners thus qualified both Priest and Lay, they agree to choose them
several Kings of their own; as near as might be, likest themselves; and the
words of my Author import as much. Kings were anointed, says he, not of Gods
anointing, but such as were cruellest, and soon after as inconsiderately,
without examining the truth, put to death by their anointers, to set up others
more fierce and proud. As for the election of their Kings (and that they had not
all one Monarch, appears both in Ages past and by the sequel) it began, as nigh
as may be guessed, either this Year or the following, Romans had quite deserted
their claim. Constant. Bid.
About which time also Pelagianism again prevailing by means of some few, the
British Clergy too weak, it seems, at dispute, entreat the second time German
to their assistance. Who coming with Severus a Disciple of Lupus that was his
former associate, stands not now to argue, for the people generally continued
right; but enquiring those Authors of new disturbance, adjudges them to
banishment. They therefore by consent of all were delivered to German; Sigon.
Gildas.
disposed of them in such place where neither they could infect others, and
were themselves under cure of better instruction. But Germanus the same year
died in Italy; and the Britans not long after found themselves again in much
perplexity, with no slight rumor that their old troublers the Scots and Picts
had prepared a strong invasion, purposing to kill all and dwell themselves in
the Land from end to end. But ere their coming in, as if the instruments of
Divine justice had bin at strife, which of them first should destroy a wicked
Nation, the Pestilence forestalling the Sword left scarce alive whom to bury
the dead; and for that time, as one extremity keeps off another, preserved the
Land from a worse encumbrance of those barbarous dispossessors, whom the
Contagion gave not leave now to enter far. Malms. L. 1.
And yet the Britans nothing bettered by these heavy judgments, the one
threatened, the other felt, instead of acknowledging the hand of Heaven, run to
the Palace of their King Vortigern with complaints and cries of what they
suddenly feared, from the Pictish invasion. Vortigern, who at that time was
chief rather than sole King, unless the rest had perhaps left their Dominions to
the common Enemy, is said by him of Monmouth to have procured the death first
of Constantine, then of Constance his Son, who of a Monk was made King, and by
that means to have usurped the Crown. But they who can remember how Constantine
with his Son Constance the Monk, the one made Emperor, the other Caesar,
perished in France, may discern the simple fraud of this Fable. But Vortigern
however coming to reign, is deciphered by truer stories a proud unfortunate
Tyrant, and yet of the people much beloved, because his vices sorted so well
with theirs. For neither was he skilled in War, nor wise in Counsel, but
covetous, lustful, luxurious, and prone to all vice; wasting the public
Treasure in gluttony and riot, careless of the common danger, and through a
haughty ignorance, unapprehensive of his own. Nevertheless importuned and
awaked at length by unusual clamours of the people, he summons a general
Council, to provide some better means than heertofore had been used against
these continual annoyances from the North. Wherein by advice of all it was
determined, that the Saxons be invited into Britain against the Scots and
Picts; whose breaking in they either shortly expected, or already found they
had not strength anough to oppose. The Saxons were a barbarous and heathen
Nation, famous for nothing else but robberies and cruelties done to all their
Neighbors both by Sea and Land; in particular to this Island, witness that
military force which the Roman Emperors maintained here purposely against them,
under a special Commander, whose title, as is found, on good record, Notitiae
imperii.
was Count of the Saxon shore in Britain; and the many mischiefs done by their
landing here, both alone and with the Picts, as above has bin related, witness
as much. They were a people thought by good Writers, Florent. Wigorn. ad an.
370.
to be descended of the Sacae, a kind of Scythian in the North of Asia, thence
called Sacasons, or Sons of Sacae, who with a Flood of other Northern Nations
came into Europe, toward the declining of the Roman Empire; and using Pyracy
from Denmark all along these Seas, Ethelwerd.
possessed at length by intrusion all that Coast of Germany and the
Nether-lands, which took thence the name of old Saxony, lying between the Rhene
and Flve, and from thence North as far as Eidora, the River bounding Holsatia,
though not so firmly, or so largely, but that their multitude wandered yet
uncertain of habitation. Such guests as these the Britans resolve now to send
for, and entreat into their houses and possessions, at whose very name
heertofore they trembled afar off. So much do men through impatience count ever
that the heaviest which they bear at present, and to remove the evil which they
suffer, care not to pull on a greater: as if variety and change in evil also
were acceptable. Or whether it be that men in the despair of better, imagine
fondly a kind of refuge from one misery to another.

The Britans therefore, with Vortigern, who was then accounted King over them
all, Ethelwerd. Malmsb. Witichind. gest. Sax. L. 1. p. 3.
resolve in full Council to send Ambassadors of their choicest men with great
gifts, and says a Saxon Writer in these words, desiring their aid. Worthy
Saxons, hearing the fame of your prowess, the distressed Britans wearied out,
and overprest by a continual invading Enemy, have sent us to beseech your aid.
They have a Land fertile and spacious, which to your commands they bid us
surrender. Heertofore we have lived with freedom, under the obedience and
protection of the Roman Empire. Next to them we know none worthier than your
selves; and therefore become suppliants to your valor. Leave us not below our
present Enemies, and to ought by you imposed, willingly we shall submit. Yet
Ethelwerd writes not that they promised subjection, but only amity and league.
Malms.
They therefore who had chief rule among them, hearing themselves entreated by
the Britans, to that which gladly they would have wished to obtain of them by
entreating, to the British Embassy return this answer. Witichind.
Be assured henceforth of the Saxons, as of faithful friends to the Britans, no
less ready to stand by them in their need, than in their best of fortune. The
Ambassadors return joyful, and with news as welcome to their Country, whose
sinister fate had now blinded them for destruction. Gildas.
The Saxons, consulting first their Gods (for they had answer, that the Land
whereto they went, they should hold 300 years, half that time conquering, and
half quietly possessing) furnish out three long Galleys, or Kyules, Bid.
with a chos'n company of warlike youth, under the conduct of two Brothers,
Hengist and Horsa, descended in the fourth degree from Woden; of whom, deify'd
for the fame of his acts, most Kings of those Nations derive their pedigree.
These, and either mixed with these, or soon after by themselves, two other
Tribes, or neighboring people, Jutes and Angles, the one from Jutland, the
other from Anglen by the City of Sleswich, both Provinces of Denmark, Martian
the Greek Emperor, Nennius. Malms.
from the birth of Christ 450, received with much good will of the people
first, then of the King, who after some assurances given and taken, bestows on
them the I Will of Tanet, where they first landed, hoping they might be made
heerby more eager against the Picts, when they fought as for their own Country,
and more loyal to the Britans, from whom they had received a place to dwell in,
which before they wanted. The British Nennius writes that these Brethren were
driven into exile out of Germany, and to Vortigern who reigned in much fear,
one while of the Picts, then of the Romans, and Ambrosius, came opportunely
into the Hav'n. Malmsb.
For it was the custom in old Saxony, when their numerous offspring overflowed
the narrowness of their bounds, to send them out by lot into new dwellings,
wherever they found room, either vacant or to be forced. But whether sought, or
unsought, they dwelt not here long without employment. Henry Huntingd.
For the Scots and Picts, were now come down, some say, as far as Stamsord in
Lincolnshire, whom, perhaps not imagining to meet new opposition, Ethelwerd.
the Saxons, though not till after a sharp encounter, put to flight; and that
more than once: Bed. Nin.
slaying in fight, as some Scotch Writers affirm, their King Eugenius the Son of
Fergus. Nenn.
Hengist percaeving the Island to be rich and fruitful, but her Princes and
other inhabitants given to vicious ease, sends word home, inviting others to a
share of his good success. Who returning with 17 Ships, were grown up now to a
sufficient Army, and entertained without suspicion on these terms, that they
should bear the brunt of War against the Picts, receaving stipend and some
place to inhabit. With these was brought over the Daughter of Hengist, a Virgin
wondrous fair, as is reported, Rowen the British call her: she by commandment
of her Father, who had invited the King to a Banquet, coming in presence with a
Bowl of Wine to welcome him, and to attend on his Cup till the Feast ended,
won so much upon his fancy, though already wiv'd, as to demand her in marriage
upon any conditions. Hengist at first, though it fell out perhaps according to
his drift, held off, excusiing his meanness; then obscurely intimating a desire
and almost a necessity, by reason of his augmented numbers, to have his narrow
bounds of Tanet enlarged to the Circuit of Kent, had it streit by donation:
though Guorangonus till then was King of that place: and so, as it were
overcome by the great munificence of Vortiger, gave his Daughter. And still
encroaching on the Kings favor, got further leave to call over Octa and Ebissa,
his own and his Brothers Son; pretending that they, if the North were given
them, would sit there as a continual defense against the Scots, while himself
guarded the East. They therefore sailing with forty Ships eev'n to the Orcades,
and every way curbing the Scots and Picts, possessed that part of the I Will which
is now Northumberland. Gildas. Bed. Ninn.
Notwithstanding this they complain that their monthly pay was grown much into
arrear; which when the Britans found means to satisfy, though alleging withal
that they to whom promise was made of wages, were nothing so many in number,
quieted with this a while, but still seeking occasion to fall off, they find
fault next, that their pay is too small for the danger they undergo, threatening
open War unless it be augmented. Guortimer the Kings Son perceaving his Father
and the Kingdom thus betrayed, from that time bends his utmost endeavor to
drive them out. They on the other side making League with the Picts and Scots,
and issuing out of Kent, wasted without resistance almost the whole Land eev'n
to the Western Sea, with such a horrid devastation, that Towns and Colonies
overturned, Priests and people slain; Temples, and Palaces, what with fire and
Sword lay altogether heaped in one mixed ruin. Of all which multitude, so great
was the sinfullness that brought this upon them, Gildas adds that few or none
were likely to be other then lewd and wicked persons. The residue of these,
part overtak'n in the Mountains were slain; others subdued with hunger
preferred slavery before instant death; some getting to Rocks, Hills, and Woods
inaccessible, preferred the fear and danger of any Death before the shame of a
secure slavery; many fled over Sea into other Countries; some into Primord.
page 418.
Holland, where yet remain the ruins of Brittenburgh, an old Castle on the Sea,
to be seen at low water not far from Leiden; either built, as Writers of their
own affirm, or seized on by those Britans in their escape from Hengist: Others
into Armorica, peopled, as some Malms. L. 1. c. 1.
think, with Britans long before; either by gift of Constantine the Great, or
else of Maximus to those British Forces which had served them in Foreign Wars;
to whom those also that miscarried not with the latter Constantine at Arles;
and lastly, these exiles driven out by Saxons, fled for refuge. But the ancient
Chronicles of those Provinces attest their coming thither to be then first when
they fled the Saxons, and indeed the name of Britain in France is not read till
after that time. Yet how a sort of fugitives who had quitted without stroke
their own Country, should so soon win another, appears not; unless joined to some
party of their own settled there before. Vortiger nothing bettered by these
calamities, grew at Ninn. Malmsb.
last so obdurat as to commit incest with his daughter, tempted or tempting him
out of an ambition to the Crown. For which being censured and condemned in a
great Synod of Clercs, and Laics, and partly for fear of the Saxons, according
to the Counsel of his Peers he retired into Wales, and built him there a strong
Castle in Radnorshire by the advice of Ambrosius Ninn.
a young prophet, whom others call Merlin. Nevertheless Faustus, who was the
Son thus incestuously begott'n under the instructions of German, or some of his
Disciples, for German was dead before, proved a religious man, and lived in
devotion by the River Remnis in Clamorganshire. But the Saxons, though Gildas.
finding it so easy to subdue the I Will, with most of their Forces, uncertain for
what cause, returned home: when as the easiness of their Conquest might seem
rather likely to have called in more. Which makes more probable that which the
British write of Guortemir. For he coming to Reign, instead of his Father Ninn.
deposed for incest, is said to have thrice driven and beseig'd the Saxons in
the I Will of Taneth; and when they issued out with powerful supplies sent from
Saxony, to have fought with them fowr other Battles, whereof three are named;
the first on the River Darwent, the second at Episford, wherein Horsa the
Brother of Hengist fell, and on the British part Catigern the other Son of
Vortiger. The third in a Field by Stonar then called Lapis tituli in Tanct,
where he beat them into their Ships that bore them home, glad to have so escaped
and not venturing to land again for 5 years after. In the space whereof
Guortemir dying, commanded they should bury him in the Port of Stonar;
persuaded that his bones lying there would be terror enough to keep the Saxons
from ever landing in that place: they, says Ninnius, neglecting his command,
buried him in Lincoln. But concerning these times, antientest annals of the
Saxons relate in this manner. Hengist and Horsa fought against Vortigern, Bid.
Ethelwerd.
in a place called Eglesthrip, now Ailsford in Kent; where Horsa lost his life,
of Florent. Annal. Sax.
whom Horsted, the place of his burial, took name.

After this first Battle and the Death of his Brother, The Kingdom of Kent.
Hengist with his Son Esca took on him Kingly Title, and peopled Kent with
Jutes; who also then or not long after possessed the I Will of Wight, and part of
Hamshire lying opposite. Creganford, or Craford, Hengist and his Son slew of
the Britans four Chief Commanders, and as many thousand men: the rest in great
disorder flying to London, with the total loss of Kent. Britans; of whom in a
Battle at Wippeds-fleot, 12 Princes were slain, and Wipped the Saxon Earl, who
left his name to that place, though not sufficient to direct us where it now
stands. Nennius, fought by Guortemir, though by these Writers far differently
related; and happ'ning besides many other bickerings, in the space of 20 years,
as Malmsbury reck'ns. Nevertheless it plainly appears that the Saxons, by
whomsoever, were put to hard shifts, being all this while fought withal in
Kent, their own allotted dwelling, and sometimes on the very edge of the Sea,
which the word Wippeds-fleot seems to intimat. But Guortemir now dead, and none
of courage left to defend the Land, Nennius.
Vortigern either by the power of his faction, or by consent of all, reassumes
the Government: and Hengist thus rid of his grand opposer, hearing gladly the
restorement of his old favourer, returns again with great Forces; but to
Vortigern whom he well knew how to handle without warring, as to his Son in
Law, now that the only Author of dissension between them was removed by Death,
offers nothing but all terms of new league and amity. The King both for his
Wives sake and his own sottishness, consulting also with his Peers not unlike
himself, readily yields; and the place of parley is agreed on; to which either
side was to repair without Weapons. Hengist, whose meaning was not peace, but
treachery, appointed his men to be secretly armed, and acquainted them to what
intent. The watchword was Malms.
Nemet eour Saxes, that is, Draw your Daggers; which they observing, when the
Britans were thoroughly heated with Wine (for the Treaty it seems was not
without Cups) and provoked, as was plotted, by some affront, dispatched with
those Poniards every one his next man, to the number of 300. the chief of those
that could do ought against him either in Counsel or in Field. Vortigern they
only bound and kept in Custody, until he granted them for his ransom three
Provinces, which were called afterward Essex, Sussex, and Middlesex. Who thus
dismissed, retiring again to his solitary abode in the Country of
Guorthigirniaun, so called by his name, from thence to the Castle of his own
building in North Wales, by the River Tiebi; and living there obscurely among
his Wives, was at length burnt in his Tower by fire from Heaven at the Prayer,
as some say, of German, but that Nin. ex legend St. Ger. Galfrid. Monmouth.
coheres not; as others, by Ambrosius Aurelian; of whom as we have heard at
first, he stood in great fear, and partly for that cause invited in the Saxons.
Who whether by constraint or of their own accord after much mischief don, most
of them returning back into their own Country, left a fair opportunity to the
Britans of avenging themselves the easier on those that staid behind.
Repenting therefore, and with earnest supplication imploring divine help to
prevent their final rooting out, they gather from all parts, and under the
leading of Ambrosius Aurelianus, a virtuous and modest man, the last here of
Roman stock, advancing now onward against the late Victors, defeat them in a
memorable Battle. Common opinion, but grounded chiefly on the British Fables,
makes this Ambrosius to be a younger Son of that Constantine, whose eldest, as
we heard, was Constance the Monk: who both lost their lives abroad usurping the
Empire. But the express words both of Gildas and Bid, assures us that the
Parents of this Ambrosius having here born regal dignity, were slain in these
Pictish Wars and commotions in the Island. And if the fear of Ambrose induced
Vortigern to call in the Saxons, it seems Vortigern usurped his right. I
perceave not that Nennius makes any difference between him and Merlin: for that
Child without Father that propheci'd to Vortigern, he names not Merlin but
Ambrose, makes him the Son of a Roman Consul; but concealed by his mother, as
fearing that the King therefore sought his life; yet the youth no sooner had
confessed his parentage, but Vortigern either in reward of his predictions, or
as his right, bestowed upon him all the West of Britain; himself retiring to a
solitary life. Whose ever Son he was, he was the first, according to surest
Authors, Gildas. Bed.
that led against the Saxons, and overthrew them; but whether before this time
or after, none have writt'n. This is certain, that in a time when most of the
Saxon Forces were departed home, the Britans gathered strength; and either
against those who were left remaining, or against their whole powers, the second
time returning obtained this Victory. Thus Ambrose as chief Monarch of the I Will
succeeded Vortigern; to whose third Son Pascentius he permitted the rule of two
Regions in Wales, Buelth, and Guorthigirniaun. In his days, says Nennius, the
Saxons Ninn.
prevailed not much: against whom Arthur, as being then Chief General for the
British Kings, made great War; but more renowned in Songs and Romances, then in
true stories. And the sequel it self declares as much. Ella the Saxon, Sax. an.
Ethelw. Florent.
with his three Sons, Cymen, Pleting, and Cissa, at a place in Suffex called
Cymenshore, arrive in three Ships, kill many of the Britans, chasing them that
remained into the Wood Andreds League. Mercreds-Burnamsted, Florent. Huntingd.
wherein Ella had by far the Victory; but Huntingdon makes it so doubtful, that
the Saxons were constrained to send home for supplies. Hengist the first Saxon
King of Kent; noted to have attained that dignity by craft, as much as valor,
Malms.
and giving scope to his own cruel nature, rather then proceeding by mildness
or civility. His Son Bed. L. 2. c. 5.
Oeric surnamed Oisc, of whom the Kentish Kings were called Oiscings, succeeded
him, and sat content with his Fathers winnings; more desirous to settle and
defend, then to enlarge his bounds: he reigned 24 years. By this time Ella and
his Son Cissa, beseiging Andredchester, Camden.
supposed now to be Newenden in Kent, take it by force, and all within it put
to the Sword.

Thus Ella 3 years after the death of Hengist, began The Kingdom of
South Saxons. Bed. L. 1. c. 15. and L. 2. c. 5.
his Kingdom of the South Saxons; peopling it with new inhabitants, from the
Country which was then old Saxony, at this day Holstein in Denmark, and had
besides at his command all those Provinces which the Saxons had won on this
side Humber. Animated with these good successes, as if Britain were become now
the field of Fortune, Kerdic another Saxon Prince, the tenth by Lineage from
Woden an Sax. an. omn.
old and practiced Soldier, who in many prosperous conflicts against the Enemy
in those parts, Kerdic-shoar, with 5 Ships, and Kenric his Son, the very same
day overthrew the Britans that opposed him; and so effectually, that smaller
skirmishes after that day were sufficient to drive them still further off,
leaving him a large territory. Porta another Saxon with his two Sons Bida and
Sax. an. omn. Huntingd.
Megla, in two Ships arrive at Portsmouth thence called; and at their landing
slew a young British Nobleman, with many others who unadvisedly set upon them.
Britans to recover what they had lost, draw together Annal. omn. Huntingd.
Camden.
all their Forces led by Natanleod, or Nazaleod, a certain King in Britain, and
the greatest says one; but him with 5000 of his men Kerdic puts to rout and
slaies. From whence the place in Hantshire, as far as Kerdicsford, now
Chardford, was called of old Nazaleod. Who this King should be, has bred much
question; some think it to be the British name of Ambrose; Camd. Vss. primord.
others to be the right name of his Brother, who for the terror of his
eagerness in fight, became more known by the Surname of Other, which in the
Welsh Tongue signifies Dreadful. And if ever such a King in Britain there were
as Other Pendragon, for so also the Monmouth Book surnames him, this in all
likelihood must be he. Kerdic by so great a blow given to the Britans had made
large room about him; not only for the men he brought with him, but for such
also of his friends, as he desired to make great; for which cause, and withal
the more to strengthen himself, Stuf, and Withgar, An. omn.
in 3 Vessels bring him new levies to Kerdic shore. Who that they might not
come sluggishly to possess what others had won for them, either by their own
seeking, or by appointment, are set in place where they could not but at their
first coming give a proof of themselves upon the Enemy: and so well they did
it, that the Britans after a hard encounter left them Masters of the field.
And about the same time, Ella the first Huntingdon.
South-Saxon King died; whom Cissa his youngest succeeded; the other two
failing before him.

Nor can it be much more or less then about this The Kingdom of East Angles.
time, for it was before the West Saxon Kingdom, that Vffa the 8th. from Woden
made himself King of the East Angles; who by their name testify the Country
above mentioned; from whence they came Malms. L. 1. c. 5. Bed. L. 1. c. 15.
Huntingd. L. 2. p. 313. 315. Bid L. 2. c. 15. Malms. L. 1. c. 6.
in such multitudes, that their native soil is said to have remained in the
days of Beda uninhabited. Huntingdon deferrs the time of their coming in, to
the ninth year of Kerdic's Reign: for says he, at first many of them strove
for principality, seizing every one his Province, and for some while so
continued making petty Wars among themselves; till in the end Vffa, of whom
those Kings were called Vffings, overtop'd them all in the year 571, then
Titilus his Son, the Father of Redwald, who became potent.

And not much after the East Angles, began also the The Kingdom of East Saxons.
East Saxons to erect a Kingdom under Sleda the tenth from Woden. But
Huntingdon, as before, will have it later by 11 years, and Erchenwin to be the
first King.

Kerdic the same in power, though not so fond of The Kingdom of West Saxons.
title, forbore the name 24 Years after his arrival; but then founded so firmly
the Kingdom of West Saxons, that it subjected all the rest at length, and
became the sole Monarchy of England. The same year he had a Victory against
the Britans at Kerdics-Ford Sax. an. omn.
Ford, by the River Aven: Kerdics Leage, but which won the day is not by any
set down. Hitherto has bin collected what there is of certainty with
circumstance of time and place to be found registered, and no more then barely
registered in annals of best note; without describing after Huntingdon the
manner of those Battles and Encounters, which they who compare, and can judge
of Books, may be confident he never found in any current Author whom he had to
follow. But this disease has bin incident to many more Historians: and the age
whereof we now write, has had the ill hap, more then any since the first
fabulous times, to be surcharged with all the idle fancies of posterity. Yet
that we may not rely altogether on Saxon relaters, Gildas, in Antiquity far
before these, and every way more credible, speaks of these Wars in such a
manner, though nothing conceited of the British valor, as declares the Saxons
in his time and before to have bin foiled not seldomer then the Britans. For
besides that first Victory of Ambrose, and the interchangeable success long
after, he tells that the last overthrow which they received at Badon Hill, was
not the least; which they in their oldest annals mention not at all. And because
the time of this Battle, by any who could do more then guess, is not set down,
or any foundation given from whence to draw a solid compute, it cannot be much
wide to insert it in this place. For such Authors as we have to follow, give
the conduct and praise of this exploit to Arthur; and that this was the last of
12 great Battles which he fought victoriously against the Saxons. The several
places writt'n by Nennius Ninn.
in their Welsh names, were many hundred years ago unknown, and so here
omitted. But who Arthur was, and whether every any such reigned in Britain,
has bin doubted heertofore, and may again with good reason. For the Monk of
Malmsbury, and others whose credit has swayed most with the learneder sort, we
may well perceave to have known no more of this Arthur 500 years past, nor of
his doeings, then we now living; And what they had to say, transcribed out of
Nennius, a very trivial writer yet extant, which has already bin related. Or
out of a British Book, the same which he of Monmouth set forth, utterly unknown
to the World, till more then 600 years after the days of Arthur, of whom (as
Sigebert in his Chronicle confesses) all other Histories were silent, both
Foren and Domestic, except only that fabulous Book. Others of later time have
sought to assert him by old legends and Cathedral regests. But he who can
accept of Legends for good story, may quickly swell a volume with trash, and
had need be furnished with two only necessaries, leisure, and belief, whether
it be the writer, or he that shall read. As to Artur, no less is in doubt who
was his Father; for if it be true as Nennius or his notist avers, that Artur
was called Mab-Vther, that is to say, a cruel Son, for the fierseness that men
saw in him of a Child, and the intent of his name Arturus imports as much, it
might well be that some in after ages who sought to turn him into a Fable,
wrested the word Other into a proper name, and so feigned him the Son of Other;
since we read not in any certain story, that ever such person lived, till
Geffry of Monmouth set him off with the surname of Pendragon. And as we doubted
of his parentage, so may we also of his puissance; for whether that Victory at
Badon Hill were his or no, is uncertain; Gildas not naming him, as he did
Ambrose in the former. Next, if it be true as Caradoc relates, Caradoc.
Llancarvon. vit. Gild.
that Melvas King of that Country which is now Summerset, kept from him
Gueniver his Wife a whole year in the Town of Glaston, and restored her at the
entreaty of Gildas, rather then for any enforcement, that Artur with all his
Chivalry could make against a small Town defended only by a moory situation;
had either his knowledge in War, or the force he had to make, bin answerable to
the fame they bear, that petty King had neither dared such an affront, nor he
bin so long, and at last without effect, in revenging it. Considering lastly
how the Saxons gained upon him every where all the time of his supposed reign,
which began, as some write, in the tenth year of Kerdic, who Malms. Antiquit.
Glaston.
wrung from him by long War the Countries of Summerset, and Hamshire; there
will remain neither place nor circumstance in story, Primord. p. 468.
Polychronic. L. 5. c. 6.
him. This only is alleged by Nennius in Arturs behalf, that the Saxons, though
vanquished never so often, grew still more numerous upon him by continual
supplies out of Germany. And the truth is, that valor may be over-toil'd, and
overcom at last with endless overcoming. But as for this Battle of Mount Badon
where the Saxons were hemmed in, or beseig'd, whether by Artur won, or
whenever, it seems indeed to have given a most undoubted and important blow
to the Saxons, and to have stopped their proceedings for a good while after.
Gildas himself witnessing that the Britans having thus compelled them to sit
down with peace, fell thereupon to civil discord among themselves. Which words
may seem to let in some light toward the searching out when this Battle was
fought. And we shall find no time since the first Saxon War, from whence a
longer peace ensued, then from the fight at Kerdics Leage in the year 527.
which all the Chronicles mention, without Victory to Kerdic; and give us
argument from the custom they have of magnifying their own deeds upon all
occasions, to presume here his ill speeding. And if we look still onward, eev'n
to the 44th year after, wherein Gildas wrote, if his obscureutterance be
understood, we shall meet with very little War between the Britans and Saxons.
This only remains Gildas.
difficult, that the Victory first won by Ambrose, was not so long before this
at Badon Seige, but that the same men living might be eyewitnesses of both;
and by this rate hardly can the latter be thought won by Artur, unless we
reck'n him a grown youth at least in the days of Ambrose, and much more then a
youth, if Malmsbury be heard, who affirms all the exploits of Ambrose, to have
bin don chiefly by Artur as his General, which will add much unbeleif to the
common assertion of his reigning after Ambrose and Other, especially the fight
at Badon, being the last of his twelve Battles. But to prove by that which
follows, that the fight at Kerdics Leage, though it differ in name from that of
Badon, may be thought the same by all effects; Kerdic 3 years after, Sax. an.
omn.
onward, as his manner was, on the continent, turns back his Forces on the I Will
of Wight; which with the slaying of a few only in Withgarburgh, he soon
masters; and not long surviving, left it to his Nefews by the Mothers side,
Stuff and Withgar; Kenric his Son held; Withgar was buried in the Town of that
Island which bore his name. Notwithstanding all these unlikelyhoods of Artur's
Reign and great acheivments, in a narration crept in I know not how among the
Laws of Edward the Confessor, Artur the famous King of Britans, is said not
only to have expelled hence the Saracens, who were not then known in Europe,
but to have conquered Freesland, and all the North East Isles as far as Russia,
to have made Lapland the Eastern bound of his Empire, and Norway the Chamber of
Britain. When should this be done? from the Saxons, till after twelve Battles,
he had no rest at home; after those, the Britans contented with the quiet they
had from their Saxon Enemies, were so far from seeking Conquests abroad, that,
by report of Gildas above cited, they fell to civil Wars at home. Surely Artur
much better had made War in old Saxony, to repress their flowing hither, then to
have won Kingdoms as far as Russia, scarce able here to defend his own.
Buchanan our Neighbor Historian reprehends him of Monmouth and others for
fabling in the deeds of Arms, yet what he writes thereof himself, as of better
credit, shows not whence he had but from those Fables; which he seems content
to believe in part, on condition that the Scots and Picts may be thought to
have assisted Arthur in all his Wars, and atchievments; whereof appears as
little grownd by any credible story, as of that which he most counts Fabulous.
But not further to contest about such uncertainties.

Ida the Saxon, sprung also from Woden in the tenth degree, The Kingdom of
Northumberland. Annal omn. Bed. Epit. Malmsb.
began the Kingdom of Bernicia in Northumberland; built the Town Bebbanburg,
which was after walled; and had 12 Sons, half by Wives, and half by Concubines.
Hengist by leave of Vortigern, we may remember, had sent Octa and Ebissa to
seek them seats in the North, and there by warring on the Picts, to secure the
Southern parts. Which they so prudently effected, that what by force and fair
proceeding, they well quioted those Countries; and though so far distant from
Kent, nor without power in their hands, yet kept themselves nigh 180 years
within moderation; and as inferior Governors, they and their offspring gave
obedience to the Kings of Kent, as to the elder Family. Till at length
following the example of that Age; when no less then Kingdoms were the prize of
every fortunat Commander, they thought it but reason, as well as others of their
Nation, to assume Royalty. Of whom Ida was the first, a man in the prime of his
Malmsb.
years, and of Parentage as we heard; but how he came to wear the Crown,
aspiring or by free choice, is not said. Certain enough it is, that his
virtues, made him not less noble then his birth, in War undaunted, and
unfoil'd; in peace tempring the aw of Magistracy, with a natural mildness he
reigned about 12 years. Kenric in a fight at Searesbirig, Annal omn.
now Salsbury, killed and put to flight many of the Britans; Beranvirig, now
Banbury, Camden.
as some think, with Keaulin his son put them again to flight. Keaulin shortly
after succeeded his father in the West Saxons. And Alla descended also of
Woden, Annal. Florent.
line, set up a second Kingdom in Deira the South part of Northumberland, and
held it 30 years; while Adda the son of Ida, and five more after him reigned
without other memory in Bernicia: and in Kent, Ethelbert the next year began.
Esca the son of Hengist had left Otha, and he Emeric to rule after him; both
which without adding to their bounds, kept what they had in peace 53 years. But
Ethelbert in length of reign equaled both his progenitors, and as Beda counts,
3 years exceeded. Malms.
Young at his first entrance, and unexperienced, he was the first raiser of
civil War among the Saxons; claiming from the priority of time wherein Hengist
took possession here, a kind of right over the later Kingdoms; and thereupon
was troublesome to their Confines: but by them twice defeated, he who but now
thought to seem dreadful, became almost contemptible. An. omn.
For Keaulin and Cutha his Son, Wibbandun 2 of his Earls, Oslac, and Cnebban.
By this means the Britans, but chiefly by this Victory at Badon, for the space
of 44 years ending in 571, received no great annoyance from the Saxons: but the
peace they enjoyed, by ill using it, proved more destructive to them then War.
For being raised on a sudden by two such eminent successes, from the lowest
condition of thraldom, they whose Eyes had beheld both those deliverances,
that by Ambrose, and this at Badon, were taught by the experience of either
Fortune, both Kings, Magistrates, Priests, and private men, to live orderly.
Gildas.
But when the next Age, unacquainted with past Evils, and only sensible of their
present ease and quiet, succeeded, strait followed the apparent subversion of
all truth, and justice, in the minds of most men: scarce the lest footstep, or
impression of goodness left remaining through all ranks and degrees in the
Land; except in some so very few, as to be hardly visible in a general
corruption: which grew in short space not only manifest, but odious to all the
Neighbor Nations. And first their Kings, among whom also, the Sons or
Grandchildren of Ambrose, were foully degenerated to all Tyranny and vicious
life. Whereof to hear some particulars out of Gildas will not be impertinent.
They avenge, says he, and they protect; not the innocent, but the guilty: they
swear often, but perjure; they wage War, but civil and unjust War. They punish
rigorously them that rob by the high way; but those grand Robbers that sit with
them at Table, they honor and reward. They give alms largly, but in the face
of their Alms-deeds, pile up wickedness to a far higher heap. They sit in the
seat of Judgment, but go seldom by the rule of right; neglecting and proudly
overlooking the modest and harmless; but countenancing the audacious, though
guilty of abominablest crimes; they stuff their Prisons, but with men committed
rather by circumvention, then any just cause. Nothing better were the Clergy,
but at the same pass or rather worse, then when the Saxons came first in;
Unlerned, Unapprehensive, yet impudent; subtle Prowlers, Pastors in Name, but
indeed Wolves; intent upon all occasions, not to feed the Flock, but to pamper
and well line themselves: not called, but seizing on the Ministry as a Trade,
not as a Spiritual Charge: teaching the people, not by sound Doctrine, but by
evil Example: usurping the Chair of Peter, but through the blindness of their
own worldly lusts, they stumble upon the Seat of Judas: deadly haters of truth,
broachers of lies: looking on the poor Christian with Eyes of Pride and
Contempt; but fawning on the wickedest rich men without shame: great promoters
of other men's Alms with their set exhortations; but themselves contributing ever
least; slightly touching the many vices of the Age, but preaching without end
their own greivances, as don to Christ; seeking after preferments and degrees in
the Church more then after Heaven; and so gained, make it their whole study how
to keep them by any Tyranny. Yet lest they should be thought things of no use
in their eminent places, they have their niceties and trivial points to keep in
aw the superstitious multitude; but in true saving knowledge leave them still
as gross and stupid as themselves; bunglers at the Scripture, nay forbidding
and silencing them that know; but in worldly matters, practiced and cunning
Shifters; in that only art and symony, great Clercs and Masters, bearing their
heads high, but their thoughts abject and low. He taxes them also as gluttonous,
incontinent, and daily Drunkards. And what should thou expect from these,
poor Laity, so he goes on, these beasts, all belly? shall these amend thee, who
are themselves laborious in evil doings? shall thou see with their Eyes, who
see right forward nothing but gain? Leave them rather, as bids our Savior,
lest ye fall both blindfold into the same perdition. Are all thus? Perhaps not
all, or not so grossly. But what availed it Eli to be himself blameless, while
he connived at others that were abominable? who of them has bin envied for his
better life? who of them has hated to consort with these, or withstood their
entering the Ministry, or endeavored zealously their casting out? Yet some of
these perhaps by others are legended for great Saints. This was the state of
Government, this of Religion among the Britans, in that long calm of peace,
which the fight at Badon Hill had brought forth. Whereby it came to pass, that
so fair a Victory came to nothing. Towns and Cities were not reinhabited, but
lay ruined and wast; nor was it long ere domestic War breaking out, wasted them
more. For Britain, as at other times, had then also several Kings. Primord. p.
444.
Five of whom Gildas living then in Armorica, at a safe distance, boldly
reproves by name; First Constantine (fabl'd the Son of Cador, Duke of Cornwall,
Arturs half Brother by the Mothers side) who then reigned in Cornwall and
Devon, a Tyrannical and bloody King, polluted also with many Adulteries: he got
into his power, two young Princes of the Blood Royal, uncertain whether before
him in right, or otherwise suspected: and after solemn Oath given of their
safety the year that Gildas wrote, slew them with their two Governors in the
Church, and in their Mothers Arms, through the Abbots Coap, which he had thrown
over them, thinking by the revernce of his vesture to have withheld the
murderer. These are commonly supposed to be the Sons of Mordred, Arturs Nefew,
said to have revolted from his Uncle, given him in a Battle his Deaths wound,
and by him after to have bin slain. Which things were they true, would much
diminish the blame of cruelty in Constantine, revenging Artur on the Sons of so
false a Mordred. In another part, but not expressed where, Aurelius Conanus was
King: him he charges also with Adulteries, and Parricide; cruelties worse then
the former; to be a hater of his Countries Peace, thirsting after civil War and
Prey. His condition it seems was not very prosperous; for Gildas wishes him,
being now left alone, like a Tree withering in the midst of a barren field, to
remember the vanity, and arrogance of his Father, and elder Brethren, who came
all to untimely Death in their youth. The third reigning in Demetia, or South
Wales, was Vortipor, the Son of a good Father; he was when Gildas wrote, grown
old, not in years only, but in Adulteries, and in governing full of falsehood,
and cruel Actions. In his latter dales, putting away his Wife, who died in
divorce, he became, if we mistake not Gildas, incestuous with his Daughter. The
fourth was Cuneglas, imbrued in civil War; he also had divorced his Wife, and
taken her Sister, who had vowed Widdowhood: he was a great Enemy to the Clergy,
high-minded, and trusting to his wealth. The last, but greatest of all in
power, was Maglocune, and greatest also in wickedness; he had driven out or
slain many other Kings, or Tyrants; and was called the Island Dragon, perhaps
having his seat in Anglesey; a profuse giver, a great Warrior, and of a goodly
stature. While he was yet young, he over-threw his Uncle, though in the head of
a complete Army, and took from him the Kingdom: then touched with remorse of
his doings, not without deliberation took upon him the profession of a Monk;
but soon forsook his vow, and his wife also, which for that vow he had left,
making love to the wife of his Brothers Son then living. Who not refusing the
offer, if she were not rather the first that enticed, found means both to
dispatch her own Husband, and the former wife of Maglocune, to make her
marriage with him the more unquestionable. Neither did he this for want of
better instructions, having had the learnedest and wisest man reputed of all
Britain, the instituter of his youth. Thus much, the utmost that can be learnt
by truer story, of what past among the Britans from the time of their useless
Victory at Badon, to the time that Gildas wrote, that is to say, as may be
guess't, from 527 to 571, is here set down altogether; not to be reduced under
any certainty of years. But now the Saxons, who for the most part all this
while had bin still, unless among themselves, began afresh to assault them, and
ere long to drive them out of all which they yet maintained on this side Wales.
Cuthulf the Brother of Reaulin, by a Victory obtained at Bedanford, now
Bedford, Camden. Annal omn.
took from them 4 good Towns, Liganburgh, Eglesburh, Besington, now Benson in
Oxfordshire, and Ignesham; but outlived not many months his good success. And
after 6 years more, Keaulin, and Cuthwin his Son, Deorrham in Glostershire,
slew three of their Kings, Comail, Condidan, and Farinmaile, and took three of
their Chief Cities; Gloucester, Cirencester, and Badencester. Britans
notwithstanding, after some space of time, judging to have out-grown their
losses, gather to a head, and encounter Keaulin with Cutha his Son, at
Fethanleage; whom valiantly fighting, they slew among the thickest, and as is
said, forced the Saxons to retire. Huntingd.
But Keaulin reinforcing the fight, put them to a main rout, and following his
advantage, took many Towns, and returned lad'n with rich booty.

The last of those Saxons who raised their own acheivments to a Monarchy, The
Kingdom of Mercia.
was Crida, much about this time, first founder of the Mercian Kingdom, drawing
also his Pedigree from Woden. Of whom Huntingd. Mat. Westminster.
all to write the several Genealogies, though it might be done without long
search, were, in my opinion, to encumber the story with a sort of barbarous
names, to little purpose. This may suffice, that of Wodens 3 Sons, from the
Eldest issued Hengist, and his succession; from the second, the Kings of
Mercia; from Malmsb. L. 1. c. 3.
the third, all that reigned in West Saxon, and most of the Northumbers, of
whom Alla was one, the first King of Deira; which, after his death, the race of
Ida seized, and made it one Kingdom, with Bernicia, Florent. ad ann.
usurping on the Childhood of Edwin, Alla's Son. Whom Ethelric the Son of Ida
expelled. Britans, ere they quitted all on this side the Mountains, forgot not
to show some manhood; for meeting Annal. omn.
Keaulin at Wodens Beorth, Wodens Florent.
Mount in Wiltshire, whether it were by their own Forces, or assisted by the
Angles, whose hatred Keaulin had incurred, they ruined his whole Army, Bed. l.
2. c. 3. Malms. Florent. Sax. an.
and chased him out of his Kingdom, from whence flying, he died the next year
in poverty; Who a little before, was the most potent and indeed sole King of
all the Saxons on this side Humber. But who was chief among the Britans in this
exploit, had bin worth remembering, whether it were Maglocune, of whose prowess
has bin spok'n, or Tendric King of Glamorgan, whom the regest of Landaff
recounts to have bin always victorious in fight; to have reigned about this
time, and at length to have exchanged his Crown for a Hermitage; till in the
aid of his Son Mouric, whom the Saxons had reduced to extremes, taking arms
again, he defeated them at Tinterne by the River Wye; but himself received a
mortal wound. The same year with Keaulin, whom Keola the Son of Cuthulf,
Keaulins Brother succeeded, Crida also the Mercian King deceased, in whose room
Wibba succeeded; and in Northumberland, Ethelfrid, in the room of Ethelric;
reigning 24 years. Thus omitting Fables, we have the veiw of what with reason
can be relied on for truth, don in Britain, since the Romans forsook it. Wherein
we have heard the many miseries and desolations, brought by divine hand on a
perverse Nation; driven, when nothing else would reform them, out of a fair
Country, into a Mountanous and Barren Corner, by Strangers and Pagans. So much
more tolerable in the Eye of Heaven is Infidelity profess't, then Christian
Faith and Religion dishonored by unchristian works. Yet they also at length
renounced their Heathenism; which how it came to pass, will be the matter next
related.

The End of the Third Book.
THE HISTORY OF BRITAIN. The Fourth Book.
THE Saxons grown up now to 7 absolute Kingdoms, and the latest of them
established by succession, finding their power arrive well nigh at the utmost of
what was to be gained upon the Britans, and as little fearing to be displanted
by them, had time now to survey at leisure one another greatness. Which
quickly bred among them, either envy, or mutual jealousies; till the West
Kingdom at length grown over powerful, put an end to all the rest. Mean while,
above others, Ethelbert of Kent, who by this time had well rip'nd his young
ambition, Bed. Malms.
with more ability of years and experience in War, what before he attempted to
his loss, now successfully attains; and by degrees brought all the other
Monarchies between Kent and Humber, to be at his devotion. To which design the
Kingdom of West Saxons, being the firmest of them all, at that time sore shak'n
by their overthrow at Wodens-beorth, and the Death of Keaulin, gave him no
doubt a main advantage; the rest yielded not subjection, but as he earned it by
continual Victories. And to win him Bed. l. 1. c. 25.
the more regard abroad, he marries Bertha the French Kings Daughter, though a
Christian, and with this condition, to have the free exercise of her Faith,
under the care and instruction of Letardus a Bishop, sent by her Parents along
with her; the King notwithstanding and his people retaining their own Religion.
Beda out of Gildas lays it sadly to the Bed. l. 1. c. 22.
Britans charge, that they never would voutsafe their Saxon Neighbors the means
of conversion: but how far to blame they were, and what hope there was of
converting in the midst of so much hostility, Bed. l. 2. c. 1.
at least falsehood from their first arrival, is not now easy to determine.
Howbeit not long after, they had the Christian Faith preached to them by a
Nation Malms. l. 1. c. 3.
more remote, and (as a report went, accounted old in Bedas time) upon this
occasion.

The Northumbrians had a custom at that time, and many hundred years after
not abolish't, to sell their Childern for a small value into any Foren Land. Of
which number, two comely youths were brought to Rome, whose fair and honest
countnances invited Gregory Archdeacon of that City, among others that beheld
them, pitying their condition, to demand whence they were; it was answered by
some who stood by, that they were Angli of the Province Deira, subjects to Alla
King of Northumberland, and by Religion Pagans. Which last Gregory deploring,
framed on a sudden this allusion to the three names he heard; that the Angli so
like to Angels should be snatched de ira, that is, from the wrath of God, to
sing Haleluia: and forthwith obtaining license of Benedic the Pope, had come
and preached here among them, had not the Roman people, whose love endured not
the absence of so vigilant a Pastor over them, recalled him then on his
journey, though but deferred his pious intention. Beda, by divine instinct, he
sent Augustine whom he had designed for Bishop of the English Nation, and other
zealous Monks with him, to preach to them the Gospel. Who being now on their
way, discouraged by some reports, or their own carnal fear, sent back Austin, in
the name of all, to beseech Gregory they might return home, and not be sent a
journey so full of hazard, to a fierce and infidel Nation, whose tongue they
understood not. Gregory with pious and Apostolic persuasions exhorts them not
to shrink back from so good a work, but cheerfully to go on in the strength of
divine assistance. The Letter it self yet extant among our Writers of
Ecclesiastic story, I omit here, as not professing to relate of those matters
more then what mixes aptly with civil affairs. The Abbot Austin, for so he was
ordained over the rest, reincourag'd by the exhortations of Gregory, and his
fellows by the Letter which he brought them, came safe to the I Will of Tanet,
Ethelbert the King, to whom Austin at his landing had sent a new and wondrous
message, that he came from Rome to proffer Heaven and eternal happiness in the
knowledge of another God then the Saxons knew, appoints them to remain where
they landed, and necessaries to be provided them, consulting in the mean time
what was to be done. And after certain days coming into the Island, chose a
place to meet them under the open Sky, possessed with an old persuasion, that all
Spells, if they should use any to deceive him, so it were not within doors,
would be unavailable. They on the other side called to his presence, advancing
for their Standard, a silver cross, and the painted image of our Savior, came
slowly forward singing the solemn Litanies: which wrought in Ethelbert more
suspicion perhaps that they used enchantments; till sitting down as the King
willed them, they there preached to him, and all in that assembly, the tidings
of Salvation. Whom having heard attentively, the King thus answered. Fair
indeed and ample are the promises which ye bring, and such things as have the
appearance in them of much good; yet such as being new and uncertain, I cannot
hastily assent to, quitting the Religion which from my Ancestors, with all the
English Nation, so many years I have retained. Nevertheless because ye are
strangers, and have endured so long a journey, to impart us the knowledge of
things, which I persuade me you believe to be the truest and the best, ye may
be sure we shall not recompense you with any molestation, but shall provide
rather how we may friendliest entertain ye; nor do we forbid whom ye can by
preaching gain to your belief. And accordingly their residence he allotted them
in Doroverne or Canturbury his chief City, and made provision for their
maintenance, with free leave to preach their doctrine where they pleased. By
which, and by the example of their holy life, spent in prayer, fasting, and
continual labor in the conversion of Souls, they won many; on whose bounty and
the Kings, receiving only what was necessary, they subsisted. There stood
without the City, on the East Side, an ancient Church built in honor of St.
Martin, while yet the Romans remained here: in which Bertha the Queen went out
usually to pray: Here they also began first to preach, baptize, and openly to
exercise divine worship. Ethelbert indeed principally showed his favor, but
compelled none. For so he had bin taught by them who were both the Instructors
Bed. l. 2. c. 5.
and the Authors of his faith, that Christian Religion ought to be voluntary,
not compelled. About this time Kelwulf the Son of Cutha Keaulins Brother
reigned over the West Saxons, Sax. an. Malms.
after his Brother Keola or Kelric, and had continual War either with English,
Welsh, Picts, or Scots. Austin, whom with his fellows, Bed. l. 1. c. 27.
Ethelbert now had endowed with a better place for their abode in the City, and
other possessions necessary to livelihood, crossing into France, was by the
Archbishop of Arles, at the appointment of Pope Gregory, ordained Archbishop of
the English: and returning, sent to Rome Laurence and Peter, two of his
associates, to acquaint the Pope of his good success in England, and to be
resolved of certain Theological, or rather Levitical questions: with answers to
which, not proper in this place, Gregory sends also to the great work of
converting, that went on so happily, a supply of laborers, Mellitus, Justus,
Paulinus, Rufinian, and many others; who what they were, may be guess't by the
stuff which they brought with them, vessels and vestments for the Altar, Coaps,
relics, and for the Archbishop Austin a Pall to say Mass in: to such a rank
superstition that Age was grown, though some of them yet retaining an emulation
of Apostolic zeal: lastly, to Ethelbert they brought a letter with many
presents. Austin thus exalted to Archiepiscopal authority, recovered from the
ruins and other profane uses, a Christian Church in Canturbury built of old by
the Romans; which he dedicated by the name of Christ's Church, and joining to it
built a seat for himself and his successors; a Monastery also near the City
Eastward, where Ethelbert at his motion built St. Peter's, and enrich't it with
great endowments, to be a place of burial for the Archbishops and Kings of
Kent: so quickly they step't up into fellowship of pomp with Kings. While thus
Ethelbert and his people had their minds intent, Bed. l. 2. l. 34.
Ethelfrid the Northumbrian King, was not less bufied in far different affairs:
for being altogether warlike, and covetous of fame, he more wasted the Britans
then any Saxon King before him; winning from them large Territories, which
either he made tributary, or planted with his own Subjects. Edan King of those
Scots that dwelt in Britain, jealous of his successes, came against him with a
mighty Army, to a place called Degsastan; but in the fight loosing most of his
men, himself with a few escaped: only Theobald the Kings brother, and the whole
wing which he commanded, unfortunately cut off, made the Victory to Ethelfrid
less entire. Yet from that time no King of Scots in hostile manner durst pass
into Britain for a hunderd and more years after: and what some years before,
Kelwulf the West Saxon is annal'd to have done against the Scots and Picts,
passing through the Land of Ethelfrid a King so potent, unless in his aid and
alliance, is not likely. Buchanan writes as if Ethelfrid, assisted by Keaulin
whom he mistitles King of East Saxons, had before this time a battle with
Aidan, wherein Cutha Keaulins son was slain. But Cutha, as is above written
from better authority, was slain in fight against the Welsh 20 years before.
Bed. l. 2. c. 3
fast, that Augustine ordaining Bishops under him, two of his assistants
Mellitus and Justus, sent them out both to the work of their ministry. And
Mellitus by preaching converted the East Saxons, over whom Sebert the son of
Sleda, by permission of Ethelbert, being born of his sister Ricula, then
reigned. Whose conversion Ethelbert to gratulate, built them the great Church
of St. Paul in London to be their Bishops Cathedral; as Justus also had his
built at Rochester, and both gifted by the same King with fair possessions.
Hitherto Austin labored well among Infidels, but not with like commendation
soon after among Christians. For by means of Ethelbert summoning the Britan
Bishops to a place on the edge of Worcestershire, called from that time
Augustines Oak, he requires them to conform with him in the same day of
celebrating Easter, and many other points wherein they differed from the rites
of Rome: which when they refused to do, not prevailing by dispute, he appeals
to a miracle, restoring to sight a blind man whom the Britans could not cure.
At this something moved, though not minded to recede from their own opinions
without further consultation, they request a second meeting: to which came seven
Britan Bishops, with many other learned men, especially from the famous
Monastery of Bangor, in which were said to be so many Monks, living all by their
own labor, that being divided under seven Rectors, none had fewer then 300.
One man there was who staid behind, a Hermit by the life he led, who by his
wisdom effected more then all the rest who went: being demanded, for they held
him as an Oracle, how they might know Austin to be a man from God, that they
might follow him, he answered, that if they found him meek and humble, they
should be taught by him, for it was likeliest to be the yoke of Christ, both
what he bore himself, and would have them bear; but if he bore himself proudly,
that they should not regard him, for he was then certainly not of God. They
took his advice, and hasted to the place of meeting. Whom Austin being already
there before them, neither arose to meet, nor received in any brotherly sort,
but sat all the while pontifically in his Chair. Whereat the Britans, as they
were counseled by the holy man, neglected him, and neither hark'n'd to his
proposals of conformity, nor would acknowledge him for an Archbishop: And in
name Spelman. council. page 108.
of the rest, Dinothus then Abbot of Bangor, is said, thus sagely to have
answered him. As to the subjection which you require, be thus persuaded of us,
that in the bond of love and charity we are all Subjects and Servants to the
Church of God, yea to the Pope of Rome, and every good Christian to help them
forward, both by word and deed, to be the Childern of God: other obedience then
this we know not to be due to him whom you term the Pope; and this obedience we
are ready to give both to him and to every Christian continually. Besides, we
are governed under God by the Bishop of Caerleon, who is to oversee us in
spiritual matters. To which Austin thus presaging, some say menacing, replies,
since ye refuse to accept of peace with your brethren, ye shall have War from
your enemies; and since ye will not with us preach the word of life, to whom ye
ought, from their hands ye shall receive death. This, though Writers agree not
whether Austin spoke it as his prophecy, or as his plot against the Britans,
fell out accordingly. Sax. an. Huntingd.
For many years were not past, when Ethelfrid, whether of his own accord,
Ethelbert incens't by Austin, with a powerful host came to Westchester, then
Caer-legion. Where being met by the British Forces, and both sides in readiness
to give the onset, he discernes a company of men, not habited for War, standing
together in a place of some safety; and by them a Squadron armed. Whom having
lernt upon some enquiry to be Priests and Monks, assembled thither after three
days fasting, to pray for the good success of their Forces against him,
therefore they first, faith he, shall feel our Swords; for they who pray
against us, fight heaviest against us by their prayers, and are our dangerousest
enemies. And with that turns his first charge upon the Monks: Brocmail the
Captain set to guard them, quickly turns his back, and leaves above 1200 Monks
to a sudden massacher, whereof scarce fifty escaped, but not so easy work found
Ethelfrid against another part of Britans that stood in arms, whom though at
last he overthrew, yet with slaughter nigh as great to his own soldiers. To
excuse Austin of this bloodshed, lest some might think it his revengeful
policy, Beda writes that he was dead long before, although if the time of his
sitting Archbishop be right computed sixteen years, he must survive this
action. Other just ground of charging him with this imputation Malms. gest.
pont. l. 1.
appears not, save what evidently we have from Geffry Monmouth, whose weight we
know. The same year Kelwulf made War on the South Saxons, bloody, Sax. an.
says Huntingdon, to both sides, but most to them of the South: Sax. an. Malms.
of West Saxons to Kinegils and Cuichelm the sons of his brother Keola. Others,
as Florent of Worster and Matthew of Westminster, will have Cuichelm son of
Kinegils, but admitted to reign with his father, Britans Camd.
in Beandune, now Bindon in Dorsetshire, Sax. an.
was the second year following, by the death of Ethelbert the first Christian
King of Saxons, and no less a favourer of all civility in that rude age. He
gave Laws and Statutes after the example of Roman Emperors, written with the
advice of his sagest Counselors, but in the English tongue, and observed long
after. Wherein his special care was to punish those who had stolen ought from
Church or Churchman, thereby showing how gratefully he received at their hands
the Christian Faith. Which, he no sooner dead, but his son Eadbald took the
course as fast to extinguish; not only falling back to Heathenism, but that
which Heathenism was wont to abhor, marrying his fathers second wife. Then soon
was perceived what multitudes for fear or countenance of the King had profess't
Christianity, returning now as eagerly to their old Religion. Nor staid the
Apostasy within one Province, but quickly spread over to the East Saxons;
occasioned there likewise, or set forward by the death of their Christian King
Sebert: whose three sons, of whom two are named Sexted and Seward, neither in
his life time would be Malms.
brought to baptism, and after his decease reestablished the free exercise of
Idolatry; nor so content, they set themselves in despite to do some open
profanation against the other Sacrament. Coming therefore into the Church, where
Mellitus the Bishop was ministering, they required him in abuse and scorn to
deliver to them unbaptiz'd the consecrated bread; and him refuseing, drove
disgracefully out of their dominion. Who crossed forthwith into Kent, where
things were in the same plight, and thence into France, with Justus Bishop of
Rochester. But Divine vengeance deferred not long the punishment of men so
impious; for Eadbald, vexed with an evil Spirit, fell oft'n into foul fits of
distraction; and the Sons of Sebert, in a fight against the West Saxons
perished, with their whole Army. But Eadbald, within the year, by an
extraordinary means became penitent. For when Laurence the Archbishop and
successor of Austin was preparing to ship for France, after Justus and
Mellitus, the story goes, if it be worth believing, that St. Peter, in whose
Church he spent the night before in watching and praying, appeared to him, and
to make the Vision more sensible, gave him many stripes for offering to desert
his flock; at sight whereof the King (to whom next morning he showed the marks
of what he had suffered, by whom and for what cause) relenting and in great
fear dissolved his incestuous marriage, and applied himself to the Christian
Faith more sincerely then before, with all his people. But the Londoners
addicted still to Paganism, would not be persuaded to receave again Mellitus
their Bishop, and to compel them was not in his power. Ethelfrid of Bernicia,
as was touched before, having thrown Edwin out of Deira, and joined that
Kingdom to his own, not content to have bereaved him of his right, whose known
virtues and high parts gave cause of suspicion to his Enemies, sends Messengers
to demand him of Redwald King of East Angles; under whose protection, after
many years wandering obscurely through all the Island, he had placed his safety.
Redwald, though having promised all defense to Edwin as to his suppliant, yet
tempted with continual and large offers of gold, and not contemning the
puissance of Ethelfrid, yielded at length, either to dispatch him, or to give
him into their hands: but earnestly exhorted by his Wife, not to betray Malmsb.
L. 1. c. 3.
the Faith and inviolable Law of Hospitality and refuge given, preferrs his
first promise as the more Religious, nor only resuses to deliver him; but since
War was thereupon denounc't, determins to be beforehand with the danger; and
with a sudden Army raised, surprises Ethelfrid, little dreaming an invasion,
and in a fight near to the East Side of the River Idle, on the Mercian border,
now Nottinghamshire, Camden.
slaies him, dissipating easily those few Forces which he had got to march out
over-hastily with him; who yet as a testimony of his Fortune, not his Valor to
be blamed, slew first with his own hands, Reiner the Kings Son. His two Sons
Oswald, and Oswi, by Acca, Edwins Sister, escaped into Scotland. By this
Victory, Redwald became so far superior to the other Saxon Kings, that Beda
reck'ns him the next after Ella and Ethelbert; who besides this Conquest of the
North, had likewise all on the hitherside Humber at his obedience. He had
formerly in Kent received Bed. L. 2. c. 15.
Baptism, but coming home and persuaded by his Wife, who still it seems, was
his Chief Counselor to good or bad alike, relapsed into his old Religion; yet
not willing to forgo his new, thought it not the worst way, lest perhaps he
might err in either, for more assurance to keep them both; and in the same
Temple erected one Altar to Christ, another to his Idols. But Edwin, as with
more deliberation he undertook, and with more sincerity retained the Christian
profession, so also in power and extent of dominion far exceeded all before
him; subdueing all, says Beda, English or British, eev'n to the Isles, then
called Mevanian, Anglesey, and Man; settled in his Kingdom by Redwald, he
sought in marriage Edelburga, whom others call Tate, the Daughter of Ethelbert.
To whose Ambassadors, Eadbald her Brother made answer, that to wed their
Daughter to a Pagan, was not the Christian Law. Edwin replied, that to her
Religion he would be no hindrance, which with her whole Household she might
freely exercise. And moreover, that if examined it were found the better, he
would embrace it. Paulinus as a spiritual Guardian sent along with the Virgin.
He being to that purpose made Bishop by Justus, omitted no occasion to plant
the Gospel in those parts, Cuichelm, at that time one of the two West Saxon
Kings, envious of the greatness which he saw Edwin growing up to, sent privily
Eumerus a hired Sword-man to assassin him; who under pretense of doing a
message from his Master, with a poisoned Weapon, stabs at Edwin, conferring
with him in his House, by the River Derwent in Yorkshire, on an Easter Day;
which Lilla one of the Kings Attendants, at the instant perceaving, with a
loyalty that stood not then to deliberate, abandoned his whole body to the
blow; which notwithstanding made passage through to the Kings Person, with a
wound not to be slighted. The murderer encompassed now with Swords, and
desperate, fore-revenges his own fall with the Death of another, whom his
Poinard reached home. Paulinus omitting no opportunity to win the King from
misbeleef, obtained at length this promise from him; that if Christ, whom he so
magnified, would give him to recover of his wound, and victory of his Enemies
who had thus assaulted him, he would then become Christian, in pledge whereof
he gave his young Daughter Eanfled to be bred up in Religion; who with 12
others of his Family, on the day of Pentecost was baptized. And by that time
well recovered of his wound; to punish the Authors of so foul a fact, he went
with an Army against the West Saxons: whom having quelled by War, and of such
as had conspired against him, put some to Death, others pardoned, he returned
home victorious, and from that time worshipped no more his Idols, yet ventured
not rashly into Baptism, but first took care to be instructed rightly, what he
learnt, examining and still considering with himself and others, whom he held
wisest; though Boniface the Pope, by large Letters of exhortation, both to him
and his Queen, was not wanting to quicken his belief. But while he still
deferred, and his deferring might seem now to have past the maturity of
wisdom to a faulty lingering, Paulinus by Revelation, as was believed, coming
to the knowledge of a secret, which befell him strangly in the time of his
troubles, on a certain day went in boldly to him, and laying his right hand on
the head of the King, asked him if he rememberd what that sign meant; the King
trembling, and in a maze riseing up, strait fell at his Feet. Behold, says
Paulinus, raising him from the ground; God has delivered you from your
Enemies, and given you the Kingdom, as you desired: perform now what long
since you promised him, to receave his Doctrine which I now bring you, and the
Faith, which if you accept, shall to your temporal felicity, add Eternal. The
promise claimed of him by Paulinus, how and wherefore made, though savouring
much of Legend, is thus related. Redwald, as we heard before, dazzled with the
gold of Ethelfrid, or by his threatening over-awed, having promised to yield up
Edwin, one of his faithful Companions, of which he had some few with him in
the Court of Redwald, that never shrunk from his adversity, about the first
howr of night comes in have to his Chamber, and calling him forth for better
secrecy, reveles to him his danger, offers him his aid to make escape; but that
course not approved, and seeming dishonorable without more manifest cause to
begin, distrust toward one who had so long bin his only refuge, the friend
departs. Edwin left alone without the Palace Gate, full of sadness and perplexed
thoughts, discerns about the dead of night, a man neither by countnance nor by
habit to him known, approaching toward him. Who after salutation, asked him
why at this howr, when all others were at rest, he alone so sadly sat waking on
a cold Stone? Edwin not a little misdoubting who he might be, asked him again,
what his sitting within doors, or without, concerned him to know? To whom he
again, think not that who thou art, or why sitting here, or what danger hangs
over thee, is to me unknown: But what would you promise to that man, who ever
would befriend you out of all these troubles, and persuade Redwald to the like?
All that I am able answered Edwin. And he, what if the same man should promise
to make you greater then any English King has bin before you? I should not
doubt, quoth Edwin, to be answerably grateful. And what if to all this he
would inform you, said the other, in a way to happiness, beyond what any of
your Ancestors has known? would you hark'n to his Counsel? Edwin without
stopping promised he would. And the other laying his right hand on Edwins head,
when this sign, says he, shall next befall ye, remember this time of night,
and this discourse, to perform what thou have promised, and with these words
disappeering, left Edwin much revived, but not less filled with wonder, who
this unknown should be. When suddenly the friend who had bin gone all this while
to list'n further what was like to be decreed of Edwin, comes back and joyfully
bids him rise to his repose, for that the Kings mind, though for a while drawn
aside, was now fully resolved not only not to betray him, but to defend him
against all Enemies, as he had promised. This was said to be the cause why
Edwin admonish't by the Bishop of a sign which had befaln him so strangely, and
as he thought so secretly, arose to him with that reverence and amazement, as
to one sent from Heaven, to claim that promise of him which he perceav'd well
was due to a Divinepower, that had assisted him in his troubles. To Paulinus
therefore he makes answer, that the Christian Belief he himself ought by
promise, and intended to receave; but would conferr first with his Chief Peers
and Counselors, that if they likewise could be won, all at once might be
baptized. They therefore being asked in Counsel what their opinion was concerning
this new Doctrine, and well perceaving which way the King inclined, every one
thereafter shaped his reply. The Cheif-Preist speaking first, discovered an old
grudge he had against his Gods, for advancing others in the Kings Favor above
him their Chief Priest: another hiding his Court-compliance with a grave
sentence, commended the choice of certain before uncertain, upon due
examination; to like purpose answered all the rest of his Sages, none op'nly
dissenting from what was likely to be the Kings Creed: whereas the preaching of
Paulinus could work no such effect upon them, toiling till that time without
success. Whereupon Edwin renouncing Heathenism, became Christian: and the Pagan
Priest, offering himself freely to demolish the Altars of his former Gods, made
some amends for his teaching to adore them. Edwin, his two Sons Osfrid and
Eanfrid, born to him by Quenburga, Daughter, as says Beda, of Kearle King of
Mercia, in the time of his banishment, and with them most of the people, both
Nobles and Commons, easily converted, were baptized; he with his whole Family
at York, in a Church hastily built up of Wood, the multitude most part in
Rivers. Northumberland thus christ'nd, Paulinus crossing Humber, converted also
the Province of Lindsey, and Blecca the Governor of Lincoln, with his Household
and most of that City; wherein he built a Church of Stone, curiously wrought,
but of small continuance; for the Roof in Bedas time, uncertain whether by
neglect or Enemies, was down; the Walls only standing. Mean while in Mercia,
Kearle a Kinsman of Wibba, says Huntingdon, not a Son, having long withheld
the Kingdom from Penda Wibba's Son, left it now at length to the fiftieth year
of his Age: with whom Kinegils and Cuichelm, the West Saxon Kings, Edwin, Sax.
ann.
fought at Cirencester, then made Truce. But Edwin seeking every way to
propagate the Faith, which with so much deliberation he had received, persuaded
Eorpwald the Son of Redwald, King of East Angles, to embrace the same belief;
Sax. an.
retaining under Edwin the name only of a King. But Eorpwald not long survived
his conversion, slain in fight by Ricbert a Pagan: Florent. Genealog.
whereby the people having lightly followed the Religion of their King, as
lightly fell back to their old superstitions for above 3 years after: Edwin in
the mean while, to his Faith adding virtue, by the due administration of
justice wrought such peace over all his Territories, that from Sea to Sea, man
or woman might have travailed in safety. His care also was of Fountains by the
way side, to make them fittest for the use of Travelers. And not unmindful of
regal State, whether in War or Peace, he had a Royal Banner carried before him.
But having reigned with much honor 17 years, he was at length by Kedwalla, or
Cadwallon, King of the Britans, who with aid of the Mercian Penda, had rebelled
against him, slain in a Battle with his Son Osfrid, at a place called
Hethseild, and his whole Army overthrown or dispersed in the year 633. and the
47th of his Age, York, was there buried in the Church by him begun. Sad was
this overthrow, both to Church and State of the Northumbrians: for Penda being
a Heathen, and the British King, though in name a Christian, yet in deeds more
bloody then the Pagan, nothing was omitted of barbarous cruelty in the
slaughter of Sex or Age; Kedwalla threatening to root out the whole Nation,
though then newly Christian. For the Britans, and, as Beda says, eev'n to his
days, accounted Saxon Christianity no better then Paganism, and with them held
as little Communion. From these calamities no refuge being left but flight,
Paulinus taking with him Ethilburga the Queen and her Children, aided by
Bassus, one of Edwins Captains, made escape by Sea to Eadbald King of Kent: who
receaving his Sister with all kindness, made Paulinus Bishop of Rochester,
where he ended his days. After Edwin, the Kingdom of Northumberland became
divided as before, each rightful Heir seizing his part; in Deira Osric, the
Son of Elfric, Edwins Uncle, by profession a Christian, and baptized by
Paulinus; in Bernicia, Eanfrid, the Son of Ethelfrid; who all the time of
Edwin, with his Brother Oswald, and many of the young Nobility, lived in
Scotland exiled, and had bin there taught and baptized. No sooner had they
gott'n each a Kingdom, but both turned recreant, sliding back into their old
Religion; and both were the same year slain; Osric by a sudden eruption of
Kedwalla, whom he in a strong Town had unadvisedly beseig'd; Eanfrid seeking
peace, and inconsideratly with a few surrendering himself. Kedwalla now ranged
at will through both those Provinces, useing cruelly his Conquest; when Oswald
the Brother of Eanfrid with a small but Christian Army, Tine, near the ancient
Roman Wall then called Denisburn, the place afterward Heaven field, from the
Cross reported miraculous for Cures, which Oswald there erected before the
Battle, in tok'n of his Faith against the great number of his Enemies.
Obtaining the Kingdom, he took care to instruct again the people in
Christianity. Sending therefore to the Scottish Elders, Beda so terms them, among
whom he had received Baptism, requested of them some faithful Teacher, who
might again settle Religion in his Realm, which the late troubles had impar'd;
they as readily harkening to his request, send Aidan a Scotch Monk and Bishop,
but of singular zeal and meekness, with others to assist him, whom at their own
desire he seated in Lindisfarne, as the Episcopal Seat, now Holy Island: and
being the Son of Ethelfrid, by the Sister of Edwin, as right Heir, others
failing, easily reduced both Kingdoms of Northumberland as before into one; nor
of Edwins Dominion lost any part, but enlarged it rather; over all the fowr
British Nations, Angles, Britans, Picts and Scots, exerciseing regal
Authority. Of his Devotion, Humility, and Almsdeeds, much is spok'n; that he
disdained not to be the interpreter of Aidan, preaching in Scotch or bad
English, to his Nobles and Household Servants; and had the poor continually
served at his Gate, after the promiscuous manner of those times: his meaning
might be upright, but the manner more ancient of private or of Church
contribution, is doubtless more Evangelical. About this time, the West Saxons,
Gevissi, by the preaching of Berinus, Sax. an.
a Bishop, whom Pope Honorius had sent, were converted to the Faith with
Kinegils their King: him Oswald received out of the Font, Cuichelm was baptized
in Dorchester, but lived not to the years end. The East Angles also this year
were reclaimed to the Faith of Christ, which for some years past they had thrown
off. But Sigbert the Brother of Eorpwald now succeeded in that Kingdom, praised
for a most Christian and Learned Man: who while his Brother yet reigned, living
in France an exile, for some displeasure conceav'd against him by Redwald his
Father, lern'd there the Christian Faith; and reigning soon after, in the same
instructed his people, by the preaching of Felix a Burgundian Bishop.

Eadbald deceasing, left to Ercombert his Son by Emma the French Kings
Daughter, the Kingdom of Kent; recorded the first of English Kings, who
commanded through his limits the destroying of Idols; laudably, if all Idols
without exception, and the first to have established Lent among us, under strict
penalty, not worth remembering, but only to inform us, that no Lent was observed
here till his time by compulsion: Mat. West.
especially being noted by some to have fraudulently usurped upon his Elder
Brother Ermenred, whose right was precedent to the Crown. Oswald having reigned
8 years, worthy also as might seem of longer life, fell into the same fate with
Edwin, and from the same hand, in a great Battle overcom and slain by Penda, at
a place called Maserfeild, now Oswestre, in Shropshire, miraculous, as says
Beda, after his Death. Camden.
His Brother Oswi succeeded him; reigning, though in much trouble, 28 years;
opposed either by Penda, Bed. L. 3. c. 14.
or his own Son Alfred, or his Brothers Son Ethilwald. Kinegils the West Saxon
dying, left his Son Kenwalk in his stead, though as yet unconverted. Sax. an.
About this time Sigebert, King of East Angles, having lernt in France, ere his
coming to Reign, the manner of their Schools, with the assistance of some
Teachers out of Kent, instituted a School here after the same Discipline,
thought to be the University of Cambridge then first founded: and at length
weary of his Kingly Office, betook him to a Monastical life; commending the
care of Government to his Kinsman Egric, who had sustained with him part of
that burden before. It happened some years after, that Penda made War on the
East Angles: they expecting a sharp encounter, besought Sigebert, whom they
esteemed an expert Leader, with his presence to confirm the Soldiery: and him
refuseing carried by force out of the Monastery into the Camp; where acting the
Monk rather then the Captain, with a single wand in his hand, he was slain with
Egric, and his whole Army put to flight. Anna of the Royal Stock, as next in
right, succeeded; and has the praise of a virtuous and most Christian Prince.
Kenwalk the West Saxon having married the Daughter of Penda, Sax. an.
and divorc't her, was by him with more appearance of a just cause vanquished in
fight, and deprived of his Crown: whence retiring to Anna King of the
East Angles, after three years abode in his Court, he there became Christian,
Oswi in the former years of his Reign, had sharer with him, Oswin Nephew of
Edwin, who ruled in Deira 7 years, commended much for his zeal in Religion, and
for comeliness of person, with other princely qualities, beloved of all.
Notwithstanding which, dissentions growing between them, it came to Arms.
Oswin seeing himself much exceeded in numbers, thought it more prudence,
dismissing his Army, to reserve himself for some better occasion. But
committing his person with one faithful attendant to the Loyalty of Hunwald an
Earl, his imagined friend, he was by him treacherously discoverd, and by
command of Oswi slain. Bid.
and for grief of him whose death he foretold, died Bishop Aidan, famous for
his Charity, meekness, and labor in the Gospel. The fact of Oswi was
detestable to all; which therefore to expiate, a Monastery was built in the
place where it was don, and Prayers there daily offered up for the Souls of both
Kings, the slain and the slayer. Kenwalk by this time reinstall'd in his
Kingdom, kept it long, but with various Fortune; Bed. l. 3. c. 7.
for Beda relates him oft-times afflicted by his Enemies with great losses:
Ethelwerd calls it) at Bradanford by the River Afene; against whom, and for
what cause, or who had the Victory, they write not. Camden names the place
Bradford in Wiltshire, by the River Avon, and Cuthred his near Kinsman, against
whom he fought, but cites no Authority; certain it is, that Kenwalk fowr years
before had given large possessions to his Nephew Cuthred, the more unlikely
therefore now to have rebelled. Peada, whom his Father Penda, though a Heathen,
had for his Princely Virtues made Prince of Middle-Angles, belonging to the
Mercians, was with that people converted to the Faith. For coming to Oswi with
request to have in marriage Alf^eda his Daughter, he was denied her but on
condition, that he with all his people should receave Christianity. Heering
therefore not unwillingly what was preached to him of Resurrection and Eternal
life, much persuaded also by Alfrid the Kings Son, who had his Sister Kyniburg
to Wife, he easily assented, for the truths sake only as he professed, whether
he obtained the Virgin or no, and was baptized with all his followers.
Returning, he took with him fowr Presbyters to teach the people of his
Province; who by their daily preaching won many. Neither did Penda, though
himself no Believer, prohibit any in his Kingdom to here to believe the
Gospel, but rather hated and despised those, who professing to believe, atested
not their Faith by good works; condemning them for miserable and justly to be
despised, who obey not that God in whom they choose to believe. How well might
Penda this Heathen rise up in judgment against many pretending Christians, both
of his own and these days! yet being a man bred up to War (as no less were
others then reigning, and oft-times one against another, though both
Christians) he warred on Anna, East Angles, Sax. an.
perhaps without cause, for Anna was esteemed a just man, and at length slew
him. About this time the East Saxons, who as above has bin said, had expelled
their Bishop Mellitus, and renounced the Faith, were by the means of Oswi thus
reconverted. Sigebert surnamed the small, being the Son of Seward, without
other memory of his Reign, left his Son King of that Province, after him
Sigebert the Second, who coming oft'n to visit Oswi his great friend, was by
him at several times fervently disuaded from Idolatry, and convinced at length
to forsake it, was there baptized; on his return home taking with him Kedda a
laborious Preacher, afterward made Bishop; by whose teaching with some help of
others, the people were again recoverd from misbeleef. But Sigebert some years
after, though standing fast in Religion, was by the Conspiracy of two Brethren
in place near about him, wickedly murdered; who being asked what moved them to
do a deed so heinous, gave no other then this barbarous answer; that they were
angry with him for being so gentle to his Enemies, as to forgive them their
injuries whenever they besought him. Yet his Death seems to have happ'nd not
without some cause by him given of Divine displeasure. For one of those Earls
who slew him, living in unlawful wedlock, and therefore excommunicated so
severely by the Bishop, that no man might presume to enter into his House, much
less to sit at meat with him, the King not regarding this Church censure, went
to feast with him at his invitation. Whom the Bishop meeting in his return,
though penitent for what he had don, and fallen at his feet, touched with the rod
in his hand, and angerly thus foretold: because thou have neglected to abstain
from the House of that Excommunicate, in that House thou shall die; and so it
fell out, perhaps from that prediction, God bearing witness to his Minister in
the power of Church Discipline, spiritually executed, not juridically on the
contemner thereof. Oswi, and fatal to Penda, for Oswi by the continual inrodes
of Penda, having long endured much devastation, to the endangering once by
assault and fire Bebbanburg, Bed. l. 3. c. 16. Camd.
his strongest City, now Bamborrow Castle, unable to resist him, with many rich
presents offered to buy his Peace. Which not accepted by the Pagan, who intended
nothing but destruction to that King, though more then once in affinity with
him, turning gifts into vows, he implores Divine Assistance, devoting, if he
were deliverd from his Enemy, a Child of one year old, his Daughter to be a
Nun, and 12 portions of land whereon to build Monasteries. His vows, as may be
thought, found better success then his profferd gifts; for heerupon with his
Son Alfrid, gathering a small power, he encounterd and discomfited the
Mercians, Camden.
30 times exceeding his in number, and led on by expert Captains: at a place
called Loyden, now Leeds in Yorkshire. Besides this Ethelwald, the Son of
Oswald, who ruled in Deira, took part with the Mercians, but in the fight
withdrew his Forces, and in a safe place expected the event: with which
unseasonable retreat, the Mercians perhaps terrified and misdoubting more
danger, fled; their Commanders, with Penda himself, most being slain, among whom
Edilhere the Brother of Anna, who ruled after him the East Angles, and was the
Author of this War; many more flying were drowned in the River, which Beda
calls Winwed, then swollen above her Banks. Mat West.
The Death of Penda, who had bin the Death of so many good Kings, made general
rejoicing, as the Song witnessed. At the River Winwed, Anna was avenged. To
Edelhere succeeded Ethelwald his Brother, in the East Angles; to Sigebert in
the East Saxons, Suidhelm the Son of Sexbald, says Bid, the Brother of
Sigebert, Bed. l. 3. c. 22.
says Malmsbury; he was baptized by Kedda, then residing in the East Angles,
and by Ethelwald the King, received out of the Font. But Oswi in the strength
of his late Victory, Mercia, Sax. an.
and of the Pictish Nation greatest part, at which time he gave to Peada his
Son in Law the Kingdom of South-Mercia, divided from the Northern by Trent.
Peada the Spring following, as was said, Sax. an.
by the Treason of his Wife the Daughter of Oswi, married by him for a special
Christian, on the Feast of Faster, not protected by the holy time, was slain.
The Mercian Nobles, Immin, Eaba, and Eadbert, throwing off the Government of
Oswi, set up Wulser the other Son of Penda to be their King, whom till then they
had kept hid, and with him adherd to the Christian Faith. Kenwalk the
West Saxon, now settled at home, and desirous to enlarge his Dominion, prepares
against the Britans, joins Battle with them at Pen in Somersetshire, and over
coming persues them to Pedridan. Another fight he had with them before, at a
place called Witgeornesburg, barely mentioned by the Monk of Malmsbury. Wulser
the Son of Penda, Sax. an.
his old Enemy, scarce yet warm in his Throne, fought with him at
Possentesburg, on the Easter Holy Days, and as Ethelwerd says, took him
Prisner; but the Saxon Annals, quite otherwise, that Wulfer winning the field,
wasted the West Saxon Country as far as Eskesdun; nor staying there, took and
wasted the I Will of Wight, but causing the Inhabitants to be baptized, till then
unbeleevers, gave the Island to Ethelwald King of South Saxons, whom he had
received out of the Font. Bed.
in the presence of Oswi and Alfred his Son, was held at a Monastery in those
parts, to debate on what Day Easter should be kept; a controversy which long
before had disturbed the Greek and Latin Churches: wherein the Scots not
agreeing with the way of Rome, nor yiedling to the disputants on that side, to
whom the King most inclined, such as were Bishops here, resigned, and returned
home with their Disciples. Another clerical question was there also much
controverted, not so superstitious in my opinion as ridiculous, about the right
shaving of crowns. The same year was seen an Eclips of the Sun in May, followed
by a sore pestilence beginning in the South, but spreading to the North, and
over all Ireland with great mortality. Malms.
In which time the East Saxons after Swithelms Decease, being governed by Siger
the Son of Sigebert the small, and Sebbi of Seward, though both subject to the
Mercians. Siger and his people unstedie of Faith, supposing that this Plague
was come upon them for renouncing their old Religion, fell off the second time
to Infidelity. Which the Mercian King Wulfer understanding, sent Jarumannus a
Faithful Bishop, who with other his fellow Laborers, by sound Doctrine and
gentle dealing, soon recur'd them of their second relaps. In Kent, Ercombert
expiring, was succeeded by his Son Ecbert. Theodore, Sax. ann.
a learned Greekish Monk of Tarsus, whom Pope Vitalian had ordained Archbishop
of Canterbury, the Greek and Latin Tongue, with other liberal Arts, Arithmetic,
Music, Astronomy, and the like; began first to flourish among the Saxons; as
did also the whole Land, under potent and religious Kings, more then ever
before, as Bede affirms, till his own days. Northumberland died Oswi, much Sax.
an.
addicted to Romish Rites, and resolved, had his Disease released him, to have
ended his days at Rome: Ecfrid the eldest of his Sons begot in Wedlock, Sax. an.
succeeded him. Ecbert in Kent deceasing, left nothing memorable behind him,
but the general suspicion to have slain or connived at the slaughter of his
Uncles two Sons, Elbert, and Egelbright. In recompense whereof, Malms.
he gave to the Mother of them part of Tanet, wherein to build an Abbey; the
Kingdom fell to his Brother Lothair. And much about this time, by best account
it should be, however placed in Beda, that Ecfrid of Northumberland, Bed. l. 4.
c. 12.
having War with the Mercian Wulfer, won from him Lindsey, and the Country
thereabout. Sebbi having reigned over the East Saxons 30 years, not long before
his Death, though long before desireing, took on him the Habit of a Monk; and
drew his Wife at length, though unwilling, to the same Devotion. Kenwalk also
dying, left the Government to Sexburga his Wife, who outlived him in it but
one year, driven out, says Mat. West. by the Nobles, disdaining Female
Government. Beda calls them, for ten years space divided the West Saxons; Bed.
l. 4. c. 12. Sax. an. Malms.
others name two, Escwin the Nephew of Kinigils, and Kentwin the Son, not petty
by their deeds: for Escwin fought a Battle with Wulfer, at Bedanhafde, and
about year a afboth deceased; Wulfer not without a stain left behind him, of
selling the Bishopric of London, to Wini the first Simonist we read of in this
story; Kenwalk had before expelled him from his Chair at Winchester; Ethelred
the Brother of Wulfer obtaining next the Kingdom of Mercia, not only recoverd
Lindsey, and what besides in those parts Wulfer had lost to Ecfrid some years
before, but found himself strong enough to extend his Arms another way, as far
as Kent, wasting that Country without respect to Church or Monastery, much also
endamaging the City of Rochester: Bed. l. 4. c. 12.
Notwithstanding what resistance Lothair could make against him. August 678.
was seen a Morning Comet for 3 Months following, in manner of a fiery Pillar.
And the South Saxons about this time were converted to the Christian Faith,
upon this occasion. Wilsrid Bishop of the Northumbrians entering into contention
with Ecfrid the King, was by him deprived of his Bishopric, and long wandering
up and down as far as Rome, England, but not dareing to approach the North,
whence he was banished, bethought him where he might to best purpose elsewhere
exercise his Ministry. The South of all other Saxons remained yet Heathen; but
Edilwalk their King not long before had bin baptized in Mercia, persuaded by
Wulfer, and by him, as has bin said, received out of the Font. For which
relations sake he had the I Will of Wight, and a Province of the Meannari
adjoining, Bed. l. 4. c. 13. Camd.
given him on the Continent about Meanesborow in Hantshir, which Wulfer had a
little before gott'n from Kenwalk. Thither Wilfrid takes his journey, and with
the help of other Spiritual Laborers about him, in short time planted there
the Gospel. It had not rained, as is said, of three years before in that
Country, whence many of the people daily perished by Famine; till on the first
day of their public Baptism, soft and plentiful showers descending, restored
all abundance to the Summer following. Sax. an.
Kentwin the other West Saxon King above-named, chased the Welch-Britans, as is
Chronicl'd without circumstance, to the very Sea shore. Sax. an.
by Beda's reckoning, 683, Kedwalla a West Saxon of the Royal Line (whom the
Welsh will have to be Cadwallader, last King of the Britans) thrown out by
faction, returned from banishment, and invaded both Kentwin, if then living, or
whoever else had divided the succession of Kenwalk, Bed. l. 4. c. 15
slaying in fight Edelwalk the South-Saxon, who opposed him in their aid; but
soon after was repulsed by two of his Captains, Bertune, and Andune, who for a
while held the province in their power. But Kedwalla gathering new force, Malms.
with the slaughter of Ber^une, Edric the successor of Edelwalk, won the
Kingdom. But reduced the people to heavy thraldom. Bed. l. 4. c. 16
Then addressing to Conquer the I Will of Wight, till that time Pagan, says Beda
(others otherwise, as above has bin related) made a vow, though himself yet
unbaptiz'd, to devote the fowrth part of that Island, and the spoils thereof, to
holy uses. Conquest obtained, paying his vow as then was the belief, he gave
hi^ fowrth to Bishop Wilsrid, by chance there present; and he to Bertwin a
Priest, his Sisters Son, with commission to baptize all the vanquished, who
meant to save their lives. But the two young Sons of Arwald, King of that Island,
met with much more hostility; for they at the Enemies approach flying out of
the I Will, and betrayed where they were hid not far from thence, were led to
Kedwalla, who lay then under Cure of some wounds received, and by his
appointment, after instruction and Baptism first given them, harshly put to
death, which the youths are said above their Age to have Christianly sufferd. In
Kent, Lothair died this year of his wounds received in fight against the
South Saxons, led on by Edric, who descending from Ermenred, it seems
challenged the Crown; and wore it, though not commendably, one year and a half:
Malms.
exposed a prey either to homebred usurpers, or neighboring invaders. Among
whom Kedwalla, taking advantage from their civil distempers, and marching easily
through the South Saxons, whom he had subdued, sorely harrass'd the Country,
untouched of a long time by any hostile incursion. But the Kentish men, all
parties uniteing against a common Enemy, with joint power so opposed him, that
he was constrained to retire back; his Brother Mollo in the flight with 12 men
of his Company, seeking Sax. an. Malms.
shelter in a House, was beset and therein burnt by the persuers: Kedwalla much
troubled at so great a loss, recalling and soon rallying his disorderd Forces,
returned fiercely upon the chaseing Enemy; Victred the Son of Ecbert, attaining
the Kingdom, both settled at home all things in peace, and secured his Borders
from all outward Hostility. While thus Kedwalla disquieted both West and East,
after his winning the Crown, Ecfrid the Northumbrian, Bed.
and Ethelred the Mercian, fought a sore Battle by the River Trent; wherein
Elswin Brother to Ecfrid, a youth of 18 years, much beloved, was slain; and the
accident likely to occasion much more sheding of blood, peace was happily made
by the grave exhortation of Archbishop Theodore, a pecuniary fine only paid to
Ecfrid, as some satisfaction for the loss of his Brothers life. Another
adversity befell Ecfrid in his Family, by means of Ethildrith his Wife, King
Anna's Daughter, who having taken him for her Husband, and professing to love
him above all other men, persisted twelve years in the obstinat refusal of his
bed, thereby thinking to live the purer life. So perversely then was chastity
instructed against the Apostles rule. At length obtaining of him with much
importunity her departure, she veild her self a Nun, then made Abbess of Ely,
died 7 years after the pestilence; and might with better warrant have kept
faithfully her undertak'n Wedlock, though now canonized St. Audrey of Ely. In
the mean while Ecfrid had sent Bertus with a power to subdue Ireland, a
harmless Nation, says Beda, and ever friendly to the English; in both which
they seem to have left a posterity much unlike them at this day: miserably
wasted, without regard had to places hallowed or profane, they betook them
partly to their Weapons, partly to implore divine aid; and, as was thought,
obtained it in their full avengement upon Ecfrid. For he the next year, against
the mind and persuasion of his sagest friends, and especially of Cudbert a
famous Bishop of that Age, marching unadvisedly against the Picts, who long
before had bin subject to Northumberland, was by them feigning flight, drawn
unawares into narrow streights overtopt with Hills, and cut off with most of
his Army. From which time, says Bid, military valor began among the Saxons
to decay, nor only the Picts till then peaceable, but some part of the Britans
also recovered by Arms their liberty for many years after. Yet Aldfrid elder,
but base Brother to Ecfrid, a man said to be learned in the Scriptures,
recalled from Ireland, to which place in his Brothers Reign he had retired, and
now succeeding, upheld with much honor, though in narrower bounds, the residue
of his Kingdom. Kedwalla having now with great disturbance of his Neighbors
reigned over the West Saxons two years, besides what time he spent in gaining
it, wearied perhaps with his own turbulence, went to Rome, desirous there to
receave Baptism, which till then his worldly affairs had deferred, and
accordingly, on Easter Day, 689. he was baptized by Sergius Peter. All which
notwithstanding, surprised with a Disease, he outlived not the Ceremony so far
sought, much above the space of 5 weeks, in the Thirtieth year of his Age, and
in the Church of St. Peter was there buried, with a large Epitaph upon his
Tomb. Him succeeded Ina of the Royal Family, and from the time of his coming
in, for many years oppressed the Land with like greevances, as Kedwalla had
done before him, insomuch that in those times there was no Bishop among them.
His first expedition was into Kent, to demand satisfaction for the burning of
Mollo: Victred loath to hazard all for the rash act of a few, delivered up 30 of
those that could be found accessory, or as others say, pacified Ina with a
great sum of money. Mean while, at the incitement of Ecbert, a Malms. Sax. an.
Ethelwerd.
devout Monk, Wilbrod a Priest eminent for learning, past over Sea, having 12
others in Company, with intent to preach the Gospel in Germany. And coming to
^epin Chief Regent of the Franks, who Frisia, by his countnance and protection,
promise also of many benefits to them who should believe, they found the work
of conversion much the easier, and Wilbrod the first Bishopric in that Nation.
But two Priests, each of them Hewald by name, and for distinction surnamed from
the color of their Hair, the black and the white, by his example, piously
affected to the Souls of their Countrymen the old Saxons, at their coming
thither to convert them met with much worse entertainment. For in the House of
a Farmer who had promised to convey them, as they desired, to the Governor of
that Country, discoverd by their daily Ceremonies to be Christian Priests, and
the cause of their coming suspected, they were by him and his Heathen Neighbors
cruelly butcherd; yet not unaveng'd, for the Governor enraged at such violence
offered to his Strangers, sending Armed Men, slew all those Inhabitants, and
burnt their Village. Mercia, Ostrid the Queen, Wife to Ethelred, was killed by
her own Nobles, as Beda's Epitomy records; Florence calls them Southimbrians,
negligently omitting the cause of so strange a fact. Bertred a Northumbrian
General was slain by the Picts. 7 years after the violent Death of his Queen,
put on the Monk, and resigned his Kingdom to Kenred the Son of Wulfer his
Brother. Aldfrid in Northumberland died, leaving Osred a Child of 8 years to
succeed him. Kenred having a while with praise governed the Mercian Kingdom,
went to Rome in the time of Pope Constantine, and shorn a Monk spent there the
residue of his days. Kelred succeeded him, the Son of Ethelred, who had
reigned the next before. With Kenred went Offa the Son of Siger, King of
East Saxons, and betook him to the same habit, leaving his Wife and Native
Country; a comely Person in the prime of his youth, much desired of the people;
and such his virtue by report, as might have otherwise bin worthy to have
reigned. Ina the West Saxon Sax. an. Huntingd.
one year after fought a Battle, at first doubtful, at last successful,
against Gerent King of Wales. Bertfrid, another Northumbrian Captain, fought
with the Picts, and slaughterd them, says Bed. Epit.
Huntingdon, to the full avengment of Ecfrids Death. Ina had another doubtful
and cruel Battle at Wodnesburg in Wiltshire, Sax. an. Sax. an. Huntingd.
with Kelred the Mercian, who died the year following a lamentable Death: for
as he sat one day feasting with his Nobles, Boniface Archbishop of Ments, an
English man, who taxes him for a defiler of Nuns, writes by way of caution to
Ethelbald, his next of Kin, who succeeded him. Osred also the young
Northumbrian King, slain by his Kindred in the 11. of his Reign, for his
vicious life and incest committed with Nuns; was by Kenred fucceeded and
avenged, he reigning two years left Osric in his room. 7th year, if Beda
calculate right, Victred King of Kent deceased, having reigned 34 years, and
some part of them with Suebhard, as Beda testifies, he left behind him three
Sons, Ethelbert, Eadbert, and Alric his Heirs. L. 5. c. 9.
after which, January, bending their blaze toward the North, at which time the
Saracens furiously invaded France, but were expelled soon after with great
overthrow. The same year in Northumberland, Osric dying or slain, Bed. l. 5. c.
24.
adopted Kelwulf the Brother of Kenred his Successor, to whom Beda dedicates
his story; but writes this only of him, that the beginning, and the process of
his Reign met with many adverse commotions, whereof the event was then
doubtfully expected. Mean while Ina7 years before, having slain Kenwuls, to
whom Florent gives the addition of Clito, given usually to none but of the
blood Royal, and the 4th. year after overthrown and slain Albright another
Clito, driven from Taunton to the South Saxons for aid, vanquished also the
East Angles in more then one Battle, as Malmsbury writes, but not the year,
whether to expiate so much blood, or infected with the contagious humor of
those times, Malmsbury says, at the persuasion of Ethelburga his Wife, went to
Rome, and there ended his days; yet this praise left behind him, to have made
good Laws, the first of Saxon that remain extant to this day, and to his
Kinsman Edelard, bequeathed the Crown; No less then the whole Monarchy of
England and Wales. For Ina, if we believe a digression in the Laws of Edward
Confessor, was the first King Crowned of English and British, since the Saxons
entrance; of the British by means of his second Wife, some way related to
Cadwallader last King of Wales, which I had not noted being unlikely, but for
the place where I found it. After Bid.
Ina, by a surer Author, Ethelbald King of Mercia commanded all the Provinces
on this side Humber, with their Kings: the Picts were in league with the
English, the Scots peaceable within their bounds, and the Britans part were in
their own Government, part subject to the English. In which peaceful state of
the land, many in Northumberland, both Nobles and Commons, laying aside the
exercise of Arms, betook them to the Cloister: and not content so to do at
home, many in the days of Ina, Clerks and Laics, Men and Women, hasting to
Rome in Herds, thought themselves no where sure of Eternal Life, till they were
Cloisterd there. Thus representing the state of things in this Island, Beda
surceas'd to write. Out of whom chiefly has bin gatherd, since the Saxons
arrival, such as has bin deliverd, a scatterd story picked out here and there,
with some trouble and tedious work from among his many Legends of Visions and
Miracles; toward the latter end so bare of civil matters, as what can be
thence collected may seem a Calendar rather then a History, taken up for the
most part with succession of Kings, and computation of years, yet those hard to
be reconciled with the Saxon Annals. Their actions we read of, were most
commonly Wars, but for what cause waged, or by what Counsels carried on, no
care was had to let us know: whereby their strength and violence we understand,
of their wisdom, reason, or justice, little or nothing, the rest superstition
and monastical affectation; Kings one after another leaving their Kingly Charge,
to run their heads fondly into a Monks Cowle: which leaves us uncertain, whether
Beda was wanting to his matter, or his matter to him. Yet from hence to the
Danish Invasion it will be worse with us, destitute of Beda. Left only to
obscure and blockish Chronicles; whom Malmsbury, and Huntingdon, (for neither
they then we had better Authors of those times) ambitious to adorn the History,
make no scruple oft-times, I doubt to interline with conjectures and surmises
of their own: them rather then imitate, I shall choose to represent the truth
naked, though as lean as a plain Journal. Yet William of Malmsbury must be
acknowledged, both for style and judgment, to be far the best Writer of them
all: but what labor is to be endured, turning over Volumes of Rubbish in the
rest, Florence of Worster, Huntingdon, Simeon of Durham, Hoveden, Matthew of
Westminster, and many others of obscurer note, with all their monachisms, is a
penance to think. Yet these are our only Registers, transcribers one after
another for the most part, and sometimes worthy enough for the things they
register. This travail rather then not know at once what may be known of our
ancient story, sifted from Fables and impertinences, I voluntarily undergo; and
to save others, if they please the like unpleasing labor; except those who
take pleasure to be all their life time, rakeing in the Foundations of old
Abbeys and Cathedrals; but to my task now as it befalls. 18th. Kalends of
September, Sax. an. Ethelwerd.
was an Eclipse of the Sun about the third howr of day, obscureing almost his
whole Orb as with a black shield. Ethelbald of Mercia, beseig'd and took the
Castle or Town of Somerton: Beda our Historian died, some say the year before.
Kelwulf in Northumberland three years after became Monk in Lindisfarne, Malms.
yet none of the severest, for he brought those Monks from milk and water, to
Wine and Ale; in which doctrine no doubt but they were soon docil, and well
might, for Kelwulf brought with him good provision, great treasure and revenues
of land, recited by Simeon, yet all under pretense of following (I use the
Authors words) poor Christ, by voluntary poverty: no marvel then if such
applause were given by Monkish Writers to Kings turning Monks, and much cunning
perhaps used to allure them. To Eadbert his Uncle, he left the Kingdom, whose
brother Ecbert, Archbishop of York built a Library there. Eadbert was busied in
War against the Picts, Ethelbald the Mercian, by foul fraud, assaulted part of
Northumberland in his absence, as the supplement of Beda's Epitomy records. In
the West Saxons, Edelard who succeeded Ina, having bin much molested in the
beginning of his Reign, with the Rebellion of Oswald his Kinsman, who contended
with him for the right of succession, overcoming at last those troubles, died
in Peace 741, Cuthred one of the same lineage to succeed Malms. Sax. an.
him: who at first had much War with Ethelbald the Mercian, and various
success, but joining with him in League two years after, Sim. Dun.
Huntingdon doubts not to give them a great Victory. Simeon reports, another
Battle fought between Britans and Picts the year ensueing. Hoved. Malms.
Now was the Kingdom of East Saxons drawing to a Period, for Sigeard and
Senfred the Sons of Sebbi having reigned a while, and after them young Offa,
who soon quitted his Kingdom to go to Rome with Kenred, as has been said, the
Government was conferred Sax. an.
on Selred Son of Sigebert the good, who having ruled 38 years, came to a
violent death; Swithred was the last King, driven out by Ecbert the West Saxon:
but London, with the Countries adjacent, obeyed the Mercians till they also
were dissolved. Cuthred had now reigned about nine years, Kuiric his Son a
valiant young Prince, was in a military tumult slain by his own Soldiers. Sax.
an. Huntingd.
The same year Eadbert dying in Kent, his Brother Edilbert reigned in his
stead. Eadbert in Northumberland, whose War with the Picts has bin
abovementioned, made now such Progress there, as to subdue Kyle, so says the
Auctarie of Bid, and other Countries thereabout, to his dominion; While
Cuthred the West Saxon had a fight with Ethelhun, one of his Nobles, a stout
Warrier, envied by him in some matter of the Commonwealth, as far as by the
Latin of Ethelward can be understood (others Huntingd.
interpret it Sedition) and with much ado overcoming, Ethelhun for his valor
into favor, Camden.
by whom faithfully served in the twelf or thirteenth of his Reign, he
encountered in a set Battle with Ethelbald the Mercian at Beorford, now
Burford in Oxfordshire; Huntingdon, as his manner is to comment upon the annal
Text, makes a terrible description of that fight between Cuthred and Ethelbald,
and the Prowess of Ethelhun, at Beorford, but so affectedly, and therefore
suspiciously, that I hold it not worth rehearsal; and both in that and the
latter conflict, gives Victory to Cuthred; Sax. an.
after whom Sigebert, uncertain by what right, Florent, stepped into the Throne,
Malms.
whom hated for his cruelty and other evil doings, Kimwulf joining with most of
the Nobility, dispossessed of all but Hamshir, that Province he lost also
within a year, Cumbran, one of his Chief Captains, who for a long time had
faithfully served, and now disuaded him from incensing the people by such
Tyrannical practices. Huntingd. Huntingd.
Thence flying for safety into Andreds Wood, forsak'n of all, he was at length
slain by the Swine-heard of Cumbran in revenge of his Master, and Kinwulf who
had undoubted right to the Crown, joyfully saluted King. Eadbert the
Northumbrian joining forces with Vnust King of the Picts, as Simeon writes,
beseig'd and took by surrender Camden.
the City Alcluith, now Dunbritton in Lennox, from the Britans of Cumberland;
and ten days after, the whole Army perishd about Niwanbirig, but to tell us
how, he forgetts. In Mercia, Ethelbald was Camd.
slain, at a place called Secandune, Seckinton in Warwickshire, the year
following, in a bloody fight Sax. an. Epit. Bed. Sim. Dun.
against Cuthred, as Huntingdon surmises, but Cuthred was dead two years
before; others write him murdered in the night by his own Guard, and the
Treason, as some say, of Beornred, who succeeded him; but ere many Months, was
defeated and slain by Offa. Yet Ethelbald seems not without cause, after a long
and prosperous Reign, to have fallen by a violent Death; not shameing on the
vain confidence of his many Alms, to commit uncleaness with consecrated Nuns,
besides Laic Adulteries, as the Archbishop of Ments in a letter taxes him and
his Predecessor, and that by his example most of his Peers did the like; which
adulterous doings he foretold him were likely to produce a slothful
offspring, good for nothing but to be the ruin of that Kingdom, as it fell
out not long after. Osmund, according to Florence, ruleing the South Saxons,
and Swithred the East, Eadbert in Northumberland, following the steps of his
Predecessor, got him into a Monks Hood; the more to be wondered, that having
Sim. Dun. Eccles. L. 2.
reigned worthily 21 years, with the love and high estimation of all, both at
home and abroad, able still to govern, and much entreated by the Kings his
Neighbors, not to lay down his charge; with offer on that condition to yield
up to him part of their own Dominion, he could not be moved from his resolution,
but relinquished his Royal Office to Oswulf his Son; cause, was slain by his
own Servants. And the year after died Ethelbert, Son of Victred, the second of
that name in Kent. Oswulf, Ethelwald, otherwise Sim. Dun. Mat West.
called Mollo, was set up King; who in his third year had a great Battle at
Eldune, by Melros, slew Oswin a great Lord, rebelling, and gained the Victory.
Alcred, Sim. Dun.
who assumed his place. Cataracta an ancient and fair City in Yorkshire, was
burnt by Arnred a certain Tyrant, who the same year came to like end. Sim. Dun.
years more, Alfred the King deposed and forsak'n of all his people, fled with
a few, first to Bebba, a strong City of those parts, thence to Kinot King of
the Picts. Ethelred the Son of Mollo, was crowned in his stead. Mean while Offa
the Mercian, growing powerful, had subdued a Neighboring people by Simeon,
called Hestings; and fought successfully this year with Alric King of Kent, at
a place called Occanford: the Annals also speak of wondrous Serpents then seen
in Sussex. Nor had Kinwulf the West Saxon given small proof of his valor in
several Battles against the Welsh heretofore; Offa, at a place called
Besington, Sax. an.
was put to the worse, and Offa won the Town for which they contended.
Northumberland, Ethelred having caused three of his Nobles, Sim. Dun.
Aldwulf, Kinwulf, and Ecca, treacherously to be slain by two other Peers, was
himself the next year driven into banishment, Elfwald the Son of Oswulf
succeeding in his place, yet not without civil broils; Sim. Dun.
year Osbald and Ethelheard, two Noblemen, raising Forces against him, routed
Bearne his General, and persueing, burnt him at a place called Seletune. I am
sensible how wearisom it may likely be to read of so many bare and reasonless
Actions, so many names of Kings one after another, acting little more then mute
persons in a Scene: what would it be to have inserted the long Bead-roll of
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Abbesses, and their doeings, neither to Religion
profitable, nor to morality, swelling my Authors each to a voluminous body, by
me studiously omitted; and left as their propriety, who have a mind to write
the Ecclesiastical matters of those Ages; neither do I care to wrincle the
smoothness of History with rugged names of places unknown, better harp'd at in
Camden, and other Chorographers. Ethelwerd. Malms.
over in silence, as wholely of such Argument, bring us to relate next the
unfortunate end of Kinwulf the West Saxon; who having laudably reigned about 31
years, yet suspecting that Kineard Brother of Sigebert the former King,
intended to usurp the Crown after his Decease, or revenge his Brothers
expulsion, had commanded him into banishment; but he Sax. ann.
lurking here and there on the borders with a small Company, having had
intelligence that Kenwulf Camd.
was in the Country thereabout, at Merantun, or Merton in Surrey, at the House
of a Woeman whom he loved, went by night and beset the place. Kenwulf
over-confident either of his Royal presence, or personal valor, issuing forth
with the few about him, runs feirsly at Kineard, and wounds him sore, but by
his followers hemmed in, is killed among them. The report of so great an
accident soon running to a place not far off, where many more attendants
awaited the Kings return, Osric and Wivert, two Earls hasted with a great
number to the House, where Kineard and his fellows yet remained. He seeing
himself surrounded, with fair words and promise of great gifts, attempted to
appease them; but those rejected with disdain, fights it out to the last, and
is slain with all but one or two of his retinue, which were nigh a hunderd.
Kinwulf was succeeded by Birthric, being both descended of Kerdic the the
Founder of that Kingdom. Sim. Dun. Malms.
the end of Elswald in Northumberland, two years after slain miserably by the
conspiracy of Siggan, one of his Nobles, others say of the whole people at
Scilcester by the Roman Wall; yet undeservedly, as his Sepulcher at Hagustald,
now Hexham upon Camd.
Tine, and some miracles there said to be done, are alleged to witness; and
Siggan 5 years after laid violent hands on himself. Osred Son of Alcred
advanced Malms.
into the room of Elfwald, and within one year driven out, left his seat vacant
to Ethelred Son of Mollo, who after ten years of banishment (impris'nment,
says Alcuin) had the Scepter put again Sim. Dun.
into his hand: Birthric King of West Saxons, gave beginning from abroad to a
new and fatal revolution of calamity on this Land. For three Danish Ships, the
first that had bin seen here of that Nation arriving in the West, to visit
these, as was supposed, Foren Merchants, the Kings gatherer of Customs taking
Horse from Dorchester, found them Spies and Enemies. For being commanded to
come and give account of their ladeing at the Kings Custom House, they slew him
and all who came with him; as an earnest of the many slaughters, rapines, and
hostilities, which they returned not long after to commit over all the Island.
Pontan. L. 3.
Of this Danish first arrival, and on a sudden worse then hostile Aggression,
the Danish History far otherwise relates, as if their landing had bin at the
mouth of Humber, and their spoilfull march far into the Country; though soon
repelld by the Inhabitants, they hasted back as fast to their Ships: But from
what cause, what reason of state, what Authority or public counsel the
invasion proceeded, makes not mention, and our wonder yet the more, by telling
us that Sigefrid then King in Denmark, and long after, was a man studious more
of peace and quiet then of warlike matters. These therefore seem rather Pontan.
L. 4.
to have bin some wanderers at Sea, who with public Commission, or without,
through love of spoil, or hatred of Christianity, seeking booties on any land
of Christians, came by chance or weather on this shore. Osred in
Northumberland, Sim. Dun.
who driven out by his Nobles had given place to Ethelred, was taken and
forcibly shav'n a Monk at York. Oels, and Oelswin, Sim. Dun.
Sons of Elfwald, formerly King, were drawn by fair promises from the principal
Church of York, and after by command of Ethelred, cruelly put to Death at
Wonwaldremere, a Village by the great Pool in Lancashire, now called
Winandermere. Nor was the Camden.
third year less bloody; Osred, who not likeing a shav'n Crown, had desired
banishment and obtained Sim. Dun. Sim. Dun. Eccles. L. 2.
it, returning from the I Will of Man with small Forces, at the secret but
deceitful call of certain Nobles, who by Oath had promised to assist him, was
also taken, and by Ethelred dealt with in the same manner; who the better to
avouch his Cruelties, thereupon married Elfled the Daughter of Offa: for in Offa
was found as little Faith or mercy. He the same year having drawn to his Palace
Ethelbrite King of East Angles, with fair invitations to marry his Daughter,
caused him to be there inhospitably beheaded, and his Kingdom wrongfully
seized, by the wicked counsel of his Wife, says Mat. West. annexing thereto a
long unlikely Tale. For which violence and bloodshed to make atonement, with
Friars at lest, he bestows the relics of St. Alban, in a shrine of Pearl and
Gold. Sim. Dun.
next year with the relics in Lindisfarne; where the Danes landing, pillaged
that Monastery, and of Friars killed some, carried away others Captive, sparing
neither Priest nor Lay: which many strange thunders and fiery Dragons, with
other impressions in the air seen frequently before, were judged to
foresignifie. This year Alric third Son of Victred ended in Kent his long Reign
of 34 years: with him ended the race of Hengist: thenceforth whomsoever wealth
or faction advanced, took on him the name and state of a King. The Saxon Annals
of 784. name Ealmund then reigning in Kent; but that consists not with the time
of Alric, and I find him no where else mentiond. Malms.
for the Death of Offa the Mercian, a strenuous and subtle King; he had much
intercourse with Charles the Great, at first enmity, to the interdicting of
commerce on either side, at length much amity and firm League, as appears by
the Letter of Charles himself yet extant, procured by Alcuin a learned and
prudent man, though a Monk, whom the Kings of England in those days had sent
Orator into France, to maintain good correspondence between them and Charles
the Great. He granted, says Huntingdon, a perpetual tribute to the Pope out of
every House in his Kingdom; for yiedling perhaps to translate Asser. Men. Sim.
Dun.
the Primacy of Canterbury to Lichfeild in his own Dominion. He drew a trench
of wondrous length between Mercia and the British Confines, from Sea to Sea.
Ecferth the Son of Offa, a Prince of great hope, who also had bin Crowned 9
years before his Fathers Decease, restoring to the Church what his Father had
seized on: yet within fowr Months by a sickness ended his Reign. And to Kenulf
next in right of the same Progeny bequeathed his Kingdom. Mean while the
Danish Pirates who still wasted Northumberland, ventring on shore to spoil
another Monastery at the mouth of the River Don, were assailed by the English,
their Chief Captain slain on the place; then returning to Sea, were most of them
Ship-wrack'd; others driven again on shore, were put all to the Sword. Simeon
attributes this their punishment to the power of St. Cudbert, offended with them
for the rifling of his Covent. Sim. Dun.
this, died Ethelred twice King, but not exempted at last from the fate of many
his predecessors, miserably slain by his people, some say deservedly as not
inconscious with them who trained Osred to his ruin. Osbald a Nobleman exalted
to the Throne, and in less then a month, deserted and expelled, was forced to
fly at last from Lindisfarne by Sea to the Pictish King, and died an Abbot.
Eardulf whom Ethelred six years before had commanded to be put to Death at
Ripun, before the Abbey-Gate, dead as was supposed, and with solemn Dirge
carried into the Church, after midnight found there alive, I read not how, then
banished, now recalled, was in York created King. In Kent, Ethelbert or Pren,
whom the Annals call Eadbright (so different they often are one from another,
both in timeing and in nameing) by some means having usurped regal power, after
two years Reign contending with Kenulf the Mercian, was by him taken Prisoner,
and soon after, out of pious commiseration let go: but not received of his own,
what became of him, Malmsbury leaves in doubt. Simeon writes, that Kenulf
commanded to put out his Eyes, and lop off his hands; but whether the sentence
were executed or not, is left as much in doubt by his want of expression. Sim.
Dun.
after this, they in Northumberland who had conspired against Ethelred, now
also raising War against Eardulf, under Wada their Chief Captain, after much
havoc on either side at Langho, by Whaley in Lancashire, the Conspirators at
last flying, Eardulf returned with Victory. The same year London, with a great
multitude of her Inhabitants, by a sudden fire was consumed. England, uniting
her seven Kingdoms into one, by Echert the famous West Saxon; him Birthric
dying Childless left next to reign, the only surviver of that lineage, descended
from Inegild the Brother of King Ina. And according to his Malms.
Birth liberally bred, he began early from his youth to give signal hopes of
more then ordinary worth growing up in him; which Birthric fearing, and with
all his juster title to the Crown, secretly sought his life, and Ecbert
perceaving, fled to Offa the Mercian* but he having married Eadburg his
Daughter to Birthric, easily gave ear to his Ambassadors; coming Sax. an.
to require Ecbert, he again put to his shifts, escaped thence into France; but
after three years banishment there, which perhaps contributed much to his
education, Charles the Great then reigning, he was called over by the public
voice (for Birthric was newly dead) and with general applause created King of
West Saxons. The same day Ethelmund at Kinneresford, passing over with the
Worcestershire men, was met by Weolstan another Nobleman with those of
Wiltshire, between whom happ'nd a great fray, wherein the Wiltshire men
overcame, but both Dukes were slain, no reason of their quarrel writ'n; such
bickerings to recount, met oft'n in these our Writers, what more worth is it
then to Chronicle the Wars of Kites, or Crows, flocking and fighting in the
Air? Eardulf the Northumbrian, Sim. Dun.
leading forth an Army against Kenulf the Mercian, for harboring certain of his
Enemies, by the diligent mediation of other Princes and Prelates, Arms were
laid aside, and amity soon sworn between them. But Eadburga the Wife of
Birthric, a Malms. L. 2. Asser.
woeman every way wicked, in malice especially cruel, Sim. Dun.
accustomed in her Husbands days to accuse any whom she spighted; and not
prevailing to his ruin, her practice was by poison secretly to contrive his
Death. It fortuned that the King her Husband, lighting on a Cup which she had
temperd, not for him, but for one of his great Favorites, whom she could not
harm by accuseing, sip'd thereof only, and in a while after still pineing away,
ended his days; the favorite drinking deeper found speedier the operation. She
fearing to be questiond for these facts, with what treasure she had, passed
over-sea to Charles the Great, whom with rich gifts coming to his presence,
the Emperor courtly received with this pleasant proposal: Choose Eadburga,
which of us two thou will, me or my Son (for his Son stood by him) to be thy
Husband. She no dissembler of what she liked best, made easy answer. Were it
in my choice, I should choose of the two your Son rather, as the younger man.
To whom the Emperor between jest and earnest, had thou chosen me, I had
bestowed on thee my Son; but since thou have chos'n him, thou shall have
neither him nor me. Nevertheless he assigned her a rich Monastery to dwell in
as Abbess; for that life it may seem, she chose next to profess; but being a
while after detected of unchastity, with one of her followers, she was
commanded to depart thence; from that time wandering poorly up and down with one
Servant, in Pavia a City of Italy, she finished at last in beggary her
shameful life. Cuthred, whom Kenuls the Mercian had, Malms. Sax. ann.
instead of Pren, made King in Kent, having obscurely reigned 8 years,
deceased. Northumberland, Eardulf the year following was driven out of his
Realm by Alfwold, who Reigned two years in his room; Huntingd. Sim. Dun.
after whom Eandred Son of Eardulf 33 years; Mat. West.
Buchanan relates, the year following, of Acaius King of Scots, who having
reigned 32 years, and dying in 809, had formerly aided (but in what year of his
Reign tells not) Hungus King of Picts with 10000 Scots, against Athelstan a
Saxon or Englishman, then wasting the Pictish Borders; that Hungus by the aid
of those Scots and the help of St. Andrew their Patron, in a Vision by night,
and the appearance of his cross by day, routed the astonished English, and slew
Athelstan in fight. Who this Athelstan was, I believe no man knows; Buchanan
supposes him to have been some Danish Commander, on whom King Alured, or
Alfred, had bestowed Northumberland; but of this I find no footsteps in our
ancient Writers; and if any such thing were done in the time of Alfred, it must
be little less then 100. years after; this Athelstan therefore, and this great
overthrow, seems rather to have bin the fancy of some Legend then any
warrantable Record. Sim. Dun.
Mean while Ecbert, having with much Prudence, Justice, and Clemency, Sax. an.
established his Kingdom and himself in the affections of his people, turns his
first enterprise against the Britans, both them of Cornwall and those beyond
Seavern, subdueing both. In Mercia, Kenulf the 6th. year after, having reigned
with great praise of his religious mind and virtues both in Peace and War,
deceased. Kenelm, Sax. an. Malms.
a Child of seven years, was committed to the care of his Elder Sister
Quendrid; who with a female ambition aspiring to the Crown, hired one who had
the charge of his nurture, to murder him, led into a woody place upon pretense
of hunting. The murder, as is reported, was miraculously revealed; but to tell
how, by a Dove droping a writt'n note on the Altar at Rome, is a long story,
told, though out of order, by Malmsbury; and under the year 821. by Mat. West.
where I leave it to be sought by such as are more credulous then I wish my
Readers. Only the note was to this purpose. Low in a mead of Kine under a Thorn,
Of head bereft li'th poor Kenelm King-born.


Keolwulf the Brother of Kenulf, after one years Reign was driven out by one
Bernulf an Usurper: Ingulf.
who in his third year, Ecbert, Sax. an.
though with great loss on both sides, overthrown and put to flight at
Ellandune or Wilton: yet Malmsbury accounts this Battle fought in 806, a wide
difference, but frequently found in their computations. Bernulf thence retireing
to the East Angles, as part of his Dominion by the late seizure of Offa, was by
them met in the field and slain: but they doubting what the Mercians might do
in revenge hereof, forthwith yielded themselves both King and people to the
Sovrantie of Ecbert. As for the Kings of East Angles, our Annals mention them
not since Ethelwald; him succeeded his Brothers Florent. Genealog. Bed. L. 2.
c. 15.
Sons, as we find in Malmsbury, Aldulf (a good King, well acquainted with Bid)
and Elwold who left the Kingdom to Beorn, he to Ethelred the Father of
Ethelbrite, whom Offa perfidiously put to Death. Simeon and Hoveden, in the
year 749. write that Elfwald King of East Angles dying, Humbeanna and Albert
shared the Kingdom between them; but where to insert this among the former
successions is not easy, nor much material: after Ethelbrite, none is named of
that Kingdom till their submitting now to Ecbert: he from this Victory against
Bernulf sent part of his Army under Ethelwulf his Son, with Alstan Bishop of
Shirburn, and Wulferd a Chief Commander, into Kent. Who finding Baldred there
reigning in his 18th. year, overcame and drove him over the Thames; whereupon
all Kent, Surrey, Sussex, and lastly Essex, with her King Swithred, became
subject to the Dominion of Ecbert. Neither were these all his exploits of this
year, the first in order set down in Saxon Annals, being his fight against the
Devonshire Welsh, at a place called Gasulford, now Camelford in Cornwall. Camd.
the Mercian, after two years preparing to avenge Bernulf his Kinsman on the
East Angles, Ingulf.
was by them with his five Consuls, as the Annals call them, surprised and put
to the Sword: and Withlaf his successor first vanquished, then upon submission
with all Mercia, made tributary to Ecbert. Mean while the Northumbrian Kingdom
of it self was fallen to shivers; their Kings one after another so oft'n slain
by the people, no man dareing, though never so ambitious, to take up the
Scepter which many had found so hot, (the only effectual cure of ambition that
I have read) for the space of 33 years, after the Death of Ethelred Son of
Mollo, as Malmsbury writes, there was no King: many Noblemen and Prelates were
fled the Country. Which mis-rule among them, the Danes having understood,
oft-times from their Ships entering far into the land, infested those parts with
wide depopulations, wasting Towns, Churches, and Monasteries, for they were yet
Heathen: The Lent before whose coming, on the North-side of St. Peter's Church
in York, was seen from the roof to rain blood. The causes of these calamities,
and the ruin of that Kingdom, Alcuin, a learned Monk living in those days,
attributes in several Epistles, and well may, to the general ignorance and
decay of lerning, which crept in among them after the Death of Beda, and of
Ecbert the Archbishop; their neglect of breeding up youth in the Scriptures, the
spruce and gay apparel of their Priests and Nuns, discovering their vain and
wanton minds, examples are also read, eev'n in Beda's days, of their wanton
deeds: thence Altars defiled with perjuries, Cloisters violated with
Adulteries, the Land polluted with blood of their Princes, civil dissentions
among the people, and finally all the same vices which Gildas alleged of old
to have ruined the Britans. In this estate Ecbert, who had now conquered all the
South, finding them in the year 827. Eandred their King becoming Tributary. Mat.
West.
he subdued more thoroughly what remained of North Wales.

The End of the Fourth Book.
THE HISTORY OF BRITAIN. The Fifth Book.
THE sum of things in this Island, or the best part thereof, reduced now under
the power of one man; and him one of the worthiest, which, as far as can be
found in good Authors, was by none attained at any time here before unless in
Fables; men might with some reason have expected from such Union, peace and
plenty, greatness, and the flourishing of all Estates and Degrees: but far the
contrary fell out soon after, Invasion, Spoil, Desolation, slaughter of many,
slavery of the rest, by the forcible landing of a fierce Nation; Danes commonly
called, and sometimes Dacians, by others, the same with Normans; as barbarous as
the Saxons themselves were at first reputed, and much more; for the Saxons
first invited came hither to dwell; these unsent for, unprovoked, came only to
destroy. Calvisius.
But if the Saxons, as is above related, came most of them from Jutland and
Anglen, a part of Denmark, as Danish Writers affirm, and that Danes and
Normans are the same; then in this invasion, Danes drove out Danes, their own
posterity. And Normans afterward, none but antienter Normans. Which invasion
Pontan. hist. Dan.
perhaps, had the Heptarchie stood divided as it was, had either not bin
attempted, or not uneasily resisted; while each Prince and people, excited by
their nearest concernments, had more industriously defended their own bounds,
then depending on the neglect of a deputed Governor, sent oft-times from the
remote residence of a secure Monarch. Though as it fell out in those troubles,
the lesser Kingdoms revolting from the West Saxon yoke, and not aiding each
other, too much concerned with their own safety, it came to no better pass;
while severally they sought to repel the danger nigh at hand, rather then
jointly to prevent it far off. But when God has decreed servitude on a
sinful Nation, fitted by their own vices for no condition but servile, all
Estates of Government are alike unable to avoid it. God had purposed to punish
our instrumental punishers, though now Christians, by other Heathen, according
to his Divine retaliation; invasion for invasion, spoil for spoil, destruction
for destruction. The Saxons were now full as wicked as the Britans were at
their arrival, brok'n with luxury and sloth, either secular or superstitious;
for laying aside the exercise of Arms, and the study of all virtuous knowledge,
some betook them to over-worldly or vicious practice, others to religious
Idleness and Solitude, which brought forth nothing but vain and delusive
visions; easily perceav'd such, by their commanding of things, either not
belonging to the Gospel, or utterly forbidden, Ceremonies, Relics,
Monasteries, Masses, Idols, add to these ostentation of Alms, got oft-times by
rapine and oppression, or intermixed with violent and lustful deeds, sometimes
prodigally bestowed as the expiation of cruelty and bloodshed. What longer
suffering could there be, when Religion it self grew so void of sincerity, and
the greatest shows of purity were impur'd?

Ecbert.
ECbert in full highth of glory, having now enjoyed his Conquest seven
peaceful years, his victorious Army long since disbanded, and the exercise of
Arms perhaps laid aside, the more was found unprovided against a sudden storm
of Danes from the Sea, who landing in the 32. of his Reign, Sax. an.
wasted Shepey in Kent. Ecbert the next year, gathering an Army, Carr in
Dorsetshire; Sax. an.
the event whereof was, that the Danes kept their ground, and encampt where the
field was fought; two Saxon Leaders, Dudda and Osmund, and two Bishops, as some
say, were there slain. This was the only check of Fortune we read of, that
Ecbert in all his time received. For the Danes returning two years after with a
great Navy, Sax. an.
with the Cornish, who had enterd League with them, were overthrown and put to
flight. Of these invasions against Ecbert, the Danish History is not silent;
whether out of their own Records or ours, may be justly doubted; for of these
times at home, I find them in much uncertainty, and beholding rather to
Outlandish Chronicles then any Records of their own. The Victor Ecbert, as one
who had done enough, seasonably now, after prosperous success, Sax. an.
and was buried at Winchester.

Ethelwolf.
EThelwolf the Son of Ecbert succeeded, by Malmsbury described a man of mild
nature, not inclined to War, or delighted with much Dominion; that therefore
contented with the ancient West Saxon bounds, he gave to Ethelstan his Brother,
or Son, as Mat. West.
some write, the Kingdom of Kent and Essex. But the Saxon Annalist, whose
Authority is Elder, says plainly, that both these Countries and Sussex, were
bequeathed to Ethelstan by Ecbert his Father. The unwarlike disposition of
Ethelwolf, gave encouragement no doubt, and easier entrance to the Danes, who
came again the next year with 33 Ships; Wulfheard, one of the Kings Chief
Captains, Sax. an.
drove them back at Southamton with great slaughter; himself dying the same
year, of Age, as I suppose, for he seems to have bin one of Ecberts old
Commanders, who was sent with Ethelwolf to subdue Kent. Ethelhelam another of
the Kings Captains with the Dorsetshire men, had at first like success against
the Danes at Portsmouth; but they reinforcing stood their ground, and put the
English to rout. Worse was the success of Earl Herebert at a place called
Mereswar, slain with the most part of his Army. Lindsey also, East Angles, Sax.
an.
and Kent, much mischief was don by their landing; Sax. an.
they came on as far as Canterbury, Rochester, and London it self, with no less
cruel hostility: and giving no respit to the peaceable mind of Ethelwolf, they
yet returned with the next year in 35 Ships, fought with him, Carr, and made
good their ground. Sax. an. Sim. Dun. Mat. West.
In Northumberland, Eandred the Tributary King deceasing, left the same tenure
to his Son Ethelred driven out in his fowrth year, Readwulf, who soon after his
Coronation hasting forth to Battle against the Danes at Alvetheli, fell with
the most part of his Army; and Ethelred like in fortune to the former Ethelred,
was re-exalted to his Seat. And to be yet further like him in Fate, was slain
the fowrth year after. Osbert succeeded in his room. Danes next year after met
with some stop in the full course of their outrageous insolences. Sax. an.
For Earnulf with the men of Somerset, Alstan the Bishop, and Osric with those
of Dorsetshire, setting upon them at the Rivers mouth of Pedridan, slaughterd
them in great numbers, and obtained a just Victory. This repulse queld them,
for ought we hear, the space of six years; Sax. an. Asser.
their, invasion with little better success. For Keorle an Earl, aided with the
Forces of Devonshire, assaulted and over-threw them at Wigganbearch with great
destruction; as prosperously were they fought with the same year at Sandwich,
by King Ethelstan, and Ealker his General, their great Army defeated, and nine
of their Ships taken, the rest driven off, however to ride out the Winter on
that shore, Asser says, they then first wintered in Shepey I Will. Hard it is,
through the bad expression of these Writers, to define this fight, whether by
Sea or Land; Hoveden terms it a Sea fight. Nevertheless with 50 Ships (Asser
and others add 300) they enterd the mouth of Huntingd. Mat West.
Thames, and made excursions as far as Canterbury and London, and as Ethelwerd
writes, destroyed both; of London, Asser signifies only that they pillaged it.
Bertulf also the Mercian, successor of Withlaf, with all his Army they forced
to fly, and him beyond the Sea. Then passing over Thames with their powers into
Surrey, and the West Saxons, and meeting there with King Ethelwolf and
Ethelbald his Son, at a place called Ak-Lea, or Oak-Lea, they received a total
defeat with memorable slaughter. This was counted a lucky year to England, and
brought to Ethelwolf great reputation. Burhed therefore, who after Bertulf Sax.
an. Asser.
held of him the Mercian Kingdom, two years after this, imploring his aid
against the North-Welch, as then troublesome to his Confines, obtained it of
him in person, and thereby reduced them to obedience. This done, Ethelwolf sent
his Son Alfrid a Child of five years, well accompanied to Rome, whom Leo the
Pope both consecrated to be King afterward, and adopted to be his Son; at home
Ealker with the Forces of Kent, and Huda with those of Surrey, fell on the
Danes at their landing in Tanet, and at first put them back; but the slain and
drowned were at length so many on either side, as left the loss equal on both:
which yet hinderd not the solemnity of a marriage at the feast of Easter,
between Burhed the Mercian, Malms.
and Ethelswida King Ethelwolf's Daughter. Danes next year winterd again in
Shepey. Sax. an.
Whom Ethelwolf not finding human health sufficient to resist, growing daily
upon him, in hope of divine aid, registerd in a Book, and dedicated to God the
tenth part of his own lands, and of his whole Kingdom, eased of all
impositions, but converted to the maintenance of Masses and Psalms weekly to be
sung for the prospering of Ethelwolf and his Captains, as appears at large by
the Patent it self, in William of Malmsbury. Asser says, de did it for the
redemtion of his Soul and the Soul of his Ancestors. After which, as having
done some great matter to show himself at Rome, and be applauded of the Pope;
he takes a long and cumbersome journey thither with young Alfrid again, and
there stays a year, Asser.
when his place required him rather here in the field against Pagan Enemies
left wintring in his land. Yet so much manhood he had, as to return thence no
Monk; and in his way home took to Wife Judith Daughter of Charles the bald,
King of France. But Asser.
ere his return, Ethelbald his eldest Son, Alstan his trusty Bishop, and Enulf
Earl of Somerset conspired against him; their complaints were, that he had taken
with him Alfrid his youngest Son to be there inaugurated King, and brought home
with him an outlandish Wife; for which they endeavored to deprive him of his
Kingdom. The disturbance was expected to bring forth nothing less then War: but
the King abhorring civil discord, after many conferences tending to peace,
condescended to divide the Kingdom with his Son; division was made, but the
matter so carried, that the Eastern and worst part was malignly afforded to the
Father: The Western and best given to the Son, at which many of the Nobles had
great indignation, offering to the King their utmost assistance for the recovery
of all; whom he peacefully dissuading, sat down contented with his portion
assigned. In the East Angles, Edmund lineal from the ancient stock of those
Kings, a youth of 14 years only, but of great hopes, was with consent of all
but his own Crowned at Bury. Buchanan relates, the Picts, who not long before
had by the Scots bin driven out of their Country, part of them coming to Osbert
and Ella, then Kings of Northumberland, obtained aid against Donaldus the
Scottish King, to recover their ancient possession. Osbert who in person
undertook the expedition, marching into Scotland, was at first put to a
retreat; but returning soon after on the Scots, over-secure of their supposed
Victory, put them to flight with great slaughter, took Prisoner their King, and
persu'd his Victory beyond Sterlinbridge. The Scots unable to resist longer,
and by Ambassadors entreating peace, had it granted them on these conditions:
the Scots were to quit all they had possessed within the Wall of Severus: the
limits of Scotland were beneath Sterlinbridge to be the River Forth, and on the
other side, Dunbritton Frith; from that time so called of the British then
seated in Cumberland, who had joind with Osbert in this Action, and so far
extended on that side the British limits. If this be true, as the Scotch
Writers themselv's witness (and who would think them Fabulous to the
disparagement of their own Country?) how much wanting have bin our Historians to
their Countries Honor, in leting pass unmention'd an exploit so memorable, by
them rememberd and attested, who are wont ofter to extenuate then to amplify
aught done in Scotland by the English? Donaldus on these conditions releas't,
soon after dies; according to Buchanan, in 858. Ethelwolf Chief King in
England, had the year before ended his life, and was buried as his Father at
Winchester. He was from his youth much addicted Mat. West.
to devotion; so that in his Fathers time he was ordained Bishop of Winchester;
and unwillingly, for want of other Legitimate Issue, succeeded him in the
Throne; mannaging therefore his greatest affairs by the activity of two Bishops,
Alstan of Sherburne, and Swithine of Winchester. But Alstan Malms.
is noted of Covetousness and Oppression, by William of Malmsbury; the more
vehemently no doubt for doing some notable damage to that Monastery. The Sigon.
de regn. Ital. L. 5.
same Author writes, that Ethelwolf at Rome, paid a Tribute to the Pope,
continued to his days. However he were facil to his Son, and seditious Nobles,
in yiedling up part of his Kingdom, yet his Queen he treated not the less
honorably, for whomsoever it displeased. The West Saxon had decreed ever Asser.
since the time of Eadburga, the infamous Wife of Birthric, that no Queen
should sit in State with the King, or be dignified with the Title of Queen. But
Ethelwolf permitted not that Judith his Queen should loose any point of Regal
State by that Law. At his Death, he divided the Kingdom between his two Sons,
Ethelbald, and Ethelbert; to the younger Kent, Essex, Surrey, Sussex, to the
Elder all the rest; to Peter and Paul certain revenues yearly, for what uses
let others relate, who write also his Pedigree, from Son to Father, up to Adam.

Ethelbald, and Ethelbert.
EThelbald, unnatural and disloyal to his Father, Asser. Malms. Sim. Dun.
fell justly into another, though contrary sin, of too much love to his Fathers
Wife; and whom at first he opposed coming into the Land, her now unlawfully
marrying, he takes into his Bed; but not long enjoying, died at three years
end, without doing aught more worthy to be rememberd; having reigned two years
with his Father, impiously usurping, Sax. an.
and three after him, as unworthily inheriting. And his hap was all that while
to be unmolested by the Danes; not of Divine favor doubtless, but to his
greater condemnation, living the more securely his incestuous life. Huntingdon
on the other side much praises Ethelbald, and writes him buried at Sherburn,
with great sorrow of the people, who missed him long after. Mat. West. says,
that he repented of his incest with Judith, and dismissed her: but Asser an Eye
witness of those times, mentions no such thing.

Ethelbert alone.
EThelbald by Death removed, the whole Kingdom came rightfully to Ethelbert his
next Brother. Who though a Prince of great Virtue and no blame, had as short a
Reign allotted him as his faulty Brother, nor that so peaceful; once or twice
invaded by the Danes. But they having landed in the West with a great Army, and
sacked Winchester, were met by Osric Earl of Southampton, and Ethelwolf of
Bark-shire, beat'n to their Ships, and forced to leave their booty. Five years
after, about the time of his Sax. an.
Death, they set foot again in Tanet; the Kentish men wearied out with so
frequent Alarms, came to agreement with them for a certain sum of money; but
ere the peace could be ratified, and the money gatherd, the Danes impatient of
delay by a sudden eruption in the night, soon wasted all the East of Kent. Mean
while or something before, Ethelbert deceasing was buried as his Brother at
Sherburne.

Ethelred.
EThelred the third, Son of Ethelwolf, at his first Sax. an. Huntingd.
coming to the Crown was entertained with a fresh invasion of Danes, led by
Hinguar and Hubba, two Brothers, who now had got footing among the East Angles;
there they winterd, and coming to terms of peace with the Inhabitants,
furnished themselves of Horses, forming by that means many Troops with Riders
of their own: These Pagans, Asser says, came from the River Danubius. Fitted
Sax. an.
thus for a long expedition, they ventured the next year to make their way over
land and over Humber, as far as York, them they found to their hands imbroil'd
in civil dissentions; their King Osbert they had thrown out, and Ella Leader of
another faction chosen in his room; who both, though late, admonished by their
common danger, toward the years end with united powers made head against the
Danes and prevailed; but persueing them over-eagerly into York, then but
slenderly walled, the Northumbrians Asser.
were every where slaughtered, both within and without; their Kings also both
slain, their City burnt, says Malmsbury, the rest as they could, made their
peace, overrun and vanquished as far as the River Tine, and Egbert of English
race appointed King over them. Bromton no ancient Author (for he wrote since
Mat. West.) nor of much credit, writes a particular cause of the Danes coming
to York: that Bruern a Nobleman, whose Wife King Osbert had ravished, called in
Hinguar and Hubba to revenge him. The example is remarkable if the truth were
as evident. Thence victorious, the Danes next year enterd into Mercia toward
Nottingham, where they spent the Winter. Burhed then King of that Country,
unable to resist, implores the aid of Ethelred and young Alfred his Brother,
they assembling their Forces and joining with the Mercians about Nottingham,
offer Battle: the Danes not daring to come forth, kept themselves Asser.
within that Town and Castle, so that no great fight was hazarded there; at
length the Mercians weary of long suspense, enterd into conditions of peace
with their Enemies. After which the Danes returning back to York, made their
abode there the space of one year, committing, some say, many cruelties. Sim.
Dun.
Ingulf.
Thence imbarking to Lindsey, and all the Summer destroying that Country, about
September they came with like fury into Kesteven, another part of Lincolnshire,
where Algar the Earl of Howland now Holland, with his Forces, and two hunderd
stout Soldiers belonging to the Abbey of Croiland, three hunderd from about
Boston, Morcard Lord of Brunne, with his numerous Family, well trained and
armed: Osgot Governor of Lincoln with 500. of that City, all joining together,
gave Battle to the Danes, slew of them a great multitude, with three of their
Kings, and persu'd the rest to their Tents; but the night following, Gothrun,
Baseg, Osketil, Halfden, and Hamond, five Kings, and as many Earls, Frena,
Hinguar, Hubba, Sidroc the Elder and Younger, coming in from several parts with
great forces and spoils, great part of the English began to slink home.
Nevertheless Algar with such as forsook him not, all next day in order of
Battle facing the Danes, and sustaining unmoved the brunt of their assaults,
could not withhold his men at last from persueing their counterfitted flight;
whereby op'nd and disordered, they fell into the snare of their Enemies, rushing
back upon them. Algar and those Captains fore-nam'd with him, all resolute men,
retreating to a hill side, and slaying of such as followed them, manifold their
own number, died at length upon heaps of dead which they had made round about
them. The Danes thence passing on into the Country of East Angles, rifl'd and
burnt the Monastery of Elie, overthrew Earl Wulketul with his whole Army, and
lodged out the Winter at Thetford; where King Edmund assailing them, was with
his whole Army put to flight, himself taken, bound to a stake, and shot to
Death with Arrows, his whole Country subdued. The next year Sax. an.
with great supplies, says Huntingdon, bending their march toward the
West Saxons, the only people now left, in whom might seem yet to remain
strength or courage likely to oppose them, they came to Reading, fortified
there between the two Rivers of Thames, and Kenet, and about three days after,
sent out wings of Horse under two Earls to forage the Country; Asser.
but Ethelwulf Earl of Barkshire, at Englefeild a Village nigh, encounterd
them, slew one of their Earls, and obtained a great Victory. Four days after
came the King himself and his Brother Alfred with the main Battle; and the
Danes issuing forth, a bloody fight began, on either side great slaughter, in
which Earl Ethelwulf lost his life; but the Danes loosing no ground, kept their
place of standing to the end. Neither did the English for this make less have
to another conflict at Escesdunc, or Ashdown, four days after, where both
Armies with their whole force on either side met. The Danes were imbattail'd in
two great Bodies, the one led by Bascai and Halfden, their two Kings, the other
by such Earls as were appointed; in like manner the English divided their
powers, Ethelred the King stood against their Kings; and though on the lower
ground, and coming later into the Battle from his Orisons, gave a fierce
onset, wherein Bascai (the Danish History names him Erazus the Son of Regicerus)
was slain. Alfred was placed against the Earls, and beginning the Battle ere
his Brother came into the field, with such resolution charged them, that in the
shock most of them were slain; they are named Sidroc Elder and Younger, Osbern,
Frean, Harald; at length in both Divisions, the Danes turn their backs; many
thousands of them cut off, the rest persu'd till night. So much the more it may
be wonderd to hear next in the Annals, that the Danes 14 days after such an
overthrow, fighting again with Ethelred and his Brother Alfred at Basing,
under conduct, says the Danish History, of Agnerus and Hubbo, Brothers of the
slain Evacus, should obtain the Victory; especially since the new supply of
Danes mentioned by Asser, arrived after this action. But after two Months, the
King and his Brother fought with them again at Mertun, in two Squadrons as
before, in which fight hard it is to understand who had the better; so darkly
do the Saxon Annals deliver their meaning with more then wonted infancy. Yet
these I take (for Asser is Pontan. hist. Dan. L. 4.
here silent) to be the Chief Fountain of our story, the ground and basis upon
which the Monks later in time gloss and comment at their pleasure. Nevertheless
it appears, that on the Saxon part, not Heamund the Bishop only, but many
valiant men lost their lives. This fight was followed by a heavy Summer Plague;
whereof, as is thought, King Ethelred Camd.
died in the fifth of his Reign, and was buried at Winburne, where his Epitaph
inscribes that he had his Deaths wound by the Danes, according to the Danish
History 872. Of all these terrible landings and devastations by the Danes, from
the days of Ethelwolf till their two last Battles with Ethelred, or of their
Leaders, whether Kings, Dukes, or Earls, the Danish History of best credit
says nothing; So little Wit or Conscience it seems they had to leave any
memory of their brutish, rather then manly actions; unless we shall suppose them
to have come, as above was cited out of Asser, from Danubius, rather then from
Denmark, more probable some barbarous Nations of Prussia, or Livonia, not long
before seated more Northward on the Baltic Sea.

Alfred.
ALfred the fourth Son of Ethelwols, had scarce performed his Brothers
obsequies, and the solemnity of his own Crowning, when at the months end in
have with a small power he encounterd the whole Army of Danes at Wilton, and
most part of the day foiled them; but unwarily following the Chase, gave others
of them the advantage to rally; who returning upon him now weary, remained
Masters of the field. This year, as is affirmed in the Annals, nine Battles had
bin fought against the Danes on the South Side of Thames, besides innumerable
excursions made by Alfred and other Leaders; one King, nine Earls were fallen
in fight, so that weary on both sides at the years end, League or Truce was
concluded. Yet next year the Danes took their march to Sax. an.
London, now exposed their prey, there they winterd, and thither came the
Mercians to renew peace with them. The year following they roved back to the
parts beyond Humber, but wintered at Torksey in Lincolnshire, where the
Mercians now the third time made peace with them. Notwithstanding which, Sax.
an. Camden.
Sax. an.
removing their Camp to Rependune in Mercia, now Repton upon Trent in
Darbishire, and there wintring, they constrein'd Burhed the King to fly into
Foreign parts, making seizure of his Kingdom, he running the direct way to
Rome; with better reason then his Ancestors, died there, and was buried in a
Church by the English School. His Kingdom the Danes farmed out to Kelwulf, one
of his Household Servants or Officers, with condition to be resigned them when
they commanded. From Rependune they Sax. an.
dislodged, Hafden their King leading part of his Army Northward, winterd by the
River Tine, and subjecting all those quarters, wasted also the Picts and
British beyond: but Guthrun, Oskitell, and Anwynd, other three of their Kings
moving from Rependune, came with a great Army to Grantbrig, and remained there
a whole year. Alfred that Summer purposing to try his Fortune with a Fleet at
Sea (for he had found that the want of Shipping and neglect of Navigation, had
exposed the Land to these Piracies) met with 7 Danish Rovers, took one, the
rest escaping; an acceptable success from so small a beginning: for the English
at that time were but little experienced in Sea affairs. The next years first
motion Sax. an.
of the Danes was toward Warham Castle: where Alfred meeting them, either by
policy, or their doubt of his power; Ethelwerd says, by money brought them to
such terms of peace, as that they swore to him upon a hallowed Bracelet, others
say Florent.
upon certain Relics (a Solemn Oath it seems which they never voutsal'd
before to any other Nation) forthwith to depart the land: but falsifying that
Oath, by night with all the Horse they had (Asser Florent.
says, slaying all the Horseman he had) stole to Exeter, and there winterd. In
Northumberland, Hafden their King began to settle, to divide the land, to till,
and to inhabit. Mean while they in the West who were marched to Exeter, enterd
the City, coursing now and then to Warham; but their Fleet the next Sax. an.
year sailing or rowing about the West, met with such a tempest near to
Swanswich, or Gnavewic, as wracked 120 of their Ships, and left the rest easy
to be maisterd by those Galleys which Alfred had set there to guard the Seas,
and streit'n Exeter of provision. He the while beleagering them in the City;
Asser.
now humbl'd with the loss of their Navy (two Navies, says Asser, the one at
Gnavewic, the other at Swanwine) distressed them so, as that they gave him as
many hostages as he required, and as many Oaths, to keep their covnanted peace,
and kept it. For the Summer coming on, they departed into Mercia, whereof part
they divided amongst themselves, part left to Kelwulf their substituted King.
The twelftide Sax. ann.
following, all Oaths forgott'n, they came to Chippenham in Wiltshire,
dispeopleing the Countries round, dispossessing some, driving others beyond the
Sea; Alfred himself with a small Company was forced to keep within Woods and
Fenny places, and for some time all alone, as Florent says, sojourned with
Dunwulf a Swine-heard, made afterward for his devotion, and aptness to
learning, Bishop of Winchester. Hafden and the Brother of Hinguar, coming with
23 Sim. Dun.
Ships from North Wales, where they had made great spoil, landed in Devonshire,
nigh to a strong Castle named Kinwith; where by the Garrison issuing forth
unexpectedly, they were slain with 12 hunderd of their men. Mean while the King
about Easter, not Asser.
despairing of his affairs, built a Fortress at a place called Athelney in
Somersetshire, therein valiantly defending himself and his followers, frequently
sallying forth. The 7th. week after, he rode out to a place called Ecbryt-stone
in the East part of Selwood: thither resorted to him with much gratulation the
Somerset and Wiltshire men, with many out of Hamshire, some of whom a little
before had fled their Country; with these marching to Ethandune now Camd.
Edindon in Wiltshire, he gave Battle to the whole Danish power, and put them
to flight. Then beseiging their Castle, within fourteen days took it. Malmsbury
writes, that in this time of his recess, to go a spy into the Danish Camp, he
took upon him with one Servant the habit of a Fiddler; by this means gaining
access to the Kings Table, and sometimes to his Bedchamber, got knowledge of
their secrets, their careless encamping, and thereby this opportunity of
assailing them on a sudden. The Danes by this misfortune brok'n, gave him more
hostages, and renu'd their Oaths to depart out of his Kingdom. Their King Gytro,
or Gothrun, offered willingly to receave Baptism, and accordingly came with 30
of his friends, to a place called Aldra, or Aulre, near to Camd.
Athelney, and were baptized at Wedmore; where Alfred received him out of the
Font, and named him Athelstan. After which, they abode with him 12 days, and
were dismissed with rich presents. Whereupon Sax. an.
the Danes removed next year to Cirencester, thence peaceably to the
East Angles; which Alfred, as some write, had bestowed on Gothrun to hold of
him; the bounds whereof may be read among the Laws of Alfred. Others of them
went to Fulham on the Thames, and joining there with a great Fleet newly come
into the River, thence passed over into France and Flanders, both which they
enterd so far conquering or wasting, as witnessed sufficiently, that the French
and Flemish were no more able then the English, by Policy or prowess to keep
off that Danish inundation from their land. Alfred thus rid of them, and
intending for the future to prevent their landing; Three years after (quiet the
mean while) Sax. an.
with more Ships and better provided, puts to Sea, and at first met with four
of theirs, whereof two he took, throwing the men overboard, then with two
others, wherein were two of their Princes, and took them also, but not without
some loss of his own. After three years another Fleet of them appeared on Sax.
an.
these Seas, so huge that one part thought themselves sufficient to enter upon
East-France, the other came to Rochester, and beleaguerd it, they within
stoutly defending themselves, till Alfred with great Forces, coming down upon
the Danes, drove them to their Ships, leaving for have all their Horses behind
them. The same year Alfred sent a Fleet toward the East Angles, then inhabited
by the Danes, which at the Sim. Dun.
mouth of Stour, meeting with 16 Danish Ships, after some flight took them all,
and slew the Soldiers aboard; but in their way home lying careless, were
overtak'n by another part of that Fleet, and came off with loss, whereupon
perhaps those Danes who were settled among the East Angles, erected with new
hopes, violated the peace which they had sworn to Alfred, who spent the next
year in repairing London, Sax. an.
(be^^^ging, says Huntingdon) much ruind and unpeopl'd by the Danes; the
Londoners, all but those who had bin led away Captive, soon returned to their
dwellings, and Ethred Duke of Mercia, was by Sim. Dun.
Sax. an.
the King appointed their Governor. But after 13 years respite of peace,
another Danish Fleet of 250 Sail, from the East part of France arrived at the
mouth of a River in East Kent, called Limen, nigh to the great Wood Andred,
famous for length and breadth; into that Wood they drew up their Ships four mile
from the Rivers mouth, and built a Fortress. After whom Haesten with another
Danish Fleet of 80 Ships, entering the mouth of Thames, built a Fort at
Middleton, the former Army remaining at a place called Apeltre. Alfred
perceaving this, took of those Danes who dwelt in Northumberland, a new Oath of
Fidelity, and of those in Essex, hostages, lest they should join, as they were
wont, with their Countrymen newly arrived. And by the next year, having Sax. an.
got together his Forces, between either Army of the Danes encamped so, as to
be ready for either of them, who first should happ'n to stir forth; Troops of
Horse also he sent continually abroad, assisted by such as could be spared from
strong places, wherever the Countries wanted them, to encounter forageing
parties of the Enemy. The King also divided sometimes his whole Army, marching
out with one part by turns, the other keeping intrencht. In conclusion rolling
up and down, both sides met at Farnham in Surrey; where the Danes by Alfreds
Horse Troops were put to flight, and crossing the Thames to a certain Island
near Coln in Essex, or as Camden thinks, by Colebrooke, were beseig'd there by
Alfred till provision failed the the beseigers, another part staid behind with
their King wounded. Mean while Alfred preparing to reinforce the seige in
Colney, the Danes of Northumberland breaking Faith, came by Sea to the
East Angles, and with a hunderd Ships Coasting Southward, landed in Devonshire,
and beseig'd Exeter; thither Alfred hasted with his powers, except a Squadron
of Welsh that came to London: with whom the Citizens marching forth to
Beamflet, where Haesten the Dane had built a strong Fort, and left a Garrison,
while he himself with the main of his Army was enterd far into the Country,
luckily surprise the Fort, master the Garrison, make prey of all they find
there; their Ships also they burnt or brought away with good booty, and many
Prisners, among whom, the Wife and two Sons of Heasten were sent to the King,
who forthwith set them at liberty. Whereupon Heasten gave Oath of Amity and
Hostages to the King; he in requital, whether freely, or by agreement, a sum
of money. Nevertheless without regard of Faith given, while Alfred was busied
about Exeter, joining with the other Danish Army, he built another Castle in
Essex at Shoberie, thence marching Westward by the Thames, aided with
Northumbrian and East-Anglish Danes, they came at length to Severn, pillaging
all in their way. But, Ethred, Ethelm, and Ethelnoth, the Kings Captains, with
united Forces pitched nigh to them at Buttingtun, on the Severn Camden.
Bank in Montgomery-shire, the River running between, and there many weeks
attended; the King mean while blocking up the Danes who beseig'd Exeter, having
eat'n part of their Horses, the rest urged with hunger broke forth to their
fellows, who lay encamp't on the East Side of the River, and were all there
discomfitted, with some loss of valiant men on the Kings party; the rest fled
back to Essex and their Fortress there. Then Laf, one of their Leaders, gatherd
before Winter a great Army of Northumbrian and East-Anglish Danes, who leaving
their money, Ships, and Wives with the East Angles, and marching day and night,
sat down before a City in the West called Wirheal near to Chester, and took it
ere they could be overtak'n. The English after two days seige hopeless to
dislodge them, wasted the Country round to cut off from them all provision, and
departed. Soon after which, next year the Sax. an.
Danes no longer able to hold Wirheal, destitute of Vittles, enterd
North Wales; thence lad'n with spoils, part returned into Northumberland,
others to the East Angles as far as Essex, where they seized on a small Island
called Meresig. And here again the Annals record them to beseige Exeter, but
without coherence of sense or story. Others relate to this purpose, that
returning by Sea from the Seige of Exeter, Sim. Dun. Florent.
and in their way landing on the Coast of Sussex, they of Cichester sallied out
and slew of them many hunderds, taking also some of their Ships. The same year
they who possessed Meresig, intending to winter thereabout, drew up their Ships,
some into the Thames, others into the River Lee, and on the Bank thereof built a
Castle twenty miles from London; to assault which the Londoners aided with
other Forces marched out the Summer following, but were soon put to Sax. an.
flight, loosing fowr of the Kings Captains. Huntingdon writes quite the
contrary, that these fowr were Danish Captains, and the overthrow theirs: but
little credit is to be placed in Huntingdon single. For the King thereupon with
his Forces, lay encamp't nearer the City, that the Danes might not infest them
in time of Harvest; In the mean time, suttlely devising to turn Lee stream
several ways; whereby the Danish Bottoms were left on dry ground: which they
soon perceaving, marched over Land to Quatbrig on the Severn, built a Fortress
and winterd there; while their Ships left in Lee, were either brok'n or brought
away by the Londoners; but their Wives and Children they had left in safety with
the East Angles. The next year was pestilent, and besides Sax. an.
the common sort took away many great Earls, Kelmond in Kent, Brithulf in
Essex, Wulfred in Hampshire, with many others; and to this evil, the Danes of
Northumberland and East Angles ceased not to endamage the West Saxons,
especially by stealth, robbing on the South-shoar in certain long Galleys. But
the King causing to be built others twice as long as usually were built, and
some of 60 or 70 Oars higher, swifter and steddier then such as were in use
before either with Danes or Prisons, his own invention, some of these he sent
out against six Danish Pirates, who had done much harm in the I Will of Wight and
parts adjoining. The bickering was doubtful and intricate, part on the water,
part on the Sands; not without loss of some eminent men on the English side.
The Pirates at length were either slain or taken, two of them stranded; the men
brought to Winchester, where the King then was, were executed by his command;
one of them escaped to the East Angles, her men much wounded: the same year not
fewer then twenty of their Ships perished on the South Coast with all their men.
And Rollo the Dane or Norman landing here, as Mat. West. writes, though not in
what part of the Island, after an unsuccessful fight against those Forces which
first opposed him, sailed into France and conquered the Country, since that time
called Normandy. This is the sum of what passed in three years against the
Danes, returning out of France, set down so perplexly by the Saxon Annalist,
ill-guifted with utterance, as with much ado can be understood sometimes what
is spok'n, whether meant of the Danes, or of the Saxons. After which
troublesome time, Alfred enjoying three years of peace, by him spent, as his
manner was, not idly or voluptuously, but in all virtuous emploiments both of
mind and body, becoming a Prince of his Renown, ended his days in the year
900. the 51. of his Age, the 30th of his Reign, and was buried regally at
Winchester; he Asser.
was born at a place called Wanading in Barkshire, his Mother Osburga the
Daughter of Oslac the Kings Cup Bearer, a Goth by Nation, and of noble descent.
He was of person comlier then all his Brethren, of pleasing Tongue and
graceful behavior, ready wit and memory; yet through the fondness of his
Parents toward him, had not bin taught to read till the twelfth year of his
Age; but the great desire of learning which was in him, soon appeared, by his
conning of Saxon Poems day and night, which with great attention he heard by
others repeated. He was besides, excellent at Hunting, and the new Art then of
Hawking, but more exemplary in devotion, having collected into a Book certain
Prayers and Psalms, which he carried ever with him in his Bosom to use on all
occasions. He thirsted after all liberal knowledge, and often complained that in
his youth he had no Teachers, in his middle Age so little vacancy from Wars and
the cares of his Kingdom, yet leisure he found sometimes, not only to learn
much himself, but to communicate thereof what he could to his people, by
translating Books out of Latin into English, Orosius, Boethius, Beda's History
and others, permitted none unlern'd to bear Office, either in Court or
Commonwealth; at twenty years of age not yet reigning, he took to Wife
Egelswitha the Daughter of Ethelred a Mercian Earl. The extremities which
befell him in the sixth of his Reign, Neothan Abbot told him, were justly come
upon him for neglecting in his younger days the complaints of such as injured
and oppressed repaired to him, as then second person in the Kingdom for
redress; which neglect were it such indeed, were yet excusable in a youth,
through jollity of mind unwilling perhaps to be detained long with sad and
sorrowful Narrations; but from the time of his undertaking regal charge, no
man more patient in hearing causes, more inquisitive in examining, more exact
in doing justice, and providing good Laws, which are yet extant; more severe in
punishing unjust judges or obstinate offenders. Thieves especially and Robbers,
to the terror of whom in cross ways were hung upon a high Post certain Chains
of Gold, as it were dareing any one to take them thence; so that justice seemed
in his days not to flourish only, but to triumph: no man then he more frugal
of two precious things in man's life, his time and his revenue; no man wiser in
the disposal of both. His time, the day, and night, he distributed by the
burning of certain Tapours into three equal portions: the one was for
devotion, the other for public or private affairs, the third for bodily
refreshment: how each hour past, he was put in mind by one who had that
Office. His whole annual revenue, which his first care was should be justly his
own, he divided into two equal parts; the first he imploi'd to secular uses,
and subdivided those into three, the first to pay his Soldiers,
Houshold-Servants and Guard, of which divided into three Bands, one attended
monthly by turn; the second was to pay his Architects and workmen, whom he had
got together of several Nations; for he was also an Elegant Builder; above the
Custom and conceit of Englishmen in those days: the third he had in readiness
to relieve or honor Strangers according to their worth, who came from all parts
to see him and to live under him. The other equal part of his yearly wealth he
dedicated to religious uses, those of fowr sorts; the first to relieve the
poor, the second to the building and maintenance of two Monasteries, the third
of a School, where he had persuaded the Sons of many Noblemen to study sacred
knowledge and liberal Arts, some say at Oxford; the fourth was for the Malms.
releif of Foreign Churches, as far as India to the shrine of St. Thomas,
sending thither Sigelm Bishop of Sherburn, who both returned safe, and brought
with him many rich Gems and Spices; gifts also and a letter he received from
the Patriarch of Jerusalem, sent many to Rome, and for them received relics.
Thus far, and much more might be said of his noble mind, which renderd him the
miror of Princes; his body was diseased in his youth with a great soreness in
the Seige, and that ceasing of it self, with another inward pain of unknown
cause, which held him by frequent fits to his dying day; yet not disinabl'd to
sustain those many glorious labors of his life both in peace and war.

Edward the Elder.
EDward the Son of Alfred succeeded, in learning Malms.
not equal, in power and extent of Dominion, surpassing his Father. The
beginning of his Reign Huntingd.
had much disturbance by Ethelwald an ambitious young man, Son of the Kings
Uncle, or Cousin German, or Brother, for his Genealogy is variously deliverd. He
vainly avouching to have equal right Sax. an.
with Edward of succession to the Crown, possessed himself of Winburne in
Dorset, and another Town diversely named, giving out that there he would live or
dye; but encompassed with the Kings Forces at Badburie a place nigh, his heart
failing him, he stole out by night, and fled to the Danish Army beyond Humber.
The King sent after him, but not overtaking, found his Wife in the Town, whom
he had married out of a Nunnery, and commanded her to be sent back thither.
About this time the Kentish Danish Pirates, fought prosperously at a place
called Holme, as Hoveden records. Ethelwald aided by the Northumbrians with
Shipping, three years after, sailing to the East Angles, Sax. ann.
persuaded the Danes there to fall into the Kings Territory, who marching with
him as far as Crecklad, and passing the Thames, there wasted as far beyond as
they durst venture, and lad'n with spoils returned home. The King with his
powers making speed after them, between the Dike and Ouse, supposed to be
Suffolk and Cambridge-shire, as far as the Fenns Northward, laid wast all
before him. Thence intending to return, he commanded that all his Army should
follow him close without delay; but the Kentish men, though oft'n called upon,
lagging behind, the Danish Army prevented them, and joined Battle with the
King: where Duke Siguls and Earl Sigelm, with many other of the Nobles were
slain; on the Danes part, Eoric their King, and Ethelwald the Author of this
War, with others of high note, and of them greater number, but with great ruin
on both sides; yet the Danes kept in their power the burying of their slain. What
ever followed upon this conflict, which we read not, the King two years after
Sax. an.
with the Danes, both of East Angles, and Northumberland concluded peace, which
continued three years, by whomsoever brok'n: for at the end thereof Sax. an.
King Edward raising great Forces out of West-Sex and Mercia, sent them against
the Danes beyond Humber; where staying five weeks, they made great spoil and
slaughter. The King offered them terms of peace, but they rejecting all, enterd
with the next year into Mercia, rendering no less hostility Sax. an.
then they had suffered; but at Tetnal in Staffordshire, says Florent, were by
the English in a set Battle overthrown. King Edward then in Kent, had got
together of Ships about a hunderd Sail, others gone Southward, came back and met
him. The Danes now supposing that his main Forces were upon the Sea, took
liberty to rove and plunder up and down, as hope of prey led them, beyond
Severn. Ethelwerd.
The King guessing what might imbold'n them, sent before him the lightest of
his Army to entertain them; Then following with the rest, set upon them in their
return over Cantbrig in Glostershire, and slew many thousands, among whom
Ecwils, Hafden, and Hinguar their Kings, and many other harsh names in
Huntingdon; the place also of this fight is variously writt'n by Ethelwerd and
Florent, called Wodensfeild. The year following Ethred Duke of Mercia, to whom
Sax. an.
Alfred had given London, with his daughter in marriage; now dying, King Edward
resumed that City, and Oxford, with the Countries adjoining, into his own
hands, and the year after, built, or much repaired Sax. an.
by his Soldiers, the Town of Hertford on either side Lee, and leaving a
sufficient number at the work, marched about middle Summer, with the other part
of his Forces into Essex, and encamped at Maldon, while his Soldiers built
Witham; where a good part of the Country, subject formerly to the Danes,
yielded themselves to his protection. Fowr years Sax. ann.
after (Florent allows but one year) the Danes from Leister and Northampton,
falling into Oxfordshire, committed much rapine, and in some Towns thereof great
slaughter; while another party wasting Hertfordshire, met with other Fortune;
for the Countrypeople inured now to such kind of incursions, joining stoutly
together, fell upon the spoilers, recovered their own goods, with some booty
from their Enemies. About the same time Elfled the Kings Sister sent her Army of
Mercians into Wales, who routed the Welsh, took the Castle of Brienam-mere by
Brecknock, Huntingd. Camd.
and brought away the Kings Wife of that Country with other Prisners. Not long
after she took Derby from the Danes, and the Castle by a sharp assault. But the
year ensueing brought a new Fleet Sax. an.
of Danes to Lidwic in Devonshire, under two Leaders, Otter and Roald; who
sailing thence Westward about the lands end, came up to the mouth of Severn;
there landing wasted the Welsh Coast, and Irchenfeild part of Herefordshire;
where they took Kuneleac a British Bishop, for whose ransom King Edward gave
forty pound, but the men of Hereford and Glostershire assembling, put them to
flight; slaying Roald and the Brother of Otter, with many more, persu'd them to
a Wood, and there beset, compelled them to give hostages of present departure.
The King with his Army sat not far off, securing from the South of Severn to
Avon; so that op'nly they durst not, by night they twice ventured to land; but
found such welcome, that few of them came back; the rest anchord by a small
Island where many of them famished; then sailing to a place called Deomed, they
crossed into Ireland. The King with his Army went to Buckingham, staid there a
month, and built two Castles or Forts on either Bank of Ouse ere his
departing, and Turkitel a Danish Leader, with those of Bedford and Northampton,
yielded him subjection. Whereupon the next year he came with Sax. an.
his Army to the Town of Bedford, took possession thereof, staid there a month,
and gave order to build another part of the Town, on the South Side of Ouse.
Thence the year following went again to Sax. an.
Maldon, repaired and fortified the Town. Turkitel the Dane having small hope
to thrive here, where things with such prudence were managed against his
interess, got leave of the King, with as many voluntaries as would follow him,
to pass into France. Early the next year King Edward re-edifi'd Tovechester,
Sax. an.
now Torchester; and another City in the Annals called Wigingmere. Mean while
the Danes of Leister and Northamptonshire; not likeing perhaps to be
neighbored with Strong Towns, laid Seige to Torchester; [but they within
repelling the assault one whole day till supplies came] quitted the Seige by
night; and persu'd close by the beseig'd, between Birnwud and Ailsbury were
surprised, many of them made Prisners, and much of their bagage lost. Other of
the Danes at Huntingdon, aided from the East Angles, finding that Castle not
commodious, left it, and built another at Temsford, judging that place more
opportune from whence to make their excursions; and soon after went forth with
design to assail Bedford: but the Garrison issuing out, slew a great part of
them, the rest fled. After this a greater Army of them gatherd out of Mercia
and the East Angles, came and beseig'd the City called Wigingmere a whole Day;
but finding it defended stoutly by them within, thence also departed, driving
away much of their Cattle: whereupon the English from Towns and Cities round
about joining Forces, laid Seige to the Town and Castle of Temsford, and by
assault took both; slew their King with Toglea a Duke, and Mannan his Son an
Earl, with all the rest there found; who chose to die rather then yield.
Encouraged by this, the men of Kent, Surrey, and part of Essex, enterprise the
Seige of Colnhester, nor gave over till they won it, sacking the Town and
putting to Sword all the Danes therein, except some who escaped over the Wall.
To the succor of these, a great number of Danes inhabiting Ports and other
Towns in the East Angles, united their Force; but coming too late, as in revenge
beleaguerd Maldon; but that Town also timely releiv'd, they departed, not only
frustrate of their design, but so hotly persu'd, that many thousands of them
lost their lives in the flight. Forthwith King Edward with his West Saxons went
to Passham upon Ouse, there to guard the passage, while others were building a
stone Wall about Torchester; to him there Earl Thurfert, and other Lord Danes,
with their Army thereabout as far as Weolud, came and submitted. Whereat the
Kings Soldiers joyfully cried out to be dismiss't home: therefore with another
part of them he enterd Huntingdon, and repaired it, where breaches had bin
made; all the people thereabout returning to obedience. The like was done at
Colnchester by the next remove of his Army, after which both East and
West-Angles, and the Danish Forces among them, yielded to the King, swearing
Allegiance to him both by Sea and Land: the Army also of Danes at Grantbrig,
surrendering themselves took the same Oath. The Summer following he came with
his Army to Stamford, Sax. an.
built a Castle there on the South Side of the River, where all the people of
those quarters acknowledged him supreme. Dureing his abode there, Elfled his
Sister a martial Woman, who after her Husbands Death would no more marry, but
gave her self to public affairs, repairing and fortifying many Towns, warring
sometimes, died at Tamworth the Chief Seat of Mercia, whereof by gift of Alfred
her Father, she was Lady or Queen; whereby that whole Nation became obedient to
King Edward, as did also North Wales with Howel, Cledaucus, and Jeothwell their
Kings. Thence passing to Nottingham, he enterd and repaired the Town, placed
there part English, part Danes, and received fealty from all in Mercia of
either Nation. The next Autumn, coming Sax. an.
with his Army into Cheshire, he built and fortified Thelwel; and while he
staid there, called another Army out of Mercia, which he sent to repair and
fortify Manchester. About Midsummer following Sax. an.
he marched again to Nottingham, built a Town over against it on the South Side
of that River; and with a Bridge joined them both; thence journied to a place
called Bedecanwillan in Pictland; there also built and fenced a City on the
Borders, where the King of Scots did him honor as to his Sovran, together with
the whole Scottish Nation; the like did Reginald and the Son of Eadulf, Danish
Princes, with all the Northumbrians, both English, and Danes. The King also of
a people thereabout called Streatgledwalli (the North Welsh, as Camden thinks,
of Strat-Cluid in Denbigh-shire, perhaps rather the British of Cumberland) did
him homage, and not undeserved. For Buchanan himself confesses, that this King
Edward with a small number of men compared to his Buch. L. 6.
Enemies, overthrew in a great Battle, the whole united power both of Scots and
Da^es, slew most of the Scottish Nobility, and forced Malcolmb, whom Constantine
the Scotch King had made General, and designed Heir of his Crown, to save
himself by flight sore wounded. Of the English, he makes Athelstan the Son of
Edward Chief Leader; and so far seems to confound times and actions, as to make
this Battle the same with that fought by Athelstan, about 24 years after at
Bruneford, against Anlaf and Constantine, whereof hereafter. But here Buchanan
takes occasion to inveigh against the English Writers, upbraiding them with
ignorance, who affirm Athelstan to have bin supreme King of Britain,
Constantine Buch. L. 6.
the Scottish King with others to have held of him: and denies that in the
Annals of Marianus Scotus, any mention is to be found thereof; which I shall not
stand much to contradict, for in Marianus, whether by Surname or by Nation
Scotus, will be found as little mention of any other Scottish affairs, till the
time of King Dunchad slain by Machetad, or Mackbeth, in the year 1040. which
gives cause of suspicion, that the affairs of Scotland before that time were so
obscure as to be unknown to their own Countryman, who lived and wrote his
Chronicle not long after. But King Edward thus nobly doing, and thus honored,
the year following died at Farendon; Sax. an. Huntingd. Mat West.
a builder and restorer eev'n in War, not a destroyer of his Land. He had by
several Wives many Childern; his eldest Daughter Edgith he gave in marriage to
Charles King of France, Grandchild of Charles the Bald abovementioned; of the
rest in place convenient. His Laws are yet to be seen. He was buried at
Winchester, in the Monastery by Alfred his Father. And a few days after him
died Ethelwerd his Eldest Son, the Heir of his Crown. He had the whole Island in
subjection, yet so as petty Kings reigned under him. In Northumberland, after
Ecbert whom the Danes had set up, and the Northumbrians Sim. Dun.
yet unruly under their yoke, at the end of 6 years had expelled, one Ricsig was
set up King, and bore the name 3 years; then another Ecbert, and Guthred; the
latter, if we believe Legends, of a Servant made King by command of St.
Cudbert, in a Vision; and enjoined by another Vision of the same Saint, to pay
well for his Royalty many Lands and privileges to his Church and Monastery. But
now to the story.

Athelstan.
AThelstan next in Age to Ethelward his Brother, who deceased untimely few days
before, though born of a Concubine, yet for the great appearance of many
virtues in him, and his Brethren being yet under Age, was exalted to the
Throne, at Kingstone Thames, and by his Fathers last Will, says Malmsbury, yet
not without some opposition of one Alfred and his Accomplices; who not likeing
he should reign, had conspired to seize on him after his Fathers Death, and to
put out his Eyes. But the Conspiratours discoverd, and Alfred denying the Plot,
was sent to Rome, to assert his innocence before Malms.
the Pope; where taking his Oath on the Altar, he fell down immediately, and
carried out by his Servants, three days after died. Mean while beyond Humber,
the Danes, though much awed were not idle. Inguald one of their Kings took
possession of Sim. Dun.
York, Sitric who some years before had slain Niel his Brother, by force took
Davenport in Ch^shire; and however he defended these doings; grew so
considerable, that Athelstan with great solemnity gave Malms. Mat. West.
him his Sister Edgith to Wife: but he enjoyed her not long, dying ere the
years end, nor his Sons Anlaf and Guthfert the Kingdom, driven out the next
Sax. an.
year by Athelstan; not unjustly says Huntingdon, as being first raisers of
the War. Simeon calls him Gudsrid a British King, whom Athelstan this year
drove out of his Kingdom; and perhaps they were both one, the name and time
not much differing, the place only mistak'n. Malmsbury differs in the name
also, calling him Aldulf a certain Rebel. Them also I wish as much mistak'n,
who write that Athelstan, jealous of his younger Brother Edwin's towardly
virtues, least added to the right of Birth, they might some time or other call
in question his illegitimate precedence, caused him to be drowned in the Sim.
Dun.
Sea; exposed, some say, with one Servant in a rott'n Bark, without Sail or
Oar; where the youth far off land, and in rough weather despairing, threw
himself overboard; the Servant more patient, got to land and reported the
success. But this Malmsbury confesses to be sung in old Songs, not read in
warrantable Authors: and Huntingdon speaks as of a sad accident to Athelstan,
that he lost his Brother Edwin by Sea; far the more credible, in that
Athelstan, as is writ'n by all, tenderly loved and bred up the rest of his
Brethren, of whom he had no less cause to be jealous. And the year following he
prosperd better Sax. an. Sim. Dun.
then from so foul a fact, passing into Scotland with great Puissance, both by
Sea and Land, and chaceing his Enemies before him, by Land as far as Dunseoder,
and Wertermore, by Sea as far as Cathness. The cause of this expedition, says
Malmsbury, was to demand Gudfert the Son of Sitric, thither fled, though not
denied at length by Constantine, who with Eugenius King of Cumberland, at a
place called Dacor or Dacre in that Shire, surrenderd himself and each his
Kingdom to Athelstan, who brought back with him for hostage the Son of
Constantine. But Gudfert Florent.
escaping in the mean while out of Scotland, and Constantine exasperated by
this invasion, persuaded Anlaf the other Son of Sitric then fled into Ireland,
others write Anlaf King of Ireland and the Isles, his Florent. Sim. Dun.
Sax. an. Malms.
Son in law, with 615 Ships, and the King of Cumberland with other forces, to
his aid. This within fowr years effected, they enterd England by Humber, and
fought with Athelstan at a place called Wendune, others term it Brunanburg,
others Bruneford, which Ingulf places beyond Humber, Camden in Glendale of
Northumberland on the Scotch Borders; the bloodiest fight, say Authors, that
ever this Island saw, to describe which, the Saxon Annalist wont to be sober and
succinct, whether the same or another writer, now laboring under the weight of
his Argument, and over-charg'd, runs on a sudden into such extravagant fancies
and metaphors, as bare him quite beside the scope of being understood.
Huntingdon, though himself peccant enough in his kind, transcribes him word for
word as a pastime to his Readers. I shall only sum up what of him I can
attain, in usual language. The Battle was fought eagerly from morning till
night; some fell of King Edwards old Army, tried in many a Battle before; but
on the other side great multitudes, the rest fled to their Ships. Five Kings,
and 7 of Anlafs Chief Captains were slain on the place, with Froda a Norman
Leader; Constantine escaped home, but lost his Son in the fight, if I
understand my Author; Anlaf by Sea to Dublin, with a small remainder of his
great host. Malmsbury relates this War, adding many circumstances after this
manner. That Anlaf joining with Constantine and the whole power of Scotland,
besides those which he brought with him out of Ireland, came on far Southwards,
till Athelstan who had retired on set purpose to be the surer of his Enemies,
enclosed from all succor and retreat, met him at Brunesord. Anlaf perceaving
the valor and resolution of Athelstan, and mistrusting his own Forces though
numerous, resolved first to spy in what posture his Enemies lay: and imitating
perhaps what he heard attempted by King Alfred the Age before, in the habit of
a Musician, got access by his lute and voice to the Kings tent, there playing
both the minstrel and the spy: then toward Evening dismis't, he was observed
by one who had bin his Soldier and well knew him, veiwing earnestly the Kings
Tent, and what approaches lay about it, then in the twilight to depart. The
Soldier forthwith acquaints the King, and by him blamed for letting go his
Enemy, answered, that he had given first his military Oath to Anlaf, whom if he
had betrayed, the King might suspect him of like treasonous mind toward
himself; which to disprove, he advised him to remove his Tent a good distance
off; and so don, it happ'nd that a Bishop with his retinue coming that night to
the Army, pich'd his Tent in the same place, from whence the King had removed.
Analf coming by night as he had designed, to assault the Camp and especially
the Kings Tent, finding there the Bishop in stead, flew him with all his
followers. Athelstan took the Allarm, and as it seems, was not found so
unprovided, but that the day now appearing, he put his men in order, and
maintained the fight till Evening; wherein Constantine himself was slain with
five other Kings, and twelve Earls, the Annals were content with seav'n, in the
rest not disagreeing. Ingulf Abbot of Croyland from the authority of Turketul a
principal Leader in this Battle, relates it more at large to this effect: that
Athelstan above a mile distant from the place where execution was done upon the
Bishop and his supplies, alarmed at the noise, came down by break of day, upon
Anlaf and his Army, overwatch't and wearied now with the slaughter they had
made, and something out of order, yet in two main Battles. The King therefore in
like manner dividing, led the one part consisting most of West Saxons, against
Anlaf with his Danes and Irish, committing the other to his Chancellor
Turketul, with the Mercians and Londoners against Constantine and his Scots.
The shower of Arrows and Darts over-pass't, both Battles attacked each other
with a close and terrible engagement, for a long space neither side giving
ground. Till the Chancellor Turketul, a man of great stature and strength,
taking with him a few Londoners of select valor, and Singin who led the
Worstershire men, a Captain of undaunted courage, broke into the thickest,
making his way first through the Picts and Orkeners, then through the Cumbrians
and Scots, and came at length where constantine himself fought, unhors'd him,
and used all means to take him alive; but the Scots valiantly defending their
King, and laying load upon Turketul, which the goodness of his Armor well
endured, he had yet bin beat'n down, had not Singin his faithful second at the
same time slain Constantine; which once known, Analf and the whole Army betook
them to flight, whereof a huge multitude fell by the Sword. This Turketul not
long after leaving worldly affairs, became Abbot of Croyland, which at his own
cost he had repaired, from Danish ruins, and lest there this memorial of his
former actions. Athelstan with his Brother Edmund victorious, thence turning
into Wales, with much more ease vanquished Ludwal the King, and possessed his
land. But Malmsbury writes, that commiserating human chance, as he displaced,
so he restored both him and Constantine to their Regal State; for the surrender
of King Constantine has bin above spok'n of. However the Welsh did him homage
at the City of Hereford, and covnanted yearly payment of Gold 20 pound, of
Silver 300, of Oxen 25 thousand, besides Hunting Dogs and Hawks. He also took
Exeter from the Cornish Britans, who till that time had equal right there with
the English, and bounded them with the River Tamar, as the other British with
Wey. Thus dreaded of his Enemies, and renowned far and near, three years after
he died at Gloucester, and was buried with Sax. an. Malms. Ingulf.
many Trophies at Malmsbury, where he had caused to be laid his two Cousin
Germans, Elwin and Ethelstan, both slain in the Battle against Anlaf. He was 30
years old at his coming to the Crown, mature in wisdom from his Childhood,
comely of person and behavior; so that Alfred his Grandfather in blessing him
was wont to pray he might live to have the Kingdom, and put him yet a Child
into Soldiers habit. He had his breeding in the Court of Elfled his Aunt, of
whose virtues more then female we have related, sufficient to evince that his
mother, though said to be no wedded Wife, was yet such of parentage and worth,
as the Royal line disdained not, though the Song went in Malmsburies days (for
it seems he refused not the authority of Ballats for want of better) that his
mother was a Farmers Daughter, but of excellent feature; who dreamt one night
she brought forth a Moon that should enlight'n the whole land: which the Kings
Nurse hearing of, took her home and bred up Courtly; that the King coming one
day to visit his Nurse, saw there this Damsel, liked her, and by earnest suit
prevailing, had by her this famous Athelstan, a bounteous, just and affable
King, as Malmsbury sets him forth; nor less honored abroad by Foren Kings, who
sought his Friendship by great gifts or affinity; that Harold King of Noricum
sent him a Ship, whose Prow was of gold, sails purple, and other golden things,
the more to be wonderd at, sent from Noricum, whether meant Norway or Bavaria,
the one place so far from such superfluity of wealth, the other from all Sea:
the Ambassadors were Helgrim and Offrid, who found the King at York. His
Sisters he gave in marriage to greatest Princes, Elgif to Otho Son of Henry the
Emperor, Egdith to a certain Duke about the Alps, Edgiv to Ludwic King of
Aquitain, sprung of Charles the Great, Ethilda to Hugo King of France, who sent
Aldulf Son of Baldwin, Earl of Flanders, to obtain her. From all these great
suitors, especially from the Emperor and King of France, came rich presents,
Horses of excellent Breed, gorgeous Trappings and Armor, Relics, Jewels,
Odors, Vessels of Onyx, and other precious things, which I leave poetically
described in Malmsbury, taken, as he confesses, out of an old versifier, some
of whose verses he recites. The only blemish left upon him, was the exposing of
his Brother Edwin, who disavow'd by Oath the treason whereof he was accused, and
implored an equal hearing. But these were Songs, as before has bin said,
which add also that Athelstan, his anger over, soon repented of the fact, and
put to Death his Cup Bearer, who had induc't him to suspect and expose his
Brother, put in mind by a word falling from the Cup-bearers own mouth, who
slipping one day as he bore the Kings Cup, and recovring himself on the other
leg, said aloud, fatally as to him it proved, one Brother helps the other.
Which words the King laying to heart, and pondring how ill he had done to make
away his Brother, avenged himself first on the adviser of that fact, took on
him seav'n years penance, and as Mat. West. says, built two Monasteries for
the Soul of his Brother. His Laws are extant among the Laws of other Saxon
Kings to this day.

Edmund.
EDmund not above 18 years old succeeded his Brother Athelstan, in courage not
inferior. Sax. an.
For in the second of his Reign he freed Mercia of the Danes that remained
there, and took from them the Cities of Lincoln, Nottingham, Stamsord, Darby,
and Leister, where they were placed by King Edward, but it seems gave not good
proof of their fidelity. Simeon writes that Anlaf setting forth from York, and
having wasted Southward as far as Northampton, was met by Edmund at Leister;
but that ere the Battails joined, peace was made between them by Odo and
Wulstan the two Archbishops, with conversion of Anlaf; for the same year Edmund
received at the Font-stone this or another Anlaf, as says Huntingdon, not him
spok'n of before, who died this year (so uncertain they are in the story of
these times also) and held Reginald another King of the Northumbers, while the
Bishop confirmed him: their limits were divided North and South by
Watling-street. But spiritual kindred little availed to keep peace between
them, whoever gave the cause; for we read him two years after driving Anlaf
(whom Sax. an.
the Annals now first call the Son of Sitric) and Suthfrid Son of Reginald out
of Northumberland, taking the whole Country into subjection. Edmund the next
year harras'd Cumberland, then gave Sax. an.
it to Malcolm King of Scots, thereby bound to assist him in his Wars, both by
Sea and Land; Mat. West. adds that in this action Edmund had the aid of Leolin
Prince of Northwales, against Dummail the Cumbrian King, him depriving of his
Kingdom, and his two Sons of their sight. But the year after he himself Sax.
an. Camden.
by strange accident came to an untimely Death, feasting with his Nobles on St.
Austins Day at Puclekerke in Glostershire, to celebrat the memory of his first
converting the Saxons. He spied Leof a noted Thief, whom he had banished,
sitting among his Guests; whereat transported with too much vehemence of Spirit,
though in a just cause, riseing from the Table he ran upon the Thief, and
catching his hair, pulled him to the ground. The Thief who doubted from such
handling no less then his Death intended, thought to die not unrevenged; and
with a short Dagger struck the King, who still laid at him, and little expected
such assassination, mortally into the breast. The matter was done in a moment,
ere men set at Table could turn them, or imagine at first what the stir meant,
till perceaving the King deadly wounded, they flew upon the murderer and hewed
him to pieces; who like a wild Beast at abbay, seeing himself surrounded,
desperately laid about him, wounding some in his fall. The King was buried at
Glaston, whereof Dunstan was then Abbot, his Laws yet remain to be seen among
the Laws of other Saxon Kings.

Edred.
EDred the third Brother of Athelstan, the Sons of Edmund being yet but
Children, next reigned, not degenerating from his worthy predecessors, and
Crowned at Kingston. Northumberland he thoroughly subdued, the Scots without
refusal swore him Allegiance; yet the Northumbrians, ever of doubtful Faith,
soon after chose to themselves one Eric a Dane. Huntingdon still haunts us with
this Anlaf (of whom we gladly would have bin ridd) and will have him before
Eric recalled once more and reign fowr years, then again put to his shifts. But
Sim. Dun.
Edred entering into Northumberland, and with spoils returning, Eric the King
fell upon his rear. Edred turning about, both shook off the Enemy, and prepared
to make a second inroad: which the Northumbrians dreading rejected Eric, slew
Amanous the Son Hoved.
of Anlaf, and with many presents appeasing Edred, submitted again to his
Government; nor from that time had Kings, but were governed by Earls, of whom
Osulf was the first. About this time Wulstan Sim. Dun.
Archbishop of York, accused to have slain certain men of Thetford in revenge
of their Abbot whom the Townsmen had slain, was committed by the King to close
Custody; but soon after enlarged, was restored to his place. Malmsbury writes
that his crime was to have connived at the revolt of his Countrymen: but Sim.
Dun.
King Edred two years after sickening in the flowr of his youth, died much
lamented, and was buried at Winchester.

Edwi.
EDwi the Son of Edmund now come to Age, after Ethelword.
his Uncle Edred's Death took on him the Government, and was Crowned at
Kingston. His lovely person sirnam'd him the Fair, his actions are diversely
reported, by Huntingdon not thought illaudable. But Malnisbury and such as
follow him write far otherwise, that he married or kept as Concubine, his near
Kinswoman, some say both her and her Mat. West.
Daughter; so inordinatly given to his pleasure, that on the very day of his
Coronation, he abruptly withdrew himself from the Company of his Peers, whether
in Banquet or Consultation, to sit wantoning in the Chamber with this Algiva,
so was her name, who had such power over him. Whereat his Barons offended, sent
Bishop Dunstan, the boldest among them, to request his return: he going to the
Chamber, not only interrupted his dalliance and rebuked the Lady, but taking
him by the hand, between force and persuasion brought him back to his Nobles.
The King highly displeased, and instigated perhaps sent Dunstan into
banishment, caused his Monastery to be rifl'd, and became an Enemy to all
Monks. Whereupon Odo Archbishop of Canterbury pronounced a separation or divorce
of the King from Algiva. But that which most incited William of Malmsbury
against him, he gave that Monastery to be dwelt in by secular Priests, or, to
use his own phrase, made it a stable of Clerks; at length these affronts done
to the Church were so resented by the people, that the Mercians and
Northumbrians revolted from him, and set up Edgar his Brother, leaving to Edwi
the Hoved.
Sax. an.
Mat. West.
West Saxons only, bounded by the River Thames; with grief whereof, as is
thought, he soon after ended his days, and was buried at Winchester. Mean
while Elfsin Bishop of that place after the Death of Odo, ascending by Simony
to the Chair of Canterbury, and going to Rome the same year for his Pall, was
froz'n to Death in the Alps.

Edgar.
Edgar by his Brothers Death now King of all England at 16 years of Age, called
home Dunstan Malms.
out of Flanders, where he lived in exile. This King had no War all his Reign;
yet allways well prepared for War, governed the Kingdom in great Peace, Honor,
and Prosperity, gaining thence the Surname of Peaceable, much extolled for
Justice, Clemency, and all Kingly Virtues, the more, ye may be sure, by Monks,
for his building so many Monasteries; Mat. West.
as some write, every year one: for he much favored the Monks against secular
Priests, who in the time of Edwi had got possession in most of their Covents.
His care and wisdom was great in guarding the Coast round with stout ships, to
the number of 3600, Mat. West. reck'ns them 4800, divided into fowr Squadrons,
to sail to and fro on the fowr quarters of the land, meeting each other; the
first of 1200 sail from East to West, the second of as many from West to East,
the third and fowrth between North and South, himself in the Summer time with
his Fleet. Thus he kept out wisely the force of Strangers, and prevented Foreign
War; but by their too frequent resort hither in time of peace, and his too much
favoring them, he let in their vices unaware. Thence the people, says
Malmsbury, learnt of the outlandish Saxons rudeness, of the Flemish daintiness
and softness; of the Danes Drunk'ness; though I doubt these vices are as
naturally homebred here as in any of those Countries. Yet in the Winter and
Spring time he usually rode the Circuit as a Judge Itinerant through all his
Provinces, to see justice well administerd, and the poor not oppressed. Thieves
and Robbers he rooted almost out of the Land, and wild Beasts of prey
altogether; enjoining Ludwal King of Wales to pay the yearly tribute of 300
Wolves, which he did for two years together, till the third year no more were
to be found, nor ever after; but his Laws may be read yet extant. Whatever was
the cause he was not Crowned till the 30. of his Age, but then with great Sax.
an. Ingulf.
Sax. an.
splendour and magnificence at the City of Bath, in the Feast of Pentecost. This
year died Swarling a Monk of Croyland, the 142. year of his Age, and another
soon after him in the 115th. in the Fenn and watrish air, the more remarkable.
King Edgar the next year went to Chester, and summoning to his Court there all
the Kings that held of him, took homage of them: their names are Kened King of
Scots, Malcolm of Cumberland, Maccuse of the Isles, five of Wales, Duswal,
Huwal, Grifith, Jacob, Judethil, these he had in such aw, that going one day
into a Gally, he caused them to take each man his Oar, and row him down the
River Dee, while he himself sat at the Stern: which might be done in meriment
and easily obei'd; if with a serious brow, discoverd rather vain glory and
insulting haughtiness, then moderation of mind. And that he did it seriously
tryumphing, appears by his words then utterd, that his successors might then
glory to be Kings of England, when they had such honor done them. And perhaps
the Divine power was displeased with him for taking too much honor to himself;
since we read that the year following he was taken Glaston Abbey. The same year,
as Mat. West. relates, he gave to Kened the Scottish King, many rich presents,
and the whole Country of Laudian, or Lothien, to hold of him on condition that
he and his successors should repair to the English Court at high Festivals when
the King sat Crowned, gave him also many lodging places by the way, which till
the days of Henry the second were still held by the Kings of Scotland. He was
of Stature not tall, of body slender, yet so well made, that in strength he
chose to contend with such as were thought strongest, and disliked nothing more
then that they should spare him for respect or fear to hurt him. Kened King of
Scots then in the Court of Edgar, sitting one day at Table was heard to say
jestingly among his Servants, he wonderd how so many Provinces could be held in
subjection by such a little dapper man: his words were brought to the Kings
Ear; he sends for Kened as about some private business, and in talk drawing him
forth to a secret place, takes from under his garment two Swords which he had
brought with him, gave one of them to Kened; and now says he, it shall be
tried which ought to be the subject; for it is shameful for a King to boast at
Table, and shrink in fight. Kened much abashed fell presently at his Feet, and
besought him to pardon what he had simply spok'n, no way intended to his
dishonor or disparagement: wherewith the King was satisfied. Camden in his
description of Ireland, cites a Charter of King Edgar, wherein it appears, he
had in subjection all the Kingdoms of the Isles as far as Norway, and had
subdued the greatest part of Ireland with the City of Dublin: but of this other
Writers make no mention. In his youth having heard of Elfrida, Daughter to
Ordgar Duke of Devonshire, much commended for her Beauty, he sent Earl
Athelwold, whose loyalty he trusted most, to see her; intending, if she were
found such as answered report, to demand her in marriage. He at the first view
taken with her presence, disloyally, as it often happ'ns in such emploiments,
began to sue for himself; and with consent of her Parents obtained her.
Returning therefore with scarce an ordinary commendation of her Feature, he
easily took off the Kings mind, soon diverted another way. But the matter
coming to light how Athelwold had forestalled the King, and Elfrida's Beauty
more and more spok'n of, the King now heated not only with a relapse of Love,
but with a deep sense of the abuse, yet dissembling his disturbance, pleasantly
told the Earl, what day he meant to come and visit him and his fair Wife. The
Earl seemingly assured his welcome, but in the mean while acquainting his Wife,
earnestly advised her to deform her self, what she might, either in dress or
otherwise, lest the King, whose amorous inclination was not unknown, should
chance to be attracted. She who by this time was not ignorant, how Athelwold
had stepd between her and the King, against his coming arraies her self richly,
useing whatever art she could devise might render her the more amiable; and it
took effect. For the King inflamed with her love the more for that he had bin
so long defrauded and robbed of her, resolved not only to recover his
intercepted right, but to punish the interloper of his destind spouse, and
appointing with him as was usual, a day of hunting, drawn aside in a Forest,
now called Harewood, smote him through with a Dart. Some censure this act as
cruel and tyrannical, but considerd well, it may be judged more favorably, and
that no man of sensible Spirit but in his place, without extraordinary
perfection, would have done the like: for next to life what worse treason could
have bin committed against him? it chanced that the Earls base Son coming by
upon the fact, the King sternly asked him how he liked this Game; he submisly
answering, that whatsoever pleased the King, must not displease him; the King
returned to his wonted temper, took an affection to the youth, and ever after
highly favored him, making amends in the Son for what he had done to the
Father. Elsrida forthwith he took to Wife, who to expiate her former Husbands
Death, though therein she had no hand, coverd the place of his bloodshed with a
Monastery of Nuns to sing over him. Another fault is laid to his charge, no way
excusable, that he took a Virgin Wilfrida by force out of the Nunnery, where
she was placed by her friends to avoid his persuit, and kept her as his
Concubine; but lived not obstinatly in the offense; for sharply reproved by
Dunstan he submitted to 7 years penance, and for that time to want his
Coronation: But why he had it not before, is left unwritt'n. Another story
there goes of Edgar, fitter for a Novel then a History; but as I find it in
Malmsbury, so I relate it. While he was yet unmarried, in his youth he
abstained not from Women, and coming on a day to Andover, caused a Dukes
Daughter there dwelling, reported rare of Beauty, to be brought to him. The
mother not dareing flatly to deny, yet abhorring that her Daughter should be so
deflour'd, at fit time of night sent in her attire, one of her waiting Maids; a
Maid it seems not unhansom nor unwitty; who supplied the place of her young
Lady. Night passed, the Maid going to rise, but daylight scarce yet appearing,
was by the King asked why she made such have, she answered, to do the work which
her Lady had set her; at which the Kingwondring, and with much ado staying her
to unfold the riddle, for he took her to be the Dukes Daughter, she falling at
his Feet besought him, that since at the command of her Lady she came to his
Bed, and was enjoyed by him, he would be pleased in recompense to set her free
from the hard service of her Mistress. The King a while standing in a study
whether he had best be angry or not, at length turning all to a jest, took the
Maid away with him, advanced her above her Lady, loved her and accompanied with
her only, till he married Elfrida. These only are his faults upon record,
rather to be wonderd how they were so few, and so soon left, he coming at 16 to
the License of a Scepter; and that his virtues were so many and so mature, he
dying before the Age wherein wisdom can in others attain to any ripeness:
however with him died all the Saxon glory. From henceforth nothing is to be
heard of but their decline and ruin under a double Conquest, and the causes
foregoing; which, not to blur or taint the praises of their former actions and
liberty well defended, shall stand severally related, and will be more then
long enough for another Book.

The End of the Fifth Book.
THE HISTORY OF BRITAIN. The Sixth Book.
Edward the Younger.
EDward the eldest Son of Edgar by Egelfieda his first Wife, the Daughter of
Duke Ordmer, was according to right and his Fathers Will, placed in the Throne;
Elfrida his second Wife, and her faction only repineing, who labored to have
had her Son Ethelred a Child of 7 years, preferred before him; that she under
that pretense might have ruled all. Mean while Comets were seen in Heaven,
portending not Famine only, which followed the next year, but the troubled State
of the whole Realm not long after to ensue. The troubles begun in Edwi's days,
between Monks and secular Priests, now revived and drew on either side many of
the Nobles into parties. For Elfere Duke of the Mercians, with many other
Pecrs, corrupted as is said with gifts, drove the Monks out of those
Monasteries where Florent. Sim. Dun.
Edgar had placed them, and in their stead put secular Priests with their Wives.
But Ethelwin Duke of East Angles, with his Brother Elfwold, and Earl Britnoth
opposed them, and gathering an Army defended the Abbeys of East Angles from
such intruders. To appease these tumults, a Synod was called at Winchester, and
nothing there concluded, a general Council both of Nobles and Prelates, was
held at Caln in Wiltshire, where while the dispute was hot, but chiefly against
Dunstan, the room wherein they sat fell upon their heads, killing some, maiming
others, Dunstan only escaping upon a beam that fell not, and the King absent by
reason of his tender Age. This accident quieted the controversy, and brought
both parts to hold with Dunstan and the Monks. Mean while the King addicted to
a Religious life, and of a mild Spirit, simply permitted all things to the
ambitious will of his Stepmother and her Son Ethelred: to whom she displeased
that the name only of King was wanting, practiced thenceforth to remove King
Edward out of the way; which in this manner she brought about. Edward on a day
wearied with hunting, thirsty and alone, while his attendance followed the
Dogs, hearing that Ethelred and his mother lodged at Corvesgate (Corse Castle,
says Camden, in the I Will of Purbeck) innocently went thither. She with all show
of kindness welcoming him, commanded drink to be brought forth, for it seems he
lighted not from his Horse; and while he was drinking, caused one of her
Servants, privately before instructed, to stab him with a poignard. The poor
youth who little expected such unkindness there, turning speedily the Reins,
fled bleeding; till through loss of blood falling from his Horse, and expiring,
yet held with one foot in the Stirrup, he was dragged along the way, traced by
his blood, and buried without honor at Werham, having reigned about 3 years:
but the place of his burial Malms.
not long after grew famous for miracles. After which by Duke Elfer (who, as
Malmsbury says, had a hand in his Death) he was Royally enterr'd at Skepton or
Shaftsbury. The murdress Elfrida at length repenting spent the residue of her
days in sorrow and great penance.

Ethelred.
EThelred second Son of Edgar by Elfrida (for Edmund Malms.
died a Child) his Brother Edward wickedly removed, was now next in right to
succeed, and accordingly Crowned at Kingston: reported by some, fair of visage,
comely of person, elegant of behavior; but the event will show that with many
sluggish Florent. Sim. Dun.
and ignoble vices he quickly shamed his outside; born and prolonged a fatal
mischief of the people, and the ruin of his Country; whereof he gave early
signs from his first infancy, bewraying the Font and Water while the Bishop
was baptizing him. Whereat Dunstan much troubled, for he stood by and saw it,
to them next him broke into these words, By God and Gods Mother this Boy will
prove a Sluggard. Another thing is writt'n of him in his Childhood; which
argued no bad nature, that hearing of his Brother Edwards cruel Death, he made
loud lamentation; but his furious mother offended therewith, and having no rod
at hand, beat him so with great Wax Candles, that he hated the sight of them
ever after. Dunstan though unwilling set the Crown upon his head; but at the
same time foretold op'nly, as is reported, the great evils that were to come
upon him and the Land, in avengment of his Brothers innocent blood. And about
the same time, one midnight, Sim. Dun.
a Cloud sometimes bloody, sometimes fiery, was seen over all England; and
within three years Malms.
the Danish Tempest, which had long surceast, revolved again upon this Island.
To the more ample relating whereof, the Danish History, at least their latest
and diligentest Historian, as neither from the first landing of Danes, in the
Reign of West Saxon Brithric, so now again from first to last, contributes
nothing; busied more then anough to make out the bare names and successions of
their uncertain Kings, and their small actions at home: unless out of him I
should transcribe what he takes, and I better may, from our own Annals; the
surer, and the sadder witnesses of their doings here, not glorious, as they
vainly boast, but most inhumanly Barbarous. For the Danes well understanding,
that England had now Eadmer. Florent.
a slothful King to their wish, first landing at Southampton from 7 great
Ships, took the Town, spoiled the Country, and carried away with them great
pillage; nor was Devonshire and Cornwall uninfested on the shore; Pirates of
Norway also harried the Coast of Hoved.
West-Chester: and to add a worse calamity, the City of London was burnt,
casually or not, is not writt'n. Sim. Dun. Hoved.
Malms. Ingulf.
It chanced fowr years after, that Ethelred beseig'd Rochester, some way or
other offended by the Bishop thereof. Dunstan not approving the cause, sent to
warn him that he provoke not St. Andrew the Patron of that City, nor wast his
Lands; an old craft of the Clergy to secure their Church Lands, by entailing
them on some Saint; the King not hark'ning, Dunstan on this condition that the
seige might be raised, sent him a hundred pound, the money was accepted and the
seige dissolved. Dunstan reprehending his avarice, sent him again this word,
because thou have respected money more then Religion, the evils which I
foretold shall the sooner come upon thee; but not in my days; for so God has
spok'n. The next year Malms.
Malms.
was calamitous, bringing strange fluxes upon men, and murren upon Cattle.
Dunstan the year following died, a strenuous Bishop, zealous without dread of
person, and for ought appeers, the best of many Ages, if he busied not himself
too much in secular affairs. He was Chaplain at first to King Athelstan, and
Edmund who succeeded, much imploi'd in Court affairs, till envied by some who
laid many things to his charge, he was by Edmund forbidd'n the Court, but by
the earnest mediation, says Ingulf, of Turkitul the Chancellor, received at
length to favor, and made Abbot of Glaston, lastly by Edgar and the general
Vote, Archbishop of Canterbury. Not long after his Death, the Danes arriving in
Devonshire were met by Goda Lieutenant of that Country, and Strenwold a valiant
Leader, who put back the Danes, but with loss of their own lives. The third year
following, under the conduct of Justin Sim. Dun.
and Guthmund the Son of Steytan, they landed and spoiled Ipswich, fought with
Britnoth Duke of the East Angles about Maldon, where they slew him; the
slaughter else had bin equal on both sides. These and the like depredations on
every side the English not able to resist, by counsel of Siric then Archbishop
of Canterbury, and two Dukes, Ethelward and Alfric; it was thought best for the
present to buy that with Silver which they could not gain with their Iron; and
Ten Thousand pound was paid to the Danes for peace. Which for a while
contented; but taught them the ready way how easiest to come by more. The next
year but one they took by storm and rifl'd Bebbanburg an ancient City nigh
Durham: Sim. Dun.
sailing thence into the mouth of Humber, they wasted both sides thereof,
Yorkshire and Lindsey, burning and destroying all before them. Against these
went out three Noblemen, Frena, Frithegist, and Godwin, but being all Danes by
the Fathers side, willingly began flight, and forsook their own Forces betrayed
to the Enemy. No less treachery was at Sea; for Alfric the Son of Elfer Duke of
Mercia, whom the King for some offense had banished but Florent. Huntingd.
now recalled, sent from London with a Fleet to surprise the Danes, in some
place of disadvantage, gave them over night intelligence thereof, then fled to
them himself; which his Fleet, says Florent, perceaveing, persu'd, took the
Ship, but missed of his person; the Londoners by chance grapling with the
East Angles made them fewer, says my Author, by many thousands. Others say,
that by this notice of Alfric, the Danes not only escaped, but with a greater
Fleet Sim. Dun.
set upon the English, took many of their Ships, and in triumph brought them up
the Thames, intending to beseige London: for Anlaf King of Norway, and Swane of
Denmark, at the head of these, came with 94 Galleys. The King for this treason
of Alfric, put out his Sons Eyes; but the Londoners both by land and water, so
valiantly resisted their beseigers, that they were forced in one day with great
loss to give over. But what they could not on the City, they wrecked themselves
on the Countries round about, wasting with Sword and fire all Essex, Kent, and
Sussex. Thence horsing their Foot, diffused far wider their outrageous
incursions, without mercy either to Sex or Age. The slothful King instead
Malms.
of Warlike opposition in the Field, sends Ambassadors to treat about another
payment; the sum promisd was now 16 thousand pound; till which paid, the Danes
winterd at Southampton; Ethelred inviteing Anlaf to come and visit him at
Andover: where Malms.
he was royally entertained, some say baptized, or confirmed, adopted Son by
the King, and dismis't with great presents, promising by Oath to depart and
molest the Kingdom no more; which he performed, Huntingd.
but the calamity ended not so, for after some intermission of their rage for
three years, the other Navy Sim. Dun.
of Danes sailing about to the West, enterd Severn, and wasted one while South
Wales, then Cornwall and Devonshire, till at length they winterd about
Tavistoc. For it were an endless work to relate how they wallow'd up and down
to every particular place, and to repeat as often what devastations they wrought,
what desolations left behind them, easy to be imagined. In sum, the next
year they afflicted Sim. Dun.
Dorsetshire, Hamshire, and the I Will of Wight; by the English many resolutions
were taken, many Armies raised, but either betrayed by the falsehood, or
discouraged by the weakness of their Leaders, they were put to rout, or
disbanded themselves. For Soldiers most commonly are as their Commanders,
without much odds of valor in one Nation or other, only as they are more or
less wisely disciplined and conducted. The following year brought them back
Sim. Dun.
upon Kent, where they enterd Medway, and beseig'd Rochester; but the Kentish
men assembling, gave them a sharp encounter, yet that sufficed not to hinder
them from doing as they had done in other places. Against these depopulations,
the King levied an Army; but the unskillfull Leaders not knowing what to do
with it when they had it, did but drive out time, burd'ning and impoverishing
the people, consuming the public treasure, and more imboldning the Enemy, then
if they had sat quiet at home. What cause moved the Danes next year to pass
into Normandy, is not recorded; but that Sim. Dun.
they returned thence more outrageous then before. Mean while the King, to make
some diversion, undertak's an expedition both by Land and Sea into Cumberland,
where the Danes were most planted; there and in the I Will of Man, or as Camden
says, Anglesey, imitating his Enemies in spoiling and unpeopleing; the Danes
from Normandy arriving in the River Ex, laid seige to Exeter; but the
Citizens, as those of London, valorously defending themselves, Sim. Dun.
they wrecked their anger, as before, on the Villages round about. The Country
people of Somerset and Devonshire assembling themselves at Penho, showed their
readiness, but wanted a head; and besides, being then but few in number, were
easily put to flight; the Enemy plundring all at will, with loaded spoils
passed into the I Will of Wight; from whence all Dorsetshire, and Hamshire, felt
again their fury. The Saxon Annals write, that before their coming to Exeter, the
Hamshire men had a bickering with them, wherein Ethelward the Kings General was
slain, adding other things hardly to be understood, Sim. Dun.
and in one ancient Copy; so end. Ethelred, whom no adversity could awake from
his soft and sluggish life, still coming by the worse at fighting, by the
advice of his Peers not unlike himself, sends one of his gay Courtiers, though
looking loftily, to stoop basely and propose a third tribute to the Danes: they
willingly hark'n, but the sum is enhaunc't now to 24 thousand pound, and paid;
the Danes thereupon abstaining from hostility. But the King to strengthen his
House by some potent affinity, marries Emma, whom the Saxons call Elgiva,
Daughter of Richard Duke of Normandy. With him Ethelred formerly Malms.
had War or no good correspondence, as appears by a Letter of Pope John the
15th. who made peace Calvis.
between them about eleaven years before; puffed up now with his supposed access
of strength by this affinity, he caused the Danes all over England, though
Florent. Huntingd.
now living peaceably, in one day perfidiously to be massacherd, both Men,
Women, and Childern; sending private Letters to every Town and City, whereby
they might be ready all at the same hour; which till the appointed time (being
the 9th of July) Calvisius.
was concealed with great silence, and performed with much unanimity; so
generally hated were the Danes. Mat. West. writes, that this execution upon the
Danes was ten years after; that Huna one of Ethelreds Chief Captains,
complaining of the Danish insolences in time of peace, their pride, their
ravishing of Matrons and Virgins, incited the King to this massacher, which in
the madness of rage made no difference of innocent or nocent. Among these,
Gunhildis the Sister of Swane was not spared, though much deserving not pity
only, but all protection: she with her Husband Earl Palingus, coming to live in
England, and receaving Christianity, had her Husband and young Son slain before
her face, her self then beheaded, foretelling and denouncing that her blood
would cost England dear. Some say this Mat. West.
was done by the Traitor Edric, to whose custody she was committed; but the
massacher was some years before Edric's advancement; and if it were done by him
afterward, it seems to contradict the private correspondence which he was
thought to hold with the Danes. For Swane breathing revenge, Sim. Dun.
hasted the next year into England, and by the treason or negligence of Count
Hugh, whom Emma had recommended to the Government of Devonshire, sacked the
City of Exeter, her Wall from East to West-gate brok'n down: after this wasting
Wiltshire, the people of that County, and of Hamshire, came together in great
numbers with resolution stoutly to oppose him, but Alfric their General, whose
Sons Eyes the King had lately put out, madly thinking to revenge himself on the
King, by ruining his own Country, when he should have orderd his Battle, the
Enemy being at hand, feigned himself taken with a vomiting; whereby his Army in
great discontent, destitute of a Commander, turned from the Enemy; who straight
took Wilton and Salsbury, carrying the pillage thereof to his Ships. Norfolk,
Sim. Dun.
he wasted the Country, and set Norwich on fire; Ulfketel Duke of the
East Angles, a man of great valor, not having space to gather his Forces,
after consultation had, thought it best to make peace with the Dane, which he
breaking within three weeks, issued silently out of his Ships, came to
Thetford, staid there a night, and in the Morning left it flameing. Vlsketel
hearing this, commanded some to go and break, or burn his Ships; but they not
dareing or neglecting, he in the mean while with what secrecy and speed was
possible, drawing together his Forces, went out against the Enemy, and gave
them a feirce onset retreating to their Ships; but much inferior in number,
many of the Chief East Angles, there lost their lives. Nor did the Danes come
off without great slaughter of their own; confessing that they never met in
England with so rough a charge. The next year, whom War could Sim. Dun.
not, a great Famine drove Swane out of the Land. But the Summer following,
another great Fleet of Danes enterd the Port of Sandwich, thence powrd Sim. Dun.
out over all Kent and Sussex, made prey of what they found. The King levying
an Army out of Mercia, and the West Saxons, took on him for once the Manhood to
go out and face them; But they who held it safer to live by rapine, then to
hazard a Battle, shifting lightly from place to place, frustrated the slow
motions of a heavy Camp, following their wonted course of robbery, then running
to their Ships. Thus all Autumn they wearied out the Kings Army, which gone home
to winter, they carried all their pillage to the I Will of Wight, and there staid
till Christmas; at which time the King being in Shropshire, and but ill
imploi'd (for by the procurement of Edric, he caused, as is thought, Alfhelm
Florent.
a noble Duke, treacherously to be slain, and the Eyes of his two Sons to be
put out) they came forth again, overrunning Hamshire, and Barkeshire, as far
as Reading and Wallingford: thence to Ashdune, and other places thereabout,
neither known nor of tolerable pronuntiation; and returning by another way,
found many of the people in Arms by the River Kenet; but making their way
through, they got safe with vast booty to their Ships. The Sim. Dun.
King and his Courtiers wearied out with their last Summers jaunt after the
nimble Danes to no purpose, which by proof they found too toilsome for their
soft Bones, more used to Beds and Couches, had recourse to their last and only
remedy, their Cofers; and send now the fourth time to buy a dishonorable peace,
every time still dearer, not to be had now under 36 thousand pound (for the
Danes knew how to milk such easy Kine) in name of Tribute and expenses: which
out of the people over all England, already half beggerd, was extorted and
paid. About the same time Ethelred advanced Edric, surnamed Streon, from
obscure condition to be Duke of Mercia, and marry Edgitha the Kings Daughter.
The cause of his advancement, Florent of Worster, and Mat. West. attribute to
his great wealth, gott'n by fine polices and a plausible tongue: he proved a
main accessory to the ruin of England, as his actions will soon declare.
Ethelred the next year somewhat Sim. Dun.
rowsing himself, ordained that every 310 Hides (a Hide is so much land as one
Plow can sufficiently till) should set out a Ship or Gally, and every nine
Hides find a Corslet and Head-peice: new Ships in every Port were builded,
vittl'd, fraught with stout Mariners and Soldiers, and appointed to meet all
at Sandwich. A man might now think that all would go well; when suddenly a new
mischief sprung up, dissension among the great ones; which brought all this
diligence to as little success as at other times before. Bithric the Brother of
Edric, falsely accused Wulnoth a great Officer set over the South Saxons, who
fearing the potency of his Enemies, with 20 Ships got to Sea, and practiced
piracy on the Coast. Against whom, reported to be in a place where he might be
easily surprised, Bithrie sets forth with 80 Ships; all which driven back by a
Tempest and wrackt upon the shore, were burnt soon after by Wulnoth.
Disheart'nd with this misfortune, the King returns to London; the rest of his
Navy after him; and all this great preparation to nothing. Whereupon Turkill, a
Danish Earl, came with a Navy Sim. Dun.
to the I Will of Tanet, and in August a far greater, led by Heming and Ilaf
joined with him. Thence coasting to Sandwich, and landed, they went onward and
began to assault Canterbury, but the Citizens and East Kentish men, coming to
composition with them for three thousand pound, they departed thence to the I Will
of Wight, robbing and burning by the way. Against these the King levies an Army
through all the land, and in several quarters places them nigh the Sea, but so
unskillfully or unsuccessfully, that the Danes were not thereby hinderd from
exerciseing their wonted Robberies. It happ'nd that the Danes one day were gone
up into the Country, far from their Ships, the King having notice thereof,
thought to intercept them in their return; his men were resolute to overcome or
die, time and place advantageous; but where courage and fortune was not
wanting, there wanted Loyalty among them. Edric with subtle arguments that had
a show of deep policy, disputed and persuaded the simplicity of his Fellow
Counselors, that it would be best consulted at that time to let the Danes pass
without ambush or interception. The Danes where they expected danger, finding
none, passed on with great joy and booty to their Ships. After this, sailing
about Kent, they lay that Winter in the Thames, forcing Kent and Essex to
contribution, oft-times attempting the City of London, but repuls't as often to
their great loss. Spring begun, leaving their Ships, they passed Sim. Dun.
Florent.
through Chiltern Wood into Oxfordshire, burnt the City, and thence returning
with divided forces wasted on both sides the Thames; but hearing, that an Army
from London was marched out against them, they on the North-side, passing the
River at Stanes, joined with them on the South into one body, and enrich't with
great spoils, came back through Surrey to their Ships; which all the Lent-time
they repaired. After Easter, sailing to the East Angles they arrived at
Ipswich, and came to a place called Ringmere, where they heard that Vlfketell
with his Forces lay, who with a sharp encounter soon entertained them; but his
men at length giving back, through the suttlety of a Danish Servant among them
who began the flight, lost the field; though the men of Cambridgeshire stood to
it valiantly. In this Battle Ethelstan the Kings Son in Law, with many other
Noblemen, was slain; whereby the Danes without more resistance, three months
together had the spoiling of those Countries and all the Fenns, burnt Thetsord
and Grantbrig, or Cambridge; thence to a hilly place not far off, called by
Huntingdon Balesham, by Camden Gogmagog Hills, and the Villages therabout they
turned their fury, slaying all they met save one man, who getting up into a
Steeple, is said to have defended himself against the whole Danish Army. They
therefore so leaving him, their Foot by Sea, their Horse by land through Fssex,
returned back lad'n to their Ships left in the Thames. But many days passed not
between, when salying again out of their Ships as out of Savage Denns, they
plunderd over again all Oxfordshire, and added to their prey Buckingham,
Bedford, and Hertfordshire; then like Humingd.
wild Beasts glutted, returning to their Caves. A third excursion they made into
Northamptonshire, burnt Northampton, ransacking the Country round; then as to
fresh pasture betook them to the West Saxons, and in like sort harrasing all
Wiltshire, returned, as I said before, like wild Beasts or rather Sea Monsters
to their Water-stables, accomplishing by Christmas the Circuit of their whole
years good Deeds; an unjust and inhuman Nation, who receaving or not receaving
tribute where none was owing them, made such destruction of mankind, and rapine
of their livelihood, as is a misery to read. Yet here they ceased not, for the
next year Sim. Dun.
repeating the same cruelties on both sides the Thames, one way as far as
Huntingdon, the other as far as Wiltshire and Southampton, solicited again by
the King for peace, and receaving their demands both of tribute and
contribution, they slighted their faith; and in the beginning of September laid
seige to Canterbury. On the twentieth day, by the treachery of Almere the
Archdeacon, they took part of it and burnt it, committing all sorts of
massacher as a sport; some they threw over the Wall, others into the fire, hung
some by the privy members, infants pulled from their mothers breasts, were
either tossed on spears, or Carts drawn over them; Matrons and Virgins by the
hair dragd and ravished. Alfage the grave Archbishop, above others hated of
the Danes, as in all Eadmer. Malms. Eadmer.
Counsels and actions to his might their known opposer, taken, wounded,
imprisoned in a noisome Ship; the multitude are tith'd, and every tenth only
spared. Sim. Dun.
Early the next year before Easter, while Ethelred and his Peers were assembled
at London, to raise now the fifth Tribute amounting to 48 thousand pound, the
Danes at Canterbury propose to the Archbishop, who had bin now seav'n months
their Prisoner, life Eadmer.
and liberty, if he pay them three thousand pound; which he refuseing as not
able of himself, and not willing to extort it from his Tennants, is permitted
till the next Sunday to consider; then haled before their Counsel, of whom
Turkill was Chief, and still refuseing, they rise most of them being drunk, and
beat him with the blunt side of their Axes, then thrust forth deliver him to be
pelted with stones; till one Thrum a converted Dane, pitying him half dead, to
put him out of pain; with a pious impiety, at one stroke of his Ax on the head
dispatched him. His body was carried to London, and there buried, thence
afterward removed to Canterbury. By this time the tribute paid, and peace so
oft'n violated sworn again by the Danes, they dispersed their Fleet; forty five
of them, and Turkill their Chief staid at London with the King, swore him
Allegiance to defend his Land against all strangers, on condition only to be
fed and clothed by him. But this voluntary friendship of Turkill was thought to
be deceitful, that staying under this pretense he gave intelligence to Swane,
when most it would be seasonable to come. In July therefore of the next year,
King Swane Sim. Dun.
arriving at Sandwich, made no stay there, but sailing first to Humber, thence
into Trent, landed and encamped at Gainsburrow: whither without delay repaired
to him the Northumbrians, with Vthred their Earl; those of Lindsey also, then
those of Fisburg, and lastly all on the North of Watling-street (which is a
high way from East to West Sea) gave Oath and Hostages to obey him. From whom
he commanded Horses and provision for his Army, taking with him besides Bands
and Companies of their choicest men; and committing to his Son Canute the care
of his Fleet and hostages; he marches toward the South Mercians, commanding
his Soldiers to exercise all Acts of hostility; with the terror whereof fully
executed, he took in few days the City of Oxford, then Winchester; thence
tending to London, in his hasty passage over the Thames, without seeking Bridge
or Ford, lost many of his men. Nor was his expedition against London
prosperous; for assaying all means by force or wile to take the City, wherein
the King then was, and Turkill with his Danes, he was stoutly beat'n off as at
other times. Thence back to Wallingford and Bath, directing his course, after
usual havoc made, he sat a while and refreshed his Army. There Ethelm an Earl
of Devonshire, and other great Officers in the West yielded him subjection.
These things flowing to his wish, he betook him to his Navy, from that time
stilled and accounted King of England, if a Tyrant, says Simeon, may be called
a King. The Londoners also sent him hostages and made their peace, for they
feared his fury. Ethelred thus reduced to narrow compass, sent Emma his Queen,
with his two Sons had by her, and all his treasure to Richard the 2d. her
Brother, Duke of Normandy; himself with his Danish Fleet abode some while at
Greenwich, then sailing to the I Will of Wight, passed after Christmas into
Normandy; where he was honorably received at Roan by the Duke, though known to
have born himself churlishly and proudly toward Emma his Sister, besides his
dissolute Malms.
Company with other women. Mean while Swane ceased not to exact almost
insupportable tribute of the people, spoiling them when he listed, besides, the
like did Turkill at Greenwich. The next Sim. Dun. Mat. West.
year beginning, Swane sickens and dies; some say terrified and smitt'n by an
appearing shape of St. Edmund armed, whose Church at Bury he had threat'nd to
demolish; but the authority hereof relies only upon the Legend of St. Edmund.
After his Death the Danish Army and Fleet made his Son Canute their King; but
the Nobility and States of England sent Messengers to Ethelred, declareing that
they preferred none before their Native Sovran, if he would promise to govern
them better then he had done, and with more Clemency. Whereat the King
rejoicing, sends over his Son Edward with Ambassadors to Court, both high and
low, and win their love, promising largly to be their mild and devoted Lord, to
consent in all things to their will, follow their counsel, and whatever had been
done or spok'n by any man against him, freely to pardon; if they would loyally
restore him to be their King. To this the people cheerfully answered, and amity
was both promisd and confirmed on both sides. An Embassey of Lords is sent to
bring back the King honorably; he returns in Lent and is joyfully received of
the people, marches with a strong Army against Canute; who having got Horses
and joined with the men of Lindsey, was preparing to make spoil in the
Countries adjoining; but by Ethelred unexpectedly coming upon him, was soon
driven to his Ships, and his Confederats of Lindsey left to the anger of their
Countrymen, executed without mercy both by fire and Sword. Canute in all have
sailing back to Sandwich, took the hostages given to his Father from all parts
of England, and with slit Noses, Ears cropped, and hands chop't off, setting them
ashore, departed into Denmark. Yet the people were not disburd'nd, for the
King raised out of them 30 thousand pound to pay his Fleet of Danes at
Greenwich. To these evils the Sea in October passed his bounds, overwhelming
many Towns in England, and of their inhabitants many thousands. The year
following an Sim. Dun.
Assembly being at Oxford, Edric of Streon, having invited two Noblemen,
Sigeferth, and Morcar, the Sons of Earngrun of Seav'nburg to his Lodging,
secretly murderd them: the King, for what cause is unknown, seized their
Estates, and caused Algith the Wife of Sigeferth to be kept at Maidulfsburg,
now Malmsbury; whom Edmund the Prince there married against his Fathers mind,
then went and possesd their lands, making the people there subject to him. Mat.
West. says, that these two were of the Danes who had seated themselves in
Northumberland, slain by Edric under color of Treason laid to their charge.
They who attended them without, tumulting Malms.
at the Death of their Masters, were beat'n back; and driven into a Church, and
defending themselves were burnt there in the Steeple. Mean while Canute
returning from Denmark with a great Navy, 200 Ships richly gilded and adorned,
well fraught Leges Ed. Conf. Tit. deduct. Norman.
with Arms and all provision; and, which Encomium Emmae mentions not, two other
Kings, Lachman of Sweden, Olav of Norway, arrived at Sandwich; And, as the same
Author then living writes, sent out spies to discover what resistance on land
was to be expected; who returned with certain report, that a great Army of
English was in readiness to oppose them. Turkill, who upon the arrival of these
Danish Powers, kept faith no longer with the English, but joining now with
Canute, as it were to reingratiate himself after his revolt, whether real or
complotted, counseled him (being yet young) not Encom. Em.
to land, but leave to him the management of this first Battle; the King
assented, and he with the Forces which he had brought, and part of those which
arrived with Canute, landing to their wish encounterd the English, though double
in number, at a place called Scorastan, and was at first beaten back with much
loss. But at length animating his men with rage only and despair, obtained a
clear Victory, which won him great reward and possessions from Canute. But of
this action no other writer makes mention: from Sandwich therefore sailing
about to the River From, and there landing, over all Dorset, Sommerset, and
Wiltshire, spread wastfull hostility. The King lay then sick at Cosham in this
County; Camd.
though it may seem strange how he could lie sick there in the midst of his
Enemies. Howbeit Edmund in one part, and Edric of Streon in another, raised
Forces by themselves; but so soon as both Armies were united, the Traitor Edric
being found to practice against the life of Edmund, he removed with his Army
from him; whereof the Enemy took great advantage. Edric easily enticeing the 40
Ships of Danes to side with him, revolted to Canute, the West Saxons also gave
pledges and furnished him with Horses. By which means the year ensueing, Sim.
Dun.
he with Edric the Traitor, passing the Thames at Cre^lad, about twelftide,
enterd into Mercia, and especially Warwickshire, depopulating all places in
their way. Against these, Prince Edmund, for his hardiness called Ironside,
gathered an Army; but the Mercians refused to fight unless Ethelred with the
Londoners came to aid them; and so every man returned home. After the Festival,
Edmund gathering another Army besought his Father to come with the Londoners,
and what force besides he was able; they came with great strength gott'n
together, but being come, and in a hopeful way of good success, it was told
the King, that unless he took the better heed, some of his own Forces would
fall off and betray him. The King daunted with this perhaps cunning whisper of
the Enemy, disbanding his Army, returns to London. Edmund betook him into
Northumberland, as some thought to raise fresh Forces; but he with Earl Vthred
on the one side, and Canute with Edric on the other, did little else but wast
the Provinces; Canute to Conquer them, Edmund to punish them, who stood neuter;
for which cause Stafford, Shropshire, and Lestershire, felt heavily his hand;
while Canute, who was ruining the more Southern Shires, at length marched into
Northumberland; which Edmund hearing dismissed his Forces and came to London.
Vthred the Earl hasted back to Northumberland, and finding no other remedy,
submitted himself with all the Northumbrians, giving hostages to Canute.
Nevertheless by his command or connivence, and the hand of one Turebrand a
Danish Lord; Vthred was slain, and Tric another Dane made Earl in his stead.
This Vthred Son of Walteof, as Simeon writes, in his treatise of the Seige of
Durham, in his youth obtained a great Victory against Malcolm Son of Kened King
of Scots, who with the whole power of his Kingdom was fallen into
Northumberland, and laid seige to Durham. Walteof the old Earl unable to
resist, had secured himself in Bebbanburg, a strong Town, but Vthred gathering
an Army raised the Seige, slew most of the Scots, their King narrowly escaping,
and with the heads of their slain fixed upon Poles beset round the Walls of
Durham. The year of this exploit Simeon cleers not, for in 969. and in the
Reign of Ethelred as he affirms, it could not be. Canute by another way
returning Southward, joyful of his success, before Easter came back with all
the Army to his Fleet. About the end of April ensueing, Ethelred after a long,
troublesome and ill governed Reign, ended his days at London, and was buried
in the Church of St. Paul.

Edmund Ironside.
AFter the decease of Ethelred, they of the Nobility Florent. Aelred in the
life of Ed. Conf.
who were then at London together with the Citizens, chose Edmund his Son (not
by Emma, but a former Wife the Daughter of Earl Thored) in his Fathers room;
but the Archbishops, Abbots, and many of the Nobles assembling together elected
Canute; and coming to Southamton where he then remained, renounced before him
all the race of Ethelred, and swore him fidelity: he also swore to them, in
matters both religious and secular, to be their faithful Lord. But Edmund with
all speed going to the Florent. Sim. Dun.
West Saxons, was joyfully received of them as their King, and of many other
Provinces by their example. Mean while Canute about mid May came with his whole
Fleet up the River to London; then causing a great Dike to be made on Surrey
side, turned the stream and drew his Ships thither West of the Bridge; then
begirting the City with a broad and deep trench, assailed it on every side; but
repulst as before by the valorous Defendants, and in despair of success at that
time, leaving part of his Army for the defense of his Ships, with the rest sped
him to the West Saxons, ere Edmund could have time to assemble all his powers:
who yet with such as were at hand invoking divine aid, encounterd the Danes at
Pen by Gillingham in Dorsetshire, and put him to flight. After mid-summer,
encreast with new Forces, he met with him again at a place called Sherastan,
now Sharstan; but Edric, Almar, and Algar, with the Hamshire and Wiltshire men,
then sideing with the Danes, he only maintained the fight, obstinatly fought on
both sides, till night and weariness parted them. Day light returning renu'd
the conflict; wherein the Danes appearing inferior, Edric to dishart'n the
English cuts off the Head of one Osmer, in countnance and hair somewhat
resembling the King, and holding it up, cries aloud to the English, that Edmund
being slain and this his head, it was time for them to fly; which falacy
Edmund perceaving, and op'nly showing himself to his Soldiers, by a spear
thrown at Edric, that Malms.
missing him yet slew one next him, and through him another behind, they
recoverd heart, and lay sore upon the Danes till night parted them as before:
for ere the third morn, Canute sensible of his loss, marched away by stealth to
his Ships at London, renewing there his leagre. Some would have this Battle at
Sherastan the same with that at Scorastan before mentioned, but the
circumstance of time permits not that, having bin before the landing of Canute,
this a good while after, as by the Process of things appears: from Sherastan or
Sharstan, Edmund returned to the West Saxons, whose valor Edric fearing, least
it might prevail against the Danes, sought pardon of his revolt, and obtaining
it swore loyalty to the King, who now the third time coming with an Army from
the West Saxons to London, raised the Seige, chaseing Canute and his Danes to
their Ships. Then after two days passing the Thames at Branford, and so coming
on their backs, kept them so turned, and obtained the Victory: then returns
again to his West Saxons, and Canute to his Seige, but still in vain; riseing
therefore thence, he enterd with his Ships a River then called Arenne; and from
the Banks thereof wasted Mercia; thence their Horse by land, their Foot by Ship
came to Medway. Edmund in the mean while with multiplied Forces out of many
Shires, crossing again at Branford, came into Kent, seeking Canute; encounterd
him at Ocford, and so defeated, that of his Horse, they who escaped fled to the
I Will of Sheppey; and a full Victory he had gained, had not Edric still the
Traitor by some wile or other detained his persuit: and Edmund who never wanted
courage, here wanted prudence to be so misled, ever after forsak'n of his
wonted Fortune. Canute crossing with his Army into Essex, thence wasted Mercia
worse then before, and with heavy prey returned to his Ships: them Edmund with
a collected Army persueing, overtook at a place called Assandune, or Asseshill,
now Ashdown in Essex; the Battle Camden.
on either side was fought with great vehemence; but perfidious Edric
perceaving the Victory to incline toward Edmund, with that part of the Army
which was under him, fled, as he had promised Canute, and left the King
over-match't with numbers: by which desertion the English were overthrown, Duke
Alfric, Duke Godwin, and Vlfketel the valiant Duke of East Angles, with a great
part of the Nobility slain, so as the English of a long time had not received a
greater blow. Yet after a while Edmund not absurdly called Ironside, preparing
to try again his Fortune in another field, was hinderd by Edric and others of
his faction, adviseing him to make peace and divide the Kingdom with Canute.
To Camd.
which Edmund overruled, a treaty appointed, and pledges mutually given, both
Kings met together at a place called Deorhirst in Glostershire; Edmund on the
West side of Severn, Canute on the East with their Armies, then both in person
wafted into an Island, at that time called Olanege, now Alney in the midst of
Camd.
the River; swearing amity and brotherhood, they parted the Kingdom between
them. Then interchanging Arms and the habit they wore, assessing also what pay
should be allotted to the Navy; they departed each his way. Concerning this
interveiw and the cause thereof, others write otherwise; Malmsbury, that Edmund
greiving at the loss of so much blood spilt for the ambition only of two men
striveing who should reign, of his own accord sent to Canute, offering him
single Combat, to prevent in their own cause the effusion of more blood then
their own; that Canute though of courage anough, yet not unwisely doubting to
adventure his body of small Timber, against a man of Iron sides, refused the
Combat, offering to divide the Kingdom; this offer pleasing both Armies,
Edmund was not difficult to consent; and the decision was, that he as his
hereditary Kingdom should rule the West Saxons, and all the South, Canute the
Mercians, and the North. Huntingdon followed by Mat. West. relates, that the
Peers on every side wearied out with continual warfare, and not refraining to
affirm op'nly, that they two who expected to reign singly, had most reason to
fight singly, the Kings were content; the Island was their lists, the Combat
Knightly; till Knute finding himself too weak, began to parle, which ended as
is said before. After which the Londoners bought their peace of the Danes, and
permitted them to winter in the City. But King Edmund about the Feast of St.
Andrew, unexpectedly deceased at London, and was buried near to Edgar his
Grandfather at Glaston. The cause of his so sudden death is uncertain; common
fame, says Malmsbury, lays the guilt thereof upon Edric, who to please Canute,
allured with promise of reward two of the Kings Privy Chamber, though at first
abhorring the fact, to assassinate him at the stool, by thrusting a sharp Iron
into his hinder parts. Huntingdon, and Mat. West. relate it done at Oxford by
the Son of Edric, and something vary in the manner, not worth recital. Edmund
dead, Canute meaning to reign sole King of England, calls to him all the Dukes,
Barons, and Bishops of the Land, cunningly demanding of them who were witnesses
what agreement was made between him and Edmund dividing the Kingdom, whether
the Sons and Brothers of Edmund were to govern the West Saxons after him,
Canute living? they who understood his meaning, and feared to undergo his
anger, timorously answered, that Edmund they knew had left no part thereof to his
Sons or Brethren, living or dying; but that he intended Canute should be their
Guardian, till they came to age of reigning. Simeon affirms, that for fear or
hope of reward they attested what was not true: notwithstanding which he put
many of them to death not long after.

Canute, or Knute.
CAnute having thus sounded the Nobility, and Sim. Dun. Sax. an.
by them understood, received their Oath of fealty, they the pledge of his bare
hand, and Oath from the Danish Nobles; whereupon the House of Edmund was
renounced, and Canute Crowned. Then they enacted, that Edwi Brother of Edmund,
a Prince of great hope, should be banished the Realm. But Canute not thinking
himself secure while Edwi lived, consulted with Edric how to make him away; who
told him of one Ethelward a decayed Nobleman, likeliest to do the work.
Ethelward sent for, and tempted by the King in private, with largest rewards,
but abhorring in his mind the deed, promisd to do it when he saw his
opportunity; and so still deferred it. But Edwi afterward received into favor
as a snare, was by him or some other of his false friends, Canute contriving
it, the same year slain. Edric also counseled him to dispatch Edward and
Edmund, the Sons of Ironside; but the King doubting that the fact would seem
too foul done in England, sent them to the King of Sweden, with like intent;
but he disdaining the Office, sent them for better safety to Solomon King of
Hungary; where Edmund at length died, but Edward married Agatha Daughter to
Henry the German Emperor. A digression in the Laws of Edward Confessor under
the Title of Lex Noricorum says, that this Edward for fear of Canute, fled of
his own accord to Malesclot King of the Rugians, who received him honorably,
and of that Country gave him a Wife. Canute settled in his Throne, divided the
Government of his Kingdom into fowr parts; the West Saxons to himself, the
East Angles to Earl Turkill, the Mercians to Edric, the Northumbrians to Eric;
then made peace with all Princes round about him, and his former Wife being
dead, in July married Emma the Widow of King Ethelred. The Christmas following
was an ill Feast to Edric, of whose Treason, the King having now made use as
much as served his turn, and fearing himself to be the next betrayed, caused
him to be slain at London in the Palace, thrown over the City Wall, and there
to lie unburied; the head of Edric fixed on a pole, he commanded to be set on
the highest Tower of London, as in a double sense he had promised him, for the
murder of King Edmund to exalt him above all the Peers of England. Huntingdon,
Malmsbury, and Mat. West. write, that suspecting the Kings intention to degrade
him from his Mercian Dukedom, and upbraiding him with his merits, the King
enraged, caused him to be strangled in the room, and out at a Window thrown
into the Thames. Another writes, that Eric at the Kings command struck off his
head. Other great men though without fault, as Duke Norman the Son Encom. Em.
Ingulf.
of Leofwin, Ethelward Son of Duke Agelmar, he put to death at the same time,
jealous of their power or familiarity with Edric: and notwithstanding peace,
kept still his Army; to maintain which, the next Sim. Dun. Huntingd. Mat. West.
year he squees'd out of the English, though now his subjects, not his Enemies,
72, some say, 82 thousand pound, besides 15 thousand out of London. Mean while
great War arose at Carr, between Vthred Son of Waldef, Earl of Northumberland,
and Malcolm Son of Kened King of Scots, with whom held Eugenius King of
Lothian. But here Simeon the relater seems to have committed some mistake,
having slain Vthred by Canute two years before, and set Eric in his place: Eric
therefore it must needs be, not Vthred, who managed this War against the Scots.
About which time in a Convention of Danes at Oxford, it was agreed on both
parties to keep the Laws of Edgar; Mat. West. says, of Edward the Elder. The
Sim. Dun.
next year Canute sailed into Denmark, and there abode all Winter. Huntingdon
and Mat. West. say, he went thither to repress the Swedes, and that the night
before a Battle to be fought with them, Godwin stealing out of the Camp with
his English, assaulted the Swedes, and had got the Victory ere Canute in the
morning knew of any fight. For which bold enterprise, though against
Discipline, he had the English in more esteem ever after. In the Spring Sim.
Dun.
at his return into England, he held in the time of Easter a great assembly at
Chirchester, and the same year was with Turkill the Dane at the dedication of a
Church by them built at Assendune, in the place of that great Victory which won
him the Crown. But suspecting his greatness, the year following banished Sim.
Dun. Malms.
Sim. Dun.
him the Realm, and found occasion to do the like by Eric the Northumbrian Earl
upon the same jealousy. Nor yet content with his Conquest of England, though
now above ten years enjoyed, he passed with 50 Ships into Norway, dispossessed
Olave their King, and subdued the land, first with great sums of money sent
the year before to gain him a party, then coming with an Army to compel the
rest. Thence Sim. Dun.
returning King of England, Denmark, and Norway, yet not secure in his mind,
under color of an Embassey he sent into banishment Hacun a powerful Dane, who
had married the Daughter of his Sister Gunildis, having conceav'd some
suspicion of his practices against him: but such course was taken, that he
never came back; either perishing at Sea, or slain by contrivance the next year
in Orkney. Canute Sim. Dun.
therefore having thus established himself by bloodshed and oppression, to wash
away, as he Sim. Dun.
thought, the guilt thereof, sailing again into Denmark, went thence to Rome,
and offered there to St. Peter great gifts of Gold and Silver, and other
precious things; besides the usual tribute of Romscot, giving great Alms by
the way, both thither and Huntingd.
back again, freeing many places of Custom and Toll with great expense, where
strangers were wont to pay, having vowed great amendment of life at the
Sepulcher of Peter and Paul, and to his whole people in a large letter writt'n
from Rome yet extant. At his return therefore he built and dedicated Sim. Dun.
a Church to St. Edmund at Bury, whom his Ancestors had slain, threw out the
secular Priests who had intruded there, and placed Monks in their stead; then
going into Scotland, subdued and received homage of Malcolm, and two other
Kings Huntingd.
Sim. Dun.
there, Melbeath, and Jermare. Three years after having made Swane his supposed
Son by Algiva of Northamton, Duke Alshelms Daughter (for others say the Son of
a Priest whom Algiva barren had got ready at the time of her feigned labor)
King of Florent.
Norway, and Hardecnute his Son by Emma King of Denmark, and designed Harold
his Son by Algiva of Northamton King of England, died at Shaftsbury, and was
buried at Winchester in the old Monastery. Florent.
This King, as appears, ended better then he began, for though he seems to have
had no hand in the Death of Ironside, but detested the fact, and bringing the
murderers, who came to him in hope of great reward, forth among his Courtiers,
as it were to receave thanks, after they had op'nly related the manner of their
killing him, delivered them to deserved punishment, yet he spared Edric whom he
knew to be the prime Author of that detestable fact; till willing to be rid of
him, grown importune upon the confidence of his merits, and upbraided by him
that he had first relinquisht, then extinguished Edmund for his sake; angry to
be so upbraided, therefore said he with a changed countnance, Traitor to God and
to me, thou shall die; thine own mouth accuses thee to have slain thy Master my
confederate Brother, and the Lords Anointed. Whereupon Malms.
although present and private Execution was in rage done upon Edric, yet he
himself in cool blood scrupled not to make away the Brother and Children of
Edmund, who had better right to be the Lords Anointed here then himself. When
he had obtained in England what he desired, no wonder if he sought the love of
his conquered Subjects for the love of his own quiet, the maintainers of his
wealth and state, for his own profit. For the like reason he is thought to have
married Emma, and that Richard Duke of Normandy her Brother might the less care
what became of Elfred and Edward, her Sons by King Ethelred. He commanded to be
observed the ancient Saxon Laws ^all'd afterward the Laws of Edward the
Confe^^^r, not that he made them, but strictly observed them. His Letter from
Rome professes, if he had done aught amiss in his youth, through negligence or
want of due temper, full resolution with the help of God to make amends, by
governing justly and piously for the future; charges and adjures all his
Officers and Vicounts, that neither for fear of him, or favor of any person,
or to enrich the King, they suffer injustice to be done in the land; commands
his treasurers to pay all his Debts ere his return home, which was by Denmark,
to compose matters there; and what his Letter professed, he performed all his
life after. But it is a fond conceit in many great ones, and pernicious in the
end, to cease from no violence till they have attained the utmost of their
ambitions and desires; then to think God appeased by their seeking to bribe him
with a share however large of their ill-gott'n spoils, and then lastly to grow
zealous of doing right, when they have no longer need to do wrong. Howbeit
Canute was famous through Europe, and much honored of Conrade the Emperor,
then at Rome, with rich gifts and many grants of what he there demanded for
the freeing of passages from Toll and Custom. I must not omit one remarkable
action done by him, as Huntingdon reports it, with great Scene of circumstance,
and emphatical expression, to show the small power of Kings in respect of God;
which, unless to Court-Parasites, needed no such laborious demonstration. He
caused his Royal Seat to be set on the shore, while the Tide was coming in; and
with all the state that Royalty could put into his countnance, said thus to the
Sea: Thou Sea belongst to me, and the Land whereon I sit is mine; nor has any
one unpunished resisted my commands: I charge thee come no further upon my Land,
neither presume to wet the Feet of thy Sovran Lord. But the Sea, as before,
came rolling on, and without reverence both wet and dashed him. Whereat the King
quickly riseing, wished all about him to behold and consider the weak and
frivolous power of a King, and that none indeed deserved the name of a King,
but he whose Eternal Laws both Heaven, Earth, and Sea obey. A truth so evident
of it self, as I said before, that unless to shame his Court Flatterers who
would not else be convinced, Canute needed not to have gone wet-shod home: The
best is, from that time forth he never would wear a Crown, esteeming Earthly
Royalty contemptible and vain.

Harold.
HArold for his swiftness surnamed Harefoot, the Florent. Bromton. Huntingd.
Mat. West. Mat. West.
Son of Canute by Algiva of Northampton (though some speak doubtfully as if she
bore him not, but had him of a Shoo-makers Wife, as Swane before of a Priest;
others of a Maidservant, to conceal her barrenness) in a great Assembly at
Oxford, was by Duke Leofric and the Mercians, with the Londoners, according to
his Fathers Testament, elected King; but without the Regal Habiliments, Encom.
Em.
which Aelnot the Archbishop having in his Custody, refused to deliver up, but
to the Sons of Emma, for which Harold ever after hated the Clergy; and (as the
Clergy are wont thence to infer) all Religion. Godwin Earl of Kent, and the
West Saxons with him, stood for Hardecnute. Malmsbury says, that the contest
was between Dane and English; that the Danes and Londoners grown now in a
manner Danish, were all for Hardecnute; but he being then in Denmark, Harold
prevailed, yet so as that the Kingdom should be divided between them; the West
and Southpart reserved by Emma for Hardecnute, till his return. But Harold once
advanced into the Throne, banished Emma his Mother-in-law, seized on his
Fathers Treasure at Winchester, and there remained. Emma not holding it safe to
abide Sim. Dun.
in Normandy while Duke William the Bastard was yet under Age, retired to
Baldwin Earl of Flanders. In the mean while Alfred and Edward Sons of Ethelred,
accompanied with a small number of Norman Soldiers in a few Ships, coming to
visit their mother Emma not yet departed the land, and perhaps to see how the
people were inclined to restore them their right; Elfred was sent for by the
King then at London; but in his way met at Guilford by Earl Godwin, who with
all seeming friendship entertained him, was in the night surprised and made
Prisner, most of his Company put to various sorts of cruel Death, decimated
twice over, then brought to London, was by the King sent bound to Eely, had his
Eyes put out by the way, and deliverd to the Monks there, died soon after in
their Custody. Malmsbury gives little credit to this story of Elfred, as not
Chronicl'd in his time, but rumored only. Which Emma however hearing, sent
away her Son Edward, who by good hap accompanied not his Brother, with all
speed into Normandy. But the Author of Encomium Emmae, who seems plainly
(though nameless) to have been some Monk, yet lived, and perhaps wrote within
the same year when these things were done; by his relation differing from all
others, much aggravates the cruelty of Harold, that he not content to have
practiced in secret (for op'nly he durst not) against the life of Emma, sought
many treacherous ways to get her Son within his power; and resolved at length
to forge a Letter in the name of their mother, inviting them into England, the
Copy of which Letter he produces writt'n to this purpose.

EMma in name only Queen, to her Sons Edward and Alfrid imparts motherly
salutation. While we severally bewail the Death of our Lord the King, most Dear
Sons, and while daily ye are deprived more and more of the Kingdom your
Inheritance; I admire what Counsel ye take, knowing that your intermitted
delay, is a daily strengthening to the Reign of your Usurper, who incessantly
goes about from Town to City, gaining the Chief Nobles to his party, either by
gifts, prayers, or threats. But they had much rather one of you should reign
over them, then to be held under the power of him who now overrules them. I
entreat therefore that one of you come to me speedily, and privately; to receive
from me wholesome Counsel, and to know how the business which I intend shall be
accomplished. By this Messenger present, send back what you determine. Farewell,
as dear both as my own Heart.

These Letters were sent to the Princes then in Normandy, by express
Messengers, with presents also as from their mother; which they joyfully
receiving, return word by the same Messengers, that one of them will be with
her shortly; naming both the time and place. Alfrid therefore the younger (for
so it was thought best) at the appointed time, with a few Ships and small
numbers about him appearing on the Coast, no sooner came ashore but fell into
the snare of Earl Godwin, sent on purpose to betray him; as above was related.
Emma greatly sorrowing for the loss of her Son, thus cruelly made away, fled
immediately with some of the Nobles her faithfullest adherents into Flanders,
had her dwelling assigned at Bruges by the Earl; where having remained about
two years, she was visited out of Sim. Dun.
Denmark by Hardecnute her Son; and he not long had remained with her there,
when Harold in England, having done nothing the while worth memory, Huntingd.
save the taxing of every Port at 8 marks of Silver Sim. Dun. Malms.
to 16 Ships, died at London, some say at Oxford, and was buried at Winchester.
After which, most of the Nobility, both Danes and English now agreeing, send
Ambassadors to Hardecnute still at Bruges with his mother, entreating him to
come and receave as his right the Scepter, who before Midsomer came with 60
Ships, and many Soldiers out of Denmark.

Hardecnute.
HArdecnute received with acclamation, and seated in the Throne, first called
to mind the injuries done to him or his Mother Emma in the time of Harold; sent
Alfric Bishop of York, Godwin and others, with Troud his Executioner to
London, commanding them to dig up the body of King Harold, and throw it into a
Ditch; but by a second order, into the Thames. Whence taken up by a Fisherman,
and convei'd to a Churchyard in London, belonging to the Danes, it was
enterr'd again with honor. This done he levied a sore Tax, that 8 marks to
every Rower, and twelve to every Officer in his Fleet should be paid throughout
England; by which time they who were so forward to call him over, had anough of
him; for he, as they thought, had too much of theirs. After this he called to
account Godwin Earl of Kent, and Leving Bishop of Worster, about the Death of
Elfred his Brother, which Alfric the Archbishop laid to their charge; the King
deprived Leving of his Bishopric, and gave it to his accuser: but the year
following, pacified with a round sum restored it to Leving. Godwin made his
Malms.
peace by a sumptuous present, a Gally with a gilded stem bravely rigged, and
80 Soldiers in her, every one with Bracelets of gold on each Arm, weighing 16
ounces, Helmet, Corslet, and Hilts of his Sword gilded; a Danish Curtax listed
with gold or silver, hung on his left shoulder, a Shield with boss and nales
gilded in his left hand, in his right a Lance: besides this, he took his Cath
before the King, that neither of his own council or will, but by the command of
Harold he had done what he did, to the putting out of Elfreds Eyes. The like
Oath took most of the Nobility for themselves, or in his behalf. The next year,
Hardecnute sending Sim. Dun.
his House Earls, so they called his Officers, to gather the Tribute imposed;
two of them rigorous in their Office, were slain at Worster by the people;
whereat the King enraged, sent Leofric Duke of Mercia, and Seward of
Northumberland, with great Forces and Commission to slay the Citizens, rifle
and burn the City, wast the whole Province. Affrighted with such news, all the
people fled; the Countrymen whither they could, the Citizens to a small Island
in Severn, called Beverege, which they fortified and defended stoutly, till
peace was granted them, and freely to return home. But their City they found
sacked and burnt; wherewith the King was appeased. This was commendable in him,
however cruel to others, that toward his half brethren, though Rivals of his
Crown, he showed himself always tenderly affectiond; as now toward Edward,
who without fear came to him out of Normandy, and with unfeigned kindness
received, remained safely and honorably in his Court. But Hardecnute Sim. Dun.
the year following, at a Feast wherein Osgod a great Danish Lord gave his
Daughter in marriage at Lambeth, to Prudon another potent Dane; in the midst of
his mirth, sound and healthful to sight, while he was drinking fell down
speechless, and so dying, was buried at Winchester beside his Father. He was it
seems a great lover of good chere; sitting at Table fowr times a day, with
great variety of Dishes and superfluity to all Comers. Whereas, says
Huntingdon, in our time Princes in their houses made but one meal a day. He gave
his Sister Gunildis, a Virgin of rare Beauty, in marriage to Henry the Alman
Emperor; and to send her forth pompously, all the Nobility contributed their
Jewels and richest Ornaments. But it may seem a wonder that our Historians, if
they deserve that name, should in a matter so remarkable, and so near their own
time, so much differ. Huntingdon relates against the credit of all other
records, that Hardecnute thus dead, the English rejoicing at this unexpected
riddance of the Danish yoke, sent over to Elfred the Elder Son of Emma by King
Ethelred, of whom we heard but now, that he died Prisner at Eely, sent thither
by Harold six year before; that he came now out of Normandy, with a great
number of men to receave the Crown; that Earl Codwin aiming to have his
Daughter Queen of England by marrying her to Edward a simple youth, for he
thought Elfred of a higher Spirit then to accept her, persuaded the Nobles that
Elfred had brought over too many Normans, had promised them lands here, that it
was not safe to suffer a Warlike and subtle Nation to take root in the Land,
that these were to be so handled as none of them might dare for the future to
flock hither, upon pretense of relation to the King; thereupon by common consent
of the Nobles, both Elfred and his Company were dealt with as was above
related; that they then sent for Edward out of Normandy, with hostages to be
left there of their faithful intentions to make him King, and their desires not
to bring over with him many Normans; that Edward at their call came then first
out of Normandy; whereas all others agree that he came voluntarily over to visit
Hardecnute, as is before said, and was remaining in the Court at the time of
his Death. For Hardecnute dead, says Malmsbury, Edward doubting greatly his
own safety, determined to rely wholly on the advice and favor of Earl Godwin,
desiring therefore by messengers to have private speech with him, the Earl a
while deliberated: at last assenting, Prince Edward came, and would have fallen
at his feet; but that not permitted, told him the danger wherein he thought
himself at present, and in great perplexity besought her help to convey him
some whether out of the Land. Godwin soon apprehending the fair occasion that
prompted him how to advance himself and his Family, cherfully exhorted him to
remember himself the Son of Ethelred, the Grandchild of Edgar, right Heir to
the Crown, at full Age; not to think of flying but of reigning, which might
easily be brought about if he would follow his Counsel; then setting forth the
power and authority which he had in England, promised it should be all his to
set him on the Throne, if he on his part would promise and swear to be for ever
his friend, to preserve the honor of his House, and to marry his Daughter.
Edward, as his necessity then was, consented easily, and swore to whatever
Godwin required. An Assembly of States thereupon met at Gillingham, where Edward
pleaded his right; and by the powerful influence of Godwin was accepted.
Others, as Bromton, with no probability write, that Godwin at this time was
fled into Denmark, for what he had done to Elfred, returned and submitted
himself to Edward then King, was by him charged op'nly with the Death of
Elfred, and not without much ado, by the intercession of Leofric and other
Peers, received at length into favor.

Edward the Confessor.
GLad were the English deliverd so unexpectedly from their Danish Masters, and
little thought how near another Conquest was hanging over them. Edward, the
Easter following, Crowned at Winchester, Sim. Dun.
the same year accompanied with Earl Godwin, Leofric, and Siward, came again
thither on a sudden, and by their Counsel seized on the treasure of his Mother
Emma. The cause alleged is, that she was hard to him in the time of his
banishment; and indeed she is said not much to have loved Ethelred her former
Husband, and thereafter the Childern by him; she was moreover noted to be very
covetous, hard to the poor, and profuse to Monasteries. About this time also
King Edward, according to promise, Malms.
took to Wife Edith or Egith Earl Godwins Daughter, commended much for beauty,
modesty, and, beyond what is requisite in a woman, learning. Inguls a youth
lodging in the Court with his Father, saw her often, and coming from the School,
was sometimes met by her and posed, not in Grammar only, but in Logic. Edward
the next year but one, made Sim. Dun.
ready a strong Navy at Sandwich against Magnus King of Norway, who threat'nd
an invasion; had not Swane King of Denmark diverted him by a War at home to
defend his own land, not out of good will to Edward, as may be supposed, who at
the Sim. Dun.
same time expressed none to the Danes, banishing Gunildis the Niece of Canute
with her two Sons, and Osgod by surname Clapa, out of the Realm. Swane Sim. Dun.
over-powred by Magnus, sent the next year to entreat aid of King Edward;
Godwin gave counsel to send him 50 Ships fraught with Soldiers; but Leofric
and the general voice gainsaying, none were sent. The next year Harold
Harvager King of Sim. Dun.
Norway sending Ambassadors, made peace with King Edward; but an Earthquake at
Worster and Darby, Pestilence and Famine in many places, much lesse'nd the
enjoyment thereof. The next year Henry the Sim. Dun.
Emperor displeased with Baldwin Earl of Flanders, had streit'nd him with a
great Army by land; and sending to King Edward, desired him with his Ships to
hinder what he might, his escape by sea. The King therefore with a great Navy
coming to Sandwich, there staid till the Emperor came to an agreement with
Earl Baldwin. Mean while Swane Son of Earl Godwin, who not permitted to marry
Edgiva the Abbess of Chester by him deflour'd, had left the land, came out of
Denmark with 8 Ships, feigning a desire to return into the Kings favor; and
Beorn his Cousin German, who commanded part of the Kings Navy, promised to
intercede that his Earldome might be restored him. Godwin therefore and Beorn
with a few Ships, the rest of the Fleet gone home, coming to Pevensey (but
Godwin soon departing thence in persuit of 29 Danish Ships who had got much
booty on the Coast of Essex, and perished by tempest in their return) Swane with
his Ships comes to Beorn at Pevensey, guilefully requests him to sail with him
to Sandwich, and reconcile him to the King, as he had promised. Beorn
mistrusting no evil where he intended good, went with him in his Ship attended
by three only of his Servants: but Swane set upon barbarous cruelty, not
reconciliation with the King, took Beorn now in his power and bound him; then
coming to Dertmouth, slew and buried him in a deep Ditch. After which, the men
of Hastings took six of his Ships and brought them to the King at Sandwich;
with the other two he escaped into Flanders, there remaining till Aldred Bishop
of Worster by earnest mediation wrought his peace with the King. About this
time King Edward sent to Pope Leo, desiring absolution from a vow, Mat. West.
which he had made in his younger years, to take a journey to Rome, if God
voutsaf'd him to reign in England; the Pope dispensed with his vow, but not
without the expense of his journey given to the poor, and a Monastery built or
re-edifi'd to St. Peter: who in a Vision to a Monk, as is said, chose
Westminster, which King Edward thereupon rebuilding endowed with large
privileges and revennues. The same year, says Florent of Worster, certain
Irish Pirates with 36 Ships enterd the mouth of Severn, and with the aid of
Griffin Prince of South Wales, did some hurt in those parts: then passing the
River Wey, burnt Dunedham, and slew all the Inhabitants they found. Against
whom Aldred Bishop of Worster, with a few out of Gloucester and Herefordshire,
went out in have: but Griffin to whom the Welsh and Irish had privily sent
Messengers, came down upon the English with his whole power by night, and early
in the morning suddenly assaulting them, slew many, and put the rest to flight.
The next Sim. Dun.
year but one, King Edward remitted the Danish Tax, which had continued 38
years heavy upon the land since Ethelred first paid it to the Danes, and what
remained thereof in his treasury he sent back Ingulf.
to the owners: but through imprudence laid the foundation of a far worse
mischief to the English; while studying gratitude to those Normans, who to him
in exile had bin helpful; he called them over to public Offices here, whom
better he might have repaid out of his private purse; by this means exasperating
either Nation one against the other, and making way by degrees to the Norman
Conquest. Robert a Monk of that Country, who had bin serviceable to him there
in time of need, he made Bishop, first of London, then of Canterbury; William
his Chaplain Bishop of Dorchester. Then began the Ingulf.
English to lay aside their own ancient Customs, and in many things to imitate
French manners, the great Peers to speak French in their Houses, in French to
write their Bills and Letters, as a great piece of Gentility, ashamed of their
own: a presage of their subjection shortly to that people, whose fashions and
language they affected so slavishly: But that which gave beginning to many
troubles ensueing, happ'nd this year, and upon this occasion. Eustace Earl of
Boloign, Father of the famous Godfrey who won Malms.
Jerusalem from the Saracens, and Husband to Goda the Kings Sister, having bin
to visit King Edward, and returning by Canterbury to take Ship at Dover, one of
his Harbingers insolently seeking to lodge by force in a House there, provoked
so the Master thereof, as by chance or heat of anger to kill him. The Count with
his whole train going to the House where his Servant had bin killed, slew both
the slayer and 18 more who defended him. But the Townsmen running to Arms,
requited him with the slaughter of 21 more of his Servants, wounded most of the
rest; he himself with one or two hardly escapeing; ran back with clamor to
the King; whom seconded by other Norman Courtiers, he stirred up to great anger
against the Citizens of Canterbury. Earl Godwin in have is sent for, the cause
related and much aggravated by the King against that City, the Earl commanded
to raise Forces, and use the Citizens thereof as Enemies. Godwin, sorry to see
strangers more favored of the King then his native people, answered, that it
were better to summon first the Chief men of the Town into the Kings Court, to
charge them with Sedition, where both parties might be heard, that not found in
fault they might be acquitted, if otherwise, by fine or loss of life might
satisfy the King whose peace they had brok'n, and the Count whom they had
injured; till this were done refuseing to prosecute with hostile punishment
them of his own County unheard, whom his Office was rather to defend. The King
displeased with his refusal, and not knowing how to compel him, appointed an
Assembly of all the Peers to be held at Gloucester, where the matter might be
fully tried; the Assembly was full and frequent according to summons; but
Godwin mistrusting his own cause, or the violence of his adversaries; with his
two Sons, Swane and Harold, and a great power gatherd out of his own and his
Sons Earldomes, which contained most of the South-East and West parts of
England, came no further then Beverstan, giving out that their Forces were to go
against the Welsh, who intended an irruption into Hereford-shire; and Swane
under that pretense lay with part of his Army thereabout. The Welsh
understanding this device, and with all diligence clearing themselves before
the King, left Godwin detected of false accusation in great hatred to all the
Assembly. Leofric therefore and Siward Dukes of great power, the former in
Mercia, the other in all parts beyond Humber, both ever faithful to the King,
send privily with speed to raise the Forces of their Provinces. Which Godwin not
knowing, sent boldly to King Edward, demanding Count Eustace and his followers
together with those Boloignians, who as Simeon writes, held a Castle in the
jurisdiction of Canterbury. The King as then having but little force at hand,
entertained him a while with treaties and delays, till his summond Army drew
nigh, then rejected his demands. Godwin thus matched, commanded his Sons not to
begin fight against the King; begun with, not to give ground. The Kings Forces
were the flower of those Counties whence they came, and eager to fall on: But
Leofric and the wiser Sim. Dun.
sort detesting civil War, brought the matter to this accord, that Hostages
given on either side, the whole cause should be again debated at London.
Thither the King and Lords coming with their Army, sent to Godwin and his Sons
(who with their powers were come as far as Southwarke) commanding their
appearance unarmed with only 12 attendants, and that the rest of their Soldiers
they should deliver over to the King. They to appear without pledges before an
adverse faction denied; but to dismiss their Soldiers refused not, nor in ought
else to obey the King as far as might stand with honor and the just regard of
their safety. This answer not pleasing the King, an edict was presently issued
forth, that Godwin and his Sons within five days depart the Land. He who
perceav'd now his numbers to diminish, readily obeyed, and with his Wife and
three Sons, Tosti, Swane, and Gyrtha, with as much treasure as their Ship could
carry, embarking at Thorney, sailed into Flanders to Earl Baldwin, whose
Daughter Judith Tosti had married: for Wulnod his fourth Son was then hostage
to the King in Normandy; his other two, Harold and Leoswin, taking Ship at
Bristow, in a Vessel that lay ready there belonging to Swane, passed into
Ireland. King Edward persueing his displeasure, divorced his Wife Edith Earl
Godwins Daughter, sending her despoiled of all her Ornaments to Warewel with
one waiting Maid, to be kept in custody by his Sister the Abbess there. His
reason of so doing was as harsh as his Malms.
act, that she only, while her nearest relations were in banishment, might not,
though innocent, enjoy ease at home. After this, William Duke of Normandy with
a great number of followers coming into England, was by King Edward honorably
entertained and led about the Cities, and Castles, as it were to show him what
ere long was to be his own (though at that time, says Ingulf, no mention
thereof passed between them) then after some time of his abode here, presented
richly and dismissed, he returned home. The next year Queen Emma died, and was
buried at Winchester. The Chronicle attributed Sim. Dun.
to John Bromton a Yorkshire Abbot, but rather of some nameless Author living
under Edward the 3d. or later, reports that the year before, by Robert the
Archbishop she was accused both of consenting to the Death of her Son Alfred,
and of prepareing poison for Edward also; lastly of too much familiarity with
Alwin Bishop of Winchester; that to approve her innocence, praying overnight
to St. Swithun, she offered to pass blindfold between certain Plow-shares red
hot, according to the Ordalian Law, which without harm she performed; that the
King thereupon received her to honor, and from her and the Bishop, penance for
his credulity; that the Archbishop ashamed of his accusation fled out of
England: which besides the silence of antienter Authors (for the Bishop fled
not till a year after) brings the whole story into suspicion, in this more
probable, if it can be proov'd, that in memory of this deliverance from the
nine burning Plow-shares, Queen Emma gave to the Abbey of St. Swithune nine
Manors, and Bishop Alwin other nine. About this time Griffin Prince of
South Wales wasted Herefordshire; to oppose whom the people of that Country
with many Normans, garrisond in the Castle of Hereford, went out in Arms, but
were put to the worse, many slain, and much booty driven away by the Welsh.
Soon after which, Harold and Leofwin, Sons of Godwin, coming into Severn with
many Ships, in the Confines of Somerset and Dorset-shire, spoiled many
Villages, and resisted by those of Somerset and Devonshire, slew in fight more
then 30 of their principal men, many of the common sort, and returned with much
booty to their Fleet. King Malms.
Edward on the other side made ready above 60 Ships at Sandwich well stored
with men and provision, under the conduct of Odo and Radulf two of his Norman
Kindred, enjoining them to find out Godwin, whom he heard to be at Sea. To
quick'n them, he himself lay on ship-broad, oft-times watched and sailed up and
down in search of those Pirates. But Godwin, whether in a mist, or by other
accident, passing by them, arrived in another part of Kent, and dispersing
secret messengers abroad, by fair words allured the chief men of Kent, Sussex,
Surrey, and Essex to his party; which news coming to the Kings fleet at
Sandwich, they hasted to find him out; but missing of him again, came up
without effect to London. Godwin advertisd of this, forthwith sailed to the I Will
of Wight; where at length his two sons Harold and Leofwin finding him, with
their united Navy lay on the coast, forbearing other hostility then to furnish
themselves with fresh victual from Land as they needed. Thence as one fleet
they set forward to Sandwich, using all fair means by the way to increase their
numbers both of Mariners and Soldiers. The King then at London, startled at
these tidings, gave speedy order to raise Forces in all parts which had not
revolted from him; but now too late, for Godwin within a few days after with
his Ships or Galleys came up the River Thames to Southwark, and till the tide
returned had conference with the Londoners; whom by fair speeches, for he was
held a good Speaker in those times, he brought to his bent. The tide returning,
and none upon the Bridge hindering, he rowed up in his Galleys along the South
bank; where his Landarmy, now come to him, in array of battle stood on the
shore, then turning toward the North side of the River, where the Kings Galleys
lay in some readiness, and Landforces also not far off, he made show as
offering to fight; but they understood one another, and the soldiers on either
side soon declared their resolution not to fight English against English. Thence
coming to treaty, the King and the Earl reconciled, both armies were dissolved,
Godwin and his sons restored to their former dignities, except Swane, who
touched in conscience for the slaughter of Beorn his kinsman, was gone
barefoot to Jerusalem, and returning home, died by sickness or Saracens in
Lycia; his wife Edith, Godwins daughter, King Edward took to him again,
dignified as before. Then were the Normans, who had done many unjust things
under the Kings authority, and given him ill counsel against his people,
banished the Realm, some of them not blameable permitted to stay. Robert
Archbishop of Canterbury, William of London, Vlf of Lincoln, all Normans,
hardly escaping with their followers, got to Sea. The Archbishop went with his
complaint to Rome; but returning, died in Normandy at the same Monastery from
whence he came. Osbern and Hugh surrendered their Castles, and by permission of
Leofric passed through his Counties with their Normans to Macbeth King of
Scotland. The year following Rhese Sim. Dun.
brother to Griffin, Prince of South Wales, who by inrodes had done much damage
to the English taken at Bulendun, was put to death by the Kings appointment,
and his head brought to him at Gloucester. The same year at Winchester on the
second holy day of Easter, Earl Godwin sitting with the King at table, sunk
down suddenly in his seat as dead: his three sons Harold, Tosti, and Gyrtha,
forthwith carried him into the Kings Chamber, hoping he might revive: but the
malady had so seized him, that the fifth day after he expired. The Normans who
hated Godwin give out, says Malmsbury, that mention happ'ning to be made of
Elfred, and the King thereat looking sowerly upon Godwin, he to vindicate
himself, uttered these words, Thou, O King, at every mention made of thy
brother Elsred, look frowningly upon me: but let God not suffer me to
swallow this morsel, if I be guilty of ought done against his life or thy
advantage; that after these words, choked with the morsel taken, he sunk down
and recovered not. His first wife was the sister of Cannute, a woman of much
infamy for the trade she drove of buying up English Youths and Maids to sell in
Denmark, whereof she made great gain; but ere long was struck with thunder,
and died. The year ensuing, Siward Earl of Sim. Dun.
Northumberland, with a great number of horse and foot, attended also by a
strong fleet at the Kings appointment, made an expedition into Scotland,
vanquished the Tyrant Macbeth, slaying many thousands of Scots with those
Normans that went thither, and placed Malcolm Son of the Cumbrian King in his
stead; yet not without loss of his own Son, and many other both English and
Danes. Told of his Sons Death, Huntingd.
he asked whether he received his Deaths wound before or behind? when it was
answered before, I am glad, says he; and should not else have thought him,
though my Son, worthy of Burial. In the mean while King Edward being without
Issue to succeed him, sent Aldred Bishop of Winchester with great presents to
the Emperor, entreating him to prevail with the King of Hungary, that Edward
the remaining Son of his Brother Edmund Ironside, might be sent into England.
Siward but one year surviving Sim. Dun.
his great Victory, died at York; reported by Huntingdon a man of Giant-like
stature, and by his own demeanor at point of Death manifested, of a rough and
mere souldierly mind. For much disdaining to die in bed by a disease, not in
the field fighting with his enemies, he caused himself completely armed, and
weapon'd with battel-ax and shield to be set in a chair, whether to fight with
death, if he could be so vain, or to meet him (when far other weapons and
preparations were needful) in a Martial bravery; but true fortitude glories not
in the feats of War, as they are such, but as they serve to end War soonest by
a victorious Peace. His Earldom the King bestowed on Tosti the Son of Earl
Godwin: and soon after in a Convention held at London, banished without visible
cause, Huntigdon says for treason, Algar the Son of Leofric; who passing into
Ireland, soon returned with eighteen ships to Griffin Prince of South Wales,
requesting his aid against King Edward. He assembling his Powers, entered with
him into Hereford-shire; whom Radulf a timorous Captain, Son to the Kings
Sister, not by Eustace, but a former husband, met two miles distant from
Hereford; and having horsed the English who knew better to fight on foot,
without stroke he with his French and Normans beginning to fly, taught the
English by his example. Griffin and Algar following the chase, slew many,
wounded more, entered Hereford, slew seven Canons defending the Minster, burnt
the Monastery and Relics, then the City; killing some, leading captive
others of the Citizens, returned with great spoils; whereof King Edward having
notice, gathered a great Army at Gloucester under the conduct of Harold now Earl
of Kent; who strenuously pursuing Griffin, entered Wales, and encamped beyond
Straddale. But the enemy flying before him farther into the Country, leaving
there the greater part of his Army with such as had charge to fight, if
occasion were offered, with the rest he returned, and fortified Hereford with a
wall and gates. Mean while Griffin and Algar dreading the diligence of Harold,
after many messages to and fro, concluded a Peace with him. Algar discharging
his fleet with pay at West Chester, came to the King, and was restored to his
Earldom. But Griffin with breach of faith, the next year set upon Sim. Dun.
Leofgar the Bishop of Hereford and his Clerks then at a place called Glastbrig
with Agelnoth Vicount of the shire, and slew them; but Leofric, Harold, and
King Edward by force, as is likeliest, though it be not said how, reduced him
to Peace. The next year Sim. Dun.
Edward Son of Edmund Ironside, for whom his Uncle King Edward had sent to the
Emperor, came out of Hungary, designed Successor to the Crown; but within a
few days after his coming died at London, leaving behind him Edgar Atheling his
Son, Margaret and Christina his Daughters. About the same time also died Earl
Leofric in a good old age, a man of no less virtue then power in his time,
religious, prudent, and faithful to his Country, happily wedded to Godiva a
woman of great praise. His Son Algar found less favor with King Edward, again
banished the year after Sim. Dun.
his Fathers death; but he again by the aid of Griffin and a fleet from Norway,
maugre the King, soon recovered his Earldom. The next year Malcolm Sim. Dun.
King of Scots coming to visit King Edward, was brought on his way by Tosti the
Northumbrian Earl, to whom he swore brotherhood: yet the next year Sim. Dun.
but one, while Tosti was gone to Rome with Aldred Archbishop of York for his
Pall, this sworn brother taking advantage of his absence, roughly harrass'd
Northumberland. The year passing to an end without other matter of moment, save
the frequent inrodes and robberies of Griffin, whom no bonds of faith could
restrain, King Edward sent against him after Christmas Harold now Duke of
West Saxons Sim. Dun.
with no great body of Horse from Gloucester, where he then kept his Court, whose
coming heard of, Griffin not daring to abide, nor in any part of his Land
holding himself secure, escaped hardly by Sea, ere Harold coming to Rudeland,
burnt his Palace and Ships there, returning to Gloucester the same day: But by the
middle Sim. Dun.
of May setting out with a fleet from Bristow, he sailed about the most part of
Wales, and met by his brother Tosti with many Troops of Horse, as the King had
appointed, began to waste the Country; but the Welsh giving pledges, yielded
themselves, promised to become tributary, and banish Griffin their Prince; who
lurking somewhere, was the next year taken and Sim. Dun.
slain by Griffin Prince of North Wales; his head with the head and tackle of
his Ship sent to Harold, by him to the King, who of his gentleness made
Blechgent and Rithwallon or Rivallon his two Brothers Princes in his stead;
they to Harold in behalf of the King swore fealty and tribute. Yet the next
year Sim. Dun. Camden.
Harold having built a fair house at a place called Portascith in
Monmouth-shire, and stored it with provision, that the King might lodge there
in time of hunting, Caradoc the Son of Griffin slain the year before, came with
a number of men, slew all he found there, and took away the provision. Soon
after which the Northumbrians in a tumult at York, beset the Palace of Tosti
their Earl, slew more then 200 of his Soldiers and Servants, pillaged his
Treasure, and put him to fly for his life. The cause of this insurrection they
alleged to be, for that the Queen Edith had commanded in her Brother Tosti's
behalf, Gospatric a noble man of that Country to be treacherously slain in the
Kings Court; and that Tosti himself the year before with like treachery had
caused to be slain in his Chamber Gamel and Vls two other of their noble men,
besides his intolerable exactions and oppressions. Then in a manner the whole
Country coming up to complain of their grievances, met with Harold at
Northampton, whom the King at Tosti's request had sent to pacify the
Northumbrians; but they laying open the cruelty of his Government, and their own
birthright of freedom not to endure the tyranny of any Governor whatsoever,
with absolute refusal to admit him again, and Harold hearing reason, all the
accomplices of Tosti were expelled the Earldom. He himself banished the Realm,
went in Flanders; Morcar the Son of Algar made Earl in his stead. Huntingdon
tells another cause of Tosti's banishment, that one day at Windsor, while
Harold reached the Cup to King Edward, Tosti envying to see his younger Brother
in greater favor then himself, could not forbear to run furiously upon him,
and catching hold of his Hair, the scuflle was soon parted by other attendants
rushing between, and Tosti forbidd'n the Court. He with continued fury rideing
to Hereford, where Harold had many Servants, preparing an entertainment for the
King, came to the House and set upon them with his followers; then lopping off
Hands, Arms, Legs of some, Heads of others, threw them into Butts of Wine,
Mead, or Ale, which were laid in for the Kings drinking: and at his going away
charged them to send him this word, that of other fresh meats he might bring
with him to his Farm what he pleased, but of Sowce he should find plenty
provided ready for him: that for this barbarous Act the King pronounced him
banished; that the Northumbrians taking advantage at the Kings displeasure and
sentence against him, rose also to be revenged of his cruelties done to
themselves; but this no way agrees, for why then should Harold or the King so
much labor with the Northumbrians to re-admit him, if he were a banished man
for his Crimes done before? About this time it happ'nd that Harold putting to
Malms.
Sea one day for his pleasure, in a Fisher Boat, from his Manor at Boseham in
Sussex, caught with a Tempest too far off land, was carried into Normandy; and
by the Earl of Pontiew, on whose Coast he was driven, at his own request
brought to Duke William, who entertaining him with great courtesy, so far won
him, as to promise the Duke by Oath of his own accord, not only the Castle of
Dover then in his tenure, but the Kingdom also after King Edwards Death to his
utmost endeavor, thereupon betrothing the Dukes Daughter then too young for
marriage, and departing richly presented. Others say, that King Edward himself
after the Death of Edward his Nephew, sent Harold thither, on purpose to
acquaint Duke William with his intention to bequeath him his Kingdom: but
Malmsbury accounts the former story to be the truer. Ingulf writes, that King
Edward now grown old, and perceaving Edgar Leges Ed. Conf. Tit. Lex Noricor.
his Nephew both in body and mind unfit to govern, especially against the pride
and insolence of Godwins Sons, who would never obey him; Duke William on the
other side of high merit, and his Kinsman by the Mother, had sent Robert
Archbishop of Canterbury, to acquaint the Duke of his purpose, not long before
Harold came thither. The former part may be true, that King Edward upon such
considerations had sent one or other; but Archbishop Robert was fled the land,
and dead many years before. Eadmer and Simeon write, that Harold went of his
own accord into Normandy, by the Kings permission or connivence, to get free
his Brother Wulnod and Nephew Hacun the Son of Swane, whom the King had taken
hostages of Godwin and sent into Normandy; that King Edward foretold Harold,
his journey thither would be to the detriment of all England and his own
reproach; that Duke William then acquainted Harold, how Edward ere his coming
to the Crown had promisd, if ever he attained it, to leave Duke William
Successor after him. Last of these Matthew Paris writes, that Harold to get free
of Duke William, affirmed his coming thither not to have been by accident or
force of Tempest, but on set purpose, in that private manner to enter with him
into secret confederacy; so variously are these things reported. After this
King Edward Sim. Dun.
grew sickly, yet as he was able kept his Christmas at London, and was at the
Dedication of St. Peter's Church in Westminster, which he had rebuilt; but on
the Eve of Epiphanie, or Twelftide, deceased much lamented, and in the Church
was Entoomb'd. That he was harmless and simple, is conjecturd by his words in
anger to a Peasant who had crossed his Game (for with Hunting and Hawking he
was much delighted) by God and Gods Mother, said he, I shall do you as shrewd
a turn if I can; observing that Law-Maxim, the best of all his Successors, that
the King of England can do no wrong. The softness of his Nature gave growth to
factions of those about him, Normans especially and English; these complaining
that Robert the Archbishop was a sower of dissension between the King and his
people, a traducer of the English; the other side, that Godwin and his Sons
bore themselves arrogantly and proudly toward the King, usurping to themselves
equal share in the Government; oft-times making sport with his simplicity,
that through Huntingd.
their power in the land, they made no scruple to kill men of whose inheritance
they took a likeing, and so to take possession. The truth is, that Godwin and
his Sons did many things boistrously and violently, much against the Kings
mind; which not able to resist, he had, as some say, his Wife Edith Godwins
Daughter in such aversation, as in bed never to have touched her; whether for
this cause or mistak'n Chastity, not commendable; to enquire further is not
material. His Laws held good and just, and long after desired by the English of
their Norman Kings, are yet extant. He is said to be at Table not excessive, at
Festivals nothing puffed up with the costly Robes he wore, which his Queen with
curious Art had woven for him in Gold. He was full of Alms-deeds, and exhorted
the Monks to like Charity. He is said to be the first of English Kings that
cured the Disease called thence the Kings Evil; yet Malmsbury blames them who
attribute that Cure to his Royalty, not to his Sanctity; said also to have
cured certain blind men with the water wherein he had washed his hands. A
little before his Death, lying speechless two days, the third day after a deep
sleep, he was heard to pray, that if it were a true Vision, not an Illusion
which he had seen, God would give him strength to utter it, otherwise not. Then
he related how he had seen two devout Monks, whom he knew in Normandy, to have
lived and died well, who appearing told him they were sent Messengers from God
to foretell, that because the great ones of England, Dukes, Lords, Bishops, and
Abbots, were not Ministers of God but of the Devil, God had deliverd the Land
to their Enemies; and when he desired that he might reveal this Vision, to the
end they might repent, it was answered; they neither will repent, neither will
God pardon them; at this relation others trembling, Stigand the Simonious
Archbishop, whom Edward much to blame had sufferd many years to sit Primate in
the Church, is said to have laugh't, as at the feavourish Dream of a doteing
old man; but the event proved it true.

Harold Son of Earl Godwin.
HArold, whether by King Edward a little before Hoved. Florent. his Death
ordained Successor to the Crown, as Simeon of Durham, and others affirm; or by
the prevalence of his faction, excluding Edgar the right Heir, Grandchild to
Edmund Ironside, as Malmsbury and Huntingdon agree, no sooner was the Funeral
of King Edward ended, but on the same day was elected and Crowned King: and no
sooner placed in the Throne, but began to frame himself by all manner of
compliances to gain affection, endeavored to make good Laws, repealed bad,
became a great Patron to Church and Churchmen, courteous and affable to all
reputed good, a hater of evil doers, charged all his Officers to punish
Thieves, Robbers, and all disturbers of the peace, while he himself by Sea and
Land labourd in the defense of his Country: so good an actor is ambition. In
the mean while a blazing Star, 7 Mornings together, about the end of April, was
seen to stream terribly, not only over England, but other parts of the World;
foretelling here, as was thought, the great changes approaching: plainliest
prognosticated by Elmer a Monk of Malmsbury, who could not foresee, when time
was, the breaking of his own Legs for soaring too high, he in his youth
strangely aspiring, had made and fitted Wings to his Hands and Feet; with these
on the top of a Tower, spread out to gather air, he flew more then a Furlong;
but the wind being too high, came fluttering down, to the maiming of all his
Limbs; yet so conceited of his Art, that he attributed the cause of his fall to
the want of a Tail, as Birds have, which he forgot to make to his hinder parts.
This story, though seeming otherwise too light in the midst of a sad narration,
yet for the strangness thereof, I thought worthy anough the placeing as I found
it placed in my Author. But to digress no farther, Tosti the Kings Brother
coming from Flanders, full of envy at his younger Brothers advancement to the
Crown, resolved what he might to trouble his Reign; forcing therefore them of
Wight I Will to contribution, he sailed thence to Sandwich, committing Piracies on
the Coast between. Harold then residing at London, with a great number of Ships
drawn together, and of Horse Troops by Land, prepares in person for Sandwich:
whereof Tosti having notice, directs his course with 60 Ships toward Lindsey,
Malms.
taking with him all the Seamen he found, willing or unwilling: where he burnt
many Villages, and slew many of the Inhabitants; but Edwin the Mercian Duke,
and Morcar his Brother, the Northumbrian Earl, with their Forces on either side,
soon drove him out of the Country. Who thence betook him to Malcolm the
Scottish King, and with him abode the whole Summer. About the same time Duke
William sending Ambassadors to admonish Harold of his promise and Oath, to
assist him in his Plea to the Kingdom, he made answer, that by the death of his
Daughter betrothed to him on that condition, he was absolved of his Oath, or
not Dead, he could not take her now an outlandish woman, Eadmer.
without consent of the Realm; that it was presumptuously done and not to be
persisted in, if without consent or knowledge of the States, he had sworn away
the right of the Kingdom; that what he swore was to gain his liberty, being in
a manner then his Prisner; that it was unreasonable in the Duke to require or
expect of him the foregoing of a Kingdom, conferred upon him with universal
favor and acclamation of the people: to this flat denial he added contempt,
sending the Messengers back, says Matthew Paris, on maimed Horses. The Duke
thus contemptuously put off, addresses himself to the Pope, setting forth the
Justice of his cause, which Harold, whether through haughtiness of mind, or
distrust, or that the ways to Rome were stopped, sought not to do. Duke William,
besides the promise and Oath of Harold, alleged that King Edward by the advice
of Seward, Godwin himself, and Stigand the Archbishop, had given him the right
of succession, and had sent him the Son and Nephew of Godwin, pledges of the
gift; the Pope sent to Duke William, after this demonstration of his right, a
consecrated Banner. Whereupon he having with great care and choice got an Army
of tall and stout Soldiers, under Captains of great skill and mature Age, came
in August to the Port of St. Valerie. Mean while Harold from London comes to
Sandwich, there expecting his Navy; which also coming, he sails to the I Will of
Wight; and having heard of Duke William's preparations and readiness to invade
him, kept good watch on the Coast, and Foot Forces every where in fit places to
guard the shore. But ere the middle of September, provision failing when it was
most needed, both Fleet and Army return home. When on a sudden, Harold Malms.
Matthew Paris.
Harvager King of Norway, with a Navy of more then 500 great Ships, (others
less'n them by two hunderd, others augment them to a thousand) appears at the
mouth of Tine; to whom Earl Tosti with his Ships came as was agreed between
them; whence both uniting, set sail with all speed and enterd the River Humber.
Thence turning into Ouse, as far as Rical, landed; and won York by assault. At
these tideings Harold with all his power hasts thetherward; but ere his coming,
Edwin and Morcar at Fulford by York, on the North side of Ouse, about the
Feast of St. Matthew had given them Battle; successfully at first, but overborn
at length with numbers; and forced to turn their backs, more of them perished in
the River, then in the Fight. The Norwegians taking with them 500 Hostages out
of York, and leaving there 150 of their own, retired to their Ships. But the
fifth day after, King Harold with a great and well appointed Army, coming to
York, and at Stamford-Bridge, or Battell-Bridge on Darwent, Camd.
assailing the Norwegians, after much bloodshed on both sides, cut off the
greatest part of them with Harfager their King, and Tosti his own Brother. But
Olave the Kings Son, and Paul Earl of Orkney, left with many Soldiers to guard
the Ships, surrendering themselves with Hostages and Oath given never to return
as Enemies, he sufferd freely to depart with 20 Ships and the small remnant of
their Army. One man of the Norwegians is not to be forgott'n, who with
incredible valor Malms.
keeping the Bridge a long hour against the whole English Army, with his single
resistance delai'd their Victory; and scorning offered life, till in the end no
man dareing to graple with him, either dreaded as too strong, or contemned as
one desperate, he was at length shot dead with an Arrow; and by his fall op'nd
the passage of persuit to a complete Victory. Wherewith Harold lifted up in
mind, and forgetting now his former shows of popularitie, defrauded his
Soldiers their due and well deserved share of the spoils. While these things
thus past in Northumberland, Duke William lay still at St. Valerie; his Ships
were ready but the wind served not for many days; which put the Souldierie
into much discouragement and murmur, taking this for an unlucky sign of their
success; at last the wind came favorable, the Duke first under sail awaited
the rest at Anchor, till all coming forth, the whole Fleet of 900 Ships with a
prosperous gale arrived at Hastings. At his Sim. Dun.
going out of the Boat by a slip falling on his hands, to correct the Omen, a
Soldier standing by said aloud, that their Duke had taken possession of
England. Landed, he restrein'd his Army from wast and spoil, saying, that they
ought to spare what was their own. But these are things related of Alexander and
Caesar, and I doubt thence borrowed by the Monks to inlay their story. The Duke
for 15 days after landing kept his men quiet within the Camp, having taken the
Castle of Hastings, or built a Fortress there. Harold secure the while and
proud of his new Victory, thought all his Enemies now under foot: but sitting
jollily at dinner, news is brought him, that Duke William of Normandy with a
great multitude of Horse and Foot, Slingers and Archers, besides other choice
Auxiliaries which he had hired in France, was arrived at Pevensey. Harold who
had expected him all the Summer, but not so late in the year as now it was, for
it was October; with his Forces much diminish't after two sore conflicts and
the departing of many others from him discontented, in great have marches to
London. Thence not tarrying for supplies which were on their way toward him,
hurries into Sussex (for he was always in have since the day of his Coronation)
and ere the third part of his Army could be well put in order, finds the Duke
about 9 mile from Hastings, and now drawing nigh, sent spies before him to
survey the strength and number of his Enemies: them, discoverd such, the Duke
causing to be led about, and after well filled with meat and drink sent back.
They not over-wise, brought word that the Dukes Army were most of them Priests;
for they saw their faces all over shav'n; the English then useing to let grow on
their upper-lip large Mustachio's, as did anciently the Britans. The King
laughing answered, that they were not Priests, but valiant and hardy Soldiers.
Therefore said Girtha his Brother, a youth of noble courage and understanding
above his Age, Forbear thou thy self to fight, who art obnoxious to Duke
William by Oath, let us unsworn undergo the hazard of Battle, who may justly
fight in the defense of our Country; thou reserved to fitter time, may either
reunite us flying, or revenge us dead. The King not hark'ning to this, least it
might seem to argue fear in him or a bad cause, with like resolution rejected
the offers of Duke William sent to him by a Monk before the Battle, with this
only answer hastily deliverd, let God judge between us. The offers were these,
that Harold would either lay down the Scepter, or hold it of him, or try his
title with him by single Combat in the sight of both Armies, or referr it to
the Pope. These rejected, both sides prepared to fight the next morning, the
English from singing and drinking all night, the Normans from confession of
their sins and communion of the host. The English were in a streit
disadvantagious place, so that many discouraged with their ill ordering, scarce
having room where to stand, slipped away before the onset, the rest in close
order with their Battel-Axes and Shields, made an impenetrable Squadron: the
King himself with his Brothers on foot stood by the Royal Standard, wherein the
figure of a man fighting was inwov'n with gold and precious Stones. The Norman
Foot, most Bowmen, made the foremost Front, on either side Wings of Horse
somewhat behind. The Duke Arming, and his Corslet given him on the wrong side,
said pleasantly, the strength of my Dukedom will be turned now into a Kingdom.
Then the whole Army singing the Song of Rowland, the remembrance of whose
exploits might hart'n them, imploring lastly Divine help, the Battle began; and
was fought sorely on either side; but the main body of English Foot by no means
would be brok'n, till the Duke causing his men to feign flight, drew them out
with desire of pursuit into open disorder, then turned suddenly upon them so
routed by themselves, which wrought their overthrow; yet so they died not
unmanfully, but turning often upon their Enemies, by the advantage of an upper
ground, beat them down by heaps, and filled up a great Ditch with their
Carcasses. Thus hung the Victory wavering on either side, from the third hour
of day to Evening; when Harold having maintained the fight with unspeakable
courage and personal valor, shot into the head with an Arrow, fell at length,
and left his Soldiers without heart longer to withstand the unwearied Enemy.
With Harold fell also his two Brothers, Leofwin, and Girtha, with them greatest
part of the English Nobility. His Body lying dead a Knight or Soldier wounding
on the thigh, was by the Duke presently turned out of military service. Of
Normans and French were slain no small number; the Duke himself also that day
not a little hazarded his person, having had three choice Horses killed under
him. Victory obtained, and his dead carefully buried, the English also by
permission, he sent the body of Harold to his mother without ransom, though she
offered very much to redeem it, which having received, she buried at Waltham, in
a Church built there by Harold. In the mean while, Edwin and Morcar, who had
withdrawn themselves from Harold, hearing of his Death, came to London; sending
Aldgith the Queen their Sister with all speed to West-Chester. Aldred Archbishop
of York, and many of the Nobles, with the Londoners would have set up Edgar the
right Heir, and prepared themselves to fight for him; but Morcar and Edwin not
likeing the choice, who each of them expected to have been chos'n before him,
withdrew their Forces and returned home. Duke William contrary to his former
Sim. Dun.
resolution, if Florent of Worster, and they who follow him say true, wasting,
burning, and slaying all in his way, or rather, as says Malmsbury, not in
hostile but in regal manner came up to London, met at Barcham by Edgar, with
the Nobles, Bishops, Citizens, and at length Edwin and Morcar, who all
submitted to him, gave hostages, and swore fidelity, he to them promised peace
and defense; yet permitted his men the while to burn and make prey. Coming to
London with all his Army, he was on Christmas day sollemly Crowned in the
great Church at Westminster, by Aldred Archbishop of York, having first given
his Oath at the Altar in presence of all the people, to defend the Church, well
govern the people, maintain right Law; prohibit rapine and unjust judgment.
Thus the English, while they agreed not about the choice of their native King,
were constrein'd to take the Yoke of an outlandish Conqueror. With what minds
and by what course of life they had fitted themselves for this servitude,
William of Malmsbury spares not to lay open. Not a few years before the Normans
came, the Clergy, though in Edward the Confessors days, had lost all good
literature and Religion, scarce able to read and understand their Latin Service:
he was a miracle to others who knew his Grammar. The Monks went clad in fine
stuffs, and made no difference what they eat; which though in it self no fault,
yet to their Consciences was irreligious. The great men given to gluttony and
dissolute life, made a prey of the common people, abuseing their Daughters whom
they had in service, then turning them off to the Stews, the meaner sort
tippling together night and day, spent all they had in Drunk'ness, attended with
other Vices which effeminate men's minds. Whence it came to pass, that carried
on with fury and rashness more then any true fortitude or skill of War, they
gave to William their Conqueror so easy a Conquest. Not but that some few of
all sorts were much better among them; but such was the generality. And as the
long suffering of God permits bad men to enjoy prosperous days with the good,
so his severity often times exempts not good men from their share in evil times
with the bad.

If these were the Causes of such misery and thraldom to those our Ancestors,
with what better close can be concluded, then here in fit season to remember
this Age in the midst of her security, to fear from like Vices without
amendment the Revolutions of like Calamities.

FINIS.
AN INDEX Of all the Chief Persons and material passages contained in the
foregoing HISTORY.
A.
ADda succeeds his Father Ida in the Kingdom of Bernicia. p. 127. Adminius the
Son of Cunobeline banished his Country, flies to the Emperor Caligula, and
stirs him up against it. p. 51. Aganippus a Gaulish King, marries Cordelia the
Daughter of King Leir. p. 20. Agricola Son of Severianus spreads the Pelagian
Doctrine in Britain. p. 104. Aidan a Scotch Bishop sent for by Oswald to settle
Religion. p. 155. he has his Episcopal Seat at Lindisfarne. ibid. he dies for
grief of the Murder of Oswin. p. 157. Alaric takes Rome from the Emperor
Honorius. p. 97. Alban of Verulam with others suffers Martyrdom under
Dioclesian. p. 88. Albanact one of the three Sons of Brutus, has Albania, now
Scotland, for his share in the Kingdom. p. 14. Albion the ancient name of this
Island. p. 4, 5. whence derived. ibid. Albina said to be the Eldest of
Dioclesians 50 Daughters. p. 5. from her the name Albion derived. ibid. Alcled
slaying Ethelwald usurps the Kingdom of the Northumbrians. p. 177. Aldfrid
recalled from Ireland, succeeds his Brother Ecfrid in the Northumbrian Kingdom.
p. 168. he leaves Osred a Child to succeed him. p. 169. Aldulf the Nephew of
Ethelwald succeeds King of the East Angles. p. 187. Alectus treacherously slays
his friend Carausius to get the Dominion. p. 87. is overthrown by Asclepiodotus
and slain. ibid. Alemannus reported one of the four Sons of Histion, descended
from Japhet, and of whom the Alemanni or Germans. p. 5. Alfage Archbishop of
Canterbury inhumanly used by the Danes. p. 256. killed outright by Thrum a
Dane, in commiseration of his misery. ibid. Alfred the fourth Son of Ethelwolf
and successor of his Brother Ethelred, encounters the Danes at Wilton. p. 204.
he gives Battle to the whole Danish power at Edinton, and totally routing them
brings them to terms. p. 206. 207. he is said to have bestowed the East Angles
upon Gytro a Danish King who had been lately baptized. p. 207. a long tedious
War afterward maintained between him and the Danes, p. 209. 210. etc. he dies
in the 30th year of his Reign, and is buried at Winchester. p. 212. his noble
Character. p. 213. 214. Alfwold driving out Eardulf usurps the Kingdom of
Northumberland. p. 185. Algar Earl of Howland, now Holland, Morcard Lord of
Brunne, and Osgot Governor of Lincoln, slaughter a great multitude of the
Danes in Battle, with three of their Kings. p. 201. overpowr'd with numbers
and drawn into a snare, Algar dies valiantly, fighting. ibid. Algar the Son of
Leofric banished by King Edward, joins with Griffin Prince of South Wales, p.
291. 292. unable to withstand Harold Earl of Kent, he submits to the King and
is restored. p. 292. banished again he recovers his Earldom by force. p. 293.
Alipius made Deputy of the British Province in the room of Martinus. p. 90.
Alla begins the Kingdom of Deira in the South-part of Northumberland. p. 127.
133. Alric King of Kent after Ethelbert the II. p. 177. with him dying, ends
the race of Hengist. p. 181. Ambrosius Aurelianus dreaded by Vortimer. p. 117.
defeats the Saxons in a memorable Battle. p. 118. uncertain whether the Son of
Constantine the Usurper, or the same with Merlin, and Son of a Roman Consul. p.
118. he succeeds Vortigern as Chief Monarch of the I Will. ibid. Anacletus the
friend of King Pandrasus, is taken in fight by Brutus. p. 9. he is forced by
Brutus to betray his own Countrymen. ibid. Andragius one in the Catalogue of
ancient British Kings. p. 28. Androgeus one of Lud's Sons has London assigned
him and Kent, p. 29. forsakes his claim to the Kingdom, and follows Caesar's
fortune. p. 51. Anlaf the Dane with his Army of Irish, and Constantine King of
Scotland, utterly discomfited by King Athelstan. p. 225. 226. etc. Anna
succeeds Sigebert in the Kingdom of the East Angles. p. 157. he is slain in War
by Penda the Mercian. p. 159. Antigonus the Brother of King Pandrasus, taken in
fight by Brutus. p. 9. Antoninus sent against the Caledonians by his Father
Severus. p. 84. after whose Death he takes hostages and departs to Rome. ibid.
Archigallo deposed for his Tyranny. p. 26. being restored by his Brother, he
becomes a new man and reigns worthily. p. 27. Archimailus, one in the number of
ancient British Kings. p. 28. Armorica in France peopled by Britans that fled
from the Saxons. p. 114. Arthur, the Victory at Badon-hill, by some ascribed to
him, which by others is attributed to Ambrose. p. 122. who he was, and whether
the Author of such famous Acts as are related of him. p. 122. 123. etc.
Arviragus engaging against Claudius, keeps up the Battle to a Victory, by
personating his slain Brother Guiderius. p. 54. Athelstan the Son of King
Edward the Elder by a Concubine, solemnly Crowned at Kingston upon Thames, p.
223. the Conspiracy of one Alfred and his accomplices against him discovered.
ibid. he gives his Sister Edgith to Sitric the Dane, but drives out Anlaf and
Guthferd out of their Kingdom. p. 224. the story of his dealing with his
Brother Edwin questioned as improbable. ibid. he over-throws a vast Army of
Scotch and Irish, under Anlaf and Constantine King of Scotland. p. 225. 226.
etc. he dies at Gloucester and is buried at Malmsbury. p. 228. his Character. p.
229. Assaracus a Trojan Prince, joins with Brutus against Pandrasus. p. 8.
Aulus Plautins sent against this Island by the Emperor Claudius p. 52. he
overthrows Caractacus and Togodumnus, ibid. is very much put to it by the
Britans. p. 53. sends to Claudius to come over, and joins with him. ibid.
leaves the Country quiet, and returns triumphant to Rome. p. 54. 55. Aurelius
Conanus a British King, one of the five that is said to have reigned toward the
beginning of the Saxon Heptarchie. p. 131. Austin with others sent over from
Rome to preach the Gospel to the Saxons. p. 138. he is received by King
Ethelbert who hears him in a great Assembly. p. 139. he is ordained Archbishop
of the English. p. 140. he has his seat at Canterbury. p. 141. he summons
together the British Bishops, requiring them to conform with him in points
wherein they differed. p. 142. upon their refusal he stirs up Ethelfrid against
them, to the slaughter of 1200 Monks. p. 144.
B.
BArdus, one of the first race of Kings fabled to have reigned in this Island.
p. 4. descended from Samothes. ibid. Beorn precedes Ethelred in the Kingdom of
the East Angles. p. 187. Bericus flying to Rome persuades the Emperor Claudius
to invade this Island. p. 51. Bernulf usurping the Kingdom of Mercia from
Keolwulf, is overthrown by Ecbert at Ellandune. p. 186. flying to the
East Angles is by them slain. ib. Berinus a Bishop sent by Pope Honorius
converts the West Saxons and their Kings to Christianity. p. 155. Birthric King
of the West Saxons after Kinwulf. p. 179. he secretly seeks the Life of Ecbert.
p. 183. is poisoned by a Cup which his Wife had prepared for another. p. 184.
Bladud the Son of Rudhuddibras builds Caerbadus or Bath. p. 17. Bleduno, one in
the number of the ancient British Kings. p. 28. Blegabedus his Excellency in
Music. p. 28. Boadicia the Wife of Prasutagus, together with her Daughters,
abused by the Roman Soldiers. p. 62. commands in Chief in the British Army
against the Romans. p. 65. vanquished by Suetonius, is thought to have poisoned
her self. p. 67. Bonosus a Britan by descent, endeavoring to make himself
Emperor, but vanquished by Probus, hangs himself. p. 84. 85. Brennus and
Belinus the Sons of Dunwallo Mulmutius contend about the Kingdom. p. 22. after
various conflicts they are reconciled by their Mother Conuvenna. p. 23. they
turn their united Forces into Foreign parts, but Belinus returns and reigns
long in Peace. p. 23. 24. Britain the History of the affairs thereof altogether
obscure and uncertain till the coming of Julius Caesar. p. 2. by whom first
peopled. p. 4. named first Samothea from Samothes, ibid. next Albion, and from
whence. p. 4. 5. Britans stoutly oppose Caesar at his landing in this Island.
p. 36. 37. they offer him terms of Peace. p. 38. their manner of fighting. p.
39. 40. they are defeated by Caesar and brought anew to terms of Peace. p. 40.
a sharp dispute between the Britans and the Romans, near the Stowr in Kent. p.
42. 43. their Nature and Customs. p. 48. 49. their cruel Massacre upon the
Romans. p. 64. they are acquitted of the Roman jurisdiction by the Emperor
Honorius, not able to defend them against their Enemies. p. 97. they again
supplicate Honorius for aid, who spares them a Roman Legion. p. 101. and again
at their renewed request a new supply. ibid. their submissive Letters to Aetius
the Roman Consul. p. 106. their Luxury and wickedness, and the corruption of
their Clergy. p. 107. 129. 130. their Embassy to the Saxons for their aid
against the Scots and Picts, with the Saxons answer. p. 110. 111. Miserably
harrass't by the Saxons whom they called in. p. 113. 114. routed by Kerdic. p.
120. by Kenric and Keaulin. p. 127. 133. by Cuthulf. p. 132. they totally
vanquish Keaulin. p. 134. they are put to flight by Kenwalk. p. 161. Britto,
named among the four Sons of Histion, sprung of Japhet, and from him the
Britans said to be derived. p. 5. Brutus, said to be descended from Aeneas a
Trojan Prince. p. 7. retiring into Greece after having unfortunately killed his
Father, he delivers his Countrymen from the Bondage of Pandrasus. p. 7. 8. etc.
marries Innogen the eldest Daughter of Pandrasus. p. 10. he lands upon a desert
Island called Leogicia, p. 10. where he consults the Oracle of Diana. p. 11.
meets with Corineus. p. 12. overcomes Goffarius Pictus. p. 12. 13. arrives in
this Island. p. 13. builds Troja Nova. p. 14. Brutus surnamed Greenshield,
succeeds Ebranc and gives Battle to Brunchildis. p. 16. Burhead holding of
Ethelwolf the Mercian Kingdom after Bertulf, reduces the North Welsh to
obedience. p. 194. he marries Ethelswida the Daughter of King Ethelwolf. p.
195. driven out of his Kingdom by the Danes, he flies to Rome, where dying he
is buried in the English School. p. 104. his Kingdom let out by the Danes to
Kelwulf. ibid.
C.
CAdwallon, see Kedwalla. Caesar, see Julius Caesar. Cajus Sidius Geta behaves
himself valiantly against the Britans. p. 53. Cajus Volusenus sent into Britain
by Caesar to make discovery of the Country and people. p. 34. Caligula a Roman
Emperor. p. 51. Camalodunum or Maldon the chief seat of Kymbeline. p. 51. made
a Roman Colony. p. 56. 62. 63. Camber one of the Sons of Brutus has allotted
to him Cambria or Wales. p. 14. Canute the Son of Swane, chosen King after his
Father's Death by the Danish Army and Fleet. p. 258. is driven back to his
Ships by Ethelred. p. 259. returns with a great Navy from Denmark accompanied
with Lachman King of Sweden, and Olav of Norway. p. 259. 260. after several
conflicts with Edmund, he at length divides the Kingdom with him by agreement.
p. 265. after Edmunds Death Reigns sole King. p. 267. he endeavors the
extirpation of the Saxon line. p. 267. he settles his Kingdom, and makes peace
with the Princes round about him. p. 268. he causes Edric, whose treason he had
made use of, to be slain, and his body to be thrown over the City Wall, etc.
ibid. he subdues Norway. p. 270. takes a Voyage to Rome, and offering there rich
gifts, vows amendment of life. ibid. he dies at Shaftsbury, and is buried at
Winchester. p. 271. his censure. p. 271. 272. Capis one in the Catalogue of the
Ancient Kings. p. 28. Capoirus another of the same number. p. 28. Caractacus
the youngest Son of Cunobeline, succeeds in the Kingdom. p. 51. is overthrown
by Aulus Plautius. p. 53. heads the Silures against the Romans. p. 56. 57. is
betrayed by Cartismandua, to whom he fled for refuge. p. 57. is sent to Rome.
ibid. his Speech to the Emperor. p. 58. by the braveness of his carriage he
obtains pardon for himself and all his Company. ibid. Carausius grown rich with
Piracy possesses himself of this Island. p. 86. he fortifies the Wall of
Severus. ibid. in the midst of the great preparations of Constantius Chlorus
against him, he is slain by his friend Alectus. p. 87. Carinus sent by his
Father Carus the Emperor to govern this Isle of Britain is overcome and slain
by Dioclesian. p. 85. Cartismandua Queen of the Brigantes, delivers Caractacus
bound to the Romans. p. 57. deserts her Husband Venutius, and gives both her
self and Kingdom to Vellocatus one of his Squires. p. 60. Carvilius a petty
King in Britain assaults the Roman Camp with three others. p. 46. Cassibelaun
one of the Sons of Heli, gains the Kingdom by common consent. p. 29. his
generosity to his Brothers Sons. ibid. he heads the Britans against Julius
Caesar and the Romans. p. 45. he is deserted by the Trinobantes, and why. p.
46. he yields to Caesar. p. 47. is reported to have had War with Androgeus,
dies, and is buried at York. ibid. Cataracta an ancient City in Yorkshire,
burnt by Arnred a Tyrant. Catellus an ancient British King. p. 28. Cerdic a
Saxon Prince lands at Cerdic shore, and overthrows the Britans. p. 120. defeats
their King Natanleod in a memorable Battle, ibid. founds the Kingdom of
West Saxons. p. 121. see Kerdic. Cherin an ancient British King. p. 28.
Christian Faith received in Britain by King Lucius. p. 79. said to have been
preached by Faganus and Deruvianus. p. 79. others say long before by Simon
Zelotes, or Joseph of Arimathaea. p. 80. upon what occasion preached to the
Saxons. p. 137. 138. Chrysanthus the Son of Marcianus a Bishop, made Deputy of
Britain by Theodosius. p. 93. Cingetorix a petty King in Britain, assaults the
Roman Camp. p. 46. is taken Prisoner by Caesar. p. 47. Claudius the Emperor is
persuaded by Bericus, though a Britan, to invade this Island. p. 51. he sends
Aulus Plautius hither with an Army. p. 52. he comes over himself and joins with
Plautius. p. 53. defeats the Britans in a set Battle, and takes Camalodunum, p.
54. he returns to Rome, leaving Plautius behind. ibid. he has excessive
honors decreed him by the Senate. ibid. Cliguellius an ancient British King.
p. 28. Clodius Albinus succeeds Pertinax in the Government of Britain for the
Romans. p. 81. he is vanquished and slain in a Battle against Septimius
Severus. p. 81. Coilus the Son of Marius leaves the Kingdom to Lucius. p. 79.
Coillus an ancient British King. p. 28. Comail and two other British Kings
slain by Keaulin and his Son. Cuthwin. p. 133. Comius of Arras sent by Caesar
to make a party among the Britans. p. 35. Constans of a Monk made a Caesar's
reduce, all Spain to his Father Constantius's Obedience. p. 95. displacing
Gerontius is opposed by him, and at last slain. ibid. Constantine the Son of
Constantius Chlorus, saluted Emperor after his Fathers Death. p. 88. 89. his
Mother said to be Helena the Daughter of Coilus a British Prince. p. 89. his
eldest Son of the same name, enjoys among other Provinces of the Empire this
Island also. ibid. a common Soldier of the same name saluted Emperor. p. 95.
by the valor of Oedebecus and Gerontius, he gains in France as far as Arles.
ibid. by the conduct of his Son Constans, and of Gerontius, he reduces all
Spain, ibid. Gerontius displac't by him calls in the Vandals against him. ibid.
beseig'd by Constantius Comes, he turns Priest, is afterward carried into
Italy, and put to Death. p. 96. Constantine the Son of Cador sharply inveighed
against by Gildas. p. 131. he is said to have murdered two young Princes of the
blood Royal. ibid. Constantine King of Scotland joining with the Danes and
Irish under Anlaf, is overthrown by Athelstan. p. 225. 226. Constantius Chlorus
sent against Carausius. p. 86. defeats Alectus, who is slain in the Battle. p.
87. is acknowledged by the Britans as their deliverer. p. 88. divides the
Empire with Galerius. ibid. dies at York. ibid. Constantius the Son of
Constantine overcomes Magnentius, who contested with him for the sole Empire.
p. 89. Cordeilla's sincere answer to her Father begets his displeasure. p. 18.
she is married to Aganippus a King in Gaul. ibid. she receives her Father,
rejected by his other Daughters, with most dutiful affection. p. 19. restores
him to his Crown, and Reigns after him. p. 20. is vanquished, deposed, and
imprisoned by her two Sister's Sons. ibid. Corineus a Trojan Commander, joins
Forces with Brutus. p. 12. slaies Imbertus. ibid. arrives with Brutus in this
Island. p. 13. Cornwall from him denominated falls to his Lot. p. 14. he
overcomes the Giant Goemagog. p. 14. Crida, the first of the Mercian Kingdom.
p. 133. Cuichelm the West Saxon sends Eumerus a Sword-man to assassin King
Edwin. p. 148. is baptized in Dorchester, but dies the same year. p. 155.
Cunedagius the Son of Regan deposes his Aunt Cordelia, p. 20. shares the
Kingdom with his Cousin Marganus, is invaded by him, meets him and overcomes
him. p. 20. Cuneglas a British King Reigns one of five a little before the
Saxons were settled. p. 131. Cunobeline, see Kymbeline. Cutha helps his Father
Keaulin against Ethelbert. p. 128. Cuthred King of West Saxons joins with
Ethelbald the Mercian, and gains a great victory over the Welsh, p. 174. he
has a fierce battle with Ethelbald the Mercian, which he not long survives, p.
175. a King of Kent of the same name. p. 185. Cuthulf the Brother of Keaulin
vanquisheth the Britains at Bedanford, and takes several Towns, p. 132.
Cuthwin, see Keaulin.
D.
DAnes first appear in the West, p. 179. they stay the Kings Gatherers of
Custom, ibid. landing at Lindisfarne in Yorkshire, they pillage that
Monastery, slay and captivate several both Friars and others, p. 181.
attempting to spoil another Monastery, they are cut off by the English, p. 182.
they make very great waste and havoc in Northumberland, p. 188. they waste
Shepey in Kent, and engage with Ecbert, near the River Carr, p. 191. they are
overthrown and put to flight by Ecbert, p. 192. their various success in the
reign of Ethelwolf, p. 192, 193, etc. many great battles between them and the
English in the reign of Ethelred with various fortune, p. 201, 202, etc. their
whole Army being defeated, they are brought to terms by King Alfred, p. 207. in
the same Kings reign several vast Fleets of Danes arrive with fresh supplies,
p. 208. a vast Army of them over-thrown by King Athelstan, p. 225. a massicre
committed upon them by the English in all parts of the Land in the reign of
King Ethelred, p. 249. Danius reckoned among the Ancient British Kings. p. 25.
Deruvianus, see Faganus. Dinothus Abbot of Bangor his Speech to Bishop Austin.
p. 143. Dioclesian supposed a King of Syria, and his 50 Daughters having (all
but one) murdered their Husbands, to have been driven upon this Island. p. 5.
Dis the first peopler of this Island, as some fabulously affirm, p. 9. the same
with Samothes. ibid. Donaldus said to have headed the Caledonians against
Septimius Severus. p. 84. Donaldus King of Scotland brought to hard conditions
by Osbert and Ella Kings of Northumberland. p. 196. Druids falsely alleged out
of Caesar to have forbidden the Britans to write their memorable deeds. p. 2.
Druis the third from Samothes fabulously written the ancientest King of this
Island. p. 4. Dunstane sent the Nobles to reprove King Edw. for his luxury, p.
233. banished by the King, and his Monastery rifled, p. 234. recalled by King
Edgar, ibid. his miraculous escape when the rest of the company were killed by
the fall of a house. p. 242. Dunwallo Mulmutius Son of Cloten King of Cornwall,
reduces the whole Island into a Monarchy, p. 21. establishes the Molmutin Laws.
p. 22. Durslus King of the Picts said to be slain by the joint Forces of the
Britans and Romans. p. 102.
E.
EAdbald after the death of his Father Ethelbert, falls back to Heathenism, p.
145. he runs distracted, but afterward returns to his right mind and faith, p.
146. by what means it happened. ibid. he gives his Sister Edelburga in marriage
to Edwin, ibid. he dies and leaves his Son Ercombert to succeed. p. 156.
Eadbert shares with his two Brothers in the Kingdom of Kent, after Victred, p.
170. his death, p. 174. Eadbert King of Northumberland after Kelwulf wars
against the Picts, p. 174. joins with Unust King of the Picts against the
Britans in Cumberland, p. 175, 176. forsakes his Crown for a Monks hood. p.
176. Eatbright, otherwise called Ethelbert, usurping the Kingdom of Kent, and
contending with Kenulph the Mercian, is taken prisoner. p. 182. Eadburga by
chance poisons her Husband Birthric with a cup which she had prepared for
another, p. 184. the choice proposed to her by Charles the Great to whom she
fled, ibid. he assigns her a rich Monastery to dwell in as Abbess, ibid.
detected of unchastity, she is expelled, and dies in beggary at Pavia. p. 185.
Eandred Son of Eardulf reigns 30 years King of Northumberland after Alfwold the
Usurper, p. 185. becomes tributary to Ecbert. p. 188. Eanfrid the Son of
Ethelfrid succeeds in the Kingdom of Bernicia. p. 154. Eardulf supposed to have
been slain by Ethelred is made King of the Northumbrians in York after Osbald,
p. 182. in a War raised against him by his people he gets the victory, p. 183.
is driven out of his Kingdom by Alswold. p. 185. East-Angle Kingdom by whom
erected. p. 121. East-Saxon Kingdom by whom hegun, p. 121. the people converted
by Mellitus, p. 142. they expel their Bishop and renounce their faith, p. 146.
are reconverted by means of Edwi. p. 159. Ebranc succeeds his Father Mempricius
in the Kingdom of Britain, p. 15. builds Caer-Ebranc now York, and other
places. ibid. Ecbert succeeds his Father Ercombert in the Kingdom of Kent, p.
163. dying, leaves a suspicion of having slain his Uncle's Sons Elbert and
Egelbright. p. 163. Ecbert of the West Saxon lineage, flies from Birthric's
suspicion to Offa, and thence into France, p. 183. after Birthric's decease is
recalled, and with general applause made King, ibid. he subdues the Britans of
Cornwall and beyond Severn, p. 186. overthrows Bernulf the Usurper of Mercia at
Ellandune or Wilton, ibid. the East Angles having slain Bernulf, yield to his
Sovereignty, ibid. drives Baldred King of Kent out of his Kingdom, and causes
both Kent and other Provinces to submit to his Scepter, p. 187. Withlaf of
Mercia becomes tributary to him, ibid. he gives the Danes battle by the River
Carr, p. 191. in another battle he puts to flight a great Army of them,
together with the Cornish men joining with them, p. 192. he dies, and is buried
at Winchester. ibid. Ecferth the Son of Offa the Mercian within four months
ends his Reign. p. 181, 182. Ecfrid Oswi's eldest Son succeeds him in the
Kingdom of Northumberland, p. 163. wins Lindsey from Wulfer the Mercian, ibid.
he wars against Ethelred the Brother of Wulfer, p. 166. he sends Bertus with an
Army to subdue Ireland, p. 167. marching against the Picts is cut off with most
of his Army, ib. his death revenged by Bertfrid a Northumbrian Captain. p. 170.
Edan a King of the Scots in Britain put to flight by Ethelfrid. p. 141. Edelard
King of the West Saxons after Ina molested with the Rebellion of his Kinsman
Oswald, p. 174. overcoming those troubles, dies in peace. ibid. Edgar the
Brother and Successor of Edwi in the English Monarchy, calls home Dunstan from
Banishment, p. 234. his peaceable and prosperous Reign, and his favor toward
the Monks, ibid. his strict observance of justice, and his care to secure the
Nation with a strong Fleet, p. 235. he is homag'd and rowed down the River Dee
by eight Kings, p. 236. his expostulation with Kened King of Scotland, p. 237.
he is cheated by the treacherous Duke Athelwold of Elflida, whom, avenging
himself upon the said Duke, he marries, p. 237, 238. attempting on the chastity
of a young Lady at Andover, he is pleasantly deceived by the mother, p. 239.
dying in the height of his glory, he is buried at Glaston-Abby. p. 236. Edgar
surnamed Atheling, his right and title to the Crown of England from his
Grandfather Edmund Ironside, p. 292. excluded by Harold Son of Earl Godwin. p.
299. Edilhere the Brother and Successor of Anna in the Kingdom of the
East Angles, slain in a battle against Oswi. p. 161. Edilwalk the South-Saxon
persuaded to Christianity by Wulfer. p. 164. Edmund crowned King of the
East Angles at Bury, p. 196. his whole Army put to flight by the Danes, he is
taken, bound to a stake, and shot with arrows, p. 201. Edmund the Brother and
Successor of Athelstane in the English Monarchy, frees Mercia, and takes
several Towns from the Danes, p. 230. he drives Anlaf and Suthfrid out of
Northumberland, and Dummail out of Cumberland, p. 231. the strange manner of
his death. p. 231, 232. Edmund surnamed Ironside, the Son of Ethelred, set up
by diverse of the Nobles against Canute, p. 262. in several Battles against the
Danes, he comes off for the most part victorious, p. 263, 264. at length
consents to divide the Kingdom with him, p. 265. his death thought to have been
violent, and not without Canute's consent. p. 266. Edred the third Brother and
Successor of Athelstane, with much ado reduces the Northumbrians, and puts an
end to that Kingdom, p. 232. dies in the flower of his age, and is buried at
Winchester. p. 233. Edric the Son of Edelwalk King of South Saxons slain by
Kedwalla the West Saxon. p. 165. Edric surnamed Streon advanced by King
Ethelred, marries his Daughter Elgiva, p. 254. he secretly murders two
Noblemen whom he had invited to his Lodging, p. 259. he practices against the
life of Prince Edmund, and revolts to the Danes, p. 260. his cunning devices to
hinder Edmund in the prosecution of his Victories against Canute, p. 263, 264.
is thought by some to have been the Contriver of King Edmunds murder, p. 266.
the Government of the Mercians conferred upon him, p. 268. he is put to death
by Canutus, and his head stuck upon a pole, and set upon the highest Tower in
London. p. 268. Edward the Elder Son and Successor of King Alfred, has War
with Ethelwald his Kinsman, who aspiring to the Crown, stirs up the Danes
against him, p. 115, 116. he proves successful and potent, diverse Princes and
great Commanders of the Danes submitting to him, p. 216, 217, etc. the King and
whole Nation of Scotland, with diverse other Frinces and people, do him homage
as their Sovereign, p. 221. he dies at Farendon, and is buried at Winchester.
p. 222. Edward surnamed the Younger, Edgar's Son by his first Wife Egelfleda,
is advanced to the Throne, p. 241. the contest in his Reign between the Monks
and secular Priests, each abetted by their several parties, p. 242. great
mischief done by the falling of a house where a general Council for deciding
the controversy was held, ibid. Edward inhumanely murdered by the treachery of
his stepmother Elfrida. p. 243. Edward Son of Edmund Ironside, Heir apparent
to the Crown, dies at London. p. 292. Edward surnamed the Confessor, the Son of
King Ethelred by Emma, after Hardecnute's death is crowned at Winchester, p.
280. he seizes on the Treasures of his mother Queen Emma, p. 281. he marries
Edith Earl Godwin's Daughter, ibid. he makes preparation against Magnus King of
Norway, but next year makes peace with Harold Harvager, ibid. he advances the
Normans in England, which proves of ill consequence, p. 283. he is opposed by
Earl Godwin in the Cause of Eustace of Boloign, banishes the Earl, and divorces
his Daughter whom he had married, p. 285, 286. entertains Duke William of
Normandy, p. 287. he sends Odo and Radulf with a Fleet against Godwin, and his
Sons exercising Piracy, p. 288. reconciliation at length made, he restores the
Earl, his Sons and Daughter, all to their former dignities, p. 289. he is said
to have designed Duke William of Normandy his Successor to the Crown, p. 296.
dies and is buried at Westminster, p. 297. his Character. p. 297, 298. Edwi the
Son and Successor of Edmund is crowned at Kingston, p. 233. he banisheth Bishop
Dunstan for reproving his wantonness with Algiva, and proves an enemy to all
Monks, p. 233, 234. the Mercians and Northumbrians revolt from him, and set up
his Brother Edgar, p. 234. with grief thereof he ends his days, and is buried
at Winchester. ibid. Edwin thrown out of the Kingdom of Deira by Ethelfrid, p.
133. 146. flying to Redwall the East-Angle for refuge, he is defended against
Ethelfrid, p. 147. he exceeds in power and extent of Dominion all before him,
p. 148. marries Edelburga the Sister of Eadbald, ibid. he is wounded by an
Assassin from Cuichelm, ibid. the strange relation of his Conversion to
Christianity, p. 149. 150. he persuades Eorpald the Son of Redwald to embrace
the Christian Faith, p. 153. he is slain in a Battle against Kedwalla. ibid.
Edwin Duke of the Mercians, see Morcar. Elanius reckoned in the number of
ancient British Kings. p. 25. Eldadus. p. 28. Eldol. ibid. Eledancus. ibid.
Elfled the Sister of King Edward the Elder, takes Derby from the Danes, p. 218.
her Army of Mercians victorious against the Welsh, ibid. after several Martial
Acts, she dies at Tamworth. p. 221. Elfred the Son of King Ethelred by Emma,
betrayed by Earl Godwin, and cruelly made away by Harold. p. 274, 276. Elfwald
the Son of Oswulf succeeding Ethelred in Northumberland is rebelled against by
two of his Noblemen Osbald and Ethelheard, p. 177. he is slain by the
conspiracy of Siggan one of his Nobles. p. 179. Elfwin slain in a Battle
between his Brother Ecfrid and Ethelred. p. 166. Elidure's noble demeanor
toward his deposed Brother, p. 26. after Archigallo's death he resumes the
Government, but is driven out again and imprisoned by his two other Brethren.
p. 27. Elind reckoned in the number of ancient British Kings. p. 28. Ella the
Saxon lands with his three Sons, and beats the Britans in two Battles, p. 119.
he and his Son Cissa take Andredschester in Kent by force, ibid. begins his
Kingdom of the South Saxons. ibid. Elwold Nephew of Ethelwald reigns King of
the East Angles after Aldulf. p. 187. Emeric succeeds Otha in the Kingdom of
Kent. p. 127. Emma the Daughter of Richard Duke of Normandy married first to K.
p. 249. afterward to Canute, p. 268. banished by her Son-in-Law Harold, she
retires to Flanders, and is entertained by Earl Baldwin, p. 274. her Treasures
seized on by her Son King Edward, p. 281. she dies, and is buried at
Winchester, p. 287. a Tradition concerning her questioned. ib. Eorpwald the Son
of Redwald King of the East Angles persuaded to Christianity by Edwin, p. 113.
he is slain in fight by Ricbert a Pagan. ibid. Erchenwin said by Huntingdon to
be the Erector of the Kingdom of the East Saxons. p. 121. Ercombert succeeds
Eadbald in the Kingdom of Kent. p. 156. Eric, see Iric. Ermenred thought to
have had more right to the Kingdom than Ercombert. p. 156. Escwin and Kenswin
the Nephew and Son of Kinegil, said to have succeeded Kenwalk in the Government
of the West Saxons, p. 164. Escwin joins Battle with Wulfer at Bedanhafer, and
not long after deceaseth. ibid. Estrildis beloved by Locrine, p. 14. is with
her Daughter Sabra thrown into a River. p. 15. Ethelbald King of Mercia, after
Ina commands all the Provinces on this side Humber, p. 171. he takes the Town
of Somerton, p. 173. fraudulently assaults part of Northumberland in Eadberts
absence, p. 174. his encounter at Beorford with Cuthred the West Saxon, p. 175.
in another bloody fight at Secandune he is slain. p. 176. Ethelbald and
Ethelbert share the English-Saxon Kingdom between them after their Father
Ethelwolf, Ethelbald marries Judith his Father's Widow, p. 198. is buried at
Shirburn. ibid. Ethelbert succeeds Emeric in the Kingdom of Kent, p. 127. he is
defeated at Wibbandun by Keaulin and his Son Cutha, p. 128. inlarges his
Dominions from Kent to Humber, p. 137. civilly receives Austin and his
Fellow-preachers of the Gospel, p. 139. is himself baptized, p. 140. moved by
Austin, he builds S. Peter's Church in Canterbury, and endows it, p. 141. he
builds and endows S. Paul's Church in London, and the Cathedral at Rochester,
p. 142. his death, p. 145. Ethelbert, Eadbert, and Alric succeed their Father
Victred in the Kingdom of Kent, p. 170. see Eadbright. Ethelbert the Son of
Ethelwolf after the death of his Brother Ethelbald enjoys the whole Kingdom to
himself, p. 198. during his Reign the Danes waste Kent, p. 199. he is buried
with his Brother at Shirburn, ibid. Ethelfrid succeeds Ethelric in the Kingdom
of Northumberland, p. 134. he wastes the Britans, p. 141. overthrows Edan King
of Scots, ibid. in a Battle at Westchester against the British Forces he slays
above 1200 Monks. p. 144. Ethelmund and Weolstan the opposite Leaders of each
party in a fight between the Worster-shire men and Wilt-shire men slain. p.
184. Ethelred succeeding his Brother Wulfer in the Kingdom of Mercia, recovers
Lindsey and other parts, p. 164. invades the Kingdom of Kent, ibid. a sore
Battle between him and Ecfrid the Northumbrian, p. 166. after the violent death
of his Queen he exchanges his Crown for a Monks Cowl. p. 169. Ethelred the So^
of Mollo, the Usurper Alcled being forsaken b^ the Northumbrians, and deposed,
is crowned in his stead, p. 177. having caused three of his Noblemen to be
treacherously slain, he is driven into banishment, ibid. after 10 year's
banishment restored again, p. 179. he cruelly and treacherously puts to death
Oelf and Oelfwin, the Sons of Elfwald formerly King, p. 180. and afterward
Osred, who though shaven a Monk, attempted again upon the Kingdom, ibid. he
marries Elfled the Daughter of Offa, p. 180. is miserably slain by his people.
p. 182. Ethelred the Son of Eandred driven out in his 4. year, p. 193. is
re-exalted to his Seat, but slain the 4. year after. ibid. Ethelred the third
Son of Ethelwolf the third Monarch of the English-Saxons infested with fresh
Invasions of the Danes, p. 199. he fights several great Battles with the Danes
with various success, p. 202, 203, he dies in the 5. year of his Reign, and is
buried at Winburn. p. 203. Ethelred the Son of Edgar by Elfrida crowned at
Kingston, p. 243. Dunstan at his Baptism presages ill of his future slothful
Reign, ibid. new Invasions of the Danes, and great spoils committed by them in
his Reign, p. 244, 245, etc. being reduced to streights by the Danes, he
retires into Normandy, p. 258. is recalled by his people, and joyfully
received, ibid. drives Canute the Dane back to his Ships, p. 259. he dies at
London. p. 262. Ethelric Ida's Son expels Edwin the Son of Alla out of the
Kingdom of Deira. p. 133. Ethelwald the Son of Oswald King of Deira, taking
part with the Mercians, withdraws his Forces, p. 160. Ethelwald the Brother of
Edelhere succeeds him in the Kingdom of the East Angles. p. 161. Ethelwald
surnamed Mollo set up King of the Northumbrians in the room of Oswulf, p. 177.
he slays in Battle Oswin a Lord that rebelled against him, ib. is set upon by
Alcled who assumes his place. ibid. Ethelwolf the second Monarch of the
English-Saxons, of a mild nature, not warlike, or ambitious. p. 192. he with
his Son Ethelbald gives the Danes a total defeat at Ak-Lea or Oak-Lea, p. 194.
he dedicatea the tenth of his whole Kingdom toward the maintenance of Masses
and Psalms for the prospering of him and his Captains against the Danes, p.
195. takes a journey to Rome with his Son Alfrid, and marries Judith the
Daughter of Charles the Bald of France, ibid. he is driven by a Conspiracy to
consign half his Kingdom to his Son Ethelbald, p. 195. dies and is buried at
Winchester, p. 197. Ethelwolf Earl of Bark-shire obtains a Victory against the
Danes at Englefield, p. 201, 202. in another Battle is slain himself. p. 202.
Ethildrith refusing for 12 years her Husband Ecfrids Bed, at length veils her
self a Nun, and is made Abbess of Ely. p. 167. Eustace Count of Boloign
revenging the death of one of his servants, is set upon by the Citizens of
Canterbury, p. 284. he complains to King Edward who takes his part against the
Canterburians, and commands Earl Godwin against them, but in vain. p. 284, 285.
F.
FAganus and Deruvianus said to have preached the Gospel here, and to have
converted almost the whole Island. p. 79. Faustus incestuously born of Vortimer
and his Daughter, lives a devout life in Glamorgan-shire. p. 115. Fergus King
of Scots said to be slain by the joint Forces of the Britans and Romans. p.
102. Ferrex the Son of Gorbogudo, slays in fight his Brother Porrex, though
assisted with Forces out of France, p. 21. is in revenge slain himself in bed
by his Mother Videna. ibid. Flattery odious and contemptible to a generous
Spirit. p. 273. Francus, named among the four Sons of Istion, sprung of Japhet,
and from him the Francs said to be derived. p. 5. Fulgenius reckoned among the
ancient British Kings, p. 28. the Commander in chief of the Caledonians against
Septimius Severus, so called by Geoffry of Monmouth. p. 84.
G.
GAlgacus heads the Britans against Julius Agricola. p. 74. Germanus in a
public disputation at Verulam, puts to silence the chief of the Pelagians, p.
104. he is entreated by the Britans to head them against the Picts and Saxons,
p. 104. he gains the Victory by a religious Stratagem, p. 105. his death. p.
108. Gerontius a Britan by his valor advances the success of Constantine the
Usurper in France and Spain, p. 95. displac't by him, he calls in the Van^^^^
against him, ibid. deserted by his Soldiers, he depands himself valiantly with
the slaughter of 300 of his enemies, p. 96. he kills his Wife Nonnichia
refusing to outlive him. ibid. Geruntius the Son of Elidure not his immediate
Successor. p. 28. Godwin Earl of Kent, and the West Saxons stand for
Hardecnute, p. 274. he betrays Prince Elfred to Harold, p. 274. 276. being
called to account by Hardecnute, he appeaseth him with a very rich Present, p.
277. he earnestly exhorts Edward to take upon him the Crown of England, p. 280.
marries his Daughter to King Edward, p. 281. he raises Forces in opposition of
the French whom the King favored, p. 285. is banished, p. 286. he and his Sons
uniting in a great Fleet, grow formidable, p. 288. coming up to London with his
Ships, and preparing for Battle, a Reconciliation is suddenly made between him
and the King, p. 289. sitting with the King at Table, he suddenly sinks down
dead in his seat. p. 290. Gomer the eldest Son of Japhet believed the first
that peopled these West and Northern Climes. p. 4. Gonorill gains upon the
affection of her Father King Lier by her dissimulation, p. 17. she is married
with Maglaunus Duke of Albania, p. 18. her ingratitude to her Father after she
had gained from him what she could. p. 19. Gorbogudo, or Gorbodego succeeds
Kinmarcus in the Kingdom. p. 21. Gorbonian succeeds Morindus in the Kingdom, p.
25. his justice and piety. p. 25, 26. Gratianus Funarius the Father of
Valentinian, Commander in chief of the Roman Armies in Britain. p. 89. Gregory
Archdeacon of Rome, and afterward Pope, procures the sending over of Abbot
Austin and others to preach the Gospel to the Saxons in this Island. p. 138.
Griffin Prince of South Wales joining with Algar, and committing great spoil in
Hereford, is pursued by Harold Earl of Kent, p. 292. after a peace concluded,
he breaks his faith, and returns to Hostility, ibid. is again reduced, ibid.
Harold sent against him, brings the Welsh to submission, p. 293. lurking about
the Country, he is taken and slain by Griffin Prince of North Wales. ibid.
Guendolen the Daughter of Corineus is married to Locrine the Son of Brutus, p.
14. being divorc't by him, gives him Battle, wherein he is slain, p. 15.
causes Estrildis whom Locrine had married, to be thrown into a River with her
Daughter Sabra, p. 15. governs 15 years in behalf of her Son Madan. ibid.
Gueniver the Wife of Melval a British King kept from King Arthur in the Town of
Glaston. p. 126. Guiderius said to have been the Son of Cunobeline, and slain
in a Battle against Claudius. p. 54. Guitheline succeeds his Father Gurguntius
Barbirus in the Kingdom. Gunhildis the Sister of Swane with her Husband Earl
Palingus, and her young Son cruelly murdered. p. 150. Guorangonus a King of
Kent before it was given to the Saxons. p. 113. Guortigner the Son of Vortiger
bends his endeavors to drive out the Saxons, p. 113. his success against them
in several Battles, p. 415. dying, he commands his bones to be buried in the
Port of Stonar. ibid. Gurguntius Barbirus succeeds Belinus in the Kingdom,
overcomes the Dane, and gives encouragement to Bartholinus a Spaniard to settle
a plantation in Ireland, p. 24. another ancient British King named Gurguntius.
p. 28. Gurgustius succeeds Rivallo in the Kingdom. p. 21. Gyrtha Son of Earl
Godwin accompanies his Father into Flanders, together with his Brothers Tosti
and Swane, p. 286. his noble advice to his Brother Harold as he was ready to
give Battle to Duke William of Normandy, p. 304. he is slain in the said Battle
with his Brothers Harold and Leofwin. p. 305. Gythro or Gothrun a Danish King
baptized and received out of the Font by King Alfred, p. 207. the Kingdom of
the East Angles said to be bestowed on him to hold of the said Alfred. ibid.
H.
HArdecnute the Son of Canute by Emma, called over from Bruges, and received
King with general acclamation, p. 276. he calls Godwin and others to account
about the death of Elfred, p. 277. enraged at the Citizens of Worcester for
killing his Taxgatherers, he sends an Army against them, and burns the City, p.
277, 278. he kindly receives and entertains his half Brother Edward, p. 278.
eating and drinking hard at a great Feast, he falls down speechless, and soon
after expiring, is buried at Winchester. ibid. Harold surnamed Harefoot, the
Son of Canute elected King by Duke Leofric and the Mercians, p. 273. he
banishes his Mother-in-Law Emma, p. 274. his perfidiousness and cruelty toward
Elfred the Son of Ethelred, p. 274. 276. he dies and is buried at Winchester.
p. 276. Harold Son of Godwin, made Earl of Kent, and sent against Prince
Griffin of Wales, p. 292. he reduces him at last to utmost extremity, p. 293.
being cast upon the Coast of Normandy, and brought to Duke William, he promises
his endeavors to make him King of England, p. 295, 296. he takes the Crown
himself, p. 299. puts off Duke William demanding it with a slighting answer, p.
300, 301. is invaded by his Brother Tosti, p. 300. by Harold Harvager King of
Norwey, whom he utterly overthrows and slays, together with Tosti, p. 301, 302.
is invaded by Duke William of Normandy, p. 303. is over-thrown at the Battle of
Hastings, and slain together with his two Brothers Leofwin and Gyrtha. p. 305.
Helvius Pertinax succeeds Ulpius Marcellus in the Government of Britain. p. 81.
Hengist and Horsa with an Army of Saxons, Jutes and Angles, lands in the Isle
of Thanet, p. 111, 112. Hengist invites over more of his Countrymen, p. 112.
he gains advantages of Vortimer by marrying his Daughter to him, p. 113. he
takes on him Kingly Title, p. 116. his several Battles against the Britans,
ibid. his treacherous slaughter of 300 British Grandees under pretense of
Treaty, p. 117. his death, p. 119. Henninus Duke of Cornwall has Regan the
Daughter of King Leir given him in Marriage. p. 18. Herebert a Saxon Earl slain
with most part of his Army by the Danes at a place called Mereswar. p. 193.
Hinguar and Hubba two Danish Brethren, how they got footing by degrees in
England. p. 199, 200. Histion said to be descended of Japhet, and to have had
four Sons who peopled the greatest part of Europe. p. 5. Honorius the Emperor
sends aid twice to the Britans against their Northern Invaders. p. 101. Horsa
the Brother of Hengist slain in the Saxons War against the Britans, p. 115,
116. his Burial-place gave name to Horsted a Town in Kent. p. 116. Humbeanna
and Albert said by some to have shared the Kingdom of East Angles after one
Elfwald. p. 187.
I.
JAgo or Lago succeeds his Uncle Gurgustius in the Kingdom. p. 21. Icenians,
and by their example the Trinobantes rise up in Arms against the Romans. p. 63.
Ida the Saxon begins the Kingdom of Bernicia in Northumberland. p. 126, 127.
Idwallo learns by his Brother's ill success to rule well. p. 27. Immanuentius
slain by Cassibelan. p. 46. Immin, Eaba, and Eadbert Noblemen of Mercia throw
off Oswi, and set up Wulfer. p. 161. Ina succeeds Kedwalla in the Kingdom of
the West Saxons, p. 168. he marches into Kent to demand satisfaction for the
burning of Mollo, ibid. is pacified by Victred with a sum of money, and the
delivering up of the Accessories, ibid. vanquishes Gerent King of Wales, p.
170. stays Kenwulf and Albright, and vanquishes the East Angles, p. 171. ends
his days at Rome. ibid. Inniaunus deposed for his ill courses. p. 27. Joseph of
Arimathaea said to have first preached the Christian Faith in this Island. p.
80. Jovinus sent Deputy into this Island by the Emperor Valentinian. p. 91.
Iric a Dane made Earl of Northumberland by Canute in place of Uthred slain, p.
261. 268. he is said by some to have made War against Malcolm King of Scots, p.
269. his greatness suspected by Canute, he is banished the Realm. ibid. Julius
Agricola the Emperors Lieutenant in Britain, almost extirpates the Ordovices,
p. 69. finishes the Conquest of the Isle of Mona, p. 69. his justice and
prudence in Government, p. 70. he brings the Britans to Civility, Arts, and an
Imitation of the Roman fashions, p. 71. he receives triumphal Honors from
Titus, p. 71, 72. he extends his Conquests to Scotland, subdues the Orcades and
other Scotch Islands, p. 72. he is hard put to it in several Conflicts, but
comes off victorious, p. 74, 75, etc. he is commanded home by Domitian. p. 77.
Julius Caesar has Intelligence that the Britans are aiding to his Enemies the
Gauls, p. 33. he sends Caius Volusenus to make discovery of the nature of the
people, and strength of the Country, p. 34. after him Comius of Arras to make a
party among the Britans, p. 35. the stout resistance he meets with from them at
his landing, p. 36, 37. he receives terms of peace from them, p. 38. he loses a
great part of his Fleet, ibid. defeats the Britans, and brings them anew to
terms of peace, and sets sail for Belgia, p. 40. the year following he lands
his Army again, p. 42. he has a very sharp dispute with the Britans near the
Stowr in Kent, p. 42, 43. he receives terms of peace from the Trinobantes, p.
46. he brings Cassibelan to Terms, p. 47. he leaves the Island, ibid. offers to
Venus the Patroness of his Family a Corselet of British Pearl. ibid. Julius
Frontinus the Emperors Lieutenant in Britain, tames the Silures a warlike
people. p. 69. Julius Severus governs Britain under Adrian the Emperor. p. 78.
K.
KEarl surrenders the Kingdom of Mercia to his Kinsman Penda. p. 152. Keaulin
succeeds his Father Kenric in the Kingdom of the West Saxons, p. 127. he and
his Son Cuthin slay three British Kings at Deorham, p. 133. gives the Britans a
very great rout at Fethanleage, ibid. is totally routed by the Britans at
Wodensbeorth, and chac't out of his Kingdom, dies in poverty, p. 134. Kendwalla
or Kadwallon a British King joining with Penda the Mercian, slays Edwin in
Battle. p. 157. Kedwalla a West Saxon Prince returned from Banishment, slays in
fight Edelwalk the South-Saxon, and after that Edric his Successor, p. 165.
going to the Isle of Wight, he devotes the fourth part thereof to holy uses,
ibid. the Sons of Arwald King of that Isle slain by his order, p. 166. he
harrasses the Country of the South Saxons, ibid. is repelled by the Kentish
men, ibid. yet revenges the death of his Brother Mollo, ibid. going to Rome to
be baptized, he dies there about five weeks after his Baptism. p. 168. Kelred
the Son of Ethelred succeeds Kenred in the Mercian Kingdom, p. 169. possessed
with an evil Spirit, he dies in despair. p. 170. Kelwulf reigns King of the
West Saxons after Keola, p. 140. he makes War upon the South Saxons, p. 145.
dying, leaves the Kingdom to his Brothers Sons. ibid. Kenwulf adopted by Osric
the Northumbrian to be his Successor in the Kingdom, p. 171. he becomes a Monk
in Lindisfarn. p. 173. Kened King of the Scots does high honor to King Edgar,
p. 236. receives great favors from him, ibid. is challenged by him upon some
words let fall, but soon pacifies him. p. 237. Kenelm succeeding a Child in the
Kingdom of Mercia after Kenulf, is murdered by order of his Sister Quendrid.
p. 186. Kenred the Son of Wulfer succeeds Ethelred in the Mercian Kingdom, p.
169. having reigned a while, he goes to Rome, and is there shorn a Monk, ibid.
another Kenred succeeds in the Kingdom of Northumberland. p. 170. Kenric the
Son of Kerdic overthrows the Britans that oppose him, p. 120. kills and puts to
flight many of the Britans at Searesbirig now Salisbury, p. 127. afterward at
Beranvirig now Banbury. ibid. Kentwin a West Saxon King chaces the
Welsh-Britans to the Seashore. p. 165. Kenulf has the Kingdom of Mercia
bequeathed him by Ecferth, p. 182. he leaves behind him the praise of a
virtuous Reign. p. 186. Kenwalk succeeds his Father Kinegils in the Kingdom of
the West Saxons, p. 156. his successes variously delivered, p. 158. he is said
to have discomfited the Britans at Pen in Somersetshire, p. 161. and giving
Battle to Wulfer to have taken him prisoner, p. 162. dying, leaves the
Government to Sexburga his Wife. p. 163. Kenwulf entitled Clito slain by Ina
the West Saxon, p. 171. Kenwulf King of the West Saxons, see Kinwulf. Keola the
Son of Cuthulf succeeds his Uncle Keaulin in the West Saxon Kingdom. p. 134.
Keolwulf the Brother of Kenulf the Mercian, after two years reign driven out by
Bernulf a Usurper. p. 186. Keorle with the Forces of Devonshire overthrows the
Danes at Wigganbeorch. p. 193. Kerdic a Saxon Prince lands at Kerdicshore, and
over-throws the Britans, p. 120. defeats their King Natanled in a memorable
Battle, ibid. founds the Kingdom of the West Saxons, p. 121. he overthrows the
Britans again twice at Kerdic's Ford, and at Kerdic's League. p. 121, 122.
Kimarus reckoned among the ancient British Kings. p. 25. Kinegils and Cuichelm
succeed Kelwulf in the Kingdom of the West Saxons, p. 145. they make Truce with
Penda the Mercian, p. 152, 153. they are converted to the Christian Faith, p.
155. Kinegils dying leaves his son Kenwalk to succeed. p. 156. Kinmarcus
succeeds Sisillius in the Kingdom. p. 21. Kinwulf, or Kenwulf (Sigebert being
thrown out, and slain by a Swineherd) is saluted King of the West Saxons, p.
175. behaves himself valorously in several Battles against the Welsh, p. 177.
put to the worst at Besington by Offa the Mercian, ibid. is routed and slain in
Battles by Kineard whom he had commanded into Banishment. p. 178. Kymbeline or
Cunobeline the Successor of Tenuantius said to be brought up in the Court of
Augustus, p. 51. his chief Seat Camalodunum or Maldon. ibid.
L.
LEarning and Arts when began to flourish among the Saxons. p. 163. Leil
succeeds Brute Greensheild, and builds Caerleil. p. 16. Leofric Duke of Mercia
and Siward of Northumberland sent by Hardecnute against the people of
Worcester, p. 277, 278. by their Counsel King Edward seizes on the Treasures
of his Mother Queen Emma, p. 281. they raise Forces for the King against Earl
Godwin, p. 285. Leofric's death. p. 293. Leofwin Son of Earl Godwin, after his
Father Banishment goes over with his Brother Harold into Ireland, p. 286. he
and Harold assist their Father with a Fleet against King Edward, p. 288. be is
slain with his Brothers Harold and Gyrtha in the Battle against William Duke of
Normandy. p. 305. Linceus delivered in fabulous story to be the Husband of one
of the feigned 50 Daughters of Dioclesian King of Syria, p. 5. the only man
saved by his Wife, when all the rest of the 50 slew their Husbands. ib. Locrin
the eldest Son of Brutus has the middle part of this Island called Leogria for
his share in the Kingdom. p. 14. Lollius Urbicus draws a Wall of Turfs between
the frith of Dunbritton and Edinborough. p. 78. London with a great multitude
of her Inhabitants by a sudden fire consumed. p. 183. Lothair succeeds his
Brother Ecbert in the Kingdom of Kent. p. 163. Lucius a King in some part of
Britain thought the first of any King in Europe who received the Christian
Faith, p. 79. is made the second by descent from Marius, ibid. after a long
Reign buried at Gloucester. p. 80. Lud walls about Trinovant, and calls it Caer
Lud or Luds Town. p. 28. Ludiken the Mercian going to avenge Bernulf, is
surprised by the East Angles, and put to the sword. p. 187. Lupicinus sent over
Deputy into this Island by Julian the Emperor, but soon recalled. p. 91. Lupus
Bishop of Troyes assistant to Germanus of Auxerre in the Reformation of the
British Church. p. 104.
M.
MAdan succeeds his Father Locrin in the Kingdom. p. 15. Maglaunus Duke of
Albania marries Gonorill eldest Daughter of King Leir. p. 18. Magoclune
surnamed the Island Dragon, one of the five that reigned toward the beginning
of the Saxon Heptarchy. p. 132. Magus the Son and Successor of Samothes, whom
some fable to have been the first peopler of this Island. p. 4. Malcolm Son of
Kened King of Scots, falling into Northumberland with his whole power utterly
overthrown by Uthred, p. 262. some say by Eric. p. 269. Malcolm Son of the
Cumbrian King made King of Scotland by Siward in the room of Macbeth. p. 290,
291. Malcolm King of Scotland coming to visit King Edward, swears brotherhood
with Tosti the Northumbrian, p. 293. afterward in his absence harrasses
Northumberland. ibid. Mandubratius Son of Immanuentius favored by the
Trinobantes against Cassibelan. p. 46. Marganus the Son of Gonorill deposes
his Aunt Cordelia, p. 20. shares the Kingdom with his Cousin Cunedagius,
invades him, but is met and overcome by him. p. 20. Marganus the Son of
Archigallo a good King. p. 27. Marius the Son of Arviragus is said to have
overcome the Picts, and slain their King Roderic. p. 79. Martia the Wife of
King Guitheline said to have instituted the Law called Marchen Leage. p. 24,
25. Martinus made Deputy of the British Province failing to kill Paulus, falls
upon his own Sword. p. 90. Maximianus Herculeus forced to conclude a peace with
Caransius, and yield him Britain. p. 86. Maximus a Spaniard usurping part of
the Empire, is overcome at length and slain by Theodosius, p. 93. Maximus a
friend of Gerontius is by him set up in Spain against Constantine the Usurper.
p. 95. Mempricius one of Brutus his Council persuades him to hasten out of
Greece. p. 10. Mempricius and Malim succeed their Father Madan in the Kingdom,
p. 15. Mempricius treacherously slaying his Brother, gets sole possession of
the Kingdom, reigns tyrannically, and is at last devoured by Wolves. p. 15.
Mellitus, Justus, and others sent with Austin to the Conversion of the Saxons,
p. 140. he converts the East Saxons, p. 142. S. Paul's Church in London built
for his Cathedral by Ethelred, as that of Rochester for Justus. ibid. Mollo,
the Brother of Kedwalla, pursued, beset, and burnt in a house whither he had
fled for shelter, p. 166. his death revenged by his Brother. ibid. Morcar the
Son of Algar made Earl of Northumberland in the room of Tosti, p. 294. he and
Edwin Duke of the Mercians put Tosti to flight, p. 300. they give Battle to
Harold Harfager, King of Norwey: but are put to the worst, p. 302. they refuse
to set up Edgar, and at length are brought to swear fidelity to Duke William of
Normandy. p. 305. Mordred Arthur's Nephew said to have given him in a Battle
his deaths wound. p. 131. Morindus, the Son of Elanius by Tanguestela, a
valiant man, but infinitely cruel. p. 25. Mulmutius, see Dunwallo.
O.
OCta and Ebissa called over by Hengist their Uncle, p. 13. they possess
themselves of that part of the Isle which is now Northumberland. ibid. Oenus,
one in the Catalogue of ancient British Kings. p. 28. Oeric or Oisc succeeds
his Father Hengist in the Kingdom of Kent, and from him the Kentish Kings
called Oiscings, p. 119. he is otherwise called Esca. p. 127. Offa the Son of
Siger quits his Kingdom of the East Saxons to go to Rome and turn Monk with
Kenred. p. 169, 170. 174. Offa defeating and slaying Beornred the Usurper,
becomes King of Mercia after Ethelbald, p. 176. he subdues a neighboring
people called Hestings, p. 177. gets the Victory of Alric King of Kent at
Occanford, ibid. inviting Ethelbright King of the East Angles to his Palace, he
there treacherously causes him to be beheaded, and seizes his Kingdom, p.
180. his at first enmity afterward league with Charles the Great, p. 181. he
grants a perpetual Tribute to the Pope out of every house in his Kingdom, ibid.
he draws a Trench of wondrous length between Mercia and the British Confines,
his death. ibid. Osbald a Nobleman exalted to the Throne of the Northumbrians
after Ethelred. p. 182. Osbert reigns in Northumberland after the last of the
Ethelreds in the time of the Danish Invasion. p. 193. Osbert and Ella helping
the Picts against Donaldus King of Scotland, put the Scots to flight at
Sterlinbridge with great slaughter, and take the King prisoner. p. 196. Osfrid
and Eanfrid the Sons of Edwin converted and baptized, p. 152. Osfrid slain
together with his Father in a Battle against Kedwalla. p. 153. Oslac and
Cnebban two Saxon Earls slain by Keaulin at Wibbandun. p. 128. Osmund King of
the South Saxons. p. 176. Osred a Child succeeds Aldfrid in the Northumbrian
Kingdom, p. 169. he is slain by his kindred for his vicious life. p. 170. Osred
Son of Alcled advanced to the Kingdom of Northumberland after Elfwald, is soon
driven out again, p. 179. is taken and forcibly shaven a Monk at York. p. 180.
Osric the Son of Elfric baptized by Paulinus, succeeds in the Kingdom of
Bernicia, p. 154. turns Apostate, and is slain by an Eruption of Kedwalla out
of a besieged Town, ibid. another Osric succeeds Kenred the second. p. 170.
Osric Earl of Southampton and Ethelwolf of Bark-shire beat the Danes back to
their Ships. p. 199. Ostorius sent Vice-praetor into Britain in the room of
Plautius the Praetor, p. 55. routs the Britans, and improves his Victory to the
best advantage, p. 55, 56. gives the Government of several Cities to Cogidunus
a British King his Allie, p. 56. defeats the Silures under the leading of
Caractacus. p. 57. Ostrid the Wife of Ethelred killed by her own Nobles. p.
169. Oswald Brother of Eanfrid living exiled in Scotland, is there baptized, p.
154. with a small Army utterly overthrows Kedwalla, ibid. settles Religion, and
very much enlarges his Dominions, p. 155. overcome, and slain in Battle by
Penda at Maserfeild, now Oswestre, p. 156. Oswi succeeds his Brother Oswald in
the Kingdom, p. 156. he persuades Sigebert to receive the Christian Faith, p.
159. he discomfits Penda's vast Army, p. 160. he subdues all Mercia, and the
greatest part of the Pictish Nation, p. 161. shaken off by the Persian Nobles,
and Wulfer set up in his stead, ibid. his death. p. 163. Oswin the Nephew of
Edwin shares with Oswi in the Kingdom of Northumberland, p. 157. coming to Arms
with him, he is over-match't, and slain by his Command. ibid. Oswulf has the
Crown of Northumberland relinquisht to him by Eadbert, p. 176. slain by his own
Servants. p. 177. Otha succeeds Esca in the Kingdom of Kent. p. 127. Otter and
Roald two Danish Leaders landing in Devonshire, their whole Forces are
scattered, and Roald slain. p. 218.
P.
PAndrasus a Grecian King keeps the Trojans in servitude, p. 7. is set upon and
beaten by Brutus. p. 8, 9. Paulinus sent spiritual Guardian with Edelburga,
endeavors to convert Northumberland to Christianity, p. 148. the manner of his
winning King Edwin to embrace the Christian Religion, p. 149, 151. he converts
the Province of Lindsey and Blecca the Governor of Lincoln, and builds a
Church in that City. p. 152. Peada the Son of Penda and Prince of the
Middle-Angles, is baptized with all his Followers, p. 158. he has South-Mercia
conferred on him by Oswi, p. 161. is slain by the treachery of his Wife on
Easter Day. ibid. Pelagius a Britan brings new opinions into the Church, p. 94.
the Pelagian Doctrine refuted by Germanus, p. 104. the Pelagians are judged to
banishment by Germanus. p. 108. Penda the Son of Wibba King of Mercia has the
Kingdom surrendered him by Kearle, p. 152. he joins with Kedwalla against
Edwin, p. 153. he slays Oswald in Battle, p. 156. in another Battle Sigebert, p
157. in another Anna King of the East Angles, p. 159. he is slain in a Battle
against Oswi. p. 161. Penissel reckoned in the number of ancientest British
Kings. p. 28. Peredure and Vigenius expel their Brother Elidure, and share the
Kingdom between them. p. 27. Perjury an example of Divine vengeance in Alfred
who conspired against King Athelstane. p. 223. Petilius Cerealis utterly
defeated by the Britans, p. 64. he commands the Roman Army in Britain. p. 68,
69. Petronius Turpilianus commands in chief in Britain after Suetonius
Paulinus. p. 68. Pir one of the ancientest Race of British Kings. p. 28. Picts
and Scots harrass the South Coasts of Britain. p. 91. etc. See Scots. Picts and
Saxons beaten by the Britans, through the pious Conduct of Germanus. p. 104,
105. Porrex the Son of Gorbogudo, though assisted from France, is slain by his
Brother Ferrex, p. 21. his death revenged by his Mother Videna, ibid. another
of that name reckoned in the Catalogue of British Kings. p. 28. Portsmouth
denominated from the landing of Porta a Saxon Prince with his two Sons Bida and
Megla, p. 120. Prafutagus King of the Icenians, leaving Caesar coheir with his
Daughters, causes the Britans to revolt. p. 62, 63. Priscus Licinius
Lieutenant in this Isle under Adrian. p. 78. Probus subdues the Usurper
Bonosus, who falls in the Battle, p. 85. prevents by his wisdom new risings in
Britain. ibid.
R.
REadwulf succeeding Ethelred in Northumbria, soon after his Coronation, cut
off with his whole Army by the Danes at Alvetheli. p. 193. Rederchius reckoned
among the ancient British Kings. p. 28. Redion, another British King. ibid.
Redwald King of the East Angles wars against Ethelfrid, in defense of Edwin,
and slays him in Battle. p. 147. Regin Son of Gorbonian, a good King. p. 27.
Rivallo succeeds his Father Cunedagius. p. 21. Rollo the Dane or Norman having
fought unsuccessfully here, turns his Forces into France, and conquers the
Country since called Normandy. p. 212. Romans land in Britain under the Conduct
of Julius Caesar, p. 36, 37. their sharp Conflict with the Britans near the
Stoure in Kent, p. 42, 43. the cruel Massacre of the Britans upon them, p. 64.
they leave the Island to succor their declining affairs in other parts, p.
104. they come and aid the Britans against the Scots and Picts, ibid. they help
them to build a new Wall, p. 102. instruct them in War, and take their last
farewell. ibid. Romanus named among the four Sons of Histion, sprung of Japhet,
and from him the Romans fabled to be derived. p. 5. Rowen the Daughter of
Hengist sent for over by her Father, p. 112. she presents King Vortigern with a
bowl of wine by her Fathers Command, p. 112, 113. she is upon the King's demand
given him in Marriage. p. 113. Rudancus King of Cambria subdued in fight, and
slain by Dunwallo Mulmutius. p. 21. Rudhuddibras succeeds his Father Leil, and
founds Caerkeint or Canterbury with several other places. p. 16. Runno the Son
of Peredure not immediate Successor. p. 28.
S.
SAbra thrown into the River (thence called Sabrina) with her Mother Estrildis
by Guendolen. p. 15. Samothes the first King that History or Fable mentions to
have peopled this Island. p. 4. Samulius recorded among the ancient British
Kings. p. 28. Saron the second King named among the Successors of Samothes. p.
4. Saxons harrass the South Coast of Britain, slay Nectaridius and Bulcobandes,
p. 91. Saxons and Picts, see Picts. Saxons invited into Britain by Vortigern,
and the Britans against the Scots and Picts, p. 109, 110. their Original, p.
110. they arrive under the leading of Hergist and Horsa. p. 111. they beat the
Scots and Picts near Stamford. p. 112. fresh Forces sent them over, and their
bounds enlarged. p. 112. 113. they making league with the Scots and Picts, wast
the land without resistance, ibid. beaten by Guortimer in four Battles, and
driven into Thanet. p. 115. they return most of them into their own Country. p.
117. the rest notably defeated by Ambrosius Aurelianus and the Britans. p. 118.
Scots, Picts, and Attacots harrass the South Coast of Britain, p. 91. overcome
by Maximus, p. 93. Scots possessed Ireland first, and named it Scotia, p. 94.
Scots and Picts beaten by the Romans, sent to the supply of the Britans, p.
101. they make spoil and havoc with little or no opposition. p. 103. Sebbi
having reigned over the East Saxons 30 years, takes on him the habit of a Monk.
p. 163. Sebert the Son of Sleda, reigns over the East Saxons by permission of
Ethelbert. p. 142. Segonax, one of the four petty Kings in Britain, that
assaulted Caesar's Camp. p. 46. Sejus Saturninus commands the Roman Navy in
Britain. p. 78. Selred the Son of Sigebert the Good, succeeds Ossa in the
East-Saxon Kingdom, and comes to a violent end. p. 174. Septimius Severus the
Roman Emperor, arrives in person with an Army in this Island, p. 81. 82. his
ill success against the Caledonians, p. 82. nevertheless goes on and brings
them to terms of peace, p. 83. builds a Wall across the Island, from Sea to
Sea, ibid. they taking Arms again, he sends his Son Antoninus against them, p.
84. he dies at York, it is thought of grief. ibid. Severus sent over Deputy into
this Island by the Emperor Valentinian. p. 91. Sexburga the Wife of Kenwalk
driven out by the Nobles, disdaining female Government. p. 163. Sexted and
Seward re-establish Heathenism in East-Saxony, after the Death of their Father
Sebert, p. 145. in a fight against the Britans they perish with their whole
Army. p. 146. Sigeard and Senfred succeed their Father Sebbi in the East-Saxon
Kingdom. p. 174. Sigebert succeeds his Brother Eorpwald in the Kingdom of the
East Angles, p. 156. he founds a School or College, and betakes himself to a
Monastical life, p. 156. being forced into the field against Penda, he is slain
with his Kinsman Egric. p. 157. Sigebert surnamed the Small, succeeds his
Father Seward King of the East Saxons, p. 159. his successor Sigebert the 2d.
is persuaded by Oswi to embrace Christianity, ibid. is murdered by the
Conspiracy of two Brethren, ibid. his Death denounc't by the Bishop for eating
with an excommunicate person, p. 160. Sigebert the Kinsman of Cuthred succeeds
him in the West Saxon Kingdom. p. 175. Siger the Son of Sigebert the Small, and
Sebbi the Son of Seward succeed in the government of the East Saxons after
Swithelms decease. p. 162. Silures a people of Britain choose Caractacus for
their Leader against the Romans, p. 56. they continue the War after Caractacus
was taken, against Ostorius and others. p. 59. 60. 61. Simon Zelotes, by some
said to have preached the Christian Faith in this Island. p. 80. Sisillius
succeeds Jago. p. 21. Sisilius the Son of Guitheline succeeds his Mother
Martia, p. 25. another of that name reckoned in the number of the ancient
British Kings. p. 28. Siward Earl of Northumberland sent by Hardecnute
together with Leofric against the people of Worcester, p. 277. 278. he and
Leofric raise Forces for King Edward against Earl Godwin, p. 285. he makes an
expedition into Scotland, vanquishes Macbeth, and places in his stead Malcolm
Son of the Cumbrian King, p. 290. 291. he dies at York in an armed posture. p.
291. Sleda erects the Kingdom of the East Saxons, p. 121. South-Saxon Kingdom
by whom erected, p. 119. South Saxons upon what occasion converted to the
Christian Faith. p. 164. Staterius King of Albany, is defeated and slain in
fight by Dunwallo Mulmutius. p. 21. Stilicho represses the invading Scots and
Picts. p. 93. Stuff and Withgar the Nephews of Kerdic bring him new levies, p.
120. they inherit what he won in the Isle of Wight. p. 125. Suetonius Paulinus
Lieutenant in Britain, attaques the Isle of Mona or Anglesey. p. 61. Suidhelm
succeeds Sigebert in the Kingdom of the East Saxons, p. 61. he is baptized by
Kedda. ibid. Swane in revenge of his Sisters Death makes great devastations in
the West of England, p. 250. he carries all before him as far as London, but is
there repelled, p. 257. is styled King of England, ibid. he sickens and dies.
p. 258. Swane the Son of Earl Godwin treacherously murders his Kinsman Beorn,
p. 282. his peace wrought with the King by Aldred Bishop of Worcester, ibid.
touched in Conscience for the slaughter of Beorn, he goes barefoot to Rome, and
returning home dies in Lycia. p. 289. Swithred the last King of the East-Saxon
Kingdom, driven out by E^bert the West Saxon. p. 174. 187.
T.
TAximagulus a petty King anciently in Britain, one of the four Kings that
assaulted Caesar's Camp. p. 46. Tenuantius one of the Sons of Lud has Cornwall
allotted him, p. 28. made King after the Death of Cassibelan. p. 50. Tendric a
Warlike King of Britain, said to have exchanged his Crown for a Hermitage, p.
134. to have taken up Arms again in aid of his Son Mouric. ibid. Theobale the
Brother of King Ethelfrid, slain at Degiastan. p. 141. Theodore a Monk of
Tarsus ordained Bishop of Canterbury by P. Vitalian, p. 163. by his means the
Liberal Arts, and the Greek and Latin Tongues flourish among the Saxons. ibid.
Theodosius sent over by the Emperor Valentinian, enters London victoriously,
p. 91. sends for Civilis and Dulcitius, p. 92. punishes Valentinus a Pannonian,
conspiring against him, ibid. he returns with applause to Valentinian. p. 92.
93. Theodosius the Son of the former preferred to the Empire, p. 93. overcomes
and slays Maximus, usurping the Empire. p. 93. Thurfert and dirers other Danish
Lords submit to King Edward the Elder. p. 220. Titulus succeeds his Father Uffa
in the Kingdom of the East Angles. p. 121. Togodumnus the second Son of
Cunobeline succeeds in the Kingdom, p. 51. is overthrown by Aulus Plautius, p.
52. slain in Battle. p. 53. Tosti the Son of Godwin made Earl of Northumberland
in the room of Siward, p. 291. he swears Brotherhood with Malcolm King of
Scotland, p. 293. goes to Rome with Aldred Bishop of York, ibid. the
Northumbrians rise against him and expel him, p. 294. 295. a story of great
outrage and cruelty committed by him at Hereford, p. 295. making War against
his Brother King Harold, he is driven out of the Country by Edwin and Morcar,
p. 300. joining with Harold Harfager King of Norway against his Brother, he is
slain together with Harfager in the Battle. p. 302. Trebellius Maximus sent
into Britain in the room of Petronius Turpilianus. p. 68. Trinobantes fall off
from Cassibelan, and submit to Caesar, and recommend Mandubratius to his
protection. p. 45. 46. Turkil a Danish Earl assaults Canterbury, but is bought
off, p. 253. he swears Allegiance to King Ethelred, that under that pretense he
might stay and give intelligence to Swane, p. 256. he leaves the English again
and joins with Canute, p. 260. his greatness suspected by Canute, he is banished
the Realm. p. 269. Turquetill a Danish Leader, submitting to King Edward,
obtains leave of him to go and try his Fortune in France. p. 219.
V.
VAlentinian the Emperor sends over several Deputies successively into this
Island. p. 91. Vectius Bolanus sent into Britain in the room of Trebellius
Maximus. p. 68. Vellocatus, see Venutius and Cartismandua. Venutius a King of
the Brigantes deserted by his Wife Cartismandua, who marries his Squire
Vellocatus, p. 60. he rights himself against her by Arms, ibid. makes War
successfully against those taking part with his Wife. p. 60. 61. Verannius
succeeds A. Didius in the British Wars. p. 61. Virtue ever highly rewarded by
the ancient Romans. p. 55. Vespasian valiantly fighting under Plautius against
the Britans is rescued from danger by his Son Titus. p. 55. for his eminent
services here he receives triumphal Ornaments at Rome. p. 55. Uffa erects the
Kingdom of the East Angles, p. 121. from him his successors called Uffings. p.
121. Victorinus a Moor, appeaseth a Commotion in Britain, by slaying a
Governor of his own recommending. p. 85. Victorinus of Tolosa made Prefect of
this Island. p. 94. Victred the Son of Ecbert obtaining the Kingdom of Kent,
settles all things in peace, p. 166. after 34 years Reign he deceaseth. p. 170.
Videna slays her Son Ferrex in revenge of her other Son Porrex. p. 21. Vigenius
and Peredure, expelling their Brother Elidure, share the Kingdom between them.
p. 27. Virius Lupus has the North part of the Government assigned him by
Severus the Emperor. p. 81. Ulfketel Duke of the East Angles sets upon the
Danes with great valor, p. 250. his Army defeated through the subtlety of a
Danish Servant, p. 254. he is slain with several other Dukes at the fatal
Battle of Assandune. p. 264. Ulpius Marcellus sent Lieutenant into Britain by
Commodus, ends the War by his Valor and Prudence. p. 8. Vortipor reigns in
Demetia, or South Wales. p. 132. Vortigern's Character, p. 109. he is advised
by his Council to invite in the Saxons against the Scots and Picts, ibid. he
bestows upon Hengist and the Saxons, the Isle of Thanet, p. 112. then all Kent,
upon a marriage with Rowen Hengist's Daughter, p. 113. condemned in a Synod for
incest with his Daughter, he retires to a Castle in Radnorshire, built for the
purpose, p. 115. his Son Guortimer dead heresumes the Government, p. 116. is
drawn into a snare by Hengist, p. 117. retiring again is burnt in his Tower. p.
117. Urianus, reckoned in the number of ancient British Kings. p. 28.
Utherpendragon thought to be the same with Natanleod. p. 120. Uthred submits
himself with the Northumbrians to Swane, p. 257. to Canute, p. 261. his Victory
over Malcolm King of Scots, p. 262. 269. he is slain by Turebrand a Danish Lord
at Canutes either Command or connivence. p. 261.
W.
West Saxon Kingdom by whom erected, p. 121. West Saxons, and their Kings
converted to the Christian Faith by Berinus. p. 155. Wibba succeeds Crida in
the Mercian Kingdom. p. 134. Wilbrod a Priest goes over with 12 others to
preach the Gospel in Germany, p. 168. he is countenanc't by Pepin Chief Regent
of the Franks, and made first Bishop of that Nation. p. 168. 169. Wilfrid
Bishop of the Northumbrians deprived by Ecfrid of his Bishopric, wanders as
far as Rome, p. 164. returning plants the Gospel in the Isle of Wight, and
other places assigned him, p. 164. 165. has the fourth part of that Island
given him by Kedwalla, he bestows it on Bertwin a Priest, his Sisters Son.
ibid. William Duke of Normandy honorably entertained by King Edward, and
richly dismissed, p. 287. he betroths his daughter to Harold, and receives his
Oath to assist him to the Crown of England, p. 295. 296. sending after King
Edwards Death to demand performance of his promise, is put off with a slight
answer, p. 300. 301. he lands with an Army at Hastings, p. 301. over throws
Harold, who with his two Brothers is slain in Battle, p. 305. he is Crowned at
Westminster by Aldred Archbishop of York. ibid. Wipped a Saxon Earl slain at a
place called Wippeds fleot, which thence took denomination, p. 116. Withgar,
see Stuff. Withgarburgh in the Isle of Wight so called from being the
burial-place of Withgar. p. 125. Withlaf the successor of Ludiken, being
vanquished by Ecbert, all Mercia becomes tributary to him. p. 187. Wulfer the
Son of Penda set up by the Mercian Nobles in the room of his Brother Oswi, p.
161. said to have been taken Prisoner by Kenwalk the West Saxon, p. 162. he
takes and wastes the Isle of Wight, but causes the Inhabitants to be baptized,
ibid. gives the Island to Ethelwald King of South Saxons, ibid. sends
Jeruvianus to recover the East Saxons, fallen off the second time from
Christianity, ibid. Lindsey taken from him by Ecfrid of Northumberland, p. 163.
his Death accompanied with the stain of Simonie. p. 164. Wulfheard King
Ethelwolf's Chief Captain, drives back the Danes at Southampton with great
slaughter, p. 192. he dies the same year, as it is thought of Age. ibid.
Wulktul Earl of Ely put to flight with his whole Army by the Danes. p. 201.
Y.
YMner King of Loegria, with others slain in Battle by Dunwallo Mulmutius. p.
21.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2. l. 16. for Britains read Britans, p. 6. l. 18. for by the same remove,
r. and by the etc. p. 8. l. 28. for be it r. be, p. 13. l. 24. for be-spoken r.
bespoken, p. 16. l. 9. for Germannus r. Germanus, p. 23. l. 3. for Brother r.
his Brother, ibid. l. 16. for Allobreges r. Allobroges, p. 25. l. 3. for
Mertian r. Mercian, p. 28. l. 18. for opportunety r. opportunety, p. 29. l. 9.
for unto r. to, p. 29. from the end of l. 26. to the beginning: of l. 33.
should not have been in a different Character, so also a line in the next page,
p. 35. l. last, for Bay-Close environed, r. Bay, close environed, p. 51. l. 20.
before made leave out he, p. 71. l. 33. for ex'steem'd r. esteemed, p. 102. l.
33. for Durstus r. Durstus, p. 119. l. 12. for Andreds League r. Andreds Leage,
p. 126. l. 18. for Arms r. Artur, p. 138. l. 5. for haleluja r. Hallelujah,
ibid. l. 6. for Benedic r. Benedict, p. 139. l. 12. for the r. their, p. 150. l.
17. for and r. as, ibid. l. 18. after begin no comma, p. 151. l. 9. for ye r.
thee, p. 157. l. 13. for Daughter r. Sister, p. 160. l. 31. for Loyden r.
Loydes, p. 161. l. 7. for her r. his, p. 161. l. 35. for Witgeornesburgh, r.
Witgeornesburg, p. 164. l. 4. for year a af read a year after, p. 169. l. 21.
for Epitomy r. Epitome, p. 170. l. 27. after testifies a period, p. 173. l. 1.
before far r. by, ibid. l. last, for Uncle r. Unkle's SSon, p. 174. l. 30. for
Kuiric r. Kinric, p. 176. l. 9. after two r. or three, ibid. l. last but one,
for Royal r. Regal, p. 177. l. 19. for Occanford r. Ottanford, p. 183. l. 23.
after Ambassadors leave out the stop, ibid. l. 24. after Ecbert two points, p.
192. l. last for Ethelhelin helam, r. Ethelhelm, p. 195. l. 13. for de did r.
he did, p. 197. l. 23. for West Saxon r. West Saxons, p. 201. l. 14. for flight
r. fight, p. 216. l. 13. for Thames, there nocomma after Thames but after
there, p. 225. l. 27. for his r. this, p 235. l. 4. for on r. about, ibid. l.
last but two, for the r. that, p. 246 l. 17. for Frenar. Frana, p. 260. l. 23.
before spread r. he, p. 264. l. 23. for Ocford r. Oxford, p. 276. l. 29. for
Bishop r. Archbishop, p. 277. l. 12. for Brother r. half Brother, p. 280. l. 4.
for that prompted him r. that now as it were prompted him, ibid. after the last
line leave out deed, p. 281. l. 13. for a youth r. then a youth, p. 296. l. 16.
for of r. with, p. 299. l. 25. after legs no stop, after hight a period, p 308.
the six last lines should have been in no different Character from the rest of
the Book, and in the last line for revolutions r. revolution, besides other
literal faults and wrong stops through the Book, which the Reader of himself
may amend.


