Nevvs from Hell, Rome, and the Innes of Court.

Wherein is set forth the copy of a Letter written from the Devil to the Pope.

The true copy of the Petition delivered to the King at York.

The copy of certain Articles of agreement between the Devil, the Pope, and
diverse others.

The description of a Feast, sent from the Devil to the Pope; together with a
short advertisement to the High Court of PARLIAMENT, with sundry other
particulars.

Published for the future peace and tranquillity of the Inhabitants of Great
BRITANY. By J. M.

Printed in the year of Grace and Reformation. 1642.

TO OUR DEARLY BELOVED SON THE most Pious and most Religious Primate of the
Roman Church, and to all our dearly beloved Children the Cardinals, and
Lordly Bishops in Europe.
Haste: Haste: Post: Haste.
Your entire Prince and God of this world, Lucifer, Prince of Darkness and
Superstition, King of Stiks and Phlegeton, Supreme Lord of Gehenna, Tartaria,
Colmakia, Samoyedia, Lappia, Corelia, and Colmagoria, Prince Abyssus, and sole
commander of Seeberia, Alteenia, Pecheora, and of all the infernal furies and
their punife, the Jesuits, Priests, and Semenaries, Sends Greeting.
MOst dearly beloved Son, and you our dutiful Children, whose sanctity we
reverence, whose persons we adore, whose wisdoms we admire, at whose policies
we wonder, at whose power we muse, and at whose invincible stratagems we stand
amazed.
Nor can we in the first place, but extol, applaud, and most highly commend
thee our dear Son for the extraordinary care in the advancement of our
Kingdom.

And as next in place the extraordinary diligent and vigilant care of all our
beloved children the Lordly Bishops in the advancement of our Regal power to
the great enlargement of our infernal dominions, by their rare and subtle
plots, and stratagems.

And in a more special manner we are pleased through our infernal grace and
favor to extol them for this their present and excellent invention, in sowing
discord amongst the English heretics, as also in provoking the Scots heretics
to an apparent opposition against their King, yea so far as to an invasion of
the Territories of England; all which services are most dear and acceptable
unto us.

In respect of which services, as also for their fidelity to us and our
Kingdom, we have caused our principal Secretary of estate, Don Antonio
Furioso Diabolo, to make an especial Inroulement of their names in our Calend,
amongst those our dear servants the plotters of the Gun-powder-treason; and
the most renowned the complotters of the former Invasion of England, in the
year of grace 1588. and since the creation of the world 5609. both which
services although their events were no ways answerable according to our Royal
expectation; yet those instruments that so freely adventured themselves in
them, shall be ever renowned in our court infernal, and most acceptable to our
person.

And for the better encouragement of these our trusty and wel-beloved servants,
in the speedier advancement of this work, now intended for the utter
extirpation of all heretics, and increase of our regal power, we are pleased
by this our Royal manuell to give unto them assurance of our aid and best
assistance in the most efficacious manner that our Princely power can extend
unto. And because our former stratagems put in execution by our beloved Cozen
and Counselor the King of Spain, were by him no ways effected according to
our Princely expectation: We have now therefore imposed our Princely command
upon our beloved servant the King of France, at the humble suit made unto us,
by our children the Lordly Bishops, and by some of our servants of greatest
quality in the Realm of England, as also by our servants the Jesuits and
Roman Catholics of England, to have a puissant army in readiness for the
Invasion of England at such a time, as those our children and servants shall
conceive it most convenient and efficacious.

And further our will and pleasure is, that you our dear Son, shall still
persist to stir up and encourage our children the Archbishops, as also the
disciples and our loyal subjects and servants the Jesuits, Priests, and
Seminaries, to this work, that they with all their might, together with our
powerful policies granted unto them, may strive to effect this work with all
celerity; that we may once more see our Kingdom of Superstition re-established
in the Monarchy of Great Britain and Ireland.

The motives to be pressed, inducing them to the expeditious effecting of the
same is principally, their respect to our Kingly honor, next their own
increase of greatness, for we promise and assure them by the word of a King
infernal, That every of them shall reign as Princes under us, not only over
the bodies and estates of men, but also over their souls, by and through the
many infernal graces by us most freely and benignely conferred on them: and
hereby, to make them the more sensible of these our several graces conferred
on them, we are pleased therefore here at present to express but some few of
them in particular, (as namely) pride, vainglory, hypocrisy, self-love of
themselves; and of this present world, love of will worship, and advancement of
Idolatry; Together with that special gift of covetousness, the only pillar
to all the rest of our infernal graces conferred on them.

Thirdly, in respect of the clear passage by us made for them, by setting the
heretics for this long time at variance amongst themselves, by our trusty
servants the Lawyers, and advancement of Idolatry amongst them: The only
means in our Princely wisdom conceived to be to the breaking of the bond of
unity and peace, thereby to provoke the great God of heaven to leave them to
themselves, and to our powerful stratagems. We are likewise pleased to take
special notice of that service done by our children the Lordly Bishops, in
working the dissolution of the assembly of Parliament in May last past, 1640.
by which means nothing was effected for the good of heretics, either
concerning their Church or Commonwealth, so as the success of this design of
ours was thereby no ways hindered: you are likewise to let them know from us,
that the Noblemen of England be disheartered, the Gentry daunted, (...)
divided, the number of our servants, the Roman Catholics infinitely increased,
and the Realm in general greatly oppressed, not only by the sundry
Monopolies, but also by the invincible oppressing power of our children the
Lordly Bishops, the multitude of our servants the corrupt Judges, base minded
Lawyers, seditious Atturnies, and woodden-headed Doctors of our civil laws,
Proctors, Prothonotaries, Registers, Advocates, Solicitors, and Apparators,
whom we have caused to swarm, like to the Egyptian Locusts, over all the
land, for the sowing of discord, and blowing the coals of contention amongst
all the Inhabitants of the same, they having all of them long since received
instructions by some of our infernal spirits, sent forth from us to that
effect.

You are likewise to let them know, that out of our Princely respect to them,
and their damnable actions for our honor: We are pleased to take special
notice of that service, which they most willingly endeavored to effect for the
confusion of all the heretics, inhabiting England, Scotland, Ireland, and the
Netherlands, by the late (conceived) Invincible Armado, procured from Spain in
the year of our reign 5660. Which through the providence of the celestial
powers then over them, and the disturbance of Martin Harper Trump, here below,
failed of that success, which we together with them expected and hoped for,
to our no less sorrow then theirs.

Nor can we but applaud the diligent care taken by our children and servants of
greatest quality in that Kingdom, in preventing the discovery of that Invasive
plott by the heretics, and their small well-meaning State, through their
speedy flight to Dover Rode, and private conference there with Don Oquindo, the
Generalissimo of Spain to that effect; All which was most exquisitely
performed, especially by our hispaniolized lack-latine Lord, our dearly
beloved servant.

And lastly our hope is, that this present plot set on foot by these our trusty
and well-beloved children, and servants aforementioned, and by their earnest
endeavors and our assistance once effected, will crown all our labors to our
unspeakable terrestrial glory, and their eternal favors by us to be
conferred on them in our Royal Palace of perdition, where we have already
imposed our Royal command upon our trusty and wel-beloved cozen and
counselor, Peter Tretyacove Chancellor, Evane Becklemeesheve our Knight
Marshall, Richardo Slow Treasurer, and Don Serborus grand Porter of our said
Palace, to give them free admittance into our Royal Presence.

Thus no ways doubting of your singular care and diligence in fulfilling this
our Royal will and pleasure hereby expressed; we do further impose our Royal
favor and Princely respect to be by you presented unto our trusty and
wel-beloved cozen and counselor your present Nuntio in the Court of England,
as also unto our beloved children and servants, the Bishops, Jesuits, Priests,
and Seminaries, our faithful agents in this invincible plot; and also to all
our faithful subjects and servants the Roman Catholics of England.

We are pleased to remain your Royal Sovereign and Patron of all your
damnable plots and stratagems now in hand.

Given at out Infernal Palace of perdition this first of September, and in
the 5661. year of our most damnable reign.

Postscript.
Since the above-writte^ we are credibly informed of the intention of a most
scandalous Petition to be delivered by a small number of heretical Lords unto
their King at York, which does not a little touch our honor, and the discovery
of this our present stratagem. Our express will and pleasure is, that there be
some speedy course taken for the suppressing of the same, and the authors
thereof severely punished, and Pomfret Castle allotted unto them for their
abode, until our will and pleasure be further known, and this our design be
effected; of which fail you not, as you tender our Royal favor, the success
of this our design, and your own safety. Farewell.

Antonio Furioso Diabolo: Principalio Secretario.

Consider this and mark the substance well,
It seems a letter from the Feind of hell;
What ere the form or method seem to be,
The intent thereof was quite the contrary.
Had not this rung a knell in some men's ears,
They Would nea'r been freed from their slavish fears,
Of tyranny, oppression, and the Bishops pride;
Judges, and Lawyers; a wicked crew beside,
Of Doctors, Proctors, that the Realm did sway,
Trod under foot Gods truth, turned night to day.
Strove to confound Great Britains Monarchy,
Justice and Truth pervert; advanced impiety;
And all by this, Romes doctrine to prefer,
Obey the Pope, and serve King Lucifer;
That is the cause, why them he does applaud,
That he thereby with them may have the LAUD,
And honor due, unto his servants all,
That strive by him, to work Great Britains fall.
A true Coppie of the Petition which was by the Lords presented unto the KING
at York, September the 12. 1640.
To the Kings most Excellent Majesty.
THe humble Petition of your Majesty's most loyal subjects, whose names are
here under subscribed, in the behalf of themselves, and diverse others.

Most gracious Sovereign,

The sense of that duty we owe to Gods sacred Majesty, and our nearest
affection to the good and welfare of this your Realm of England, have moved us
in all humility, to beseech your Royal Majesty, to give us leave to offer to
your Princely wisdom, the apprehension which we and others your faithful
subjects have conceived, of the great distemper and danger now threatening this
Church and State, and your Royal person, and of the fittest means to remove
and prevent the same. The evils and dangers whereof your Majesty may be pleased
to take notice of, are these.

That your Majesty's sacred person is exposed to hazard and danger, in this
present expedition against the Scottish Army, and that by occasion of this
war, your Majesty's revenues are much wasted, your subjects burdened with
cote and conduct money, billiting of soldiers, and other military charges, and
diverse rapines and disorders (committed,) in several parts of this your Realm,
by the soldiers raised for that service, and the whole Realm full of fears
and discontentments.

The sundry innovations in matters of Religion, the oath of Canons lately
imposed upon the Clergy, and others of your Majesty's subjects, the great
increase of Popery, and employing of Popish Recusants, and others ill affected
unto Religion, are established in places of power and trust; especially in
commanding of men and arms, both in the field, and in sundry other Counties of
this your Realm, which by the laws, they are not permitted to have any arms
in their own houses, The great mischief that may fall upon this Kingdom, if
the intention which has been credibly reported of the bringing in of Irish
and foreign forces, should take effect; The heavy charge of Merchants, to the
great discouragement of trade; The multitude of Monopolies and other Patents,
whereby the commodities and manufactures of this Kingdom are much burdened,
to the great and universal grievances of your people, the great grief of your
subjects, with the long intermission of Parliaments, and the late and former
dissolving of such as have been called, without the happy effects, which
otherwise they might have produced; for remedy whereof, and prevention of the
danger that may ensue to your Royal person, and the whole state, They do in
all humility and faithfulness beseech your Majesty, that you will be pleased
to summon a Parliament in some short and convenient time, whereby the causes of
these and other great grievances, which your people suffer under, may be taken
away, and the Authors and Counselors of them may be brought to such legal
trial, and condign punishment, as the nature of their offenses shall require,
and that the present war may be composed by your Majesty's wisdom without
bloodshed, in such a manner as may conduce to the honor of your Majesty's
person and safety, the comfort of your people, and uniting of both the Realms
against the common enemies of the reformed religion, and your Majesty's
petitioners shall etc.

The names of such Earls and Barons as subscribed this Petition. viz. Earls:
Bedford, Hartford, Essex, Mougrave, Warwick, Bullingbrooke, Rutland, Lincoln,
Exeter. Vicounts: Lord Say and Seal, Mandifield, Brook, Harford, North,
Willowby, Savell, Wharton, Lovelace, Saint John.

Articles of agreement, made, concluded, and done this 28. of September, in the
year of grace, 1641. and of the world, 5662. by and between the high and
mighty Prince Lucifer, King of Sticks and Phlegeton, the holy and most
superstitious Primate of the Roman Church, the Cardinals, Bishops, Jesuits,
Priests, and Semenaries, (of the one party) and Judge Bribery, Lawyer
Corruption, Attorney Contention, Solicitor Sedition, Justice Connivence, Jailer
Oppression, and State Negligence, (of the other party) in manner and form
following.

Imprimis,

IT is this day mutually agreed, by and between the several parties
abovenamed, That there shall be a league offensive, and defensive, concluded,
and confirmed by both parties, at or before Holy-roode day, next ensuing the
date hereof. Item, That whereas there has been lately by the subtle
practices of some Parliamentary reformists, a discord and dissension raised
between the State Ecclesiastic, and the state of the Inns of Court, whereby
there has happened no small prejudice unto the ecclesiastic state, the likes
whereof is to be doubted, may also fall upon the state of the Innes of Court,
and so consequently upon the Crown and dignity of our Sovereign Lord King
Lucifer. It is therefore mutually agreed, that all former controverfies and
contentions between both parties shall cease, and that all unity, peace, and
concord, shall be embraced on either side, according to the expressions in the
precedent Article, to the honor of our Sovereign Lord King Lucifer, his
crown and dignity.

Item, It is agreed that the said state of the Inns of Court, and the state
Ecclesiastic aforesaid, shall jointly and severally use the uttermost of
their strength, power, and policy, to resist and suppress all such proceedings
of this present Parliament, which shall any way tend to the Reformation and
suppression of Oppression, Extortion, Bribery, Contention, and Tradition; And
that they shall and will, with all their might, power, and policy, endeavor
and strive to broach, advance, and maintain, all the said several impieties
again, to the honor of our Sovereign Lord King Lucifer, his crown and
dignity.

Item, It is agreed by and between our Sovereign Lord King Lucifer, and the
whole state Ecclesiastic, of the one part, and Judge Bribery; That forthwith
upon the dissolution of this present Parliament, He the said Judge Bribery, is
then again to put in practice the taking of bribes, passing of false judgment,
and maintaining his false and corrupt sentences and decrees, to be things
sacred and infallible; oppressing the innocent by close imprisonment; and also
favoring all Jesuits, Priests, and Semenaries, if any of them happen by the
Instruments of Justice to be laid hold on; animating and instructing all
Atturnies, Soliciters, and Clarks, for and to the sowing of strife and
contention amongst the people of the land, to the honor of our Sovereign Lord
King Lucifer, his crown and dignity.

Item, It is agreed by and between our Sovereign Lord King Lucifer, and
Lawyer Corruption: that he the said Lawyer Corruption, shall notwithstanding
any powerful Parliamentary reformation, still persist in taking fees, both of
plaintiff and defendant, nor shall ever bring any honest cause to its period,
until he has (in fees) devoured the whole substance both of plaintiff and
defendant, neither shall he the said Lawyer Corruption ever at any time give
any true and prevalent advice to any his clyents, but shall delude and delay
them, until he has draynd them as aforesaid, to the utter ruin of them,
their wives and children, to the honor of our Sovereign Lord King Lucifer,
and the propagation of his Crown and dignity. To their own present, rich
impiety, and assured successful perdition.

Item, It is agreed and concluded, by and between our Sovereign Lord King
Lucifer, and Atturny Contention; That he the said Atturny Contention, shall and
will, at all times, in all places, and upon all occasions, use his best
diligence to sow debate, strife, variance, and contention amongst the people of
the land without exception of persons; yea, he shall not omit to set the father
against the son, and the son against the father, as also one brother against
the other, to the utter ruin of their estates, houses, and families, to that
end he shall dispose of himself and all his imphes, into all the quarters and
several corners of the Kingdom; neither shall there be any market-towne or
place of habitation, but he shall seat himself there, to the intent and
purpose aforesaid, to the honor of our Sovereign Lord King Lucifer, his
Crown and dignity, and to the advancement of the said science of iniquity.

Item, It is agreed by, and between our Sovereign Lord King Lucifer, and
Solicitor Sedition, That he the said Solicitor Sedition, shall and will at all
times use his best endeavor to stir up, animate, and encourage all people, of
what condition, degree, and profession soever, unto ^ in the law, and that he
the said Solicitor Sedition, shall and will prove faithful unto all Lawyers
and Atturnies, and shall and will be slow in the prosecution of any man's cause
whatsoever, and spin out the thread thereof unto its full length, especially in
the Courts of equity, by multiplicity of (begging orders) and by not omitting
to have this clause inserted into every of his orders; viz. (unless cause be
showed to the contrary at the next court day by the defendant) as also by
falsifying of orders through the corrupting of registers, and corrupting of
counsel in an honest cause, by deceiving his clyents through false and unjust
bills of charges, by brybing the Judges of the several Courts, and the masters
of the Chancery, richly, to the honor of our Sovereign Lord King Lucifer, his
Crown and dignity, and the eternal damnation of Solicitor Sedition.

Item, It is agreed and concluded in Perpetuum, between our Sovereign Lord
King Lucifer, and Jailer Oppression, that whereas through the rigor of the
law, many poor Christian souls are committed unto his keeping and safe
custody for sundry causes, and sometimes for no just cause at all: He the said
Jailer Oppression, shall and will, by himself, his clarks and servants, be void
of all mercy and compassion toward them; and shall and will, as much as in him
lies, endeavor to work the utter ruin of the estates and lives of all such
as shall be committed to his custody, and to that end, he the said Jailer
Oppression, shall nor will not be slack in giving bribes, otherwise styled
new-yeares-gifts yearly unto all the Judges of the Courts of Justice, for, and
toward the better encouragement and animation of them, to the commitment of
all such to prison, as are, or shall be brought before them on the least
occasion; and that he the said Jailer Oppression shall be ever ready to yield
his daily attendance on the Judges in their Courts, thereby to stir them up to
be mindful of him to that effect: and lastly it is agreed and concluded, that
he the said JaylorOppression, shall and will by himself and his servants, set
such snares and gins for all those committed to his custody, that they being
once intrapped within his prison doors, shall never find the way out, during
the continuance of their lives, or of their estates at the least, to the honor
of our Sovereign Lord King Lucifer, his Crown and dignity, and to the
eternal perdition of Jailer Oppression.

Item, It is agreed by and between our Sovereign Lord King Lucifer, and
Justice Connivence, that he the said Justice Connivence, shall not nor will
have any regard or respect to the justnes of any poor man's cause, nor shall
ever incline his ear to any his just complaints, but shall and will ever
connive and bear with the oppressor, defrauder, and deceiver; and that he the
said Justice Connivence, shall and will ever prefer the value of a Goose, a
Pig, a Capon, a brace of Partridges, a good fat Sheep, a Bore at Christmas, or
a letter from a friend, written in favor of Sir Oppressor, Mr. Defrauder, and
Dick Deceiver, far before Justice it self, or the justness of any honest man's
cause whatsoever; nor that he the said Justice Connivence shall ever execute
Justice in any poor man's cause, but on the contrary, he shall oppress them,
and have his Mittimus ready written by his Clark. M' double fees for the speedy
commitment of them to prison; neither shall he ever incline his ear to hear
their just complaints against the several golden persons of worship
aforesaid, to the honor of our Sovereign Lord King Lucifer, his Crown and
dignity, and the benefit of Jailer Oppression.

Item, It is agreed by and between our Soveragine Lord King Lucifer, and state
Negligence, that he the said state Negligence, shall ever prefer his own
peace and present benefit, before the welfare and future prosperity of his King
and country, and also that he the said state negligence shall not at any time,
take notice of any the Illegal proceedings in any the Courts of Justice, nor
shall addict himself or ever endeavor to suppress nor prevent by any good or
wholesome laws the practice of tyranny, oppression, in justice, extortion,
bribery, contention, idolatry, and the like. But shall and will soly addict
himself to the pastimes, of hunting, hauking, gaming, whoring, and the utter
rejection of the present and future benefit and welfare of his native country,
to the honor of our Sovereign Lord King Lucifer, the prosperity of his
Religious Vicegerent, and the peace and tranquillity of all his servants the
Jesuits, Priests, Seminaries, and the Roman Catholics of England. In witness
of the truth of these presents, and of every particular contained in the same,
the parties above named have hereunto set their hands and seals, the day
aforesaid, and in the 5662 year of the reign of our most damnable Sovereign
Lord, King Lucifer. Etcetera.

Signed, sealed, and delivered in the presence of us. William Laud, Bishop.
Isoprise Crauly, Judge. Bribing Long, Justice. Corrupt Fountain, Lawyer.
Jumping Jumper, Attorney. Johnson in Grain, Jailer. Robert Kilfart, Solicitor.
And Rudine (...), Notarius publicus.

HERE FOLLOWS A BRIEF RELAtion of a great feast, which from Lucifer Prince of
hell was by the hands of Cardinal Pegusius presented to the view, disposal
and approbation of the Pope of Rome, in the year of Jubilee, 1641.
Pope. MY Lord Cardinal Pegusius, and you the rest of my holy Brethren, I
beseech you view these excellent varieties, and variety of excellencies, well
dressed, and most exquisitely set forth and garnished. But the contents of
every dish, I believe, is best known to you my Lord Pegusius, from whom I
desire to be satisfied, concerning the contents, qualities and operation of
every several dish.


Card. May it please your Holiness, These varieties of dishes, which your
holiness here sees thus set forth, were all of them prepared, for the only
table of our high and mighty Monarch, King Lucifer, your Holiness sole Patron
and Protector, a certain number of which dishes his Majesty has graciously
been pleased to cause them to be presented to your Holiness disposal, and the
residue of them, only to your Holiness view and approbation, being to be
preserved for his Majesty's own peculiar palate.


Pope. I beseech you my Lord Card. let me have them brought hither before me in
order, according to the appointment of my Sovereign and most munificent patron.


Card. Your holiness will and pleasure shall be accomplished, and here in the
first place may it please your holiness to take notice, that the first dish by
his majesty's appointment to be presented to your holiness disposal, is this
large (Latin charger) containing twenty two Lordly Bishops, stued with the
fire contention, on the chafindish of exasperation, and seasoned with the
several spices of man's invention, as with the spice of the Mass, Priesthood,
holy days, Altars, Candles, Rayles, holy-bread, holy water, holy-ashes, devout
prayer for the dead, invocation of Saints, offerings at the Altars,
excommunications: and the strong and operative spice, of the high commission.
It is also garnished about, with the several heretical Doctrines of all the
new entitled Priests of England, and this dish his majesty has appointed to
be disposed of by your holiness.


Pope. I will surely taste of it, (it looks lovely) oh admirable, it is a most
LAVDable dish of meat: I can find nothing wanting in this dish: but only
three grains of the spice of accomplishments, and then it had bin devoutly
seasoned for my pallat: but I pray-what is the next dish my lo'


Card. The next dish may it please your holiness, is a silver charger,
comprehending all the contrivers, and complotters of the dissension between
England and Scotland, of the last Spanish invasion of England, and the
practisers with the French for the subversion of a the heriticks in England,
Scotland, and Ireland, it is seasoned with all our Iesuitical practices, Church
policies and all our English Roman Catholic trecheries, and garnished with
all our English Roman Statists: this dish of meat is now almost cold, and
therefore at this present unfit for your holiness pallat, it only wants the
breath of the Earl of Straffords fiery zeal to heat it, by a LAVDable blast
or two.


Pope. However I pray let me taste of it, oh the lamentation of a sinner, pity,
pity, yea a thousand pities is it, that this dish had not bin kept hot and
seasoned to the proof, that we might have sung most LAVDably, ^e Lucifer
Landamus. But my Lord Cardinal what is the next dish.


Card. May it please your holiness, this dish contains a certain number of
false and corrupt Judges, it is seasoned with the spice of aged detestable
covetousness, bribery, extortion, oppression, injustice, unmercifulness, and
with pervertion of all the statute laws, garnished with ship money,
forrest-money, lone-money, and a multitude of Isoprises, but this dish is by
his majesty's special order to be preserved for his own peculiar palate.


Pope. His majesty's will be done, I shall ever be ready and obedient to al his
majesty's commands, nor will I presume to taste of it, but only pass my
judgment on it, that it is a Princely dish, fit only for his majesty's table.

What is the next I pray my Lord?


Card. The next may it please your Holiness, is a large golden charger,
containing a very great number of base-minded, covetous, unjust, extorting and
oppressing Lawyers who value every word by them uttered at a bar of Justice,
at a far higher price then your Holiness does your Bulls, issued forth for
remission of sins: and these caterpillars, his majesty king Lucifer has
brought into such great esteem, with all the Inhabitants of England, as that
no man of quality thinks his house to stand, unless it be supported by one of
those vermin pillars and brood of contention, this dish is seasoned with the
spice of extorting fees from one 20 shillingspeece, to 5 to 10. yea, to 20,
especially by those who are styled the Judges favorites, all this is given
sometimes but for the speaking of two or three words, it is likewise seasoned
with the taking fees on both sides, deluding Clyents, spinning out the thread
of an honest cause to its full length, until the purs-strings both of Plaintiff
and defendant crack, and then they are tied together, by a commission into the
country, where these caterpillars are reverenced and feared like so many gods,
by all the people: this dish is garnished with some 10000. pestiferous
pettifogging seditious ten-groat-Atturnies, one of whose perfidious bills of
charges, in one term advances it self sometimes unto the sum of 5, 10. 20.
yea, 30. pounds, especially when he finds his Clyent naturally inclined to the
conditions of an ass. And on every of these garnishes hanges five
cony-catching deceitful Solicitors, properly termed lawyers-lime-twigs, traps
or nets to catch the poor silly creatures called Clyents, and this dish his
majesty has also reserved for his own table.


Pope. It is a Princely dish indeed, and fit only for the peculiar table of so
great a Monarch, as is our most damnable sovereign King Lucifer, the operation
and virtue of which dish, is able to season a whole kingdom, to be fit meat
for his majesty's palate, especially if there be but the operative spice added
to it, called the (action of the Case.)

But what is this dish my Lord Cardinal.


Card. May it please your Holiness, this dish contains a certain number of
base muck-worms, styled Doctors of our Civil Law, Chancellors and Officials,
this dish is also seasoned with the unjust spice of extortion, oppression,
fraud and deceit, and garnished about with a most damnable crew of Proctors,
Notaries, Registers, Deligates, Advocates, Sumners, and petty Apparaters, these
have for many years proved notable instruments of strife and vexation, unto
the Inhabitants of England, and through their deceiveable ways, have mightily
oppressed the people, being not much inferior unto the precedent Golden
Charger.

But to this dish may it please your Holiness, there has happened this year a
very great mischance in the cooking, for when we thought it should have bin
most Laudably boiled up to its greatest height of Catholic operation there
happened a Spider to fall into it, through a sudden blast of reformation which
has made it somewhat dangerous now for your holiness to taste of, for, the
Lamb that was most richly seasoned in it, is now through this sudden and
unexpected misfortune putrified, and the Duck being awatry foul, is quite
dissolved, and this dish by his majesty's special order, is to be left now to
your holiness disposal.


Pope, I am much bound to his majesty for his gracious favor to me herein, I
shall be very careful through deliberation and mature consideration to study
for the most fittest disposal thereof during the time of my vicegency here,
and then return it again to his Majestyes disposal. But I pray you my Lord
Cardinal what do those coper vessels contain?


Card. may it please your holiness: this covered mess is a gallimophre or as
the Flemine calls it a Hutchpot, wherein are sundry meats stued together: it
contains a certain number of beasts called corrupt masters of the Chancery,
and half a dozen corrupt clarks of the chancery, also 150. of their puny
clarks commonly termed Atturnies in chancery, it also contains 6 new Atturnies
of the Court of requests and some 60 of their puny clarks: this Hutchpot is
seasoned with the spice of bribery, false witnesses styled Knights of the
post, a spice greatly in request in those Courts, especially in the examiners
offices and the late Coventry affidavit office, but his majesty's special
command is to have this covered mispreserved in its present condition, least
contention should cease amongst the inhabitants of England, and unity and peace
take place, which cannot but tend much to his majesty's detriment and loss of
dominion in that Kingdom, and to that end he has caused the same to be sealed
up, and to be conveyed from Coventry to Manchester by the goulden-Finche.


Pope. Good my Lord Cardinal I beseech you, let his majesty's will and
pleasure herein be very carefully accomplished, for it concerns much his
majestyes honor and our safety.

But what is in this dish my Lord?


Card. This may it please your holiness, is likewise a Hutchpot, containing
meats of sundry sorts and operations, it contains a certain number of
Prothonotaries, Registers, and Clarks of the Star Chamber, Chancery, Court of
Request, King's Bench, Common Pleas, and the Exchecker, this galimofre is
seasoned with subornation of false-witnesses, falsifying of orders, and
decrees, it is garnished with the subtle practices of the renter warden of the
fleet and his imphes, as also with Kilvert, kilfart, kilbennet, kill Bishop,
and the like instruments of Lawyers gain, the operations of this dish chiefly
consists in the confusion of men's estates, to extract Gold out of all men's
purses, to suppress virtue and peace, and to advance iniquity and contention,
to wrong and oppress every man, and to do right unto no man.

And this mess is also to be reserved for his Majesty's Table.


Pope. Good my Lord Cardinal, I pray you let me taste of this mess, the
operation whereof by your relation appears to be admirable, I wish from my
heart that I might also grow capeable of that virtue of extracting Gold out of
the English nation, as some of my predecessors have don before me, (I confess)
the study of this Art was begun by my Physician most laudadly, but alas and
woe is me, it was marred by a robustuous storm of wind out of the North, and
quite spoiled a vehement shower of puritanicall rain, and what is the next
mess my Lord?


Card. May it please your holiness, this is also a Hutchpot, containing sundry
course meats, as scriveners, brokers, usurers, jailors, baliss, sergeants,
informers, perjured Chuch-wardens, justlers of the peace, and bumbailifs: this
mess is seasoned with parchment, deceit, extortion, usury, oppression,
murdering of Christian souls in prisons through famine, false information,
injustice, neglect, and tyranny, and is garnished with a number of irreligious
Majors, Sherifs, Feoderies, escheaters, Clerks of the syse, Clarcks of the
peace, Constables and headboroughs. But this mess is by his majesty's order to
be disposed of unto his servant.


Pope. Indeed my Lord Card. me thinks this Mess has a very bitter relish
with it, else my mouth is quite out of taste, I confess it to be a mess fit
only for his majesty's Hell Hounds, But what is this last mess?


Card. I conceive this mess to be very well known to your holiness, for it is
seasoned with most of those operative spices that all the meat dressed in your
holiness kitchen is seasoned with this mess, contains diverse justicial birds of
Middlesex, as namely the Long, the Hearn, the Snape, the Hooker, the Geay, and
the likes of them. Seasoned with the fees and bribes of all the whores and
thieves that live in Westminster, Coven-Garden, Holborn, Grub-street,
Clarkenwell, Rosemarylane, Turnbull-street, Ratcliff, Southwark, Bank-side, and
Kent-street; this dish is also garnished with the New-yearsgifts of the whores,
thieves, and cutpurses, dwelling in the forenamed several places, but this
Mess is by his majesty reserved for his own peculiar palate.


Pope. Oh venerable Bead, Oh holy Garnet, O sanctified Faux, O reverend Becket,
O beloved Ravilliack, Campion, Watson, Parsons, Morton, Sands, and admired
Bellarmine, I call you all to witness this day, whether you or any of you have
ever as yet been capeable of such a delicious feast, adorned with so many
varieties, beautified with so many several rarieties, and seasoned with such
delectable spices.

Sancte ^dicte Or^ pro nobis.
And thus rendering all humble and hearty thanks, with all reverence in all
obedience unto his Majesty, our most damnable prince and Protector, Lucifer,
King of Sticks and Phlegeton; I remain his majesty's humble servant and Vice
gerent, at his majesty's sole disposal during life.

PAPA ROMANORUM




Advices and motives to the Honorable Assembly in Parliament.
E. S. I. The stake's three Crowns, four Nations gamsters are,
E. W. I. S. There Is three to one, and yet no man that dare.
Take these great odds, the cause is as they say,
The fourth knows both our stock, and cards we play.
This turns the odds, and makes most gamesters think,
Wee'r but in jest, and play our Cards and wink.
The Set goes hard, when gamesters think it best,
Though three men vie it, the fourth sets his rest.
My Masters, you that undertake the game,
Look to it, your Countries safety and her fame
Are now at stake, be careful how you cut
And deal, as known occasions put you to it.
The Cards are strangely shuffled, for your parts,
It Is odds, you ever get the ace of hearts.
Yet the five finger, and some helps beside,
Lie in the pack dispersed, be those your guide,
That you possess, to tell you what you want,
Least the mistake of one poor trick should daunt,
Your spirits quite, and make you fling away
Your liberty, not to be lost by play:
Detest foul juggling, now it is in your powers,
Let none but square play pass, the game is yours.
For here you see, Hell, Rome, and all their train,
Plot to confound all your good Laws again.
Then have a care, expel Romes imphes, make sure,
Your Laws and Liberties may still endure,
To future ages, posterities then may,
Have cause to bless your memories for aye.
LAment, lament, you Bishops all each wear his blackest gown,
Hang up your Rochets on the wall, your pride is going down.
It needs must grieve each Romish heart to hear this sad relation:
All Cannons are not worth a fart, made in the Convocation.
The Bishops holy Synod, and the Priests of Baal, that there
Consented, and concluded all, are now in grievous fear,
To be deprived of Priestly style, of Coat Canonical:
And quite be banished this I Will, they fear they must be all.
Ah, poor (Etcetera,) is now dead, which grieves the Bishops most:
What they would have immortal made, has now given up the Ghost.
Alas I what new begotten oath, like snow against the Sun,
It did begin to melt away, when the Parliament begun.
All Ceremonies are good cheap,
And I will tell you how:
The Tippit, Hood, and Surplisse eke, are good for nothing now.
And which I was more woeful is, and most their courage quayles:
There was a grievous murder made, among their holy Rayles.
Oh, when this sad and heavy news, unto that Synod came,
The Birds and Beasts were in a muse,
Ass, Wren, and Duck, and Lamb.
And then a doleful ditty these, did thus lament together:
Alas, we must all run away, when shall we run, and whether.
Shall we with Windibanke to France, or fly to Holland, where
The Finch is flown, for us a place, before hand to prepare.
No quoth the Duck, we will fly to Rome, and there rest without fear
Of Parliament, and then the Lamb, may come up in the rear.
And there we will drink a health to all the Puritans confusion,
That have thus strongly wrought our fall, by Parliament conclusion.
The Judges and the Lawyers all,
Atturnies, Proctors, Clerks,
Soliciters, and Advocates,
Must now stand in their Sarkes;
And penance do for all their faults,
Their bribes they must restore,
Their cheats and tricks which they did use,
They practice must no more.
The people long they have beguiled,
And many a one undone,
Gods curse their wealth for this does melt,
As snow is by the Sun.
Their children and posterity,
The Gallows does devour,
Themselves have made a league with hell,
To reign still by his power.
God is the God of unity,
Of love, and peace alone,
But these men for deceit and strife,
The like of them there is none.
Probatum est.
Received by me, Fountain of iniquity, this 22. of September, 1641. by the
help of Judge Bribery, and the furtherance of Lawyer Impiety, of Romanus
Treachery, the sum of 10. pounds of damnable simplicity: 9. pounds of
superstitious ignorance: 7. pounds of idolatrous folly: 6. pounds of wilful
stupidity: and 3. pounds of perverseness, to and for the use of Impatience:
And by his appointment to be delivered unto gentle Prodigality, to and for the
use of Mistress Inconstancy, daughter and sole heir unto Mistress Letchery, the
grandchild of Mistress Bawdery, dwelling next door unto Mistress Beggary.

By the new Prison near the whipping thong:
At no great distance from M. Justice Long.
Long has a long time been a knave:
Receiving bribes from every slave.
Long ever has a shelter been full sure,
For every thief, a Cutpurse, and a Whore.
Long knows full well his Christmas how to keep,
On cost of Whores, those are his only sheep.
His Capons, Wood-cocks, Sheeps-heads, S^ites and Geayes:
Providers of good cheer on all assayes.
Long may he feast his body, fill his purse,
By such a crew of hellish imphes. Gods curse
Assuredly will fall on him and his.
And prove his fatal recompense for this.
Long may he be a knave, of such great fame
To all Whores glory, his own eternal shame.
FINIS.

