OF PRELATICAL EPISCOPACY, AND VVhither it may be deduced from the Apostolical
times by virtue of those Testimonies which are alleged to that purpose in some
late Treatises: One whereof goes under the Name of JAMES ARCHBISHOP OF ARMAGH.

London, Printed by R. O. and G. D. for Thomas Underhill, and are to be sold at
the sign of the Bible, in Wood-Street, 1641.

OF PRELATICALL EPISCOPACY:
EPYSCOPACY, as it is taken for an Order in the Church above a Presbyter, or as
we commonly name him, the Minister of a Congregation, is either of Divine
constitution, or of humane. If only of humane, we have the same humane
privilege, that all men have ever had since Adam, being borne free, and in the
Mistress Island of all the British, to retain this Episcopacy, or to remove
it, consulting with our own occasions, and conveniences, and for the
prevention of our own dangers, and disquiets, in what best manner we can
devise, without running at a loss, as we must needs in those stale, and
useless records of either uncertain, or unsound antiquity, which if we hold
fast to the grounds of the reformed Church, can neither skill of us, nor we of
it, (so often as it would lead us to the broken reed of tradition. If it be of
Divine constitution, to satisfy us fully in that, the Scripture only is able,
it being the only Book left us of Divine authority, not in any thing more
Divine then in the all sufficiency it has to furnish us, as with all other
spiritual knowledge, so with this in particular, setting out to us a perfect
man of God accomplished to all the good works of his charge. Through all which
Book can be no where, either by plain Text, or solid reasoning found any
difference between a Bishop, and a Presbyter, save that they be two names to
signify the same order. Notwithstanding this clearness, and that by all
evidence of argument, Timothy, and Titus (whom our Prelates claim to imitate
only in the controuling part of their office) had rather the vicegerency of an
Apostleship committed to them, then the ordinary charge of a Bishopric, as
being 2 Timothy 4.
men of an extraordinary calling, yet to verify that which Saint Paul foretold
of succeeding times, when men began to have itching ears, then not contented
with the plentiful and wholesome fountains of the Gospel, they began after
their own lusts to heap to themselves teachers, and as if the divine Scripture
wanted a supplement, and were to be eek't out, they cannot think any doubt
resolved, and any doctrine confirmed, unless they run to that indigested heap,
and fry of Authors, which they call Antiquity. Whatsoever time, or the
heedlesse hand of blind chance, has drawn down from of old to this present,
in her huge dragnet, whether Fish, or Sea-weed, Shells, or Shrubbs, unpickt,
unchosen, those are the Fathers. Seeing therefore some men, deeply conversant
in Books, have had so little care of late to give the world a better account
of their reading, then by divulging needless tractats stuff't with specious
names of Ignatius, and Polycarpus, with fragments of old Martyrologies, and
legends, to distract, and stagger the multitude of credulous readers, and
mislead them from their strong guards, and places of safety under the tuition
of holy writ, it came into my thoughts to persuade my self, setting all
distances, and nice respects aside, that I could do Religion, and my Country no
better service for the time then doing my utmost endeavor to recall the people
of GOD from this vain forraging after straw, and to reduce them to their firm
stations under the standard of the Gospel: by making appear to them, first
the insufficiency, next the inconvenience, and lastly the impiety of these gay
testimonies, that their great Doctors would bring them to dote on. And in
performing this I shall not strive to be more exact in Method, then as their
citations lead me.

First therefore concerning Ignatius shall be treated Page 4.
fully, when the Author shall come to insist upon some places in his Epistles.
Next to prove a succession of 27. Bishops from Timothy, he cites one Leontius
Bishop of Magnesia, out of the 11. act of the Chalcedonian Council: this is
but an obscure, and single witness, and for his faithful dealing who shall
commend him to us, with this his Catalogue of Bishops? what know we further of
him, but that he might be as factious, and false a Bishop, as Leontius of
Antioch that was a hunderd years his predecessor? for neither the praise of
his wisdom, or his virtue has left him memorable to posterity, but only
this doubtful relation, which we must take at his word; and how shall this
testimony receive credit from his word, whose very name had scarce been thought
on, but for this bare Testimony? But they will say he was a member of the
Council, and that may deserve to gain him credit with us. I will not stand to
argue, as yet with fair allowance I might, that we may as justly suspect,
there were some bad and slippery men in that council, as we know there are
wont to be in our Convocations. Nor shall I need to plead at this time, that
nothing has been more attempted, nor with more subtilty brought about, both
anciently by other Heretics, and modernly by Papists, then to falsify the
Editions of the Councels, of which we have none but from our Adversaries
hands, whence Canons, Acts, and whole spurious Councels are thrust upon us, and
hard it would be to prove in all, which are legitimat against the lawful
rejection of an urgent, and free disputer, but this I purpose not to take
advantage of, for what availes it to wrangle about the corrupt editions of
Counsels, when as we know that many years ere this time which was almost 500.
years after Christ, the Councels themselves were foully corrupted with ungodly
Prelatisme, and so far plunged into worldly ambition, as that it stood them
upon long ere this to uphold their now well-tasted Hierarchy by what fair
pretext soever they could, in like manner as they had now learnt to defend many
other gross corruptions by as ancient, and supposed authentic tradition as
Episcopacie. And what hope can we have of this whole Council to warrant us a
matter 400. years at least above their time concerning the distinction of
Bishop and Presbyter, whenas we find them such blind Judges of things before
their eyes in their decrees of precedencie between Bishop, and Bishop,
acknowledging Rome for the Apostolic throne, and Peter in that See for the
rock, the basis, and the foundation of the Catholic Church, and Faith,
contrary to the interpretation of more ancient Fathers; and therefore from a
mistaken text did they give to Leo as Peter's successor a kind of pre-eminence
above the whole Council, as Euagrius expresses (for now the Pope was come to
that height, as to arrogate to himself by his Vicars incompetible honors) and
yet having thus yielded to Rome the universal Primacie for spiritual reasons,
as they thought, they conclude their sitting with a carnal, and ambitious
decree to give the second place of dignity to Constantinople from reason of
State, because it was new ROME, and by like consequence doublesse of earthly
privileges annexed to each other City, wasthe BISHOP thereof to take his place.

I may say again therefore, what hope can we have of such a Council, as
beginning in the Spirit, ended thus in the flesh. Much rather should we attend
to what Eusebius the ancientest writer extant of Church History,
notwithstanding all the helps he had above these, confesses in the 4. chap. of
his 3. Book, that it was no easy matter to tell who were those that were left
Bishops of the Churches by the Apostles, more then by what a man might gather
from the Acts of the Apostles, and the Epistles of St. Paul, in which number he
reckons Timothy for Bishop of Ephesus. So as may plainly appear, that this
tradition of Bishoping Timothy over Ephesus was but taken for granted out of
that place in St. Paul, which was only an entreating him to tarry at Ephesus,
to do something left him in charge. 1 Timothy 1. 3.
Now if Eusebius a famous writer thought it so difficult to tell who were
appointed Bishops by the Apostles, much more may we think it difficult to
Leontius an obscure Bishop speaking beyond his own Diocese: and certainly much
more hard was it for either of them to determine what kind of Bishops those
were, if they had so little means to know who they were; and much less reason
have we to stand to their definitive sentence, seeing they have bin so rash to
raise up such lofty Bishops and Bishoprics out of places in Scripture merely
misunderstood. Thus while we leave the Bible to gadde after these traditions of
the ancients, we hear the ancients themselves confessing, that what knowledge
they had in this point was such as they had gathered from the Bible.

Since therefore Antiquity it self has turned over the controversy to that
sovran Book which we had fondly straggl'd from, we shall do better not to
detain this venerable apparition of Leontius any longer, but dismiss him with
his List of seven and twenty, to sleep unmolested in his former obscurity.

Now for the word (...), it is more likely that Timothy never knew the word in
that sense: it was the vanity of those next succeeding times not to content
themselves with the simplicity of Scripture phrase, but must make a new Lexicon
to name themselves by, one will be called (...), or Antistes, a word of
precedence, another would be termed a Gnostick as Clemens, a third Sacerdos, or
Priest, and talks of Altars; which was a plain sign that their doctrine began
to change, for which they must change their expressions: But that place of
Justin Martyr serves rather to convince the Author, then to make for him, where
the name (...), the president, or Pastor of the Brethren (for to what end is he
their President but to teach them) cannot be limited to signify a Prelaticall
Bishop, but rather communicates that Greek appellation to every ordinary
Presbyter: for there he tells what the Christians had wont to do in their
several Congregations, to read, and expound, to pray and administer, all which
he says the (...), or Antistes did. Are these the Offices only of a Bishop, or
shall we think that every Congregation where these things were done, which he
attributes to this Antistes, had a Bishop present among them? unless they had
as many Antistites as Presbyters, which this place rather seems to imply, and
so we may infer even from their own alleged authority, that Antistes was
nothing else but Presbyter.

As for that namelesse Treatise of Timothy's martyrdom, only cited by Photius
that lived almost Page 5.
900. years after Christ, it hansomely follows in that author, the Martyrdom
of the seven Sleepers, that slept (I tell you but what mine Author says) three
hundred seaventy, and two years, for so long they had bin shut up in a Cave
without meat, and were found living. This Story of Timothy's Ephesian
Bishopric as it follows in order, so may it for truth, if it only subsist
upon its own authority, as it does, for Photius only says he read it; he does
not aver it. That other legendarie piece found among the lives of the Saints,
and sent us from the shop of the p Eusebius. l. 6. (...)
Jesuits at Lovain, does but bear the name of Polyerates, how truly who can
tell? and shall have some more weight with us, when Polycrates can persuade us
of that which he affirms in the same place of Eusebius 5. Book, that St. John
was a Priest, and wore the golden brestplate: and why should he convince us
more with his traditions of Timothy's Episcopacie, then he could convince
Victor Bishop of Rome with his traditions concerning the Feast of Easter, who
not regarding his irrefragable instances of examples taken from Philip, and his
daughters that were Prophetesses; or from Polycarpus, no nor from St. John
himself, Excommunicated both him, and all the Asian Churches for celebrating
their Easter judaically: he may therefore go back to the seven Bishops his
kinsmen, and make his moan to them that we esteem his traditionall ware, as
lightly as Victor did.

Those of Theodoret, Felix, and John of Antioch are autorities of later times,
and therefore not to be received for their Antiquities sake to give in evidence
concerning an allegation, wherein writers so much their Elders, we see so easily
miscarry. What if they had told us that Peter, who as they say left Ignatius
Bishop of Antioch, went afterward to Rome, and was Bishop there, as this
Ignatius, and Irenaeus, and all Antiquity with one mouth deliver, there be
never the less a number of learned, and wise Protestants who have written, and
will maintain, that Peter's being at Rome as Bishop cannot stand with
concordance of Scripture.

Now come the Epistles of Ignatius to show us first, that Onesimus was Bishop
of Ephesus; next to assert the difference of Bishop and Presbyter, wherein I
wonder that men teachers of the Protestant Religion, make no more difficulty of
imposing upon our belief a supposititious offspring of some dozen Epistles,
whereof five are rejected as spurious, containing in them Herefies and trifles,
which cannot agree in Chronology with Ignatius, entitling him Archbishop of
Antioch Theopolis, which name of Theopolis that City had not till Justinians
time long after, as Cedrenus mentions, which argues both the barbarous time,
and the unskilful fraud of him that foisted this Epistle upon Ignatius. In the
Epistle to those of Tarsus he condemns them for Ministers of Satan, that say
Christ is God above all. To the Phillippians them that kept their Easter, as
the Asian Churches, and Polycarpus did, and them that fasted upon any Saturday,
or Sunday, except one he counts as those that had slain the Lord. To those of
Antioch he salutes the Subdeacons, Chaunters, Porters, and Exorcists, as if
these had bin Orders of the Church in his time: those other Epistles less
questioned are yet so interlarded with Corruptions, as may justly indue us with
a wholesome suspicion of the rest. As to the Trallians he writes that a Bishop
has power over all beyond all government, and authority whatsoever. Surely then
no Pope can desire more then Ignatius attributes to every Bishop, but what will
become then of the Archbishops and Primates if every Bishop in Ignatius
judgment be as supreme as a Pope? To the Ephesians, near the very place from
whence they fetch their proof for Episcopacy, there stands a line that casts an
ill hue upon all the Epistle, Let no man err, says he, unless a man be
within the rays, or enclosure of the Altar, he is deprived of the bread of
life. I say not but this may be stretched to a figurative construction, but yet
it has an ill look, especially being followed beneath with the mention of I
know not what sacrifices. In the other Epistle to Smyrna wherein is written
that they should follow their Bishop as Christ did his Father, and the
Presbytery as the Apostles: not to speak of the insu^^e, and ill-layd
comparison, this cited place lies upon the very brimme of a noted corruption,
which had they, that quote this passage, ventured to let us read, all men would
have readily seen what grain the testimony had bin of, where it is said, that
it is not lawful without a Bishop to baptize, nor to offer, nor to do
sacrifice. What can our Church make of these phrases but scandalous: and but a
little further he plainly falls to contradict the Spirit of God in Solomon,
Judge by the words themselves. My Son, says he, honor God and the King; but I
say, honor God and the Bishop as High Priest, bearing the image of God
according to his ruling, and of Christ, according to his Priesting, and after
him honor the King. Excellent Ignatius! can ye blame the Prelates for making
much of this Epistle? Certainly if this Epistle can serve you to set a Bishop
above a Presbyter, it may serve you next to set him above a King. These, and
other like places in abundance through all those short Epistles must either be
adulterat, or else Ignatius was not Ignatius, nor a Martyr, but most
adulterate, and corrupt himself. In the midst therefore of so many forgeries
where shall we fix to dare say this is Ignatius? as for his style who knows
it? so disfigured and interrupted as it is, except they think that where they
meet with any thing found, and orthodoxal, there they find Ignatius, and then
they believe him not for his own authority, but for a truths sake, which they
derive from else where: to what end then should they cite him as authentic for
Episcopacie, when they cannot know what is authentic in him, but by the
judgment which they brought with them, and not by any judgment which they
might safely learn from him. How can they bring satisfaction from such an
Author, to whose very essence the Reader must be fain to contribute his own
understanding. Had God ever intended that we should have sought any part of
useful instruction from Ignatius, doubtless he would not have so ill provided
for our knowledge, as to send him to our hands in this broken and disjoynted
plight; and if he intended no such thing, we do injuriously in thinking to
taste better the pure Euangelick Manna by seasoning our mouths with the tainted
scraps, and fragments of an unknown table; and searching among the verminous,
and polluted rags dropped overworn from the toyling shoulders of Time, with these
deformedly to quilt, and interlace the entire, the spotless, and undecaying
robe of Truth, the daughter not of Time, but of Heaven, only bred up here below
in Christian hearts, between two grave and holy nurses the Doctrine, and
Discipline of the Gospel.

Next follows Irenaeus Bishop of Lions, who is cited page 8,
to affirm that Polycarpus was made Bishop of Smyrna by the Apostles: and this
it may seem, none could better tell then he who had both seen and heard
Polycarpus: but when did he hear him? himself confesses to Florinus, when he
was a Boy. Whether that age in Irenaeus may not be liable to many mistakings;
and whether a Boy may be trusted to take an exact account of the manner of a
Church constitution, and upon what terms, and within what limits, and with what
kind of Commission Polycarpus received his charge, let a man consider, ere he
be (...). It will not be denied that he might have seen Polycarpus in his youth
a man of great eminence in the Church, to whom the other Presbyters might give
way for his virtue, wisdom, and the reverence of his age and so did Amcetus
Bishop of Rome, even in his own City, give him a kind of priority
inadministring the Sacrament; as may be read in Eusebius: but that we should
hence conclude a distinct, and superior order from the young observation of
Irenaeus, nothing yet alleged can warrant us, unless we shall believe such as
would face us down, that Calvin, and after him Beza were Bishops of Geneva,
because that in the unsetl'd state of the Church, while things were not fully
composed, their worth, and learning cast a greater share of business upon
them, and directed men's eyes principally toward them, and yet these men were
the dissolvers of Episcopacie. We see the same necessity in state affairs
Brutns that expelled the Kings out of Rome, was for the time forced to be as it
were a King himself, till matters were set in order, as in a free Commonwealth.
He that had seen Pericles lead the Athenians which way he listed, happily would
have said he had bin their Prince, and yet he was but a powerful and eloquent
man in a Democratie, and had no more at any time then a Temporary, and elective
sway, which was in the will of the people when to abrogate. And it is most
likely that in the Church they which came after these Apostolic men being
less in merit, but bigger in ambition, strove to invade those privileges by
intrusion and plea of right, which Polycarpus, and others like him possessed from
the voluntary surrender of men subdued by the excellency of their heavenly
gifts, which because their Successors had not, and so could neither have that
authority, it was their policy to divulge that the eminence which Polycarpus and
his equals enjoyed, was by right of constitution, not by free will of
condiscending. And yet thus far Irenaeus makes against them as in that very
place to call Polycarpus an Apostolical Presbyter. But what fidelity his
relations had in general, we cannot sooner learn then by Eusebius, who near
the end of his third Book, speaking of Papias a very ancient writer, one that
had heard St. John, and was known to many that had seen, and bin acquainted
with others of the Apostles, but being of a shallow wit, and not understanding
those traditions which he received, filled his writings with many new
doctrines, and fabulous conceits, he tells us there, that diverse
Ecclesiastical men, and Irenaeus among the rest, while they looked at his
antiquity, became infected with his errors. Now if Irenaeus were so rash as to
take unexamin'd opinions from an Author of so small capacity, when he was a
man, we should be more rash our selves to rely upon those observations which he
made when he was a Boy. And this may be a sufficient reason to us why we need
no longer muse at the spreading of many idle traditions so soon after the
Apostles, whilst such as this Papias had the throwing them about, and the
inconsiderate zeal of the next age, that heeded more the person, then the
Doctrine, had the gathering them up. Where ever a man, who had bin any away
conversant with the Apostles, was to be found, thither slew all the inquisitive
ears, the exercise of right instructing was changed into the curiosity of
impertinent fabling: where the mind was to be edified with solid Doctrine,
there the fancy was soothed with solemn stories: with less fervency was
studied what Saint Paul, or Saint John had written then was listened to one
that could say here he taught, here he stood, this was his stature, and thus
he went habited, and O happy this house that harbored him, and that cold stone
whereon he rested, this Village wherein he wrought such a miracle, and that
pavement bedewed with the warm effusion of his last blood, that sprouted up
into eternal Roses to crown his Martyrdom. Thus while all their thoughts
were powered out upon circumstances, and the gazing after such men as had sat
at table with the Apostles (many of which Christ has professed, yea thoughthey
had cast out Devils in his name, he will not know at the last day) by this
means they lost their time, and truanted in the fundamental grounds of saving
knowledge, as was seen shortly by their writings. Lastly for Ireneus, we have
cause to think him less judicious in his reports from hand to hand of what
the Apostles did, when we find him so negligent in keeping the faith which they
writ, as to say in his third Book against Heresies, that the obedience of Mary
was the cause of salvation to her self, and all mankind, and in his fifth
Book, that as Eve was seduc't to fly God, so the Virgin Mary was persuaded to
obey God, that the Virgin Mary might be made the Advocate of the Virgin Eve.
Thus if Irenaeus for his neerenesse to the Apostles, must be the Patron of
Episcopacy to us, it is no marvel though he be the Patron of Idolatry to the
Papist, for the same cause. To the Epistle of those brethren of Smyrna, that
write the Martyrdom of Polycarpus, and style him an Apostolical, and
prophetical Doctor, and Bishop of the Church in Smirna, I could be content to
give some credit for the great honor, and affection which I see those brethren
bear him, and not undeservedly if it be true which they there say that he was
a Prophet, and had a voice from Heaven to comfort him at his death, which they
could hear, but the rest could not for the noise, and tumult that was in the
place, and besides if his body were so precious to the Christians, that he was
never wont to pull off his shoes for one or other that still strove to have
the office, that they might come to touch his feet, yet a light scruple or two
I would gladly be resolved in; if Polycarpus (who, as they say, was a Prophet
that never faild in what he foretold) had declared to his friends, that he knew
by vision, he should die no other death then burning, how it came to pass
that the fire when it came to proof, would not do his work, but starting off
like a full sail from the mast, did but reflect a golden light upon his
unviolated limbs exhaling such a sweet odor, as if all the incense of Arabia
had bin burning, in so much that when the bill-men saw that the fire was
overaw'd, and could not do the deed, one of them steps to him, and stabs him
with a sword, at which wound such abundance of blood gusht forth as quenched the
fire. By all this relation it appears not, how the fire was guilty of his
death, and then how can his prophecy be fulfilled? Next how the standers by
could be so soon weary of such a glorious sight, and such a fragrant smell, as
to hasten the executioner to put out the fire with the Martyrs blood, unless
perhaps they thought, as in all perfumes, that the Smoke would be more
odorous then the flame? Yet these good brethren say he was Bishop of Smyrna. No
man questions it, if Bishop, and Presbyter were anciently all one, and how does
it appear by any thing in this testimony that they were not? If among his
other high titles of prophetical, Apostolical, and most admired of those
times, he be also styled Bishop of the Church of Smirna in a kind of speech,
which the Rhetoricians call (...), for his excellence sake, as being the most
famous of all the Smyrnian Presbyters, it cannot be proved neither from this
nor that other place of Irenaeus, that he was therefore in distinct, and
monarchical order above the other Presbyters, it is more probable, that if the
whole Presbytery had been as renowned as he, they would have termed every one
of them severally Bishop of Smyrna. Hence it is that we read sometimes of two
Bishops in one place, and had all the Presbyters there been of like worth, we
might perhaps have read of twenty.

Tertullian accosts us next (for Polycrates has had his answer) whose
testimony, state but the question right, is of no more force to deduce
Episcopacy, then the two former. He says that the Church of Smirna had
Polycarpus placed there by John, and the Church of Rome Clement ordained by
Peter, and so the rest of the Churches did show, what Bishops they had received
by the appointment of the Apostles. None of this will be contradicted, for we
have it out of the Scripture that Bishops or Presbyters, which were the same,
were left by the Apostles in every Church, and they might perhaps give some
special charge to Clement, or Polycarpus, or Linus, and put some special
trust in them for the experience they had of their faith, and constancy; it
remains yet to be evinc't out of this and the like places, which will never
be, that the word Bishop is otherwise taken, then in the language of Saint
Paul, and the Acts, for an order above Presbyters. We grant them Bishops, we
grant them worthy men, we grant them placed in several Churches by the
Apostles, we grant that Irenaeus, and Tertul: affirm this, but that they were
placed in a superior Order above the Presbytery, show from all these words why
we should grant. It Is not enough to say the Ap: left this man Bishop in Rome,
and that other in Ephesus, but to show when they alterd their own decree set
down by St. Paul, and made all the Presbyters underlings to one Bishop. But
suppose Tertullian had made an imparity where none was originally, should he
move us, that goes about to prove an imparity between God the Father, and God
the Son, as these words import in his Book against Praxeas. The Father is
the whole substance, but the Son a derivation, and portion of the whole, as he
himself professes because the Father is greater then me. Believe him now for a
faithful relater of tradition, whom you see such an unfaithful expounder of
the Scripture. besides in his time all allowable tradition was now lost. For
this same Author whom you bring to testify the ordination of Clement to the
Bishopric of Rome by Peter, test fies also in the beginning of his treatise
concerning Chastity, that the Bishop of Rome did then use to send forth his
edicts by the name of Pontifex Maximus, and Episcopus Episcoporum chief Priest,
and Bishop of Bishops. For shame then do not urge that authority to keep up a
Bishop, that will necessarily engage you to set up a Pope. As little can your
advantage be from Hegesippus an Historian of the same time not extant, but
cited by Eusebius, his words are, that in every City all things so stood in his
time as the Law, and the Prophets, and our Lord did preach. If they stood so,
then stood not Bishops above Presbyters, for what our Lord, and his Disciples
taught, God be thanked, we have no need to go learn of him: and you may as
well hope to persuade us out of the same Author, that James the brother of our
Lord was a Nazarite, and that to him only it was lawful to enter into the holy
of Holies, that his food was not upon any thing that had life, fish, or flesh,
that he used no woollen garments, but only linen, and so as he trifles on.

If therefore the tradition of the Church were now grown so ridiculous, and
disconsenting from the Doctrine of the Apostles, even in those points which
were of lest moment to men's particular ends, how well may we be assured it was
much more degenerated in point of Episcopacy, and precedence, things which
could affor'd such plausible pretenses, such commodious traverses for ambition,
and Avarice to lvrke behind.

As for those Britain Bishops which you cite, p. 13.
take heed what you do, for our Britain Bishops less ancient then these,
were remarkable for nothing more then their poverty, as Sulp Severus, and Beda
can remember you of examples good store.

Lastly (for the fabulous Metaphrastes is not p. 16.
worth an answer) that authority of Clemens Alexandrinus is not to be found in
all his works, and wherever it be extant, it is in controversy, whether it be
Clements or no; or if it were it says only that Saint John in some places
constituted Bishops: questionless he did, but where does Clement say he set
them above Presbyters? no man will gainesay the constitution of Bishops, but
the raising them to a superior, and distinct order above Presbyters, seeing
the Gospel makes them one and the same thing, a thousand such allegations as
these will not give Prelaticall Episcopacy, one Chapel of ease above a Parish
Church. And thus much for this cloud I cannot say rather then petty-fog of
witnesses, with which Episcopal men would cast a mist before us, to deduce
their exalted Episcopacy from Apostolic times. Now although, as all men well
know, it be the wonted shift of error, and fond Opinion, when they find
themselves outlawed by the Bible, and forsaken of sound reason, to betake them
with all speed to their old starting hole of tradition, and that wild, and
overgrowne Covert of antiquity thinking to farm there at large room, and find
good stabling, yet thus much their own deify'de antiquity betrays them, to
inform us that Tradition has had very seldom or never the gift of
persuasion; as that which Church Histories report of those East, and Western
Paschalists formerly spoken of will declare, who would have thought that
Polycarpus on the one side could have erred in what he saw Saint John do, or
Anicetus Bishop of Rome on the other side, in what he or some of his friends
might pretend to have seen Saint Peter, or Saint Paul do, and yet neither of
these could persuade either when to keep E^ster; The like frivolous contention
troubled the Primitive English Churches, while Colmanus (...) Wilfride on
either side deducing their opinion (...) the one from the undeniable example of
Saint John, and the learned Bishop Anatolius, and la^^^ the miraculous Columba
the other from Saint Peter, and the Nicene Council could gain no ground each
of other till King Oswy perceiving no likelihood of ending the Controversy
that way, was feign to decide it himself good King, with that small knowledge,
wherewith those times had furnished him. So when those pious Greek Emperors
began, as Cedrenus relates, to put down Monks, and abolish Images, the old
Idolaters finding themselves blasted, and driven back by the prevailing light
of the Scripture, sent out their sturdy Monks called the Abramites, to allege
for images the ancient Fathers Dionysius, and this our objected Irenaus, nay
they were so high flowne in their antiquity, that they undertook to bring the
Apostles, and Luke the Evangelist, yea Christ himself, from certain records
that were then current, to patronize their Idolatry, yet for all this the
worthy Emperor Theophilus, even in those dark times chose rather to nourish
himself, and his people with the sincere milk of the Gospel, then to drink
from the mixed confluence of so many corrupt, and poisonous waters, as tradition
would have persuaded him to by most ancient seeming authorities: In like manner
all the reformed Churches abroad unthroning Episcopacy doubtless were not
ignorant of these testimonies alleged to draw it in a line from the Apostles
days, for surely the Author will not think he has brought us now any new
authorities, or considerations into the world, which the Reformers in other
places were not advised of, and yet we see, the intercession of all these
Apostolic Fathers could not prevail with them to alter their resolved decree
of reducing into Order their usurping, and over provender'd Episcopants: and
God has blessed their work this hundred years, with a prosperous and
steadfast, and still happy success. And this may serve to prove the
insufficiency of these present Episcopal Testimonies not only in themselves,
but in the account of those ever that have been the followers of truth. It
will next behoove us to consider the inconvenience we fall into, by using our
selves to be guided by these kind of Testimonies. He that thinks it the part
of a well learned man, to have read diligently the ancient stories of the
Church, and to be no stranger in the volumes of the Fathers shall have all
judicious men consenting with him; not hereby to control, and new fangle the
Scripture, God forbid, but to mark how corruption, and Apostasy crept in by
degrees, and to gather up, where ever we find the remaining sparks of
Original truth, wherewith to stop the mouths of our adversaries, and to
bridle them with their own curb, who willingly pass by that which is
Orthodoxall in them, and studiously cull out that which is commentitious, and
best for their turns, not weighing the Fathers in the balance of Scripture,
but Scripture in the balance of the Fathers, if we therefore making first the
Gospel our rule, and Oracle shall take the good which we light on in the
Fathers, and set it to oppose the evil which other men seek from them, in this
way of Skirmish we shall easily master all superstition, and false doctrine;
but if we turn this our discreet, and wary usage of them into a blind devotion
toward them, and whatsoever we find written by them, we both forsake our own
grounds, and reasons which led us at first to part from Rome, that is to hold
to the Scriptures against all antiquity; we remove our cause into our
adversaries own Court, and take up there those cast principles which will
soon cause us to soder up with them again, in as much as believing antiquity
for it self in any one point, we bring an engagement upon our selves of
assenting to all that it charges upon us. For suppose we should now neglecting
that which is clear in Scripture, that a Bishop and Presbyter is all one both
in name, and office, and that what was done by Timothy, and Titus executing an
extraordinary place, as fellow laborers with the Apostles, and of a universal
charge in planting Christianity through diverse regions, cannot be drawn into
particular, and daily example, suppose that neglecting this cleerenesse of the
text, we should by the uncertain, and corrupted writings of succeeding times,
determine that Bishop and Presbyter are different, because we dare not deny
what Ignatius or rather the Perkin Warbeck of Ignatius says, then must we be
constrained to take upon our selves a thousand superstitions, and falsities
which the Papist will prove us down in from as good authorities, and as
ancient, as these that set a Bishop above a Presbyter. And the plain truth is
that when any of our men of those that are wedded to antiquity come to dispute
with a Papist, and leaving the Scriptures put themselves without appeal to the
sentence of Synods, and Counsels, using in the cause of Sion the hired
souldjary of revolted Israel, where they give the Romanist one buff^, they
receive two counterbuffs. Were it therefore but in this regard, every true
Bishop should be afraid to conquer in his cause by such authorities as these,
which if we admit for the authorities sake, we open a broad passage for a
multitude of Doctrines that have no ground in Scripture, to break in upon us.

Lastly I do not know, it being undeniable that there are but two
Ecclesiastical Orders, Bishops, and Deacons mentioned in the Gospel, how it
can be less then impiery to make a demurre at that, which is there so
perspicuous, confronting, and parallelling the sacred verity of Saint Paul with
the offalls, and sweepings of antiquity that met as accidentally and absurdly,
as Epicurus his atoms to patch up a Leucippean Ignatius, enclining rather to
make this phantasme an expounder, or indeed a depraver of Saint Paul, then
Saint Paul an examiner, and discoverer of this impostorship, nor caring how
slightly they put off the verdit of holy Text unsalv'd, that says plainly
there be but two orders, so they maintain the reputation of their imaginary
Doctor that proclaims three: certainly if Christ's Apostle have set down but
two, then according to his own words, though he himself should unsay it, and
not only the Angel of Smyrna, but an Angel from Heaven should bear us down
that there be three, Saint Paul has doomed him twice, let him be accur'st, for
Christ has pronounced that no tittle of his word shall fall to the ground, and
if one jot be alterable it is as possible that all should perish; And this
shall be our righteousness, our ample warrant, and strong assurance both now,
and at the last day never to be ashamed of, against all the heaped names of
Angels, and Martyrs, Counsels, and Fathers urged upon us, if we have given
our selves up to be taught by the pure, and living precept of Gods word only,
which without more additions, nay with a forbidding of them has within it
self the promise of eternal life, the end of all our wearisome labors, and
all our sustaining hopes. But if any shall strive to set up his Ephod, and
Teraphim of Antiquity against the brightness, and perfection of the Gospel,
let him fear lest he and his Baal be turned into Bosheth. And thus much may
suffice to show that the pretended Episcopacy cannot be deduc't from the
Apostolical TIMES.

The End.

