THE REASON OF Church-governement Urged against PRELATY By Mr. John Milton.

In two Books.

LONDON, Printed by E. G. for John Rothwell, and are to be sold at the Sun in
Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

The Reason of Church Government urged against PRELATY.
THE PREFACE.
IN the publishing of humane laws, which for the most part aim not beyond the
good of civil society, to set them barely forth to the people without reason
or Preface, like a physical prescript, or only with threatenings, as it were a
lordly command, in the judgment of Plato was thought to be done neither
generously nor wisely. His advice was, seeing that persuasion certainly is a
more winning, and more manlike way to keep men in obedience then fear, that
to such laws as were of principal moment; there should be used as an
induction, some well tempered discourse, showing how good, how gainful, how
happy it must needs be to live according to honesty and justice, which being
uttered with those native colors and graces of speech, as true eloquence the
daughter of virtue can best bestow upon her mothers praises, would so incite,
and in a manner, charm the multitude into the love of that which is really
good, as to embrace it ever after, not of custom and awe, which most men do,
but of choice and purpose, with true and constant delight. But this practice we
may learn, from a better and more ancient authority, then any heathen writer
has to give us, and indeed being a point of so high wisdom and worth, how
could it be but we should find it in that book, within whose sacred context all
wisdom is infolded? Moses therefore the only Lawgiver that we can believe to
have been visibly taught of God, knowing how vain it was to write laws to
men whose hearts were not first seasoned with the knowledge of God and of his
works, began from the book of Genesis, as a prologue to his lawer; which
Josephus ^ ight well has noted. That the nation of the Jews, reading therein
the universal goodness of God to all creatures in the Creation, and his
peculiar favor to them in his election of Abraham their ancestor, from whom
they could derive so many blessings upon themselves, might be moved to obey si
cerely by knowing so good a reason of their obedience. If then in the
administration of civil justice, and under the obscurity of Ceremonial rites,
such care was had by the wisest of the heathen, and by Moses among the Jews,
to instruct them at least in a general reason of that government to which
their subjection was required, how much more ought the members of the Church
under the Gospel seek^ to inform their understanding in the reason of that
government which the Church claims to have over them: especially for that the
Church has in her immediate cure those inner parts and affections of the mind
where the seat of reason is; having power to examine our spiritual knowledge,
and to demand from us in Gods behalf a service entirely reasonable. But
because about the manner and order of this government, whether it ought to be
Presbyteriall, or Prelaticall, such endless question, or rather uproare is
arisen in this land, as may be justly termed, what the fever is to the
Physicians, the eternal reproach of our Divines; whilst other profound C^
erks of late greatly, as they conceive, to the advancement of Prelaty, are so
earnestly meting out the Lydian proconsular Asia, to make good the prime
metropolis of Ephesus, as if some of our Prelates in all haste meant to change
their solle, and become neighbors to the English Bishop of Chalcedon; and
whilst good Breerwood as busily bestirres himself in our vulgar tongue to
divide precisely the three Patriarchats, of Rome, Alexandria, and Antioch, and
whether to any of these England does belong, I shall in the mean while not
cease to hope through the mercy and grace of Christ, the head and husband of
his Church, that England shortly is to belong, neither to See Patriarchall, nor
See Prelaticall, but to the faithful feeding and disciplining of that
ministerial order, which the blessed Apostles constituted throughout the
Churches: and this I she ll assay to prove can be no other, then that of
Presbyters and Deacons. And if any man incline to think I undertake a task
too difficult for my years, I trust through the supreme inlightning assistance
far otherwise; for my years, be they few or many, what imports it? so they
bring reason, let that be look on: and for the task, from hence that the
question in hand is so needful to be known at this time chiefly by every
meaner capacity, and contains in it the explication of many admirable and
heavenly privileges reached out to us by the Gospel, I conclude the task must
be easy. God having to this end ordained his Gospel to be the revelation of
his power and wisdom in Christ Jesus. And this is one depth of his wisdom,
that he could so plainly reveal so great a measure of it to the gross
distorted apprehension of decayed mankind. Let others therefore dread and shun
the Scriptures for their darkness, I shall wish I may deserve to be reckoned
among those who admire and dwell upon them for their clearness. And this
seems to be the cause why in those places of holy writ, wherein is treated of
Church Government, the reasons thereof are not formally, and profestly set
down, because to him that heeds attentively the drift and scope of Christian
profession, they easily imply themselves, which thing further to explane,
having now prefac'd enough, I shall no longer defer.

CHAP. I.
That Church Government is prescribed in the Gospel, and that to say otherwise
is unsound.

THe first and greatest reason of Church Government, we may securely with the
assent of many on the adverse part, affirm to be, because we find it so
ordained and set out to us by the appointment of God in the Scriptures; but
whether this be Presbyteriall, or Prelaticall, it cannot be brought to the
scanning, until I have said what is meet to some who do not think it for the
ease of their inconsequent opinions, to grant that Church discipline is
platform'd in the Bible, but that it is left to the discretion of men. To this
conceit of theirs I answer, that it is both unsound and untrue. For there is
not that thing in the world of more grave and urgent importance throughout the
whole life of man, then is discipline. What need I instance? He that has read
with judgment, of Nations and Commonwealths, of Cities and Camps, of peace
and war, sea and land, will readily agree that the flourishing and decaying
of all civil societies, all the moments and turnings of humane occasions are
moved to and fro as upon the axle of discipline. So that whatsoever power or
sway in mortal things weaker men have attributed to fortune, I durst with more
confidence (the honor of divine providence ever saved) ascribe either to the
vigor, or the slacknesse of discipline. Nor is there any sociable perfection in
this life civil or sacred that can be above discipline, but she is that which
with her musical cords preserves and holds all the parts thereof together.
Hence in those perfect armies of Cyrus in Xenophon, and Scipio in the Roman
stories, the excellence of military skill was esteemed, not by the not needing,
but by the readiest submitting to the edicts of their commander. And certainly
discipline is not only the removal of disorder, but if any visible shape can
be given to divine things, the very visible shape and image of virtue, whereby
she is not only seen in the regular gestures and motions of her heavenly paces
as she walks, but also makes the harmony of her voice audible to mortal
ears. Yea the Angels themselves, in whom no disorder is feared, as the Apostle
that saw them in his rapture describes, are distinguished and quaternion^ into
their celestial Princedomes, and Satrapies, according as God himself has
writ his imperial decrees through the great provinces of heaven. The state
also of the blessed in Paradise, though never so perfect, is not therefore left
without discipline, whose golden survaying reed marks out and measures every
quarter and circuit of new Jerusalem. Yet is it not to be conceived that those
eternal effluences of sanctity and love in the glorified Saints should by this
means be confined and cloyed with repetition of that which is prescribed, but
that our happiness may or be it self into a thousand vagancies of glory and
delight, and with a kind of eccentricall equation be as it were an invariable
Planet of joy and felicity, how much less can we believe that God would leave
his frail and feeble, though not less beloved Church here below to the
perpetual stumble of conjecture and disturbance in this our dark voyage
without the card and compass of Discipline. Which is so hard to be of man's
making, that we may see even in the guidance of a civil state to worldly
happiness, it is not for every learned, or every wise man, though many of them
consult in common, to invent or frame a discipline, but if it be at all the
work of man, it must be of such a one as is a true knower of himself, and
himself in whom contemplation and practice, wit, prudence, fortitude, and
eloquence must be rarely met, both to comprehend the hidden causes of things,
and span in his thoughts all the various effects that passion or complexion can
work in man's nature; and hereto must his hand be at defiance with gain, and
his heart in all virtues heroic. So far is it from the kenne of these wretched
projectors of ours that bescraull their Pamflets every day with new forms of
government for our Church. And therefore all the ancient lawgivers were either
truly inspired as Moses, or were such men as with authority anough might give
it out to be so, as Min^ s, Lycurgus, Numa, because they wisely forethought
that men would never quietly submit to such a discipline as had not more of
Gods hand in it then man's: To come within the narrowness of household
government, observation will show us many deep counselors of state and judges
to demean themselves incorruptly in the settled course of affairs, and many
worthy Preachers upright in their lives, powerful in their audience; but look
upon either of these men where they are left to their own disciplining at home,
and you shall soon perceive for all their single knowledge and uprightness,
how deficient they are in the regulating of their own family; not only in what
may concern the virtuous and decent composure of their minds in their several
places, but that which is of a lower and easier performance, the right
possessing of the outward vessel, their body, in health or sickness, rest or
labor, diet, or abstinence, whereby to render it more pliant to the soul, and
use^ ull to the Commonwealth: which if men were but as good to disci^ ne
themselves, as some are to tutor their Horses and Hawks, it could not be so
gross in most households. If then it appear so hard and so little known, how
to govern a house well, which is thought of so easy discharge, and for every
man's undertaking, what skill of man, what wisdom, what parts, can be
sufficient to give laws and ordinances to the elect household of God? If we
could imagine that he had left it at random without his provident and gracious
ordering, who is he so arrogant so presumptuous that durst dispose and guide
the living arc of the holy Ghost; though he should find it wandering in the
field of Bethshemesh, without the conscious warrant of some high calling. But
no profane insolence can parallel that which our Prelates dare avouch, to drive
outragiously, and shatter the holy arc of the Church, not born upon their
shoulders with pains and labor in the word, but drawn with rude oxen their
officials, and their own brute inventions. Let them make shows of reforming
while they will, so long as the Church is mounted upon the Prelaticall Cart,
and not as it ought between the hands of the Ministers, it will but shake and
totter, and he that sets to his hand though with a good intent to hinder the
shogging of it, in this unlawful waggonry wherein it rides, let him beware it
be not fatal to him as it was to V^ a. Certainly if God be the father of his
family the Church, wherein could he express that name more, then in training
it up under his own all-wise and dear Economy, not turning it loose to the
havoc of strangers and wolves that would ask no better plea then this to do^
in the Church of Christ, what ever humor, faction, policy, or ^centious will
would prompt them to. Again, if Christ be the Churches husband expecting her
to be presented before him a pure unspotted virgin; in what could he show his
tender love to her mo^ then in prescribing his own ways which he best knew
would be to the improvement of her health and beauty with much great^ care
doubtless then the Persian King could appoint for his Queen^ Esther, those
maiden dietings and set prescriptions of baths, and odo^ which may tender her
at last the more amiable to his eye. For o^ any age or sex, most unfitly may a
virgin be left to an uncertain and arbitrary education. Yea though she be well
instructed, yet is she still under a more strait tuition, especially if
betrothed. In like manner the Church bearing the same resemblance, it were not
reason to think she should be left destitute of that care which is as
necessary, and proper to her, as instruction. For public preaching indeed is
the gift of the Spirit working as best seems to his secret will, but
discipline is the practick work o^ preaching directed and applied as is most
requisite to particular duty; without which it were all one to the benefit of
souls, as it would be to the cure of bodi^ s, if all the Physicians in London
should get into the several Pulpits of the City, and assembling all the
diseased in every pari^ should begin a learned Lecture of Pleurisies, Palsies,
Lethargies, to which perhaps none there present were inclined, and so without
so much as feeling one pulls, or giving the least order to any skillful
Apothecary, should dismiss 'em from time to time, some groaning, some
languishing, some expiring, with this only charge to look well to themselves,
and do as they hear. Of what excellence and necessity then Church Discipline
is, how beyond the faculty of man to frame, and how dangerous to be left to
man's invention who would be every foot turning it to sinister ends, how
properly also it is the work of God as father, and of Christ as Husband of the
Church; we have by thus much heard.

CHAP. II.
That Church government is set down in holy Scripture, and that to say
otherwise is untrue.

AS therefore it is unsound to say that God has not appointed any set
government in his Church, so is it untrue. Of the time of the Law there can be
no doubt; for to let pass the first institution of Priests and Levites, which
is too clear to be insisted upon, when the Temple came to be built, which in
plain judgment could breed no essential change either in religion, or in the
Priestly government; yet God to show how little he could endure that men should
be tampring and contriving in his worship, though in things of less regard,
gave to David for Solomon not only a pattern and model of the Temple, but a
direction for the courses of the Priests and Levites, and for all the work of
their service. At the return from the Captivity things were only restored
after the ordinance of Moses and David; or if the least alteration be to be
found, they had with them inspired men, Prophets, and it were not sober to say
they did ought of moment without divine intimation. In the Prophecy of Ez-kiel
from the 40 Chapt. onward, after the destruction of the Temple, God by his
Prophet seeking to weane the hearts of the Jews from their old law to expect a
new and more perfect reformation under Christ, sets out before their eyes the
stately fabric and constitution of his Church, with all the ecclesiastical
functions appertaining; indeed the description is as sorted best to the
apprehension of those times, typical and shadowie, but in such manner as never
yet came to pass, nor never must literally, unless we mean to annihilat the
Gospel. But so exquisit and lively the description is in portraying the new
state of the Church, and especially in those points where government seems to
be most active, that both Jews and Gentiles might have good cause to be
assured, that God when ever he meant to reform his Church, never intended to
leave the government thereof delineated here in such curious architecture, to
be patch't afterward, and varnish't over with the devices and imbellishings of
man's imagination. Did God take such delight in measuring out the pillars,
arches, and doors of a material Temple, was he so punctual and circumspect
in lavers, altars, and sacrifices soon after to be abrogated, left any of
these should have been made contrary to his mind? is not a far more perfect
work more agreeable to his perfection in the most perfect state of the Church
militant, the new alliance of God to man? should not he rather now by his own
prescribed discipline have cast his line and level upon the soul of man which
is his rational temple, and by the divine square and compass thereof form
and regenerate in us the lovely shapes of virtues and graces, the sooner to
edify and accomplish that immortal stature of Christ's body which is his
Church, in all her glorious lineaments and proportions. And that this indeed
God has done for us in the Gospel (...) shall see with open eyes, not under a
veil. We may pass over the history of the Acts and other places, turning only
to those Epistle^ of S. Paul to Timothy and Titus: where the spiritual eye may
discern more goodly and gracefully erected then all the magnifice^ ce of
Temple or Tabernacle, such a heavenly structure of evangel^ ck discipline so
diffusive of knowledge and charity to the prosperous increase and growth of the
Church, that it cannot be wondered if that elegant and artfull symmetry of the
promised new temple in Ezechiel, and all those sumptuous things under the Law
were made to signify the inward beauty and splendour of the Christian Church
thus governed. And whether this be commanded let it now be j^ dg'd. S. Paul
after his preface to the first of Timothy which he concludes in the 17 Verse
with Amen, enters upon the subject of his Epistle which is to establish the
Church Government with a command. This charge I commit to thee son Timothy:
according to the prophecies which went before on thee, that thou by them
might war a good warfare. Which is plain enough thus expounded. This charge
I commit to thee wherein I now go about to instruct thee how thou shall set up
Church Discipline, that thou might war a good warfare, bearing thy self
constantly and faithfully in the Ministry, which in the I to the Corinthians
is also called a warfare: and so after a kind of Parenthesis concerning
Hymenaeus he returns to his command though under the mild word of exhorting,
Cap. 2. v. 1. I exhort therefore. As if he had interrupted his former command
by the occasional mention of Hymeneus. More beneath in the 14 V. of the 3 C.
when he has delivered the duties of Bishops or Presbyters and Deacons not once
naming any other order in the Church, he thus adds. These things write I unto
thee hoping to come unto thee shortly (such necessity it seems there was) but
if I tarry long, that thou man 'st know how thou ought to behave thy s^ lfe
in the house of God. From this place it may be justly ask'^, whether Timothy by
this here written might know what was to be known concerning the orders of
Church Governors or no? If he might, then in such a clear t^ xt as this may
we know too without further j^ ngle; if he might not, then did S. Paul write
insufficiently, and moreover said not true, for he says here he might know,
and I persuade my self he did know ere this was written, but that the Apostle
had more regard to the instruction of us, then to the informing of him. In the
fifth Chap. after some other Church precepts concerning discipline, mark what a
dreadful command follows, Verse 21. I charge thee before God and the Lord
Jesus Christ, and the elect Angels, that thou observe these things, and as if
all were not yet sure anough, ^ e closes up the Epistle, with an adj^ ring
charge thus. I give thee charge in the sight of God who quickneth all things,
and before Christ Jesus, that thou keep this commandment: that is the whole
commandment concerning discipline, being them ine purpose of the Epistle:
although Hooker would feign have this denouncement referred to the particular
precept going before, because the word Commandment is in the singular number,
not remembering that even in the first Chapt. of this Epistle, the wo^
Commandment is used in a plural sense, Verse. 5. Now the end of the
Commandment is charity. And what more frequent then in like manner to say the
Law of Moses. So that either to restrain the significance too much, or too
much to inlarg it would make the adjuration either not so weighty, or not so
pertinent. And thus we find here that the rules of Church Discipline are not
only commanded, but hedged about with such a terrible impalement of commands,
as he that will break through wilfully to violate the least of them, must
hazard the wounding of his conscience even to death. Yet all this
notwithstanding we shall find them broken wellnigh all by the fair pretenders
even of the next ages. No less to the contempt of him whom they fain to be the
archfounder of prelaty S. Peter, who by what he writes in the 5 Chap. of his
first Epistle should seem to be far another man then tradition reports him:
there he commits to the Presbyters only full authority both of feeding the
flock, and Episcopating: and commands that obedience be given to them as to the
mighty hand of God, which is his mighty ordinance. Yet all this was as nothing to
repel the ventrous boldness of innovation that ensued, changing the decrees
of God that is immutable, as if they had been breathed by man. Nevertheless
when Christ by those visions of S. John foreshewes the reformation of his
Church, he bids him take his Reed, and meet it out again after the first
pattern, for he prescribes him no other. Arise, said the Angel, and measure
the Temple of God and the Altar, and them that worship therein. What is there
in the world can measure men but discipline? Our word ruling imports no less.
Doctrine indeed is the measure, or at least the reason of the measure, it is
true, but unless the measure be applied to that which it is to measure, how
can it actually do its proper work. Whether therefore discipline be all one
with doctrine, or the particular application thereof to this or that person, we
all agree that doctrine must be such only as is command^, or whether it be
something really differing from doctrine, yet (...) it only of Gods
appointment, as being the most adequat measure of the Church and her children,
which is here the office of a gr^ Evangelist and the reed given him from
heaven. But that part of the Temple which is not thus measured, so far is it
from being (...) Gods tuition or delight, that in the following verse he
rejects i^, however in show and visibility it may seem a part of his Church,
yet in as much as it lies thus unmeasured he leaves it to be trampled by the
Gentiles, that is to be polluted with idolatrous and Gentilish rites and
ceremonies. And the the principal reformation here foretold is already come to
pass as well in discipline as in doctrine the state of our neighbor Churches
afford us to behold. Thus through all the periods and changes of the Church it
has been proved that God has still reserved to himself the right of
enacting Church Government.

CHAP. III.
That it is dangerous and unworthy the Gospel to hold that Church Government
is to be pattern'd by the Law, as B. Andrews and the Primat of Armagh maintain.

WE may return now from this interposing difficulty thus removed, to affi^ me,
that since Church Government is so strictly commanded in Gods Word, the first
and greatest reason why we should submit thereto, is because God has so
commanded. But whether of these two, Prelaty or Presbytery can prove it self
to be supported by this first and greatest reason, must be the next dispute.
Where in this position is to be first laid down as granted; that I may not
follow a chase rather then a^ argument, that one of these two, and none other
is of Gods ordaining, and if it be, that ordinance must be evident in the
Gospel. For the imperfect and obscure institution of the Law, which the
Apostles themselves doubt not o^ t-times to ^ ilifre, cannot give rules to the
complete and glorious ministration of the Gospel, which looks on the Law, as
on a child, not as on a tutor. And that the Prelates have no sure foundation
in the Gospel, their own guiltiness does manifest: they would not else run
questing up as high as Adam to fe^ h their original, as it is said one of them
lately did in public. To which assertion, had I heard it, because I see they
are so insatiable of antiquity, I should have gladly assented, and confessed them
ye^ more ancient. For Lucifer before Adam was the fir^ prela^ Angel, and both
he, as is commonly thought, and our (...) Adam, as we all know, for aspiring
above their order^, were miser^ bly degraded. But others better advised are
content to receive their beginning from Aaron and his sons, among whom B.
Andrews of late ye^ res, and in these times the Primat of Armagh for their
learning are reputed the best able to say what may be said in this opinion. The
Primat in his discou^ se about the original of Episcopacy newly revised begins
thus. The ground of Episco^ cy is fetched partly from the pattern prescribed by
God in the old Testament, and partly from the imitation thereof brought in by
the Apostles. Herein I must entreat to be excused of the desire I have to be
satisfied, how for example the ground of Episcop. is fetched partly from the
example of the old Testament, by whom next, and by whose authority. Secondly,
how the Church Government under the Gospel can be rightly called an imitation
of that in the old Testament? for that the Gospel is the end and fulfilling of
the Law, our liberty also from the bondage of the Law I plainly read. How then
the ripe age of the Gospel should be put to school again, and learn to
govern her self from the infancy of the Law, the stronger to imitate the
weaker, the freeman to follow the captive, the learned to be lesson'd by the
rude, will be a hard undertaking to evince from any of those principles which
either art or inspiration has written. If any thing done by the Apostles may
be drawn howsoever to a likeness of somethi^ g Mosaicall, if it cannot be
proved that it was done of purpose in imitation, as having the right thereof
grounded in nature, and not in ceremony or type, it will little avail the
matter. The whole Judaick law is either political, and to take pattern by
that, no Christian nation ever thought it self o^ g'd in conscience; or
moral, which contains in it the observation of whatsoever is substantially,
and perpetually true and good, either in religion, or course of life. That
which is thus moral, besides what we f^ tch from those unwritten laws and
Ideas which nature has engraven in us, the Gospel, as stands with her dignity
most, lectures to us from her own authentic handwriting and command, not
copies out from the borrowed manuscript of a subservient scrow^, by way of
imitating. As well might she be said in her Sacrame^ of water to imitate the
baptism of John. What though ^ he retain excommunication ^ s'd in the Syna ^
ogue, retain the morality of the Sabbath, she does not therefore imitate the
law her underling, but perfect her. All that was morally delivered from the law
to the Gospel in the office of the Priests and Levites, was that there should
be a ministry set a part to teach and discipline the Church; both which duties
the Apostles thought good to commit to the Presbyters. And if any distinction
of honor were to be made among them, they directed it should be to those not
that only rule well, but especially to those that labor in the word and
doctrine. By which we are taught that laborious teaching is the most honorable
1 Timothy 5^
Prelaty that one Minister can have above another in the Gospel: if therefore
the superiority of Bishopship be grounded on the Priesthood as a part of the
moral law, it cannot be said to be an imitation; for it were ridiculous that
morality should imitate morality, which ever was the same thing. This very word
of patterning or imitating excludes Episcopacy from the solid and grave
Ethicall law, and betraies it to be a mere child of ceremony, or likelier
some misbegotten thing, that having plucked the gay feathers of her obsolet
bravery to ^ i would her own deformed bareness, now vaunts and glories in her
stolen plumes. In the mean while what danger there is against the very life of
the Gospel to make in any thing the typical law her pattern, and how
impossibl^ in that which touches the Priestly government, I shall use such
light as I have received, to lay open. ^ t cannot be unknown by what
expressions the holy Apostle S. Paul spar^ s not to explane to us the na^ ure
and condition of the l^ calling those o^ dinances which were the chief and
(...) offices of the Priests, the elements and rudiments of the world both
weak and beggarly. Now to br^ ed, and bring up the child^ en of the promise,
the heirs of liberty and grace under such a kind of government as is professed
to be but an imitation of that ministry which engendered to b^ ndage the so^ s
of Agar, how can this (...) but a foul injury and derogation, if not a
cancelling of that birth-r^ ght and immunity which Christ has purchased for us
with his blood. For the ministration of the law consisting of c^ all things,
drew to it such a ministry as consisted of ca^ all respects, dignity,
precedence, and the like. And such a ministry established in the Gospel, as
is founded upon the points and ter^ of superiority, and nests it self in
worldly honor, will draw to it, and we see it does, such a religion as ^ unnes
back again to the old pomp and glory of the flesh. For doubtless there is a
certain attraction and magnetic force betwixt the religion and the
ministerial form thereof. If the religion be pure, spiritual, simple, and
lowly, as the Gospel most truly is, such must the face of the ministry be. And
in like manner if the form of the Ministry be grounded in the worldly degrees
of authority, honor, temporal jurisdiction, we see it with our eyes it will
turn the inward power and purity of the Gospel into the outward carnality of
the law; evaporating and exhaling the internal worship into empty
conformities, and gay she was. And what remains then but that we should run
into as dangerous and deadly apostasy a^ our lamented neighbors the Papists,
who by this very snire and pitfall of imitating the ceremonial law, fell into
that irrecoverable superstition, as must need^ make void the cov^ nant of
salvation to them that persist in this blindness.

CHAP. IV.
That it is impossible to make the Priesthood of Aaron a pattern whereon to
ground Episcopacy.

THat which was promised next, is to declare the impossibility of grounding
Evangelick government in the imitation of the Jewish Priesthood: which will be
done by considering both the quality of the persons, and the office it self.
Aaron and his sons were the Princes of their Tribe before they were
sanctified to the Priesthood: that personal eminence which they held above the
other Levites, they received not only from their office, but partly brought it
into their office: and so from that time forward the Priests were not chosen
out of the whole number of the Levites, as our Bishops, but were borne
inheritors of the dignity. Therefore unless we shall choose our Prelat^ only
out of the Nobility, and let them run in a blood, there can be no possible
imitation of Lording over their brethren in regard of their persons altogether
unlike. As for the office which was a representation of Christ's own person more
immediately in the high Priest, and of his whole priestly office in all the
other; to the performance of which the Levits were but as servitors and Deacons,
it was necessary there should be a distinction of dignity between two
functions of so great od^. But there being no such difference among our
Ministers, unless it be in reference to the Deacons, it is impossible to found
a (...) upon the imitation of this Priesthood. For wherein, or in w^ work is
the office of a Prelat excellent above that of a Pa^ in ordination you will say;
but flatly against Scripture, for there we know Timothy received ordination by
the hands of the Presby^ y, notwithstanding all the vain delusions that are
used to (...) that testimony, and maintain an unwarrantable usurpation. But
wherefore should ordination be a cause of setting up a superior degree in the
Church^ is not that whereby Christ became our Savior a higher and greater
work, then that whereby he did ordai^ e messengers to preach and publish him
our Savior? Every Minister sustains the person of Christ in his highest work
of communicating to us the mysteries of our salvation, and has the power of
binding and absolving, how should he need a higher dignity to represent or
execute that which is an inferior work in Christ? why should the performance of
ordination which is a lower office exalt a Prelat, and not the seldom
discharge of a higher and more noble office (...) is preaching and administering
much rather depressehim? Verily neither the nature, nor the example of
ordinationdoth any way require an imparity between the ordainer and the
ordained. For what more natural then every like to produce his like; man to
beget man, fire to propagate fire, and in examples of highest opi^^on the
ordainer is inferior to the ordained; for the Pope is not man e by the
precedent Pope, but by Cardinals, who ordain and consecrate to a higher and
greater office then their own.

CHAP. V.
To the Arguments of B. Andrews and the Primat.

IT follows here to attend to certain objections in a little treatise lately
printed among others of like sort at Oxford, and in the title said to be out of
the rude draughts of Bishop Andrews. And surely they be rude draughts indeed,
in so much that it is marvel to think what his friends meant to let come
abroad such shallow reasonings with the name of a man so much bruited for
learning. In the 12 and 23 pages he seems most notoriously inconstant to
himself; for in the former place he tells us he forbeares to take any argument
of Prelaty from Aaron, as being the type of Christ. In the latter he can
forbear no longer, but repents him of his rash gratuity, affirming, that to
say, Christ being come in the flesh, his figure in the high Priest cease, is
the shift of an Anabaptist; and stiffly argues that Christ being as well King
as Priest, was as well fore-resembled by the Kings then, as by the high Priest.
So that if his coming take away the one type, it must also the other.
Mavelous piece of divinity! and well worth that the land should pay six
thousand pound a year for, in a Bishopric, although I read of no Sophister
among the Greeks that was so dear, neither Hippias nor Protagoras, nor any whom
the Socratick school famously refuted with out hire. Here we have the type of
the King sowed to the typet of the Bishop, suttly to cast a jealousy upon the
Crown, as if the right of Kings; like M^ ager in the Metamorphosis, were no
longer lived then the firebrand of Prelaty. But more likely the Prelates fearing
(for their own guilty carriage protests they do fear) that their fair days
cannot long hold, practice by possessing the King with this most false
doctrine, to engage his power for them, as in his own quarrel, that when they
fall they may fall in a general ruin, just as cruel Tyberius would wish,

When I dye, let the earth be roul'd in flames.

But where, O Bishop, does the purpose of the law set forth Christ to us as a
King? That which never was intended in the Law, can never be abolish'^ as part
thereof. When the Law was made, there was no King: if before the law, or under
the law God by a special type in any King would foresignifie the fut^ re
kingdom of Christ, which is not yet visibly come, what was that to the law?
The whole ceremonial law, and types can be in no law else, comprehends nothing
but the propitiatory office of Christ's Priesthood, which being in substance
accomplished, both law and Priesthood fades away of it self, and passes into
air like a transitory vision, and the right of Kings neither stands by any
type nor falls. We acknowledge that the civil magistrate wears an authority of
Gods giving, and ought to be obeyed as his vicegerent. But to make a King a
type, we say is an abusive and unskilful speech, and of a moral solidity
makes it seem a ceremonial shadow. Therefore your typical chain of King and
Priest must unlink. But is not the type of Priest taken away by Christ's
coming? no says this famous Protestant Bishop of Winchester; it is not, and
he that says it is, is an Anabaptist. What think ye Reade^, do ye not
understand him? What can be gathered hence but that the Prelat would still
sacrifice? conceave him readers, he would missifi^ ate. Their altar^ indeed
were in a fair forwardness; and by such arguments as the they were setting up
the molten Calfe of their Masseagaine, and of their great Hierarch the Pope.
For if the type of Priest be not taken away, then neither of the high Priest,
it were a strange behe^ ding; and high Priest more then one there cannot be,
and that o^ e can be no less then a Pope. And this doubtless was the bent of
his career, though never so covertly. Yea but there was something else in the
high Priest besides the figure, as is plain by S. Paul's acknowledging him. It Is
true that in the 17 of Deuteronomy, whence this authority arise^ to the Priest in
matters too hard for the secular judges, as must needs be many in the occasions
of those times involved so with ceremonial niceties, no wonder though it be
commanded to enquire at the mouth of the Priests, who besides the Magistrat^
their colleagues had the Oracle of Uri^ to consult with. And whether the high
Priest Ananias had not incroach't beyond the limits of his Priestly authority,
or whether used it rightly, was no time then for S. Paul to contest about. But
if this instance be able to assert any right of jurisdiction to the Clergy, it
must impart it in common to all Ministers, since it were a great folly to seek
for counsel in a hard intricat scruple from a Dunce Prelat, when there might
be found a speedier solution from a grave and learned Mi^ ister, whom God has
gifted with the judgment of Urim more amply oft-times then all the Prelates
together; and now in the Gospel has granted the privilege of this oraculous
Ephod alike to all his Ministers. The reason therefore of imparity in the
Priests, being now as is aforesaid, really annulled both in their person, and
in their representative office, what right of jurisdiction soever, can be from
this place Levitically bequeathed, must descend upon the Ministers of the
Gospel equally, as it finds them in all other points equal. Well then he is
finally content to let, Aaron go. El^ r will serve his turn, as being a
superior of superiors, and yet no type of Christ in Aarons life time. O thou
that would wind into any figment, or phantasme to save thy Miter! Yet all
this will not fadge, though it be cunningly interpolisht by some second hand
with crooks and emendations; Hear then; the type of Christ in some one
particular, as of entering yearly into the Holy of holies and such like, rested
upon the High Priest only as more immediately personating our Savior: but to
resemble his whole satisfactory office all the lineage of Aaron was no more
then sufficient. And all, or any of the Priests considered separately without
relation to the highest, are but as a livelesse trunk and signify nothing. And
this shows the excellent or Christ's sacrifice, who at once and in one person
fulfilled that which many hunderds of Priests many times repeating had anough
to foreshew. What other imparity there was among themselves, we may safely
suppose it depended on the dignity of their birth and family, together with the
circumstances of a carnal service, which might afford many priorities. And
this I take to be the sum of what the Bishop has laid together to make plea
for P^ laty by imitation of the Law. I hough indeed, if it may stand, it will
infer Popedom all as well. Many other courses he tries, enforcing himself
with much ostentation of endless genealogies, as if he were the man that S.
Paul forewarnes us of in Timothy, but so unvigorously, that I do not fear his
winning of many to his cause, but such as doting upon great names are either
over-weake, or over sudden of faith. I shall not refuse therefore to lea^ ne so
much prudence as I find in the Roman Soldier that attended the cross, not to
stand breaking of legs, when the breath is quite out of the body, but pass to
that which follows. The Primat of Armagh at the beginning of his tractat seeks
to avail himself of that place in the 66 of Esaiah, I will take of them for
Priests and Levites, says the Lord; to uphold hereby such a form of
superiority among the ministers of the Gospel, succeeding those in the law, as
the Lords day did the Sabbath. But certain if this method may be admitted of
interpreting those prophetical passages concerning Christian times in a
punctual correspondence, it may with equal probability be urged upon us, that
we are bound to observe some monthly solemnity answerable to the new moons, as
well as the Lords day which we keep in lieu of the Sabbath: for in the 23 v.
the Prophet joins them in the same manner together, as before he did the
Priests and Levites, thus. And it shall come to pass that from one new moon
to another, and from one Sabbath to another shall all flesh come to worship
before me, says the Lord. Undoubtedly with as good consequence may it be
alleged from hence, that we are to solemnize some religious monthly meeting
different from the Sabbath, as from the other any distinct formality of
Ecclesiastical orders may be inferred. This rather will appear to be the
lawful and unconstrained sense of the text, that God in taking of them for
Priests and Levites, will not esteem them unworthy though Gentiles, to
undergo any function in the Church, but will make of them a full and perfect
ministry, as was that of the Priests and Levites in their kind. And Bishop
An^ rows himself to end the controversy, sends us a candid exposition of this
quoted verse from the 24 page of his said book, plainly deciding that God by
those legal names there of Priests and Levites means our Presbyters, and
Deacons, for which either ingenuous confession, or slip of his pen we give him
thanks, and withal to him that brought these treatises into one volume, who
setting the contradictions of two learned men so near together, did not
foresee. What other deducements or analogies are cited out of S. Paul to pro^ e
a likeness between the Ministers of the Old and New Testament, having tried
their sinews. I judge they may pass without harm doing to our cause. We may
remember then that Prelaty neither has nor can have foundation in the law, nor
yet in the Gospel, which assertion as being for the plainness thereof a
matter of eye sight, rather then of disquisition I voluntarily omit, not
forgetting to specify this note again, that the earnest des^ e which the
Prelates have to build their Hierarchy upon the sandy bottom of the law, gives
us to see abundantly the little assurance which they find to rear up their
high roofs by the authority of the Gospel, repulst as it were from the writings
of the Apostles, and driven to take sanctuary among the Jews. Hence that open
confession of the Primat before mentioned. Episcopacy is fetched partly from the
pattern of the Old Testament and partly from the New as an imitation of the
Old, though nothing ca^ be more rotten in Divinity then such a position as
this, and is all one as to say Episcopacy is partly of divine institution, and
partly of man's own carving. For who gave the authority to fetch more from the
pattern of the law then what the Apostles had already fetched, if they fetched
any thing at a^ l, as has been proved they did not. So was Jer^ oams
Episcopacy partly from the pattern of the law, and partly from the pattern of
his own carnality; a parti-colour'd and a parti-member'd Episcopacy, and what
can this be less then a monstrous? Others therefore among the Prelates perhaps
not so well able to brook, or rather to justify this foul relapsing to the
old law, have condiscended at last to a plain confessing that both the names
and offices of Bishops and Presbyters at first were the same, and in the
Scriptures no where distinguished. This grants the remonstrant in the fifth
Section of his desc^ e, and in the Preface to his last short answer. But what
need respect he had whether he grant or grant it not, when as through all
antiquity, and even in the lo^ jest times of Prelaty we find it granted.
Jerome the learned of the Fathers hides not his opinion, that custom only,
which the Proverb calls a tyrant, was the maker of Prelaty; before his
audacious workman^ p the Churches were ruled in common by the Presbyters, and
such a certain truth this was esteemed, that it became a decree among the
Papal Canons compiled by Gratian. Ans^ lme also of Canturbury, who to uphold
the points of his Prelatisme made himself a traitor to his country, yet
commenting the Epistles to Titus and the Philippians acknowledges from the
cleernesse of the text, what Jerome and the Church Rubric has before
acknowledged. He little dreamt then that the weeding-hook of reformation would
after two ages pluck up his glorious poppy from insulting over the good corn.
Though since some of our British Prelates seeing themselves pressed to produce
Scripture, try all their cunning, if the New Testament will not help them, to
frame of their own heads as it were with wax a kind of Mimick Bishop limm'd
out to the life of a dead Priesthood. Or else they would strain us out a
certain figurative Prelat, by wringing the collective allegory of those seven
Angels into seven single Rochets. Howsoever since it thus appears that custom
was the creator of Prelaty being less ancient then the government of
Presbyters, it is an extreme folly to give them the hearing that tell us of
Bishops through so many ages: and if against their tedious muster of citations,
Sees, and successions, it be replied that wagers and Church antiquities, such
as are repugnant to the plain dictat of Scripture are both alike the arguments
of fools, they have their answer. We rather are to cite all those ages to an
arraignment before the word of God, wherefore, and what pretending, how
presuming they durst alter that divine institution of Presbyter^, which the
Apostles who were no various and inconstant men surely had set up in the
Churches, and why they choose to live by custom and catalogue, or as S. Paul
says by sight and visibility, rather then by faith? But first I conclude from
their own mouths that Gods command in Scripture, which doubtless ought to be
the first and greatest reason of Church Government, is wanting to Prelaty. And
certainly we have plenteous warrant in the doctrine of Christ to determine that
the want of this reason is of it self sufficient to confute all other
pretenses that may be brought in favor of it.

CHAP. VI.
That Prelaty was not set up for prevention of Schism, as is pretended, or if
it were, that it performs not wh^ t it was first set up for, but quite the
contrary.

YEt because it has the outside of a specious reason, and specious things we
know are aptest to work with humane lightness and frailty, even against the
soli^ est truth, that sounds not plausibly, let us think it worth the examining
for the love of infirmer Christians, of what importance this their second
reason may be. Tradition they say has taught them that for the prevention of
growing schism the Bishop was heaved above the Presbyter. And must tradition
then ever thus to the worlds end be the perpetual cankerworme to eat out Gods
Commandments? are his decrees so inconsiderate and so fickle, that when the
statutes of Solon, or Lycurgus shall prove durably good to many ages, his in 40
years shall be found defective, ill contrived, and for needful causes to be
altered? Our Savior and his Apostles did not only foresee, but foretell and
forewarne us to look for schism. Is it a thing to be imagined of Gods
wisdom, or at least of Apostolic prudence to set up such a government in the
tenderness of the Church, as should incline, or not be more able then any
other to oppose it self to schism? it was well known what a bold lurker
schism was even in the household of Christ between his own Disciples and
those of John the Baptistabo^ fasting: and early in the Acts of the Apostles
the noise of schism had almost drowned the proclaiming of the Gospel; yet we
rea^ e not in Scripture that any thought was had of making Prelates, no not in
those places where dissension was most rife. If Prelaty had been then esteemed
a remedy against schism, where was it more needful then in that great
variance among the Corinthians which S. Paul so labored to reconcile? and
whose eye could have found the fittest remedy sooner then his? and what could
have made the remedy more available, then to have used it speedily? and lastly
what could have been more necessary then to have written it for our
instruction? yet we see he neither commended it to us, nor used it himself.
For the same division remaining there, or else bursting forth again more then
20 years after S. Paul's death, we find in Clements Epistle of venerable
authority written to the yet factious Corinthians, that they were still governed
by Presbyters. And the same of other Churches out of Hermas, and diverse other
the scholars of the Apostles by the late industry of the learned Salmatius
appears. Neither yet did this worthy Clement S. Paul's disciple, though writing
to them to lay aside schism, in the least word advise them to change the
Presbyteriall government into Prelaty. And therefore if God afterward gave, or
permitted this insurrection of Episcopacy, it is to be feared he did it in his
wrath, as he gave the Israelites a King. With so good a will does he use to
alter his own chosen government once established. For mark whether this rare
device of man's brain thus prefe^ 'd before the ordinance of God, had better
success then fleshly wisdom not counseling with God is wont to have. So far
was it from removing schism, that if schism parted the congregations before,
now it rent and mangled, now it ^ aged. Heresy begat heresy with a certain
monstrous haste of pregnancy in her birth, at once borne and bringing forth.
Contentions before brotherly were now hostile. Men went to choose their Bishop
as they went to a pitched field, and the day of his election was like the
sacking of a City, sometimes ended with the blood of thousands. Nor this among
heretics only, but men of the same belief, yea confessors, and that with such
odious ambition, that Eusebius in his eighth book testifies he abhorred to
write. And the reason is not obscure, for the poor dignity or rather burden of
a ^ ochial Presbyter could not engage any great party, nor that to any deadly
feud: but Prelaty was a power of that extent, and sway, that if her election
were popular, it was seldom not the cause of some faction or broil in the
Church. But if her dignity came by favor of some Prince, she was from that
time his creature, and obnoxious to comply with his ends in state were they
right or wrong. So that in stead of finding Prelaty an impeacher of Schism or
faction, the more I search, the more I grow into all persuasion to think rather
that faction and she as with a spousall ring are wedded together, never to be
divorc't. But here let every one behold the just, and dreadful judgment of
God meeting with the a^ dacious pride of man that durst offer to mend the
ordinances of heaven. God out of the strife of men brought forth by his
Apostles to the Church that beneficent and ever distributing office of Deacons,
the stewards and Ministers of holy alms, man out of the pretended care of
peace and unity being caught in the snare of his impious boldness to correct
the will of Christ, brought forth to himself upon the Church that
irreconcilable schism of perdition and Apostasy, the Roman Antichrist: for
that the exaltation of the Pope arose out of the reason of Prelaty it cannot be
denied. And as I noted before that the pattern of the High Priest pleaded for
in the Gospel (for take away the head Priest the rest are but a carcass) sets
up with better reason a Pope, then an Archbishop, for if Prelaty must still
rise and rise till it come to a Primat, why should it stay there? when as the
catholic government is not to follow the division of kingdoms, the temple
best representing the universal Church, and the High Priest the universal
head; so I observe here, that if to quiet schism there must be one head of
Prelaty in a land or Monarchy rising from a Provincial to a national Primacy,
there may upon better grounds of repressing schism be set up one catholic
head over the catholic Church. For the peace and good of the Church is not
terminated in the schismelesse estate of one or two kingdoms, but should be
provided for by the joint consultation of all reformed Christendom: that all
controversy may end in the final pronounce or canon of one Arch-primat, or P^
otestant Pope. Although by this means for ought I see, all the diameters of
schism may as well meet and be knit up in the center of one grand falsehood.
Now let all impartial men arbitrate what goodly inference these two maine
reasons of the Prelates have, that by a natural league of consequence make more
for the Pope then for themsel^. Yea to say more home are the very womb for a
new subantichrist to breed in; if it be not rather the old force and power of
the same man of sin counterfeiting protestant. It was not the prevention of
schism, but it was schism it self, and the hateful thirst of Lording in the
Church that first bestowed a being upon P^ elaty; this was the true cause, but
the pretense is still the same. The Prelates, as they would have it thought, are
the only mawls of schism. Forsooth if they be put down, a deluge of
innumerable sects will follow; we shall be all Brownists, Familists
Anabaptists. For the word P^ ritan seems to be quasht, and all that heretofore
were counted such, are now Brownists. And thus do they raise an evil report
upon the expected reforming grace that God has bi^ us hope for, like those
faithless spie^, whose carcasses shall perish in the wilderness of their own
confused ignorance, and never taste the good of reformation. Do they keep away
schism? if to bring a number and chil stupidity of soul, an unactive blindness
of mind upon the people by their leaden doctrine, or no doctrine at all, if to
persecure all knowing and zealous Christians by the violence of their courts,
be to keep away schism, they keep away schism indeed; and by this kind of
discipline all Italy and Spain is as p^ ely and politickly kept from schism
as England has been by them. With as good a plea might the dead pal^ boast to
a man, ti^ I that free you from stitches and pains, and the troublesome
feeling of cold and heat, of wounds and strokes; if I were gone, all these
would molest you. The Winter might as well vaunt it self against the Spring, I
destroy all noisome and rank weeds, I keep down all pestilent vapors. Yes
and all wholesome herbs, and all fresh dews, by your violent and hid ^ bound
frost; but when the gentle west winds shall open the fruitful bosom of the
earth thus over-gird^ d by your imprisonment, then the flowers put forth and
spring and then the S^ ne shall scatter the mists, and the man ing hand of the
Tiller shall roo^ up all that burdens the soil without thank to your bondage.
But far worse then any frozen captivity is the bondage of P^ elates, for that
other, if it keep down any thing which is good, within the earth, so does it
likewise that which is ill, but these let out freely the ill, and keep down the
good, or else keep down the less^ r ill, and let out the greatest. Be ashamed
at last to tell the Parliament ye curb Schismatics, when as they know ye
cherish and side with Papists, and are now as it were one party with them, and
it is said they help to petition for ye. Can we believe that your government
strains in good earnest at the petty g^ ats of schism, when as we see it makes
nothing to swallow the Camel heresy of Rome; but that indeed your throat^ are
of the righ^ Pharisaical strain. Where are those schismatics with whom the
Prelates hold such hot skirmish? show us your acts, those glorious annals which
your Courts of loathed memory lately deceased have left us? those schismatics
I doubt me will be found the most of them such a^ whose only schism was to have
spoke the truth against your high abominations and cruelties in the Church;
this is the schism ye hate most, the removal of your criminous Hierarchy. A
politic government of yours, and of a pleasant conceit, set up to remove those
as a pretended schism, that would remove you as a palpable heresy in
government. If the schism would pardon ye that, she might go jagg'd in as many
cuts and ^ lashes as she pleased for you. As for the rending of the Church, we
have many reasons to think it is not that which ye labor to prevent so much
as the rending of your pontifical sleeves: that schism would be the sorest
schism to you, that would be Brownisme and An^baptisme indeed. If we go down,
say you, as if Adrians wall were broke, a flood of sects will rush in. What
sects? What are their opinions? give us the Inventory; it will appear both by
your former prosecutions and your present instances, that they are only such to
speak of as are offended with your lawless government, your ceremonies, your
Liturgy, an extract of the Mass book transl^ ted. But that they should be
contemners of public prayer, and Churches used without superstition, I trust
God will manifest it ere long to be as false a sl^ nder, as your former
slanders against the Scots. Noise it till ye be hoarse; that a rabble of Sects
will come in, it will be answered ye, no rabble sir Priest, but a unanimous
multitude of good Protestants will then join to the Church, which now because
of you stand separated. This will be the dreadful consequence of your
removal. As for those terrible names of Sectaries and Schismatics which ye
have got together, we know your manner of fight, when the quiver of your
arguments which it ever thin, and weakly stored, after the first brunt is quite
empty, your course is to be take ye to your other quiver of slander, wherein
lies your best archery. And whom ye could not move by sophistical arguing,
them you think to confute by scandalous misnaming. Thereby inciting the
blinder sort of people to mislike and deride sound doctrine and good
christianity under two or three vile ^ nd hateful terms. But if we could
easily endure and dissolve your doubtiest reasons in argument, we shall more
easily bear the w^ rst of your unreasonablenesse in calumny and false report.
Especially being foretold by Christ, that if he our Master were by your
predecessors cal^ 'd Samaritan and Beelzebub, we must not think it strange if
his best Disciples in the reformation, as at first by those of your tribe they
were called Lollards and Hussites, so now by you be termed Puritans, and
Brownists. But my hope is that the people of England will not suffer themselves
to be juggl'd thus out of their faith and religion by a mist of names cast
before their eyes, but will search wisely by the Scriptures, and look quite
through this fraudulent aspersion of a disgraceful name into the things
themselves: knowing that the Primitive Christians in their times were accounted
such as are now called Familists and Adamites, or worse. And many on the
Prelatickside like the Church of Sardis have a name to live, and yet are dead;
to be Protestants, and are indeed Papists in most of their principles. Thu^
persuaded, this your old fallacy we shall soon unmask, and quickly apprehend
how you prevent schism, and who are your schismatick^. But what if ye prevent,
and hinder all good means of preventing schism? that way which the Apostles
used, was to call a council; from which by any thing that can be learnt from
the fifteenth of the Acts, no faithful Christian was debarred, to whom
knowledge and piety might give entrance. Of such a council as this every
parochial Consistory is a right homogeneous and constituting part being in it
self as it were a little Synod, and toward a general assembly moving upon
her own basis in an even and firm progression, as those smaller squares in
battle unite in one great cube, the main phalanx, an emblem of truth and
steadfastness. Whereas on the other side Prelaty ascending by a graduall
monarchy from Bishop to Archbishop, from thence to P imat, and from thence,
for there can be no reason yielded neither in nature, nor in religion,
wherefore, if it have lawfully mounted thus high, it should not be a Lordly
ascendent in the horoscope of the Church, from Primate to Patriarch, and so to
Pope. I say Prelaty thus ascending in a continual pyramid upon pretense to
perfect the Churches unity, if notwithstanding it be found most needful, yea
the utmost help to dearn up the rents of schism by calling a council, what
does it but teach us that Prelaty is of no force to effect this work which she
boasts to be her maister-peice; and that her pyramid aspires and sharpens to
ambition, not to ^ erfection, or unity. This we know, that as often as any
great schism disparts the Church, and Synods be proclaimed, the Presbyters ^ ve
as great right there, and as free vote of old, as the Bishops, which the Canon
law conceals not. So that Prelaty if she will seek to close up divisions in the
Church, must be forced to dissolve, and unmake her own pyramidal figure, which
she affi^ mes to be of such ^ niting power, when as indeed it is the most
dividing, and schism^ icall form that Geometricians know of, and must be feign
to inglobe, or incube her self among the Presbyters; which she hating to do,
sends her haughty Prelates from all parts with their fork^ d Miters, the badge
of schism or the stamp of his clov^ n foot whom they serve I think, who
according to their hierarchies ac^ nating still higher and higher in a cone of
Prelaty, in stead of healing up the gas^ es of the Church, as it happens in
such pointed bodies m^ eting, fall to gore on^ another with their sharp spires
for upper place, and precedence, till the council it (...) prove the greatest
schism of all. And thus they are so far from hindering dissension, that they
have made unprofitable, and eve^ noisome the chiefest remedy we have to keep
Christendom at one, which is by councels: and these if we rightly consider
Apostolic example, are nothing else but general Presbyteries. This seemed so
far from the Apostles to think much of, as if hereby their dignity were
impaired, that, as we may gather by those Epistles of Peter and John, which are
likely to be latest written, when the Church grew to a settling, like those
heroic patricians of Rome (if we may use such comparison) hasting to lay down
their dictatorship, they rejoys't to call themselves and to be as fellow Elders
among their brethren. Knowing that their high office was but as the scaffolding
of the Church yet unbuilt, and would be but a troublesome disfigurement, so
soon as the building was finis^. But the losty minds of an age or two after,
such was their small discerning, thought it a poor indignity, that the high
reared government of the Church should so on a sudden, as it seemed to them,
squat into a Presbytery. Next or rather before councels the timeliest
prevention of schism is to preach the Gospel abundantly and powerfully
throughout all the land, to instruct the youth religiously, to endeavor how
the Scriptures may be easiest understood by all men; to all which the
proceedings of these men have been on set purpose contrary. But how O Prelates
should you remove schism, and how should you not remove and oppose all the
means of removing schism? when Prelaty is a schism it self from the most
reformed and most flourishing of our neighbor Churches abroad, and a sad
subject of discord and offense to the whole nation (...) home. The remedy which
you allege is the very disease we groan under; and never can be to us a remedy
but by removing it self. Your predecessors were believed to assume this
preeminence above their brethren only that they might appease dissension. Now
God and the Church calls upon you, for the same reason to lay it down, as being
to thousands of good men offensive, burdensome, intolerable. Surrender that
pledge which unless you sowlely us^ rpt it, the Church gave you, and now
claims it again, for the reason she first lent it. Discharge the trust
committed to you prevent schism, and that yeoan never do, but by discha^ ging
your selves. That government which ye hold, we con^ esse pr^ s much, hinders
much (...) move^ much, but what the (...) of the Church? -- no, but all the
peace and unity, all the welfare not of the Church alone, but of the whole
kingdom. And if it be still permitted ye to hold, will cause the most sad I
know not whether separation be anough to say, but such a wide gulf of
distraction in this land as will never close her dismal gap, until ye be
forced (for of your selv^ ye will never do as that Roman Curtius nobly did) for
the Churches peace and your countries, to leap into the midst, and be no more
seen. By this we shall know whether yours be that ancient Prelaty which you say
was first constituted for the reducement of quiet and unanimity into the
Church, for the^ you will not delay ^ o prefer that above your own preferment.
If otherwise, we must be confident that your Prelaty is nothing else but your
ambition, an insole^ t preferring of your selves above your brethren, and all
your learned scraping in antiquity even to disturb the bones of old Aaron and
his sons in their graves, is but to maintain and set upon our necks a stately
and severe dignity, which you call sacred, and is nothing in very deed but a
grave and reverent gluttony, a sanctimonious avarice, in comparison of which,
all the duties and dearnesses which ye owe to God or to his Church, to law,
custom, or nature, ye have resolved to set at naught. I could put you in mind
what counsel Clement a fellow labourer with the Apostles gave to the
Presbyters of Corinth, whom the people though unjustly sought to remove. Who
among you says he, is noble minded, who is pitiful, who is charitable, let
him say thus, if for me this sedition, this enmity, these differences be, I
willingly depart, I go my ways, only let the flock of Christ be at peace with
the Presbyters that are set over it. He that shall do this, says he, shall get
him great honor in the Lord, and all places will receave him. This was
Clements counsel to good and holy men that they should depart rather from
their just office, then by their stay, to ravle out the seamlesse garment of
concord in the Church. But I have better counsel to give the Prelates, and
far more acceptable to their cares, this advice in my opinion is fitter for
them. Cling fast to your Pontifical Sees, bate not, quit your selves like
Barons, stand to the utmost for your haughty Courts and votes in Parliament.
Still tell us that you prevent schism, though schism and combustion be the
very issue of your bodies your first born; and set your country a bleeding in a
Prelaticall mutiny, to fight for your pomp, and that ill favored weed of
temporal honor that sits dishonourably upon your laick shoulders, that ye may
be fat and fleshy, swo^ with high thoughts and big with mischievous designs,
when God comes to visit (...) you all this forescore years vexation of his
Church under your Egyptian tyranny. For certainly of all those blessed souls
which you have persecuted, and those miserable ones which you have lost; the
just vengeance does not sleep.

CHAP. VII.
That those many Sects and Schisms by some supposed to be among us, and that
rebellion in Ireland, oug^ t not to be a hindrancc, but a hastening of
reformation.

AS for those many Sects and divisions rumor'd abroad to be amongst us, it is
not hard to perceave that they are partly the mere fictions and false alarmes
of the Prelates, thereby to cast amazements and panick terrors into the hearts
of weaker Christians that they should not venture to change the present
deformity of the Church for fear of I know not what worse inconveniences. With
the same objected fears and suspicions, we know that subtle Prelat Gardner
sought to divert the first reformation. It may suffice us to be taught by S.
Paul that there must be f^ cts for the manifesting of those that are sound
hearted. These are but winds and flaws to try the floting vessel of our faith
whether it be stanch and sail well, whether our ballast be just, our anchorage
and cable strong. By this is seen who lives by faith and certain knowledge,
and who by credulity and the prevailing opinion of the age; whose virtue is of
an unchangeable grain, and whose of a slight wash. If God come to try our
constancy we ought not to shrink, or stand the less firmly for that, but pass
on with more steadfast resolution to establish the truth though it were through
a lane of sects and heresies o^ each side. Other things men do to the glory of
God: but sects and errors it seems God suffers to be for the glory of good men,
that the world may know and reverence their true fortitude and undaunted
constancy in the truth. Let ^ s not therefore make these things an encumbrance,
or an excuse of our delay in reforming which God sends us as an incitement to
proceed with more honor and alacrity. For if there were no opposition where
were the trial of an unfai^ d goodness and magnanimity? virtue that wavers is
(...) virtue, but vice revolted from i^ self, and after a while returning. The
actions of just and pious men do not darken in their middle course but Solomon
tells us they are as the shining light, that shines more and more unto the
perfet day. But if we shall suffer the trifling doubts and jealousies of future
sects to overcloud the fair beginnings of purpos'st reformation, let us rather
fear that another proverb of the same Wiseman be not up^ ided to us, that the
way of the wicked is as darkness, they stumble at they know not what. If sects
and schisms be turbulent in the unse^ l'd estate of a Church, while it lies
under the amending hand, it best beseems our Christian courage to think they
are but as the throws and pangs that go before the birth of reformation, and
that the work it self is now in doing. For if we look but on the nature of
elementall and mixed things, we know they cannot suffer any change of one kind
o^ quality into another without the struggl of contrarietie^. And in things
artificial, seldom any elegance is wrought without a superfluous wast and
refuse in the transaction. No Marble statue can be po^ itely carved, no fair
edifice built without almost as much ^ bbish and sweeping. Insomuch that even
in the spiritual conflict of S. Paul's conversion there fell scales from his
eyes that were not perceav'd before. No wonder then in the reforming of a
Church which is never brought to effect without the fierce encounter of truth
and fashood together, if, as it were the splinters and shares of so violent a
jousting, there fall from between the shock many fond errors and fanatic
opinions, which when truth has the upper hand, and the reformation shall be
perfet^ d, will easily be rid out of the way, or kept so low, as that they
shall be only the exercise of our knowledge, not the disturbance, or
interruption of our faith. As for that which Barcl^ y in his image of minds
writes concerning the horrible and barbarous conceits of Englishmen in their
religion. I deem it spoken like what he was, a fugitive Papist traducing the
Hand whence he sprung. It may be more judiciously gathered from hence, that the
Englishman of many other nations is least atheistical, and bears a natural
disposition of much reverence and awe toward the Deity; but in hi^ weakness
and want of better instruction, which among us too f^quently is neglected,
especially by the meaner sort turning the b^ nt of his own wits with a
scrupulous and ceaselesse care what he might do to inform himself a right of
God and his worship, he may fall not unlikely sometimes as any otherland man
into an uncouth opinion. And verily if we look ^ t his native towardli^ sse i^
the roughcast without breeding, some nation or other may happily be better
composed to a natural civility, and right judgment the^ he. But if he get the
benefit once of a wise and well rectified ^ture, which must first come in
general from the godly vigilance of the Church, I suppose that where ever
mention is made of countries manners, or men, the English people among the
first that shall be praised, may deserve to be accounted a right pious, right
honest, and right hardy nation. But thus while some stand dallying and
deferring to reform for fear of that which should mainly hasten them forward,
lest schism and error should increase, we may now thank our selves and our
delays if instead of schism a bloody and inhumane rebellion be struck in
between our slow movings. Indeed against violent and powerful opposition there
can be no just blame of a lingering dispatch. But this I urge against those that
discourse it for a maxim, as if the swift opportunities of establishing, or
reforming religion, were to attend upon the ^ eam of state business. In state
many things at first are crude and hard to digest, which only time and
deliberation can supple, and concoct. But in religion wherein i^ no immaturity,
nothing out of season, it goes far otherwise. The door of grace turns upon
smooth hinges wide opening to send out, but soon shutting to recall the
precious offers of mercy to a nation: which unless Watchfulness and Zeal two
quick-sighted and ready-handed Virgins be there in our behalf to receave, we
loose: and still the of^ er we loose, the straiter the door opens, and the
less is offered. This is all we get by demurring in Gods service. It Is not
rebellion that ought to be the hindrance of reformation, but it is the want of
this which is the cause of that. The Prelates which boast themselves the only
bridle^ of schism God knows have been so cold and backward both there and with
us to repress heresy and idolatry, that either through their carelessenesse
or their craft all this mischief is befal^. What can the Irish subject do
less in Gods just displeasure against us, then revenge upon English bodies the
little care that our Prelate have had of their souls. Nor has their negligence
been new in that Island but ever notorious in Queen Elizabeth's days, as Camden
their known friend forbears not to complain. Yet so little are they touch^ with
remorce of these their cruelties, for these cruelties are theirs, the bloody
revenge of those souls which they have fami^ ht, that wh^ s against our
brethren the Scot^, who by their upright and loyal and loyal deed^ have now
bought themselves a^ honorable name to posterity, whatsoever malice by slander
could invent, rag^ i^ hostility attempt, they greedily attempted, toward these
murd^ ous Irish the enemies of God and mankind, a cursed offspring of their
own connivence, no man takes notice but that they seem to be very calmely and
indifferently affected. Where then should we begin to extinguish a rebellion
that has his cause from the misgovernment of the Church, where? but at the
Churches reformation, and the removal of that government which pe^ sues and
war^ es with all good Christians under the name of schismatics, but maintains
and fosters all Papists and Idolaters (...) tolerable Christians. And if the
sacred Bible may be our light, we are neither without example, nor the witness
of God himself, that the corrupted estate of the Church is both the cause of
tumult, and civil wars, and that to stint them, the peace of the Church must
first be s^ l'd. Now for a long season, says Azariah to King Asa, Israel has
(...) without the true God, and without a teaching Priest, and without, law;
and in those times there was no peace to him that went out, ^ or to hi^ that
came in, but great vexations were upon all the inhabit^ nts of the countries.
And nation was destroyed of nation, and City of City, f^ God did vex them with
all adversity. Be ye strong therefore, says he to the reformers of that age,
and let not your hands be weak, for your work shall be rewarded. And in
those Prophets that lived in the times of reformation after the Captivity often
does God stir up the people to consider that while establishment of Church
matters was neglected, and put off, there was no peace to him that went out or
came in, for I, says God, had set all men every one against his neigbour.
Zechar. 8.
But from the very day forward that they went seriously, and effectually about
the welfare of the Church, he tells them that they Haggai 2.
themselves might perceave the sudden change of things into a prosperous and
peaceful condition. But it will here be said that the reformation is a long
work, and the miseries of Ireland are urgent of a speedy redress. They be
indeed; and how speedy we are, the poor afflicted remnant of our martyred
countrymen that sit there on the Seashore, counting the hours of our delay
with their sighs, and the minutes with their falling tears, perhaps with the
destilling of their bloody wounds, if they have not quite by this time cast
off, and almost cursed the vain hope of our foundered ships, and aids, can best
judge how speedy we are to their relief. But let their succors be hasted, as
all need and reason is, and let not therefore the reformation which is the
chiefest cause of success and victory be still procrastinated. They of the
captivity in their greatest extremities could find both counsel and hands
anough at once to build, and to expect the enemies assault. And we for our
parts a populous and mighty nation must needs be fallen into a strange plight
either of effeminacy, or confusion, if Ireland that was once the conquest of
one single Earl with his private forces, and the small assistance of a petty
Kernish Prince, should now take up all the wisdom and prowess of this potent
Monarchy to quell a barbarous crew of r^ bells, whom if we take but the right
course to subdue, that is beginning at the reformation of our Church, their own
horrid murders and rapes, will so fight against them, that the very sutler^ and
horse boys of the Camp will be able to rout and chase them without the
staining of any Noble sword. To proceed by other method in this enterprise, be
our Captains and Commanders never so expert, will be as great an error in the
art o^ war, as any novice in souldiership ever committed. And thus I leave it
as a declared truth, that neither the fear of sects no nor rebellion can be a
fit plea to stay reformation, but rather to push it forward with all possible
diligence and speed.

The second Book.
HOw happy were it for this frail, and as it may be truly called, mortal life
of man, since all earthly things which have the name of good and convenient in
our daily use, are withal so cumbersome and full of trouble if knowledge yet
which is the best and, lightsomest possession of the mind, were as the common
saying is, no burden, and that what it wanted of being a load to any part of
the body, it did not with a heavy advantage overlay upon the spirit. For not
to speak of that knowledge that rests in the contemplation of natural causes
and dimensions, which must needs be a lower wisdom, as the object is low,
certain it is that he who has obtained in more then the scantest measure to
know any thing distinctly of God, and of his true worship, and what is
infallibly good and happy in the state of man's life, what in it self evil and
miserable, though vulgarly not so esteemed, he that has obtained to know this,
the only high valuable wisdom indeed, remembering also that God even to a
strictness requires the improvement of these his entrusted gifts cannot but
sustain a sore^ burden of mind, and more pressing then any supportable toil, or
weight, which the body can labor under; how and in what manner he shall
dispose and employ those sums of knowledge and illumination, which God has
sent him into this world to trade with. And that which aggravats the burden
more is, that having received amongst his allotted parcels certain precious
truths of such an orient luster as no Diamond can equal, which never the less
he has in charge to put off at any cheap rate, yea for nothing to them that
will, the great Merchants of this world searing that this course would soon
discover, and disgrace the false glitter of their deceitful wares wherewith
they abuse the people, like poor Indians with beads and glasses, practice by
all means how they may suppress the venting of such rarities and such a
cheapnes as would undo them, and turn their trash upon their hands. Therefore
by gratifying the corrupt desi^ of men in fleshly doctrines, they stir them
up to persecute with hatred and contempt all those that seek to bear themselves
uprightly in this their spiritual factory: which they forseeing though they
cannot but testify of Tr^ th and the excellence of t^ at heavenly traffic
which they bring against what opposition, or danger soever, yet needs must it
sit heavily upon their spirits, that being in Gods prime intention and their
own, selected heralds of peace, and dispensers of treasures inestimable without
price to them that have no pence, they find in the discharge of their
commission that they are made the greatest variance and offense, a very sword
and fire both in house and City over the whole earth. This is that which the
sad Prophet Jeremiah laments, Woe is me my mother, that thou have born me a man
of strife, and contention. And although divine inspiration must certainly have
been sweet to those ancient profets, yet the irksomeness of that truth which
they brought was so unpleasant to them, that every where they call it a burden.
Yea that mysterious book of Revelation which the great Evangelist was bid to
eat, as it had been some eye-brightning electuary of knowledge, and foresight,
though it were sweet in his mouth, and in the learning, it was bitter in his
belly; bitter in the denouncing. Nor was this hid from the wise Poet Sophocles,
who in that place of his Tragedy where Tirefias is called to resolve K. Edipus
in a matter which he knew would be grievous, brings him in bemoaning his lot,
that he knew more then other men. For surely to every good and peaceable man it
must in nature needs be a hateful thing to be the displeaser, and molester of
thousands; much better would it like him doubtless to be the messenger of
gladness and contentment, which is his chief intended business, to all mankind,
but that they resist and oppose their own true happiness. But when God
commands to take the trumpet and blow a dolorous or a jarring blast, it lies
not in man's will what he shall say, or what he shall conceal. If he shall think
to be silent, as Jeremiah did, because of the reproach and derision he met with
daily, and all his familiar friends watched for his halting to be revenged on
him for speaking the truth, he would be forc'^ to confess as he confessed, his
word was in my heart as a burning fire shut up in my bones, I was weary with
forbearing, and could not stay. Which might teach these times not suddenly to
condemn all things that are sharply spoken, or vehemently written, as
proceeding out of stomach, virulence and ill nature, but to consider rather
that if the Prelates have leav to say the worst that can be said, and do the
worst that can be don, while they strive to keep to themselves to their great
pleasure and commodity those things which they ought to render up, no man can
be justly offended with him that shall endeavor to impart and bestow without
any gain to himself those sharp, but saving words which would be a terror, and
a torment in him to keep back. For me I have determined to lay up as the best
treasure, and solace of a good old age, if God voutsafe it me, the honest
liberty of free speech from my youth, where I shall think it available in so
dear a concernment as the Churches good. For if I be either by disposition, or
what other cause too inquisitive, or suspicious of my self and mine own doings,
who can help it? but this I foresee, that should the Church be brought under
heavy oppression, and God have given me ability the while to reason against
that man that should be the author of so foul a deed, or should she by blessing
from above on the industry and courage of faithful men change this her
distracted estate into better days without the lest furtherance or
contribution of those few talents which God at that present had lent me, I
foresee what stories I should hear within my self, all my life after, of
discourage and reproach. Timorous and ungrateful, the Church of God is now
again at the foot of her insulting enemies: and thou bewailst, what matters it
for thee or thy bewailing? when time was, thou could not find a syllable of
all that thou had read, or studied, to utter in her behalf. Yet ease and
leisure was given thee for thy retired thoughts out of the sweat of other men.
Thou had the diligence the parts, the language of a man, if a vain subject
were to be adorned or beautified, but when the cause of God and his Church was
to be pleaded, for which purpose that tongue was given thee which thou have,
God listened if he could hear thy voice among his zealous servants, but thou
were domb as a beast; from hence forward be that which thine own brutish
silence has made thee. Or else I should have heard on the other care,
slothful, and ever to be set light by, the Church has now overcom her late
distresses after the unwearied labors of many her true servants that stood up
in her defense; thou also would take upon thee to share amongst them of their
joy: but wherefore tho^ where can thou show any word or deed of thine which
might have ha^ ten'd her peace; whatever thou do now talk; or write, or look
is the alms of other me^ active prudence and zeal. Dare not now to say, or
do any thing better then thy former sloth and infancy, or if thou dare, thou
do impudently to make a thrifty purchase of boldness to thy self out of the
painful merits of other men: what before was thy sin, is now thy duty to be,
abject, and worthless. These and such like lessons as these, I know would have
been my Matins duly, ^ nd my Even-song. But now by this little diligence, mark
what a privilege I have gained; with good men and Saints to clame my right of
lamenting the tribulations of the Church, if she should suffer, when others
that have ventured nothing for her sake, have not the honor to be admitted
mourners. But if she lift up her drooping head and prosper, among those that
have something more then wished her welfare, I have my charter and freehold of
rejoicing to me and my heirs. Concerning therefore this way ward subject
against prelaty, the touching whereof is so distasteful and disquietous to a
number of men, as by what has been said I may deserve of charitable readers to
be credited, that neither envy nor gall has ente^ d me upon this controversy,
but the enforcement of conscience only, and a preventive fear least the
omitting of this duty should be against me when I would store up to my self the
good provision of peaceful hours, So lest it should be still imputed to me, as
I have found i^ has bin, that some self-pleasing humor of vainglory has
incited me to contest with men of high estimation now while green yeer^ are
upon my head, from this needless sor^ isall I shall hope to dissuade the
intelligent and equal auditor, if I can but say succesfully that which in this
exigent behoovs me, although I would be heard only, if it might be, by the
elegant and learned reader, to whom principally for a while I shall beg leav I
may address my self. To him it will be no new thing though I tell him that if
I hunted after praise by the ostentation of wit and learning, I should not
write thus out of mine own season, when I have neither yet completed to my
mind the full circle of my private studies, although I complain not of any
insufficiency to the matter in hand, or were I ready to my wishes, it were a
folly to commit any thing elaborately composed to the careless and interrupted
listening of these tumultuous timer. Next if I were wise only to mine own ends,
I would certainly take such a subject as of it self might catch applause,
whereas this has all the disadvantages on the contrary, and such a subject as
the publishing whereof might be delayed at pleasure, and time enough to pencill
it over with all the curious touches of art, even to the perfection of a
faultlesse picture, whenas in this argument the not deferring is of great
moment to the good speeding, that if solidity have leisure to do her office,
art cannot have much. Lastly, I should not choose this manner of writing wherein
knowing my self inferior to my self, led by the genial power of nature to
another task, I have the use, as I may account it, but of my left hand. And
though I shall be foolish in saying more to this purpose, yet since it will be
such a folly as wisest men going about to commit, have only confessed and so
committed, I may trust with more reason, because with more folly to have
courteous pardon. For although a Poet soaring in the high region of his fancies
with his garland and singing robes about him might without apology speak more
of himself then I mean to do, yet for me sitting here below in the cool element
of prose, a mortal thing among many readers of no Empyreall conceit, to
venture and divulge unusual things of my self, I shall petition to the gentler
sort, it may not be envy to me. I must say therefore that after I had from my
first years by the ceaselesse diligence and care of my father, whom God
recompense, bin exercised to the tongues, and some sciences, as my age would
suffer, by sundry masters and teachers both at home and at the schools, it was
found that whether ought was imposed me by them that had the overlooking, or
betak'n to of mine own choice in English, or other tongue prosing or versing,
but chiefly this latter, the style by certain vital fignes it had, was likely
to live. But much latelier in the private Academies of Italy, whither I was
favored to resort, perceiving that some trifles which I had in memory, composed
at under twenty or thereabout (for the manner is that every one must give some
proof of his wit and reading there) met with acceptance above what was looked
for, and other things which I had shifted in scarsity of books and conveniences
to patch up amongst them, were received with written Encomiums, which the
Italian is not forward to bestow on men of this side the Alps, I began thus
far to assent both to them and diverse of my friends here at home, and not
less to an inward prompting which now grew daily upon me, that by labor and
intent study (which I take to be my portion in this life) joined with the
strong propensity of nature, I might perhaps leave something so written to
aftertimes, as they should not willingly let it die. These thoughts at once
possessed me, and these other. That if I were certain to write as men buy Leases,
for three lives and downward, there ought no regard be sooner had, then to Gods
glory by the honor and instruction of my country. For which cause, and not
only for that I knew it would be hard to arrive at the second rank among the
Latins, I applied my self to that resolution which Aristo followed against
the persuasions of Bembo, to fix all the industry and art I could unite to the
adorning of my native tongue; not to make verbal curiosities the end, that were
a toylsom vanity, but to be an interpreter and relater of the best and sagest
things among mine own Citizens throughout this Island in the mother dialect.
That what the greatest and choycest wits of Athens, Rome, or modern Italy, and
those Hebrews of old did for their country, I in my proportion with this over
and above of being a Christian, might do for mine: not caring to be once named
abroad, though perhaps I could attain to that, but content with these British
Islands as my world, whose fortune has hitherto bin, that if the Athenians,
(...) some say, made their small deeds great and renowned by their eloquent
writers, England has had her noble atchievments made small by the unskilful
handling of monks and mechanick^.

Time serv^ not now, and perhaps I might seem too profuse to give any certain
account of what the mind at home in the spacious circuits of her musing has
liberty to propose to her self, though of highest hope, and hardest attempting,
whether that Epick form whereof the two poems of Homer, and those other two of
Virgil and Tasso are a diffuse, and the book of Job a brief model^ or whether
the rules of Aristotle herein are strictly to be kept, or nature to be
followed, which in them that know art, and use judgment is no transgression,
but an enriching of art. And lastly what K or Knight before the conquest might
be chosen in whom to lay the pattern of a Christian Hero. And as Tasso gave to
a Prince of Italy his chois whether he would command him to write of Godfreys
expedition against the infidels, or Belisarius against the Goths, or
Charlemain against the Lombards; if to the instinct of nature and the
imboldning of art ought may be trusted, and that there be nothing advers in our
climat, or the fate of this age, it happily would be no rashness from an equal
diligence and inclination to present the like offer in our own ancient stories.
Or whether those Dramatick constitutions, wherein Sophocles and Euripides
reign shall be found more doctrinal and exemplary to a Nation, the Scripture
also affords us a divine pastoral Drama in the Song of Solomon consisting of
two persons and a double Chorus, as Origin rightly judges. And the Apocalypse of
Saint John is the majestic image of a high and stately Tragedy, shutting up
and intermingling her solemn Scenes and Acts with a sevenfold Chorus of
halleluja's and harping symphonies: and this my opinion the grave authority of
Pare^ commenting that book is sufficient to confirm. Or if occasion shall lead
to imitat those magnifick Odes and Hymns wherein Pin^darus and Callimachus are
in most things worthy, some others in their frame judicious, in their matter
most an end faulty: But those frequent songs throughout the law and prophets
beyond all these, not in their divine argument alone, but in the very critical
art of composition may be easily made appear over all the kinds of Lyrick
poesy, to be incomparable. These abilities, wheresoever they be found, are the
inspired gift of Go^ rarely bestowed, but yet to some (though most abuse) in
every Nation: and are of power beside the office of a pulpit, to inbreed and
cherish in a great people the seeds of virtue, and public civility, to allay
the perturbations of the mind, and set the affections in right tune, to
celebrate in glorious and lofty Hymns the throne and equipage of Gods
Almightinesse, and what he works, and what he suffers to be wrought with high
providence in his Church, to sing the victorious agonies of Martyrs and Saints,
the deeds and triumphs of just and pious Nations doing valiantly through faith
against the enemies of Christ, to deplore the general relapses of Kingdoms and
States from justice and Gods true worship. Lastly, whatsoever in religion is
holy and sublime, in virtue amiable, or grave, whatsoever has passion or
admiration in all the changes of that which is called fortune from without, or
the wily suttleties and refluxes of man's thoughts from within, all these things
with a solid and treatable smoothness to paint out and describe. Teaching over
the whole book of sanctity and virtue through all the instances of example with
such delight to those especially of soft and delicious temper who will not so
much as look upon Truth herself, unless they see her elegantly dressed, that
whereas the paths of honesty and good life appear now rugged and difficult,
though they be indeed easy and pleasant, they would then appear to all men
both easy and pleasant though they were rugged and difficult indeed. And what a
benefit this would be to our youth and gentry, may be soon guest by what we
know of the corruption and bane which they suck in daily from the writings and
interludes of libidinous and ignorant Poetasters, who having scars ever heard
of that which is the main consistence of a true poem, the choys of such persons
as they ought to introduce, and what is moral and decent to each one, do for
(...) most part lap up vicious principles in sweet pills to be swallowed down,
and make the taste of virtuous documents harsh and sour. But because the spirit
of man cannot demean it self lively in this body without some recreating
intermission of labor, and serious things, it were happy for the Common
wealth, if our Magistrates, as in those famous governments of old, would take
into their care, not only the deciding of our contentious Law cases and brauls,
but the managing of our public sports, and festival pastimes, that they might
be, not such as were autoriz'd a while since, the provaction^ of drunkenness
and lust, but such as may inure and harden o^ bodies by martial exercises to
all warlike skill and performance, and may civilize, adom and make discreet our
minds by the learned and affable meeting of frequent Academies, and the
procurement of wise and artfull recitations sweetened with ^ oquent and
graceful inticements to the love and practice of justice, temperance and
fortitude, instructing and bettering the Nation at all opportunities, that the
call of wisdom and virtue may be heard every where, a^ Solomon says, She cries
without, she utters her voice in the streets, in the top of high places, in
the chief concours, and in the openings of the Gates. Whether this may not be
not only in Pulpits, but after another persuasive method, at set and solemn
Paneguries, in Theaters, porches, or what other place, or way may win most upon
the people to receiv at once both recreation, and instruction, let them in
authority consult. The thing which I had to say, and those intentions which have
lived within me ever since I could conceiv my self any thing worth to my
Country, I return to crave excuse that urgent reason has plucked from me by an
abortive and foredated discovery. And the accom^ lishment of them lies not but
in a power above man's to promise; but that none has by more studious ways
endeavored, and with more unwearied spirit that none shall, that I dare almost
aver of my self, as far as life and free leisure will extend, and that the
Land had once infranchis'd her self from this impertinent yoke of prelaty,
under whose Inquisitorins and tyra^ ical duncery no free and splendid wit can
flourish. Neither do I think it shame to covenant with any knowing reader, that
for some few years yet I may go on trust with him toward the payment of what I
am now indebted, as being a work not to be raised from the heat of youth, or
the vapors of wine, like that which flows at wast from the pen of some vulgar
^ Word^, or the trencher fury of a riming parasite, nor to be obtained by the
invocation of Dame Memory and her Siren daughters, but by devout prayer to that
eternal Spirit who can enrich with all utterance and knowledge, and sends out
his Seraphim with the hallowed fire of his Altar to touch and purify the lips
of whom he pleases: to this must be added industrious and select reading,
steady observation, insight into all seemly and generous arts and affairs,
till which in some measure be compast, at mine own peril and cost I refuse not
to sustain this expectation from as many as are not loath to hazard so much
credulity upon the best pledges that I can g^ ve them. Although it nothing
content me to have disclosed thus much before hand, but that I trust hereby to
make it manifest with what small willingness I endure to interrupt the pursuit
of no less hopes then these, and leave a calm and pleasing solitaryn^ s fed
with cherful and confident thou^ hts, to imbark in a troubled sea of noises and
hoars disputes, put from beholding the bright countenance of truth in the quiet
and still air of delightful studies to come into the dim reflection of hollow
antiquities sold by the seeming bulk, and there be fain to club quotations with
men whose learning and belief lies in marginal stuffings, who when they have
like good sumpter^ laid ye down their horse load of citations and fathers at
your door, with a rapsody of who and who were Bishops here or there, ye may
take off their packsaddles, their days work is don, and episcopacy, a^ they
think, stoutly vindicated. Let any gentle apprehension that can distinguish
learned pains from unlearned drudgery, imagine what pleasure or profoundnesse
can be in this, or what honor to deaf against such adversaries. But were it
the meanest under-service, if God by his Secretary conscience enjoin it, it
were sad for me if I should draw back, for me especially, now when all men
offer their aid to help ease and enlighten the difficult labors of the Church,
to whose service by the intentions of my parents and friends I was destined of
a child, and in mine own resolutions, till coming to some maturity of years
and perceaving what tyranny had invaded the Church, that he who would take
Orders must subscibe slave, and take an oath withal, which unless he took
with a conscience that would ^ etch he must either strait perjure, or split his
faith, I thought it better to prefer a blameless silence before the sacred
office of speaking bought, and begun with servitude and forswearing. Howsoever
thus Church-outed by the Prelates, hence may appear the right I have to meddle
in these matters, as before, the necessity and constraint appeared.

CHAP. I.
That Prelaty opposes the reason and end of the Gospel three ways, and first
in her outward form.

AFter this digression it would remain that I should single o^ some other
reason which might undertake for Prelaty to be a fit and lawful
Church Government; but finding none of like validity with these that have
already sped according to their fortune, I shall add one reason why it is not
to be thought a Church Government at all, but a Church-tyranny, and is at
hostile terms with the end and reason of Christ's Evangelick ministry. Albeit I
must confess to be half in doubt whether I should bring it forth or no, it
being so contrary to the eye of the world, and the world so potent in most men's
hearts, that I shall endanger either not to be regarded, or not to be
understood. For who is there almost that measures wisdom by simplicity, strength
by suffering, dignity by lowliness, who is there that counts it first, to be
last, something to be nothing, and reckons himself of great command in that he
is a servant? yet God when he meant to subdue the world and hell a^ once, part
of that to salvation, and this wholly to perdition, made chois of no other
weapons, or auxiliaries then these whether to save, or to destroy. It had bin a
small maistery for him, to have drawn out his Legions into array, and flankt
them with his thunder; therefore he sent Foolishnes to confute Wisdom, Weakness
to bind Strength, Despisednes to vanquish Pride. And this is the great mystery
of the Gospel made good in Christ himself, who as he testifies came not to be
minister'd to, but to minister; and must he fulfilled in all his ministers till
his second coming. To go against these principles S. Paul so feared, that if
he should but affect the wisdom of words in his preaching, he thought it would
be laid to his charge, that he had made the cross of Christ to be of none
effect Whether then Prelaty do not make of none effect the cross of Christ by
the principles it has so contrary to these, nullifying the power and end of
the Gospel, it shall not want due proof, if it want not due belief. Neither
shall I stand to trifle with one that will tell me of quiddities and
formalities, whether Prelaty or Prelateity in abstract notion be this or that,
it suffices me that I find it in his ^ kin, so I find it inseparable, or not
oftener otherwise then a Pheni^ has bin seen; although I persuade me that
whatever faultines was but superficial to Prelaty at the beginning, is now by
the just judgment of God long since branded and inworn into the very essence
thereof. First therefore, if to do the work of the Gospel Christ ou^ Lord took
upon him the form of a servant, how can his servant in this ministry take upon
him the form of a Lord? I know Bils^ has deciphered us all the galanteries of
Signore and Monsignore, and Monsieur as circumstantially as any punctualist of
Casteel, Naples, or Fountain Blea^ could have don, but this must not so
complement us out of our right minds, as to be to learn that the form of a
servant was a mean, laborious and vulgar life aptest to teach; which form
Christ thought fittest, that he might bring about his will according to his own
principles choosing the meaner things of this world that he might put under the
high. Now whether the pompous garb, the Lordly life, the wealth, the haughty
distance of Prelaty be those meaner things of the world, whereby God in them
would manage the mystery of his Gospel, be it the verdit of common sense. For
Christ says in S. John, The servant is not greater then his Lord, nor he that
is sent greater then he that sent him. And adds, If ye know these things,
happy are ye if ye do^ them. Then let the prelates well advise, if they neither
know, nor do these things, or if they know, and yet do them not, wherein their
happiness consists. And thus is the Gospel frustrated by the Lordly form of
Prelaty.

CHAP. II.
That the ceremonius doctrine of Prelaty opposes the reason and end of the
Gospel.

THat which next declares the heavenly power, and reveals the deep mystery of
the Gospel, is the pure simpl^ ity of doctrine accounted the foolishnes of this
world, yet crossing and confounding the pride and wisdom of the flesh. And
wherein consists this fleshly wisdom and pride? in being altogether ignorant of
God and his worship? no surely, for men are naturally ashamed of the. Where
then? it consists in a bold presumption of ordering the worship and service of
God after man's own will in traditions and ceremonies. Now if the pride and
wisdom of the flesh were to be defeated and confounded, no doubt, but in that
very point wherein it was proudest and thought it self wisest, that so the
victory of the Gospel might be the more illustrious. But our Prelates instead of
expressing the spiritual power of their ministry by warring against this
chief bulwark and strong hold of the flesh, have entered into fast league with
the principal enemy against whom they were se^, and turned the strength of
fleshly pride and wisdom against the pure simplicity of saving truth. First,
mistrusting to find the authority of their or^ er in the immediate institution of
Christ, or his Apostles by the clear evidence of Scripture, they fly to the c^
nal supportment of tradition: when we appeal to the Bible, they to the unweildy
volumes of tradition. And do not shame to reject the ordinance of him that is
eternal for the pervers iniquity of sixteen hunderd years; choosing rather to
think truth it self a liar, the^ that sixteen ages should be tax with an
error; not considering the general a postasy that was foretold, and the
Churches flight into the wilderness. Nor is this anough, instead of showing the
reason of their lowly condition from divine example and command, they seek to
prove their high pre-eminence from humane consent and authority. But let them
chaunt while they will of prerogatives, we shall tell them of Scripture; of
custom, we of Scripture; of Acts and Statutes, still of Scripture, til the quick
and pearcing word enter to the dividing of their souls, and the mighty weakness
of the Gospel throw down the weak mightines of man's reasoning. Now for their
demeanor within the Church, how have they disfigured and defaced that more then
angelick brightness, the unclouded serenity of Christian Religion with the dark
overcasting of superstitious coaps and flaminical vestures; wearing on their
backs; and, I abhor to think, perhaps in some worse place the unexpressible
Image of God the father. Tell me ye Priests wherefore this gold, wherefore these
roabs and surplices over the Gospel^ is our religion guilty of the first
trespass, and has need of clothing to cover her nakedness? whatdoes this
else but have an ignominy upon the perfection of Christ's ministry by seeking
to adorn it with that which (...) the poor remedy of our ^ Word^. ^ eleive it,
wondrous Doctors, all corporeal resemblances of inward holiness and beauty are
now past; he that will cloth the Gospel now, intimates plainly, that the
Gospel is naked, uncomely, that I may not say reproachful. Do not, ye Church
maskers, while Christ is clothing upon our barenes with his righteous garment
to make us acceptable in his fathers fight, do not, as ye do, cover and hide
his righteous verity with the polluted clothing of your ceremonies to make it
seem more decent in your own eyes. How beautiful, says Isaiah, are the feet
of him that brings good tidings, that publishes salvation! Are the feet so
beautiful, and is the very bringing of these tidings so decent of it self?
what new decency then can be added to this by your spinstry? ye think by these
gaudy glisterings to stir up the devotion of the rude multitude; ye think so,
because ye forsake the heavenly teaching of S. Paul for the hellish Sophistry
of Papism. If the multitude be rude, the lips of the Preacher must give
knowledge, and not ceremonies. And although some Christians be new born babes
comparatively to some that are stronger, yet in respect of ceremony which is
but a rudiment of the Law, the weakest Christian has thrown off the robes of
his minority, and is a perfect man, as to legal rites. What childrens food
there is in the Gospel we know to be no other then the sincerity of the word
that they may grow thereby. But is here the utmost of your outbraving the
service of God? No. Ye have bin bold, not to set your threshold by his
threshold, or your posts by his posts, but your Sacrament, your ^ igne, call it
what you will, by his Sacrament, baptizing the Christian infant with a solemn
sprinkle, and unbaptizing for your own part with a profane and impious
forefinger: as if when ye had laid the purifying element upon his forehead, ye
meant to cancel and cross it out again with a caracter not of Gods bidding. O
but the innocence of these ceremonies! O rather the fottish absurdity of this
excuse! what could be more innocent then the washing of a cup, a glass, or
hands before meat, and that under the Law when so many washings were commanded,
and by long tradition, yet our Savior detested their customs though never so
seeming harmless, and charges them severely that they had transgrest the
Commandments of God by their traditions and worshipped him in vain. How much more
then must these, and much grosser ceremonies now in force delude the end of
Christ's coming in the flesh against the flesh, and stifle the sincerity of our
new covenant which has bound us to forsake all carnal pride and wisdom
especially in matters of religion. Thus we see again how Prelaty sailing in
opposition (...) the main end and power of the Gospel does not join in that
^sterious work of Christ, by lowlines to confound height, by simplicity of
doctrine the wisdom of the world, but contrariwise has made it self high in the
world and the flesh to vanquish things by the world accounted low, and made it
self wise in tradition and fleshly ceremony to confound the purity of doctrine
which is the wisdom of God.

CHAP. III.
That Prelatical jurisdiction opposes the reason and end of the Gospel and of
State.

THe third and last consideration remains, whether the Prelates in their
function do work according to the Gospel practizing to subdue the mighty
things of this world by things weak: which S. Paul has set forth to be the
power and excellence of the Gospel, or whether in more likelihood they band
themselves with the prevalent things of this world to overrun the weak things
which Christ has made chois to work by: and this will soonest be discerned by
the course of their jurisdiction. But here again I find my thoughts almost in
suspense betwixt yea and no, and am nigh turning mine eye which way I may best
retire, and not proceed in this subject, blaming the ardency of my mind that
fixed me too attentively to come thus far. For Truth, I know not how, has
this unhappiness fatal to her, ere she can come to the trial and inspection
of the Understanding, being to pass through many little wards and limits of
the several Affections and Desires, she cannot shift it, but must put on such
colors and attire, as those Pathetick handmaids of the soul please to lead her
in to their Queen. And if she find so much favor with them, they let her pass
in her own likeness; if not, they bring her into the presence habited and
colored like a notorious Falsehood. And contrary when any Falsehood comes that
way, if they like the ^ rrand she brings, they are so artfull to counterfeit
the very shape and visage of Truth, that the Understanding not being able to
discern the ^ ucus which these inchantresses with such cunning have laid upon
the feature sometimes of Truth, sometimes of Falsehood interchangeably,
sentences for the most part one for the other at the first blush, according to
the subtle imposture of these sensual mistresses that keep the port^ and
passages between her and the object. So that were it not for leaving imperfect
that which is already said, I should go near to relinquish that which is to
follow. And because I see that most men, as it happens in this world, either
weakly, or falsely principl'd, what through ignorance, and what through custom
of license, both in discourse and writing, by what has bin of late written in
vulgar, have not seemed to attain the decision of this point, I shall likewise
assay those wily Arbitresses who in most men have, as was heard, the sole
ushering of Truth and Falsehood between the sense, and the soul, with what
loyalty they will use me in conuoying this Truth to my understanding; the
rather for that by as much acquaintance as I can obtain with them, I do not
find them engaged either one way or other. Concerning therefore ecclefial
jurisdiction, I find still more controversy, who should administer it, then
diligent enquiry made to learn what it is, for had the pains bin taken to
search out that, it had bin long ago enroul'd to be nothing el^ but a pure
tyrannical forgery of the Prelates; and that jurisdictive power in the Church
there ought to be none at all. It cannot be conceived that what men now call
jurisdiction in the Church, should be other thing then a Christian censorship;
and therefore is it most commonly and truly named ecclesiastical censure. Now
if the Roman censor a civil function, to that severe assise of survaying and
controuling the privatest, and sliest manners of all men and all degrees had no
jurisdiction, no courts of plea, or indictment, no punitive force annexed,
whether it were that to this manner of correction the intanglement of suits was
improper, or that the notic^ of those upright Inquisitors extended to such the
most covert and spiritous vices as would slip easily between the wider and mo^
e material grasp of Law; Or that it stood more with the Majesty of that office
to have no other Sergeants or maces about them but thos^ invisible ones of
Terror and shame: Or lastly, were it their fear, lest the greatness of this
authority and honor armed with jurisdiction might step with ease into a
tyranny. In all these respects with much more reason undoubtedly ought the
censure of the Church be quite divested and disintal'd of all jurisdiction
whatsoever. For if the course of judicature to a political censorship seem
either too t^ dions, or too contentions, much more may it to the discipline of
Church whose definitive decrees are to be speedy, but the execution of rigor
slow, contrary to what in legal proceedings is mo^ usual, and by how much the
less contentious it is, by so much will it be the more Christian. And if the
censor in his moral episcopy being to judge most in matters not answerable by
writ or action could not use an instrument so gross and bodily as jurisdiction
is, how can the minister of Gospel manage the corpulent and secular trial of
bill and process in things merely spiritual. Or could that Roman office
without this juridical sword or saw strike such a reverence of it self into the
most undaunted hearts, as with one single dash of ignominy to put all the
Senate and Knighthood of R^ into a tremble, surely much rather might the
heavenly ministry of the Evangel bind her self about with far more pearcing
beams of Majesty and aw by wanting the beggarly help of halings and amercements
in the use of her powerful Keys. For when the Church without temporal support
is able to do her great works upon the unforc't obedience of men, it argues a
divinity about her. But when she thinks to credit and better her spiritual
efficacy, and to win her self respect and dread by strutting in the false visard
of worldly authority, it is evident that God is not there; but that her apostolic
virtue is departed from her, and has left her Key-cold. Which she perceaving as
in a decayed nature seeks to the outward fomentations and chafings of worldly
help, and external flourishes, to fetch, if it be possible, some motion into
her extreme parts, orto hatch a counterseit life with the crafty and arteficial
heat of jurisdiction. But it is observable that so long as the Church in tr^ e
imitat^ on of Christ can be content to ride upon an Ass carrying her self and
her government along in a mean and simple guise, she may be as he is, a Lion of
the tribe of Judah, and in her humility all men with loud Hosanna's will
confess her greatness. But when despising the mighty operation of the spirit by
the weak things of this world she thinks to make her self bigger and more
considerable by using the way of civil force and jurisdiction, as she sits upon
this Lion she changes into an Ass, and instead of Hosanna's every man pel^ s
her with stones and dirt. Lastly, if the wisdom of the Romans feared to commit
jurisdiction to an office of so high esteem and d^ d as wa^ the con^ ors, we
may see what a solecism in the art of policy it has bin all this while through
Christendom to g^ jurisdiction to ecclesiastical Censure. For that strength
joined with religion abused and pretended to ambitions ends must of necessity
breed the heaviest and most quellingty ranny not only upon the necks, but even
to the souls of men: which if Christian Rome had bin so cautelous to prevent in
her Church, as Pagan Rome was in herstate, we had not had such a lamentable
experience thereof as now we have from thenceupon all Christendom. For although
I said before that the Church coveting to ride upon the Lionly form of
jurisdiction makes a transformation of her self into an Ass, and becomes
despicable, that is to those whom God has enlight'nd with true knowledge; but
where they remain yet in the relics of superstition, this is the extremity of
their bondage, and blindness, that while they think they do obeisance to the
Lordly visage of a Lion, they do it to an ass, that through the just
judgment of God is permitted to play the dragon among them because of their
wilful stupidity. And let England here well rub her eyes, lest by leaving
jurisdiction and Church censure to the same persons, now that God has bin so
long medcining her eyesight, she do^ not w^ her overpolitick fetches mar all,
and bring her self back again to worship this Ass bestriding a Lion. Having
hit herto explained, that to ecclesiastical censure no jurisdictive power can
be added without a childish and dangerous oversight in polity, and a pernicious
contradiction in evangelick discipline, as anon more fully; it will be next to
declare wherein the true reason and force of Church censure consists, which by
then it shall be laid open to the root, so little is it that I fear lest any
crookednes, any wrincle or spo^ should be found in presbyterial governnient
that if Bodin the famo^ French ^ r though a ^ apist, yet affirms that the
Commonwelth which maintains this discipline will certainly flourish in virtue
and piety, I dare assure my self that every true protestant will admire the
integrity, the uprightnes, the divine and gracious purposes thereof, and even
for the reason of it so coherent with the doctrine of the Gospel, besides the
evidence of command in Scripture, will confess it to be the only true
Church Government, and that contrary to the whole end and m^ ry of Christ's
coming in the flesh a false appearance of the same is exercised by Prelaty.
But because some count it rigorous, and that hereby men shall be liable to a
double punishment, I will begin somewhat higher and speak of punishment. Which,
as i^ is an evil, I esteem t^ be of two forty, or rather two degrees only, a
reprobat conscience in this life, and hell in the other world. Whatever else
men ^ l punishment, or censure is not properly an evil, so it be not an
illegal violence, but a saving med'cin ordained of God both for the publik and
private good (...) man, who consisting of two parts the inward and the outward,
(...) by the eternal providence left under two sorts of cure, the Church and
the Magistrate. The Magistrate has only to deal with the outward part, I mean
not of the body alone, but of the mind in all her outward acts, which in
Scripture is called the outward man. So that it would be helpful to us if we
might borrow such authority (...) the Rhetoricians by pa^ ent may give us, with
a kind of Prometh^ skill to shape and fashion this outward man into the
similitude (...) a body, and set him visible before us; imagining the inner man
only as the soul. Thus then the civil Magistrate looking only upon the outward
man (I say as a Magistrate, for what he does further, he does it as a member of
the Church) if he find in his complexion, skin, or outward temperature the
signs and marks, or in his doings the effects of injustice, rapine, lost,
cruelty, or the like, sometimes he shuts up as in frenetick, or infectious
diseases; or confines within doors, as in every sickly estate. Sometimes he
shaves by penalty, or mulct, or else to cool and take down those luxuriant
humors which wealth and excess have caused to abound. Otherwhiles he ser^, he
cauterizes, he scarifies, lets blood, and finally for utmost remedy cuts off.
The patients which mostanend are brought into his hospital are such as are
far gone, and beside themselves (unless they be falsely accused) so that force
is necessary to tame and quiet them (...) their unruly fits, before they can be
made capable of a more human ^ ure. His general end is the outward peace and
welfare of the Commonwealth and civil happiness in this life. His p^ ular ^ nd
in every man is, by the infliction of pain, damage, a^ disgrace, that the
senses and common perceivance might carry this message to the soul within, that
it is neither easefull, profitable, nor praisworthy in this life to do evil.
Which must needs tend to the good of man, whether he be to live or die; and be
undoubtedly the f^ means to a natural man, especially an offender, which might
open his eyes to a higher consideration o^ good and evil, as it is taught in
religion. This is seen in the often penitence of those that suffer, who, had
they escaped, had gone on sinning to an immeasurable hea^, which is one of the
extremest punishments. And this is all that the civil Magistrate, as so being,
conser^ to the healing of man's mind, working only by terrifying (...) upon the
rind and orifice of the ^ ore, and by all outward appli^, as the Logicians say,
a post^, at the effect, and not from the cause: not once touching the inward
bed of corruption, and that hectic disposition to evil, the sourse of all
vice, and obliquity against the rule of Law. Which how insufficient it is to
cure the soul of man, we cannot better guess then by the art of bodily
physic. Therefore God to the intent of further healing man's depraved mind, to
this power of the Magistrate which contents it self with the restraint of evil
doing in the external man, added that which we call censure, to purge it and
remove it clean out of the inmost soul. In the beginning this authority seems to
have bin placed, as all both civil and religious rites once were, only in each
father of family. Afterward among the heathen, in the wise men and
Philosophers of the age; but so as it was a thing voluntary, and no set
government. More distinctly among the Jews as being Gods peculiar, where the
Priests, Levites, Profets, and at last the Scribes and Pharisees took charge of
instructing, and overseeing the lives of the people. But in the Gospel, which
is the straitest and the dearest covenant can be made between God and man, we
being now his adopted sons, and nothing fitter for us to think on, then to be
like him, united to him, and as he pleases to express it, to have fellowship
with him, it is all necessity that we should expect this blessed efficacy of
healing our inward man to be minister'd to us in a more familiar and effectual
method then ever before. God being now no more a judge after the sentence of
the Law, nor as it were a school master of perishable rites, but a most
indulgent father governing his Church as a family of sons in their discreet
age; and therefore in the sweetest and mildest manner of paternal discipline he
has committed this other office of preserving in healthful constitution the
innerman, which may be termed the spirit of the soul, to his spiritual deputy
the minister of each Congregation; who being best acquainted with his own
flock, h^ th best reason to know all the secret^ st diseases likely to be,
there. And look by how much the inter^ ^ an is more excellant and noble then
the external, by so much (...) his cure more exactly, more thoroughly, and more
particularly to be performed. For which cause the holy Ghost by the Apostles
joined to the minister, as assistant in this great office sometimes a certain
number of grave and faithful brethren, (for neither does the physician do all
in restoring his patient, he prescribes, another prepares the med'cin, some
read, some watch, some visit) much more may a minister partly not see all,
partly err as a man: besides that nothing can be more for the mutual honor
and love of the people to their Pastor, and his to them, then when in select
numb^ and cours^ they are seen partaking, and doing reverence to the holy (...)
discipline by their serviceable, and solemn presence, and receiving honor
again from their employment, not now any more to be separated in the Church by
vails and partitions as laics and unclean, but admitted to wait upon the
tabernacle as the rightful Clergy of Christ, a chosen generation, a royal
Priesthood to off^ up spiritual sacrifice in that meet place to which God and
the Congregation shall call and assign them. And this all Christians ought to
know, that the title of Clergy S. Peter gave to all Gods people, till Pope
Higinus and the succeeding Prelates took it from them, appropriating that name
to themselves and their Priests only; and condemning the rest of Gods
inheritance to an injurious and alienat condition of Laity, they separated from
them by local partitions in Churches, through their gr^ sse ignorance and pride
imitating the old temple: and excluded the members of Christ from the property
of being members, the bearing of orderly and fit offices in the ecclesiastical
body, as if they had meant to sow up that Jewish vail which Christ by his death
on the Cross rent in sunder. Although these usurpers could not so: presently
over-maister the liberties and lawful titles of Gods freeborn Church, but that
Origin being yet a lay man expounded the Scriptures publicly, and was therein
defended by Alexander of Jerusalem, and Theoctistus of Caesarea producing in
his behalf diverse examples that the privilege of teaching was anciently
permitted to many worthy Laymen; And Cyprian in his Epistles professes he will
do nothing without the advice and assent of his assistant Laics. Neither did
the first Nicene council, as great and learned as it was, think it any robbery
to receive in, and require the help and presence of many learned lay brethren,
as they were then called. Many other autorities to confirm this assertion bot^
(...) of Scripture and the writings of next antiquity Golartius has collected
in his notes upon Cyprian; whereby it will be evident that the Laity not only
by Apostolic permission, but by consent of many the aucientest Prelates did
participat in Church offices as much as is desired any lay Elder should now do.
Sometimes also not the Elders alone, but the whole body of the Church is
interested in the work of discipline, as (...) as public satisfaction is given
by those that have given public scandal. Not to speak now of her right in
elections. But another reason there is in it, which though religion did not
commend to us, yet moral and civil prudence could not but extol. It was
thought of old in Philosophy, that shame or to call it better, the reverence of
our elders, our brethren, and friends was the greatest incitement to virtuous
deeds and the greatest dissuasion from unworthy attempts that might ^ Word^.
Hence we may read in the Iliad where Hector being wished to retire si o^ the
battle, many of his forces being routed, makes answer that he durst not for
shame, lest the Trojan Knights and Dames should think he did ignobly. And
certain it is that whereas Terror is thought such a great stickler in a
Commonwealth, honorable shame is a far greater, and has more reason^ For
where shame is there is fear, but where fear is there is not presently shame.
And if any thing may be done to inbreed in us this generous and Christianly
reverence one of another, the very Nurs and Guardian of piety and virtue, it
can not sooner be then by such a discipline in the Church, as may use us to
have in aw the assemblies of the faithful, and to count it a thing most
grievous, next to the grieving of Gods Spirit, to offend those whom he has put
in authority, as a healing superintendence over our lives and behaviors, both
to our own happiness and that we may not give offense to good men, who without
amends by us made, dare not against Gods command hold communion with us in holy
things. And this will be accompanied with a religious dred of being outcast
from the company of Saints, and from the fatherly protection of God in his
Church, to consort with the devil and his angels. But there is yet a more
ingenuous and noble degree of honest shame, or call it if you will an esteem,
whereby men bear an inward reverence toward their own persons. And if the love
of God as a fire sent from Heaven to be ever kept alive upon the altar of our
hearts, be the first principle of all godly and virtuous actions in men, this
pious and just honoring of our selves is the second, and may be thought as the
radical moisture and fountain head, whence every laudable and worthy enterpri^
issues forth. And although I have given it the name of a liquid thing, yet is
it not incontinent to bound it self, as humid things are, but has in it a most
restraining and powerful abstinence to start back, and glob it self upward
from the mixture of any ungenerous and unbeseeming motion, or any soil ^ ewith
it may peril to stain it self. Something I confess it is to ^ 'd of evil doing
in the presence of any, and to reverence the opinion and the countenance of a
good man rather then a bad, fearing most in his ^ ght to offend, goes so far
as almost to be virtuous; yet this is but still the fear of infamy, and many
such, when they find themselves alone, (...) their reputation will compound
with other scruples, and co^ close treaty with their dearer vices in secret.
But he that holds himself in reverence and due esteem, both for the dignity of
Gods (...) upon him, and for the price of his redemption, whi^ he thin^ (...)
visibly marked upon his forehead, accounts himself both a fit person to do the
noblest and godliest deeds, and much better worth then to deject and defile,
with such a debasement and such a pollution as sin is, himself so highly
ransomed and enobl'd to a new friendship and filial relation with God. Nor can
he fear so much the offense and reproach of others, as he dreads and would
(...) at the reflection of his own severe and modest eye upon him^, if it
should see him doing or imagining that which is sinful though in the deepest
secrecy. How shall a man know to do himself this right, how to perform this
honorable duty of estimation and respect toward his own soul and body? which
way will lead (...) best to this hill top of sanctity and goodness^ above
which there is no higher ascent but to the love of God which from this
self-pious regard cannot be assunder? no better way doubtless then to let him
duly understand that as he is called by the high calling of God to be holy and
pure, so is he by the same appointment ordained, and by the Churches call
admitted to such offices of discipline in the Church to which his own
spiritual gifts by the example of Apostolic institution have autoriz'd him.
For we have learnt that the scornful term of Laick, the consecrating of
Temples, carpets, and table-clothes, ^ he railing in of a repugnant and
contradictive Mount Sinai in the Gospel, as if the touch of a lay Christian
who is never the less Gods living temple, could profane dead judaisms, the
exclusion of Christ's people from the offices of holy discipline through the
pride of a usurping Clergy, causes the rest to have an unworthy and object
opinion of themselves; to approach to holy, duties with a slavish fear, ^ nd to
unholy doings with a familiar ^ ldnesse. For seeing such a wide and terrible
distance between religious things and themselves, and that in respect of a
wooden table and the perimeter of holy ground about it, a flagon pot, and
(...) corporal, the Priest (...) their lay-ships unhallowed and ^ Word^, they
fear religion with such a fear as loves not, and think the p^ rity of the
Gospel too pure for them, and that any uncleanness is more suitable to their
(...) estate. But when every good Christian thoroughly acquainted with all those
glorious privileges of sanctification and adoption which render him more sacred
then any dedicated altar or element, shall be restored to his right in the
Church, and not excluded from such place of spiritual government as his
Christian abilities and his approved good life in the eye and testimony of the
Church shall prefer him to, this and nothing sooner will open his eyes to a
wise and true valuation of himself, which is so requisite and high a point of
Christianity, and will stir him up to walk worthy the honorable and grave
employment wherewith God and the Church has dignified him: not fearing left he
should meet with some outward holy thing in religion which his lay touch or
presence might profane, but lest something unholy from within his own heart
should dishonor and profane in himself that Priestly unction and Clergy-right
whereto Christ has entitled him. Then would the congregation of the Lord soon
recover the true likeness and visage of what she is indeed, a holy generation,
a royal Priesthood, a Saintly communion, the household and City of God. And
this I hold to be another considerable reason why the functions of
Church Government ought to be free and open to any Christian man though never
so laick, if his capacity, his faith, and prudent demeanor commend him. And
this the Apostles warrant us to do. But the Prelates object that this will bring
profaneness into the Church, to whom may be replied, that none have brought
that in more then their own irreligious courses; nor more (...) holiness out
of living into livelesse things. For whereas God who has cleans'd every beast
and creeping worm, would not suffer S. Peter to call them common or unclean,
the Prelat Bishops in their printed orders hung up in Churches have proclaimed
the best of creatures, mankind, so unpurifi'd and contagious, that for him to
lay his hat, or his garment upon the Chancell table they have defined it no
less heinous in express words then to profane the Table of the Lord. And thus
have they by their Canaanitish doctrine (for that which was to the Jew but
jewish is to the Christian no better then Canaanitish) thus have they made
common and unclean, thus have they made profane that nature which God has not
only cleans'd, but Christ also has assumed. And now that the equity and just
reason is so perspicuous, why in Ecclesiasic^ censure the assistance should be
added of such, (...) whom not the vile odor of gain and fees (forbid it God
and blow it with a whirle^ out of our land) but charity, neighborhood, and
duty to Church Government has called together, where could a wiseman wish a
more equal, gratuitous, and meek examination of (...) offense that he might
happen to commit against Christianity (...) here? would he prefer those proud
simoniacall Courts? (...) therefore the Minister assisted attends his heavenly
and spiritual cure. Where we shall see him both in the course of his
proceeding, and first in the excellence of his end from the magistrate far
different, and not more different then excelling. His end is to recover all
that is of man both soul and body to an everlasting health: and yet as for
worldly happiness, which is the proper sphere wherein the magistrate cannot
but confine his motion without a hideous exorbitancy from law, so little aims
the Minister, as his intended scope, to procure the much prosperity of this
life, that oft-times he may have cause to wish much of it away, a^ a diet
puffing up the soul with a slimy fleshinesse, and weakening her principal
organick parts. Two heads of evil he has to cope with, ignorance and malice.
Against the former he provides the daily Manna of incorruptible doctrine, not
at those set meals only in public, but as often as he shall know that each
infirmity, or constitution requires. Against the latter with all the branches
thereof, not meddling with that restraining and styptick surgery which tho law
uses, not indeed against the malady but against the eruptions, and outermost
effects thereof. He on the contrary beginning at the prime causes and roo^ of
the disease sends in those two divine ingredients of most cleansing power to
the soul, Admonition and Reproof, besides which two there is no drug or
antidote that can reach to purge the mind, and without which all other
experiments are but vain, unless by ^dent. And he that will not let these
pass into him, though he be the greatest King, as Plato affirms, must be
thought to remain impure within, and unknowing of those things wherein his
pureness and his knowledge should most appear. As soon therefore as it may be
discerned that the Christian patient by feeding (...) here on meats not
allowable, but of evil juice, has disordered his diet, and spread an ill
humor through his (...) immediately disposing to a sickness, the minister as
being much nearer both in eye and duty, then the magistrates, speeds him betimes
to overtake that diffused malignance with some gentle potion of admonishment;
or if ought be obstructed, puts in his opening and disenssive con^. This not
succeeding after once or twice or oftener, in the (...) of two or three his
faithful brethren appointed thereto be advis^ him to be more careful of his
dearest health, and what it is that he so rashly has let down in to the divine
vessel of his soul Gods temple. If this obtain not, he then with the counsel
of more assistants who are informed of what diligence has been already used,
with more speedy remedies lays nearer siege to the entrenched causes of his
distemper, not sparing such servent and well aimed reproofs as may best give
him to see the dangerous estate wherein he is. To this also his brethren and
friends entreat, exhort, adjure, and all these endeavors, as there is hope
left, are more or less repeated. But if, neither the regard of himself, nor
the reverence of his Elders and friends prevail with him, to leave his vicious
appetite, then as the time urges, such engines of terror God has given into
the hand of his minister as to search the tenderest angles of the heart: one
while he shakes his stubbornness with racking convulsions nigh despair, other
whiles with deadly corrosives he gripes the very roots of his faulty liver to
bring him to life through the entry of death. Hereto the whole Church beseech
him, beg of him, deplore him, pray for him. After all this performed with what
patience and attendance is possible, and no relenting on his part, having done
the utmost of their cure, in the name of God and of the Church they dissolve
their fellowship with him, and holding forth the dreadful sponge of
excommunion pronounce him wiped out of the list of Gods inheritance, and in the
custody of Satan till he repent. Which horrid sentence though it touch neither
life, nor limme, nor any worldly possession, yet has it such a penetrating
force, that swifter then any chimicall sulphur, or that lightning which harms
not the skin, and rifles the entrals, it scorches the inmost soul. Yet even
this terrible denouncement is left to the Church for no other cause but to be
as a rough and vehement cleansing medcin, where the malady is obdurat; a
mortifying to life, a kind of saving by undoing. And it may be truly said, that
as the mercies of wicked men are cruelties, so the cruelties of the Church are
mercies. For if repentance sent from heaven meet this lost wanderer, and draw
him out of that steep journey wherein he was hasting toward destruction, to
come and reconcile to the Church, if he bring with him his bill of health, and
that he is now clear of infection and of no danger to the other sheep, then
with incredible expressions of joy all his brethren receive him, and set before
him those perfumed bankets of Christian consolation; with precious ointments
bathing and somenting the old and now to be forgotten stripes which terror and
shame had inflicted; and thus with heavenly solaces they cheer up his humble
remorse, till he regain his first health and felicity. This is the approved way
which the Gospel prescribes, these are the spiritual weapons of holy censure,
and ministerial warfare, not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling
down of strong holds, casting Cor. 2. 10.
down imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against the
knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ. What could be done more for the healing and reclaming that divine
particle of Gods breathing the soul, and what could be done less? he that
would hide his faults from such a wholesome curing as this, and count it a
twofold punishment; as some do, is like a man that having foul diseases about
him, perishes for shame, and the fear he has o^ a rigorous incision to come
upon hi^ flesh. We shall be able by this time to discern whether Prelaticall
jurisdiction be contrary to the Gospel or no. First therefore the government
of the Gospel being economicall and paternall, that is, of such a family where
there be no servants, but all sons in obedience, not in servility, as cannot be
denied by him that lives but within the sound of Scripture, how can the
Prelates justify to have turned the fatherly orders of Christ's household, the
blessed meekness of his lowly roof, those ever open and inviting doors of his
dwelling house which delight to be frequented with only filial accesses, how
can they justify to have turned these domestic privileges into the bar of a
proud judicial court where fees and clamours keep shop and drive a trade, w^
ere bribery and corruption solicits, paltring the free and monilesse power of
discipline with a carnal satisfaction by the purse. Contrition, humiliation,
confession, the very sighs of a repentant spirit are there sold by the penny.
That undeflour'd and unblemishable simplicity of the Gospel, not she her self
for that could never be, but a false-whi^ ed, a lawnie resemblance of her, like
that aire-born Helena in the fables, made by the sorcery of Prelates, instead of
calling her Disciples from the receipt of custom, is now turned Publican her
self; and gives up her body to a mercenary whor^ ome under those fornicated
ches which she calls Gods house, and in the fight of those her altars which she
has set up to be adored makes merchandise of the bodies and souls of men.
Rejecting purgatory for no other reason, as it seems, then because her
greedines cannot defer ^ ut had rather use the utmost extortion of redeemed
penances in this life. But because these matters could not be thus carried
without a begged and borrowed force from worldly authority, therefore prelaty
slighting the deliberat^ d chosen counsel of Christ in his spiritual
government, whose glory is in the weakness of fleshly things to t^ ad upon the
crest of the worlds pride and violence by the power of spiritual ordinances,
has on the contrary made these her friends and champions which are Christ's
enemies in this his high design, smothering and extinguishing the spiritual
force of his bodily weakness in the discipline of his Church with the
boistrous and carnal tyranny of an undue, unlawful and ungospellike
jurisdiction. And thus Prelaty both in her fleshly supportments, in her carnal
doctrine of ceremony and tradition, in her violent and secular power going
quite counter to the prime end of Christ's coming in the flesh, that is to
revele his truth, his glory and his might in a clean contrary manner then
Prelaty seeks to do, thwarting and defeating the great mystery of God, I do not
conclude that Prelaty is Antichristian, for what need I? the things themselves
conclude it. Yet if such like practices, and not many worse then these of our
Prelates, in that great darkness of the Roman Church, have not exempted both
her and her present members from being judged to be Antichristian in all
orthodoxall esteem, I cannot think but that it is the absolute voice of truth
and all her children to pronounce this Prelaty, and these her dark deeds in the
midst of this great light wherein we live, to be more Antichristian then
Antichrist himself.

The Conclusion. The mischief that Prelaty does in the State.
I Add one thing more to those great ones that are so fond of Prelaty, this is
certain that the Gospel being the hidden might of Christ, as has been heard,
has over a victorious power joined with it, like him in the Revelation that
went forth on the white Horse with his bow and his crown conquering, and to
conquer. If we let the Angel of the Gospel ride on his own way, he does his
proper business conquering the high thoughts, and the proud reasonings of the
flesh, and brings them under to give obedience to Christ with the salvation of
many souls. But if ye turn him out of his rode, and in a manner force him to
express his irresistible power by a doctrine of carnal might, as Prelaty is,
(...) will use the, fleshly strength which ye put into his hands to subdue your
spirits by a servile and blind superstition, and that again shall hold such
dominion over your captive minds, as returning with an insatiat greediness and
force upon your worldly wealth and power wherewith to deck and magnify her
self, and her false worships, she shall spoil and havoc your estates, disturb
your ease, diminish your honor, inthraul your liberty under the swelling mood
of a proud Clergy, who will not serve or feed your souls with spiritual food,
look not for it, they have not wherewithal, or if they had, it is not in their
purpose. But when they have glutted their ungrateful bodies, at least if it be
possible that those open sepulchers should ever be glutted, and when they have
stufft their Idolish temples with the wastefull pillage of your estates, will
they yet have any compassion upon you, and that poor pittance which they have
left you, will they be but so good to you as that ravisher was to his sister,
when he had used her at his pleasure, will they but only hate ye and so turn
ye loose? no^ they will not, Lords and Commons, they will not favor ye so
much. What will they do then in the name of God and Saints, what will these
man-haters yet with more despite and mischief do? I Will tell ye, or at least
remember ye, for most of ye know it already. That they may want nothing to make
them true merchants of Babylon, as they have done to your souls, they will sell
your bodies, your wives, your children, your liberties, your Parlaments, all
these things, and if there be ought else dearer then these, they will sell at
an outcry in their Pulpits to the arbitrary and illegal dispose of any one
that may hereafter be called a King, whose mind shall serve him to listen to
their bargain. And by their corrupt and servile doctrines boring our ears to
an everlasting slavery, as they have done hitherto, so will they yet do their
best to repeal and erase every line and clause of both our great charter^. No^
is this only what they will do, but what they hold as the main^ reason and
mystery of their advancement that they must do; ^ e the Prince never so just
and equal to his subjects; yet such are their malicious and depraved eyes,
that they so look on him, and so understand him, as if he required no other
gratitude, or piece of service si^ the^ then this. And indeed they stand so
opportunly for the disturbing or the destroying of a state, being a knot of
creatures whose dignities, means, and preferments have no foundation in the
Gospel, as they themselves acknowledge, but only in the Princes favor, and to
continue so long to them, as by pleasing him they shall deserve, whence it must
needs be they should bend all their intentions, and services to no other ends
but to his, that if it should happen that a tyrant (God turn such a scourge
from us to our enemies) should come to grasp the Scepter, here were his spear
men and his lances, here were his firelocks ready, he should need no other
pretorian band nor pensionry then these, if they could once with their
perfidious preachments aw the people. For although the Prelates in time of
popery were sometimes friendly anough to magnacharta, it was because they stood
upon their own bottom, without their main dependence on the royal nod: but now
being well acquainted that the protestant religion, if she will reform her self
rightly by the Scriptures, must undresse them of all their gilded vanities,
and reduce them as they were at first, to the lowly and equal order of
Presbyters, they know it concerns them nearly to study the times more then the
text, and to lift up their eyes to the hills of the Court, from whence only
comes their help; but if their pride grow weary of this crouching and
observance, as ere long it would, and that yet their minds clime still to a
higher ascent of worldly honor, this only refuge can remain to them, that they
must of necessity contrive to bring themselves and us back again to the Popes
supremacy, and this we see they had by fair degrees of late been doing. These
be the two fair supporters between which the strength of Prelaty is born up,
either of inducing tyranny, or of reducing popery. Hence also we may judge that
Prelaty is mere falsehood. For the property of Truth is, where she is publicly
taught, to unyoke and set free the minds and spirits of a Nation first from the
thraldom of sin and superstition, after which all honest and legal freedom of
civil life cannot be long absent; but Prelaty whom the tyrant custom begot a
natural tyrant in religion, and in state the agent and minister of tyranny,
seems to have had this fatal gift in her nativity like another Midas that
whatsoever she should touch or come ne^ r either in ecclesial or political
government, it should turn, not to gold, though she for her part could wish it,
but to the dross and scum of slavery breeding and settling both in the bodies
and the souls of all such as do not in time with the sovran tr^ le of sound
doctrine provide to fortify their hearts against her Hierarchy. The service of
God who is Truth, her Liturgy confesses to be perfect freedom, but her works
and her opinions declare that the service of Prelaty is p^ rfect slavery, and
by consequence perfect falsehood. Which makes me wonder much that many of the
Gentry, studious men, as I hear should engage themselves to write, and speak
(...) in her ^fence, but that I believe their honest and ingenuous natures
coming to the Universities to store themselves with good and solid learning,
and there unfortunately fed with nothing else, but the s^ gged and thorny
lectures of monkish and miserable sophistry, w^ re sent home again with such a
scholastical burre in their throats, as has stopped and hinderd all true and
generous philosophy from entering, cracked their voices for ever with
metaphysical gargarisms, and has made them admire a sort of formal outside men
prelatically addicted, whose unchast'nd and unwrought minds never yet initiated
or subdued under the true lore of religion or moral virtue, which two are the
best and greatest points of learning, but either slightly trained up in a kind
of hypocritical and hackny course of literature to get their living by, and
dazzle the ignorant, or else fondly overstudied in useless controversies, except
those which they use with all the specious and delusive suttlety they are able,
to defend their prelatical Sparta, having a Gospel and Church Government set
before their eyes, as a fair field wherein they might exercise the greatest
vertu's, and the greatest deeds of Christian authority in mean fortunes and
little furniture of this world, which even the sage heathen writers and those
old Fabritii, and Curii well knew to be a manner of working, then which nothing
could lik'n a mortal man more to God, who delights most to work from within
himself, and not by the heavy luggage of corporeal instrument, they understand
it not, and think no such matter, but admire and dote upon worldly riches, and
honors, with an easy and intemperat life, to the bane of Christianity: yea
they and their Seminaries shame not to profess, to petition and never lin
pealing our ears that unless we fat them like boores, and cramme them as they
list with wealth, with Deaneries, and pluralities, with Baronies and stately
preferments, all learning and religion will go underfoot. Which is such a
shameless, such a bestial plea, and of that odious impudence in Churchmen,
who should be to ^ is a pattern of temperance and frugal mediocrity, who should
teach us to contemn this world, and the gaudy things thereof, according to the
promise which they themselves require from us in baptism, that should the
Scripture stand by and be mute, there is not that sect of Philosophers among
the heathen so dissolute, no not Epicurus, nor Aristippus with all his
Cyrenaick rout, but would shut his school doors against such greasy sophisters:
not any College of Mountebanks, but would think scorn to discover in themselves
with such a brazen forehead the outrageous desire of filthy lucre. Which the
Prelates make so little conscience of, that they are ready to fight, and if it
lay in their power, to massacre all good Christians under the names of horrible
schismatics for only finding fault with their temporal dignities, their
unconscionable wealth and revenues, their cruel authority over their brethren
that labor in the word, while they sno^ in their luxurious excess. Openly
proclaming themselves now in the sight of all men to be those which for a while
they fought to cover under sheeps clothing, ravenous and savage wolves
threatening inrodes and bloody incursions upon the flock of Christ, which they
took upon them to feed, but now clame to devour us their prey. More like that
huge dragon of Egypt breathing out wast, and desolation to the land, unless he
were daily fatn'd with virgins blood. Him our old patron Saint George by his
matchless valor slew, as the Prelat of the Garter that reads his Collect ^ an
tell. And if our Princes and Knights will imitate the same of the t old
champion, as by their order of Knighthood solemnly taken, they vow, far be it
that they should uphold and side with this English Dragon; but rather to do as
indeed their oath binds them, they should make it their Knightly adventure to
pursue and vanquish this mighty sailewing'd monster that menaces to swallow up
the Land, unless her bottomless gorge may be satisfied with the blood of the
Kings daughter the Church; and may, as she was wont, fill her dark and infamous
den with the bones of the Saints. Nor will any one have reason to think this as
too incredible or too tragical to be spok'n of Prelaty, if he consider well
from what a mass of slime and mud, the sloathful, the covetous and ambitious
hopes of Church-promotions and fat Bishoprics she is bred up and nuzzl'd in,
like a great Python from her youth, to prove the general poison both of
doctrine and good discipline in the Land. For certainly such hopes and such
principles of earth as these wherein she welters from a young one, are the
immediate generation both of a slavish and tyranous life to follow, and a p^
stiferous contagion to the whole Kingdom, till like that fenborn serpent she be
shot to death with the darts of the sun, the pure and powerful beams of Gods
word. And this may serve to describe to us in part, what Prelaty has bin and
what, if she stand, she is like to be toward the whole body of people in
England. Now that it may appear how she is not such a kind of evil, a^ has
any good, or use in it, which many evils have, but a distilled quintessence, a
pure elixar of mischief, pestilent alike to a^ I shall show briefly, ere I
conclude, that the Prelates, as they are to the subjects a calamity, so are they
the greatest underminers and betrayers of the Monarch, to whom they seem to be
most favorable. I cannot better liken the state and person of a King then to
that mighty Nazarite Samson; who being disciplined from his birth in the
precepts and the practice of Temperance and Sobriety, without the strong drink
of injurious and excessive desires, grows up to a noble strength and perfection
with those his illustrious and sunny locks the laws waving and curling about
his god like shoulders. And while he keeps them about him undiminisht and
unshorn, he may with the jaw bone of an Ass, that i^, with the word of his
meanest officer suppress and put to confusion thousands of those that rise
against his just power. But laying down his head among the strumpet flatteries
of Prelates, while he sleeps and thinks no harm, they wickedly shaving off all
those bright and weighty tresses of his laws, and just prerogatives which were
his ornament and strength, deliver him over to indirect and violent councels,
which as those Philistims put out the fair, and farre-sighted eyes of his
natural discerning, and make him grind in the prison house of their sinister
ends and practices upon him. Till he knowing this prelatical rasor to have
bereft him of his wonted might, nourish again his puissant hair, the golden
beams of Law and Right; and they sternly shook, thunder with ruin upon the
heads of those his evil counselors, but not without great affliction to
himself. This is the sum of their loyal service to Kings; yet these are the
men that still cry the King, the King, the Lords Anointed. We grant it, and
wonder how they came to light upon any thing so true; and wonder more, if Kings
be the Lords Anointed, how they dare thus oil over and bes^ ear so holy an
unction with the corrupt and putrid ointment of their base flatteries, which
while they smooth the skin, strike inward and envenom the life blood. What
fidelity Kings can expect from Prelates both examples past, and our present
experience of their doings at this day, whereon is grounded all that has bin
said, may suffice to inform us. And if they be such clippers of regal power and
shavers of the Laws, how they stand affected to the law giving Parliament, your
selves, worthy Peers and Commons, can best testify; the current of whose
glorious and immortal actions has bin only opposed by the obscure and
pernicious defignes of the Prelates: until: their insolen^ broke out to such a
bold affront, as has justly immured their haughty looks within strong walls.
Nor have they done any thing of late with more diligence; then to hinder or
break the happy assembling of Parlaments, however needful to repair the
shattered and disjoynted frame of the Commonwealth, or if they cannot do this,
to cross, to disinable, and traduce all Parlamentary proceedings. And this, if
nothing else, plainly accuses them to be no lawful members of the house, if
they thus perpetually mutine against their own body. And though they pretend
like Salomons harlot, that they have right thereto, by the same judgment that
Solomon gave, it cannot belong to them, whenas it is not only their assent,
but their endeavor continually to divide Parlaments in twain; and not only by
dividing, but by all other means to abolish and destroy the free use of them to
all posterity. For the which and for all their former misdeeds, whereof this
book and many volumes more cannot contain the moytie, I shall move ye Lords in
the behalf I dare say of many thousand good Christians, to let your justice and
speedy sentence pass against this great malefactor Prelaty. And yet in the
midst of rigor I would beseech ye to think of mercy; and such a mercy, I fear
I shall overshoot with a desire to save this falling Prelaty, such a mercy (if I
may venture to say ^ Word^) a^ may exceed that which for only ten righteous
persons would have saved Sodom. Not that I dare advise ye to contend with God
whether he or you shall be more merciful, but in your wise esteems to balance
the offenses of those peccant Cities with these enormous riots of ungodly
mis-rule that Prelaty has wrought both in the Church of Christ, and in the
state of this Kingdom. And if ye think ye may with a pious presumption strive
to go beyond God in mercy, I shall not be one now that would dissuade ye.
Though God for less then ten just persons would not spare Sodom, yet if you
can find after due search but only one good thing in prelaty either to
religion^ or civil govern^ to King or Parliament (...) Prince or people, to
law, liberty, (...) learning, spare her, (...) her live, let her spread among
ye, till with her shadow, all your dignities and honors, and all the glory of
the land be darkened and obscurd. But on the contrary if she be found to be
malignant, hostile, destructive to all these, as nothing can be surer, then let
your severe and impartial doom imitate the divine vengeance; rain down your
punishing force upon this godless and oppressing government: and bring such a
dead Sea of subversion upon her, that she may never in this Land rise more to
afflict the holy reformed Church, and the elect people of God.

The end.

