Mr. COWLEY's VERSES In PRAISE of MR. HOBBES, OPPOSED;

By a Lover of Truth and Virtue.

Idcirco Virtus medio jacet obruta coeno:
Nequitiae classes candida vela ferunt.
(...)
-- (...)
(...) --
-- (...)
-- (...).
Sint nunquam mihi tales
Mores Jupiter Pater: sed viis
Simplicibus vitae insistam --
Laudans Laudanda, Vituperiumque
Inspergens Improbis.
PIND. NEM. ODE VIII. LONDON, Printed in the Year, 1680.

To Mr. HOBBES
(1)
VAst Bodies of Philosophy
I often have seen, and read,
But all are Bodies dead,
Or Bodies by Art fashioned:
I never yet the Living Soul could see
But in thy Books, and thee.
It Is only God can know
Whether the fair Idea thou do show,
Agree entirely with his own, or no.
This I dare boldly tell,
It Is so like Truth 'twill serve our turn as well*
Just as in *Nature thy Proportions be.
As full of Concord their Variety;
As firm the parts upon their Center rest,
And all so Solid are, that they at least
As much as Nature, Emptiness detest.
(2)
What Bodies of Philosophy
You often have seen, and read,
I wish you had but mentioned,
We Would judge if they are alive, or dead:
We cannot judge before we Try.
The Morals of the Stagarite
Are Stars which to the Dark World gave Light,
But Hobbes by his would turn our Day to Night.
Great Zenophon, and Plato, who relate,
How Socrates embraced his Fate,
And all the Brave Socratick Race,
Whose Monuments Time cannot deface,
Shall live, when Hobbes shall have his Doom,
So Lie as dead, as does TOM THUMB:
Good Men his Knavery spy:
His Books contain some Truths, and many a Lie,
Some Truths well known, but strange Impiety.
* Stay! stay! where now fond Lad!
Thy Wit thus strained, You Are ten times worse than Mad.
What Is Nature but the Ordinary way
Wherein our Good Creator does display
His Power, and Wisdom in the things he made
For his own Goodness sake? Man's not a Shade,
But utter Darkness; whilst he acts alone,
Whilst his works are not natures; but his own*
What! Hobbes, and Nature thus to parallel!
What Is this but to confront Bright Heaven with Hell!
So does the Poets wit suit with his Theme:
He that will Hobbes Applaud must first Blaspheme.
(2)
Loug did the mighty Stagirite retain
The universal Intellectual Reign,
Saw his own Countries short-lived Leopard slain;
The stronger Roman Eagle did out-fly,
Oftener renewed his Age, and saw that Dye.
Mecha it self in spite of Mahomet possessed,
And chased by a wild Deluge from the East,
His Monarchy new planted in the West.
But as in time each great Imperial Race
Degenerates, and gives some new one place:
So did this Noble Empire wast,
Sunk by degrees from Glories past,
And in the School-mens hands perished quite at last.
Then naught, but words it grew,
And those all Barbarous too*
It perished, and it vanished, there,
The Life and Soul breathed out, became but empty Air.
(2)
The Empire of the Stagarites sublime and piercing wit,
(Thoth'Empire both of Greece, and Rome
Time did long since or'ecome)
Shall never decay, but men shall still to its vast Power submit;
For All well-ordered thoughts must go
Within the Compass of those Rules, which his great Art did show.
Our HARVEY, whose bright Fame
So Dazel'd Envies Eye, that she could never see
The least Pretense to lessen his Great Name,
Even He commends the Stagirite
To all Posterity,
As one that had a Clear Insight
Into the Secret ways of Natures Majesty.
It Is true he failed in that he did not see
That things Successive could not be
From all Eternity:
But yet he saw
That this is Natures Law,
That all things must depend on him alone,
Who gives to all things Motion, though himself has none,
Who Is, and Was, and Ever shall Be ONE
In all Simplicity,
From Composition, and from Alteration free:
To whom may all true Praise be given
In Earth, as it is in Heaven.
(3)
The Fields which answered well the Ancients Plow,
Spent and out-worn return no Harvest now,
In Barren Age wild, and unglorious lie
And boast of past Fertility,
The poor relief of present Poverty.
Food, and Fruit we now must want,
Unless New Lands we plant.
We break up Tombs with Sacrilegious hands;
Old Rubbish we remove,
To walk in Ruins like vain Ghosts we love,
And with fond Divining Wands
We search among the Dead,
For Treasures Buried,
Whilst still the liberal Earth does hold
So many Virgin Mines of undiscovered Gold*
(3)
That in this Age Men don't their Thoughts confine
Within the Line
Of what Judicious Aristotle said;
Nor are his Works so commented,
As they were in those Days;
They don't hereby detract from his Great Praise.
Since they walk in those ways,
To which his mighty Genius led.
His Commendation was not this, that he
Did show the Truth of this, or that Particularitie;
But that he showed the way to clear our Thought,
That every Man might find that Truth, which should by him be sought.
(4)
The Baltic, Euxin, and the Caspian,
And slender limbed Mediterranean
Seem Narrow Creeks to Thee, and only fit
For the poor wretched Fisher-Boats of Wit*
Thy Nobler Vessel the vast Ocean tries,
And nothing sees but Seas and Skies,
Till unknown Regions it descries.
Thou great Columbus of the Golden Lands of New Philosophies,
Thy Task was harder much than his;
For thy learned America is
Not only found out first by thee,
And rudely left to future Industry;
But thy Eloquence, and thy Wit
Has planted, peopled, built, and civilized it.
(4)
It Is true, thy New Philosopher has left the Caspian,
The Baltic, Euxin, Mediterranean;
The Narrow ways to all that V^ritie
Which Mortals can descrie;
He Sails in the Ocean of the most Profound Impiety;
And from the Coasts of Hell
He brings those Wares, which he shall never sell
To any, but those dark'ned Souls, which lie, where Adam fell.
The Power of Earthly Princes he does foolishly pretend
By his fictitious Loyalty to extend
To larger measures; gives to Kings what is due to God alone:
Thus what he seems to make more great, he really makes none:
For sure on Earth there is No Monarchy,
If it consist in ABSOLUTE Sovereignty.
The King of Kings commands us to obey our King,
By cheerful Doing, or by quiet Suffering:
He that the Power of Kings would have much higher to arise,
His King Dishonours, and his GOD he does Despise:
Such Folk dwell in those Colonies,
Which Hobbes has planted in his Lands of New Philosophies.
I little thought before,
(Nor being my own self so poor,
Could comprehend so vast a store)
That all the Wardrobe of rich Eloquence,
Could have afforded half enuff
Of bright, of new, and lasting Stuff,
To cloth the mighty limbs of thy Gigantick Sens^,
Thy solid Reason like the Shield from Heaven,
To the Trojan Hero given,
Too strong to take a mark from any mortal Dart,
Yet shines with Gold, and Gems in every part,
And wonders on it engraved by the learned hand of Art;
A Shield that gives delight
Even to the Enemies sight,
Then when they are sure to lose the Combat by it.
(5)
His Monstrous Thoughts may well be called Gigantick Sense,
To Heaven they fain would offer violence,
Like those Giants of old
Of which the Poets told.
Even like Goliath they Defy
The Armies of the Living God, and like him too they Die.
The Man with his Gigantick Sense, his mighty Spear and Shield
Comes forth into the Field;
And for some time he Boasted there
As if he had no Cause to Fear.
His Captive-Darkned Soul cannot see,
What it is to have our Souls set free
From the Black Chains of dire NECESSITY;
This and a Thousand Errors more
He strives to Land upon our Shore*
But then the Mighty BRAMHAL comes, and takes his Arms away,
Shows that this Painted Shield's not fit for Fight, but Play,
Strikes down the Monster, does to All his Ugly Shape display.
Then in another Field he is met by the Mighty WARD;
And here 'twas plainly seen, that he could neither guard
Himself from being Wounded, or give Wounds;
Down strait he falls, his Armor on him sounds,
What e're his Followers say, he never Rose again:
His Ghost is heard to Rave sometimes, but then Bold TOM was slain.
(6)
Nor can the Snow, which now cold Age does shed
Upon thy reverend Head,
Quench or allay the noble Fires within,
But all which thou have bin,
And all that Youth can be, you are yet,
So fully still do Thou
Enjoy the Manhood, and the Bloom of Wit,
And all the Natural Heat, but not the Fever too.
So Contraries on Aetna's Top conspire
Her hoary Frosts, and by them breaks out Fire.
A secure peace the faithful Neighbors keep,
The emboldned Snow next to the Flame does sleep.
And if we weigh like Thee,
Nature, and Causes we shall see,
That thus it needs must be*
To things Immortal, Time can do no wrong,
And that which never is to Dye, for ever must be Young,
TOM's grown Another Man, and now himself betakes
To Poetry, and Sonnets makes
Of Gods, and Goddesses, and such like things:
He Is now the Echo of what HOMER Sings.
If Versifying be a Sign of Youth,
The Man of Politics is youthful still:
He does not here Pretend to show the Truth,
On which Pretense how much Ink did he spill!
O that he had spent all the Time
In hard Translations, and in Rhyme,
Which he spent in Opposing Truths, by which to Heaven we climb.
No wonder, that Old Age, and Youth, Aetnean Cold, and Heat
Should Meet in Him, in whom long since such Contradictions Met.
I wish he may not Die too soon after so long a Life,
That he no longer would maintain his cursed Strife
,Against That, which would make him repent of all is Impieties:
Least his Long Life bring him in the End to the WORM that Never Dies.
FINIS.

