Mr. ROTHERHAM's Case AT THE Committee of Elections and Privileges, the Eighth
of December, Concerning the Election of St. EDMVNDS-BVRY.
IT was agreed, that if all the Burgesses had right to Elect, then Sir Thomas
Cullum deceased, and Mr. Rotherham, were duly Elected; but if a select number
only, [had right by a Grant 12 Jac.] then Sir Thomas Harvey and Mr. Jermyn
were duly Elected.

The first Question was, Whether St. Edmunds is a Borough by Prescription?

To prove it so, was urged, That H. 1. granted to the Burgesses of the Borough
of Bury several Privileges.

Four Writs to choose, upon which St. Edmund is indorsed among other Buroughs
which send Burgesses, and a Mandavi Ballivo returned upon one, in 30 Ed. 1. and
upon another 34 Ed. 1. Prec. Edm. among other Buroughs, and the like 21 Ed. 3.
and the like 14 Ed. 3. but no Return; and Christ-Church in Hampshire, and
Heydon in Yorkshire, had but one Precept to either, and no Return till lately,
and yet they send Burgesses.

A Writ directed to the Alderman of St. Edmunds, which recites, That the
Guild Hall was used for choosing the Aldermen per communitatem villae, and for
collecting the Kings Tenths and Fifteens. 1 R. 2.


The King by his Letters-Pattens recites, That it is an ancient Borough and
had diverse Privileges by Prescription. 12 Jac.


1 Inst. 109 A. It is named an ancient Borough. Cook.


Jac.

Ed. 3. for in that year there was an Agreement between the Abbot and the men
of Bury which recites, The Abbot had recovered 140000 l. against them in three
Writs, of which at the Kings Entreaty, he forgave 122333 l. 13 s. 4 d. and
forgave 10000 l. more upon condition they should never reverse the Judgments,
nor implead the Jury, nor any others, by reason of the Premises; And if they
nor their Successors neither claim nor maintain any communality in the said
Will, then he forgave the Residue, being 7666 l. 6 s. 8 d. otherwise Execution
might be sued of 17666 l. 13 s. 4 d. and thereupon they acknowledge and grant
for them and their Successors, That they neither have nor claim, nor might for
the future claim any Community: after which they durst not meet as a Community,
much less choose Burgesses. But this was resolved in the Negative by 54 against
48.



The King recites, That Bury is an ancient Borough, and they shall be known by
the name of Alderman and Burgesses; and that there shall be 12 capital
Burgesses, and named them, and 24 of the Common Council, and named them, and
calls them Primos and Modernos, etc. and upon the death of any of them, the
major part of the Survivers to choose others. 4 Jac.


The King grants to the Alderman and Burgesses, That there shall be two
Burgesses in the Borough of St. Edmunds, and that the major part of Aldermen
and capital Burgesses, and Burgesses of the Common Council, shall choose them;
and the Burgesses so chosen shall send, and they shall stay at the Parliament
at the charges of the Borough and Inhabitants. 12 Jac.
It was urged that the restrictive Clause is void, and the whole Borough which
is to bear the Charge, ought to choose; for though as to private concerns of
Corporations created by the King, he may restrain them as he pleases, yet he
cannot in their Choice of Burgesses, which concerns the Legislative power: for
if he can make new Corporations with such Clauses, then admit the King should
create 300 such, and one of his naming to choose them, there would be 600 in
effect of the Kings naming, then the King can make as many Lords as he pleases;
the consequences whereof is plain: but it was agreed, that by Prescription
Freemen, owners of Burgage-houses, or other select number of men, may choose,
and do so legally: Mr. Rotherham is chosen by the major part of the Burgesses
in general. Sir Thomas Harvey and Mr. Jermyn, by the major part of the select
number.



