THE MAGISTRAT'S Dignity, Duty, and Danger, Set forth in a SERMON Preached in
the High Church OF EDINBVRGH, On the Anniversary Day of the Election of the
MAGISTRATES.

Nehemiah 5.19. Think upon me, my God, for good, according to all that I have
done for this people.

Claudianus de 4. Consultatu Honorii.
Tu Civem pat remque geras, tu Consule canctis,
Nec tibi, nec tua te moveant, sed publica vota.
Lucanus Lib. 2. de Laud. Catonis -- -- Patriaeque impendere vitam.
Nec sibi sed toti genitum se credere mundo.
--

In Commune bonus: nullosque Catonis in actus
subrepsit, partemque tulit sibi nata voluptas.
London, Printed by J. D. and are to be Sold by John Vallange Bookseller in
Edinburgh, 1693.

To the Right Honorable Sr. JOHN HALL of Dunglass, Lord Provost. And to the
much Honored Baillies.
ARCHIBALD MUIR of Thorntoun GEORGE CLARK GEORGE HUME
JAMES MACLURG Dean of Gild. WILLIAM MEINZIES Theasaurer. Mr. HENRY FERGUSSON
Colledge-Theasaurer. GEORGE STIRLING Deacon-Conveener.

And to the rest of the Honorable Council of the City of Edinburgh.
THe Integrity with which you manage the public Concerns of the good Town, has
justly raised your Reputation a fair and lasting Memorial in the Hearts of the
Neighborhood of the City: the calmness of your Tempers, the moderation of your
Proceedings, the solidity of your joint Consultations for their common Welfare,
the sober and prudent Methods by which you tender the quiet and peace of the
Inhabitants, in this difficult Juncture, speak loudly your Care and Diligence
is more levelled at their Ease and Advantage, than prostituted to gratify Humor
or private Interest: Privati pertinacia in publicum exitium.
The great Bane of all Communities.

It is the happiness of the City, that as the Candor and Justice you practiced
in your private Capacity, Tacius pessimum very affectus and judicii veninum
suaquique utilitas: idem:
in the Pursuit and Conduct of your particular Affairs, pathed the Way to your
Rising to the Dignity you are in so you have Carried and do Retain the same, in
the Eminent Station you now move in, only you have a more Splendid Theater, a
more Ample Sphere, to Display and Exerce these and the other Virtues, you are
so happily Endowed with; and as these Secure you in the Minds of the Citizens,
from all Suspicion of Dishonesty in your Publik Trust, so the Opulency of
Fortune, with which God has Blessed and Crowned your Industry, Elevats you
above all Sordid Temptations thereto, to which the Straightened Condition of
others makes them Obnoxious, all which makes Un-prejudiced Men equally Esteem
and Love you, and promise much Honor and Felicity to the Place, from your
Auspicious Government. Seneca. Omnium enim somnos illius vigilantia defendit,
omnium ovium illius labor, omnium delicias illius indastria, omnium vacationem
illius occupatio, ut remissam aliquando animam habebat nunquam (...)


I may safely Transfer and Apply to you what the Prince of Moralists wrote of
Polybins, your VValking makes the Indwellers Sleep sound, you Toil for their
Ease, you are Bufied that they may more freely follow their Pastime, you are
constantly Employed that they may have release from Trouble; so that though you
may enjoy some Intermission, yet no immunity from Care. The fate of all in such
conspicuous places of Authority, if they act conform to the ends of their great
Trust, and their comfort in the day of their solemn Account, that they have
bent their study and endeavor this way, more to serve the Public than their
own Avarice or Ambition, which many under that Pretense too frequently advance.

How little you are influenced by Humor or Partiality, I my self am a signal
Instance, that being outed from my Ministry for not complying with the present
Scene of Affairs, yet you have not measured your Affection by the difference of
your Persuasion, but have kindly remembered my Twenty years Service in the work
of the Gospel among you, by a Donative with such frankness and generosity, as
discover the benignity of your Natures, the impartiality of your Actings, and
how far you are above the narrow divisive Practice of some, who confine all
their Offices of Charity, Humanity and Justice, to those of their own Opinion,
and make that the Standard of their public and private Benefits or Deeds, yea
and the Caracteristick or Mark, (...)
not only of their own, but of God's Party too.

Having some Inclinations to retire from this public Place, since I can be no
more Serviceable in the Station I was once in, I thought it my Duty from the
just Sense of your VVorth, and the grateful Resentment I retain of your Favor,
to say all this, and in Testimony of my Sincerity in Avouching it, to Dedicat
this Discourse to your Honorable Board, where, that God's Spirit may Preside,
and Direct you in your public Ministrations, and Prosper your honest
particular Imploys, is the hearty VVish and constant Prayer of

Your most Humble, most Faithful, and most Obliged Servant, JOHN MACKQVEEN.

To the Reader.
WHen I removed from Edinburgh, with Resolution to take that innocent
satisfaction in the Society of my Relations, their distance from this place,
and my constant fixedness to my Charge in the City deprived me of, for so
considerable a time; I left this Discourse, as you now have it, to the care of
a particular Friend, in order to be Printed, but my Books being seized upon by
Command of some in the Government, my Papers were so scattered, that these few
Sheets came not into the hands they were appointed for, so that upon my coming
to this place, I was surprised to find them here, not expecting but they had
been published at the time I intended, however now you have the Sermon as it
was then designed.

It was preached in a time, when the City was divided, if not crumbled into
Factions, and I never was, nor will be interessed in the sidings of Popular
Communities, I delivered these plain Truths without any concernedness for one
Party or other, as by perusal it may appear to any, and it is well known, that
at the time it was delivered, it relished ill with some who thought more
Elogies than are here bestowed were due to them upon account of their Dignity,
whether they deserved them or no: And a slavish Custom had so far tirannized
over some in their public Appearances, meanly through their lavish
Commendations to foster this Humor in the Magistrates, by foisting into their
Discourses some Claw-back Expressions, whereby they were soothed in their
Vanity, rather than instructed in their Duty.

Since my entry to the Ministry, I judged it more becoming me, to reprove the
Faults of my Hearers, of whatsoever Quality or Degree, than to palliat them,
and howsoever this may pass for Folly in the Opinion of some, who make the
Favor of these Balaks on whom they depend, the Pol-star of their public
Motions: Yet I had rather with Micajah, incur the Displeasure of Men, by
telling the Truth, than either offend GOD by lying in his Room, or through
encouraging Men to continue in their sinful Course, flatter them to their
Ruin, by hiding their deformities, or representing them to their view, through
leslening perspecttives.

I hope a Discourse so honestly intended, will leave no bad Impression on these
who now are, or at any other time may be in trusted with the Government of the
GOOD TOWN: It is the property of divine Truths, and unbyassed Sermons, they
are adjusted to all times, Romans 14.
what was written before, was written for our Learning. And this small Essay,
will render no less seasonable and useful Instructions to others in these
Offices, than it did to them for whom it was first prepared: If it conduce to
the effectual bettering the City, by exciting the Magistrates to Zeal and Care
for the Public, by making us all endeavor to be more useful to the World, and
benesicial to one another, the Author has his Wish; the City will have the
Benefit, the Magistrates will have the Comfort, and GOD will have the Glory.

Acts 13.36. For David after he had served his own Generation, by the will of
God, fell on sleep.


THe mind of Man is more easily instructed, his affections more readily swayed
by the light and efficacy of an illustrious Example, than by a thousand
Precepts or Directions: a single Instance or precedent of Excellency, strikes
more powerfully on our Fancy, insinuats it it self more dexterously into our
Memory, is more convincing of our judgment, more attractive of our Love and
influential on our Practice, to beget in us a generous Emulation, than all the
Embellishments of Rhetoric, or florid Elogies, wherewith studious speculative
Men seek to adorn or recommend it: Hence it comes, that the Method of writing
particular Men's Lives, has been of old in great esteem, and is now by some
ingenious men preferred to Annals or History, for as the Sunbeams contracted in
a Burning-glass to a point, has greater force, so Virtue darts more beautiful
Rays, more irresistible Charms operats with stronger Energy when exposed to
our Consideration in a well-drawn Picture or eminent Pattern.

Now these Misconceits of Difficulty or Impossibility, wherewith we palliat our
Sloth or Negligence are confuted, these Chains by which we are fettered from
Industry and Action, are filed off by the Copy these have left us, who with
Honor and Success have performed their Duty and Task: We see in brave and
heroic Examples, Virtue clothed as it were with Flesh and Blood, that which in
the Writings of it is greatest Admirers, is but a dead Letter, in the Harrang's
of the most eloquent and passionate Orators but an ineffective sound, is now
drawn to the life, made visible in its best features and full Proportion for
our incitment and incouragment: For you must know the Descriptions of excellent
Men we read in the Scriptures, are not to be treat by us as Pictures in great
men's Galleries, are gazed on by Bours and Idiots, which serve for Ornament to
the Room, or Divertisement to the more intelligent, but they are
Looking-glasses to us, Directories for our life, Patterns for our imitation,
Copys for our transcribing; for which end I come now to offer your Religious
Attention, that of our Text, David after he had served his own generation, etc.

What some have observed of Aristotle, that his Rule is wrapped up in the example
or instance he brings, is the Method of the Holy Ghost, when David says, I will
walk within my house with a perfect heart, he gives the Character of a
Magistrat's domestic Behavior, psalm. 101.2.
what he should be at home as well as abroad: When Job says, I put on
righteousness, and it clothed me: he fits a Robe for every good Magistrate, Job.
29.14.
preferable to your present distinguishing splendid Attire: When Joshua says, I
and my house will serve the Lord, he draws the Picture of every good Master of
a Family, Josh. 24.15.
who in the defection of others, should make his own Dwelling a Chapel for
God's Worship. When holy David says, psalm. 6.6.
I water my coutch with my tears, he has showed us a more lively (though not so
ostentive) Portracture of a penitent than St. Francis with his coule Sandal,
Hair-shirt, and the other external Trumperie of Mortification, his order can
present us, so here David after he had served his own generation, carries in i^
a commanding Precedent for us to serve ours.

In the Words, we have David's Character and his end, or his Employment and
Liberation therefrom, he served his generation, that was his Character and
Work, and then fell a sleep, he was exoner'd of his Burden: or you may call it
his Charge and Discharge, his Toil and his Rest: he served his generation. This
was his Charge and Toil, he fell on sleep, here his Exemption, Ease and
Freedom from his Work and Labor. By Generation, we are to understand men of
the Age in which he lived, these who were co-temporary with him, whom David in
his public capacity did set himself to Benefit and Advantage, to serve, these
was certainly a matter of Toil, Labor and Difficulty, as the word serve in
the Original imports, which signifies to pull and stretch our selves as Rowers
at the Oar, a violent painful Exercise; by his falling a sleep, the following
words explain this to be, he Dyed, and was laid into his Fathers, and saw
Cirruption.

It is usual in Scripture, to set forth Death under the Metaphor of Sleep, and
all I Will say of it, is, it were well we made Sleep a Memorial of it, and that
our Bed did put us in mind of our Coffin, Men would not go to their rest, with
Brains so discomposed with Excess, or hearts impregnated with Malice, as often
falls out: This representation of Death, under the term of Sleep, may pare off
much of it is frightfulness abate much of it is Terror, it is but a long Sleep,
as Sleep is but a short Death.

We contribute extremely to our own Disquiet, we are too ingenious to our own
Disadvantage, by the horrid Schems and terrible Dress our imagination presents
Death to us in, while if we ponder right, it is not the things in themselves,
but the appearances of them, the Circumstances we clothe them in, which
frequently beget in us an averseness to them: The Spirit of God would have us
make our selves familiar with Death, by viewing and considering it often in
these little Images of it, obvious to our senses and notice, that we may be
less terrifyed, when it accosts us in it is true Shape and natural Visage.

David after he had served his own Generation, etc. What his Service was, we
can best gather from the History of his Life. However we shall consider him
here in his public capacity, so I find the Current of Interpreters, take the
words as the Character of an excellent Magistrate. David's Service was not
contracted within the narrow Sphere of Self, it was not confined within the
strait compass of his own private Concern, it was not levelled at his Emolument
or Advantage, his Pains, Care, and Trouble, had a larger Circumference, and
another Center, even the Men of the Age he lived in, and with, teaching us all
to lay out our selves, but more particularly these in public Stations, for the
Advantage and Benefit of these we live among; this is truly and properly to
serve our Generation. But before I prosecute this more fully, let me hint a
little at something employed in the word Serve, (...)
being transferred from the hard and laborious Exercise of Mariners tugging at
the Oar, to reptesent the Magistrates Duty and Care.

These places of Trust in which Magistrates move, for the good and interest of
others, are not places of ease to indulge our laziness, or gratify our
idleness. Grandures and Dignities are not the Region of Tranquillity, for all
the glitter they make, Job 14.1.
what Job says, that man born of a Woman is of few days and full of trouble,
seems to be more peculiarly calculated for public persons; the greatest
Laboureres are not those who dig in Mines, or pull in Galleys, no, no, they are
clothed in Purple, and carried in Pomp, who sweat for our rest, and endure a
hundred Tortures for our quiet. The Palace is often but a stately Prison, or a
gilded Cage, they Sleep more soundly, Feed more cheerfully, and which is far
better, they Pray more fervently, Fast more frequently, Chant the Praises of
the Almighty more melodiously, who dwell in Cottages, stretch themselves on a
Couch of Bull-rushes, than these who sit under a Canopy of State, and ly upon
Beds of Ivory: Wealth is a glittering Burden, Speciosa supplicia Cyprianus.
attended with vexing Cares; Honor is a splendid Servitude, carrying Torments
and Punishments under Masks and Disguise; they who have shared most liberally
of both these, have been more happy, and at more ease in other Men's opinion,
than they were either in reality or in their own apprehension: Roses are no
more environed with Thorns than are Thrones, Crowns are lined with Cares, nor
are great Men's Chains the weaker for being more curiously linked, nor their
Fetters less strong or heavy for being of Gold and not of Iron: yet were this
something, if for all their Weight they were not brittle as Glass, or weak as
Withes of Straw: for all the Pageantry and Parade, for all the Ensigns of
Honor and Ornaments of State, these who serve the Public vapor with; for all
the Hosanna's the fickle Populace (which upon a little Disgust, Caprice, or
sudden turn, they soon change into Crucifig's) sound in their Ears, while they
pass through the Crowd, Magra fortuna magna servitus. Seneca.
or enter their solemn Assemblies, they but for the most part, carry a
discontented Mind under a smiling Countenance, a real Slavery under a painted
Liberty, a troublesome Bondage under an appearing Greatness.

We may be sure if this were well weighed and looked to, there would not be
such justling for Places, such bandying of Factions, and sordid Methods for
obtaining Dignities in Church and State, as some may justly be charged with;
but I fear many Eye the Profit and Honor annexed to these Preferments, more
than the Burdens and Duties of them, or the Care and Diligence they require:
and whatever any of you may think of your Advancement, I Will assure you, if you
answer the Ends of it, your Labor and Toil will be greater, and if you idly
indulge your own Ease, and prostitute any Power or Profit which accresses by
your Places, to ends of Revenge or Riot, of Vanity or Pride, of Injustice or
Oppression, your Account will be the heavier, and the Burden of your Doom will
exceed that of your Office, or any Temporal Disgrace or Punishment whatsoever.

I know serving the Public is the ordinary Apology in the Mouths of those who
struggle by Hook and Crook to thrust themselves into grand Employments, but God
knows the Avarice and Ambition of severals, advance their Crest under this
Coverture: Many instead of serving the Public, serve themselves of it to
purpose, and Feather their own Nests out of the Common-Good of these
Communities they take Inspection of; I pray God it be not so with any that do
now, or hereafter may bear Charge in the Good-Town.

Since these in eminent Stations are singled out for Toil and Trouble, it
should make all Governors, and us for them, more instant with God, for His
Spirit to direct them in the managment of their Trust, to support them under
the Burden and Difficulties they are exposed to, in the discharge of their
Offices: Augustine observes on Elisha's Prayer for a double Portion of Elijah's
Spirit, that it was not strange he sought a double Portion, because he was to
live in the Court, in the Sunshine of the Grandeurs and Honors of the World,
where the way was more slippery, danger more frequent and enticing, while
Elijah being a man of Afflictions, more retired from the hurry and noise of the
World, a single Portion was sufficient for his Conduct and Comfort; Adversity
not being so difficultly born as Prosperity. many, the higher they rise in the
World, lose so much of Goodness and Virtue as they acquire of secular Grandeur:
It is a known Story of Eulogius, who from a poor Mason in Justin's time, became
great in Wealth and Power, lost his Integrity and Virtue with the change of his
State to the better, and in Justinian's time, upon his return to his former
mean Condition, recovered that Virtue the Opulency of his Fortune, Luxuriant
animi rebus plerumque secundis. Ovid.
and the Favor of the Court had drowned and stifled. Greatness has been Fatal
to many, more have been ruined by their Dignities than bettered by them, like
those Fountains in the Indies, which retain their natural freshness and
sweetness all the Night over, but are no sooner shined on by the warm Beams of
the Sun in the Morning, than they degenerat into sowrness. Have not you known
some upon their Exaltation, change that Modesty, Meekness, and Humility, which
adorned their former Station into Starchtness, Insolency and
sausie-distance-keeping, wherewith they sought to hide the obscurity of their
Birth, and the meanness of their Parts* All which, wakened others to inquire
more narrowly into both, and in end made them fall short of that esteem they so
sinistrously hunted after. Abundance and worldly glory-makes People often
forget God, misken themselves, and neglect their best Friends: Prosperity as a
heavy Clog makes the Soul drive slowly in the ways of God, as Bees rol'd in
Honey cannot raise themselves; the smiling Delights of the World are too great
a counterpoise to the expedit Elevations and Mountings of our Spirits;
therefore the holy Man, who was like to be in danger from them prays for a
double Portion: and truly a double Diligence, a double Devotion, a double
Watchfulness, is little enough for those in such Circumstances, an ordinary
measure of Piety, of Care or Circumspection, though it may be proof enough,
againnst any tincture of Vice, wherewith the Temptations of a private condition
may assault the Soul, yet it may prove too feeble to grapple with the force
wherewith Satan rushes on, or violently invades those of a higher Elevation.

Yet would not I by this fright men of Parts and Endowments, of Honesty and
Integrity from those honorable Imployes, because of the Burden, Toil and
Danger annexed to them, he that fears each danger, startles at every
Difficulty, will never interprise any Action of Honor or Glory: but as all
Merchants must not loiter in the Harbor, because others are lost in the
Voyage, nor all Soldiers wallow in their Tents, be-because others walter in
their Blood in the Field: if some have miscarried, others have returned with
rich Cargoes and Laurels from their Adventures, no more must you decline these
public places, although others have splited thereupon, since in all Ages some
have been worse, some have been better for their preferments: if we foregoe
every thing attended with Hazard, stoop to every Opposition, shrink at every
appearing Cloud, or approaching Tempest, we will never attempt any thing
generous or grand for our selves or others: Danger is the very Element of
virtue, and Theater of Glory, le ventlae tempeste l'orage monstrem du la
courage.
nor should we consider how invidious or perilous the matter is, but how noble
and useful: Let none of you then, whom providence in a regular way shall call
to these higher Seats, avoid them upon score of trouble or danger, you may by
the exercise of these Gifts which were eclipsed in your Privacy, convert that
into matter of Renown, which has had some malignant influence upon weaker
Constitutions, and you may raise Trophies for your Honor, from what has been
to others precipes of Ruin and Disgrace.

It argues Dispondency of the divine Assistance, as well as Bastardliness of
Spirit, to decline these Honors a favorable providence casts in our way, and
a happy concurrance of Circumstances, through God's blessing may, make us to
improve to Gods glory, our Countrey's good, our own and others common
Advantage: It is only the sneaking sinistrous Methods by which some screw
themselves into Places, for which God never fitted them, Nature never qualifyed
them, their Breeding neverpolished them, nor were they by Cultivation of parts
capacitated for them, that is to be justly taxed: but for men of large Souls
and proportionable Estates, disposed to Acts of bounty and generosity,
regularly to ascend to these public Stations, where they are seconded with
Power and Ability, with an ample Theater for their Magnificence and Bounty:
Such men's Advancement is like the conjunction of these auspicious Planets,
which purifyes the Air, tempers the Seasons, fertilizes the Earth, and benefits
the world with their Influences. But I believe I need not spend time in
reconciling men's Affections to public Imployes, in an Age and Place, where I
know there are more Competitors and Candidats for preferment, than there are
Dignities to part among them; there is as little fear of som's abstractedness
this way, as of rich beautiful Maids among us turning Nuns, or opulent young
Heirs becoming blind with Studying, or mad with Learning.

When we moderat our Desire of worldly things, and propose Noble and Excellent
Ends in the fruition of them, when we wish them for ends of Necessity or
Conveniencie, for honest and innocent Purposes, they become rational: But
besides these ends, if we extend our Desires of them further to spiritual Uses,
if we desire Riches, not only to supply our Wants, but to exercise our Charity,
if we covet Power to curb the Insolency of the Injurious, and help the
Oppressed, if we seek Honor not only to ward-off Contempt, but to make our
Virtue more Illustrious and Influential on others, to have a splendid Sphere
for displaying it is Rays, and alluring others to it is Admiration and Liking,
then our affection to Places of Honor and Trust, and such secular Objects
becomes Heavenly, Purifyed and Refined: It commences into the Region of
Religion, it becomes a spiritual Instrument, for furtherance of our everlasting
Felicity.

However the Consideration of the Toil and Danger of those who serve the
Public in honorable Stations, should check Inferiors envying their
Conditition; every Glance on their Stare, should invite our Prayers in their
behalf, rather than their imaginary Splendour provoke our Envy, Care and Trouble
we see are their Companions of greatness, Vanity and Vexation, are in a more
special manner the Appennags of public Places, the Curse thundered out against
the Earth of bringing forth Briars and Thorns, seems particularly levll'd at
the higher Ground: and to raise this a little higher, if Subjects knew the
black Phantasms of Care, Fear, and inward Discontents, which attend the
Monarchs of the World, and they drag with them to their Thrones, and from them
to their Closets, which make their Meals many a time heartless, their Sleeps
unequal, their Pillows of Silk and Beds of state uneasy, their sumptuous Fare
disgustfull, they would not so much envy their Condition or be discontentented
at their own.

Let us then be taught by this Reflection, Contentment with our our private
State, since we are thereby secured from many Difficulties and Temptations: It
had been good for some they had never been so great, they had sleeped longer in
a whole Skin, and retained longer a sound Conscience, they had had fewer
Snares, less Guilt, and easier Cares: they had with safety escaped these Traps,
Sins and Inconveniences, into which Satan's Cunning, man's Malice, and there
our Vanity precipitated them many a time. The Providence that has assigned us
our lot, has measured it better for us, than if we were our own Carvers; and I
am sure, if we have less Dignity than others, we have less account to make
hereafter, and less danger to strugle with for the present: But if it come to
our turn to be exalted higher in Honor or Power, if we follow the Precedent
set before us in our Text in his publick-spiritedness, our honorable Post and
temporal accomodations will give reputation to our parts by making them more
conspicuous, we will have the Comfort, and others the Benefit, that we
faithfully and worthily served our generation, which is David's Commendation,
David after he had served his generation, etc.

The Text lays before us the Character of an excellent Magistrate, for we will
consider David here in his public and politic Capacity, and it affords us
this Conclusion, that Magistrates should be men of public spirits, employing
their Power, Parts and Abilities, for the common Advantage and Interest of the
People over whom they are set: This was the great praise of all the Worthies
advanced into the Government among the People of Israel: Moses stands in the
Gap for them, although they were a stif-necked People in reference to God, and
very ungrate and ungovernable as to himself, yet when God offered to take him
off from entreating for them, Exodus 32.10.
by telling, I Will make of thee a great Nation, let me alone, that my wrath may
wax hot against them: He would not forbear, Moses was of another Spirit than
many among us, who care not what come of the Public, whether it rise or fall,
whether it thrive or perish, if they can sit at a full Table, and sleep in a
sound Skin: I Will make of thee a great Nation. What a Temptation this would have
been to those who scruple at nothing, leave no Stone un-turned (as we say) to
raise their Families, though on the Ruin of their Neighbors, yea, and will
not stand to tread on the neck of their best Friends to serve their own ends:
Heb. 1.25, 26.
Moses preferred the prosperity of the People to his own Grandeur, he made
choice to share in their Affliction, before the Riches and Honor of Egypt:
Yea, Exodus 32.32.
his Zeal for the Public flew higher, when he was content to forego his
Happiness, that they might not miss theirs: Sumus magnorum Exemplorum parvi
imitatores, Salust.
Did not the same public Spirit act Jehojedah and Nehemiah, Mordecai, and
Vriah, Jeremiah and St. Paul; and O! what punie Followers are we of this cloud
of Witnesses.

To convince you how much you are all concerned to advance and promot the
common Advantage of one another, and the public well, view the whole frame of
Nature, and you will see there is nothing created for it self, but so placed by
the Divine Providence, that it may contribute to the good of others: all that
is most excellent in Nature, is most communicative and beneficent, as if with
on consent they conspired to condemn Selfishness: The great Luminaries of
Heaven, the Waters of the Ocean, the Fruits of Trees, the Folwers of Meadows;
these are for the Pleasure, Use and Benefit of others, as well as for the
Beauty and Ornament of the Universe: The more noble any thing is, Caussin's
holy Court Discourse of Monarchs.
it is so much the more useful, and as an eloquent Author has it, the great
things of the World were made to serve the lesser, God would not that the great
things should be great in vain, but that they should pay for their greatness,
by the favors and care they were to take for the little ones, Kings and
Monarchs are for the Peopl's Safety and Preservation.

Royalty is an invention of God, appointed not for the benefit of Kings, but
of the Commonwealth, it was not instituted for the Vain glory of Men, but for
the safety of the Universe, and Princes are more for the Peopl's sake, than the
People for theirs.

It were happy if Rulers of all Degrees did believe this, and act accordingly,
then they would not measure the lawfulness of their Practices, by the length of
their Sword, or the strength of their Arm, Ferrique potestas confundit jus omne
manu Lucan. lib. 1. circa finem.
Men were never clothed with Power to use it Arbitrarly, to serve their
Avarice with the Goods, or their Revenge with the Blood of their People: if
these whose Authority is absolute, did stretch it no further than they should,
did they count nothing Glorious but what is Just, nothing Magnifick but what is
Virtuous, their Power would prove the Bull-wark of their People, and the
Peoples Lives and Fortunes would be the Support of their Grandeur, and the
Security of the Government: since then the doing good to others, is the
Language of the whole Creation, and the most excellent things are the most
useful, we most not think God has given Men Natural Gifts, Temporal
Accomodations, Spiritual Endowments, for themselves alone: No, no; what is
withheld from this Common and Universal End, is a piece of Monopoly, Theft, or
Sacrilege, Brutus exuit patrum ut consulem ageret Valcrius Max. lib. 5. cap. 8.
which God will enquire after, and accordingly punish.

The Sages of Gentilism without any other Light, than what they received in the
Sinai of Nature, concluded they were born Tributaries to their Country, Zeal
for the Honor of the State with them, swallowed up all thoughts for their own
Ease or Domestic Concern: Plutarch vit. Lyc^rg. vircit a^or patriae laudumque
immensa cupido Virg. Aeneid. lib. 6.
this so far swayed them, it did preponderat, that Natural Affection to their
Children, Care of their own particular Honor and Reputation, Love of Life, and
all things else, which have most Ascendent over Men.

How it stiffl'd in them Natural Affection, we have an instance in Brutus, who
with a stern Countenance and stout, but yet serene Heart, ordered from his
Judicial Tribunal, his two Sons to be whipped to Death in his own Presence, for
Conspyring to subvert their Country, and prostitute it to the Tyranny of the
Tarquins, Non ego te Catilinae adversus Patriam sed Vatriae adversus Catilinam
genui Valerius Max. lib. 5. cap. 8.
from which it was newly liberated. Fulvius without pitying the Youth, or
regarding the blooming hopes so apparent in his Son, in whom Nature had
engraven all the rare Accomplishments, capable of Politness and Improvement by
Art, caused put him to Death for joining with Catiline, telling he begot him,
to serve his Country against Catiline, and not to serve Catiline against his
Country. Pharnaces King of the Parthians when he was dying, bequeathed the
Kingdom to his Brother, because better qualified, rather than to any of his own
Sons, saying, he held himself more tied to their public State, than to his
Family, and that it was mor incumbent on him to provide for the Kingdom, than
for his Posterity.

But howsoever a high Pitch of Masculine Spirit in some Heroes, or a piece of
Roman Gallantry in others, or some will say an obdur'd Temper, or some Politic
Consideration might choke all Natural Sentiments, in those of a more hardy
Constitution, Plutarch vit. Lycurgi.
yet to see the Spartan Matron counter-act the Genuine Tenderness of her Sex,
the Peculiar Weakness of old Age, so subject to repining Grief, the fond
Affection of a Mother, to see her Generosity and Magnanimity transport her
beyond all Humane Ties, to rejoice in the Death of her Sons, when it was for
the Ransom of her Country, to see her Master so great a Disaster, and
patiently digest the Frustration of so great Hopes, as she might rationally
expect from such promising Sparks, and all this from a Principle of Zeal for
the Honor and Interest of her Country, is such an instance as may at once
strike us with Wonder and Admiration of her Virtue, and a just detestation of
the Mean-spiritedness, so generally predominant amongst us.

2. Others to uphold the Reputation and Interest of their Country, sacrificed
their own Honor, than which nothing is dearer to Men of Spirit, it was this
which put Life and Motion into all their Actions of Bravery, yet upon
Competition, they did choose to Forfeit their own to save their Countrey's
Credit, so Catulus when the Roman Army fled shamefully against his will, he ran
and marched on their head, Plutarch vit. Marii.
that they might be concluded not so much to have turned their backs to their
Enemies through Cowardice, as to have made an orderly Retreat at the Command of
their General, desirous by this, the Disgrace should rather fall on himself,
than his Country. This made the Lacedemonian in Despection of his own Parts,
rejoice, there were three hundred found in the City, fitter for the public
Magistracy than himself. This inspired another of that Nation, when he came on
an Embasly, to treat for some honorable Conditions to his Country, Plut. vit.
Lycurgi.
he was demanded whether he came of himself, or by Authority of the Ephori, to
make that bold and resolute Answer, if I speed I came from the Governors of
Sparta, but if I am repulsed, I came of my own head: so loath was he to expose
either the Credit or Authority of the Commonwealth, to be flouted at by being
denied in any thing, and would rather take with a guilt he was free of, than
that that it should be thought the great Mistress of Greece for Policy, was of
so little Foresight, as to have sent them a bootless Errand.

But this general Concernedness for their Country, not only made some famous
Men counteract Nature, renunce their Honor, but lay down their Lives, yea seek
out and fish for Opportunities of Death, to perpetuat the flourishing of the
State, at the expense of their Lives, Vallerius Paterc. lib. 1. circa initium
in the War betwixt the Athenians, and some Neighbors, when the Response of
the Oracle was, that whose King was killed, that Kingdom should conquer: Codrus
their Monarch laying by all the Marks and Ensigns of his Princely Dignity,
putting himself in a mean contemptible Dress, that he might not be known to be
their King, thrust himself into the thickest of the Enemy, where he was sure to
be overpowered, and so designedly preserved his Country with his own Ruin.
Dignosci arduum est utrum Romana civitas utilius habuerit Darios duces an
amiserit; quoniam vita little ne vinceretur obstitit, mors facit ut vinceret.
Valerius Max. lib. 5. cap. 6.
So did the Decii of whom it was said, it was hard to determine, whether their
Lives or their Deaths contributed more to the Glory and Safety of Rome, in
their Life their Valor made it Victorious, and by their Death it became
Triumphant over all it is Enemies, but if any will satisfy his Curiosity with
more instances of this kind, let him look that Compend of Heroism by Valerius
Maximus, lib. 5. cap. 6, 7, 8, 9. Lucan's Character of Cato, lib. 2. v. 380.

But what need we wade into Heathen Authors, for Examples of this Nature, where
they are often Adulterated with Romantic Glosses, or at best mixed with much
Dross and Allay, let us raise our thoughts and fasten our eyes on those we have
named, sine Christo omnis virtus in vitio est. Hierom. in Epist. ad Gal.
presented to our Consideration in Scripture, these will have a less dangerous
Impression on us, and excite in us a more generous, as well as a more innocent
Emulation, their Virtues are inspired by a nobler Principle, illuminated by a
clearer Light, levelled at a higher Elevation, infidelium virtus idolum est,
cujus species jucunda, sed virtus inanis. Augustinus.
without any Tincture of vain Glory, which as a thread ran through and twined
it self with the splendid Actions of Infidels, these, these are of a purer
Complexion, and stronger Efficacy, than those which act by the Spirit of the
World, or Maxims of Morality.

But if the Material World in it is Bulk and Parts, if the Pagan World in it is
eminent Heroes, be against particular Drifts to the prejudice of the Public,
the Christian World is as remote from all narrow Self-assignments, or private
Byasses, therefore consider in the third place, if Nature and Humanity would
have us Communicative, Grace is not for our being Niggard, of what the Bounty
of Heaven has committed to us: it is set forth under the Notion of a Fountain,
John 14.14.
or a Well of Water, which freely springs, constantly flows, and largely
streams, to water all about it, there is nothing pinches or straitens the Soul
like sin, nor is it ever so freely enlarged, as when it is impregnated with
Grace, when it dilates it self upon the Divinity, and feeds upon Celestial
Objects, these ennoble, ampliat, and extend it, the nearer any Being comes
into God, who is infinite Fullness, the more it resemble him, and partake of his
Nature, it is by so much the more Diffusive and Beneficial: and the further it
slides from him, it is so much the more straightened and confined: nothing
enslaves the Soul like low selfish ends, nor does it ever act more freely or
fully, than when it expatiats it self upon God, for so it expands it self in
some proportion to the divine Nature, to set forward the Benefit and Advantage
of others. If you would ask a devout Soul, when is it he has most enlarged
Desires and Designs of Benificence? His answer would be, he finds himself most
Un-bounded, when he is under the most powerful Constraints of divine Love, and
the gracious Influences of infinite Goodness. Every thing is so much the more
noble, 1 Thessalonians. 2.8.
quo longiores habet fines, as the Sphere of it is Activity and ends are
extended, Grace opens the Heart, and stretches out the Affections toward
others, Acts 4.34.
so it did in those new Converts, who before this work of Grace, were both
strait hearted and strait-handed: sin contracts the Affections and manacles the
hands from charitable and generous Offices, but when Grace has made it is Entry
and Conquest, Man's Soul is more enlarged, the Cirle of his Actings more ample,
and he himself becomes more bountiful to Mankind, and useful to the World.

And no Wonder, since all Christian Societies are as a Politic Mystical Body,
in need of one anothors mutual Assistance, the Variety that is observable in
the whole frame of Nature, is one of it is greatest Ornaments, the Diversity of
Functions in the Natural Body, with the mutual Harmony of it is parts, gives no
small Luster to it is Beauty, and the difference of Conditions in the Body
Politic, is at once it is greatest Decency and Safety, and as the divine
Providence has made this agreeable Mixture of High and Low, Rich and Poor,
Magistrates and Commons, for the Profit as well as Pleasure of all, the
necessary Service of Individuals, as well as for the comely Order of the whole,
Charity which is the Cement of Christian Societies, should make our
Contentments common, rejoice in another good fortune, without grudging or
interferring with one another, join heart and hand, to encourage and promot one
another Interest, with a Subserviency to the public and common Felicity of
the Place.

This the divine Apostle sets forth with equal strength of Reason and
Eloquence, 1 Cor. 12.
in the friendly Imployes of the parts of the Natural Body, which are
serviceable to the whole, and to one another, the eye sees not for it self, but
for the Body, the hand works not for it self, but for the Body, so that to
prefer a private good before the public is to transcribe his folly, who would
famish his whole Body to fatten a toe, or save his finger. We see in Nature,
the great Fabric of the World is maintained by the Reciprocal Friendship and
Confederacy of it is Parts, which, should they universally fall out, and break
the Bond of Unity, that is betwixt them, should they act their Antipathies upon
each other, yea should they but cease to serve one another for the general
good, the whole Machine of Heaven and Earth would be dissolved, and all things
shuffled into Confusion and Ruin. The great Animal of a Republic has as much
consent of Parts, as much need of one another's friendly supply, the
Representation of this in that pretty Apologue of Menenius Agrippa reclaimed
the Common People that beast of many heads, but few eyes and little brains, to
their Duty after their seditious Revolt.

He told them, Plutarch vita Coriclani.
there fell a discord betwixt the Stomach and the members of the Body, they
accused it, as devouring all, and doing naught, while they toiled and fatigued
to serve and uphold it, in the mean time she asserted, that by her providence,
all she received, was expended and communicated, for the use and sustenance of
the other parts, without whose Cares and Pains, they would have famished and
become unfit for Motion or Action: and this was the case of the People of Rome,
and the Senate, which housbanded whatever it received for their behove, and by
it is prudent Managry, reserved it for their need, upon necessitous Emergents,
and fit Opportunities distributed the same, so as it circulated to supply, and
answer the Indigencies of all the Parts, of the vast Body of the Common wealth,
by this familiar and witty comparison, he described truly the nature of their
State, appeased the fury of the Multitude, and made them cheerfully resign
themselves to the Conduct of their Governors.

Now these four Reasons from Nature and Morality, Grace and Policy may convince
us, how justly this Public spiritedness may be expected from us all, but more
peculiarly from you, my Honorable Patrons, whose Station, Capacities, and
Abilities are more calculated for this end, in a more eminent manner, than the
Circumstances of others can qualify them for, and as I doubt not of your Zeal,
to employ your Trust for the Honor and Interest of the City, so that you may
do it sucessfully, take these following Directions, as so many helps to that
Purpose.

1. Piety qualifies Magistrates, to act worthily for the Public, I may well
begin with this, for it has the same Preeminence among the Graces, (...) Philo.
which God has among Beeings: other Virtues requisite in Rulers will miscarry,
without this lay the Groundwork, they will make a glittering show, without
they be enlightened and enlivened by this, it is this that sanctifies their
Policies, from this they may expect a happy Event to their Undertakings, things
have never succeeded better under any Man's Conduct, than under these, who seek
the Direction and Assistance of Heaven, it is no Wonder, these who have such
Power and Favor with God, by the pious and welcome Violence of their Prayers,
the Assiduity of their Devotion, should have an auspicious influence on the
happy ordering public Affairs to their designed end: the Religion of Rulers is
the best Angelguardian of the City, and Superintendent of it is common Concerns.

The Romans concluded, Plutarch vit. Marcelli.
the flourishing and Prosperity of the Commonwealth, depended more on the
Senats zealous Care of the matters of Religion at Home, than on the Power and
Policy of their Armies abroad, and therefore they imputed the bad Success of
their Affairs, to some neglect or defect in their Religious Services: your
private Christian regular walk in your own Families, although it be not obvious
to others, yet is not less acceptable to God, less Comfortable to you, or less
influential to prosper your public Proceedings: the Prayers of the Closet
although less conspicuous, yet is not less vigorous to bring the Benedictions
of Heaven on your Actings, at the Council Table, were we all more exact and
more conscientious in our private Houses, Selfishness, and Partiality, Revenge,
and Pride, would not mingle so much with our Administrations, Psalm. 101.2.
to the prejudice of the Public. David's care to walk in his own house with a
perfect heart, fitted him the better to sway the Scepter of Israel: there are
some Magistrates who compose themselves to a decent Carriage, a grave
Deportment, a modest Behavior, while they walk the Sreets, sit at the
Council Board, frequent solemn Assemblies, or meet on public business, they
are then hemmed in by the multitude of Witnesses, overawed by the Ceremonies
of their place, but trace them home, you will find them little better, than
incarnate Devils there, you will see them domineering Husbands, unnatural
Parents, and imperious Masters: many have been admired abroad, in whom neither
the the Wife or Servant, could behold any thing Praiseworthy at home, these
Magistrates run the fate of such Prophets, Mat. 13.57.
who are not honored in their own Country: Respect is certainly, the very
soul of Government, the great Charm to tie humane minds; to a cheerful
Subjection to their Superiors, and where this is wanting, no Power or Policy of
Rulers, can make the obedience of Inferiors cordial or lasting. Piety infuses
Awfulness into their Countenances, and Authority into their Commands, people
will never readily or from the heart obey these, who maintain not the Honor of
their Character by Religion and Virtue.

This Piety will introduce Self-denial into the Soul, than which I know no
better disposition toward Magistrates,
acting zealously for the public, Public persons with private Aims, are the
ruin of Church and State, of City and Country, while private Persons with
public spirits are the supporters thereof: Self-love is the Original of all
the disorders in the universe, faevior est tanto quanto est occultior hostis.
Claudian
a Person can neither be a good Christian, or a good Magistrate, so long as he
is biased thereby, the City had as good guard against a selfish Magistrate, as
a Common Foe; for of the two he is the most dangerous Enemy, has greater
Advantages, and fairer Opportunities to injure it: It is large Souls more than
large Estates which capacitats Men for great undertakings, these who are
content to be poor in a rich City, rather than Rich in a poor Community, are
certainly more likely to manage it is Concerns for the public Welfare of the
Place, such will never make the Common-good a Stale to the interest of a
factious Party, or enrich themselves at it is cost. Search the Scriptures or
Humane Stories, you will hardly find any Commended for their care of the Public,
without this self-denial: Carnal ends, Private Affections, domestic Interests,
usually obstruct noble Enterprises, men subject to Impressions from these, in
time of any Storm or Difficulty go foreward or backward for the service of the
Public, as they see it consistent with their own temporal Safety, or personal
Security.

Pray you abandon your private Aims, and selfish narrow Designs, look not
a-squint to your own particular, when the Public is in Danger, call to mind
the solemn Protestations you have reiterated, the Objections made against some
of your Predicessors, how justly or unjustly my Business is not in this place,
or at this time to inquire into, consider the Expectation people have conceived
of you, upon your getting the Reins of the Government into your hands, if you
embazle the common Stock to increase your own, if you raise your Fortuns on the
Ruin of the Towns Treasure, or employ it to ends of Luxury or Riot, you
falsify your Oaths, you will get a Sting in your Souls, a Blot in your Names,
which will outlive your Authority, and dashyour Memories with Infamy and
Reproach.

But if in stead of this narrow Self-confinement, we transfer our Love to the
Public, and suffer it to dilate it self in proportion to the large extent of
it is concerns, this widening and amplifying it is Object, is so far from
weakening it is force, that it fortifies and replenishes our Souls with strong
Inclinations and generous Resolutions to advance it is Interest, to withstand
whatever is levelled directly against it, or may have a Tendency to it is
detriment: This will make Magistrates indefatigable in their pains for the
public, and inflexible to all the Temptations wherewith others seek to corrupt
their Integrity: We see what Miracles this passion is able to produce, when it
terminats on some sorry Objects, it is not frighted with Dangers, nor chock'd
with Difficulty, it is not stiffl'd with Opposition, or diverted with
Discouragments, it looks on all these as Trials of its strenght, and occasions
of it is Triumph, and truly it has afforded the World no less matter of wonder
in these many Hero's upon record, who were inflamed thereby to welcome Death
with all the Harbingers of Terror, Circumstances of Horror, and dreadful
Consequences, wherewith the ingenious Cruelty of some inhumane Monsters
presented it to them, rather than survive their Countrey's Liberty and Glory.
St. Paul confounds all the Graces with Charity, as if they were not so
different in Nature as in Name from it; No winder it is the Soul that quickens
and acts them all, and as the passions are nothing but the Lackeys of Love, so
we may say all the Virtues requisite in a Magistrate, are the Ministers of
Charity, this will set his prudence on work to discern the Seasons of acting,
as well as the nature of these things which conduce to the Hurt or Well of the
Community: This will make him just, though to his own prejudice, for the
benefit of the Society, it will make him with such Temperance and Moderation
hold the Reins so evenly, that the City suffer not by foolish Pity or cruel
Severity: and it will inspire him with Courage and Fortitude, than which I know
no Virtue more necessary to men in public Stations, to carry them through in
acting for the common Advantage.

Let me therefore in a particular manner recommend it to you, as that which
will make you invincible to the assaults of the Great, Immovable with the
Aspersions of the Envyous, and victorious over the Clamors of the Rabble.
Indeed Love to the public in the Civil, is like the Sun in the Natural World,
the Fomenter and Cherisher of all that conduce to it is Ornament and
Preservation; yet as the Sun in the Firmament has it is different Mansion
houses, in which his influences are various, in some more, in some less Benign
and Forcible, so this Love to the Public exerces it is Efforts, with more or
less Vigor, as it is in conjunction with those divine Habits, but with none is
it more Triumphant than with this Christian Fortitude, here he darts his most
refulgent Beams, here he makes his most vigorous Sallies, here he makes his
bravest Conquests, here he makes his stoutest Resistance against all violent
Invasions, here he practices the greatest Warchfulness against the cunning
Encroachments on the Goods and Properties of these he has charge of,

If this Fortitude had not animated the first Founders of Empires, the State
had perished in it is Swadlingbands, had not this born them up in the pursuit of
their great projects, they had fainted in the Way, and did it not accomplish
their Exploits, their former Advances had been repelled with disgrace, they
lose the Reward of all their Labor, and their Names dyed without Elogies or
Applause: This has made famous Men choose Death with all it is frightful
Appearances, rather than a Life of pleasure and ease, while their Nation lost
it is Honor: they coveted not to retain either Life or Liberty longer than
thereby they could serve and save their Country, and when they expired in it is
quarrel, were crushed with it is Ruin, they raised lasting Arches for their
glory.

We need not search the Rolls of Greece, the Records of Rome, or the Region of
Romances for instances of Heroic Courage, or this public Gallantrie of
Spirit, not only the Christian World, but our own Country afford Examples of
undaunted Bravery, and Publick-spiritedness: Many who loved not their Lives to
the Death, but were hailed to Prisons, martyred on Scaffolds, fell Victimes to
the Fury of a popular Rabble, preferring an honorable Death to an infamous
Life, which they counted such if they survived, though with all affluence of
Wealth, pleasure and honor their Countries glory

It is this Fortitude which makes men in power and place, contemn great
Dangers, conceive great things, combat great Hardships for the Public, it is
not want of Power but want of Courage in Magistrates, that the Weak become a
prey to the Strong, and innocence is born down by Injustice and Oppression:
This will ingadge them to espouse stoutly the cause of afflicted Widows and
distressed Orphants, against those mighty Nimrods, or strong Oppressors, who
seek to maintain their Vanity, Luxury, and Pride, and support the declining
Grandeur of their Families, with their Portion and Patrimony: There are some
Relicts and Offspring of honest Merchants and Laborious Trads men in the GOOD
TOWN, which need your assistance upon this Account, nor is there greater
Oppression or Injustice in any obscure distant Corner of the Kingdom, than what
is committed through Force and Fraud on some of the Inhabitants of this City,
the public Seat of Justice, in which to my certain knowledge, many who to keep
up their former Reputation, seek under a bashful Modesty to conceal their
Straits, hide their hard Condition under a fair Countenance, visit their
Neighbors Houses with hungry Stomachs, where they sit picking their clean
Teeth after many a sorry Meal, rather than discover their extremities to the
World, while others vapor it profusly, feed highly, fair sumptuously, and are
gorgeously apperrell'd with their Sustenance, the parings of whose Excess, or
the Tenths of what they justly owe them, might afford them tolerable, if not
comfortable Relief.

It is this which makes a Magistrate equally unshaken with the Threats of the
Mighty, justum and tenacem propositi virum non civium ardor, etc. mente quatit
solida. Horat. Lib. 3. Carm. Od. 3.
or the Menaces of the Mob, this makes him alike untouched with the daring
Frowns, or pleasing Flatteries of all that accost him, his Love to the public
makes him bold in it is Defense, while a Coward will betray it through Fear, or
desert it through Folly and Falsehood, a timorous person can never be honest to
God or Man, but he that is endued with Fortitude, to serve his generation, is
triumphant over Fears and Favors, over Honor and Disgrace, over the Affronts
and Court-ship of all above about, or beneath him, and deserves the Venetian
Motto, Nec fluctu nec flatu movetur.

A Magistrate that is acted by these Principles, adorned with these Qualities I
have laid before you, need not rgard much the Jealousies of secret, or the
Obloquies of more avowed invidious Enemies, the honesty of men in public
Places, may secure them from Guilt, even upon all Turns and Revolutions, but
neither their Prudence or Innocence, can ward off the Envy of ambitious men, or
the quarrellous Clamors of the Populary.

You that serve in these Creditable Offices, may consider, so long as there is
any Competition among any of the Rich or pragmatick Neighborhood for these
Places of Trust and Honor, you cannot escape Envy from these who think they
have less Share in the Managment of Affairs, than their vain Pretenses gives
them in their own weakly grounded, but strong conceited Imaginations, or in the
flattering Apprehensions of their Friends, Alleys, and expectant Dependents:
And there are three sort of Persons you may expect will invade your Reputation,
and labor to asperse your Names, and blacken your Actings.

First, Those who are thrust from the Government, it is rare to find these who
by some disaster are removed from Public Trust, or disappointed of them,
commend what is praiseworthy in their Successors, or present possessors of
these Honors:
Envy heats every one that mounts the Seat from which it self fell, or was put
by; it will aggravate every Misfortune into a Crime, and ascribe it unto the
mismanagement of those they intend to defame with the people: Whatever fall out
cross is charged on them, and as if the most Fortuitous Contingencie depended
on their Will, or it were possible for them to fore know or prevent the
extravagancies the Capricious Humors of the fickle Populace (which like
Reuben's glory, is unstable as water) upon some unlucky occurrent commit, when
either blown on by a Fuctions Club, or stirrd up by a Seditious Medler, when
either egged on by some underhand Pragmatick Whisperer, or broke out by
chance: No humane prudence or foresight can guard against all Inconvenience,
nor the diligence, integrity, or care of the best Rulers Prevent the
disorderly effects of some unlucky conjunctures, or of jealousy and suscicion
when they enter the giddy Heads, or possess themselves in the fickle hearts of
the multitude: The Miscarriage of a drunken Cabal, the Scuffle of some Childish
and Foolish Mechanics, a sudden Rupture, a Tumultuous Mutiny, an Accidental
Commotion, a Casual Vproar, with all the Train of their fatal consequences, and
I know not what, although these things break out in the best governed Cities in
the World as Madi's tales (as we say) in the Market Alarms in Camps, or the
slanderous aspersions of some fair and innocent, but unfortunate Females, the
Authors and Fomenters of the one, as well as of the other, are sculking in the
Crowd, or lost in the multitude of Informers: Yet these and a thousand such
like unlooked for emergents are laid at their door: Nay, as if Nature were at
their beck a misfortune by Fire, the disorderliness of the Season, the
infectious influence of some unhappy Conjunction of the Planets, the contagion
of the Air, the Sterility of the Earth; Nay (as we say) If a Stone fall from
the Clouds, it is as unjustly as maliciously imputed to their ill conduct, and
that sometimes by Men, were they at the Stern themselves, their Sagacity could
not foresee, nor their Prudence ward off, nor their Wit rectify, or their
Dexterity improve such eventual Mischances, half so well to any tolerable use
for the present or future security of the place. We treat our Governors often
as the Ba^barous Mexicans do their Kings, whom they accuse for all the
Mischiefs that befall them, but in this Magistrates do but run the fate of that
Divinity they represent, and the Providence that installed them, which is
frequently through Ingratitude and Unjustice, by Ignorant and Vicious Men,
loaded with their own faults, and the evils they justly bring upon themselves.

But not only these who by a higher Ordinance are removed from these places of
Government in the City, whether deservedly, or upon sinistrous information of
some that would Monopolize the Administration of Affairs into their own hands,
I will not determine; I think I am not much concerned to dive too narrowly into
that, or too plainly declare my opinion therein, but even these who are put by
their expectation, or disappointed of their aims in the Regular way of
Election, and would wind themselves into Employment, will be quarreling your
preceedings, and critically canvassing your Actings, how virtuous so ever in
themselves, or honestly intended, which God knows, that which mainly sets them
a gaggling against you, is that they are not the Actors nor Contrivers
themselves; I beseech you behave so, as none of these may upon some Change or
Turn of Affairs accuse you openly of what they now clandestinly inveigh against
you for, the favor of the Court shifts it is Quarters, and there may arise
another Pharaoh, who will let loose upon you other Inquisitors than you are
aware of, who will sift all your Actings, discuss all your proceedings, and
stretch on the Tenters your must pardonable escapes, and by this Severity
against you, seek to cover their own Blemishes, like those Birds who making a
great deal of noise, and fluttering with their Wings at distance from their
Nests, to divert Passengers from finding them nearer hand.

But though this should not happen, and you were in no fear of being called
into an Account by Man; Remember, you have the great King of Heaven and Earth
to compear before, who will not err through ignorance, or before-stall'd
through favor, who will not be overborn with Power, or corrupted with Bribes,
in passing Judgment on you for your Administrations, nothing will yield so much
Solace and Contentment to you under all the Calumnies of Adversaries,
Reproaches of evil men, as the joyful Reflection of your Consciences on your
Carriage in your different Trusts and Stations: Isa. 38.3.
If you can say with good Hezekiah, Remember, O Lord, how I walked before thee
in integrity, in my post, whether of Magistrate or Minister, whether of Judge
or Barrester, this will be a brazen Wall, an impregnable Fortress against all
the Shocks of envious Competitors, the Clamors of discontented Neighbors, and
the tumultuous Noise of a giddy Multitude. This will make you stand in Judgment
and look GOD in the Face, Psalm. 2.
when the Wicked are driven like Chaff before the Wind and ashamed to look up:
Believe it, it is more to look GOD in the Face than to look Tigers in the face,
Lions in the face, Flams in the face, yea Torments and Gibbets, yea Devils and
all the Infernal Troup, yet by walking according to the Rules I have prescribed
you, I doubt not but you will do it boldly with Comfort, and GOD will Reward
you with Joy.

3. But beside the Difficulties you may meet with from envious, or disappointed
Competitors, you have to do with a Resty untoward easily discontented Body of
Inhabitants: Est in omni populo quid Malignum and quaerulum in imperantes
Tacitus.
the Common People is a skittish Beast that Kicks at it is Governors, and will
be still Attempting to cast it is Rider, who are never pleased with the best
Rulers too long, and scarce any so bad but may please them for a time, when
unjustly disgusted with the present Settlement of Affairs: Nor is there any
thing more taken with the MOB, than what grate the ears of their Betters.
Aspersing their Governors, detracting from their Superiors, finding or making
Faults in their Management of Trust, Tickles them with Delight, and I have in
my own time observed them never better satisfied, than with these streperous
Harangues how void soever of Reason or Sense, of Piety, Modesty or Discretion,
full of Libels and Invectives against Magistrates and them in Public Office:
And often the greatest and most zealous Promoters of the Common-good,
when the Maggot or Caprice takes the many headed Beast, become the Butts of
Vulgar Railing, and Sacrifices of Public Hatred.

But in this Case as good Steers-men in a Storm or Tempest mind their Work,
Virtus Ripulsae nescia fordidae, intaminatis fulgit honoribus, nec sumit aut
ponit secures arbitrio popularis aurae. Horat. lib. 3. car. 2. Plutarch vit.
Fabii.
are not hindered by the Noise of the Passengers or the Clamors of Sea
sick-people, no more should Governors be hindered from, or Retarded in their
Administrations, by the Bawlings or Censures of an unskilful and unruly
Multitude; They should with Fabius hold on their Course, and follow his
Example, he was Reviled by the Army for deferring giving Battle to Hannibal,
his Friends told him the Contumely the Soldiers loaded him with upon this
score, he answered them, I should be more Fainthearted than they judge me, if
for fear of their Reproaches I should abandon my own Reason: Vnus homo nobis
cunctando restituit Rem, non ponebat ante salutem ergo postque magisque viri
nunc gloria clarat. Vir. lib. 6. v. 854.
That Man is not fit to Rule others, nor will he ever Attempt any thing worthy
of himself or his place, who shall be startled or shaken from his Post with
Rumors and Calumnies, for then he degrades and subjects himself to the
Chimerical Fancies of these he ought to command.

Reckon as we say then with your selves, do never so great or good things for
the Interest of the City, Govern never so well, there will still be some Shimeh
or other to Revile you, there will be still some to Detract from your Merit,
Eclipse your Virtues, and Slander your best and most innocent Actings, but a
good Magistrate that minds his Business, is both deaf to the Barking, Ille velut
Rupes vastum quae prodit in aequor, obvia ventorum furiis, expostaque ponto,
ipsa immota manens. Virgil aeneid. 10. de Mezentio.
and as a firm Rock immovable with the rage of Waves, or fury of Winds: The
Serenity of his Mind is as little Discomposed, his Purpose for the public as
little altered, by all these injurious and invidious Methods, as we are moved
with these Showrs, which break their Force on the Stones of the Street, or
covering of our Houses. Magistrates are not compared to Cooks, who make Sauces,
and prepare Meat for pleasing Men's liquorish Pallats, but to Physicians who
search Sores, pry into Wounds, cleanse Ulcers, cut Gangrened Limbs, apply
Caustives and Corrosives, as well as Lenitives, and the Body natural stands not
in more need of these Operations, than the Body Politic of such like in their
Kind: A good Magistrate who is Conscious to himself of doing no base or unworthy
thing in his public Capacity, is no more diverted or shaken from Managing his
Trust, with the malicious Talk, or spiteful Revilings of some, than a
Physician is hindered with the Tears and Cries of some Childish Effeminat
Patients: He is as little fretted with the Slanders of some, who set up for
Wits and honest Men, when they are nothing less than such, as he is lifted up
with the flattering Complements of foolish Friends, or designing Foes.

Finally, If you would stop the Mouths of your Adversaries, at least give them
no just ground to Object against you, if you would Answer the Ends of your
Stations, and advance the public Interest of the City, if you would keep up
your Esteem in the Mearts and Mouths of it is Inhabitants, let Justice and
Prudence square your Actings, these are the best Preservatives of your Dignity,
these are the Illustrious Virtues which strike Fear and Reverence into the
Hearts of those beneath you, and will keep them on their due Hinges within
their just Bounds. Plutarch says, nothing makes one Man Frankly yield Obedience
to another, but either Assurance of Love, or Opinion of his Integrity or
Justice who commands; for we even see that Obedience which is due to the
highest Powers on Earth is a frail thing where these are wanting,
and unless People have a mixture of Fear and Love, from the Apprehension they
have of the Worth and Qualities of their Governors, they are soon Debauched
from their Duty: As the Authority of Men of Power, which is the Attractive of
Obedience from their Inferiors, is gained by good Acts, so it is lost by ill,
and Majesty it self void of the necessary Virtues and Endowments to support it,
dwindles into Contempt, and Disgrace.

Let me Address my self to you the People of this numerous City, and Exhort you
all to Reverence and Obey your Magistrates, you see how they are exposed to
Dangers, and Tossed with Perplexities, do not imbitter their Charge with
restlessness and untowardliness; it is ungenerous to make their Burden more
heavy and uneasy by your untractableness, they Watch that you may Sleep
soundly, they Toil for your Rest, and Labor for your Ease, Ex quo si Regno
dedicavit, sibi eripuit. Senec^ ad Polybium.
they are in effect and reality the greatest Servants, as Agamemnon says of
himself in Homer. It is some satisfaction to Men in Place, when they abandon
the ease and security of a private State, for serving the Public, that they are
not at all this pains for an Ingrate or Stubborn People, what Reputation will
it be to you, Plutarch. vit. Lycurg.
and Comfort to your Magistrates if they could Answer with the Spartan Archon,
who Replied when some were attributing the Flourishing and Prosperity of their
State, to the Conduct of their Governors, that because their Kings knew best
to Manage their commanding Power, they therefore did thrive so well, No, says
he, but our People of all other know best how to Obey, (...)
and hence comes the Felicity of Sparta: So true is that of Aerschysus that
ready Obedience of People is the source of their Happiness; When Cities are
crumbled into Factions, their Strength declines, their Trade decays, their
Wealth is dissipated, to maintain Parties, their Honor is trampled upon by
every rising Courtier, and their Privileges becomes a Prey to the
Arbitrariness of Presumptuous Rulers, or the Insolency of some Hectoring
Grandees, who take advantage of their Divisions, and Fish best for their own
Ends in such troubled Waters: Obedience to your Magistrates, and Unity amongst
your is selves the best Bull-wark against Encroachments of Disdainful
Adversaries without us, or intestine Designs of Pragmatick self-seeking Men
within our own Bosom.

I shall conclude this Discourse with a word more peculiarly fitted to you the
Magistrates, and another adapted to us all in general: For you that are, or in
your Turns, may be Governors in this Ancient and Honorable City, that Tablet
which Marcus Aurelius Antonius found at Thebes, whereon Ptolomy Arsacides
caused write this Protestation of his own Behavior in the exercise of his
Power, is worth your Regard and Remembrance, the Emperor was so much taken
with it, he carried it with him to Rome as a precious Relic, hung it in his
Bedchamber, left it as a singular Treasure to his Son Cammodus, who succeeded
him in the Empire.

I never exalted the Proud Rich Man, neither bated the Poor Just Man.

I never denied Justice to the Poor for his Poverty, nor pardoned the Wealthy
for his Riches.

I never gave Reward through Partial Affection, nor punished out of Passion.

I never suffered evil to escape unpunished, nor passed by goodness unrewarded.

I never denied Justice to him that asked it, nor mercy to him that deserved it.

I never punished in the extremity of mine anger, nor promised in the height of
my mirth.

I never did evil out of malice, nor good for By-ends.

I never opened my gate to the Flatterer, nor my ear to the Backbiter.

I always sought to be beloved of the Good, and to be feared of the Wicked.

I always favored the Poor, who was able to do little, and God who was able to
do much, always favored me.

These are as so many succinct and nervous Aphorisms, pithy Sentences, worthy
to be written in Golden Letters in your Council Chamger, but if they be
in-printed in your hearts, and practiced in the Exercise of your Offices, this
is a better Register of such Weighty and excellent Sayings, the effect will
make the City happy, your Souls blessed, and your Memory honorable in the
City-records, in the mouths of the present and succeeding Generation.

Let me for the Instruction of all, subjoyn to this, what that great Light of
the African Church says, August. (...) Johan.
and may in our several Stations, be transcribed by us all.

That Family is most firmly established, where the Master of the house like
Joshua is Religious, the Mistress like Abigail Discreet and Virtuous, where the
Father like Abraham is Faithful, the Mother like Sarah is Helpful and
Industrious, the Sons like Isaac Dutiful, Brethren and Sisters like Laban and
Rebecca Cheerful, the Servants like those of the Centurions Tractable, there is
Prosperity and Tranquillity in the House or City, when every one studieth to be
quiet, and do his own Business, when Man and Wife live together in Amity,
Brethren and sisters in Unity, Companions and Servants in Unanimity, when
Superiors give Examples of Integrity, Inferiors discharge their Duty, when the
elder sort are Patterns of Sobriety, and the younger sort Vessels of Sanctity.

If you that are or may be Magistrates, observe this Protestation, and you the
Citizens this Instruction, you will be Authors of blessing and happiness to the
City, and to one another, the Affairs of the good Town will succeed
prosperously. This will make you the Magistrates pass for gods in the
Scripture-sense, the people will receive your Commands as Oracles, this will
strike Fear and Reverence toward you, not only when you sit in your Judicial
Seats, with all Ensigns of State and Magnificence, but upon transient
occasions, when people meet you, they will be apt to say, with those in the
Acts of the Apostles, Acts 14.11.
behold the gods are descended to us in likeness of men, and our houses, if we
answer Augustines Advice, will be Temples for God, the whole City will become a
Model of Heaven, and a Habitation of Righteousness, Isai. 26.1.
God will appoint Salvation for Walls and Bullwarks.

FINIS.

