MISERY to be Lamented: Or, A Doleful Relation of the sad Accident which
befell Lawrence Cawthorn, a Journey-man-Butcher, belonging to the Shambles in
Newgate-Market, who being supposed to be dead, was caused to be presently
buried by his Lanlady Mris. Co^k, in Pincock-Lane, only, as is supposed out of
her greedy desire to gain his clothes. And how he came to himself again, when
he was in the grave, as appeared when he was taken up, by the sad
consequences of his struggling and striving to get out of the Coffin, his arms
being beaten black and blew, his head bruised and swelled as big as two heads,
and his eyes starting almost out of his head; It being also certainly reported,
that he was heard to utter many grievous shrieks and groans the time he lay
under ground, which was from Friday night, June 21. to Monday morning, June 24.
1661.
To the Tune of, Troy Town.


ALL you that spend your precious times
i^ sensual pleasures and delights,
In drinking, swearing, and such crimes,
whom death it self no whit afrights,
Give ear to what I shall declare,
and well consider what you are.
Your days in length are like a span,
your life's a vapor, which appears
But for a little while, and than
death puts a period to your years;
O! therefore now, even whilst you may
prepare you for your dying day.
Let not presumptuous thoughts take place
within your hearts, but surely know
Your life's but for a little space
(death is a debt which all men owe)
O! the efore now, even whilst you may
prepare you for your dying day.
Repentance must not be deferred
until old age or sickness come;
Death often meets men unprepared,
and sends them to their longest home;
Therefore so live, that still you may
be ready for your dying day.
It is appointed that all men
must dye; this truth we know full well,
But in what manner, where, or when
none but the Lord alone can tell;
Therefore so live, that still you may
be ready for your dying day.
We daily by experience see
that from deaths heavy mortal blow
Naught in the world can set us free,
but to the stroke we all must bow,
O! therefore now, even whilst you may
prepare you for your dying day.
A sad Example has of late
been evident before our eyes.
A young man whose unhappy fate
may teach us all to be more wise
And live so, that we always may
be ready for our dying day.
A Butcher was this young man's Trade
and Lawrence Cawthorn was his name,
The place where he his lodging had,
was at a house in Pincock-Lane,
Wherein one Master Cook does dwell,
in Newgate-Market, known full well.
When he his Freedom did obtain,
a Iourney-mans place he undertook
A livelihood thereby to gain,
well t^ his business he did look,
And very careful he was still
to satisfy his Masters will.
But now what unto him befell,
I plainly to you will declare,
That this is true which I shall tell,
most certainly it does appear;
It Is strange! yet thus it came to pass,
alive this young man buried was.
The second Part to the same Tune.


ON Thursday June the twentieth day,
as soon as evening-tide was come,
His work being done, he went some say
unto an Alehouse near his home,
And tarried certain hours space
with his companions in that place.
Then coming home, to peoples view
he seemed in perfect health to be
Much work he said he had to do
next morn as soon as he could see,
And told his Landlord to that end
to rise betimes he did intend.
But when next morning light appeared,
and he not rising as he said,
To do his work; his Landlord feared
that sleep his senses had betrayed,
Therefore he to his Chamber hies,
and loudly calls to make him rise.
But all in vain, for why alas,
the young man heard not when he spoke,
Which to him a great wonder was
that Laurence would no answer make.
Then down the stairs he did run,
and told some Neighbors what was done.
A Smith was sent for then with speed
who soon broke open the Chamber door:
Which being done, they then indeed
began to wonder more and more:
For why, they surely thought that death
had quite bereft him of his breath.
They found him lying on the bed
his clothes were ^n, his eyes were shut:
No motion from the foot to head,
which them into amazement put.
And all concluded certainly
his life was past recovery.
The Searchers then came up, and viewed
his body over in every place:
And to the people then they showed,
what was their judgment in that case.
Their Uerdict was, that cruel Death
had by a Quinsey stopped his breath.
His Landlady through covetousness
to gain his clothes I understand:
Did make it her great business
to bury him quickly out of hand.
A shallow Grave was dig'd with speed
and he therein was laid indeed.
But ah! what groans he uttered
as some report for verity:
For as it seems he was not dead,
but only in a trance did lie.
And coming to himself again
he did endure most grievous pain.
With head and feet, and arms he wrought,
so long as any strength remained:
Most earnestly for life he sought,
which could by no means be obtained.
For being underneathe the ground
to save his life no way was found.
From Friday night till Monday morn
he lay in earth imprisoned:
Disconsolate and quite forlorn,
until his breath was smothered.
And then when as the time was past,
they dig'd him out o'th grave at last.
His Coffin opened was, wherein
a doleful sight they then beheld:
With struggling he had bruised his skin,
his head and eyes were sadly sweld.
His body over black and blew,
as many do report for true.
His Landlord and his Landlady
being suspected for this deed:
Examined were most certainly
and unto Newgate sent with speed
And till themselves they well can clear,
it is supposed they must lie there.
Now let us all with one consent
turn to the Lord with heart and mind:
And of our grievous sins repent,
that so we may Gods mercy find,
And to conclude to God let us call,
from such a death Lord keep us all.
FINIS.
London, printed for F. G. on Snow-hill. Entered according to Order.


