Mr. Ashtons Ghost To his late Companion in the TOWER. vid Account of the late
horrid, Conspiracy.

Ld. P. I Am extremely Mistaken or I hear some Body Walking about the Room --
Who is it that is so uncivil to disturb me at such an unseasonable Hour?


Ash (drawing the Curtains.) Start not my L -- I Am e'ne your Old Friend and
Fellow Traveller, returned from the Dead, much more willingly than we all did
from Graves-End, when that ill-natured Tar of a Captain, would by no means be
so generous, to run away with us, and be Hanged for Company.


L. P. You must give me leave, good Mr. Ghost, to be a little cautious how I
believe you. We live in very bad times, and if we cannot trust the Inhabitants
of this World, it is not very likely we should find more honesty among those of
the other. How finely were I cheated, if it is the Ghost of Essex, which
appears to me (for there is no Features in Shades, and I cannot tell how to
distinguish ye.) To be short, Show me your Credentials, and I Will believe you.
Let me see the the other half of the Broken Six Pence and you shall know all my
Heart the next moment.


M. Ash. Upon the Word of a Ghost, I gave it to Charon for my passage -- by the
sum token that he Grumbled Cursedly, and I Would much ado to persuade the Rascal
to take it instead of his Halfpenny -- But I Will give ye as good a Token. Your
Lordship was this day at the Council, and I Will tell you in your Ear, (least any
of the Warders should be listening) what past there, and how you managed your
self in so ticklish a juncture.


L. P. That any one may do, that has but a good Correspondence, without being
either a Conjurer or a Devil. But I Have one great Objection, against your being
my Old Frievd -- If you are He, were not He and I Sentenced at the same time to
be Hanged, Drawn and Quartered -- the 19th. of January, and was not Sentence.
Executed on you the 28th. after? Now were you really my Old Friend the Major,
we should have you drop in like the Devil in D^^^^ Dobson* here a Leg, and
there an Arm; first your Head, then your Bowels, and then your other (...) when
as I see you are as sound as a Roach, and bating a little Black Ring about the
Neck, no sign of Hanging, Drawing, and Quartering; all over your whole Body,


M. Ash. Just as wisely might I question, whether you were the Witty Scotch
Vicount, I was formerly acquainted with, because you have your Flesh and Blood
still about you, whereas he was Condenmed to the same Death, I already
suffered. The truth is the Government has been more Merciful to us both, then
we could have expected, or did deserve. It let me escape with no more then a
fair Hanging, and your L -- p with not so much -- if it been't your own fault,
and you have not a mind to Hang your self.

But to detain you in suspense no longer, I Will give you one Secret, and
Infallible Token, that I am I, and that I have no design to Impose upon you --
you know as well as I, that I was by, when you writ your Memoirs, See Account
as before
and that I persuaded you to trust 'em, rather to your Memory then suffer a
possibility of their ever rising up in Judgment against you. Besides I Am so far
from being upon the Trappan with you, that I desire no acknowledgment from your
L -- p of what has past, either when you and I were acquainted, or since my ^
kindness, and upon account of old (...) to infor^^^^^ in some (...) may (...)
ve^^ ^uch concern you, and where in my Judgmen is more altered, then you would
easily imagine, since I came into these Black Territories, where your Lordship
is with as much impatience expected every moment, as our Masters great Enemy
was at the Hague.


L. P. Nay, now you would make me suspect you more then ever -- had you not given
me such a Token as I cannot answer. Is It possible that you who have been a
Martyr for the Cause, and slid of the Stage with so much Decorum and Bravery,
should alter your Principles in 'tother World, when you died for 'em here? I
thought you had been all firm enough in that; whatever I may be in this, and
that no change of place or condition, neither Heaven or Hell could ever have
made you started an inch from what you formerly professed.


Ash. My L -- d, I come from a Country where Compliments are quite out of
Fashion; where we see things as they are in their own Natures, stripe from all
those odd Disgnises, which Prejudice, Interest, or Humor, here dresses 'em in
and where you would be certainly of my mind, the very next moment after you come
thither, and which in a few more will make you forget most of the Politics,
which you have hitherto been learning all your life long.


L. P. Torment me then no longer, but by our Old Friendship, if you are him
whose* Name you take, inform me what Sentiments you had of those things we have
so often discoursed, as soon as you Arrived in the other World.


M. Ash. You have heard, I suppose, how unconcernedly I went off from this, and
that I dyed a Traitor against my Country, perhaps with as much Resolution as
Russel and the rest of 'em, Died Martyrs for it.


L. P. I have, and of the kindness of your Ghostly. Fathers -- How Zealous the
little Spark of I -- was to clap you upon the Shoulder in the last Conflict,
and what a deal of Maudlin grief their was at parting with so good a Friend,
when they would have made such excellent Company to have gone with you: I have heard
too of your Speech delivered to the Sheriff, which our Party Swear is as
Infallible as any Chapthe in the Bible, and is kept from the Laity for the same
Reason that the Papists keep the Scriptures from 'em.


M. Ash. I confess, would good store of my Quondam Friends, take the same way,
and never speak Treason but when at the Gallows; the Government might find it
worth the while, to Print their Speeches, as fast as they or the Club could
make 'em. -- But otherwise, I my self can see no Reason why any Man should
Print a Libel against himself. The Friends of the Government, cannot sure be so
weak, as to desire the gratification of a Foolish Curiosity, at the Expense of
a real damage to what they respect and honor, nor can its E^emies with modesty
expect to have their Fancies tickled with a mess of Treason, Cum Privilegio.
Though all Truths would bear the light, all Lies will not, and where there are
more Fools then Wise; as undoubtedly may be found all the World over, it is no
hurt to keep Edged Tools from 'em, lest they should make use of 'em to cut
their own Fingers, or an honester and wiser Man's throat.


L. P. Why, you argue as if you were all perfect Williamites in 'tother World,
and designed to make us so in this. I expected far different discourse from the
Ghost of Major Ashton.


M. Ash. I was just telling you what Converted me. The very FIRST STEP that I
made into the Infernal Regions, before my body was well covered in St. Faiths,
(whither I expect shortly to have any Tomb stone worn as deep with the knees of
those good Catholics, who come to adore my Heretical Dust, as St. Patricks
Well, or the Marbles before the Shrine of Thomas a Becket:) But who should I
see there but the Protomartyr of the Cause, poor Cross, who was Hanged 'tother
day, (and showed us what we must all come to) for nothing, but a little Voyage
that he made aboard the French Fleet, when they lay upon our Coast last Summer.
He had about him the whole Rabble of Devils at his first Arrival, and looks
exactly like a Pick-Pocket, when fallen into the clutches of their mortal Mob.
However, they were civiler to him then those would have been above Ground, and
gave him Law for his Life, hurrying him away before Judge Aedeus, who was then
trying Causes at Pluto's Court, where appeared at least a thousand Witneses,
against him summoned by his own Conscience, and two or three false Loons of
Devils, who first tempted him to sin, and afterward discovered him, all these
gave their Affidavits, that he endeavored to betray his Country, and
Corresponded with its inveterate, and declared Enemies -- and upon the clear
proof of the whole, he was immediately Sentenced to be cast into the same
Copper, where Judas, Herostratin, Guy Faux, Tarperia, and all the odious
Traitors to their Country, or Friends are to be tortured, till a Ja^bite loves
the Protestant Religion, and hates the King of France and his own good
Godfather -- your L -- p may easily guess how much this Alarmed me -- I
immediately fell a trembling, and 'twas well I was nothing but Spirit, for had
I been still chained to a Body, something not very pleasant about me had
certainly betrayed me.

If this Fool of a Rogu^ has such hard treatment, what thought I, am I to
expect, if once the truth is known to these grim Justices? On the whole, I e'ne
thought it the wisest way to step to the Bar of my own accord, where falling on
my knees, I e'ne fairly confessed the whole Fact before any one accused me^
that I with several other false Traitors had Conspired to overturn and destroy
my own Country and Government, and that this poor wretch just then Condemned,
had a much less share in the Villainy, then I my self had.


L. P Was this the way to obtain any Mitigation, or would it not rather make
you fare worse than he that went before you?


M. Ash. There was no other Remedy -- I knew 'twas but broyling for it at last.
But besides I found out an Expedient which got me at least a Reprieve, whatever
may become of a Pardon, I Humbly proposed to the Judges, who looked much more
angry upon me, then those at the Old Eaily that I Would return again to Life, and
persuade those Persons who were concerned with me in the same Villainies, to
abandon their Cursed designs, and discover all they knew ou^t, giving my Parole
of Honor to come back again as soon as I had accomplished my Errand.

This wrought so much on the Sooty-Faced Gentlemen that I obtained leave, and
accordingly the first Persons I address my self to is your L -- p, both upon
account of the past intimacy which has been between us, and because it may
conduce very much to the Mitigation of my Torments, if I can take off so (...)
able a Person as your L -- p f^^m that cause which I am like to Suffer so much
for in the other World, as well as this.


L. P. You tell me wonders -- but it is still a greater to me how Hell comes to
be so angry with our design, or why, as our Predecessors in the Gunpowder Plot
used to say, Satan discovered what we were about, or is since so mightily
concerned at it; since had the Grand Lewis powered his Army in, as we had
proposed, those below had undoubtedly received whole Legions of Souls every day
crouding down to them, from every part of the Conquered Nation.


M. Ash. Notwithslansling all this they fear the examples and tho they love
Treason very well, I find they hate the Traitor as much as any of our mortal
Politician^. For should those who live under so happy a Government as the
English at present enjoy (say they among themselves) once Rebel against it and
bring in the French, to torment enslave and destroy them if once they
accomplish their design, all Europe it undoubtedly their own and in that as
good as all the world when once the ^rand (...), is Universal M^^arch of the
upper World ten to one but he will h^ve such a Freak come into his Head as
Alexander, the Great had and have a Months mind for a Touch at the other World
when he has conquered all his own and among these ours lies most open to his
attempts both because, he is now very old and Sinful and not likely to stay
long above before he gives us a visit and makes his last Campaign amongst us
and because his Luidores have already made him such a party here by the help of
his many Agents, which are come^ it her before him that Lucifer, himself would
hardly be safe in his Throne, but be daily in danger of Abdication and being
the last conqust to the French Arms and Policies.


L. P. What course then would you advise me to take in order tomy own happiness
and yours -- You know several Gentlemen of my acquaintance and yours, will not
be flack to tell me I must certainly have School Butter in 'tother World, if I
tell Tales our of School in this; and of 'tother side, dare pawn their own
Souls for mine, that if I hold right to the Scaffold, my Soul shall be in
Paradise, as soon as my Head leaps off from my Shoulders.


M. Ash. It Is at your Liberty to believe them or me, as your L -- p thinks fit.
But to be free, the Question lies thus, -- whether you can expect Heaven for
endeavoring to Ruin Earth, and whether it is so Meritorious a ti^ing, as some
pretend, whatever they think, to (...) Native (...) bar^^^ (...) or (...).

(...) L -- p (...) a Passion for (...) (...) in the (...) di^^^^ged my (...)
like a Ghost of Honor -- In the (...) I Will about the rest of my E^^bissie, and
see (...) I shall meet with among the remainder of my (...) Friends.


L. P. If common Interests and Dangers have any Power, I conjure you by them to
stay a Minute longer, and resolve me 2 or 3 very material Questions.


M. Ash. We don't forget every thing as soon as our Moths are cold, and
therefore if I Am not forbidden by the Laws of the dark Kingdom, I Will give you
all the satisfaction I Am able.


L. P. My first Query is -- which will be out first, this Year, the French
Fleet, or the English?


M. Ash. In that my L- your Memoires have failed you. The diligence of the
Government, and readiness of the Seamen, the encouragement of the Proclamation;
Reforming Officers, and Kicking Old Grizzel out of doors, have brought matters
into so good a posture, that the Fleet is now in better Order then 'twas last
Year by May, and whereas your Judgment was; 'twou'd not be out before Ju^^,
you will certainly see a great part on it ready before the end of this Month.


L. P. How did Mr. Reading and Mrs. Reading receive the News of our
disappointment -- our Factors being broken, our being nonsuited in our Law
business, and the Lord of the Manors, sitting faster, and being more loved and
feared th^n ever, -- you know my meaning -- for you are no stranger to this
Language.


M. Ash. Mr. Reading was almost in as bad, a condition as his Grandfather used
to be, (...) poor Mrs. Reading was in ten times more fright and pain, then at
her last Lying In.


L. P. One word more and I Have done -- shall I save my Life, or must I follow
^^n.


M. Ash. -- Ask your L -- y that -- th^^ you your self know whether you can, or
will do any thing to deserve it. But my time is past -- I must to the rest --
Adue.


FINIS.
LONDON. printed for T. Axe 1691


