Mr. Ducats CASE. Wherein he humbly, by Petition, Appeals to the Right
Honorable, the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, in the High Court of Parliament
Assembled; For Relief against a Decree pronounced against him by this present
Lord Chancellor.
WIlliam Mildmay, Esquire having Right to, but out of possession, of an Estate Real
and Personal, viz. to part in Fee Simple, and to the rest for Life, Remainder
to the Issue of his Body with Remainders over, and his Brother and other
Friends having forsaken him in the last Great Plague, and not having Money to
subsist, he resorts to the Petitioner, who was his full Cousen Germain, who
very kindly entertained him and his Servants at the Petitioners house in
Cambridgeshire.

That the Petitioner, at the earnest solicitation of Mr. Mildmay, undertakes a
Suit in his name against one Clutterbuck and others, for recovering the said
Estate, and laid out therein above 1000 l. and in 1669 obtained a Decree for
the same.

That Mr. Mildmay being sensible of the Petitioners kindness, and of the
unkindness of his other Relations, and having had a Wife, but never any Child,
and being then a Widdower and (as himself expressed) incapable of ever having a
Child, and having often declared he would settle his Estate upon the Petitioner
and his Children, did, about the year 1670, and since, by several Deeds settle
his Estate accordingly, reserving to himself, for his Life a Maintenance of 200
l. per Annum and upwards.

That after the said Settlement Mr. Mildmay declared to several persons he had
settled his Estate on the Petitioner his Kinsman and best Friend, and the
Tenants had notice thereof, and Attorned and paid their Rents to the
Petitioner, and called and owned him Landlord unto the year 1676.

That Mr. Mildmay in July 1676. coming up to London on some business, was drawn
into Company, who betrayed him into a Marriage which was one Day proposed, and
the next Day had, with one Mrs. Brewster; but so soon as he was Married and
came to consider what he had done, he went away and left his Wife without
Bedding her.

That since this Marriage, viz. in October 1676. Mr. Mildmay is prevailed on to
settle the Estate (formerly settled on the Petitioner without any Trust or Power
of Revocation) upon his said Wife, or on Friends in Trust for her and Mr.
Mildmay; and Mr. Mildmay and his Wife and Wives Trustees in November 1676
exhibit a Bill in Chancery to overthrow the Settlements made on the Petitioner,
and for Equity allege the same were obtained by Fraud, or were only in Trust
for Mr. Mildmay; and tho the Petitioner has by his Answers fully denied both a
Fraud and Trust, and proved the Deeds to be absolute, and to be read to and
understood by Mr. Mildmay before he executed them, yet the Court of Chancery
has declared the Settlements on the Petitioner to be a Trust, and Decreed the
same to be set aside.

Therefore Prays the said Decree may be reversed.

