A DIVINE and MORAL ESSAY ON THE Christian Pilgrim's Conduct, WITH SOME GLANCES
On that of the SECULAR.

By John Macqueen M. A. late Minister in Edinburgh, and Sub-Dean of the Chapel
Royal in the Kingdom of Scotland. Now Minister of Welton near Daventry in
Northamptonshire.

Me pulsum Patria, pelagique extrema sequentem,
Fortuna Omnipotens and ineluctabile fatum
His posuere locis.
Virg. Aen. lib. 8. LONDON, Printed for Daniel Brown at the Swan and Bible
without Temple Bar, and Richard Smith at the Angel and Bible near the Maypole
in the Strand. 1699.

TO James Johnston Esquire
THe Kings and Potentates of the Earth can make Men Great, but it is the
Donation of Heaven that can render them Virtuous and Wise. Indeed it is Happy
when these Embellish with some Rays of their Image, where God first Imprinted
His own: Whereby what Affection they show, or Honor they add to such Persons,
Rebounds to the Original.

And this the King, who well Weighs the fitness of Men for the Charges He puts
them in, Considered, when He made Choice of You, to serve His Majesty in the
Creditable Stations, Envoy Extraordinary to the Duke of Brandenbargh. And
Secretary of State for the Kingdom of Scotland.
and Honorable Offices You have undergone; In which great Trusts You Carried
the same Sereness of Spirit and Affability of Address, which Accompanied you in
all Your Actings: And all, who have the Happiness to know You, will be so just,
as to Attest your Honors altered not Your Temper: Nor have You Assumed an
artificial Air of Benignity or Humanity in Your present Circumstances, as if
You had formerly laid by these Ornaments with Your private Capacity; but You
Exert them in every State and Condition, as the Natural Inseparable Qualities
of Your Gentile and Generous Disposition.

What the Prince of Moralists says, You confirm. Seneca.
That outward Splendor, Pompous Ceremonies and the other Pieces of Pageantry,
which Attend those in Power, make up but the least Part of a Brave Man; for now
when You stand Divested of those Honors, which were no less the Reward of Your
Desert, than Marks of Your Prince's Favor; You retain that Stock of Merit,
that Greatness of Mind, that Nobleness of Soul which Heaven only bestows upon
special Favorites: And none but Persons of Extraordinary Geniuses still
Possess in all Turns and Changes. And the Beams of Your Virtues are no no less
Radiant when Separated from those external Accoutrements, nor less impressive
of Esteem, or Attractive of Love, from Wise and Discerning Persons. It is true,
these Circumstantial Appennages may affect the Populace, and conciliate some
Cringes, Submissions, and Courtship; in which there may be more of Fashion,
Constraint and Policy, than of Sincerity, Alacrity or Affection; but the other
Penetrate Hearts, Captivate Reason, and Establish an Empire over the Souls even
of the Better and more Refined sort of Mankind.

Hence, these of this kind who have the advantage of Your Acquaintance,
earnestly Covet the frequency of Your Converse; which could never be so
Ardently desired by the Good, the Great, and the Ingenious of the City, Court
and Country, if Your Prudence and Complaisance, Your Acuteness of Spirit, and
Debonairness of Humor, made it not Agreeable, Amiable and Beneficial, Conjunct
results of the other happy Mixtures: Neither of them to be met with so
harmoniously Cemented, but in Souls of no common Elevation; therefore, by all
considering Persons, Honored and Loved beyond the Ordinary.

For if either of these Qualities separately found, be sufficient to raise the
Reputation of some; What may we conclude, when we see them meet and and embrace
each other in such a happy Union, whereby they Fortify and Beautify one
another by their Mutual Aid and Luster; but that they shall prove secure
Supporters of a growing Fame, and lasting Renown. And if Nature had not drawn
the first Strokes, and laid, as we say, the groundwork of these
Accomplishments in the Faculties of Your great Soul; Your Breeding among
Strangers and Foreign Embassies, though they have given them a comely Tincture,
yet could never make them go off with that Facility and taking Air, which speak
them to be the Effects of Your Natural Temper, polished by the dextrous
Improvement of Your Ingenuous Education.

It was by these Steps You made Your Ascent to the Illustrious Posts You passed
through: And by the Favor of Providence You will persevere in the same course
of Virtue; to the further Service of Your Prince, the Credit and Benefit of
Your Country, to God's Glory, and Your Friends Comfort: Which none wishes more
sincerely, or Prays for more Fervently, than,

SIR, Your much Obliged, and Most Humble Servant, Jo. Macqueen.

TO MY FRIENDS AND Acquaintances IN THE CITY OF EDINBOURGH.
DUring the Twenty Years I had the Honor to Serve in the Ministry among you, I
could not but Contract Acquaintance with many, and Friendship with some of the
Inhabitants. However I am not such a Flatterer of my self, as to imagine, I
want Enemies: Considering that, besides the Natural fickleness of Peoples
Affections, how liable they are to Change from the supervening Contingencies,
occasioned by the different Aspect of Affairs, and the various Turnings, that
happened in so long a tract of time; in which Persons in Public Posts, are often
hooked in, to be interess'd by some singular Emergents, more than by Choice or
Inclination.

Yet this I will say, whatever Enemies I may have, Mistake on my part more than
Design, and some unfortunate Circumstances or unlucky occasions on the other
side, more then ill Nature, made them become such. For although at a distance
now from you, I cannot but bear witness, that in the several Parties among you,
there are Persons of Piety and Prudence, of Learning and Discretion, of
Breeding and Integrity; who will not be easily biased by Humor, or Opinion,
to malicious Apprehensions, slanderous Expressions, or unjust Practices.

I never loved the uncharitable, censorious, unchristian way too prevalent in
the Discourses and Writings of some of the Age; Who charge the faults and
miscariages of particular Persons of different Interests, or Persuasions from
them, on whole Societies. It Is said that all the Florentines are not Wits, nor
all the Switzers Block-heads: No more do I think that all the Episcopalists are
Saints, or the Presbyterians Reprobates; verily I believe that whosoever of
either of these Fears God and works Righteousness, Acts 10.35.
is accepted by God, and should be so by Man likewise. The Jewish vanity of
confining the favor of heaven to Times and Places, is transplanted among
Christians; and this with the sowrness of their tempers too much transcribed by
many, who sacrifice all Offices of Charity and Humanity to their Narrow
Opinions; not considering that these are due to all that in every place call
upon the Name of Jesus Christ, our Lord, 1 Cor. 1.2.
both theirs and ours.

Although I began the Course of my Ministry among you when I was very young,
before I arrived to that Consistency of Age prescribed by the Canons; the
necessity of the Church in that juncture, and the Indulgence of my Superiors,
more than any Prematurity of my parts, suspending the Obligation of the
Ecclesiastical Law; Yet my Early Endeavors in the work of the Gospel met with
welcome Reception, and while I continued in that Station, my pains by the
Blessing of God became in some degree helpful to the Spiritual Benefit of some
of you; so that I may presume in a manner to say with the Apostle; 1 Thessalonians. 2.1.
That neither my entrance, or abiding with you were in vain.

I confess it was uneasy to me, to leave the Post I was in among you; for I
had a strong Conviction upon me to Serve in the Ministry, to which I was
Called, and for which, through the Grace of God, I acquired some Fitness by
ingenuous Education in your University; and where, if I did any good through
the Divine assistance toward the Conversion, or Confirmation of any, in the
great truths of Religion, or Practice of Godliness, I might in my more Mature
Age, have Riveted the same, and promoted it to further Accomplishment; and
possibly have made up the defects of my General, or Personal Vocation in the
inconsiderate, as well as inconsiderable past part of my Life, by a more
serious Application of my self in my latter Days to the Duties of both.

I freely declare I was loath to Remove from a place, to which I owed any small
measure of Breeding, or Learning I was endowed with; and where, after my
Running through the ordinary Stages of Students in your Schools, I soon became
a Public Teacher of others; and spent the best portion of my time in some
Reputation and Returns of Affection from the finest of the Inhabitants. Where I
could not walk the Streets without the Regret of some for my not Compliance,
the Compassionate wishes of others for my Return, and the Express Counsels of
many to conform to the Establishment then. Where, I could not pass without
often interruption from the kind Approaches of the Children of honest
Neighbors, and the Affectionate Civilities of their Parents. And I cannot but
acknowledge the weakness, or shall I rather call it the Natural tenderness of
my Constitution such, that I was not a little softened, and my Resolutions made
somewhat fluctuating with the Fondness of of the Younger sort; and there is
something in their way of expressing their liking, which as it is more ignorant
and unaffected, so it is better and more easily felt, than is eloquently
described; and is more impressive than the studied Complements, and artificial
Addresses of others of riper Age; and is frequently the Echo of the Parents
Example and Respect, as well as the Result of instruction and discipline.

Besides that some whom I had Baptized and frequently Catechis'd, had been
Married by me, (and many more likely would have been so, had I continued
longer) who received me into their Houses with equal Degrees of Affection and
Esteem, so that the kindness of Young and Old went very near to preponderate my
Intentions of coming away. All which begot in me a flattering expectation, that
if I had stayed with you until old Age had seized on me, since I spent my
Vigor and Strength among you, you might have been the more easily Induced to
bear with the Decays and Infirmities of my declining State. But 'its possible
it might prove otherwise; Peoples present favor is but a very uncertain
Security of their future Kindness. I have known the best of Magistrates, and
the ablest Ministers, have their Hosanna's turned into Crucifige's; not only
from the muddy Mob, but from those who look upon themselves as of a finer Clay:
Yet often when the Maggot takes, the Populacy become the servil Instruments of
their Ingratitude, and the prostituted Tools of their Insolency, against their
Civil Governors, and Spiritual Directors. Persons Respect and Love to their
Pastors in great Cities, like the Morning Dew vanishes before the Abilities and
Parts of their Teachers come to their Noon, or begin to Decline; and who knows
but divine Providence foreseeing it, would prove so to me, upon my longer
staying among you: And for other wise Ends permitted my Removal so, lest I
should meet with such an afflicting Disappointment.

My maintenance among you was not Mean, and the necessities of my Family
required my Continuance in my Charge, for their more comfortable Sustenance;
and I doubt not but I could have made my Incomes greater by following this
gentile Method of Writing, which I found formerly so successful toward the
increase of my Fortune; and I could that same way have attracted the favor of
some befriending Planet to better my Condition still.

These were all Pulbacks to detain me, but when I Muster up these, why should I
Omit to make, grateful mention of He succeeded me in the Coledge Church of
Edenborough, and was (...) of the first General Assembly held in that Kingdom
since (...) of the Presbyterian Government there.
Mr. Hugh Kennedy his Invitation to join with him, and of the earnest Request
of the leading Men of the Presbyterian persuasion in the Parish, to the same
purpose. I do not Narrate this with that Feminine Vanity, some silly Dames
reckon up the number of their Courtiers; who take every transient Glance, for
one of Hymen's Messengers, and construct every civil Complement an Amorous
Intrigue: But I do it, to show that I am not led by humor or partiality, so
far as to neglect thankful Returns to obligeing Overtures, from whatsoever
Corner they come. And although I could as little comply with their desires, as
with the principles, by which they were Acted; yet since they thought them
best, and the other was calculated so much for my worldly advantage, and they
were so very Industrious to engage me in their Interest, by which I would in
all probability have bettered my Temporal Condition, above what it is for the
present, or I expect it to be in haste; I cannot but conclude it an Instance of
good Will and Esteem; for which the Living have my thanks, and I Will pay some
tribute of acknowledgment to the Memory of the Deceased.

I may add without any Ostentation, and appeal to the experience of some of
you, that the inoffensiveness of my Conduct, and Carriage in my general
Conversation, and particularly in my Behavior with, and toward Dissenters,
conduced to state me so fair in the good likeing of the Neighborhood, and to
procure me the favor of the Magistrates who have Governed the City, since the
Scene of Affairs turned so propitious to that Party: My Gentleness formerly in
reference to Recusants, bearing down the prejudices which some thought might
duly enough be fastened on my Principles: The goodness of my Parishioners, and
the discretion of them who then bore Rule among you, would not allow them to
transfer any hatred they had at my disproving Sentiments of their Government,
to my Person,; so that through their beningn Temper, the difference of my
Opinion was no Obstruction of their Benevolence. And as I made not diversity of
Judgment the Standard of my Deportment toward others of different Persuasion
from me, nor would I be provoked thereby, to any rash Treatment of them, when
it was in my power to create them Trouble: No more did they upon the
Revolution, make my dissenting from their Maxims, any hindrance of their
kindness toward me. And this want of distinction in the acts of their
Generosity distinguishes them with Honor, and a greater Sense of true
Christianity in not only many of their own, but even of our party too.

This appeared in the Gratuities which your Common Council twice bestowed on
me, when the circumstances of Affairs, and my discontentedness with them, would
not permit me to tarry longer in the Exercise of my Ministry among you. And I
cannot but Record with Gratitude the Civility with which Sr. John Hall of
Dunglass then head Provost, used me; and since I hear he is Dead, I must do the
Justice to his Memory, as to declare he kept that sereness of Disposition and
equality of Mind, that modesty of Carriage, and humility of Deportment in in
his Elevation, which was his Ornament when he stood on the same Level with his
Neighbors. He was of another Ballast than those who are transformed unto
Starchness and Insolency, by the increase of their Estate, or the Dignity of
their Station, in his Public Ministrations and private Transactions; plain,
upright Dealing was his Policy, and at Home as well as Abroad, Religion was the
Compass he Steered by.

I must likewise mention with Honor and Respect the Worthy and Generous
Gentleman Sr. Archibald Muir of Thorntown, who succeeded Sr. John Hall in the
great Trust of chief Magistrate in the City, and at this Instant for the second
time, in regard of his more then Ordinary Merit, and singular Abilities. is
invested with the same Power and Dignity again, who by the calmness of his
Temper, and the discretion of his Behavior, the prudence of his Conduct, and
his Justice in the management of his Authority, forcibly attracts to him the
good Opinion, Esteem and Affection of all Impartial and unbiased Men of both
Parties.

Nor can any thing less be expected of a Gentleman of his Birth and Pedigree,
being Descended of the Ancient Family of Rowallan, whence many of our Kings
have derived their Blood.

The longer I Live in the World, I am fully convinced, as our Proverb Runs,
Fortes creantur for: ibus, et bonis: Est in Juvencis, est in equis patrum
Virtus: nec imbellem feroces. Progenerant aquilae columbam. Ho. Od. lib. 4. Od.
4.
It Is happy to be the Hawk of the right Nest. It Is Felicity to bring with our
Extraction, the Seeds of Gentility with us to the World; for this advantage of
Birth, lays a good foundation for what Improvement, Art, Education, or
Experience may Superadd.

Me thinks I hear some of my Friends ready to say, it seems strange to them, I
Blazon at this rate with some Elogies, these who since the Revolution have born
Charge in the good Town; while I pass over with silence those who formerly,
during the last Reigns, were Entrusted with its Government; under whose
Protection I and the rest of my Function enjoyed our Places, for many Years,
with Freedom and Safety.

Therefore to avoid all suspicion of Ingratitude as well as Injustice; let me
cast back my Eyes on the former times, and say that in those Days there were
those by their Birth, Prudence and Virtues, brought additional Luster to the
Honorable Offices they swayed in the City, as all who know and heard, (and who
did not far and near, at Home and Abroad?) of Sr Andrew Ramsay of Abbots-hall,
must bear witness. Indeed if ever the Ministers and the Inhabitants of the
City, had Reason to Magnify the former Days above the latter, it was in the
space of his Saturnian management of Affairs: How justly may he be called the
Nehemiah of that Age, he took such Care of the House of God, and its Offices,
by increasing their Provision, that they did the Work of the Lord with
cheerfulness, and alacrity; so as it may be well said of him, he Loved our
Nation, and Built us a Synagogue. Indeed we may apply to him, what the Prince
of the Roman Poets says, Aurea, quae perhibent, illo sub rege fuerunt
Saecula; sic placida populos in pace regebat.
Deterior donec paulatim ac decolor aetas,
Et belli rabies, et amor successit habendi.
Virg. Aen. lib. 8. v. 314. With his mild Empire, Peace and Plenty came:
And hence the golden Times derived their name.
A more degenerate and discolored Age,
Succeeded this, with Avarice and Rage.
Dryden.

This worthy Nehemiah for Sixteen Years together was Provost, or Lord Mayor of
the City of Edinborough, his Birth raised him beyond the level of some of his
emulous Competitors in the State, and his Envious Adversaries among the
Citizens; by which he preserved the honor of the Provostry from Contempt of
the insolent, who bore themselves haughtily on score of their Pedigree; as by
his integrity and care he defended the Revenues of the Good Town from the
Encroachments of the Covetous. His Policy fitted him for his King's Service and
his Countrey's good in the honorable Post he had as Member of his Majesty's
Privy Council; which he he held till his Death. His Abilities qualified him for
the Bench. His wise Conduct and assiduous pains about the Cities concerns made
him be continued so long in the creditable station of it is Chief Magistrate.
Nothing but a singular concurrence of Endowments peculiarly adapted to these
several, different, Eminent Offices, could make one Man capable of them all,
and at one time; and manage each of them in their turns, with such a signal
dexterity, as discovered he had a soul large enough for all these great
Employments; and too ample for any one of them.

Here was a kind of Triumvirat in one Man; the Provost, Senator, and
Counselor, and he so consideratly well divided his time in the exercise of
each of these Trusts, that the one never interfer'd with the other; his
attendance on the duties of any of them never made him slack or negligent of
those of the other; the care of the Provostry never hindered the business of the
judge; nor was either of these an impediment to the application of the
Counselor, for the King and Countries Interest. In the City Council none more
exact; in the Privy Council none more acute; on the Bench none more just, a
Vigilant Magistrate, an upright Senator, and a Faithful Counselor; and in all
a good Christian.

I would have set down some things more relating to the Magistrates during the
former Reigns but that I am afraid to be tedious. I have made some Remarques on
the sordid methods by which in that time some obtained the Provostry; and on
the blemish of their conduct in that considerable Employment, but they are
scattered in some loose papers now at distance from me. I remember in imitation
of some of Lucian's Dialogues, I have formed one betwixt Sir Andrew Ramsay's
Ghost, and those of some unjust complainers, and selfseeking Competitors; who
after his voluntary relinquishment of the Chief Office in the City worm'd
themselves into it, for which neither their birth nor breeding had qualified
them; nor had they the courage, uprightness, or parts to employ it aright; for
it is certain these who compass their Dignities fairly and justly, are
likeliest to improve them to better purposes, with more honesty and integrity.
And if providence bring me and these scattered sheets together, it is possible
for cautioning the present and succeeding Age, against such sinistrous ways, I
may suffer them to fly abroad.

It might have been expected that something in this long introduction should
have related to the following discourse; and so I did design, but now I cannot,
at least not so largely, run out that way; since this Preface has increased
beyond my aim, several things crouding themselves into my mind, while my hand
was writing, and I must now curb its further excursion; lest this small Essay
prove but an Appendix to the initiatory Epistle; (...)
as Diodorus Siculus blames some, who as it were tack't their Curtailed
Orations to their longwinded preliminary Addresses, wherewith they intended to
Captivate the favor of Hearers, or Readers, and to avoid this censure, or the
more trite, of making the Gate larger than the City, or the Portal than the
House, I shall hasten to a conclusion.

Nor will I nauseate the Reader in imitating these trifling methods some
Fencers for applause, or famae negotiatores use, who look one way that they may
hit another; as some writers contending for Fame think by a kind of Rebound to
catch it more greedily, while they cast down themselves and there performances
so low, with their sham vilifyings, as the homeliness of the Dress, the
plainness of the style, the simplicity of the Phrase, etc. and I know not what.
Nor shall I allege for publishing this Essay, the threed-bare pretense of the
importunity of friends, preventing of false copies, etc. Nor will I blame the
shortness of time, Hoc ipso placere cupiunt quod placere contemnunt, and mirum
in modum laus dum vitatur, appetitur, Hieronimus.
for what is crude or raw in it. I look upon these and such like little
Artifices, wherewith some would conceal their Ambition to be in Print, and fish
for commendation to their Attempts; as on these thin Mourning Vails, or
Patches, by which fair Females design the increase of their Charms; only with
this difference the vanity and ostentation of the one are more palpably
perceived to a loathsome degree while the beauty of the other, like Diamond set
in Jet, is more bright and shining.

I shall say nothing of it, but that it is the product of Melancholy thoughts
on my present disastrous Condition; which had been published soon after I came
to this Retired Place where I now am, but that being entrusted in loose sheets
to a certain deserving Person, it fell by and could not be found; which put me
to a second, or rather a new trouble: But now you have it such as it is; and
I Will make no Appology for its Defects; -- Sed vatem egregium cui non sit
publica vena Anxietate carens animus facit, Juven. Sat.
the afflicting Circumstances of my Stare, which have somewhat pinioned my
fancy, and flatted my expression; may with considering Persons supersede me
this task; I shall only say, it is like, if I had enjoyed the society of my Old
beloved Companions, viz. my Books, the subject had been better managed; for I
confess my self an insufficient Artist without these tools; to which were they
now by me I could transfer out of Boethius, (for he and Buchanans Paraphrase on
the Psalms are my Vade Mecum's in my Solitary Rangings,)

Gloria foelicis olim viridisque juventae,
Solantur maesti nunc mea fata senis.
I shall conclude with this one Reflection, which though it might have been
Incorporated into the Body of the Treatise, and enlarged on; yet may be
admitted Room appositely enough in this place.

Pilgrims and Strangers affect solitude and retirement; being ashamed to make
others witnesses of their Sighs and Sobs, they give vent to their groans under
shady Trees, or in bushy Caverns; in the silence of Fields, or solitariness of
Woods; there they Ruminate on the condition of their own Country; if it be
overrun with any Calamity, they bewail its Fate, help it with their Prayers, or
bedew its misery with their tears, or if in a flourishing State, they rejoice
in its prosperity, and what Male-treatment soever they meet with from it, they
cannot but wish well to it; the strength of their natural affection
preponderating the Resentment of any hard measure they may meet with from it.
And any revengful thoughts which come bubbling up in their minds against the
particular instruments of there misfortune, are swallowed up in the expansion
of their concern for, and extent of their love to the Common welfare of their
Counrrey.

Thus I have seen devout Pilgrims very serious by the brinks of Brooks and
banks of purling streams, Ille vere dolet, qui sine test dolet.
in the Covert of Woods, or cool shade of Grottos; where the consideration of
their absence from there heavenly Country lay heavy on their hearts, while they
did sit, or walk intent on their Melancholy Musings; groaning under the
thoughts of their distance from it; nor could they receive any satissactory
respite from their Moans, or comfortable Remedy to their Languishing, but from
the solace the well grounded expectation of a happy return thereto, ministered
to them.

And as I can without vanity profess I have in some degree transcribed this
part of the Pilgrim's Character, in reference to my heavenly; so I am not
ashamed to confess, I have spent many hours by night and day, in pensive
thoughts, and sorrowful reflections on the present afflicting circumstances of
my own and others Condition, who have left their native soil, and of these my
Fathers and Brethren who still remain in a suffering State, in their Earthly
Country.

And although in my early walks, the Chanting little Choristers of the Air, and
the Musical nocturnal lodgers of the bushes, have often contended by their
sweet inartificial Antiphonies, which of them by tickling my Ears, could divert
me most; and the Embroidery of flowers, the Beauty of Meadows, the Mixture of
Colors, in all the different objects of sight, seemed to strive which of them
by attracting my Eyes, could ease my mind best: Yet in the midst of all this
agreeable variety of Nature's Delicacies, and Medley of charming Delights,
which puzzled my Senses into a pleasant Controversy which of them was most
gratified, our Country man Buchanan's Paraphrase of the 137 Psalm afforded me
most diversion: The suitableness of the matter hitting the Calamitous State of
the Episcopal Clergy of the Scottish Church, and David's divine strain mixed with
the high Fancy and dressed with the Elegancy of this admirable Poet's Phrase,
affected me with a wonderful Ravishment in time of my troublesome damps; and my
frequent reciting it over, surnisht me such satisfaction in my solitary
Recesses and Mournful Soliloquies, or Meditations, upon the Banks of Welton and
about the Arbours of Watford; and first suggested to my mind the expediency of
spending some thoughts on the few heads of the ensuing Treatise.

Buchan. Paraphras. in Lib. Psalm. 137.
Dum procul a patria maesti Babylonis in or is,
Fluminis ad liquidas forte sedemus aquas;
Illa animum subiit species miseranda Sionis,
Et nunquam patrii tect a videnda soli.
Flevimus, and gemitus luctantia verba repressit;
Inque sinus liquidae decidit imber aquae.
Muta super virides pendebant nablia ramos,
Et salices tacitas sustinuere lyras.
Eece ferox dominus Solymae populator opimae
Exigit in mediis carmina laeta malis:
Qui patriam exilio nobis mutavit acerbo,
Nos jubet ad patrios verba refer modos.
Quale canebamus, stet^rat dum celsa Sionis
Regia, finitimis invidiosa loc is.
Siccine divinos Babylon irrideat hymnos?
Audiat and sanctos terra profana modos?
O solyma, O adyta, and sacri penetralia templi,
Ullane vos animo deleat hora meo?
Comprecor, ante meae capiant me oblivia dextrae,
Nec memor argutae sit mea dextra lyrae:
Os mihi destituat vox, arescente palato,
Haereat ad fauces aspera lingna meas:
Prima mihi vestrae nisi sint praeconia laudis:
Hinc nisi laetitiae surgat origo meae.
At tu (quae nostrae insultavit laeta rapinae)
Gentis Idumaeae tu memor esto Pater.
Diripite, ex imis evertite fundament is,
Aequaque (clamabant) reddite tecta solo.
Tu quoque crudeles Babylon dabis impia paenas:
Et rerum instabiles experiere vices.
Felix qui nostris accedet cladibus ultor:
Reddet ad exemplum qui tibi damna tuum.
Felix qui tenero consperget saxa cerebro,
Eripiens gremio pignora cara tuo.
The pleasure I took in poring on this Paraphrase and often repeating of it in
my retired wandering circuits, through the Fields, made me request from the
Ingenious Mr. Thomas Yaldin Fellow of Magd Coll. in Oxford, this Translation
which the Concurrence of my Worthy and singularly Obliging Neighbor Mr.
Charles Allestry, Minister of Daventry, prevailed with him to grant as the
Reader may perceive by the Letter prefixed to it.

TO THE REVEREND Mr. Charles Allestrey, Minister of Daventry in
Northamptonshire.
Sir,
OUT of that entire Obedience which I shall ever pay to your Commands, I writ
the ensuing Paraphrase; and unless the common Fate of all Poets (which is, to
be fondest of their last Productions) very much blinds my Judgment, I think the
honor you have laid upon me in this Request, has informed the piece with a
greater Genius and Spirit, than usually attends my Writings. I am not
insensible that it is as natural for a Poet to flatter himself as his Patrons;
but here my wishes conspire with my weakness, to put the best varnish over the
humble present, and make it seem in some measure worthy your acceptance.
Buchannan, Oldham, and Woodford have been happiest in their versians of this
Psalm; till I finished my own, I avoided seeing their Composures: choosing
rather to correct my thoughts by others Works than design by them. The only one
I may have seemed to follow is Mr. Oldham, the great respect I have for this
Anthor cannot biass my judgment so far as to overlook his faults; his
Digressions are too long even for Pindarick Poetry; his Verse wants Number and
Cadence: but the most unpardonable fault, is that the Pathetick Air of this
Psalm is not observed with Poetical Justice. I would not in this immitate our
modern Writers, first to steal immediately from an Author, then Censure and Rail
at him, that the World may not suspect them. I hope your leisure will permit
you to Read him, at once to justify the Character I have given, and to see how
industriously I have avoided even the Resemblance of Thoughts and Expressions,
though the subject be the same. But lest I make my Preface Resemble the head of a
Rickety Child, that is vastly disproportioned to the smallness of the body, I
shall only beg your favorable Acceptance of this, and to think I always retain
a grateful acknowledgment of those many favors you have conferred on,

Magdalen College in Oxford, June, 1697. Your dutiful Son and very humble
Servant Thom. Yalden.

A PARAPHRASE On the 137th Psalm. A Pindarick ODE.
WHere famed Euphrates winding Current Flows,
And Tribute pays to losty Babylon:
There by a strange Reverse of Fate,
A-round the mournful Shores, we laid us down,
And wept in sad Remembrance of our Woes,
And in pathetick Words deplored our abject State.
But Sion when we called to Mind,
The beauteous Sion left behind:
When loved Judea to remembrance came,
Our native Palestine, and Jordan's Stream;
A wild Excess of grief we showed,
The Tears in lavish Torrents flowed,
When Sion to our fond remembrance,
Judea's pleasant Soil, and Jordan's Stream.
Unhappy Sion lost, and Desolate!
That once in Glory far out-Shone,
The boasted Walls of Babylon:
In Beauty, Strength, and Empire great,
Sion revered by Men, our God's exalted Seat.
Our useless Harps mute, and unstrung,
Our Harps and Instruments renowned,
For matchless Harmony and Tuneful Sound:
Were on the shady Willows hung,
Or lay neglected on the Ground.
Often would the Proud insulting Victors erie,
Come on, your Harps and Voices try!
Sing, sing us a Gay Melodious Song!
Songs of Triumph let them be,
Full of Wit and Harmony,
Such as to Sions joyful Courts belong!
Such as of old Immortal David Sung,
When he in Triumph Rode:
When Victory inspired his Tongue,
And Prince of the Harmonious Band,
A Harp employed the Hero's Hand,
Of Sion was his Song, and worthy Sion's God.
Shall Babylon our Hymns of Triumph Hear!
Or cursed Euphrates Streams the Accents bear!
Shall Israel prostitute their Sacred Lays,
What, Sions Harmony profane,
And the inimitable David's Strain!
Or in a foreign Land attempt Jehova's Praise!
Ah, no, ye cruel, ye Inhuman Race!
Though Israel suffers your afflicting Scorn,
Though you in Triumph smile at our Disgrace,
And insolently laugh to see the Wretched mourn;
A Song you shall in vain demand,
In vain compel the skilful Hand,
Or Harmony require in proud Assyria's Land.
Do mournful Chains with Harps agree,
Or Songs of Triumph suit with Misery?
Cursed be the Voice, and Cursed the Lute,
That pays Obedience to the haughty Foe;
But though our Instruments are Mute,
Ye shall have Sighs and Groans, the Consorts of our Woe,
Jerusalem, loved Object of my Thought!
When thou art absent from my Mind:
When mourning Palestine's forgot,
Our Native Shores, and all we left behind;
Then may my unperforming Hand
Forget its boasted Art:
No more the Tuneful Harp Command,
Nor to the Lute soft Harmony Impart.
Sion, thou darling of my Muse!
When I forget thy Venerable Name,
Thy suffering Majesty, and injured Fame:
Let my right Hand forget its use,
Let my right Hand its Artful cunning Lose.
Sion, if I prefer not thee,
In all my Hours of Mirth and Harmony,
Thou subject of my nobler Song;
Then let my inauspicious Tongue,
Cleave to its vaulted Roof, and cease to speak,
Let motion every Vocal nerve forsake:
Let Discord Seize my Harp and Lute,
Oh, let my perjured Tongue eternally be Mute!
Remember Edom's unrelenting Race,
On that detested Day:
That Day of Infamy and dire Disgrace,
When lost Jerusalem became the Victors Prey.
With how much Insolence and Pride,
With what Imperious Brows they Cried,
Level their Sion's Walls, their sacred Shrines deface!
Shall Edom's cruel Offspring be forgot!
Latest Posterity shall never cease,
To brand the Infamously Savage Race,
With an Eternal Blot.
That cried aloud, Come, hurl their Sion down,
The beauteous Rival of our Babylon:
To future Times let no Remains be found,
But Furrow up the desolated Ground.
Now Mourn, thou proud Assyria Mourn,
In sadder Accents let Euphrates Flow:
To Tears let Tigris and Hydaspis turn,
Tears to supply the Scenes of thy approaching Woe.
O Babylon! ill F'ated Babylon!
Mature for Ruin, to destruction led!
How Numerous are thy Horrors grown!
How are our Curses fallen on thy devoted Head.
Blessed be the Sword, ah, doubly blessed the Hand,
That executes Revenge and Lust!
That with repeated Plagues infests thy Land,
That makes thy wasted Shores Accursed,
And sheds Assyrian Blood, with an insatiate Thirst.
But he that Pity, that Compassion shows,
May he be Cursed, Cursed to partake thy Woes:
Let mercy to thy Anguish be unknown,
And fly the Sighs and Tears of Babylon;
Whilst wild Ambition, Lust, and Rage,
Urge every Arm, each Sword engage,
And Steel the Victors Hearts obdurate as thy own.
Happy, thrice happy shall the Victors be,
That Babylon destroy:
That Triumph over thy Misery,
And Treat thy Anguish with insulting Joy.
That Cast thee down with scornful Pride,
Thy Palaces and splendid Courts deface:
Thy Sighs, thy piercing Groans deride,
Shake their disdainful Heads, and Laugh at thy disgrace.
Thy kneeling Matrons shall Implore in Vain,
In Vain for Mercy raise their Hands and Eyes:
Whilst Streams of Blood thy Temples stain,
Triumphant Slaughter round thee Flies,
Neglects the Orphans Tears, and prostrate Virgins cries.
With Conquest may his Arms be Blessed,
With Fame distinguished far above the Rest,
That Drags the Clasping Infant from the Mothers Breast;
That hurls thy sprawling Offspring round, and stains,
The marble Pillars with their living Brains:
That strews with mangled Limbs thy Pavements ore,
And makes thy Channels swell with Streams of Reaking Gore.
But before I conclude this long Epistle let me tell you my Friends and
Acquaintances in Edinborough, who long to hear any advantageous thing of me, or
from me: that since I came to Welton, the Civilities of some of the Gentry in
this Country, the Pious and Learned Converse of some of the Clergy, the
Humanity of some of the Commons, and the particular kindness of my own
Parishioners and and some other Neighbors have, and do very much allay the
grief which arises from the Consideration of any uneasiness I have in my
present Circumstances; I have great comfort in the success of my Ministry among
this people, and in the returns of the Affection and Esteem, I meet with from
them; and I Magnify the Grace of God for any good I either hove done, or may
do to Souls, wherever Providence pleases to dispose of me. I Reverence the
Divine Wisdom in the tossings, tumblings and all the disappointments I have met
with, and I heartily bless the Name of my God for the smalness my Living in
this Obscure place: where if any light communicated to me from the Rays of the
Sun of Righteousness, may shine to the benefit of others, for the advancement
of his glory, my departure from you, and diminution of of my temporal State,
shall not afflict me; nor will I repine at any disadvantagious change as to
Externals, which may befall me; if, wherever I come, or whatever my outward
condition be, I may through God's blessing be an instrument to set forth his
Gospel, or set up his honor, in any station though never so low, whereon these
can be raised. For as to worldly Accommodations, I have by the Divine Aid
acquired some degrees of such a holy Indifferency, that I can say in some
measure, (and my servent desire is that more and more from entire Resignation I
may freely and sincerely assert) I am willing to want, what God is not willing
to give.

It is no small felicity to be able to redeem time by the evils of our days;
and if by the distress that has happened me, I can recover the Mortgage of some
of the neglected portions of my past life, by the right improvement of the
Remainder, I Will conclude my self happy; and it is not unlikely that what I now
say in this small Essay, may prove beneficial to others, who (for as firmly
fixed as they seem to be in their warm Nests) may undergo the same, or the like
disastrous Alterations, or Vicissitudes; and if I can be serviceable to any
among you, to any of my well affected, Reverend Brethren, wherever they are,
or to others, to any of my Friends, Acquaintances, or Relations, by the Fruits
of my Retirement, or absence from them, in this, or any other discourse I
intend to publish; I hope I may say whatever has befallen me (howsoever
intended by some) was ordered by that All-seeing Providence, (which governs all
things by the Highest Wisdom, exactest Reason, and profoundest justice:) for
their and my welfare; in which my daily request to God is, that the Event of
his future dealings toward either of us, may terminate; to which purpose the
Assistance of your Prayers is earnestly entreated by,

Your very humble and most devoted servant Jo. Macqueen.

THE CONTENTS.
THE Preface sets forth the folly of Men who are unwilling to think on their
Transitory State, when so many things serve to awake them to the same; With
some short Reflections on the taking Methods by which the Scriptures would
engage us thereto. The Penmen of the Sacred Oracles no Enemies to Acts of
Insinuation. The difference betwixt Stranger and Pilgrim. To Page 10.

The Characters of the Pilgrim.
CHAR. I. How accurately he observes every thing in his way: Whether they be
the Curious productions of Art, or the various and more wonderful Effects of
Nature, and the use he makes of the same. P. 10. CHAR. II. The Pilgrim's
Discourse. P. 17. CHAR. III. The Pilgrim's Affection to his Country; the Energy
thereof. P. 25. CHAR. IV. The Pilgrim for his more expedite Traveling, strips
himself of Encumbrances. P. 30. CHAR. V. The Pilgrim's indifferency as to all
accidental Occurrences, his equality of Mind, and firm Resolution upon all
Emergents. P. 34. CHAR. VI. The Pilgrim's Meek, Calm, Peaceable Deportment
toward others P. 42. CHAR. VII. The Pilgrim is much for Unity, a social
Agreement with, and mutual Assistance to his fellow Travelers, in which there
is a Vindication of the Church, in 3 pat Instances from the Old and New
Aspersion of its Adversaries, with a modest Expostulation with Dissenters for
their Separation. P. 47. CHAR. VIII. The Pilgrim's Caution and Circumspection.
P. 64. CHAR. IX. The Pilgrim's Sobriety and Temperance, with some Hints on his
Charity to the Poor. P. 71. CHAR. X. The Pilgrim's willingness to leave the
World, and Return to his own Country, P. 88. The Conclusion. Showing the
Influence the Consideration of being Srangers has on Persons to Frame them to a
Suitable Behavior; with a Commendation of those who Improve the Complaisant
Address they acquire by Traveling, to the Service of Religion: And how far
they may promote the same, with some Hints at Civility and Morality, the
Excellency of Christianity, and the Insufficiency of the Heathens Morality. P.
97.
A DIVINE AND Moral Essay, etc.
IT is strange to consider, though Sense as well as Faith, Reason as well as
Religion, Morality as well as Divinity conspire to convince us that this World
is not our Home, nor the Earth the habitation of Rest, nor this Life the Region
of our felicity: yet we are content to be deceived by the specious Phantasms
which flatter our Eyes, the glittering accommodations which gratify our ease,
and the pleasant allurements which enchant our appetites, so as to neglect (if
not wholly abandon) all care and concern of a future State; as if in the midst
of Revolution of Kingdoms, Dissolution of Churches, Tumbling of Crowns, and
Casting down of Mitres: and in the throng of all successive Variations, and
frequent Changes of universal Nature, we alone were privileged with Perpetuity
and our Mountain to Remain immovable. Psalm. 30.1.


It is very odd, when we may Read our fate in the continual vicissitude of all
things about us, we should be diverted from thoughts of our own Instability and
perishing condition, nor can any thing cure this folly, (but that is too Soft a
term) I must Rather say, nothing can correct this Madness, or purge us of this
desperate Frenzy, more than often and earnest application of our Minds to a
serious Consideration of our Quality and Circumstances in this World: Which is
frequently in the Scriptures represented under that of Pilgrims and Strangers,
than which nothing can afford us a truer notion of our Selves, or frame us to a
more agreeable disposition or temper in all Alterations.

Yet it would seem, Persons are unwilling to view themselves in this Mirror,
to Consider themselves according to this Representation of Itinerants or
transient Passengers in the World, and to behave accordingly in keeping
themselves unspotted with the corruptions thereof, 1 Pet. 2.11.
when St. Peter with such Signal insinuations of kindness and respect, with so
much softness of address and tenderness of expression bespeaks all Christians
as to both; Dearly beloved, I beseech you as Stangers and Pilgrims, abstain
from fleshly lusts which war against the Soul.

What Indications of the Apostles Zeal, of his great concern about them in this
matter, of the weight and importance of what he proposes to Christians
observation and practice, are contained in this Preface! And so far as I can
remember, These two introductory half Sentences, Dearly beloved, I beseech you,
meet not together in any passage of Scripture, but this one verse, and it is
truly to be regarded, that separately, either of them is the Prologue or
Introduction to some matter of Note and Consequence, like an Asterisque or Hand
in the margent of a Book, pointing to some ^^and and considerable thing, and if
either of them singly be so what may we reckon them, when both united: But that
they are like John the Baptist, the forerunner of some extraordinary remarkable
purpose; like the Tolling of the great Bell upon some solemn Sacred occasion,
to excite and rouse up Men's Spirits, to attend and regard what follows; or
shall I compare them (for as soft and as smooth as they run) to the Sound of a
Trumpet, or displaying the Ensign of Battle, or to a great Alarm in the Camp
before the Fight; for this allusion may be justified from the Warfare in the
Rear, (so to speak) of that forementioned place, abstain from fleshly lusts
which War against the Soul.

With what affectionate Compellation does the Apostle path his way. Dearly
beloved! Love is a good usher to clear the avenues for access, and procure
acceptance to Pastors Message, if it be a sharp Reproof, it is as Oil to the
Nail that makes it pierce more easily: if it be Counsel or Advice, it is as
Honey to the Pill, to make it glide more pleasantly into our hearts; Perchance
it is one of the strongest weapons in Christian Orators Spiritual Armory, or
Artillery, to Conquer the Obstinate, to engage the Indifferent, to melt an
Adversary, or confirm friends; to respect their persons, value their Office,
and comply with their desire. But there is a higher strain in it, this
additional word Dearly shows it was no faint wish or roving fancy: it was not
an inconsiderate Fit, or an indifferent degree of kind inclination: No, no; it
was a fervent and constant, a strong and serious disposition to promote their
Interest; in which there was more of a Holy flame than Human Flesh, of devout
affection, than natural passion, of Heavenly warmth, and Christian charity,
than of any of these ingredients; which in the commerce of the friendship of
the World, commonly mix themselves with our ordinary pretenses of kindness and
good will.

And this certainly made the Prince of the Apostles become their submissive
Petitioner in this earnest and humble manner, I beseech you. Men command their
Servants, counsel their Friends, entreat their Equals, but they beseech their
Superiors and betters: whence flows this humility, this modesty, this
courtesy, and meekness, when he might have come with a Rod or a sharp Rebuke,
1 Cor ^.4.21. Tit. 1.13.
when he might have enjoined with absoluteness and indisputable Authority: he
had more willingly apply himself to them, not so much in the Language of a kind
Friend, a tender Brother, a compassionate Parent; But rather accosts them with
the passion of a Lover, and the humility of a Supplicant, Dearly beloved I
beseech you.

I must say St. Peter and the rest of the Apostles learned this obliging manner
of Address, from him who was their Master: Phil. 2.6.
who, though he thought it no robbery to be equal with God, yet transformed
himself into the condition of a Servant, and approaches us more with the kind
importunities of a Suitor, than the awfulness of a Sovereign; Leaving them and
all Spiritual directors an Example of Condescendence and Complaisance, whereby
to recommend themselves the better to Peoples favor, and render their
Instructions more impressive on their Minds, and influential on their Practice,
by these endearing methods of Affection and Respect.

And I am sure, there is nothing more benign or human, more civil and gentle,
than that Divine wisdom where with the Penmen of Holy Writ were acted, nor had
any Institution more of these plausible qualities than the Christian Religion.
There are in the Scriptures many Instances of decent behavior, by which the
scornful Pharisee and unmannerly Sectany, the morose Dissenter, and
supercilious Professor, may cure the sourness of his Temper, the rudeness of
his behavior, the surlin^ss of his looks, Cinicalness of his converse, as well
as there are in them Illustrious patterns of Ingenuity and Virtue, for
modelling the sneaking Hypocrite and foppish Beau, the profane Gallant or
Hectoring Ruffian, to sincerity and affability, to piety and peaceableness.

But that which in my Retirement I have spent some Reflections on, is the
Epithets given us in the forecited place, and we our selves own as exceeding
suitable to our State. viz. Strangers and Pilgrims. Two words by a Hendiadis,
(...). Unum per duo.
a figure usual among Sacred and Human Writers, whereby one and the same thing
is expressed, and accordingly so understood, by two terms more different in
sound than meaning: And so are these Strangers and Pilgrims, yet if you please
to Criticize a little upon them.

A Stranger is one that Lives, (...)
Resides, or Transiently passes through a foreign Nation, or other Place
considerably distant from that of his own Nativity: or may be, has a fixed
Habitation, and if he please may keep Commerce and Traffic with his own
Country, or any other part convenient for intercourse of Merchandise, or
follow any other Employment in it.

How applicable, is this denomination to a Christian? Heaven is the believers
Country, the World is but the place of his transitory Residence. Heaven is his
Home, this World is his Workhouse. Heaven is his dwellingplace, the World is
his Shop, where he should drive a Heavenly Trade, that he may say, Phil. 3.20.
his Conversation is in Heaven; by which he best acquits himself as a Stranger
in this World.

The other Epithet is that of Pilgrim, how well this suits him, (...).
will soon appear; for what is a Pilgrim but a Stranger in motion, one that
neither has nor designs a settled Station: a Passenger that travails from one
Place to another, a Sojourner that has no abiding place. Indeed the quickness
of a Post, or the swiftness of a Ship carried with Wind and Tide, Job 9.15, 16.
seem but sorry Emblems of our hasty progress, in Job's opinion; when by a
Rhetorical gradation his comparison flies as high as the Eagle, whose rapacious
appetite sharpens its scent, and both make it with its large spread Wings fly
with equal speed, and greediness to its pray. Well may we all take up that
confession, We are Strangers and Sojourners, as all our Fathers: 1 Chr. 29.15.
H^b. 11.13.
and our days on the Earth, are as a shadow, and there is none abiding.

This then is our Character, we are Strangers and Pilgrims, and that our
deportment may answer it, I have drawn a Scheme of Rules for our Conduct, from
such maxims as the best polished, who visit distant places, mark in their
course or passage through them; and any glances I cast on the Travelers of
this World, is with design to reflect some light and help, for the better
government of those, who are bound for another.

First, then we know Strangers and Pilgrims are apt to gratify their sight
with the prospect of the places through which they travail, and to feed their
eyes with viewing the curious productions of Nature, in the height of Hills, or
fertility of Valleys, the covert of Woods, or extent of Fields, the stature of
Trees, or color of Plants, The fineness of Metals, or the fairness and
strangeness of Minerals, the imbellishments of Meadows or the winding current
of Rivers, the shape and taste of Fruits, the sorts of Flowers, or the forms of
Animals, and all the other pleasant meadly of objects in Natures Shop; which
can by their utility benefit, or variety delight any of our Senses or
Faculties; As likewise they will readily consider the exquisite rarities of
Art, they meet with in their way, be they splendid Palaces, or spacious
Gardens, sumptuous Statues, stately Obelisks, magnificent Monuments: wonderful
Pyramids, or any other famous Engine. How ready will they be to enquire after
the Author, and usefulness of such excellent pieces. Nor will any ingenious
Trayeller think a transient glance of his eye, or a light touch of his tongue,
sufficient Indication of his esteem of the one, or his value of the other; how
delighted is he to commend the workmanship, to extol the skill and cunning of
the Artificer, and to celebrate the praises of those Hero's represented by such
memoirs, whether they be Conquerors or Benefactors, or what way soever renowned
for any contrivance or action, enterprise or exploits.

And shall the Christian Pilgrim pass on without exerting his rational faculty,
or making any Spiritual reflection, when he beholds these miracles of power,
these wonders of providence, these instances of mercy and examples of Justice:
These tracts of wisdom and effects of goodness, so conspicuously remarkable in
the whole frame of Narure, and in the order and government of the World. Or
shall he tread on in his way with less regard of these, and their Author, than
the brutal Animals, which Jog under their load, have of him who furnishes them
their provender, whose gratitude to their owner is no less a shameful document
of our duty to our maker, Isay. 1.3. Psalm. 92.6.
than their Incogitancy and dullness as to their Creator, is the reproachful
Emblem of our stupidity in not regarding the work of the Lord or considering
the operation of his hands. Isa. 5.12.


Although the World be much defaced by Sin, yet it retains such strokes of the
Founders Art and Hand, as may raise attentive minds to admiration of his work,
and adoration of his power; and they may perceive such Charms and Beauty in it,
as may ravish their Eyes with wonder, and their hearts with affection, to the
Inventer and disposer of it. What is the great Machine of Nature, but a Theater
which infinite wisdom contrived: a goodness and power proportionable perfected
for displaying the glory of the Divine attributes. Romans 1.
And if the Heathen Sophies were condemned for not spying them in this mirror,
what shall become of inconsidering Christians, who but very carelessly cast any
look on the general frame, or particular parts of this splendid Fabric, and
their Souls lie grovelling on the Earth without darting a thought to the noble
Architector: who ordered the several Stories of this vast Structure, as steps,
by which our minds might ascend to him, and again descend to his works, but so
as thereby they may rebound higher, and thus pass and repass by the same Stairs
to himself.

If there be a fine Invention in the Mathematics, a pretty notion in
Philosophy, if there be a sovereign remedy in Physic, or useful experiment in
Chimistry, if there be a succesful stratagem in War, or happy overture in
Politics? etc. if there be any rare operation of Mechanic art, or any notable
production of human wit or power: The Devisers think themselves disparaged,
their pains lost, and their work vilified, if its links and chains, its
minutest particles be not Critically observed, and eloquently descanted on, so
as the World may ring with their praises, the exaltation of their names, and
commendation of their labor. We are often too lavish in our Elogies, and
acclamations this way, while the miraculous demonstrations of the Divine hand,
stupendous efforts of its power, the signal Triumphs of providence are passed
over silently without any great remark on the work, grateful recognition of the
Author, or serious consideration of the intent.

And I must tell you, (...). Aristot.
not only the Majestic, the extraordinary, the most beautiful, but even the
common, the smallest, the most deformed pieces, of this great building may
minister to our Sense and Soul, matter of joyful delectation to the one, and
delightful speculation to the other.

The ordinary effects of the Divine power, or frequent transactions of
providence in the productions of the Earth, or Influences of the Planets, in
the regular Revolutions of the different Seasons of the Year, in the alternate
succession of Night and Day, and of the serviceable light of the great
Luminaries of Heaven, Consuetudine oculorum assueseunt animi, neque admirantur,
neque requirunt rations earum rerum, quas semper vident Cicde Not Deorum lib.
^.
The shining of the Sun, the increase and decrease of the Moon, the
conservation of Animals and the other ordinary Phenomenon of Nature, although
slighted by reason of the commonness of them, are yet in themselves most
admirable, and worthy our profoundest speculation.

There is not the least Creature that bears the print of Gods finger but is
worthy the observation of the highest Intellect: And as we see the Painters
skill, largely displayed in contracted Tablets, Natura in minimis major, in
infimis sublimior, in contemtis admirabilior.
or that of an excellent Mechanic in some small narrow Engine; so there are
more curious Lineaments of the Divine hand, in some little parcels, than in
more ample draughts of his pencil.

Nor are the degenerate dashes and Aberrations of Nature without their
usefulness. They serve as patches to the more comely and regular parts, or as
shades to increase the luster of the more noble pourtraitures, by which variety
our curiosity is gratified as well as the beauty of the other more excellent
productions advanced. And they are sometimes chastisements of our sins,
declarations of God's controversy, or presages of some great Revolutions and
Calamity. For when Nature runs out of its Course or ordinary Channel, either in
Monsters or Tempests, in Plagues, extraordinary Punishments, or in the
disorderliness of the Seasons; These are the frightful marks of Gods angry Arm,
whereby he nurtures the rebellious World to fear his severity, since it would
not be kept in order by his Clemency.

You see then, there is nothing in the universe but may furnish the Christian
Pilgrim subject for pleasant meditation, or profitable instruction: He is a
Spiritual Chemist, to extract pious reflections from all occurrences, he
converts every thing into an occasion of Religion, he makes his very recreation
an instrument of Devotion, and when he diverts himself in viewing the beautiful
variety of Natures delicacies, he entertains himself with ejaculations,
concerning the Creators wisdom and goodness. His very divertisements drives him
nearer his Heavenly Country: And these things which retard him in his journey,
by staying his Eyes or fastening his attention on them, are happy furtherances
of his Spiritual progress, and the very pauses of his feet puts his Soul in
motion, and the poring down-cast looks of his Eyes, is a mean of the elevation
of his mind toward his maker.

Hence his tongue keeps pace with the mounting of his thoughts, and his
expressions bear the Impress of the liness of his disposition: The
Communication of his mouth is the best Comment on the Contemplation of his
Mind; and this leads me to a Second reflection upon our Character of Strangers
and Pilgrims.

We know such are easily induced almost upon every Turn and Occasion, to run
out in speeches of their own Country, and its Concerns: And they are glad of
an opportunity whereby they may Prudently and Discreetly represent it to
Advantage; Curiales in Caula, de Aula loquuntur.
As Courtiers, howsoever distressed, or wheresoever dispersed, are apt to speak
of the King and Court, to descant upon the Grandeur and Splendour of the one and
other.

Thus the Christian Pilgrim keeps fresh on his heart the Ideas of Divine
matters conveyed to him by sensible Objects, and his Discourse savours of
Spiritual things, his Converse is Heavenly; There is a Vein of Piety that mixes
it self with most of his Intercourse, and sociable Entertainment: His Language
follows the temper of his Mind: His Words are the Interpreters of his Thoughts,
and the Intelligencers of his Affections.

When Fulgentius happened to be at Rome upon a solemn Occasion, in which the
People made show of their Riches, and great Magnificence in an extraordinary
manner, he broke out into a passionate Exclamation, O how Glorious must needs
the Mansion house of the Saints above be, when any worldly place is so
sparkling and beautiful!

When Lintprand the Bishop of Cremona was sent on an Embassy to the Emperor of
Constantinople, he had his Audience with wonderful Ceremonies of State and
Pomp, which to describe would look more like a Romance, than the true Narration
of any real matter: The Emperor is set on a Throne with all the Ensigns of his
Royalty, Surrounded with Troops of Nobles, Guards of Soldiers, various Orders
of Senators: The Room very Spacious, the Ceiling made to resemble the Heavens,
as near as humane art, curious vanity, or Princely power could effectuate.
There was one vast Globe of Light resembling the Moon in the middle, and in
Imitation of the lesser Stars, a great quantity of Flambeaus of different.
Sizes, Artificially set round the Roof. The Imperial Throne was Supported by
several Lions of Brass, which by some Engine Raised and Sunk it as often as
they pleased, and that with such terrible Roaring from the mouths, and
Streperous Noise with the Feet of those Lions, as was able to astonish and
amaze all the Beholders: But this was drowned in a Consort of melodious
ravishing Music. In short all was so extraorordinary Magnifick that if any
thing of Earthly Grandeur could Justify Virgils Flight of Flattery to
Augustus, Divisum Imperium cum Jove Caesar habet.
or make any pertinent Application of it, it was then.

However the good Bishop is so little Dazzled with all this Splendour, that he
turned about to those near him, before he made his Harangues, and thus he spoke
them; What a sight think you, the Son of Man shall be, when his Celestial
Harbingers with the awakening Trumpets will gather the Nations before him, and
the Princes of the Earth shall Tremble at his Presence; when he sets his Throne
in the Clouds, attended with his Heavenly Host, and an Innumerable Company of
Angels, with the general Assembly and Church of the first Born, which are
written in Heaven; This was the Reflection of one who minded the glories of
this Heavenly Country, more than the Gaieties of his Pilgrimage, and the
Christian Traveller will Improve every thing to Spiritual Use and Sacred
Purposes; and out of the abundance of his Heart, Luke 6.45.
his Mouth will utter Divine matters, upon Suitable Occasions and Accidents.

But I am afraid I am now writing a Mystery, a thing to which many of us are
Srangers; There is but little Divine Contemplation, and consequently of Holy
Communication amongst us, from ordinary or extraordinary Occurrences. I know
not how it comes to pass, but as in the Society of some who pretend to
Learning, every thing of Literature and Reading, is counted Pedantry; so in
some Conversations which pretend to Breeding, every thing that is Serious and
tending to Edification is scoffed at, as nauseous Cant, as unsavory and
unseasonable Jargon, as an unfashionable Grievance. With what idle Stuff, with
what vain and trifling Stories, do some put off their Complementing Visits? But
if this were the Worst on it, It were the least Culpable; but alas, with what
uncharitable Surmises, slandering, Whispers, yea, down right defamatory
Reproaches, malicious Reports of one another, (and that of some we never knew
or saw, and we take up Prejudices against upon hear say; than which, nothing
can be more unjust) do many entertain themselves, and others at some of their
Encounters? What unmannerly; as well as wicked Censures of our betters, what
seditious Expressions, and dangerous Insinuations against our Governors in
Church and State; what misconstruing their Actions, reading their Intentions in
our mischievous Wishes or unreasonable Fears, etc. And such like is the
Divertisement not only of some merry Meetings and jovial Clubs, but even of
some of the more Refined Sort, and better Quality. How many profusely spend
much of their Time in Talking of of public News or of the Affairs of their
Trade, of their Bargains and Adventures, yet in their Converse with their Wives
or Children, with their Servants and Families, with their Friends or
Neighbors, trace them from Morning to Evening, from one Week to another, yea I
fear for Months and Years, thereis little of God or Religion to be heard among
them; little Discourse of the Joys of Heaven, or the Glory of Paradise; few who
for any holy Conference may be set down in Gods Book of Remembrance: Mal 3.16,
17.
or upon this score may expect to be reckoned a part of his Treasure, when he
makes up his Jewels.

O whence comes this! that so few of these who pretend to be Traveling to the
Heavenly Jerusalem, Commune so little of Sacred matters? whence is it, there is
so little Communication to Minister any Grace or Instruction, Counsel or
Comfort to one another? Nay, that any Excursions this way, is wearisome, and
hateful to some, Impertinent and unseasonable, although never so well timed,
there can be no answer made, but that they Savor not the things of God: Mat
16.23. Romans 8.6. 1 Cor. 2.14.
and that these who are Carnally minded, have no relish of the things of the
Spirit; for they are foolishness to them.

Why should not we look thorough the Terrestrial Court of the Monarchs of the
World, to those Regions of bliss! Why should not the Magnificence of the Prince
make us both think and speak of the Majesty of God, whom he represents! Why
should not the Beauty of the Creature raise our Minds to view, and tune our
Tongues to chant out Praises on the Purity of God! To give you more familiar
Hints, why should not our external Pollution and Washing, bring to our Memory
our Internal Spots, and means of Purification! why should not the putting off
our Clothes make us sometimes dart a pious Ejaculation to God, That he would
help us to put off the Old Man; and likewise our putting them on, mind us of
the putting on of Christ! Why should not the Light of the Day at the opening of
our Eyes, mind us of the Light of the Gospel, of the Light of Grace, and that
of Glory! And a thousand such like Instances I could give you, and I must say,
one reason why Spiritual matters are so frequently Shadowed out to us, under
Earthly Comparisons, and homely Parables in the Scriptures, and such
Similitudes as are commonly Obvious to us, is, That when these or the like meet
with us, they may give rise to some devout Meditation, pious Reflection, and
holy Discourse: And this they would never miss, were we so heavenly Minded, or
divinely Disposed as we ought.

Suffer me to tell you, that how Mean or Contemptible soever some may think
this Subject, as below their Dignity, or the high flights of their
Conversation: Yet I must be free to acquaint you where the Power of Religion is
within, and any thing of Celestial Fire, it will break out into some sparkles
of Light and Heat, for the Direction and kindly Warmth of the Devotion of those
about us. We should be shining, John 5.35. Luke 6.45.
as well as burning Lights; And a good Man out of the good Treasure of his
Heart, will bring forth that which is good, Ephesians. 4.29.
to the Eidfying of, and Ministering Grace to them about him. Let me recommend
in a Spiritual manner, and leave that Precept of the Apostles with all
Christian Pilgrims, let no corrupt Communication proceed out of your Mouths,
but that which is good to the use of Edifying, and may Minister Grace to the
Hearers.

Now all this heavenly Strain of Thought and Discourse, whereby the Christian
Pilgrim is distinguished from the Common Traffickers of the World, is the Result
of that constant remembrance he retains, and fervent Affection he bears his
Celestial Country, which no distance or absence can remove from his Mind. This
may in the Third place be reckoned a necessary Ingredient into his Composition,
yea, the principle of his Motions, the constant Companion of his Toil and
Pleasure.

When Strangers or Pilgrims in their Peregrination meet with pleasant Sears and
populous Cities, with fruitful Fields and fragrant Gardens, with stately
Palaces, and splendid Partars or Walks; They take a transient View of those
things, and though they may be delighted with a slight Glance of them, the
Biass of their Mind is still Homeward. Although the place of their Nativity be
but as a Barren Wilderness, or a Rocky Precipice, little better than Lybian
Sands or Scythian Snows: Yet I must say, there is a kind of Jene-scay-quoi,
Nescio qua Natale solum duledine Cunctos Ducit et immemores non sinit esse sui
Ovid.
an unspeakable Somewhat, That forcibly Charms them to it. A Stranger in all
his Travails, receives not such Solace from the shows of one Court, or the
Gallantry of another, the Magnificence of the third, or the sumptuous Regales
of a fourth. As he delights himself with the very Expectation of Contentment
and Satisfaction, he will be Transported with on his return, from the Caresses
of his Dear Wife, The pleasant Lips of those pretty Pieces and Splinters of
himself, his little Children hanging about his Neck and Knees: or from the
Merry but Innocent Entertainment of his Friends, the frequent Concourse and
facetious Converse of his Acquaintance and Relations.

Thus devout Pilgrims meet with nothing while estranged from Heaven, that can
stifle their longings after it. The Dignities of the World cannot rebate their
Desires, nor can its Dainties beget in them an Oblivion of its Joys: Its
fairest Scenes do not Chase it from their. Minds, nor can its greatest Proffers
bias their Love from it. They count whatsoever is Amiable in Art, or admirable
in Nature, too much Dignified, when they prove to them but Dark and Obscure
Representations of its Glory. They consider them no more than as Optics, by
which they take the height and excellency of Celestial things; They make use of
them not only as transparent Perspectives to carry their Spiritual Sight
higher, but as burning Glasses to reflect the Rays of Divine things more warmly
into their Hearts, whence their heavenly Thoughts become more intense by the
meditation of those Terrene Objects.

O the ingenious Efforts of a heavenly Soul, which is able to make the most
seemingly Opposite contrarities, Vehicles for carrying it home to its own
Country: Or shall I say, here is a Master piece of its magical Art, that it can
present a Map of Heaven still before us, without any Delusion of Sense. Here is
no external Deceit, nor sinful Invention of Art, the Impressions here are
Intimate, beyond what any outward Imagery can produce: Innocent without Guilt:
Ravishing without Noise; and Permanent without cloying: which in despite of
all Distance or medial Resistance, point forth our Country to our view, so
that no Opacous Body can Eclipse it from our Sight, none of the polished
Glories of the World lessen it in our Esteem, nor the Courtship of its
competing Blandishments interrupt our Affections therefrom.

O how great is the Energy of Divine Love, which can Convert every thing to
promote its Approach to, and Union with its Object. The painted Spectacles, the
pompuous Parade, the glittering Profits, the luscious Pleasures and the other
flattering Vanities, of a false fawning World, which dazzle the Eyes, darken the
Minds, terminate the Desires, and detrude the Souls of poor Mortals: These
which are the precipices of the Ruin, the stumbling Blocks, for the fall of
thousands of the Children of this World, become stepping Stones to mount the
Spirits of divine Lovers Heavenward; that they ascend thither by the same
Stairs, by which others tumble to the Regions of Darkness and Amazement.

And they are so swallowed up in serious Speculation of, and fervent Affection
to their heavenly Country: That as there is nothing so remote, Obscure or
Opposite, but can bring it into their Minds, expose it to their View, and raise
their Hearts thereto: So they are Blind to the shining atractives of the Earth,
and Deaf to the Syrene Songs of all its tempting Vanities: That they look down
from this Mountain of Contemplation, with Contempt and Despection upon all
Temporalities. And for as distant as they are from Heaven, and that they have
but faint Glimmerings of its Light, or few Clusters of its Comforts, yet they
have so much as Tarnishes the Luster, Withers the Beauty, Imbitters the Taste,
Blunts the Force of all Worldly Excellencies, when they stand in Opposition to,
or in Competition with it, for their Love; They are no more Affected with those
things, then a dead Man is with Shows and Dainties, Music and Pastimes; This
is indeed to be Crucified to the World, which leads to Consider in the fourth
Place the Christian Pilgrim as he stands disposed to the World.

We know Pilgrims do not clog themselves with unnecessary Burdens, or
superfluous Encumbrances, These hinder their Progress, and make them drive on
heavily with as little Pleasure as Speed: Thus Christian Passengers shake from
them all undue Estimation of, or inordinate Affection to the World, as well
knowing there is nothing can Retard them more in their March, nothing can
Obstruct the elevation of their Affections to the Regions of Bliss while in the
Way, or the Reception of their Souls into those Mansions of Glory above, at
their Journeys end, like worldly Love. This blinds the Eyes, slacks the Pace,
and impedes the Entry of some Pilgrims into the Land of promise: This
extinguishes the Love of God and their Country in their Hearts. It was this
made the young Man in the Gospel, Mat. 19.22. Tim. 4.10.
after some Advances, go back Sorrowing. This made Demas forsake the right Way,
and Judas betray the Savior of the World: This has made more Heretics and
Schismatics, more Apostates and Backsliders, than any thing else, among some
who set out in Pilgrimage toward the heavenly Jerusalem, and many had
persever'd to the Journeys end, if they had not preferred the trash of the
World to the Truths of Religion, and the Treasures of Heaven.

Did we as heartily and seriously mind and Love our Country as we pretend: Did
we Strive and Struggle against our Lusts as against our Competitors for Places
of Gain and Perferment in the World. Did we Watch and Pray, sit up Late and
rise Early to secure Heaven; were half of that Diligence and Pains transferred
to Religious Exercises, which we Lavish out on worldly Projects, or covetous
Practices, on lustful Intreagues or ambitious Designs, as our progress to our
Home would be more Swift, so our Success would be more Sure.

Let me then Advise all in the Words of St. John, love not the World, 1 Ep. 2.
nor the things of the World. Here the Apostle who from the Ardor of Divine
Love, with which he was heated in the Bosom of his Master, is well styled the
Disciple of Love; And breathed nothing but flashes of Light, and and flames of
Love, in all his Epistles: Yet he stretches a cloud of Darkness over the World,
and disparages all its pretenses to our favor: Nor will he allow the least
grain of our Affections to slide that way. It is worthy your observing, he
does not muster up the Miseries and Calamities, the Troubles and Disasters of
it, to discredit it in our Esteem, or divorce our Affections therefrom: But he
Marshals its greatest Forces, Triarij its three famous Worthies, its
Jannizaries, its Generals and stoutest Champions, In which its Strength and
Stratagems, its Power and Policy do consist: The Lust of the Eye, the Lust of
the Flesh, and the Pride of Life; here he displays all its Beauty and Glories,
here he discloses all its Charms, here he Proclaims all its Titles, and hoists
up all its Sails, even to depreciate it in our Esteem, and if its most precious
things whereof it can make the best show and the greatest boast, be Antidotes
against our affecting, What is then left it wherewith to Entice or Ensnare us?

Certainly Almighty God by driving Adam out of Paradise, and so depriving him
and us of the most delightful Portion of the Earth, (for it has ever since been
a Terra incognita, unknown to the Inhabitants of the World,) would seem by this
to remove the greatest Inducement of our Affections to it: since what was in
all appearance the most lovely and desirable part thereof, is now missing, and
hid from the most inquisitive Christian Travelers, what Title can any other
Dividend of it now lay to our excessive Esteem or Liking.

Pilgrims degrade themselves too far, and discredit their own Country, when
they overvalue what they meet in their transient Passage through foreign
Places. Indeed if we prefer the pleasing of Men to the serving of God: If we be
more Enamoured of the refined Pieces of the Earth, than of the beauty of Virtue
or the glory of Paradise; If we are more taken with the Pageantry of the World,
than with the reward of Religion or the Euge's of a good Conscience, Psalm.
17.24.
we behave more like Inhabitants who have their Portion in this Life, than like
passengers to Heaven, or expectants of its Inheritance; and we give just ground
to others to conclude our temporal Concerns have a greater Ascendant over us
than our eternal Interest: And that we have more of that profane Cardinal's
temper (who told he would not forgo his part of Paris for any Portion of
Paradise, and so he might well say for any Title he had to it) than of the
Royal Prophet, Psalm. 19.10.
who saw more brightness, and felt more sweetness in Gods Law, than he could
perceive in the sparklings of Gold, or taste of Honey: That is to say, than in
all the profits or pleasures of the World.

It is this Preference of their own Country in their Opinion and Affection, and
the low and mean Apprehension they have of all Temporalities, that makes
Christian Pilgrims keep on in their Way, with great indifferency in reference
to all Occurrences, and equality of Mind upon all Emergments. And this is a
Fifth property, without which its impossible for us to hold on, or arive at the
Jerusalem above; we shall be entangled by Smiles and Flatteries, or deterred by
Frowns and Storms; without this disposition, nothing can make us Steady against
prosperous Gales or adverse Blasts, pleasant Endearments or painful
Affrightments like this indifferency of Temper; this makes Christian Travelers
forsake their Carnal Relations, contemn Earthly possessions, when they prove
obstacles to their Progress: And say to the one, Mat. 8.33.
Get you behind me for you Savor not the things of God, and to the other,
Phil. 3.8.
I count all things Dross and Dung, Heb. 11.25.
it is this makes them prefer a tedious Pilgrimage and Sufferring State, to a
flourishing Condition of Ease and wanton Dalliance.

We know Pilgrims are not like those who go to Sea for Pastime, or Walk abroad
for Pleasure; whom a little blast of Wind or breath of cold Air, a small
appearance of Rain, or a hovering Cloud, a little uncleanness or unevenness in
the Way hinders from setting forth, or frights soon from going forward: No,
they are resolved to keep on in their Way, be it Smooth or Rough, be it Plain
or Hilly, be the Weather Fair or Foul; and although the House or Inn they step
in, for refreshment by Day, or tarry in by Night, be not well Furnished or
Adorned: Although their Entertainment be Poor, and Accommodation Slender, they
send not for an Upholsterer to alter their Beds, or a Glasier to mend the
Windows; or a Carpenter to repair what is Ruinous; or a Painter to Beautify
what is deformed: No, no, for the short Time they stay, they content themselves
with things as they find them, without Afflicting themselves, or creating any
Trouble to others.

Is not this, in more familiar Terms, but the very same indifferency the
Apostles speaks of to the Romans when he would have them use the World as if
they used it not, 1 Cor. 7.31.
or that Contentment he by his Practice as well as Preaching Prescribes the
Philippians; Phil. 4.11.12.
when in every State they should carry the same calmness and evenness of Mind
upon all turns of Elevation or Depression, upon all changes of Prosperity or
Adversity: And without this disengagement of Heart and looseness of Affection
from the things of the World, we will never be able to reject its Baits, or
resist its Blusters: Every Avocation will divert us, every Amusement stop us,
not only Real but Imaginary appearances of Danger and Difficulties will scare
us. We tremble at the shaking of a Leaf, quake at the whistling of the Wind,
we will bow to every Promise, couch at every Threatening: we will worship every Idol,
dread every Mormo, we will Sink under every little Load, and fall prostrate to
every trifling Temptation.

Rut when our Spirits are raised to this high pitch of Unconcernedness, all the
flattering Arguments derived from Hope, or the frightful Confusion deduced from
fear, cannot shake our Resolution. We will with serene Countenances and sedate
Minds, welcome all Events, be prepared for all Weathers, and ready for all
Trials. If Riches, Honors, and worldly Conveniences come in our Way, we will
receive them without Insolence, enjoy them without Excess, and forgo them
without Impatience. If Poverty, Disgrace, Pain or Affliction, be the Way that
is Chalked out for us, we will not Balk, we know this to be the beaten Road, in
which the glorious Company of the Apostles, the goodly Fellowship of the
Prophets, the noble Army of Martyrs, the honorable Society of Confessors, that
cloud of Witnesses and Catalogue of Worthies, which went before us, have tread:
And we must not look that ours should be Strewn with Roses and Lillies, if we
Trace their steps, or expect their Palms.

And suffer me to single out of this List, One that made no small Figure in it,
and propose for our Imitation his behavior, when he had the Prediction of his
Death communicated to him: He takes it as it were his Life in his hand, he is
resolved to go on in his Course, to abide the Worst, to endure all the
Hardships and Dangers, which the malice of Men or cruelty of Devils could
Invent or Execute. He Will go through them all, and accomplish his Work, whatever
it stand him, or cost him, he says, none of these things move me: None of
these things would make him desert his Post, or neglect his Duty, and this is
truly a Motto I would have every Christian Pilgrim take to himself, this will
make him despise those Terrors that are Bugbears to the Children of this World,
disdain these Pleasures that are Fetters to the Nimrods of the Earth: And Count
them all as Withs of Straw, when Employed to detain or drive him from his
Journey. He is resolved the Tempests of the World shall not Conquer him; nor
its Courtship Cajole him, but through Honor and Dishonor, etc. he will proceed,
maugre all discouragements or opposition. And this makes him to Improve every
thing he meets with, to further him in his Way. Want as well as Wealth,
Contempt as well as Applause: Occasions of Grief as well as these of Joy, can
set him forward, for all things work together to Advance him. Romans 8.


And that your Progress may be more Successful and Comfortable, Strangers and
Pilgrims are, or at least should be, of meek Address, calm Deportment, and
peaceable Behavior: They know nothing conduces more to their Ease and Security
in the Places whither they Travel: Nor can any thing Expose them to more
dangerous Inconveniences than a quarelling Temper or a contentious
Disposition; the effects of which howsoever they may be winked at in Natives
they become intolerable in Strangers. To Embroyl the State by Sedition, or
divide the Church by Schism, to Sow discord among Brethren, Jars in Families,
or Dissension among Neighbors, is faulty in any, but abominably Criminous in a
Stranger.

The Spiritual Pilgrim should consider, meekness is the peculiar Character a
Christian: The Beauty and Ornament of his Profession: The glory of his
Religion; by which it Conquered the great, Subdued the Wise, Confuted the
Scribe, and Triumphed over the Disputer of the World. Although our Savior and
his followers did not escape the cruelty of their Persecutors by their soft
Expressions and meek behavior: Yet by them they Erected Trophies of Esteem and
Approbation of themselves in the Hearts of their Enemies, extorted Elogies from
their Mouths, and struck the Spectators and Executioners of their Punishments
with Wonder and Amazement.

It is this that makes the Christian Pilgrim in his Converse carry such
evenness of Mind in the midst of these different humors, he may occasionally
encounter, that he neither Creates them any trouble, or himself any vexation.
Although he may frequently hear what may grate his Ears, and see what may be as a
Thorn to his Eye, he Stifles any hard Resentment, and is Calm in the midst of
their Insulting provocations: And if he cannot by his prudence and discretion
allay their Contentions among themselves, he will not by any officious
Interposing Exasperate them against one another, or inflame them against
himself: And by his sedate Behavior among them, or abstractedness from their
Affairs, he avoids giving or receiving Offense upon every sudden caprice,
tempting opportunity, or trifling Emergent: And if he cannot by all this Caution
evite the Scorn of some proud and petulant Tempers, who from ill Nature, or
worse Breeding, with insolent Railing or Railery invade his Modesty; his Mind
is not put out of Tune, nor his Countenance out of Frame, or Expressions out of
Order: but upon every Turn, he is gentle and easy to be Entreated, without
grudging these Buffoons the Spoils of their Vanity, or envying them the Praises
they Assume from their rude Attacks on his Meekness; Which he holds up as a
Bank against the Torrent of the more Furious, or as a Buckler against the
direct, or squint Reflections of the less Dangerous, but equally unmannerly,
Litigious assaulters.

This makes him go on in his Road without Interessing himself unnecessarily in
the Quarrels of others. He knows a Stranger should not be a busy Medler in
other Men's matters: 1 Pet. 4.15.
What has he to do, to shuffle himself into the Crowd of squabling Miscreants,
or the Fray of Hectoring Ruffians: What is he concerned to mix himself into the
Company of brawling Gallants, or or bawling Fops whose Souls hate Peace. Psalm.
120.


Nay he will be loath to concern himself in the Debates of more modest Contenders:
He may justly fear the pertinent Application of what was with equal
Impertinence and Injustice objected to Lot, Genesis 19.9.
This fellow came to Sojourn among us, and he must be a Judge. Luke 12.
How unwilling was our Savior to be an Arbitrator between the two Brethren? A
busy medler in other Men's matters is no less Injurious to his own Quiet than
he is to that of others, like a Bone out of Joint, is pained it self, and
causes the aching to other parts. He minds that Passage of Solomon, Prove, 26.17.
he that passes by and medleth with Strife not belonging to him, is like one
that takes a Dog by the Ears.

The Christian Pilgrim is a Professor of the Gospel of Peace, a Subject of the
Prince of Peace, the Receptacle or the Temple of the Spirit of peace, and God
delights in the Title of the God of peace: What powerful Arguments are in all
these to Engage him so far as is possible to live peaceably with all Men. Rom
12.18. ^al. 5.
Consider the fruits of the Spirit reckoned by the Apostles; what are they but
so many branches of this peaceable Disposition, requisite in all Christian
Pilgrims: Consider reiterate precepts of the Gospel, the behavior of Christ
and those Pilgrims who have gone before us: and you will find it is not by hints,
and little Insinuations, by Starts or on Temporary occasions, that this
peaceable Temper is recommended to us; was not peace the Alpha and Omega of
Christ's Entry to, and Exit out of the World. Luke 9.14.
Peace on Earth was the Oyes at his Birth, and his Legacy at his farewell. John
14.27. Mat. 5.
He proclaimed Peace makers blessed in his Sermon on the Mount, and Blazons
their Coat of Arms with a Title of Honor beyond all worldly Pedigree; They
shall be called the Sons of God: when the mighty Tyrants of the Earth, Those
privileged Robbers (as we may say) of men's Liberties and Estates, or
Successful Thieves of Kingdoms and Countrey's, who delight in Blood and
Massacres, and the little Incendiaries of Contention and Strife, will be Cursed
as the Children of the Devil, and sent with him and his Angels to the Vengeance
of everlasting burnings.

Let me freely Address my self to all Christian Pilgrims, and tell them how
incongruous a thing it is that we who profess our selves Strangers in this
World, should behave so unlike the Captain of our Host, and his followers, whom
we pretend to Love and Imitate. Look upon the whole Course of his Life, and
you will find nothing therein but issues of Tenderness and Meekness, of Love and
Benignity: He went about doing good while we do all the mischief we can, turn
every thing top-side-turfwise, that crosses our Humor, or that thwarts our
pitiful, narrow Interest. How unaccountable is it, that while he presents us
the meekness of a Lamb, we should transcribe it in the rage of a Lion, or the
cruelty of Tigers; That while he prescribes to us the Innocence of a Dove, we
Bite one another like Dogs, sting like Serpents, and breath out nothing but the
Gall and Venom of Asps; That he should speak in a still Voice, and we thunder
Hailstones and coals of Fire. That he should pray for his Enemies, and we
curse our best Friends and Anathematize all that oppose our Opinion, or seek to
rectify our Mistakes. Alas, this is not agreeable to the Condition of
Strangers and Pilgrims; if we make meekness and peaceableness the
Charateristick of those who Travel to another Country, and look for another
City, we must seek for them elsewhere, than where we live: Where Malice and
Bitterness, Strife and Envy tage so Violently, that by this we may best be
distinguished from the rest of the World. It was not so of Old, when behold how
they love one another was the honor and badge of their Profession, and the
wonder of their Adversaries: and it would be so still, if they did keep
themselves in Concord and Uunity together, and go on in their Journey in
Troops, not like scattered Straglers, but as a compact Army or Society of
fellow Travelers. And this leads me in the Seventh place to speak of as
necessary a Character of Christian Pilgrims as any I have yet named, and that
is their Unity.

Strangers and Pilgrims who are acted by principles of Prudence, Discretion, or
good Nature, are not more careful of peaceable calm Behavior toward others,
in the Foreign parts where they Travel; than they are of avoiding all quarrels
and dissension among themselves: They consider nothing exposes them more to the
Ludibry of Strangers, retards them more in their Progress, or encourages
Enemies to Attacque them, than when they fall out among themselves by the Way,
or separate from one another into By-Roads, and differrent Parties.

And it is the same among Christians; unity is their Credit against the
obloquie, their Cordial against the annoyances, their Bulwark against the
Assaults of their Adversaries. It is no greater Security to a Kingdom or
Family, to an Army or any Society; than it is to Christian Pilgrims and
Spiritual Travelers: It is a happy Association, when, in a regular way, many
Pilgrims Confederate together, to stand by one another with mutual Counsel and
Assistance, in their Journey Heavenward. A Man's Soul may well rejoice in such
Company: Psalm. 122.1.
and say I was glad when they said, let us go to the house of the Lord
together. Good Company makes the Road less tedious, and the Time glide gently
away: It reconciles us to the uneasiness of a tiresom Journey, and ministers
Relief and Comfort to us in our Weariness and Distress. Owls and Savage Beasts
go frequently single, but the Tamer and Gentler Animals and those by which
Christian Travelers are set forth, flock together in Troops. David's City
compact together, our Saviors Kingdom unite, and Silurus his sheaf of Arro.
St. Paul's complete Building or Natural Body with the agreement of its different
Parts and various Functions, are no more Emblems, than Instructions of the
happiness and security which result from Unity among Christian Pilgrims. And if
divine Harmony were as strong among those of Christian Community, as natural
Affection is in the organical Body, or politic Considerations are among
secular and civil Societies, Religion would then Thrive as in its wholesome Air:
The sacred Constitution of our Church would be more firm; Its Members would
transcribe the same dispositions in assisting the Weak, quickening the Lazy,
supplying the indigent in their March; by which they would become more
Beneficial one to another, more honorable to their Captain, and terrible to
the Common Enemy, who durst not make these attempts on an entire Body,
wherewith he will be bold enough to ply mutinous Bands and scattered Fractions

The strength of an Army consists in its Discipline, Order and Unity; where
these are wanting, neither its Number or Force can preserve it from Ruin: and
if the professors of Religion like loose vagrant Soldiers forsake their Posts,
or regular Assembling themselves together, they may come to feed upon husks, be
exposed to wild Beasts, 1 Pet. 5.8.
or fall within the paw of that Lion, who goes about seeking whom he may
devour.

So that they but deceive themselves who think their following by-ways the best
method to advance with more Safety, or arrive with more speed at their desired
Rest; such are frequently suffered, as a just punishment for their separation,
to be led unto Quagmires and Precipices, by the ignis fatuus of their own
bewildred Imaginations; like Men out of their Way in a Wood, once wrong, still
worse; 1 Timothy 4.15.
so dangerous it is to divide from the Church, the ground and Pillar of Truth;
and do not we find that these who made the first Rupture in her Unity, may read
their Sin in their Judgment? God Almighty in revenge of the Rent they made, has
beaten them with their own Rod, by permitting them to split and fall asunder
into so many Parties and Subdivisions; the ordinary Fate of all Broachers of
Schi-sm and Hatchers of Sedition.

But that which is most Astonishing is that after all the Prudence and
Moderation of the first Reformers of this National Church, after all the
Courage and Constancy of her Martyrs and Confessors, after all the Zeal and
Learning of her Apologists and Defenders, after all former Instances upon
Record, and fresher of later Date to our own Sense and Knowledge of her
strenuously opposing Popery; any should divide from her Communion, upon score
of her Symbolizing with Rome; and asperse her Worship and Constitution as
Popish and Superstitious: under this Flag the first Deserters sheltred
themselves, and the little Viperous Parties since (wherewith the Church has
been, and still is Harassed, or the Kingdom Infested) have made and still make
the same Hue and Cry; although she be the strongest Bulwark of the Protestant
Religion in the World; the richest Storehouse of its stoutest Champions, the
surest Sanctuary of its persecuted Adherents: Whereby she is become the
greatest Eyesore to the Papacy, and the most invidious Object of its Curses
and Anathema's. It is strange that when the Pope and Conclave so Incessantly
vent their Spite and Venom against her, as Heretical, any in her own Bosom
should charge her with Affection to so Implacable and Avowed an Adversary.

From which Envious Imputation, I will not attempt to vindicate her, by
mustering up Arguments from Scripture, Reason and Antiquity in defense of her
Liturgy and Government; that has been done over and over again to the
Confutation of gainsayers: but I shall single out some matters of Fact, no less
for the honor of the Church, than the Conviction of her Malicious Accusers.

And first I would have you Consider that some of the Compilers of the Common
Prayer Book, suffered Martyrdom, were Burned to Ashes in Queen Mary's Reign;
the Liturgy discharged, and the Mass Book introduced. If these had dissown'd
the Religious Service which some now spurn; and embraced that Hotch-Potch of
Supplications to Saints and Angels, in the Romish Ritual: If they had renounced
the Articles of the Church of England, submited their Consciences to the Pope,
and the sacred Scriptures to the Canons of the Council of Trent; they might
have avoided the cruelty of their Persecutors. But they loved neither their
Lives, Rev. 12 11.
nor Honors to the Death, but chose to forgo these, rather than the Faith;
and God would have it so, that he might not want the Glory of such Christian
Magnaminity, nor the Truth of the Protestant Religion, the honor of the
Triumph of such resolute Warriors: That the Church might not miss the Boast of
such renowned Generals; nor the Age then, the Influential Encouragment of such
affecting Examples; or the succeeding, the reviving Energy of such excellent
Precedents; to invigorate their Faith, quicken the Courage, and fortify the
Hope of other Strangers and Pilgrims. Truly if we weigh without prejudice and
partiality this same Instance, we must needs Conclude they were no Friends to
Popery, who upon account of their Religion felt so much of its Severity; nor
can the public Service of this Church be constructed a favourer of Romish
Devotion, when it must be thrust out, to make way for its Superstitious Worship.

But Secondly there is another thing I would have you consider: And it is this
that next in the late unhappy Times of prosperous Rebellion, when the Liturgy
of this Church was laid aside and the Episcopal Government demolished; then
Anarchy invaded the State, and Confusion the Church, Tyranny and Usurpation
possessed the Throne; Heresy and Blasphemy the Pulpit; Popery made more
considerable Advances in that Interval, than in many Years before, when the
decent Worship and orderly Discipline of this Church kept footing. It is well
enough known there were many Roman Catholics in the Parliament Army, as the
Royal Martyr in his printed Papers declared: And Mr. Monteith, who from being a
Protestant Minister turned to be a Romish Priest, whose History of the Troubles
of Britain he published in French, and I saw at Nantes, confesses there were
many Priests slain at Edgehill; which, considering he was a New Proselyte, he
durst never have averred, to occasion so much Reproach and Scandal to a
Profession he had but recently Embraced, if Truth had not forced him thereto:
And let it be remembered that the Enemies of the Liturgy and Government then,
and those of them now Surviving, whose Faces are not steeled with Impudence, or
whose Hearts are not hardened with Impenitence, seek to remove from themselves
the Odium of the Kings execrable Marther, by charging the multitude of Jesuits
and Popishly affected, in the Army therewith. If those of this Persuasion
shuffled themselves into the Army by parroting the Cant of the Age, against the
Liturgy and Government: If they had the Power and Cunning to wheedle others
into their Net, and make them Tools and Instruments in carrying on the War, or
execution of the King: Did not the Dissenters then bring their pretenses and
Designs against Popery to a fair Issue; when instead of Extirpating or Staving
it off, it increased with our Divisions, swarmed in our Armies and spread
through all the Corners of the Land.

Now if we find to our woeful Cost and sad Expenses that upon the Ruin of the
Church formerly, there followed an Inundation of Error and Heresy to corrupt
the Doctrine of Immorality and Profaneness, to destroy the Power and Practice of
Religion; That the Monarchy as well as the Hierarchy was overturned; that
Faction in the State as well as Schism in the Church, Oppression in the City
and Country, came in on the Dissolution of the Government, and removal of the
Liturgy, Can we look for other Effects from the same fatal Occasions, or (I may
say) dismal Causes, if renewed or set on Foot again. Indeed to expect better
Fruit from the same Tree, rooted in the same luxuriant Soil, under the same
malignant Influences, and care of the same cunning Dressers, (I should rather
have said cruel Hacksters) is to look for Grap^s from Thorns, Mat. 7.16.
or Figgs from Thistles.

But there are many in the Kingdom, whose gray Hairs and snowy Heads are Crowns
of glory to them, for espousing the Interest of the King and Church; and bear
these marks of Honor, and proofs of Valor in their Scars and Wounds, which
may supersede any more Enlargment on this subject: These are living Witnesses,
(and, blessed be God, there are many such Surviving in the Nations) of the
Havoc, Religion and Property, Laws and Liberty sustained, when Episcopacy was
abrogated, and the Liturgy abandoned. These still retain the Sense of Honor
and Conscience of Duty, which acted them formerly to adhere with undaunted
Hearts and valiant Hands to the Crown and Mitre, against the Torrent of
triumphant Treachery; the same princples afford them now joyful reflections on
their past Calamities, and are ready upon occasions to Animate a-fresh their
chill Blood, to swell their old shrivel'd Veins with new Life and Vigor, to
give a timous check to the rash Attempts of those petulant young Sparks, who
may be deluded with the novelty of an unexperienced project into a Disvalue, if
not a Dislike of the present Settlement.

But if these Instances be stale and old, and so less impressive on the
volatile Spirits of the present Age; permit me in the Third place to come a
little nearer and tell you, what is within your own Kenning: Pray you, who so
resolutely stood in the Gap, so early scented, or earnestly opposed the Designs
and Contrivances of a Popish Party, who lately flattered themselves with great
expectations, but the Venerable Prelates of this Church. If in former Ages some
of the preceding Bishops were Martyrs for the Protestant Religion; were not
these in our Time, to our own view, Confessors for the same. If the former
were dragged to Stakes, these were haled to Prison; who maintained the
Protestant Doctrine with such Christian (...) in public Harrangues, who
asserted it in Print with such degrees of Zeal and Learning, who pressed it
more convincingly in private, accidental Conferences, or appointed Meetings,
and upon extraordinary Occasions? where were there Combatants to be singled
out, to defend the Truth, and overthrow the arguments of its Enemies, with such
ponderous Reasons and nervous Eloquence, like the Orthodox Regular Clergy of
this Church?

Let me then entreat all who vouchsafe to read this Essay, that they suffer not
themselves to be imposed upon by the cunning artifice of these Hucksters of
Souls, and Factors for Schism; who asperse the best Reformed Church in the
World with favoring Rome, which her Doctrine Condemns, her Worship abhors, and
her practice Remonstrates against. Why should People any more shut their Eyes
against the Light, or stop their Ears against the Truth? These I have written
are plain matters of Fact, without any slight or guise; and if you consider
them without Pride, Passion, or Partiality, I dare say you will easily be
convinced, the ancient Ecclesiastic Government of this National Church has
been, and is the best Fence of the Protestant Religion, and its Bishaps the
Stoutest Champions of the same. What powerful Preachers, what Prudent
Governors, what Learned Writers, Valiant Martyrs, what Courageous Confessors,
have some of that Venerable Order proved! How have some of these and of the
other intelligent Clergy of all Degrees in this Kingdom, by the Piety of their
Lives, and their Courage at Death; by the Eloquence of their Tongues, and the
smartness of their Pens; By the solidity of their Reasons, and magnificence of
their Charity, battered the Walls of Rome, more than all the little Sectaries
of Europe were ever able to do. Neither have there been wanting some of the
flourishing Nobility, some of the renowned Gentry, some of the piously
affected, ingenious Commons; who have in an eminent Degree, in like manner,
maintained the Worship and Government of this Church against its adversaries;
and what would some of our Predecessors of both Sexes not have given in Henry
the Eighth and Queen Mary's Reign, for that Worship and Sacrament in the Forms
wherewith they are now Administered in this Church; for all the mixture of
Superstition, or worse, Dissenters charge them with? O that we did look back,
and consider the Days of Yore; what would they have parted with, to obtain what
some among us contemn and despise? And if ever God in his Wrath suffer Popery
to overrun the Land, Persons shall have neither of these in the purity we now
enjoy them. We'll have more Ave Mary's then Pater Nosters; more Invocation of
Saints than Adresses to God: We must receive the half Sacrament as the Priests
will give it, or if we take it in the way the Church now enjoins, be Burned at
Stakes as Profaners of that Sacred Ordinance; For all the uncharitable and
unjust clamours, Persons make against the way wherewith it is now exhibited as
popish and Superstitious.

Now for my own part I must declare in the presence of God, it is really
Strange and Surprising to me, and I think it may be so to any considering
Person; that after this fresh later testimony of the Christian Fortitude and
zeal of our Bishops for the Protestant Interest, there should be any Protestant
Separatist from the Communion of this Church: Much less any to Bark against her
as Roman or Antichristian.

Some Persons perchance may think it too Nice a speculation, to say that the
Dissenters are the greatest Friends to Popery: yet I dare boldly assert it for
Truth. Not that I think they are so by paction or design; but in the Issue, it
has, and I fear it may again be found, that these widen the Gap for the Common
Enemies Entry. And were there an exact search made, there would be found more
Papists in Masquerade in the several Fraternities which have divided from the
Church, than many well meaning Persons among them are aware off, or willing to
believe.

For it is certain, how opposite soeever the Opinions of the Separatists are to
those of Rome in some Points; Yet as to Matters of Government they are equally
Combined against the Royal and Ecclesiastic Power: And the Church or Kingdom
like an open Field, may be Harrass'd by both; Deuteronomy. 22.20.
and then the forbidden mixture of plowing with an Ox and Ass, shall be more
dangerously practiced, when the learned Jesuit is joined with the Phanatick
Donatist: the Seminary Priest and the gifted Brother: the Foreign Conclave and
the Domestic Conventicle shall conspire together to Demolish the Fabric,
Deface the Beauty, and Destroy the Purity of our Church.

It were happy if we did consider, that differences among those of one Religion
and Nation are a great advantage to the common Enemy: For in this case every
Subdivision is a strong Weapon in the Hand of the contrary Party: And by how
much inconsiderable our adversaries might appear to us, were we United, by so
much the more Formidable they become to us, through our own unhappy
Dissentions: By which their Interest is more Advanced, their hope of success
Increased, than by all their Plots and Stratagems.

It were to be wished that the Enmity of the Church of Rome which is eagerly
enough set against us all, and in the End would swallow us without distinction,
could by a kind of Antiperistasis inflame our mutual Love, Multitudo inimicorum
corroborat unitatem amicorum.
stifle our private Animosities, make us more Unite among our selves, and
willing to compose our differences: This were to extract an Antidote out of
their Malice, Discord. in unitatem trahant and plagae in Remedia vertantur:
unde metuit Ecclesia periculum, indesumat augmentum. Ambros.
and make Treacle of the Venom of the Viper, to Improve our common Danger unto
an occasion of greater Safety. Nothing inspires them more with Courage and
Resolution against us, than the several Ruptures among us: Which were they made
up, their Confidence would fag, and their attempts turn to their own shame.

But to conclude this Paragraph, in which justice to the best reformed Church
in the World, Zeal for Religion, and Concernedness for all who think it worth
their while to read what I have hear asserted, carried me to this modest
Vindication. I therefore beseech all by what is dear and sacred to them, that
they keep themselves within the Pale of that Church, whose Doctrine is pure,
whose Worship is Decent, whose Discipline is Primitive; from which some through
weakness have so ignorantly, some through mistake, have so inconsiderately, and
others through wantonness, have so unnecessarily departed; or shall I say, from
which, some by wilfulness, have so unjustly, some through prejudice have so
perversely; and others through wickedness have so malicously Separated.

As I wish Christian Pilgrims keep more close and unite together, since their
friendly Society conduces so much to their natural Preservation; So I would
recommend a great deal of Caution and Circumspection to them. There is a
certain jealousy and suspicion not only allowable, but commendable in
Strangers, which contributes extremely for the security of their Credit and
Interest, whethersoever they pass, or wherever they tarry. They know there is a
curiosity in others to Gaze much upon them, to be inquisitive about their
Circumstances, to make some remarks thereon; Perhaps on their Birth and
Quality, their Station and Condition, their Garb and Country: and whether it
be Affliction (if Necessity make them Travel) or Policy (when it is but their
Choice for Improvement) or Fancy, that they visit Foreign Places; they are very
wary and considerate; they know many things may pass current in the Natives,
which are not so easily excused or indulged in them; therefore are careful to
do nothing, which may expose them to Derision, Censure, or hard Treatment.

It were happy Spiritual Pilgrims did transcribe this Copy in their behavior;
that they were more strict and watchful: Many Eyes, many spies are over them,
and a small escape or failure in them is more Notic'd, becomes more Criminous
in them, than a greater matter in a mere worldling: Many snares and dangerous
occasions are about them, many deceitful objects to entice them, many real
Foes, in the disguise of pretending Friends, to cajole them; And I know no
better Amulet against open or Secret Enemies, against violent Assaults, sly
Insinuations, than that of Epicharmus, Be Sober and Diffident. Trust not all
you see, though never so goodly or promising in appearance: Believe not all you
Hear, though never so delectable to your Ears: Taste not all presented, though
in a Golden Cup, it invites your Appetite, and courts your Liking with its
Flavor.

There is no part of Prudence more necessary or profitable for Mortals, than a
well ordered and cautious Jealousy. Solomon says, a prudent Man foreseeth Evil
and hides himself; but the Simple passes on and is punished; It is true, the
Wise Man speaks there of Judgments and penal Evils; but it holds as true in
Reference to Moral; And a wise Christian will See and Dread Danger, where Fools
neither perceive nor fear any Inconveniency, till it be too late; He suspects
there may be Fire under the Ashes; a Hook under the Bait; that the Color which
sparkles in the Glass, may delude him; the Charms which flatter his pleasing
Passion, may bite like a Cockatrice, and the glitterings of Gains may dazzle his
Eyes to his everlasting Damage; Therefore he will sift well in his Thought what
is Obvious to his Senses: That the reflections of his Mind may Correct the
Errors of these deceitful Intelligencers, and guard him, so far as possible,
against Misfortunes or Miscarriages; If he unavoidably encounter such things,
as may prove occasions of Evil, with what Modesty, Moderation and Sobriety will
he look about him; when he sits down to his Repast, he will Feed with Fear that
his Table may not become a Snare; when he falls into Company, he Converses with
such Caution, that lighter Freedoms shall not betray him to loose Practices:
He Will keep a loof from Harms way, and Satan's Road; He Will be loath to shuffle
himself into drunken Clubs or Litigious Societies; he knows these are the Marts
and Rendevouzes of Woes and Sorrows, of Wounds and causeless Quarrels; And that
many Strangers through inadvertency or over-ventrousness have at such occasions
met with dismal Accidents, slipped into fatal Extravagancies, and come to
Tragical Ends.

This Cautionary Fear is the Fortress of Chastity, the Sanctuary of Temperance,
and the Guardian of Innocence' It is a Tutelary Angel against the force and
subtilty of Sin, and all its Abettors; it is a Sentinel over our own Frailty,
whereby we preserve our Integrity in the midst of all dangerous Encounters: The
suspicious and fearful are safe, when the Foolhardy and Presumptuous have
their Heels tript up. He that fears not a Temptation, knows neither his own
Weakness, the treachery of his Heart, nor the deceitfulness of Sin, the power
or policy of Satan. There is no Courage in braving Sin, or daring the Devil,
nor is there any Cowardice in flying occasions of, or fearing Temptations to
Evil; these Panders for Sin and Solicitors for Hell. None are in greater Danger
from these, than the Secure; nor any more fatally deceived or shamefully
worsted, than they who think themselves too strong, or too cunning for their
Sins; well then might Solomon say, Prove. 28.14.
happy is the Man that fears always. And St. Paul recommends it as a
Preservative from falling, or a Staff to support all Christian Pilgrims, 1 Cor.
10.12.
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall.

Their way is Narrow and Slippery to the Boat, and they had need look well,
where to tread, and how to fasten their steps, that their feet slip not: A
Malicious thought, a Lustful glance, a Tatling Tongue, a credulous Ear, a
liquorish Palate, a deceitful Hand, are all wry Steps, or Deviations from the
royal Road in which they ought to Walk; and they had need of a watchful Eye, a
jealous Heart, a wary Foot, when a mistake is so easy, and in case thereof the
Danger so Great.

It is this makes many Spiritual Travelers shy of Lawful things, that they may
Work themselves into a fear of what is sinful. They deny themseves many things,
which they may with less Sin than Scandal, or danger, Enjoy: They know those
who extend their freedom to the utmost Verge, may soon transgress the March;
that these who Ride with loose Reins in a narrow Road, and advance with full
speed toward the Score, may soon slip beyond it; that these who go as far as
they can with Innocence, may go further than they ought with Prudence;
therefore they Curb themselves with a Holy Fear, least their Liberty betray
them into Looseness, or their Wantonness in playing Feats so near the Enemies
Quarters, expose them to be hooked in by Ambush, or Violence.

These who will be trying such dangerous Experiments, may easily slide into
Impiety or Scandal. The bounds betwixt Virtue and Vice, are neither so large
nor so high as these, wherewith God and Nature (likely to terminate the
ambition of Encroaching Neighbors, and secure Possessours their Properties)
has separated Nations and Kingdoms from one another. Their Confines are near
and more passable, and what is Lawful, and Sinful are not so distant as the two
Poles; yea, 1 Samuel 20.3.
we may say of them, as David said in another Case, there is but a step betwixt
them. Many who put on Resolution to stay their Course within the mark of
Virtue, have by too much haste and inadvertency, passed beyond their Line, and
gone further than either they themselves or others thought: and found a
Precipice or a Gulf, where they expected Fieldroom; been plunged over Head and
Shoulders, while they intended to keep aloof, and retreat with Safety.

I wish all Christian Pilgrims may consider the occasions of Sin are wrapped up
in their greatest Comforts, Licitis perimus omnis.
and most innocent Enjoyments, as you find by these Recusants in the Gospel,
Luke 14.16.
whose exclusion was the effect of their Abuse of, and inordinate Affection to
things in themselves commendable: We have never therefore more need of
Circumspection and a cautelous Fear, than in the use of those things allowed us
by the bounty of Heaven; which if they minister matter of Danger, the greater
is our Virtue in making them serviceable to noble Ends, and excellent Purposes,
in our honest and decent fruition of them; whereby we convert them into matter
of Praise and Honor, to which nothing can conduce more than watchfulness and
Sobriety: Let me then close this Paragraph with the Apostles advice be Sober
and Vigilant; 1 Pet. 5.8.
join Sobriety to your watchfulness, these are fellow-helpers and
conjunct-furtherers of one another in the Apostles opinion, all our Caution and
Circumspection will be Maim and Lame, an unfaithful and insufficient Sentinel,
if Sobriety keep it not waking.

I may then in the Ninth Place say that Abstemiousness of Appetite and Sobriety
of Diet is no small help toward that Caution and Circumspection I lately
mentioned, or shall I call it a Considerable Branch of the same; and as
Necessary an ingredient unto Pilgrims prescription for their Conduct, as any I
can Name. This keeps their Bodies in good Plight, and their Minds in Serene
Temper; those who immerse themselves in Sensual Delights, and wallow like great
Earthworms in a fat Dunghill of Voluptuousness, are hardly Rouzed; or when they
are up, they Advance with such a Lethargick pace, as makes them apt to Stumble
or Faint; their Body by Intemperance becomes Heavy and Unweildy a very Nursery
of Diseases: their Blood is hindered in its Circulation by such Redundancy of
Gross Humors, which drown the Vital Spirits, (...).
that they neither move Regularly nor Briskly: so that those laden Bellies
have frequently empty Heads and leaden Heels: Defects no less prejudicial to
the Spiritual, than Secular Passengers.

Corpulency or Grossness of Body in most men, is a great Impediment to Activity
and Nimbleness, to the Spirituousnes of their Nerves, and the Agility of their
Limbs; Their too much Phlegm obstructing the Vigorous motions of their Blood, or
Enervating ir by Commixing or Gliding with it. Voluptuousnes by a Natural
Causality has the same unhappy influence on the Body and Soul; as it makes the
former Listless and Resty, so it is no less injurious to the expedit Effects of
the latter: and brings a kind of Palsy on the one, as well as the other, Opimit
as sapientiam impedit, exilitas expedit, paralysis mentem prodigit, Phtisis
servat Tertull. de Anima.
a fat Opulent Diet occasions often a lean Soul, while a spare one ministers no
less to the Soundness and Sharpness of our Spirits, then to the Health and
Vigor of our Bodies.

There is that near Amity betwixt Soul and Body, that they share alike in one
another good or bad Fortune. And though the Soul be the Mistres, she is Affected
with what Troubles and Annoys her Servant; and whatever prejudices or detains,
what Disables or Retard's this, Touches that: The Immoderate use of Worldly
Pleasures wound these Copartners at once; weakens the Body in all its Parts,
and the Soul in all its Faculties: And there is scarce any thing more Shameful
for the present, or more Tragical in the end; disgraceful Maladies not fit to
be named, Grandes Rhombi, patinaeque grande ferunt una cum damno dedecus.
Horat. Lib. 2. Sat 2.
are the Reproachful Punishments, Greedy Physicians the costly Pensioners,
Nauseous Hospitals the last Sanctuaries of these Slaves of Sense, and Vassals
of Lusts.

When the Body is out of Tune the Mind drives but heavily: Its Sprightly
progress in a Virtuous Course depends extremely upon the good disposition of
its neighbor; To which nothing conduces more, than Temperance, this is the
best Nurse of Health, the surest preservation of Strength, the truest Enhanser
of Pleasure, the safest Tutress of a sound Mind; and what more Needful or
Comfortable to a Traveler, then Agility of Body, clearness of Sight, and
Cheerfulness of Spirit; all which are quickn'd, cherished, and promoted by
Sobriety.

For when the Body is pampered by Gluttony and Excess, it becomes like a
Kitchen, where much Provision is made ready, whose Roof is blackned with Smoke
and Reek. We frequently find the upper Story of such Men Sullied, their Brain
Crusted, their outward and inward Sight lesed, that they become very unfit for
Earthly as well as Heavenly Concerns. Reason is Stifled with this Liberty, and
Religion Starved with this Plenty: -- Quum corpus onustum hesternis vitiis,
animum quoque praegravat una: Atque affiget humo divinae particulam aurae
Horat. Lib. 2. Sat. 2.
The Soul is so be-misted that we cannot see our way, or depressed with the
weight of its mate, to grovel so on the ground, that we must needs lag in our
Journey, whereby we come to miss our Road and Home either by Straying, or
Loitering.

What shall we say then to these Kitchen Virtuoso's, whose Care and Study makes
them only witty in the Art of Cookery, who are Curiously expert in inventing
new Methods of Luxury to gratify their Palate, irritate their Appetite, and
Cram their Paunch? May we not assert that they carry their Brains in their
Bellies, their Guts in their Heads, and their Treasure in their Dishes? or
shall we call them Idolatrous Purveyors for the Flesh, or Prostituted Slaves to
their Stomachs, or (to give you their Character in Tertullian's Phrase) They
make their Bellies their God, their Cook their Priest, their Table their Altar,
their Kitchen their Chapel, their Messes their Sacrifices, amd their Sauces
their Graces.

It is strange that what our Noble Predecessors looked upon, as the most
Servile of all Employments, should now become the Science of Gentlemen; and
that he who returns from his Travels Fraughted with an Inventory of Rare
Ragoues, etc. Kick-shawes of odd Dishes and Sauces, should be reputed to have
attained to a Master-Peice of Breeding: Though all the Improvement he brought
home, discovers he spent more time in the Tavern or Victuallinghouse, then in
the Library or Accademy; and that he is better Accomplished to be Clerk of the
Kitchen, than of the Closset, or fitter to order a Feast, then the affairs of
the Court or Camp.

Men are not now satisfied with what is Healthy and Necessary, Non in caro
nidore voluptas summa, sed in te ipso est. Tu pulmentaria quaere sudando.
Corruptus vanis Rerum; quia vaeneat auro Rara avis, and picta pandat spectacula
cauda. Ducit te species. Horat. Lib. 2. Sat. 2.
we Nauseate what is Cheap and Common, because more easily obtained, though
generally better and more nourishing; provident Nature having so far consulted
the Benefit of Mankind in General, that what is most useful is compassed with
less Toil and Expense; yet some are pleased with nothing but what is of great
Cost and purchased at a dear Rate; nothing raises their Taste and Delight, but
what Enhanses the Price, and Peoples Wit must be set on the Rack, to find out
Studied Rarities to provoke their Languid Stomachs, which a constant fullness
only has made so, and might be sharpened better by a little hunger, proceeding
from exercise or respite from Feasting; this would Season their Viands with
more advantage to their health, more pleasure to their Palate, and Satisfaction
to their Appetite.

As long as Man was content with such Fare as sufficed Nature, Cum labor
extuderit fastidia, siccus, inanis sperne cibum vilem. Jejunus Rarostomachus
vulgaria temnit, Horat. ibid. Poscis opem nervis, corpusque fidele senectae,
esto age, sed grandes pastinae, tucet aque crassa, annuere his superos vetuere,
Jovemque inrantur Persius Sat. 2.
and satisfied Hunger, his Body was wholesome and Vigorous, and Free from
Distempers, but since his Liquorish Curiosity has exceeded those bounds which
the Innocent simplicity of our Ancestors accustomed themselves to, and that Sea
and Land must be Ransackt to gratify his inordinate Desire, Diseases have
broken in thick and threefold in Troops upon him; the Curiosity of his Brain
has kindled a Consumption in his Lungs; the Distending of his Belly has
Contracted his Nerves, and crampt his Spirits: That as a Neighbor Historian
observes, and if it was so then, much more may we assert now, that the Variety
of Strange distempers was the Effect of new and strange Dishes, Hector Boethius
Hist. Scot. Lib. 2. Hos utinam inter heroas natum tellus me prima tulisset.
Horat. ibidem.
unknown to our Progenitors, who kept sounder Minds in stronger Bodies, and
that former Years too, by their sober unsophisticated Diet, than we now do with
all our Plenty and Variety of Delicacies.

Did I to shame the Luxury of the present Age, deduce from History some
instances of the abstinence of Primitive Pilgrims, which bred Envy and Amazment
in the Pagan World, it would pass for Fable and Romance, so unwilling we are to
believe, what we have no will (although Ability enough) to Practice, and does
so much Reproach and Condemn our Riotous way of Living.

I could tell you of some who lived in Caves and Grotto's, in Shades and
Deserts, where Heaven was their Canopy, a stone or Turf their Pillow, a Purling
brook their Lullaby, or the incentive of their Repose; a little Bread and
Water, a few Roots, or some Herbs and Fruits, their Provision: and yet their
Sleep was more sound, the Meals more hearty, their Bodies more Vigorous, their
Spirits more Cheerful, than ours, when we swell with the most sumptuous
Dainties, swallow the Richest Junkets, or swim in the greatest Affluence. Or to
give it in the Prophets phrase and Scripture Language, Amos 6.3, 4, 5.
Than when we drink Wine in Bowls, and chant to the sound of the Viol; when we
have Eaten Lambs out of the Flock, and Calves out of the Stall, when we stretch
our selves on Couches, and lie upon beds of Ivory.

Now I have not said all this, as if I thought it possible to Retrieve the
Sobriety of Anchorits, or the Abstemiousness of Ancient Ascetics; for I equally
despair of that, as I do of bringing the Fervours of their Devotion, the
frequency of their Prayers, the flights of their Spirits, the height of their
Zeal, or the measures of their Charity into Fashion, in this degenerate Age.
This were such a misapplication of Remedies, (not because they are not right,
but because the Malignancy is too Strong, and the Patient too Weak) that I
might run the Risque of incurring such another Censure, as Cicero past on Cato.
Loquitur tanquam in Republica Catonis, quum sumus in faece Romuli.
I consider then we are in the Dregs, not in the Prime, of the Golden Age of
Christianity; I shall therefore forbear, and with a pardonable inversion, say,
Such old Wine is not for such new Bottles, such strong Grain is not for such
slender Ground, and ancient Austerity is not for these Licentious and Luxurious
times.

Only I must content my self to do, as Generals, who for the Encouragement of
Subaltern Officers, or younger Soldiers, entertain them with some Elogies of
the Courage of Caesar, or the Conduct of Hannibal, or the Military prowess of
some Veteran famous Warriors: Not that they think, these Juniors shall come up
to them, but that by proposing such excellent Precedents, they may beget in
them an esteem of Gallantry, and generous Attempts to acquire Reputation by
some Feats of Bravery: So would I gladly generate in you Emulation to make some
Aproaches to these noble Patterns of Abstinence and Sobriety.

Let me therefore Caution you in the words of our Savior, Luke 21.34.
Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your Hearts be overcharged with
Surfeiting and Drunkenness; be Sober and Vigilant, 1 Pet. 5.8. Gal. 5.24.
Crucify the Flesh with the Lusts and Affections thereof: There is no greater
provokement to these, than Gluttony, and Intemperance, withdraw the Fuel, and
the Fire cease. These are the Parents and Incendaries of all mischief to Soul
and Body: The Cloggs and Remoarcs of our March: The Bars and Portcullises
aagainst our Entrance unto the everlasting Kingdom.

I wish you may repress your Appetite, moderate your way of living, and Pare
off from your Superfluities something for these for whom nothing is prepared;
Neh. 1.10.
what is left behind, would go farther, and be more blessed to your Children
and Families. If People did indulge themselves less in their Mirth and Jollity,
A little that the Righteous has is better than the Riches of many Wicked.
Psalm. 37.16.
in their Pomp and Vanity, in the needless Excess of their Apparel, or Table,
and reserve a part of what is Prodigally wasted that Way, to be expended on
Sacred Purposes, and charitable Uses, to encourage Gods Worship, to Feed the
hungry Bellies, and Cloth the naked Backs of Christ's poor Members, they would
in some laudable Degree resemble those ancient Pilgrims, who by denying the
Pleasures of the Flesh, and despising the Profits of the World, became the more
easily inclined to hear the Groans and supply the Needs of their necessitous
Brethren. The Cries of the Poor are drowned in the noise of Feasting, the
Mourning of Joseph Stifled in our Mirth, and the Afflictions of others are
disregarded when our Affections are too intent on the World. If our Abstinence
be not accompanied with Works of Mercy; it can no more further us in our
Progress to our heavenly Country, Isay 58.5.
in the Prophet's Opinion, than Faith separated from Charity can avail us in
the Apostles. James 2.14.
If when we mortify our Appetite, we do not enlarge our hearts; if when we
retrench our Diet, we do not extend our Hands to help and succor the Needy:
Our Abstinence is as much without acceptance, as our Faith is without Life.

When your forbearance Feeds others, and your Faith Fills and warms them, you
have fasted unto God, and believed unto Salvation; the Prayers of the Poor
shall prosper you in your Journey, engage God for your Guide and Angels for
your Guard.

Religion does not discharge us all Commerce with the World: No, no. We may
lawfully Traffic in it, but still as Foreigners; we must not Pawn our best
Coin for its worst Commodities; but should purchase those which upon our Return
may prove of most Advantage in our own Country: And make use of the current
Species of the Place, to serve our Necessities, or Conveniences therewith,
while we stay in it; and what we save over and above these Require, lend it
unto them who will give us (or transmit before us) Bills of Exchange answerable
upon our Masters Credit, in those Mansions of Bliss. By thus depositing our
lesser Sums in Gods Treasury, we Secure at our Death (contrary to the Tenor of
that in this World) not only Double, but beyond Measure, more valuable Returns
than what we Disburse: And by a free Scattering or Casting away some portions
of our inconstant, uncertain Estates, we Lay a Sure and fixed Foundation of
Eternal Life, upon unsure and unsolid Means; and different from the way of
Terrestrial Architecture, we will Rear up a Firm and Stable Superstructure of
Hope and Comfort on the Transitory motion of our Temporalities, through our
Hearts and Hands unto such Fast and Stanch Friends, as will Welcome and Receive
us into everlasting Habitations, and so we procure faithful Friends by
unfaithful Servants, an incorruptible Crown, by corruptible Treasure; an
abiding Inheritance by the frequent Removes and voluble Rotations of this
World's Goods to such as cannot Refund the same in Specie, or the Equivalent as
to any Earthly kind in this Life, but will in an everlasting State make them
Rebound to us with infinite Advantage and incomparable Increase.

Ancient Pilgrims acquired Mastery over the Flesh, Prove. 23.2.
by putting a Knife to their Throat, when it was in their power to gratify it;
and they brought the World into Subjection, by keeping it out of their Hearts,
when they had most of it in their Hands, and so they became more willing to let
some Charitable distributions of it slip through their Fingers, for the Relief
of others: And this voluntary Restraint they put themselves under, prepared
them the better to bear up under the Hardships they were brought unto, by
Violence or Extremity; and the looseness of their Hearts from the World,
disposed them while they were in the way, the more Readily to part with some
Portions of it, for the Succor of their distressed Neighbors, Per licentiam
utendi, continentiae experientia procedit. Tertull.
and Shake it quite off when they came to their Journeys end, The Checks and
Crossings they gave their natural Inclinations, as to lawful Freedoms, in a
State of full Liberty, and overflowing Plenty, Qualified them to bear the want
of Satisfying them, when they were Pincht by Penury or Oppression, They
suspected those Opportunities which put much in their Power: Suspect^^ habeo
have indulgentiam.
They Curbed themselves, before they were Crossed by others, they denied
themselves, before others laid any Restraint on them; and would scarcely either
taste or tip their Tongues with what others glutted themselves with; they
forbore Necessaries many a time, to accustom themselves the better to contemn
Superfluities at all times.

I must tell you that in the Prosperity and Peace of the Church, the Severities
of their Mortification, the Austerities of their Diet, the Rigours of their
Discipline, made many Martyrs of Penance, Patterns of Patience, examples of
Christian Fortitude, before ever the fury of Infidels, the malice of Heretics,
or the cruelty of Usurpers, made them Martyrs of Persecution, Mirrours of
Constancy, or disgraceful Spectacles of infamous Pageantry; and if they had not
Innur'd themselves to the former, they had never so Courageously endured the
latter, Their ordinary Meals were but Preparatives to Hunger, and Want: Their
affected Privacy while they were in a state of Liberty, abated the uneasiness
of a close Prison upon their Confinement; their abstract way of Living in their
own Country, the foresight and previous Thoughts of the necessity they would
one Day be put upon, to leave it, disposed them for Banishment; 1 Cor. 15.31.
and by an ingenious way of Dying daily, they fitted themselves for heir last
Exit, and Departure, And if they had not thus Disciplined and Schooled
themselves before, they had never (when it came to the Push) obtained such
famous Triumphs over fiery Trials, or made their Ascent through Thorns and
Crosses to Crowns and Thrones.

By these happy Methods, Ancient Pilgrims procceded in their way, Shaking off
all entanglements of Sense, Stifling the Inclinations of the Flesh, Stripping
themselves of all encumbrances from the World, by all which they were well
disposed at their Journeys end, cheerfully to leave it, Joyfully to commit
their Souls to the Father of Spirits, and their Earthly Tabernacle to the
common Receptacle of all Living, the Grave. They considered the World as the
place of their Exile, yea, as their Enemies Country, and so were well pleased
to forsake it, when they received their Sentence of Removal; and if we expect
to finish our Course with Joy, to obtain the Prize, Assume the Robes, Receive
the Palms, they have gone before us to take Possession of; as the same mind
must be in us, in reference to the other instances I have named, so likewise as
to a hearty farewell, and contented parting with the World, we must look on it
with the same indifferency and jealousy, use it with the same sobriety and
abstinence, leave it with the same willingness and resignation.

Our Condition in this World is but a Probationary State, and would you be
always Striving or Running, and never receive the Crown, or reach the Prize?
Would you be continually traveling, and never come to your Journeys end? Would
you be still in the Academy, learning to Exercise; and never come to officiate
in these Ministrations in the Court of Heaven, you have been trained to, by all
the Nurture and Discipline of this Life? Our Residence in this Region of
Mortality puts us under these or the like disadvantages. Pray you, what
Apprentice or Servant does not long for the term of his Freedom? What Labourer
in the Vineyard, does not look for, and gladly receive his Hire? Or, what
Stranger will be afraid to return to his Fathers House? How much may these
Instances reproach the dastardly Fear, and strange Unwillingness of some to
dye? What Bride does not joyfully expect the time of her Espousals? What Heir
does not wish the fruition of his Inheritance? what Prisoner does not desire
the Period of his Misery? Or what Prince does not Covet the season of his
Coronation? Now the day of Death is all this to the Christian Pilgrim, his
translation from Darkness to Light, from the Wilderness to Canaan, from Bondage
to Paradise, from Slavery to Liberty, from a tempestuous Sea to a safe Shore,
and a sure Haven of constant Joy and perpetual Rest.

These Spiritual Travelers, who are either timorous or unwilling to Die, bring
an ill Report on their heavenly Country, as if it were not so desirable; and
make others believe, the Passage to it is more Difficult and Terrible, than
truly it is; that their Title to it is but Weak, their Expectation of it but
Faint, when they shrink at the Fore-thoughts, or Shrugg at the Approach of the
Messenger to bring them thither: And it may be justly enough presumed, the
Earth has too great an ascendant over their Hearts, too much of their Value and
liking, when they are so much grieved to part with it; it disparages their
Faith, it reproaches their Hope, it detracts from their Love of the unseen
things of the other World, to see them leave this with so much Reluctance. It
is no strange thing, to see Infidels take Death heavily, and constrainedly;
since they believe no better Life than the present: No wonder to see them go
off the Stage with Roaring and Impatience, since they are separated from their
Idols, and worldly Comforts, without any expectation of a better Exchange.
Atheists and Libertines whose Felicity expires with their Breath, may be forry
to Die: But how unaccountable is it, that Christians should be so, who believe
that their light Affliction which is but for a Moment, 1 Cor. 4.17.
works for them a far more Sure and eternal Weight of Glory; that Death is
their Vehicle to this, the Grave, the Cradle of their Resurrection, and the
period of their weary troublesome Pilgrimage.

Has not the Captain of their Salvation and the whole Host of Pilgrims made
their Entry by this Gate, and so Consecrated and Facilitated the same to their
Followers; it argues they have little Affection to their heavenly Country, or
their Company, when they are so loath to go hence to Enjoy it, and their
Society; it discredits them who have gone before, as if their practice had no
Influence to make them trace their Steps, with Alacrity and Resolution: It
disheartens their Familiars, when they See; and discourages them who come
after, when they Hear, how Cowardly or Sadly, such receive the Message of their
Return, or the News of their Delivery.

Let us all then who profess our selves Christian Pilgrims, and pretend to be
Traveling toward the heavenly Jerusalem; let us for the Honor of Christ, and
Reputation of Heaven; for the Credit of our Profession, and Praise of divine
Grace in our last Behavior; for Commendation of the Example, that cloud of
Witnesses which went before us, have left us; for the Comfort of those about
us, the Encouragement of them who come after us, the Satisfaction of our
Friends, the Conviction of our Foes; let us by looking to, and considering
these things, be excited to disentangle our Hearts from terrene Objects; to
Banish all averseness of our Dissolution, wherewith the flattering
blandishments of Sin, or the falacious affrightments of Death, would possess
us; Heb. 12.1
and laying aside any Weight which may Let us, in running with patience our
Race; or at its End bow down our Spirits, and hinder their flight to the
Regions of Light and Life, Luke 12.35. 2 Pet. 2.12.
let us with our Loins Girt and our Lamps burning, wait for our Lords coming;
yea, look for, and hasten to the same: And if we be thus prepared and
qualified; if we be thus ready and disposed; we may cheerfully resign and
commit the keeping of our Souls to God in well doing, 1 Pet. 4.19.
as to our faithful Creator. And we may be sure his Arms are stretched out to
Embrace us; the Gates of Heaven shall be set wide open, to receive us, and we
shall be hois'd to Mount Sion, Heb. 12.13.
to the City of the living God, the Heavenly Jerusalem, to an Innumerable
Company of Angels, to the General Assembly and Church of the first born, to the
Spirits of just Men made perfect, and of those Heroic Pilgrims, and Conquering
Strangers, now Triumphant Citizens in Glory; Ephesians. 2.19.
who all with Songs of Praise, and Universal Acclamations of Joy, will welcome
us to our Home, and everlasting Habitations.

Thus I have in some Common Topics drawn some Lines by the Behavior of the
Secular, for direction of the Spiritual Pilgrim; to which I could have added
from the Parallel some more Reflections no less Useful and Genuine; but I
presume not to say all that could, or should be said on this Subject; my own
present Circumstances suggested these, and such like Thoughts unto my Mind, in
my retired Walks; while I am now absent from my Native Soil: And if from them I
have Copi'd out any good Plan or Form for the Reader's, or my own better
deportment in our Estrangement, mine from my Earthly, and both of us from our
heavenly Country, I have my Intent; let me then by way of Epilogue shut up all,
with this further Reflection.

When we pass through Foreign Parts, this Reflection of being Strangers and
Pilgrims, wants not its own Auspicious Influence, to Curb our Licentiousness,
to Hem in these Extravagancies, we indulge our selves in, in our Native
Climate, to pare off the Asperities of our Nature, or the Blemishes of our
unfortunate Education, and to compose us to the best temper of Mind, and habit
of Body; to exert the utmost Industry and Diligence for our Improvement in all
worthy Endowments; and it would have the like Efficacy to model us to a
suitable Behavior in Reference to our Spiritual State, and the Relation we
stand in to the World upon that Score, as the place of our Peregrination;
where, as in a Academy, it would Engage us in all Divine Exercises, in pursuit
of such excellent Seize; as may qualify us at our Return, for more Noble
Ministrations in these Courts of Honor, and Mansions of glory above; And it
would never miss this Effect: but that we are more careful of the Modes and
Fashions, of the paint and dress of our Exterior, than we are of adorning the
Interior Man, with the Virtues and Graces so agreeable to its Divine Original;
and the necessary preparatory accomplishments for our acceptable Reception to
our heavenly Country.

But I am afraid both the one and the other, the Secular and Spiritual
Traveller, Rest too much here; and the consideration of their common condition
as Strangers, affects them no farther, than to frame them to some external
discreet sort of Conduct. It is matter of Regret, that some Return from their
Travels more fraught with Nauseous set Forms of Courtship, and Superstitious
observances of some punctilious Ceremonies of Civility; than any Real
advancement in Morals or Intellectuals. It is to be feared, many who walk with
their faces toward Jerusalem: are in the same Condemnation; who tumble over
some Prayers they have con'd by Rot, and jog on in a certain Round of Customary
performances, Matthew. 23.25.
cleansing the outside of the Platter, without any serious endeavor to obtain
any inward saving change wrought in their Souls. And to what purpose is all
this Diligence both of the one and the other; but for some outward varnish to
the Cabinet, while the Jewel is Neglected a trimming of the Scabbard, while the
Blade is set at naught? But what signify these shows and shadows, these little
trifling Arts of insinuation and complaisant Methods, whereby either of them
fit themselves for the Gallantry of some Choice Conversation? What are they but
false blazes, superficial flattering Scenes, while their minds are not
cultivated with any ingenuous Improvement; Nor furnished with any store of
wholesome instructions; or decked with these useful qualities; which may make
them serviceable in their Stations, comfortable to their Friends, or profitable
to the World?

I wish both the one and the other may consider the Weightier Matters; Matthew.
23.23.
and take care of the better part, to have their Souls Enriched with these
Ornaments, which may give luster to the other; that they may join inward purity
with External Neatness, a Sober Mind with a graceful Mien, a sanctified heart
and honest designs, with an agreeable address and silken converse; and when
there is this happy Conjunction of a heavenly disposition with a Civil
Deportment, their foreign Education and exterior polishments serve as a
Transparent Coverlet to increase the beauty of their virtues; and their
Breeding makes no mean figure in the Equipage of their Religion. And I must
rather say, it proves a fortunate Usher to bespeak room for it, among these
more Nice and delicate Constitutions: who stand aghast at a slovenly, as well as
a sinful approach; and look asquint on any thing, that does not accost them
with pleasantness and affability.

Some Travelers by customary Associating themselves with Strangers have
acquired such a Free unconstrained Carriage, that they can dexterously
accommodate themselves Respectively to the various Places and Persons, Tempers,
Sizes and occasions they meet with. 1 Cor. 9.22.
These for Pious purposes transcribe St. Paul's politic; of becoming all
things to all men, that they may Proselyte some of all Conditions, to a love
and imitation of their Virtues: If they chance to deal with unpolished, rugged
Natures, they some times (as we say) hit two Marks with one Stone; for when by
their smooth and gentle Applications, they pare off the Roughness that is in
such, so as to dispose them to Civility toward Men; they in the mean time with
the same breath instill unto them Piety toward God; with the more ingenious and
better accomplished their obliging Behavior introduces themselves into Favor,
and then they improve this advantage to convey Religion more forcibly into the
hearts of such, and by their taking way of Management, they Establish an Empire
for it in their Affections, which of it self, for all its amability, it could
not obtain without these Charming Methods, for even some of these Polite Wits
are so indifferent or Platonic lovers of Religion, that it Runs the Fate of
these Persons of Quality, how Eminent soever or Deserving fare the better in
some places for their Companion sake.

These Pilgrims who can in this manner, make outward decency Minister to the
conveniences of Religion, may in their Traversing, make a great Conquest for
it, in the Civil Regions of the World; by Clothing it in soft Raiment, Matthew.
12, 8.
they facilitate its Entry to these more Resined Societies and exalted
Stations, which are disgusted with Rudness and Unmannerliness; Even to the
Palaces of Princes, Academies of Nobles, and Colleges of Virtuosos: who are
qualni'd by a similitude of civilized tempers to receive impressions so patly
adapted to their Relish, which Court them in their own Language and Fashion.
And when they have succeeded so happily, may it not be said, although others
have done much, and deserve well of Christianity, who by their arr and example
make it current through the lower valleys of the Earth: yet these who by
uniting Sanctity, and Civility, Piety and Humanity, Devotion and Discretion,
raise it to the Hills and Mountains, these seats of Honor, and Convert them
into Sanctuaries of Religion, Nurseries of Grace, and Seminaries of Virtue;
These, these do it more considerable Service, add to its Beauty, by the
Harmonious Mixture of this pleasant Variety, and to its Strength, by the
prosperous Transformation its flowing so high makes in those upper Grounds;
from which it cannot but descend with greater force, more auspicious speed and
benign influence, for bettering the Inferior Parts of the Intellectual World.

I am apt to believe there are some Spiritual Travelers, whose care of their
Moral Deportment resembles that, the other take about their Civil behavior;
and as I have advised these to suit their inward frame to their outward form;
so I request those who would aspire to an Eminency in Moral Virtues and Human
Accomplishment; that they would endeavor to excel in Christian Grace and
Religious Practice; Morality in Relation to Christianity, is but as the
Handmaid to the Mistress: As the Suburbs to the City, and if we set up our Rest
there, we'll never be admitted Denizons of Heaven; These who are Punctual and
Exact in Civil Commerce, who avoid some Noisy scandalous Crimes, while they
neglect mortifying their Natural Corruptions, mourning over their secret Sins,
subduing their Spiritual Pride, irregular Appetites, and inordinate Lusts; are
more Pharisaical than truly Christian, more for Scouring the outside, than
Cleansing the inside.

One of the greatest excellencies of the Christian Religion, which should be
our Directory, is, that it searches into the Closest Retirement of the Heart,
and is not content to Cut away any excrescency in the Life or Conversation; but
it checks our inward inclinations, to which no human power can reach, and the
Morality of the Heathens was defective in; it curbs our very thoughts, which
scorn the Edict of Princes, and baffle the authority of Tyrants: it chides the
first Risings of Lust, and stifles them in their very Conception; it governs
our most retired Imaginations, and speaks in an imperious strain to our very
Intentions; prescribing a Rule to the Principles, Motives and designs of men's
Actions: Male velle, male facere, male dicere, ex aequo vetamur. Not only to do
Evil but even to speak evil, not only so but to wish it, or think on it with
satisfaction, or design to act it; is prohibited us.

What a happy Engine for the good Policy of the World, and felicity of
Communities, is this Superintendency over our Hearts and thoughts, which
Religion Enjoins? For these are the sources and springs of all the Mischief and
Disorders, Mark 7.20.21, 22, 23.
which Ruin Churches and States, Kingdoms and Empires; and if this inward
Fountain be kept clean, that no streams issue thence to defile the Life, there
will be no Rapins or Oppressions, there will be no Frauds or Overreaching,
there will be no Schisms or Factions, and the Gospel may make Archimedes his
Challenge without any Vanity, give it Footing as to this one thing, and it will
overturn the World; but in a good Sense, toward its Reformation and
Improvement, toward its happiness and Amendment. How dare he Embrue his hands
in the blood of his Neighbor, that must not so much as move his Tongue to
defame his Name, or stain his Credit, by spreading Lies, or even telling the
Truth with a Malicious design or sinistrous purpose; or how dare he do the one
or the other, when the very first tendency to either, in the motions of his
mind is discharged; or how dare he defile his Neighbors bed, that must not
indulge the fanciful Ideas of a sensual solace to pollute his Soul; or how dare
he keep a false Balance or Measure in his shop, to cheat or wrong his
Customers, that must not covet? for a person to think he may imagine an ill turn
against his Brother, so he do not vent it, or if he utter it smoothly, provided
it be not in boistrous Language, with a supercilious brow, or insolent
threatening, or that he may Menace, taking care he do not strike him; or if he
strike, that he forbear to do it with the Cruelty of a Turk, or the Rigor of a
Jew, these are such whimsical extenuations, wherewith men may flatter
themselves, but cannot delude God, Heb. 4.12.
whose word divides asunder the Soul and Spirit, and reaches the thoughts and
intents of the Heart.

Give me leave to tell you that the Ethics of Pagan-Moralists, were short in
this, and their exactest prescriptions aford but a flatulent Diet, a windy
Repast for Religious Pilgrims, they exalt the passions and actions of their
Heroes with such pompous Elogies, as are apt to minister Fuel to Pride and
Vainglory, and to beget in men an ambition to be great, Rather than good, of
doing brave rather than just things, and Courting the applause of the World,
rather then the favor of God, or approbation of Conscience; while Christian
Ethics glide in a more gentle strain, and recommend to us these Virtues and
Duties; which though they make less Noise, yet are more beneficial to others,
more comfortable to our selves, and more acceptable to God; and I wish these of
this kind I have mentioned in this Essay may be transcribed by Christian
Pilgrims with whom I leave for the Final Complement of what I have said the
Apostle's injunction, Romans 12.2.
Be not conformed to this world: but be ye transformed by the renewing of your
mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable and perfect will of
God.

FINIS.

