A Model of a COLLEGE to be Settled In the Glocester-Hall in Oxford is judged
to be a very fit place, and accordingly is s^t apart for the same.
UNIVERSITY, For the Education of some Youths of the Greek Church.
I. THAT there be a College in the University for the Education of Twenty
Youths of the Greek Communion, to be brought up here for the space of five
Years, or fewer, if in lesser time they shall have gone thorough the Course of
Studies, which shall be thought necessary for them; and then without any
pretense whatever to the contrary four of them to be yearly sent back into
their own Country, and others to be still successively brought over to succeed
them here. II. That in the said College, they be furnished with Lodging, Meat,
Drink, Clothes, Medicines, Books, and whatever else shall be necessary for
their Support or Studies. III. That the usual Age at which they come over be
between 14 and 20; and that they be already entered in the Ancient Greek: and
if there be any of them who understand the Turkish, Arabic, Persian, Armenian
or Russian Language, that as many of them, as can be had, may be such. IV. That
at their first arrival, either by the Right Honorable the Governor, or the
Honorable the Deputy Governor of the Turkey Company, they shall be Solemnly
delivered into the care of him, who is to be their Governor, who having
received them, shall forthwith present them to the Right Reverend the Lord
Bishop of London; and in a Day or two after conduct them to the University. V.
That the Lodgings prepared to receive them, be so contrived that each Classis,
(for they will be to be divided into two Classes) may have their Chambers and
Studies within the view, or call of their respective Tutor, who shall be always
ready, as to direct them in their Studies, so to be the Guardian of their
Manners, and keep them constantly to the Language they are to converse in. VI.
That the Language in which they shall converse for the two first years be the
ancient Greek, and that then, or sooner, as their Seize shall be, they
may be entered in the Latin, making that their constant Language for one or two
other Years, and when sufficiently advanced in these, they may be entered in the
Hebrew. VII. That they be all alike Habited, in the gravest sort of Habit worn
in their own Country; and that they wear no other either in the University, or
any where else. VIII. That as to Philosophy they begin with Aristotl^ and the
Greek Scholiasts, from thence be led on to Plato, joining with these the Study
of their other ancient Authors, and such of the Greek Fathers, as shall most
conduce to the explaining of the Holy Bible, and thereby fit them to be Learned
and able Preachers and Schoolmasters in their own Country IX. That they be
likewise acquainted with the (...) of the chiefest Controversies, as between
their own Church, and that of Rome, so between the Protestant, and the Papist.
X. That Dr. B. Woodroffe Can. of Chapter Chapter in Oxon is appointed Governor of
Glocester-Hall, with Power and Direction to take to him
the Governor of the said College constantly attend at the times of solemn
Devotion, and preside at all public Exercises, frequently visiting the Youths
in their Chambers, and daily setting out, and taking an account of their
Studies. XI. That the said Associates or Tutors.
two Associates or Tutors, (who may be provided out of any other College or
Hall in the University, or elsewhere,) be joined with the Governor, to whom it
shall belong to assist under him in the Education and Government of the said
Youths. XII. That the Youths go not out of the College without leave from the
Governor thereof, nor without a Companion by him to be appointed; to recompense
which Restraint, places for innocent Exercises, and Recreations may be allotted
within themselves. XIII. That there be no Vacation in the said College, but
wholly left to the Discretion of the Governor to give what Relaxations he shall
see fit. XIV. That as to the times of their solemn Devotions, which shall
always be in Greek, half an hour after five in the Morning, half an hour before
Supper, and at Nine at Night shall be the prefixed Seasons; at each of which
they shall in their turns read a Greek Chapter out of the Holy Bible. XV. That
for their better Instruction in Religion, an Orthodox Catechism be compiled in
the Ancient, and Modern Greek, both for their present use here, and to be
carried with them at their return, to be distributed among poor Christians of
the Eastern Church. XVI. That for the Satisfaction of the University, some of
them twice every Term perform public Exercises in the Schools in Greek, by
declaiming once, and disputing once, as shall be directed by the
Vice Chancellor. XVII. That for the Satisfaction of others, who may be
concerned in this Work, and may not have the Opportunity of taking Cognizance
of what is done in the University an Account of their Progress in their Studies
may from Year to Year, or oft'ner, if thought fit, be given in in Writing to
the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of London, and a Duplicate thereof at the
same time sent to the Turkey Company: And when to return into their own Country
they may be again presented to the Right Reverend the Lord Bishop of London,
and so returned back to the Turkey Company by their Governor, with a particular
account in Writing of the whole Progress each shall have made in his Studies in
the time of his stay here, to be sent with them to the respective Partiarch to
whom they belong. XVIII. That as to all things, besides what are above
mentioned, relating to good Manners and Discipline, etc. they be subject to the
Statutes of the University. XIX. That for the better Ordering of the Fund by
which this is to be carried on, (it being to arise chiefly by the Contributions
of those, whose Hearts God already has, or shall move to so good a Work) it be
managed by such Trustees as the Contributors, or major part of them, shall
nominate and appoint, to see the Sums subscribed to be employed for the Uses
abovementioned. XX. That a Receiver be likewise appointed by the Major Part of
the Subscribers or Trustees, whose Business it shall be to receive the several
Subscriptions to be paid in to the Governor or Officers of the said College as
shall be thought most fit; who shall likewise Audit, or make up the Accounts
from Quarter to Quarter with the said Governor or Officers, to be remitted back
to, and approved by the Trustees.

