A NEW VOYAGE TO ITALY
Printed for R. Bentley, M. Wootton, T. Goodwin, and S. Manship.



A New Voyage TO ITALY: With a Description of the Chief Towns, Churches, Tombs,
Libraries, Palaces, Statues, and Antiquities of that Country.

Together with Useful INSTRUCTIONS for those who shall Travel thither.

By MAXIMILIAN MISSON, Gent.

Done into English, and adorned with FIGURES.

In Two Volumes.

Vol. I.

LONDON, Printed for R. Bently, at the Post House in Russel Street,
Covent Garden; M. Gillyflower, at the Spread-Eagle in Westminster Hall; T.
Goodwin, at the Queen's-Head, and M. Wotton, at the Three Daggers in
Fleet Street; and S. Manship, at the Ship in Cornhill, 1695.

To the Honorable Charles Butler, Cornet of the First Troop of GUARDS.
SIR,
THE only Consideration that engaged me to Publish this Work, was my Desire to
please You, and to secure that Interest in Your Goodness, with which You are
pleased to Honor me. I confess my Resolution was a little shocked, when I
reflected on the Dangers and Discouragements to which an Author exposes
himself, by appearing in so Nice and Knowing an Age: But my Reluctance was
quickly overcome by the sense I had of my Obligation to give You this Mark of
my Acknowledgment and Respect.

When His Grace the DUKE of ORMOND, Your Grandfather, did me the Honor to
commit the Care of Your Education to me, I labored with all the Application I
was capable of, to discharge that great Trust with suitable Diligence and
Fidelity: And, to speak only of Your Travels, I may say without Vanity, that I
was very careful to make You receive all that Pleasure and Advantage You might
desire or expect from 'em. My present Attempt is but a Continuation of my
former Care: My chief Design in the Publication of these Letters being to
refresh and preserve the Idea's of what You then observed, and to make that
Satisfaction lasting, which, perhaps, Time would have insensibly destroyed.

I hope, SIR, You will receive favorably this Effect of my Zeal and Affection
to Your Service. If You were as severe a Critic, as You are an exact Judge, I
might justly despair of pleasing You: But all my Fears vanish when I reflect on
that peculiar Sweetness of Temper, and that Natural Inclination You have to
consider Things on the most Advantageous side. This Thought inspires me with so
much Confidence, that nothing less than Your Modesty, could overawe me, and
restrain the Impetuosity of my Desires. I would give You all the Praises You
deserve, and think my self obliged to take this Occasion to proclaim the
Generosity, Probity, Courage, Moderation, and all the other Virtues which I
have so often admired in You, if I were not sensible that I could not do You
Justice without offending You.

And therefore all that I shall say on so alluring a Subject is, That those
admirable Perfections are a part of Your Heritage, as being inseparably united
to the Illustrious Blood that fills Your Veins. True Nobility, and Greatness of
Mind have been always entailed on Your Family. The Reputation of His Grace the
late DUKE of ORMOND is spread over all Europe, in the most Glorious manner
imaginable. And the EARL of OSSORY, Your Father, applied himself with equal
Care and Success to the Imitation of so Noble a Pattern: That Great Captain was
at once the Terror of His Prince's Enemies, the Joy and Love of the People, the
Delight of the Court, and Admiration of Strangers. The Honor which I had in
Your Company, to approach several Sovereign Princes, gave me the Opportunity to
learn from their own Mouths, how highly they esteemed him, and with how
sensible an Affliction they received the News of the untimely Period of so
bright a Life. His Grace the DUKE of ORMOND Your Brother, is, with You, SIR,
the Worthy Successor of those Hero's. You are both unwearied Pursuers of Glory,
and You lose no Opportunity to signalize Your Valor and Conduct. I offer up
the most ardent Prayers for Your Common Prosperity; and I entreat You to
believe that I shall always remain with an unalterable Passion, and profound
Respect,

SIR, Your most Humble, and Obedient Servant, Maximilian Misson.
London, Jan. 1. 1691.
THE AUTHOR's PREFACE.
WHEN I undertook the Voyage described in the following Letters, I resolved to
keep an exact Journal of the most remarkable Things that should fall under my
Observation; and some of my Friends having engaged me to communicate my Remarks
to 'em, from time to time, my intended Journal was insensibly changed to
Letters.

I will not trouble the Reader with an Account of the Reasons that oblige me to
suffer this little Work to appear in Public: But, perhaps, it will not be
improper to inform him, why I thought fit to send it abroad in its Native
Dress. The Style of the Letters is Concise, Free, and Familiar, and in all
respects most suitable to my Design. When an Author undertakes to give a
particular Description of the Subject on which he writes, he is obliged to
acquaint his Reader with all its Circumstances, and to omit nothing that
relates to it. But there is a very wide difference between an exact Description
of a Country, and a brief Account of it in a Letter.

So that if it be Objected, that I have forgot to mention several things that
deserved to be taken notice of, I shall content my self with making this short
Reply, that, He who Promises nothing, cannot be justly accused of Forgetting
any thing. These are familiar Letters, in which I do not in the least oblige my
self to insert all that might be said of the Places mentioned in 'em: Only I
relate what I have seen, or heard, from Persons of unquestioned Credit; and
what, in my Opinion, deserves to be communicated to the Public.

If it be further pretended, that I treat of some things which were generally
known before; I answer, That if all those who repeat the Observations of others
must be condemned without Mercy, by the same Sentence most Books that are
extant, must be doomed to the Fire: For the new Discoveries of a whole Age
would scarce fill a small Volume. Every Man has a different way of expressing
his Thoughts, and of representing the Subjects of which he treats; which makes
'em in a manner different from themselves, when described by another, and gives
a right to each particular Person to make new Reflections on 'em. But not to
insist on that Plea; The Reader of these Letters will find an Account of those
Things that happened in my Time, and of some late Alterations, which I cannot
be supposed to have borrowed from those who wrote before me: And, in the
general, I see no reason why the Book, which I now offer to the Public, may
not justly claim the Title of a New Work, and I Am confident, it will be
acknowledged as such, by all unprejudiced Persons, who shall consider either
that I have added several remarkable Circumstances, or established Idea's that
I found to be juster, and more exact than those I had received from the
Relations of others; or, to add no other Considerations, that I have given a
new Turn of Expression to such things as were already described. And though I
could not wholly omit some Passages that had been formerly taken notice of by
other Authors, without spoiling the Connection of the Parts of my Work, and
depriving the future Traveller of part of the Advantage which I hope he may
receive from my Labors; yet, upon a careful Examination, it will be found that
many of my Observations are in all respects New and Uncommon.

I could not leave the Places through which I past on the Road, without examining
and enquiring into the most remarkable Things that were to be found in 'em, and
without giving some account of 'em in my Letters. But since the main Design of
our Voyage was to see Italy; and since I have chiefly insisted on the
Description of that Country, I thought fit to give that Title to the whole
Work, which agrees properly to the principal part of it.

Of those who travel into Italy, some make it their only business to enquire
after its Antiquities; and others apply themselves wholly to the study of
Painting and Architecture: There are some who mind nothing but Libraries, and
Cabinets of Curiosities; and others spend their time in visiting Churches and
Relics. But my Curiosity was more Universal, and would not suffer me to
confine my Enquiries to one Subject; which gives my Letters the advantage of
Variety, and at least in this respect, I hope they will not seem unpleasant to
the generality of Readers.

When I found my self under an almost indispensable necessity to consent to the
Publication of this Work, I thought my self obliged to make it useful to those
who shall afterward undertake the same Voyage: And therefore I have inserted
several Passages in those Letters, which I did not think fit to mention, when
they were only directed to two or three Friends: And, in pursuance of the same
Design, I have subjoined an Appendix at the end of the Book, containing Advice
or Instructions to a Traveller.

To satisfy the importunate desires of those with whom I entertained a
Correspondence during my Travels, I was forced to give 'em an account of every
thing I observed, without omitting even the smallest and least considerable
Remarks. But since the Curiosity of most Readers extends not so far, I was soon
persuaded to obey those who advised me to cut off several Passages in my
Letters, which perhaps would have been esteemed Impertinent or Trifling. For
those who have the Happiness to be Masters of an Universal Wit, and of an
equally solid and nice Judgment, are capable of making Advantage of every
thing, and are usually sooner pleased than those who are less beholding to
Nature for the liberal Distribution of her Favors. If it be still urged, that
I have left several Passages which might have been cut off with the rest, I
must beg leave to tell those pretended Critics, that They are very much
mistaken if they imagine that nothing ought to be admitted into Works of this
Nature, but what is great and important. These are neither Sermons, nor
Negotiations of Ambassadors; and that which might be justly called a Trifle in
a Discourse upon a lofty Subject, deserves another Title in such a Relation as
this, and especially in a Letter. Besides, there are some mean and seemingly
trifling Things, which, for all their meanness, are yet very pleasant and
diverting. The Public has received some Relations very favorably, which take
notice of the smallest Circumstances, not forgetting even the Signs of Taverns;
neither indeed is it just to oblige a Traveller to relate nothing but
Prodigies. It Is true, he ought not to fill his Journal with insipid
Observations; but there is hardly any thing on which an exact and ingenious
Person is not capable of making Reflections.

I have observed, that those who speak of Italy are usually full of Prejudices,
which are extremely to the Advantage of that Country. Most Young Travelers
being persuaded that they shall find there an infinite Number of surprising
Rarities, go thither with a Resolution to admire every thing they see. And all
the Relations we have of it, seem to have been designed for Panegyricks. The
Fame of that part of the World has been raised so high, and so strongly
established, that it is esteemed an unpardonable Crime to lessen its Reputation.
The Grandeur, for Example, and the almost infinite Magnificence of the
celebrated City of Rome, with the ancient Charms of Bayae and Capua, inspire
the generality of Mankind with a Veneration for a few pieces of Marble, which
are the only Remainders of their Ruins; though it is certain that those Places,
if we consider 'em in their present Condition, are not at all preferrable to a
vast Number of others, which are not so much as taken notice of in the World.
But there is also another Reason, which doubtless contributes very much to
confirm Travelers in their Prejudices; and that is, the usual manner in which
the Italians speak of their Country. It Is certain, that the People of that
Nation have so much Fire in their Imagination, and their Phrases are naturally
so strong and significative, that they are oftentimes apt to speak of Things
with too much Force. It Is true, they have many soft and pleasant, not to say
Apish and Childish Expressions; but when they change their Style, they are apt
to run to the other extremity, and, on a sudden, lose themselves in wild and
unnatural Hyperboles. This Humor of the Italians by degrees infects some of
those Strangers who reside among 'em, and in conjunction with their former
Prejudices, prompts 'em to make long and lofty Discourses, on the most
inconsiderable Subjects. The Observation of those Miscarriages in others, made
me very careful to avoid falling into the same Errors: I examined things
coolly, and suffered those perpetual Admirers to evaporate in sublime Figures,
and Exclamations of Wonder, without regarding their pompous and superlative
Expressions. But though I had not the Complaisance to admire every thing which
they extolled, I hope I shall not have the Misfortune to be accused of being
possessed with a Prejudice, opposite to that which I blame in others; for the
equitable Reader will easily perceive, that I take Pleasure to do justice to
those things which I think deserve Praise.

I wrote these Letters without consulting the Authors who have treated of the
same Subject before me: For besides that the hurry of Traveling made such a
Design impracticable, I could not have received much benefit by it, since, as I
intimated before, I intended only to relate what I saw, or learned, without
engaging in a particular and exact Description of the Country. I thought fit to
make this ingenuous Declaration, That if any Passages in this Work be found to
be inconsistent with the Relations of others, I may not be accused of taking
Pleasure to contradict 'em; for I only give a sincere and natural Account of my
own Observations, or of what I heard from Persons of unsuspected Credit,
without the least Design to offend any Man whatsoever.

I hope every candid Reader will make a Distinction between those things which
I affirm positively, and those which are ushered in with a It Is said; though even
in these Cases I have related nothing but what is grounded on the general
Opinion, and was never contradicted by any with whom I have had occasion to
converse: For, after all, I would not be obliged to warrant the Truth of these
common Reports, which are oftentimes found to be common Lies.

To avoid the Confusion occasioned by the various length of Leagues and Miles
in Germany; I usually express the distance of Places by the Number of Hours
that are commonly spent in traveling between 'em; and if at any time I make
use of the Word League, I understand an Hour's Journey. The Italian Miles are
generally known, and need no explication; only the Reader may take notice, That
Two Miles in Piedmont make almost Three, after the ordinary way of reckoning;
and that the Miles of Lombardy are the shortest of all. I shall only add, That
when I measure any Distance by a certain number of Paces, I mean the Steps I
usually make in Walking,

ADVERTISEMENT. Some BOOKS newly Published.
THe Present State of Persia: With a faithful Account of the Manners, Religion,
and Government of that People. By Monsieur Sanson, a Missionary from the French
King. Adorned with Figures. The Present State of the Empire of Morocco: With a
faithful Account of the Manners, Religion, and Government of that People. By
Monsieur de St. Olon, Ambassador there in the Year 1693. Adorned with Figures.
Letters written by a French Gentleman: Giving a faithful and particular Account
of the Transactions of the Court of France, relating to the Public Interest of
Europe. With Historical and Political Reflections on the ancient and present
State of that Kingdom. Communicated by the famous Monsieur Vassor. The Roman
History, from the Building of the City, to the perfect Settlement of the Empire
by Augustus Caesar, containing the space of 727 Years. Designed as well for the
understanding of the Roman Authors, as the Roman Affairs. By Lawrence Echard,
A. M. of Christ-College in Cambridge. The Life of the Famous Cardinal-Duke de
Richlieu, Principal Minister of State to Lewis XIII. King of France and Navarr.
In Two Volumes.
A NEW VOYAGE TO ITALY. A. M. D. W.
LETTER I.
SIR,
HOLLAND is a Country so near and so well known to yours, that I should,
perhaps, have said nothing of it, had not your express Commands obliged me to
it; in compliance therefore with your desires, I will endeavor to give you an
Idea of this rare Country, with a particular Account of the Cities I saw there.
As to the rest, Holland has so many particulars worth your Observation and
View, that I think it impossible you should decline making a Voyage thither:
The Passage over is but short, and you will have a thousand opportunities to
render it convenient. But being persuaded, that you will not fail, one day, to
satisfy so reasonable a Curiosity, I shall not entertain you so largely as I
might, with an account of those charming Provinces, wherein I have formerly,
for a long time, sojourned.

We observed, from our Vessel, as we approached these Coasts, that the nearer
we came, we perceived the tops of the Trees, and the summits of the Steeples,
as if they issued out of a Land sunk under Water. In short, Holland is
universally flat and low, like one continued Meadow. It Is cut into Canals, and
large Ditches, to receive and drain the Waters, which otherwise would soak the
Lands like drunken Tosts; there are but few Places that can be Cultivated. A
Country like this is not naturally Habitable; yet, Industry, constant Labor,
and the Love of Profit, have brought it into such a State, that there is not in
the World, one so Rich, and so well Peopled, proportionably to its extent
Pufendorf. Others pretend that the Seven Provinces together do not contain more
than Two Millions of Inhabitants. It is difficult for a private Person to learn
the certainty of those kind of things. See Vossius.
: Some do not stick to averr, that this little Province alone, includes more
than Two Millions and Five Hundred Thousand Souls.

The Cities are as it were The United Provinces have one City of the first
Rank, viz. Amsterdam. Above twenty of the second Rank, which may compare with
the great Cities of France, after Paris. More than Thirty of the third, which
equal Parma and Modena. Above two hundred great Towns, and more than eight
hundred Villages. G. L.
linked together, and we may say that they are all of a sparkling Beauty. The
more we consider them, the more agreeable we find them. There is no less
curiosity and neatness in their Ships than in their Houses. This Cleanliness
extends throughout: You may find it in the Stables, where the Cows Tales are
tied up with a little Cord to the Roof, least they should defile themselves.
They wash all, and scowre all the Walls, Movables, and Vtensils of
Household Stuff.
Great care is taken to keep their Houses neat and fine, both within and
without, they Wash them, and Paint the very Bricks over, from time to time; so
that they always look new. The Doors and the Cross-bars are commonly revested
with hewn Stone or Marble; the inside of the Shops, and lower Rooms, even with
the common Tradesmen, are also commonly lined with square Tiles. The
Glass-Windows all shine like Crystal; every Window has its Shutters, which
are commonly painted red or green, and make altogether a mixture most pleasant
to the sight.

The Streets are so clean, that the Women walk abroad in Slippers all the Year.
The Canals every where are adorned with two rows of Trees, which make a
delightful Shade, and a delicate Walk on each side the Streets. You have here
almost a general Idea not only of the Cities, but also of the Towns and
Villages, for the same Order and Neatness is to be seen throughout.

The most usual way of Traveling, is by the Canals, and nothing is so
convenient. The Boats are drawn by Horses, and they go off at set hours. You
are therein conveniently seated, against Storms of Rain or Wind: So that you
change the Country, without knowing almost that you are out of the House. When
the Canals are Frozen, the Skates and the Sledges -- are instead of the Boats;
and this new way of Traveling is a second Pleasure. Those who slide skilfully
on Skates will outrun the Posthorses, some will undertake to go a League in
ten Minutes. Thus you see how commodious their Canals are, but this is not all
the convenience they receive, by the drain of their Waters; they are also
useful for Traffic, and transport of Goods as well as Men. The Earth which
they take out, raises the Banks, and makes the ways more fit for Footmen; they
serve both for Enclosure and Ornament. In some Places they have plenty of Fish.

Abundance of things are naturally wanting in Holland: But Foreign Countries
plentifully supply them with Corn, as well as Wines and all other Necessaries
for Life. All the World knows how far their Trade extends: And it may well be
said, that as it in part gave the original Strength to the State, so it is
still its principal or only support. Every Man in Holland is a kind of
Amphibious Creature, equally accustomed both to Sea and Land. I remember I have
read it in a good Author: That this sole Province has more The number of
Vessels in the common Opinion is esteemed so great, that it is thought to equal
all the rest of Europe together. Card. Bentivoglio. Pufendorf says the same,
and others bave writ that the United Provinces have as many Ships as Houses. I
cannot think any Person has exactly Calculated them, every one speaks as he
imagines, or has heard, so that little heed is to be given to Discourses of
this nature.
Shipping than all the rest of Europe.

It is true, that if on one side the Sea is the cause of all the Riches of
Holland, it must also be confessed, that it has sometimes caused terrible
Damages. It is stopped with Banks of Earth, which we call Dams, and all care
imaginable is taken to maintain them. They have Mills to empty the Water, and
use all imaginable Industry to prevent Mischief, or to remedy it when it has
happened. Yet some places of these Banks are often broken, and the rolling of
the Waves makes most furious Ravages. So that as to the On the 17th of April,
1420. one hundred thousand People were drowned at Dort, or thereabouts. There
were fifteen Parishes drowned. Seb. Munster. The Sea carried away 121 Houses of
the Villages of Scheveling, and 1574. (S. Parival) at this day the Church is
near the Sea, whereas formerly it was in the midst of the Village.
Sea, they may well use the Device of a Torch Reversed. That which feeds me
kills me. This, Sir, is the fatal Mischief of Holland, a strange inconveniency,
of which all that can be said is, That they labor to help it as much as they
can; but can never restore the drowned Cities, nor the lives of many Millions
of Men who have, from time to time, perished by these Deluges.

It is not without some regret that I disturb your former and more pleasing
Idea's; but I fancy that to apprehend things well, we must know both what is
for, and what is against them. Nor is this the only defect. For the Air is no
where very good. Sometimes in the fairest Weather it suddenly becomes Cold, and
this inequality admits of no great difference between the Summer and Winter
Clothes. The Gabel of Salt is the least considerable; Salt costs but two Pence
or three Pence the Pound, of sixteen Ounces. The greatest Imports are on Wine,
Beer, and Corn.
The Impositions are great, which partly cause the dearness of Victuals: But
the People of this Country who are born under the Yoke, and whom their great
Trade has made live at ease, scarce think of it. I confess I should not long
admire those continued Meadows of which Holland is composed: They seem very
fine for a few hours, but one grows weary of their perpetual uniformity. And I
am persuaded the variety of your Province of Kent, must be far more grateful.

We were at the same time surprised and charmed at the first thing which we
observed at our arrival at Rotterdam. This City having this singular
Qualification, that many of its Canals are broad and deep enough to receive the
greatest Vessels, nothing can compare with the effect produced by the
extraordinary mixture of Chimnies, tops of Trees, and Streamers of Vessels. One
is astonished at the Port to behold so rare a confusion, as is that of the tops
of the Houses and Trees, and Penons of the Masts, one cannot tell whether it be
a Fleet, a City, or a Forest, at least one sees a thing seldom heard of, a
Convention of those three things, the Sea, the City, and the Campaign.

ROTTERDAM.
Rotterdam is not accounted as one of the Principal Cities of the Province,
because it has not been always in such a flourishing condition as we see it at
this day; but without doubt it ought to be the second of the first Rank,
whereas now it is but the first of the second. Its Port is most commodious and
fair, and is always filled and encompassed with Shipping, and its Trade
increases daily. It is very large, well Peopled, rich and pleasant, and has
the neatness I have represented; the situation is flat, as you are to suppose
of the rest of the Cities.

The Magazines for the equipping of Ships. The Townhouse, aad that of the
Bank, are all most stately Structures. When you come into the Glass-house, you
see them at work on little enameled Bowls, and I know not how many Children's
Baubles, with which they drive a great Trade amongst the Savages. Also near
this you have the curious Works in Paper of the Sieur Van Uliet, as Ships,
Palaces, and whole Landskips in Basso relievo, all as they say done and made
out with the point of a Penknife.

There are at present two French Churches at Rotterdam; which the Magistrates
take care particularly to see furnished with Ministers of exemplary Merit. It
is certain, that this City is become famous for its Learned Men, as well as by
its Trade and Beauty. It is this which bestowed on us, the Novels of the
Republic of Learning, a work so accepted and esteemed: I might even say, a
Work which is ready to be lamented, since the Indisposition of the Author gives
us reason to fear; he will be no more able to apply himself to so painful an
undertaking; I am informed that Mr. Basnage de Beauval intends the
continuation. He is endowed with a great deal of Learning, an extraordinary
Wit, and all the sharpness which can be thought necessary for the well-ordering
such a Work.

Erasmus was born in Rotterdam, October. 27. 1467. he died at Basil, June 12.
1536. They erected a Statue of Wood, An. 1540. one of Stone, Anno 1557. and at
last that of Brass, which is seen this day, Anno 1622.
The brazen Statue of Erasmus is in the Place called the great Bridge. This
Statue is on a Pedestal of Marble, encompassed with Rails of Iron. Erasmus is
in a Doctors Habit, with a Book in his Hand. Hard by you may see the House in
which he was born, it is a very little one, having this Distich wrote on the
door.

Aedibus his Ortus, Mundum decoravit Erasmus Artibus ingenuis, Relligione,
Fide. Being for some Reasons induced to visit a Village called Leckerkeck,
three Leagues distant from hence, upon the River Leck, I will impart to you
three or four curious things which I observed there.

The Lord of the Place told us, That the Salmon Fishing, the fifth part whereof
only belongs to him, yielded him formerly twenty thousand Francs per annum, and
ofttimes more. And that the Salmon having left it by degrees, that Revenue is
so strangely diminished, that it scarcely defrays the Charge of the Fishery in
many Years, so that he had given it over, only lying under a necessity to
maintain the Right. Formerly also the Salmon spawned before Dordretcht in such
multitudes that the Maidservants of that City, made their Bargains not to be
compelled to eat it above twice in the Week, but at present they are rid of
that trouble.

We went to see a Country Woman there, who last Year was brought to Bed of Six
Sons, there were four of them Baptized, the Eldest of which lived four Months.

A Maid of the same Village carried a Musket Seven Years, without being
discovered what she was. She went always by the name de la Bonto, which Name
she was Mustered by, and at present she is a Maidservant in the House of the
Lord of that Place.

Some Years since died in this place, Gueret Bastiense, a Fisherman, who was
eight Foot high, and weighed 500 Weight, though he was very lean. We were in
his House, the Doors whereof are very high, where they showed us many of his
Clothes and Things.

The Post hour obliges me here to finish this Letter; be persuaded, Sir, that I
will omit nothing which I believe proper for your satisfaction. And if Time
shall not permit me to particularize many things, assure your self my accounts
shall be without Partiality, after I have got an exact Information. I am,

SIR, Yours, etc.
At Rotterdam, October. 6. 1687. New-Stile.
LETTER II.
SIR,
DELFE.
WE came from Rotterdam to Delfe in less than two hours, by the Rotterdam Boat.
Delfe holds the third Rank in the Assembly of the States of Holland. I will
give you no other Description than what I have told you of the Cities in
general, the Idea whereof you must always call to mind. One of the principal
Things which they show to Strangers, is the Tomb of Prince William, who was By
Balthazar Gerard, or Serach of the Franc County, Anno 1584. the Prince 52 Years
old.
Assassinated in this City You may also see the Palace of the State-holder, the
Grand Place, and the great Hospital with the Garden.
. The Arsenal and the Townhouse are the principal things whicy they show to
Strangers. It is but a good League from Delfe to the Hague, following the
course of the Canal. You pass not far from Riswick and the Voorburg, which are
very pleasant Villages, all there is full of Houses of Pleasure, Walks, and
delightful Gardens.

HAGUE.
Although the Hague has the Privileges of a City, yet is it put in the Rank of
the Boroughs, because it is Walled: And it sends no Deputies to the States
General. Yet we may say, that its Grandeur and Beauty deserve as much Honor as
the best Cities.

At present King of Engl.
The Prince of Orange resides there, and his Court is very fine. The States
General are there You may see the place of this Assembly, and the other Hall
where the States of Holland meet.
Assembled. The Ambassadors and other Ministers of Foreign Princes have there
their Residence. The People are more civil and sociable than in other places.
Travelers sojourn here. The Coaches are numerous. The Houses and Walks are
very fine. The Air is perfectly good. In a word, it is most certain the Hague is
an Enchanting place. The Wood is one of its chief Ornaments: For as I told you
the other day, it tires one to see nothing but near Objects: To walk in a Wood
in Holland affords double refreshment. For you have also the Walk by the Sea
side to the Village of Scheveling, Between the Hague and Scheveling is a House
of Pleasure, belonging to the Earl of Portland.
whither you go in a good half hour, by a strait Pathway cut cross the Downs.
There is a good Fishery at Scheveling. There you may see a Chariot with Wheels
and Sails, which the Wind drives on the Sand of the Seashore, which is both
hard and even.

The Sieur Resner, a Gentleman of Zealand, who dwells at the Hague, has a
Cabinet, where, amongst other things, you may see a great number of very
curious Shells.

The situation of the Hague highly deserves distinction from all the rest of
Holland, because of the variety of its Landscape: For it has the Wood on the
North, the Meadow on the South, some Arable Lands Eastward, and the Sea to the
West.

Its Trade is inconsiderable, in respect of the Cities which have Havens, or
great Manufactures yet good store of business is there transacted: Besides,
there are many rich and noble Families, which live on their Revenues or Employs
in the Army or Court.

This great concourse of Persons of Quality, is the cause that it is always
furnished with Masters, requisite for the Instruction of young Gentlemen in all
sorts of Exercises. The Academy beyond all is of great Reputation. There is one
of the finest riding Houses I ever beheld, and the Rider is a very skilful and
honest Man.

The Prince of Orange is lodged The Chapel of this Palace now is made use of
for the French Church.
in the Palace of the ancient Earls of Holland. To speak truth, this Palace
has nothing in it extraordinary: That which is called the Old Court, where the
Princes of Orange formerly dwelt, is the most regular building. In the
Neighborhood of the Hague is the Honflerdyke, the House of the Wood, and the
Garden of Mr. De St. Anneland.
The Houses of Pleasure are exquisitely beautiful.

We had the Curiosity to go on purpose to the Village of Losdun, to see there
two Dishes of Brass, in which were Baptized the three hundred sixty five
Children of the Countess of Heneberg, Daughter to Florent, This History is to
be found in Erasmus, Vives, Guicciardin, Christoval, Guy Dominick Peter, Author
of the Annals of Flanders: And in many others, who speak of this Lying-in, as
of a thing credible and well Attested, and as they believe true. The Annals
relate, that the 365 Children, were Baptized by Don William, the Bishop
Suffragan of Treves, and that both they and their Mother died on the same day,
which was Good Friday, in the Year 1276.

Surius Garon, and diverse Chronologers, relate an History of a Lady of
Provence, called Irmentrude, and Wife of Isembard, Earl of Altorfe, who being
brought to Bed of twelve Sons, would have caused eleven to be Drowned in the
River. They add, That Isembard, meeting the Woman which carried them, asked her
what she had in her Pannier, the Woman answered, they were some little Whelps,
which she went to drown; Isembard was resolved to see them, and having
discovered the matter, he took the Children and put them to Nurses, and when
they were grown up presented them all alive to his Wife; in memory of which,
says the History, that Family assumed the name of Wolf, which it still retains.

John Pic de Mirandole II. has written that a Woman of his Country, named
Dorothy, brought twenty Children into the World at two Births, nine at one, and
eleven at the other.

Albert the Great, speaks of a German Woman, who was brought to Bed of one
hundred and fifty Children. It would be no hard matter to produce a number of
the like Examples.


the Fourth Earl of Holland.

You have heard what has been said of this Lady; that having reproached a
Beggar-Woman for having too many Children, the poor Creature in answer, wished
her as many as there were days in the Year; which that Year accordingly
happened, for the Countess was brought to Bed of three hundred sixty five
Children, who were all Christened, and the same day buried in the Church of
Losdun. This History is to be seen a little more at large, in a great Picture,
on the sides whereof the two Basins are fixed. We must not forget, that the
Boys were named John, and the Girls Elizabeth. Mark Cremer relates of a
Polonian Lady, the Wife of Count Virboslaus, who in sequel of such an
Imprecation, was brought to Bed of thirty six Children.

I am loath so soon to part with the Hague, which, without contradiction, is
one of the most pleasant Places in the World, but I must say something of
Leyden and Haerlem, before I finish my Letter. But think not, that when you
leave the Hague, and come to Leyden, you fall into a desert Country: Every
thing has its value, and that of Leyden is not small; it is true all the
Cities of Holland are fair to amazement: And we cannot praise one enough,
without saying so much, as must leave us no expressions for the other.
Nevertheless, I should be glad to be able to give you some new Idea of the
Beauties of Leyden.

LEYDEN.
This City has not so great a number of Coaches as are seen at the Hague, nor
so much noisie business as Rotterdam. But perhaps its quiet is far more
charming. It is a great City, but repose Rules there, and in it you enjoy all
the sweets of a Country Life. Its little disturbance allows it an extraordinary
Neatness: Nothing comes near that of its Houses, and we may compare the Streets
to so many Alleys of a well-adorned Garden. Yet we must freely confess, that
the Inhabitants of Leyden would willingly consent that their Pavement should be
less clean, and that they endured a little more trouble, on condition they
could be Masters of a good Haven: I have heard Projects have been contrived
about it. But it is said, that their Land lies so low that they dare not give
the Sea a Passage: So that the Woollen-Manufacture makes the greatest Trade of
this City.

You know Leyden is very Some believe that the Town is a work of the Romons:
Others attribute it to the Saxons: but Jo. Scaliger pretends it was made by the
Earls not above four or five hundred Years ago.
ancient, and there are still found some Marks of her Antiquity. But that which
renders it most Famous, is her The number of Scholars is fifteen hundred or
thereabouts. The University has diverse Privileges.
University. They commonly lead the Strangers to the Physick-School; and in the
Anatomy-Hall you may see a great number of Skeletons of Men and Beasts: Many
natural Rareties, and other Curiosities; as of Plants, Fruits, Animals, Arms,
strange Habits, Pictures, Mummies, curious Works, Urns, Images, etc. I fear you
would incline to be incredulous of the Story of a Prussian Peasant which is
there Painted: He had swallowed a very large Knife: So that they were forced to
cut open his Stomach to get it out, after which, as is said, he lived eight
Years.

In the midst of the Hall is an unfortunate Thief, whom they derided to
extremity, after they had Hanged him. They fixed his Skeleton to a Gibbet, upon
that of an Ox, because he had been a Cowstealer; they made another Shoes of
his own Skin, and a Shirt to another of his own Bowels.

The Physick-Garden is not far from hence. A great number of Rareties are still
to be seen in the Gallery of this Garden, and in the Cabinet called the
Indian-Cabinet, to which this Gallery leads. I remember I observed amongst
other things, an Ape, and a Cat, which were produced with There are many flying
Cats in the Province of Malabar. Tassoni.
Wings: The hand of a Mermaid: A Stare with long Ears, a Vegetable Priapus,
which is a most curious Plant: A Monster which issued out of a Hens Egg. A
Piece of Money of Card or Paper, made at Leyden, when it was Besieged by the
Spaniards in 1574. And a Serpent brought from Surinam, on whose Skin are
several natural Figures, which much resemble some Arabic Characters. I make
you this last Observation, because your Tutor very much admires this little
wonder of Nature. But indeed, to speak freely, I find nothing singular in this,
no more than in the Greek Letters which form, as some thought the turnings and
windings of a Maze. There is so universal a diversity in all things in the
World, that it is easy to find the like of the first Figure which presents it
self, if we would give our selves the trouble of a search.

The greatest part of Animals, Insects, and other things, are hanged up in
Vials filled with Spirits of Wine, whereby they are preserved from Corruption.

Going out hence, we were to see the great Church, which is a vast Pile; and
afterward we took Boat for Haerlem. But before we proceed on our Voyage, I
must needs give you some account of the unfortunate destiny of the Rhine, of
which there are some small remains at Leyden. Other Rivers increase their
course and their glory, at the rate they proceed; but this so great and famous
River, becomes nothing, and is utterly lost in the Harbor. After it has been
constrained to divide it self at Meeting with the Skenk Fort, where one half of
its Waters, take the name of Wahal: the Yssel robs it It is to be observed,
that the branch of the Rhine, which takes to the right a little above Arnheim,
and carries the name of the Yssel, is not properly the Yssel. It is a Channel
which Drusus dug, and brought near to a place now called Doesbourg, to make
a communication at this place between the Waters of the Rhine and the Yssel.
of the other half a little above Arnheim. Yet it goes on to that City, though
much weakened, and at seven or eight Leagues from thence is again obliged to
separate at the little City of Dorstadt: Its principal Branch there takes a new
Name, and is called the Leck, and the poor little stripped Rivulet, which
escaped, and turns to the Right, retains still its name of Rhine, and passes
on to Utrecht, where it has a fourth Division: The Vecht breaks off at that
place, and takes its course to the North: And the little thread of Water which
is yet called the Rhine, passes quietly to Worden. It comes to bid its last
farewell to Leyden, and faintly finisheth its course, by losing the small
remainders of its Waters, in two or three Canals, without having the Honor to
enter into the Sea. The Scamander, the Simois, and some other renowned Rivers,
which are worthy to be compared to the Rhine, have yet found the same reverse
of Fortune: The whole surface of the Earth is subject to continual Alterations.
These Catastrophes put me in mind of what Ovid has said, Vidi ego quod fuerat
quondam solidissima tellus
Esse fretum, vidi factas ex aequore terras, etc.


But we are not ignorant of the cause of the Rhine's fate; it was an Earthquake
which shook the Downs, and In the Year 860. or as John Gerbrardus at Leyden, in
the Year 840. This Author represents the then Storm as most terrible and
dreadful.
filled the Mouth of this River, and forced it to return to seek a new Passage.
The Leck was then scarce worth notice, but the Waters of the Rhine, which were
driven back and overflowed the Country, swelled, enlarged, and deepned the
Leck's Canal; and the entrance to Sea has ever since been shut against the
Rhine's ancient course: This poor River, which had run the greatest hazards in
the Lake of Constance, and which had thrown it self down the Precipice, near to
Schaffhausen, at last loses both its Reputation and Waters, at the Village of
Catwick.

There are still found some Pieces of the Card or Paper-Money, which were
Coined during the famous Siege carried on by the Spaniards in 1574. on one side
was Inscribed, Haec libertatis ergo, and on the other Pugno pro Patria.

They likewise told me, that they have still preserved the Board of the famous
Tailor John Bucold.
, called John of Leyden, (because born there) head of the Anabaptists, King of
Munster, etc. You know the Person.

It is about five Leagues from Leyden to Harlem, but the Villages and pleasant
Houses which you see on the right and left, all along the Canal, make the way
seem very short. Harlem is large and very agreeable: It is in one respect
better than Leyden. Its Waters are quickn'd by the little River Sparen, which
joins it self to its Canals, and which gives to some their course, and to
others some Circulation. The Linen and Tape which are made at Harlem, have for
a long time been its chief Trade: But I hear that at present they have a great
Manufacture of Silk Stuffs. It was dedicated to S. Baron. It is the greatest of
all the Province.
The Great Church and the Townhouse are the stateliest Buildings: And its Wood
of tall Trees, with its long and strait Walks, is one of its principal
Ornaments. It boasts to have given Birth to Laurence Coster, who, if you will
believe them, was the With Thomas Pieterson, John Guttenburg, and his two
Brothers.
Inventer of Printing. But you know, Sir, that Guttenburg of Strasburgh
disputes that Invention with this Coster: And that the pretended Conjurer, John
Faustus of Mentz, will give place to neither; and besides this Invention is
attributed to Conrade and Arnold, There are to be seen in the Town house diverse
Rareties, amongst which they keep with particular care in a Casket of Silver,
and wrapped in Silk, the first Book (according to those of Harlem) that ever
was Printed: Its Title is Speculum humanae Salvationis: It has many Figures.
The keeping of this Book, is entrusted to several Magistrates, who have every
one a different Key of the place where it is, which renders it not easy to be
seen. The Statue of Laurence Coster is likewise to be seen in this place. The
Inscription which you have here was put in Letters of Gold on the door of his
House, with the following Verses: MEMORIAE SACRUM.
Typographia Ars Artium omnium Conservatrix hic primum inventa circa annum 1440.
Vana quid Archetypos and prela Moguntia jactas?
Harlemi Archetypos prelaque nata scias.
Extulit hic, monstrante Deo, Laurentius artem.
Dissimulare virum, dissimulare Deum est.



Brothers and Burgesses of the same City of Mentz. It Is strange that History is
so blinded with Fables, that we cannot extricate the Truth in so novel a
matter. If what Trigaultius and other Travelers have said be true, that
Printing is of so ancient usage in China it is very probable, Tavernier assures
us, that the Persians have not yet the use of Printing.
that those who first brought it into Europe, were but Imitators of others.
Meyer reports, that in the Year 1403. a Mermaid was brought to Harlem, who, by
a furious Tempest, was thrown on the Neighboring Shore: That they accustomed
her to Eat several Meats, but her principal Food was Bread and Milk: That they
taught her to Spin; and that she lived many Years. Others write, that this
Mermaid was sent from Embden to Harlem. J. G. of Leyden adds, that she would
often pull off her Clothes to return to the Water, and that she had an odd kind
of Speech. ( (They did not understand her Speech, nor she our Language.)
Locutionem ejus non intelligebant, sed nec ipsa nostrum intellexit idioma).
And that she was buried in a Churchyard, because she had Learned to salute the
Cross. He also said, that he knew Persons that had seen her.

We would willingly have again taken Boat to come from Harlem hither, but it
being a little too late when we came from thence, and we willing to get hither
as soon as we could, we thought it better to make use of a Coach. The Carriage
was a little uneasy, because the Coach was not hung, but to make amends, it
went a great deal swifter than the Boat. I am,

SIR, Yours, etc.
Amsterdam, this 15. October. 1687.
LETTER III.
SIR,
I Had some regret to write my last Letter to you from Amsterdam, AMSTERDAM.
without giving any account of that famous City, but that I fansied I should do
well to refresh my Memory with its Idea, that I might write things more
certainly. In the mean time I entreat you to remember, that I have not promised
to give you an entire description of any place: It would require a long
continuance in this City to learn every thing of it, and a great Volume to
write it all.

Amsterdam is without doubt one of the most beautiful, admirable, and important
Cities in the World; and it is certain, that it answers in every point the great
Reputation it has in the World: But that one may be more Surprised with its
Beauty, it would be best not to have known beforehand, the other Cities of
Holland. I confess, that after I had seen the Haven of Rotterdam, and the
Beauties of the Hague and Leyden, I was but little surprised when I came first
to Amsterdam: I found nothing there which might much distinguish it from those
other Cities. Nay, I must freely tell you, that the multitude of Carts and
Truckles, There are some Streets which are always very clean.
whose number swells daily by the vastness of the Trade, so pester and dirty
the Streets, that it is not a very diverting Object to one who is charmed only
with such things as appear pleasant to the Eye, especially if he come from
another City, which can show more neatness and tranquillity.

There is no comparison to be made between the greatness of Amsterdam and
London, since, according to Calculation, there are near seven hundred thousand
Souls in London, and Amsterdam contains not above two hundred thousand,
although so great a number of French Refugees are lately settled there.
Nevertheless, it must be acknowledged, that Amsterdam yields not to any City in
the World for Riches, or extent of Trade. You know the This Company was
established in 1594.
East India Company alone is so renowned and powerful that it has made head
against Princes, without interrupting the course of its Traffic. This famous
City is all founded on Piles in the midst of a Marish: It is built on the South
of the River Ye, Or Tie.
which is, as it were, an Arm of the Zuyder-zee, on which the prodigious number
of Ships resembles a vast Forest.

The Twenty two Bastions. The Ditches are Eighty paces broad, deep and filled
with running Water; the ordinary Garrison is eight Companies of 200 Men each:
the Captains must be Amsterdamers. Besides, there are 60 Companies of Burghers,
of 150 Men each. The Gates are shut at Nine of the Clock. They are partly
guarded by the Citizens, and partly by the Garrison. The Keys are put into an
Iron Chest in custody of the Citizens, and the chief Burgomaster keeps the
Keys. G. L.
Fortifications are not slight, and besides, there are Arsenals, and Sluices to
drown all the Country about: So that it may be justly accounted a very strong
place. It is said this Building cost three Millions.
The Townhouse is a very large and stately Fabric of hewn Stone, its length
is one hundred and ten paces, and its breadth twenty four. The Foundation did
certainly cost as much as all the Superstructure. Its Architecture is highly
valued, yet I fancy it ought to have had a fairer Portal, instead of those low
and narrow Doors, which debase the entrance into this most splendid Palace; it
were also to be wished, that the Courtyard before it were more neat and
regular.

As soon as you leave this, you pass into the It is called the New Church. It
was formerly dedicated to St. Catharine. The Organs cost one hundred thousand
Crowns. The Tomb of de Ruyter, is a piece worth your view in this Church. They
designed to erect a very high Steeple to it, but that work remains imperfect.
principal Church, which is not so large as those of Leyden and Harlem. It is
to be considered, that Amsterdam, about four hundred and fifty Years ago was
only a Village of Fishermen: And this so renowned a City in our Age, was but in
a very indifferent condition when the Church, of which I am speaking, was
built. In it they show you the Pulpit, and tell you that it, together with its
Canopy, cost twenty two thousand Crowns. It is made only of Wood, of Gothic
Carving, much loaded with Ornaments. On the Glass-Windows of this Church is
Painted the History of the Emperor Maximilian the Second, who honored the
Arms of the City with an Imperial Crown, in acknowledgment of the good Offices
he had received from this City. The Portugueze Jews here are extraordinary
Rich, and their Synagogue is a It is a square Building, erected Anno 1671.
notwithstanding the Inquisition against the Jews in Spain and Portugal. A
Portugueze Jew (Don Jerome Nunez de Costa) was Agent of Portugal, at Amsterdam.
And another (Don Emanuel de Belmont) Resident of Spain. This last received the
Title of Count from the Emperor.
stately Building, whereas that of the High Dutch is but mean and contemptible.

As we went along they brought us to one of the Rasp-house.
Houses of Correction for the young Debauchees, where they are constrained to
work: There was one in a dark Cellar, where he Pumped incessantly, without
which the Cellar would in a quarter of an hour be filled with Water, and he by
consequence in danger of Drowning. Every one has his Occupation and Task,
which he must punctually perform under the Penalty of Whipping. Some are there
for their lives, others only for a time. There is also the like Spin-house.
House for Whores, but they treat them with less Severity: This House is not
very full. It is a double misfortune to about a Score of poor Creatures who are
kept in this Prison to do Penance per force, whilst some thousands of their
Comrades have their Tails at liberty: For to speak the truth, if these unhappy
Recluses have deserved such a Treatment, it is most certain, that there are
many others in Amsterdam who deserve it more than they, yet are not thus shut
up.

A modern Author, who lived a long time at Amsterdam, has written, that there
are in that City about 13000 Roman Catholics, and as many Lutherans, 4000
Anabaptists, 80 Families of Arminians, 50 of Quakers, 450 or some more of
Portugueze Jews, 100 of High Dutch Jews, and many private Persons who are of no
Religion at all.
The Roman Catholics have here their Liberty, as well as through all the States
Dominions: but I assure you that their number is not near so great in this
City, as some would persuade us. I had the fortune to discourse with a very
intelligent and curious Person, who has examined this matter; and he affirms,
that the Roman Catholics, and the other Sectaries together, do not make a
fourth part of the Inhabitants of Amsterdam. I know not whether you have heard
of a kind of Convent of Nuns, called There is 130 of them. They are in a large
Cloister. Their Church may easily contain 2000 People. Calvisius reports, that
the Order of the Beguines was Instituted in the Year 1207. by one called Begues.
Beguines, who are still tolerated here: There are a great many of them in the
Spanish Netherlands. But because I believe you are not acquainted with this
sort of Society, I will give you the Character of it in few and general terms:
It is composed of Maidens or Widows who have no Children. There are amongst
them some of all sorts of Qualities, and nothing is required to make them
capable of admittance but good Testimonials, and an Estate sufficient to
maintain them at their own Charges; every Beguine may have her House and
necessary conveniences by her self, or they may join several together,
according as Kindred or Friendship may incline them. The place of this Society
bears the name of the Beguinage, which is commonly like a little City enclosed
within another, and has about it a Wall and a Ditch. There is one Church in
this enclosure, where the Beguines are obliged to be present at the hours
appointed for their Devotions. Their Habits are black, and something
fantastical. They regulate their Expenses as they please themselves, as well
for their Table as Furniture. They receive and pay Visits when they please.
They quit the Beguinage when they are minded to Marry, or on any other
occasion. And it may be said, that this retreat, far from the vowed constraint
of a Convent, is a very sweet and reasonable manner of living.

The confusion caused by the Coaches, by reason of the perpetual Carriage of
Merchandises, and the danger of shaking the Houses, which, as I told you, are
founded on Piles, is the reason that none but Strangers and Physicians are
allowed to have any; Sleds indeed are permitted, but that being a slow and
uneasy Carriage, there are none but old Women who make use of it.

We went to see a French Opera, where there was neither Machines, nor rich
Clothes, nor good Actors. That which we found most pleasant was a great Lass,
You ought to see at Amsterdam the Cabinets of Mr. Wiltzen, Vanderhem, Occo and
Grill. C. Patin.
who acts the part of a Man, and pronounced what she sung so well, that one
would have believed her naturally French, though all she said was by rote, for
she understood not a word of French. They say she was a Drummer for five or six
Years amongst the Dutch Troops.

It is requisite I should say something of the famous Musick-Houses: They are a
kind of Taverns or Halls for Dancing, where the young People, of the meanest
sort, Men and Maids, meet every Evening. These are the meeting places, but the
Intrigue is carried on in another. Usually Strangers have the curiosity to see
them. They must make show as if they had a mind to drink a Glass of Wine when
it is offered, and give some gratuity to him or her who presents it. The
Exchange of London is about 148 foot in length, and 120 in breadth.


The Burse or Exchange was built in the Year 1608. It is a Building of fine
carved Stone, and founded on more than two thousand Piles. The place where the
Merchants assemble is 200 foot long, and 124 in breadth. The Galleries are
supported by forty six Pillars; they are neither so fine nor so numerous as
those on the Exchange at London.

The Academy, vulgarly called the illustrious School, is a handsome Building:
There they teach the Oriental and other Tongues: Divinity, Philosophy, History,
etc. The Lawyers and the Physicians have also their Schools.

There are five Towers in the City, each of them having a great Clock, which
are so placed and distributed, that the hours may be easily known in any part
of the City. I had an hundred other Curiosities to tell you of Amsterdam, but I
once more advise you to visit them your self.

We hope to depart to morrow for Utrecht, by the Canal; and though I cannot
precisely tell the way we shall take thence to Cologne, yet I shall not fail to
write to you as soon as I shall have wherewithal to fill a Letter.

I returned yesterday from Losdun, whither some Friends obliged me to go a
second time with them. I am very glad I can inform you, that the Inscription
which is seen in the Church of this Village, differs from that in the Annals
which I cited to you, in that, it calls the Bishop who Baptized the 365
Children, Guido, Suffragan of Utretcht; and in the Annals he is named William,
Suffragan of Treves. This variation calls not in question the truth or
probability of the Fact. There are many times alterations in the speaking and
writing of things which in themselves are very true; and this might be by the
fault of the Transcriber. Above the Inscription are these two Verses: En tibi
monstrosum nimis, and memorabile factum,
Quale nec a mundi condition datum.
And below, Haec lege, mox animo stupefactus, Lector, abibis.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
At Amsterdam, this 20th. of October, 1687.
LETTER IV.
SIR,
WE were seven whole hours on the Canal between Amsterdam and Utrecht, but the
way was extremely pleasant, as well because of the fair Weather, and the fine
Country, as of the good Company we had in the Boat.

We left on the Right Hand, three Leagues from Amsterdam, the old Castle of
Abcow, with the Village of the same name, where are the bounds of the Province
of Holland.

It was late when we came to Utrecht, and our Affairs allowed us to stay there
but some part of the next day. This City begins to abate of the extreme
neatness of the Province of Holland, though it yet retains enough of it. You
know it is great, ancient, and famous for its University. UTRECHT.
The happy Union made here in the last Age Anno 1579.
, which is the Band and Knot of the Republic, is an eternal Honor to this
City. They boast of the extraordinary height of the Steeple of this Cathedral
in which Church are kept some pretended Relics, This Church was begun by
Dagobert I. about the Year 630.
which are in great Veneration with the Romanists.

M. Kercringius, a famous Physician and Anatomist, dwelling at Utrecht, has
Foetus's of all Ages, by which you may observe the order, proportion, and
progress of their Formation, from the Egg to the forming of all the Organs of
the Body. C. Patin.
The Walk of the Mall is fine, and those of Utrecht esteem it the more, because
it was spared by order of the French King when he came to that City some Years
since; and his Troops, as you know, ruined all things thereabouts.

A Gentleman of Utrecht imparted a curious Observation to me, by which you may
judge of the number of Towns throughout this Country; he found forty eight, to
each of which one may go easily from Utrecht in a day, and there are thirty
three of them to which you may go and come back the same day.

When you go out of Utrecht, you find a Country altogether different from that
we left last. The Canals and Ditches of Holland are changed into Hedges, and
the Meadows into high and plowed Fields. Two hours from Utrecht we crossed the
fine Avenues of Zeist in sight of a Castle on the right hand. ZEIST.
It is a very fair Building, compassed with large Ditches full of running
Water, and adorned with Woods, Gardens, Statues, Fountains, and all other
Embellishments you can desire. This House belongs to one of the great Lords of
the Country, who built it some Years since, and has the repute of doing things
magnificently.

Between Rhenen and Arnheim the Fields are almost wholly Planted with Tabaco,
and the Stakes by which it is propped, make a show of Vineyards at a distance.

Approaching the Village of Rhincom, three hours on this side Rhenen, you find
a boundary Stone, which separates the Lordship of Utrecht from the Duchy of
Gueldres.

Arnheim is tolerably Fortified, ARNHEIM.
otherwise I found nothing worth noting in it. The Beds in the Inns are made
like Presses or Cupboards; which you go up a Ladder to, and after plunge your
self into a deep Feather-bed, and have another of the same sort for your
covering.

Two good hours and an half from Arnheim we passed the Yssell divided into
three Branches very near each other: And then having traversed Doesbourg,
DOESBOURG.
which is a little City on that River in the County of Zutphen, we were forced
to Dine with Biscuit and Milk in a paltry Village, and in the Evening we were
treated much after the same manner at Ysselbourg, YSSELBOURG.
which is a poor little dismantled place, at the entrance into the Country of
Cleves.

There is scarce any thing but Woods and Sandy Grounds between Ysselbourg and
Wesel; WESEL: formerly a Hans-Town.
and this last place has no great matter remarkable: Its Fortifications are so
so. They are at present at Work on a Citadel between the City and the Fort of
Lip on the bank of the Rhine. The Elector of Brandenburg gives liberty for
the public exercise of their Religion to the Roman Catholics in his Duchy of
Cleves, by a Treaty which that Prince made with the Duke of of Neuburg, now
Elector Palatine, on condition that the Duke should grant the same liberty to
the Protestants in his Dutchies of Juliers and Berg. There are four Churches at
Wesel: The Protestants called Calvinists, have the two principal, the Lutherans
the third, and those of the Roman Communion the other. The Jews have a little
Synagogue there.

We passed the Lip half an hour from Wesel, which River throws it self into
the Rhine, and we came the same day in good time to Duisbourg. DUISBOURG
formerly a Hans-Town.
This City is about the bigness of Wesel, without Fortifications, or any thing
considerable but its University. The principal Church is fair enough, and
belongs to the Protestants. The Scholars walk about the Streets in their
Morning-Gowns, like those of Leyden. I was informed that the Roman Catholics
might carry the Host about there, according to the plenary liberty which is
granted them in all this Country, though they chose rather to refrain from
doing it, lest any accidents should happen which might disturb the peaceable
manner of living which they and the Protestants enjoy together. A good half
League from Duisbourg we entered into the Country of Berg, which, with that of
Juliers, belongs to the Duke of Neuburg, Eldest Son to the Elector Palatine.
And two hours after we passed through Keyserwaert, KEYSERWAERT.
which is a very little City upon the Rhine. It belongs to the Elector of
Cologne, to whom, as we were informed, it remains in Mortgage, and by whom it
was Fortified.

We have now been a few hours at Dusseldorp, DUSSELDORP.
where we have already walked about a great while to discover something worth
our Observation. This City is bigger by half than Duisbourg, and every way
better; there are no Suburbs to it, no more than to Keyserwart. The
Fortifications are very well kept, and the Electoral Prince, the Duke of
Newbourg, there makes his Residence. This is all I can now say.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
At Dusseldorp, October. 23. 1687.
LETTER V.
SIR,
THis Letter will give you an Account of part of what I could observe at
Cologne in three days. COLOGNE, an Imperial City and Hans-Town. Otho the Great
made it an Imperial City, and gave it the Privileges it now enjoys.
As we wandered in our Walks abroad, you must expect no regular Order in the
little Relations which I send you. I am glad to give you this Advertisement by
the by, that you may not expect to have things in a better Method than we found
them.

Cologne is to be seen far enough off, and all in plain view in a level
Country. The City is very great, There are 24 Gates, 13 to the Land, and 11 on
the Rhine.
surrounded with a Wall and dry Ditch, with Towers and Bastions which defend
its Gates. There is rarely so great a number of Steeples to be any where seen,
as appeared to us on the side we approached it.

Cologne, as you know, is an Imperial City, governed by its Burgo-Masters: But
the Archbishop has there a very great Power. This Prince takes cognizance of
all Affairs both Civil and Criminal, and can Pardon those whom the Magistrates
condemn. And the Oath which the City takes, seems to be a kind of Homage: It is
in these terms; We Free Burgesses of Cologne, do this day, for now, and for
ever promise to -- Archbishop of Cologne, to be faithful and favorable to
him, as long as he shall conserve in our Rights and Honor, and in our ancient
Privileges, Us, our Wives, our Children, and our City of Cologne. So God and
his Saints help us.

There is great Jealousy between the City and the Elector. They will not
suffer him to stay long there with any great Train. Many Archbishops have
attempted their Liberties. Under the Reign of the Emperor Adolphus of Nassaw,
the Inhabitants went in Arms to meet their Archbishop, as far as Woringhen in
Brabant, where having put the Keys of their City between him and them in the
Field of Battle, to be the price of the Victory, they obtained that with their
Keys and Franchises. They have ever since celebrated a Festival on this
Account, with a great deal of Ceremony. Heiss.
If you please, you may have the Answer which the Bishop returns them; it was a
Burgo-Master gave me them both.

We -- by the Grace of God, Archbishop of the Holy Church of Cologne, and
Arch-Chancellor of the Empire in Italy: To the end that there may be an
amicable Confederacy, entire Confidence, and sincere and inviolable Peace
between Us and our dear Burgesses of the City of Cologne, do make known to all
by these Presents, that we do promise and declare sincerely, and without Fraud,
that we do confirm all their Rights and Franchises, written or not written, old
or new, within or without the City of Cologne, which have been granted to it by
the Popes, Emperors, Kings, and Archbishops, of Cologne, without ever doing
any thing to violate the same. In Testimony whereof, etc.

The Chapter of Cologne is composed of sixty Canons, who ought all to be
Princes or Earls. The four and twenty Eldest are the Capitularies.

It was formerly the Electors of Cologne, who Crowned the Emperor according to
the Constitution of the Golden-Bull; but these Electors not having been Priests
for a long time, those of Mentz perform that Office in their stead, and the
last have They pretend also to this right, in quality of the first
Archbishops. The Emperor now reigning was Crowned by the Archbishop of
Cologne.
since remained in possession of that Privilege.

I am informed that there are here many Protestants known to be such: They go
into the Lands of the Duke of Newbourg, to exercise their Religion. They are
always called by their old name of Those who presented the Petition were
Habited all alike. They never take it ill to be called Gueux, and to
distinguish themselves by that Name, they hung a Medal at their Necks, upon
which, on one side, was the Effigies of the King, (Philip II.) and on the
other, two hands joined together, which held two Budgets, with diverse little
Porringers, and round about was written, Faithful to the King even to Beggary.
Gab. Chappuys, Hist. of the Wars of Flanders.
Gueux, or Beggars, which, as you know, was given at Brussels to the Authors of
the Agreement, by the Count de Barlemont.

The Townhouse is a great Gothic Building. We saw there, amongst other
things, Chambers full of Bows, Arrows, Cross-Bows, Quivers, Bucklers, and other
ancient Arms. I measured one of those great Cross-Bows which had need of Rests;
The Bow was of Whale-Bone, and had twelve Foot of length, eight Inches broad,
and four Inches thick. It is very pleasant to behold Cologne, and the delicate
Country about it, from the top of the Tower of this House.

The little part of the City, which is on the other side of the Rhine, is the
Propriety of the Elector, and is the Quarter allotted to the Jews.

The Cathedral Church remains in a very imperfect State; it is great pity so
fine a beginning should never attain its end. In the Year 1622. the three
pretended Kings, who came to adore our Savior, were brought from Milan into
this Church, When Frederick Barbarossa caused Milan to be
where Fame attributes many Miracles to them. They sell for a penny a dozen
little Billets, which have touched them, and communicate their Virtue.

An extraordinary Drought having caused a Famine in Hungary (I know not
positively in what time it was) a great number of the People of that Country,
came to supplicate the assistance of the three Kings, after they had in vain
invoked the Saints of their Country and Neighborhood; who had no sooner spoke
the word, but it rained in great abundance. From that time a Procession of
Hungarians comes every seventh Year to pay Homage to their Benefactors; and
these People are treated and waited upon by the Magistrates for fifteen days,
in a very fine House built on purpose for them.

I observed a hole three or four Foot wide, on the top of the Vaulted Roof of
the Church, and almost over the Chapel, where are kept these Royal Relics.
There are these words written round this Overture, Anno 1404. 30. See To. II.
Letter xxiii.
October. ventus de nocte flat ingens grandem per tectum lapidem pellit. On the
30th. of October, in the Year 1404. a great Wind blew in the Night, and drove a
great Stone through the Roof. This Stone lies on the Pavement near the Chapel.
Our Guide told us, they called it, the Devil's Stone, because it is believed,
the Devil threw it out of Malice to destroy the Chapel. I observed likewise in
the same Church, over one of the doors, thirty six gilded Staves, about three
foot long each; and this Distich is written underneath: Quot pendere vides
Baculos tot Episcopus Annos
Huic Agrippinae praefuit Ecclesiae.
And in effect, the Elector is at this time in the thirty seventh Year of his
Archbishopric. But I could not learn neither the Original, nor the Benefit of
this Custom.

We saw, as we passed, the curious Church of the Jesuits, and from thence went
to that of St. Ursula. You know, without doubt, the Legend of this Saint, and
of her eleven thousand Virgins, who were Massacred with her by the Huns at
Cologne, in the Year 238. Those who first wrote this Story, supposed that there
was one Etherus, King of England, and Husband of Ursula, and one Pope Cyriack,
his Contemporary, Persons of whom no notice is taken in History. In the mean
time, every one of the eleven thousand Virgins, have done eleven thousand
Miracles, and furnished a great number of Relics. The Body of Ursula lay for
a long time confounded amongst the rest; but they say it was at last
distinguished by a Pigeon; who, for several days, came regularly at a set hour
to her Tomb: And at present the Saint is laid near her Husband Etherus. The
Church is filled with the Tombs of many of the Virgins, and you find always a
multitude of Old-Women in it, repeating of Pater-nosters from Morning to Night.
They say the Earth of this Church will not endure any other dead Corpse; and to
prove this, they there show the Tomb of a Daughter of a certain Duke of
Brabant, who, after they had forcibly Interred her there, raised up her self,
and remained in the Air, so that they were fain to fix her with Iron, as she is
now two or three Feet from the Earth, against one of the Pillars of the Church.

It is pleasant to see in a great Chapel, which is on the side of this same
Church, the Bones of the Virgins, with which it is adorned and hung, after the
manner which you see the Swords and Pistols ranged at White Hall, in the
Guard-Chamber. These Bones, except the Heads, have no Ornaments, but to the
Heads they have done particular Honors; for some of them are put up in cases
of Silver, and others have coverings of Gold, there is none which have not at
least their Caps of Cloth of Gold, or a Bonnet of Crimson-Velvet, wrought with
Pearls and Jewels. Behold, Sir, what, together with the pretended three Kings,
is the chief Object of the Devotion of Cologne, and from whence it comes to be
called Cologne the Holy: and from hence also it is, that the Arms of this City
are, Argent, eleven Flames Gules, with a Chief of the Second, charged with
three Crowns Or. The eleven Flames are in Memorial of the eleven thousand
Virgins, and the three Crowns represent the three Kings.

In the Church of the Maccabees there is a Crucifix which wears a Peruke, which
is very singular; but that which is mavelous and edifying is, that when the
Hungarian Pilgrims come to Cologne, they do each of them cut off a lock of Hair
from this Peruke, and yet it never diminishes.

I observed, at the entrance into the Church of the Twelve Apostles, a Picture,
which represents a very rare Event; which nevertheless might easily be received
for Truth, if the end of the Story did not render it suspicious. The Wife of a
Consul of Cologne, being Buried in the Year 1571. with a Ring of great Price,
the Sexton, the Night following, opened the Tomb to steal the Ring; I leave you
to judge if he were not frighted when he felt his hand caught hold of, and when
the good Lady grasped him to get out of the Sepulcher, and yet he loosed
himself and fled away, without further Conversation. The Person raised,
unwrapped her self as well as she could, and went to knock at the door of her
House; She called a Servant by his Name, and in few words told him the sum of
her Adventure, that he might not let her Perish with Cold: But the Man thought
her a Ghost, and all in a fright run to tell the thing to his Master. (So far
may be true, now comes the Fable.) The Master, as incredulous as the Man,
called him Fool, and said he would as soon believe his Horses were in the
Garret, and instantly a most dreadful noise was heard in the Garret; the Man
went up thither, and found six Coach-Horses there, without counting the rest in
the Stable. The Consul, amazed at so many Prodigies, was not able to speak; the
Man was in an Ecstasy or Swound in the Garret, and the living deceased, quaking
in her Shroud, was expecting to be let in: at last it came to pass that the
door was opened, and they chafed and used her so well, that she revived as if
nothing had passed; and the next day they made Machines necessary to let down
the Horses. And to make the truth of this appear, there is at this day to be
seen in the Garret, some Wooden Horses, which are covered with the others
Skins. And they show in the Church of the Twelve Apostles, a great piece of
Linen Cloth which this Woman Spun after her return to the World; in which she
lived seven Years afterward.

I have nothing further to tell you of Cologne, only that this is the Country
wherein we first begun to find Vines; though Wine here is very dear in the Houses
of Entertainment. And that there are yet remaining some Leskirken and Judaes.
Families, who affirm they are issued from the Roman Race, and who produce
their Genealogies, from the first time this City was made a Colony of the
Empire.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
At Cologne, October. 26. 1687.
LETTER VI.
SIR,
THE Ways from Cologne to Mentz are so bad at present, and the Chariot so
unpleasant and uneasy, that we chose rather to remount the Rhine, let the
Passage be never so slow.

BONN.
We quickly arrived at Bonn, which appeared to us a little dirty City; I could
not learn that there was any thing in it to deserve our stay there. The
Fortifications are neglected, and the Palace of the Elector of Cologne, who
there makes his Residence, seems to be but a very indifferent House. We had in
the Boat a Burgo-Master of Cologne, ANDERNACH. and Keyserwaert have a right of
Toll on the Rhine.
who told me, as we passed by Andernache that there are some Gentlemen in that
little City who have particular Privileges, and are called Free Knights. He
also told me many Stories of a great House on the other side the Rhine, which
is not Inhabited, and which he said was haunted with Spirits, the ordinary
scandal of uninhabited Houses or Castles.

COBLENTZ. The most ancient Archbishopric in all Germany, and the Residence
of the Elector of Treves. The Chapter of Treves admit neither Princes nor Earls
easily. The Canons are, as much as is possible, only Gentlemen; they must prove
sixteen Descents of Nobility, both on the Father and Mother's side. Heiss.
Coblentz is built upon a nook of Ground, which the Moselle makes when it falls
into the Rhine. This City seemed to us very agreeable, and they told us it was
very well Fortified on the Land side, but we saw only single Walls on that part
which is watered by the Moselle and the Rhine. The Castle, which is on a rising
Ground, on the other side of the River, is a very strong place, and wholly
commands the City. They call this Castle Ehrenbreisten, EHRENBREISTEN.
which signifies the famous Rock, or the Rock of Honor: It is built on the
Ruins of the Fort of Hermestein, of which there remains only that corner of
the Rock on which the Windmil stands. There is always a good Garrison in this
place, with store of Arms and Ammunition. The Palace of the Elector of Treves
is at the foot of the Hill, under the Fortress, and on the Bank of the Rhine.

Over Against the Town of Caub, which belongs to the Elector Palatine, half a
League from Baccharach, which appertains to him likewise, there is an old
Castle called Pfaltz in the middle of the Rhine, from whence, as some say, the
Pfaltzgravts, or, as we call them, the Palsgraves, or Counts Palatines, derive
their Name. BACCHARACH.
Baccharach is a very little City built on the side of a Hill, and famous for
its excellent Wines. One of the Ministers of the place, with whom we Dined,
pretended that Baccharach was derived from Bacchi Ara, or the Altar of Bacchus;
and he told us there were four ancient Towns in the Neighborhood, which were
also Consecrated to Bacchus: Steegbach, which is on a Hillock, Scala Bacchi,
the Ladder of Bacchus. Diebach, Digitus Bacchi, or the Finger of Bacchus.
Handbach, or Mannersbach, Manus Bacchi, or the Hand of Bacchus: And Lorch,
Laurea Bacchi, or the Bays of Bacchus.

As we parted from Baccharach, a furious Storm arose, which cast away a large
Boat, and ours was not without some danger. We went ashore a little before we
came to Rudisheim, where the bad Weather constrained us to stay a while; and we
passed by an old ruinous House, which they said belonged to that wicked
Archbishop of Mentz, Mentz was made an Archbishopric by Pope Zachary, Anno,
745.
who was eaten by Rats. The Rhine makes there a little Island, in the midst of
which is a square Tower, which they call the Tower of Rats: And it is commonly
reported, that this Prelate, who was then the most wicked and cruel Man alive,
fell sick in that House which I lately mentioned (some say it was in another a
little further off, but that is nothing to the Story,) and that, by an
extraordinary Judgment of God, he was environed with Rats, which could by no
means be driven away. They add, that he caused himself to be carried into the
Island, where he hoped he might have been freed from them, but the Rats
multiplied, swam over the River and devoured him. An ingenious Man, whom I saw
in this place, assured me, that he had read this Story in some old Chronicles
of the Country. He said he remembered, that the Archbishop was there named
Renald, and that this happened in the Tenth Age. I would willingly give credit
to this Story, but I fear however that there is some mistake in it. For I know
that about this time there was a certain Priest, named Arnald, who fraudulently
dispossessed the Archbishop Henry; and that this Arnald was Massacred by the
People, which may have given occasion to some confusion in these Histories.
Another Person told me, that the Name of the Archbishop was Hatton II.
surnamed Bonosus; and that in a time of Famine, he caused a great number of
poor People to be assembled in a Barn, where he caused them to be burnt,
saying, These are the unprofitable Vermin, which are good for nothing but to
consume the Bread which should serve for the Sustenance of others. However,
Pliny, upon the Testimony of Varro, relates that the Isle of Gyara, one of the
Cyclades, was abandoned by the Inhabitants because of Rats. He adds, That a
City of Spain, was overthrown by Rabbets. One in Thessaly by Moles. One in
France by Frogs. And another in Africa by Mice.
this Story is generally believed here, though others look upon it as a Fable.
Some will lightly and hastily swallow any Prodigy, and others may offend as
much by too much incredulity. If the Holy Scripture describes us a Pharaoh,
pestered with Lice and Frogs, and an Herod, devoured by Worms; why should we
hastily condemn the like event for a Fable? More surprising things have no
doubt fallen out: And I remember I have read two such Histories in the
Fasciculus temporum. The words of the Author are very like these, Mures
infiniti convenerant quemdam, potenter circumvallantes cum in concivio, nec
potuerunt abigi donec devoraretur. That is, A multitude of Mice compassed him
about, strongly assaulting him in a Banquet, nor could they be driven away till
they had devoured him. This happened about the Year 1074. He adds, Idem cuidam
Principi Poloniae contigit. The same thing happened to a certain Poppiel II.
Surnamed Sardanapalus, he, his Wife and Children, were eaten by Rats, Anno 823.
Poppielus Principes Polonorum Patruos suos veneno per fraudem interimit, eosque
insepultos projicit, sed ex cadaveribus mures enati sunt qui Poppielum and
ambos ejus filios una cum uxore devorant. Chronicon de Pop. Garon places this
event in the Year 830. And he adds, That the Rats eat the name of Hatton, which
was in many places in the Tower of the Rhine. The History of Hatton is related
at large by Trithemius in his Chronicles, and by Camerarius in his Meditations.
Calvisius reports, that in 1013. a certain Soldier was eaten by Rats. See 1 Samuel chapter 6. ver. 4, 5.
Prince of Poland.

From Bonn to Binghen, three Leagues below Mentz, the Rhine is almost always
between the Mountains; this Passage which it so happily met with, seems to be a
particular work of Providence. You would fancy it to be a Canal made on
purpose for this River, cross a Country which naturally was inaccessible to it,
for fear, that not being capable to continue its course, it should swell and
overflow the Provinces, which now its Stream only waters: At the foot of the
Mountains which thus shut it up, the whole Country is full of Vineyards; and
there are to be seen, on its Banks, both to the right and left, a great number
of little Cities and good Villages. Castles there are also very frequent, most
of them built on ascents, and even on the points of the sharpest Rocks. I
counted forty since my departure from Cologne.

I observed also in my way, a strange fantasticalness in the Habits of the
Peasants, especially the Women. About Bonn and Rhindorfe they wore only on
their Heads a little Cap of colored Stuff, bordered with Galoon of another
color. Their Hair hangs in Tresses quite down their Backs. They make their
Waste extremely short, and have a broad Leather Girdle with which they girt
themselves half a Foot below their Waste, which is compassed with a thick
folded Roll, and lifts up their Petticoats so high, that they reach but little
below their Knees.

The Rhine is very broad, all the way from Binghen to Mentz. MENTZ.
At Mentz you go over it on a Bridge of Boats which has no supporters. The
first thing you meet with, when you come to this City from Cologne, is the
Elector's Palace; it is of reddish Stone, and its Architecture has a great
number of Ornaments, after the German, though otherwise regular and magnificent
enough.

The bad Weather hindered us from seeing the Arsenal, as well as the Citadel and
other Fortifications. But we were assured our loss was not great, there being
nothing at all rare in any of them.

They told us, that in the middle of the Citadel there is a kind of Tower,
commonly called the Tomb of Drusus. Drusus Germanicus, Brother to Tiberius,
died in Germany, to the great Grief, as you know, of the People and Army: But
he died not on the Rhine. Besides, you may remember that his Body was carried
to Rome to be burnt in the Field of Mars. It is true, that after Augustus had
caused the Senate to give him the Surname of Germanicus, he also made Statues
to be erected for him, with triumphal Arches, and other Monuments on the Banks
of the Rhine: And perhaps this Tower or Mausoleum was one of his honorary
Tombs, which the Ancients called (...).

The Ornaments in which the Electors celebrate Mass are extraordinary Rich: And
the Canopy under which the Host is carried, on certain occasions, is all
covered with Pearls. I remember I have read in the Chronicles of the Abbey of
Usberg, that they had formerly in the Treasury of the Vestry, an hollow Emerald
of the bigness and shape of half a large Melon. This Author said, that on some
days they put Water into that Cup, with two or three little Fishes which swam
about in it; and when the Cup was covered they showed it to the People, and the
motion of the Fishes produced such an effect, as persuaded the silly People
that the Stone was alive.

Every Elector bears the Arms of his own House, but he Quarters Gules, a Wheel
Argent, which are the Arms of the Electorate. It is said, that the Original of
these Arms came from the Willigese or Viligese of the Country of Brunswick.
This Chapter is wholly composed of Gentlemen. There are 42, of which 24 are
Capitularies. Two thirds of their Suffrages are required in the choice of an
Elector. Heiss. The University was Founded by the Archbishop Ditherus, Anno
1482. Calvis.
first Elector, who was the Son of a Cart-wright. There are to be seen in this
Church many magnificent Tombs of these Princes who commonly are buried there.

The Protestants may live at Mentz, but not exercise their Religion there. The
City is indifferently large, but not much Peopled, and the University in no
very good Condition. However, the situation makes amends, which is very
pleasant, and the Country about it is excellently good.

You know that the Elector of Mentz, is the first of the Ecclesiastics, and
Dean of the Electoral College. I shall say nothing of his Fines or Revenue, nor
of those of the other Princes; for in things of that nature, it is almost
impossible to make a right Judgment.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
At Mentz, Nov. 3. 1687.
LETTER VII.
SIR,
AFter we had crossed the Rhine before Mentz, we entered into the Meine, which,
by the Figure Parenthesis, is called Moganus, as well as Moenus; and from
thence some think Moguntia took its name. We made use of the ordinary Boat of
Francfort, and came thither the same day in very good time.

FRANCFORT, an Imperial City.

Eleven Royal Bastions.


This City is larger, richer, fairer, and better Peopled than Mentz. Its
Fortifications seem tolerable, though they have their defects. It is seated in
a flat Country, and has no Suburbs. The Houses are built of that red kind of
Stone, of which I have spoken before, or of Wood or Plaster covered with
Slates. The Meine, which is a considerably large River, leaves it on the Right.
A Stone Bridge, which is four hundred paces long, makes the Communication
between Francfort and Saxenhausen.

Francfort is an Imperial City, and has a small Territory under its
Government. The Senate are Lutherans, as also the greatest part of the
Inhabitants. The Roman Catholics are in possession of the principal Church; in
which the Ceremony of anointing the Emperor is performed. But they only carry
the Host incognito, and make no Processions in public. The Protestants, whom
they call Cavinists, have the exercise of their Religion at Bochenheim, which
is a small hour's Walk from thence, in the County of Hannau. They are obliged
to Marry and Christen in the Lutheran Churches.

We took a view It was burned in the Year 1460. with the Records of the City.
Charlemain granted its freedom with very great Privileges.
in the Townhouse, of the Chamber in which the Election of the Emperor is
made, and where is kept one of the Originals of the Golden Bull: This Chamber
has nothing Magnificent; there are only old Tapistry Hangings, a great Table
with a green Carpet, and great Elbow-Chairs of black Velvet for the Electors.
On the side of this Chamber is the Hall, where certain Ceremonies are observed
which succeed the Election; and when they are over, the Emperor descends from
the Hall, and goes to the Church, where he is Crowned.

The Golden Bull is a Book of twenty four Leaves of Parchment, in Quarto, which
are sewed together, and covered with another piece of Parchment, without any
Ornament. The Seal is fastened to it by a silken String of many Colors, and is
covered with Gold, so as it resembles a Medal: It is two Inches and a half in
breadth, and a large Line in thickness. Upon the Seal is the Emperor Charles
IV. Seated and Crowned, holding a Scepter in his Right Hand, and the Globe in
his Left. The Shield of the Empire is on his Right, and that of Bohemia on his
Left. And about it is written, Carolus quartus divina favente clementia
Romanorum Imperator semper Augustus, and on each side near the two Scutcheons,
Et Bohemiae Rex. On the Reverse there is a kind of a Gate of a Castle between
two Towers, which apparently denotes Rome, this Verse being written about: Roma
Caput mundi regit orbis fraena rotundi. And upon the Gate between the two
Towers, Roma aurea.

This Bull was given at Nuremberg, in the Year 1356. by the Emperor Charles
IV. with the consent of all the States of the Empire. The design of the
Institutors was, that this Edict should be perpetual and irrerevocable, yet
Particularly in the Treaties of Westphalia.
many Innovations have been made since. It describes particularly the form of
the Election of the Emperor, or The Emperor, and the King of the Romans, in
the sense of the Bull, are but one Person. In it he is often called Head of the
Faithful, and first Prince of the Christian World. The Bull is written in Latin.
the King of the Romans, whom it frequently styles the Temporal Head of the
Christian World. It regulates many things that relate to the Electors, touching
their Rank, their Assemblies, their Rights and Immunities, the Right of
Succession to the Electorate, and the Manner after which every one of them is
to perform his Function in public Ceremonies. It ordains these Princes to
assemble once in the Year to settle the Affairs of the Empire. The Elector of
Saxony, in conjunction with the Elector Palatine, are declared Regents, after
the Death of the Emperor. But things, as you know, having been changed in
favor of the Duke of Bavaria, that Elector pretends to the Regency. It Is a
question whether the Vicariat be affixed to the Electorate, in which the Duke
of Bavaria was invested, or if it remain to the House of the Counts Palatines.

Now, there is a King of the Romans, he is perpetual Vicar and Heir of the
Empire. It was for this reason that Philip II. had only the Kingdom of Spain
for his share, and that Ferdinand his Uncle, who in the Life of Charles V. was
elected King of the Romans, came to be Emperor.

Francfort is the place appointed by the Bull, for the Election of the
Emperor. Nevertheless, Henry II. was chosen at Mentz, and Henry III. at Aix la
Chappelle; This is no longer observed.
some have been also Elected at Cologne, and others at Ausbourg and Ratishonne.
It was also ordained, that the Emperor should be first Crowned at Aix, which
for a long time has not been practiced. Every Elector may have On the day of
Electing the Emperor, there is a whole Ox served in a Dish, roasted, larded,
and stuffed with Wild Fowls and Venison. After the Feast the Ox is left to the
People. Borjou Dign. Temp.
two hundred Men, as well for his Guard as his Attendance, during the time of
the Election. And the Citizens of Francfort are to take care that no Strangers
be found in their City at that time, upon pain of losing their Privileges.
This Bull contains many Regulations, which I shall not at present relate.

The famous Treacle of Francfort is made there by Doctor Peter's, who is a
skilful Apothecary, and in other respects a very curious Person. There are more
than an hundred several Drugs that enter this Composition, which are to be seen
ranged in Pyramids, on a long Table. The Doctor has many Antiquities, and
other Rarities, amongst which he highly values a Stone taken out of a humane
Body, which is as big as ones head, and cost him 1600 Crowns.

There are in this place a great number of Jews, but they are as beggarly as
those of Amsterdam are rich. They wear their Beards piqued, and have black
Cloaks, with puffed Ruffs, they go from Tavern to Tavern, to sell any thing to
Strangers: but being reputed Thieves you must take heed of 'em. Moreover here
is a Task imposed on them, to run and fetch Water when any Fire happens in the
City.

Of Francfort, see further, p. 117.
You know, the Fairs of Francfort contribute much to the Fame and Riches of that
City. There are Three in a Year, which bring a considerable Trade to it.

The University was founded in the Year 1506, by Joachim and Albert of
Brandenburgh.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
At Francfort, Nov. 7. 1687.
LETTER VIII.
SIR,
AS we took Coach at Francfort to proceed on our Journey, we observed the
Coachman to put a little Salt upon each of his Horses, with certain little
Ceremonies, which made part of the Mystery; and this, as he told us, was to
bring us good Luck, and to preserve us from Charms and Witchcraft, during our
Voyage.

We passed the Rhine at Gernsheim, and after we had gone through Woods that
were drowned, by the overflowing of that River, (which made the ways both
dangerous and difficult) we found them very good between the End of this Wood,
and the City of Worms, which is but two little Leagues. WORMS, an Imperial City.
This City is about three or four hundred Paces, on the left side of the Rhine,
in an excellent Country, and most pleasant Situation. It is girt about with a
double Wall, without any Garrison, or even Fortification that is worth
Observation. Worms was formerly an Arch Bishopric But Pope Zachary removed the Sea to Mentz, to punish the Archbishop Gervillian, who, contrary to his Faith,
killed a Man, whom he invited out of the Camp of the Saxons, his Enemies, to
have a familiar conference with him. Heiss. This is a poor Bishopric.
The Bishop has a great Power there, though it be a free and Imperial City. It
is near as large as Francfort, but poor, melancholy and ill peopled. They
showed me a House that was lately sold for a thousand Crowns, which had been
Let formerly for a thousand Crowns per Annum. There are many void places in
this City, in which they have planted so many Vines, that they yield every Year
fifteen hundred Foudres of Wine: the Fouder is a Cask which holds about two
hundred and fifty English Gallons. They highly prize this Wine, and they have a
Proverb, That it is sweeter than the Virgins Milk. The City presents it to
Persons of Quality, as they pass by, as also Fish and Oats. The Fish is to show
the Right of Fishing, which they have on the Rhine; but what the Oats signify
I know not: it cannot be to represent their Territory, because they have none.
The Lutherans have here a Church; and, besides that, they preach by turns with
the Roman Catholics, in that of the Dominicans; the rest belong to the Roman
Catholics, who carry not the Host publicly, nor make any Procession, except
the Day after Easter. The Protestants, whom I will still call Calvinists to
distinguish them from the Lutherans, have their Church at Newhawsel in the
Palatinate, about half a League from the City; the Lutherans are not shy
sometimes to Christen their Children there, which is directly opposite to the
Practice of the Lutherans at Francfort.

They say, that a Lord of the House of Alberg, having brought a great many Jews
from Palestine, sold Thirty of them for a Piece of Silver, at the City of
Worms: where they were for a long time treated as Slaves, before they could
obtain the Liberty which they at present enjoy in common with the other
Inhabitants.

The Church of St. Paul seems to be an ancient Building, but I believe that of
St. John is the older. This last is built with very great square Stones, and
its Figure is quite irregular. The Walls are above twelve Foot thick, the
Windows are narrow, and there are Galleries all round the outside of the
Building just under the Roof. There is but little Appearance that this was
built for a Church: the Cathedral is a long Structure of a considerable Height,
with a Tower at each of the four Corners; the whole Building is very massive,
and embellished with Gothic Ornaments. They showed us a certain Animal, over
one of the Doors of this Church, of which the People tell a hundred Stories.
This Animal is as big as an Ass, and has four Heads; one Head of a Man, one of
an Ox, one of an Eagle, and one of a Lion: it lifts up the two first, and
hangs down the other two. The right Foot before is a Man's, the left an Oxe's,
the two hinder Feet are of an Eagle and a Lion: and a Woman sits upon the
Beast. If I durst penetrate into this Mystery, I think it might be conjectured,
that this Hieroglyphick is a Chimera composed of the four Animals in the Vision
of Ezekiel, and that the Woman represents the Gospel.

I took notice of a Picture, over the Altar of one of the Chapels of this
Church, in which the Virgin is represented receiving Christ as he descends from
the Cross, while several Angels carry the Instruments of the Crucifixion to
Heaven. But either the Painter has forgot, or else the Angels have since
brought back all these Relics.

There is another very curious Picture, at the Entrance of the Church of St.
Martin, over a moveable Altar. This Picture is about five Foot Square. God the
Father is on the Top of one Corner, from whence he seems to speak to the Virgin
Mary, who is on her knees in the midst of the Picture: she holds the little
Infant Jesus by the Feet, and puts his Head into the Hopper of a Mill: the
twelve Apostles turn the Mill by a Wheel, with their Hands, and they are
assisted by these four Beasts of Ezekiel, which we just spoke of, who work on
the other side. Not far off the Pope kneels to receive the Hosts, which fall
from the Mill ready made into a Cup of Gold. He presents one to a Cardinal, the
Cardinal gives it to a Bishop, the Bishop to a Priest, and the Priest to the
People.

There are in the City two public Houses; one of which is called the Burgher's
House, in which the Senate assembles twice every Week, about the Affairs of the
State: the other is for the Magistracy, and is the Place where common Causes
are pleaded. It was in the first that Luther made his Appearance on an occasion
known to all the World. They tell us, that this Doctor, having spoke with much
eagerness, and being besides heated by the fire which was before him, some body
brought him a Glass of Wine, which he received; but such was his vehemence,
that he forgot to drink, and without thinking of it, set it on a Bench which
was by his side: they add, that the Glass immediately after broke without any
Person's touching it, and it passed for current that the Wine was poisoned. I
will make no Gloss upon this Story. But afterward the Bench on which he set
the Glass was broken, and some Pieces were taken out of it, which some zealous
Lutherans keep in memory of their Master.

We went also to see another House, which they call the Mint; in which, among
other things, I observed a These two Verses are written on the Top of the Leaf.
Mira fides, pedibus Juvenis facit omnia recta,
Cui pariens matter brachia nulla dedit.

Leaf of Parchment, in a square Frame, upon which there are twelve sorts of
Hands written, very fairly, with many Miniatures and Draughts boldly traced
with a Pen. It was written by one Thomas Schuveiker, who was born without Arms,
and performed this with his Feet. They also show another little round piece of
Vellum, about the bigness of a Guiney, upon which the Lord's-Prayer, without
abbreviation, is written. But this is no extraordinary thing. I know a Maximin
Mossileni.
Man who wrote the same Prayer six times in the same compass, more distinctly.
This House has a long Portico, between the Arches of which hang great Bones
and Horns. They say the Bones are the Bones of Giants, and the Horns the Horns
of the Oxen which drew the Stones with which the Cathedral is built. And are
not these very curious and venerable Pieces? The outside of the House is full
of several Pictures, amongst which there are many of Armed Giants, which in the
Inscription below are called Vangiones. We know very well that the People who
formerly inhabited this part of the Rhine, were called Vangiones, as we find in
Tacitus, and others. But I cannot tell the reason, why they would have these
Vangiones to be Giants. Nevertheless, these great Men there make a great noise
at Worms, they tell a thousand Stories of them, and when they have done, every
one is at liberty to say what he pleases of them.

We only passed by Frankendal, FRANKENDAL.
the Fortifications of which are pretty good, and would be better if they were
lined; but they are forced to slope them too much, because the too soft and ill
cemented Earth could not otherwise be supported. This defect is yet apparently
greater in the Fortifications of Manheim. MANHEIM.
These two little places belong to the Elector Palatine. It Is but two hours
Travel from one to the other. The situation of Manheim is its greatest
Strength: For it is not commanded by any rising Ground, and is almost
surrounded by the Neckar and the Rhine. There is a good Garrison in the Citadel,
but the greatest Rarity that I found in it is the Temple of Concord. The
Elector Charles Louis, Father of Charles the Last, Deceased, caused this Church
to be built, to serve in common for the Protestants, both Calvinists and
Lutherans. But this Prince being of a pleasant Humor, and not very scrupulous
about Religion, the first day they Preached in this Church, permitted a Curate
of the Neighborhood to Preach there also; who made rather an Encomium of the
Prince, than a Sermon. But they pretended not then that this was to be
continued by course, and after that time the Lutherans, with the other
Reformists, solely made use of the Church. But in fine, this present Elector
being a Romanists, has thought fit to join those of his Communion with the
others. And besides his Will, which is most strong and prevalent, he pretends
this reason, that it is not contrary to the Will of the Founder, which he
proves from the Harangue of the Curate. Therefore now the three Ministers of
the three Religions, perform each in their turn the Service in the Church of
Concord. They begin and end successively, in such manner as in three successive
Sundays, each of the three Ministers has the privilege to begin first, as
also to be second or third. The Church is not great, but is very fine. The
Pulpit is in common, when the Roman Catholics have ended Mass, they draw the
Curtain, and hide the Altar.

About forty Years ago, Manheim was but a little Village, Frederick, Father of
Charles Louis, caused it to be fortified, and named it Fredericksburg; at the
same time this City was built, which resumed the name of Manheim, and was
fortified also. All the Streets are in straight Lines, and in some are Trees
planted, as in Holland. Manheim is a very pretty place. Every day at five of
the Clock in the Morning, at Noon and at six in the Evening, there are hired
Musicians, who sing part of a Psalm on the Tower of the Townhouse. They have
such loud Instruments that they are heard all over the Town. This is done in
most places of the Palatinate.

When we left Manheim, after we had passed the Neckar, over a Bridge of Boats,
we traversed a very fertile Plain, which continued for three hours, to the foot
of the Mountains of Heidelberg. These Mountains make a long ridge as if they
would hinder ones going further: Yet there we met with an opening, through
which the Neckar goes out. This River is passed over on a covered Bridge, and
you find the City of Heidelberg on the other side, which lies high and low
amongst the Trees and Rocks. It is no very fine City, and I know not by what
Spirit of Contradiction, they have built it almost all of Wood, whereas they
might have had good Stone in abundance. The Prince's Palace is upon an ascent,
it consists of many Pieces begun and not finished. This City was Stormed, and
utterly laid waste by the French, May 22. 1693.
The whole is built of hewn Stone, and there are some parts of this Structure
of fine Architecture. They have made fine Gardens amongst the Rocks, but for
all the care they have taken to adorn the place, it is still Melancholy and
Irregular, if we take all together; and I think it would be praise enough, to
call this House a magnificent Hermitage. It being not long since the Duchess
of Orleance, Sister to the last Elector, and Inheritrix of some part of his
Goods, caused the Furniture of this House to be taken away, for we found it
very naked. All things were sold even to the Wine of the famous Tun, and
apparently they had taken that away, The Colossus of Rhodes, says Mr. Patin,
did not hold more Water between its Thighs, than this great Tun Wine in its
Intrails. It is, adds he, 31 foot long, and 21 high.
had not the Toy been too troublesome. They go up to it by a pair of Stairs of
fifty Steps, and above there is a Platform of twenty Foot long, circl'd with a
Balcony round about. The Arms of the Elector are placed in the finest part of
the Tun. Bacchus in the largest Size, with I know not how many Satyrs, and
other Drunkards of that kind, are there also. The Vines, the Grapes, the
Glasses, and the Leather-Jacks are there to be seen, and make part of its
Ornaments in basso releivo. And there are likewise many Jests and Apothegms in
High Dutch, written on this rich Subject.

The misfortunes of the War, of which this Country has been so often the
Stage, have reduced it to a very poor condition, though it be naturally very
good. All Religions are tolerated; but the Magistrates are all Protestants. In
the great Church of this City, are to be seen many Magnificent Tombs of the
Counts Palatines: That of Robert, King of the Romans, and Founder of the
University of Heidelberg, is in the Choir of this same Church.

You are not ignorant of the Loss which Heidelberg, sustained in the Year 1622.
when its famous Library was transported to the Vatican.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
At Heidelberg, Nov. 12. 1687.
LETTER IX.
SIR,
TWO good Hours on this side Heidelberg, we past through whole Forests of
Firr-trees, and afterward met with many more. They set fire to them, cut them
down and pluck them up as much as they can; but the Nature of the Soil produces
them so fast, that they cannot root them out. All this Country is very poor,
and Money is so scarce, that about Wiseloc^ and Sintzheim, a Loaf of Wheaten
Bread, weighing eight Pounds, cost but Twopence. We were four days coming
hither from Heidelberg, and we scarce saw any thing but Firr-trees all the way;
I believe there are not more in Carolina: there are I know not how many little
Towns, which deserve not to be mentioned.

WINSHEIM, an Imperial City.

WIMPHEN, an Imperial City.

PALEMBERG.


Winsheim is the best of them, and is a Free City as well as Wimphen. All the
Inhabitants of both are Lutherans. I fancy, a more pleasant Assembly was never
seen than that of the Burgo-Masters of the little City of Palemberg. These
Sparks were in the same Tavern where we eat, which is the place where they
ordinarily meet, when they have any important Affair, to debate; imagine you
see a dozen or fifteen Peasants with pointed high-crowned Hats laden with
green and yellow Ribbon, with red or blue Wastcoats, and Ruffs or Cravats of
black Taffeta: their Hair cut round close below their Ears, and their Beards
after the Mode of the Capouchins. The whole Club is tipsie, their Elbows on the
Table, every Man with a Glass in his hand, drinking without intermission,
splitting of Causes, and every one striving to outbawl his Fellow; their
Gestures and Postures are much more diverting, but such as cannot be expressed.
In the mean time, it is not at all strange that they should love Drink so much
in this Country, since they can have four great Pots of Wine for a Penny; for
they know not what a small Measure means. If a Traveller demand a Cup of Wine
as he goes by, they bring him a Jack enough to make ten Men drunk.

The Tobacco and the Hops supply the place of Vines, when you approach this
Place, and the mountainous Country begins to grow plain and lower; so that you
may see the great and fair City of Nuremberg at a good distance. NUREMBERG, an
Imperial City.
Before we came at it, we often found our selves on the Banks of the little
River of Pegnitz, which runs from it, but serves only to turn the Mills. It
might without any difficulty be made navigable, and the Profit that would
result from such an Undertaking would quickly recompense the Charge.

But this defect does not hinder Nuremberg from being a City of great Trade,
very rich and well peopled. It is said to be twice greater than Francfort; and
it has seven other Cities in its Territory, with four hundred and eighty
Boroughs and Villages. Its Fortifications are of little esteem in respect of
those that are now in use: but it enjoys a profound Peace: and being in the
Heart of Germany, its Neighbors preserve it while they defend themselves.
Should the Emperor be Master of Nuremberg, as he is of his hereditary
Countries, it would not be very advantageous to him: for at the bottom, as free
as these little States are, they are nevertheless Slaves to the Emperor,
being, at the same time, Fiefs of the Empire; they are made to contribute Men,
Arms, and Money on occasion: and there are a thousand ways found to vex them,
if they perform not the things required of them.

It has 6 Gates, 228 principal streets public Fountains, and 118 Wells, Gal.
Gualdo.
Nuremberg is a very fair City, though the Structure of its Buildings is
somewhat Gothic, and not at all agreeable to the true Rule of Architecture. The
Houses are generally great, handsome and strongly built. Some are covered with
Pictures on the outsides, and almost all the rest are of very fine hewn Stone.
There are many Fountains of Brass in sundry places of the City: we saw a very
magnificent one, which is yet at the Artificers house, on which there are Brass
Statues to the Value of Seventy thousand Crowns, besides other Ornaments. The
Streets are broad, clean, and well paved, but it is Pity they are not more
strait. The Tradition of the Country will have Nuremberg to be built by Nero,
and there is one of the Towers of the Castle which is called the Tower of Nero,
but this is but a poor Argument; I rather think that Noriberga, called also in
Latin Mons Noricorum, was derived from Noricum, the old Name of the Country,
and the word Berg, which in high Dutch signifies a Mountain.

The Castle is on a high Rock, though the rest of the City be flat enough. The
Form of the Castle is wholly irregular, because they have been forced to make
it agreeable to the Mass of the misshapen and unequal Rock. They assured us that
the Well in it was sixteen hundred Foot deep, but none of us would believe
them; they also told us that the Chain of the Bucket weighs three thousand
Pounds. We saw in one of the Halls of this Castle, four Corinthian Pillars,
about fifteen Foot high; which, they say, the Devil brought from Rome, upon a
Challenge which a Monk made him. The Story would be too tedious to relate at
length. They tell another of a famous Conjurer of the Country, who leaped on
horseback over the Castle Ditches, and show the Print of the Horses Shoes on
the Stones of the Parapet.

The Ornaments which are used, at the Anointing of the Emperor, are kept in
the Church of the Hospital.

The Diadem or the Crown, called also the This is the Crown of Charlemain, it
weighs fourteen pounds.
Infula, is of Gold, and covered almost all over with precious Stones. It is
not closed as the Imperial Crowns which they ordinarily paint to us. Suppose
that instead of the Fleurets on Ducal Coronets, there are the Plates rounded on
the top, which are joined by the sides, and make the Compass of the Bonnet.
There are seven of them, and that before is the most richly adorned. There is a
Cross on the top of all, and a Semicircle supported between the two head Plates
behind, which is raised above the Bonnet, and joined to the top of the Cross.
The Scepter and Globe are of Gold, and they say that the Sword was brought by
an Angel from Heaven. The Robe of Charlemain is of Violet Color, embroidered
with Pearls; the Imperial Cloak is edged with Pearls, and strewn with Eagles
of Gold, and a great number of Jewels: there are likewise the Cope, the Stole,
Embroidered with Stones.
the Breeches, the Stockins and the covered with Plates of Gold.
Buskins. They also keep many Relics in this Church; and amongst others, the
Iron Head of blessed St. Longin's Lance. They are not ignorant that the
pretended Head of this Lance is to be seen in above ten other places of the
World; but, say they, theirs Lancea Domini reperta est in Antiochia a quidam
rustico cui beatus Andreas and locum ostendit. Quidam cum ea totum exercitum
letificavit, W. Roolwink.
came from Antioch; it was St. Andrew who found it; one Man with it discomfited
a whole Army: it was the thing of the World which Charlemain loved most. The
other Lances are Counterfeits, and this is the true one: they make much of it
as a precious Memorial, if they do not worship it as a Relic.

Their Lance puts me in mind of their Arsenal, which is one of the most
renowned in Germany. In the Year 1453, Mahomet II. besieged Constantinople, and
battered it with many Pieces of Cannon of Four hundred pound Ball, there was
one amongst the rest so heavy, that there were twenty Yoke of Oxen to draw it.
Calvisius.
There are two great Halls in it, each of two hundred and fifty paces long, and
well replenished with Arms. We counted three hundred Pieces of Cannon; but, to
speak truth, the greatest part of the other Arms savor of Antiquity; Muskets
and Harquebuses, Casks and Cuirasses in great Number: fine Hangings for
Arsenals, and this is all. There are many of those great Cannons of a monstrous
Bore, which they call Mermaids and Basilisks; and the biggest of these Pieces
carries a three hundred pound Ball.

We also saw the Library; it is in a Cloister which formerly belonged to the
Dominicans, and contains, as they tell you, twenty thousand Volumes. This was
collected out of the Ruins of many Convents, in the Time of the Reformation.
The most ancient Manuscript is of nine hundred Years; it is a Copy of the
Gospels with the Prayers and Hymns formerly used in the Greek Church. The
Character is very different from that now in use. It is a Treatise of
Predestination.
I observed a Book which was printed at Spire, in the Year 1446. but there
might be an Error in the Ciphers, for they showed us another of the Impression
of Faustus at Mentz, in 1459. at the End whereof there is an Advertisement, by
which it is said, That this Book was not written by the Hand, but was printed
by an admirable Secret newly invented. It Is probable that this was the first
Impression which was made at Mentz: and if it be so, there is no ground to
suppose that another Book was printed at Spire, thirteen Years before: nor had
Faustus any reason to boast so much of his new Secret. I have heard that there
is another Impression of Durandus's Officiale at Basil, printed by Faustus in
the same Year 1549.

They keep in this Library many Rarities, and curious Antiquities, but they are
not comparable to those that are in the Cabinet of Mr. Viati. We saw it in a
great Chamber quite filled with diverse Arms of all Countries, all Uses, and all
Fashions. It is scarce to be conceived how a single Man, and he a private
Person, who has not the Means of a Prince or a very great Lord, could heap
together so many things; for the Number is very great, and, I believe, brought
from all the four Quarters of the World. He showed us the Experiment of a
Wind-Gun, which is a very pretty, but a most destructive Invention, because
with this Engine great Mischiefs may be done a far off, and without any Noise.
From this Chamber you may go into another, where there are rare Pictures,
Medals, curious Works ancient and modern, Idols, Shells, Plants, Minerals, and
other natural Productions.

The Townhouse is very great, and has a very beautiful and well-proportion'd
Front, but it wants a Court before it. When we went from thence, our Friends
brought us to the City Cellar, which is two hundred and fifty Paces long, and
contains, as they tell us, Twenty thousand Aums of Wine, that is to say, Twenty
thousand middlesiz'd Tuns. We must allow it to be a very fair Cellar: but the
truth is, such People as we, know not how to enjoy all the Pleasures of it.

The Germans are, you know, Germanorum vivere bibere est.
strange Drinkers; but there are no People in the World more obliging, more
civil, or more officious, and yet they have terrible Customs as to the Point of
Drinking. Every thing is done there by drinking, and they drink in all they do.
There is not time given to speak three Words in a Visit, but presently comes
the Collation, or at least some large Jacks of Wine, with a Plate full of
Crusts of Bread hash'd with Pepper and Salt, a fatal Preparative for puny
Topers. But before we proceed I must give you an account of those sacred and
inviolable Laws that are afterward to be observed. Every Draught must be a
Health, and as soon as you have emptied your Glass, you must present it full to
him whose Health you drunk. You must never refuse the Glass which is presented,
and you must drink it off to the last drop. Do but reflect a little on these
Customs, and see how it is possible to leave off drinking: And indeed they
never make an end, The Duke of Rohan sai h in his Voyage, that the Germans have
succeeded better than all the Mathematicians of the World in finding out the
perpetual Motion, by the continual Agitation of their Cups.
but carouse in a perpetual Round: to drink in Germany is to drink eternally.
Pardon my Digression, and judge of our troublesome Entertainment in the Cellar.
You must do penance there for some time, and at last hide your self behind the
Casks, steal away and make your escape.

You must further know, that the Glasses are as much respected in this Country
as the Wine is beloved. They place them all en Parade. The greatest part of the
Chambers are wainscotted, even to two thirds of the Walls, and the Glasses are
ranged all about, upon the Cornish of the Wainscot, like Pipes of Organs. They
begin with the Little, and end with the Great ones; and these Great ones are
always used, and must be emptied at a draught, when there is any Health of
Importance. At going out of the Cellar we went to Consort, where we hoped we
should do nothing but sing, but the Bread, the Pepper, the Salt, and the Wine
followed in such abundance, that an Air was no sooner finished, but the whole
Company rose up to drink.

We saw yesterday in the Evening some part of the Celebration of a Wedding. The
future Husband accompanied with a long Train of his Relations came first to the
Church. He marched on foot from a house which was not two hundred Paces
distant, and to which he came in a Coach. His Bride, who was in the same place,
followed a while after, being also attended by a great Number of her Friends.
Both of them being got into the Church, the Bridegroom sits with his Company on
one side, and the Bride on the other, directly Diverse Habits of the Women at
Nuremberg
Vol. 1. P. 73.

depiction of women opposite to him; over each of their Heads against the Wall
was a Figure of Death. They both approached to the Minister, who attended them
in the midst of the Choir: and after he had performed his Office, four or five
Trumpets, which were on the Top of the Steeple, sounded a great many Levets,
and the new-married Couple returned in the manner they came thither.

The Husband was in Black Clothes, with a Cloak over-laid with Lace, a great
Ruff, and a little Crown of Gold Plate-Lace above his Peruke. But the Wife's
Dress will be a little more difficult to describe. The best Account I can give
you of it, is to tell you, That in framing to your self an Idea of her
Head-Tire, you must fancy a Mixture of Plate-Wire gilded, like a Bob-Peruke,
half a Foot higher than her Forehead, and very much frizzed and swelled out on
the Sides. This was ordered after such a manner, that in all the Thickness of
this Bush there was no more space or distance between the Threads, than was
sufficient to fasten to them an infinite Number of little Plates of Gold,
round, polished and shining, which hung both within and without, and waved with
the least Motion. Her Habit was Black, with long Skirts resembling the
Hongrelines which were not very long since used in France. The Body of this
little Cassock, which was cut very short, had a Gold Lace over all the Seams.
The Skirts were full of little close Knots of black Satin Ribbon, and the
straight Cuffs fell just on the Fist. Over this she had a Neck-band of Fine
Antique Lace, cut before like a Man's Band, and ending in a Point behind, which
reached down to the middle of the Back. She had besides a great Gold Chain on
her Shoulders, just like the Collar of some Order, and such another Chain for
her Girdle. Her Petticoat was short enough, and adorned below with Gold Fringe
and Black Bone-Lace. We had the Pleasure to see this Fair one dance with a
Senator in a great Ruff; and I believe at Japan there could not be found
Customs more different from ours, than those which we observed at this Feast. I
should never make an End if I should undertake to describe all the other
Habits. But, as fantastical as all these Dresses might seem at first view, one
might be easily accustomed to them, and every Habit appears handsome and
becoming, when the Persons that wear them are of themselves beautiful and
agreeable.

There are not more industrious People in the World than the Artists of
Nuremberg; some attribute to them the invention of Some say that a Monk called
Berthold Schwartz was the inventor. Others believe that it was one named
Bertrand the Black of Chioggia. But Tavernier, and many other Travelers,
pretend that this Invention came from China, as well as that of Printing. Luke
de la Porta, is of the same Opinion. He adds, that the Augustins brought the
use of both of them into Europe.
Firearms, as well as that of Cannon-Powder. Others affirm that this Powder
was invented at Chioggia, in the State of Venice; and there are some who
pretend that it came from Denmark. All Europe is filled with the little
Curiosities of Nuremberg. There are some of Wood, of Ivory, of Alabaster, and
even of Paper and Starch. Their Houses are large and neat, and I believe there
is not a Ceiling in all the City, which is not accompanied with an undersetting
of very fine Joyner's-Work. I cannot express the Particular Kindness they have
for Horns; for all their Houses are full of them. They are every where instead
of Pictures, and other curious things. You often see in the finest Chamber, a
Stag's, or Bull's Head, with a magnificent Pair of Horns hanging on the
Ceiling, without any other Design but for Ornament.

We were but poorly treated on all the Road from Heidelberg, and Straw was
commonly our Bed. But we made our selves amends at Nuremberg, where the Houses
of Entertainment have very good Accommodations. They served us every Day with
late Fruits, which I never saw any where else. We are here at the end of
November, and commonly eat very good Fish.

St. Sebald is the principal Church where they show a Wooden Crucifix which
passes for a Masterpiece. The Church of St. Laurence, is the biggest of all.
These are both Gothic, but the last has Eight Doors, which is look d upon as
a singularity. The great Churchyard is worth the seeing: There are in it above
Three Thousand Tombs with Epitaphs, and Coats of Arms wrought in Brass. No Jews
are suffered to live in the City, because they formerly Poisoned the Fountains.
They reside in a Village not far off, and may, for a small piece of Money, The
Author of the State of the Empire relates, that the Burghers of Nuremberg have
a singular and extraordinary Privilege to drown their Children.
come into the City, provided they depart the same day. The Roman Catholics
are but few in number, and they have but half a Church, where they perform
their Service after the Lutherans are gone out. Those who are called
Calvinists, go a League from the City into the Marquisate of Onspach, and their
Children are Baptized by the Lutherans, as at Francfort.

We are preparing for our departure to morrow Morning, to continue our way to
Ausbourg. I will also continue to write to you from thence, and will omit no
opportunity to show how much I am,

SIR, Yours, etc.
At Nuremberg, Nov. 22. 1687.
LETTER X.
SIR,
INGOLSTADT.
BEtween Nuremberg and Ingolstadt, the Ways are very bad and full of Forests;
but when you come near this City, you find a Champion Country, excellently well
tilled. Ingoldstadt is seated on the Danube, in the Duchy of Bavaria, of which
it is the strongest place. It is indifferently large. The most part of the
Houses are painted or whited without. The Streets are broad, straight, and well
paved: And the whole City seemed pleasant enough, though it be poor and ill
Peopled. They boast much of the Arsenal, but you must be put to trouble to
obtain liberty to see it, so that we would not take the pains. I know very well
that these inaccessible Arsenals are commonly the worst provided for; if they
were well filled and furnished, they would make a public Show of them, rather
than hide them. But they excuse themselves upon some secret Reasons, when they
have nothing to show but Cross-Bows and rusty Firelocks. Nothing is more easily
obtained, than the sight of the Arsenals of France, and it is as true, that
nothing is finer and in better order.

I observed at Ingolstadt, as in most of the other Cities of Germany, that
every where near the Fountains there are Casks of Wood or Brass, mounted on
little Carriages with four Wheels, which serve to carry Water when any Fire
happens. And this is very wisely contrived; But they have another Custom
throughout all this Country, which we thought much more troublesome than
useful. These are certain Singers in the Night, who trot about every hour: They
gave notice to beware of Fire, and afterward exhort us to sleep quietly,
without considering that their horrid Music keeps all the City awake.

NEWBOURG.
We came from Ingolstadt to Newbourg, which is a very little City, and without
Fortifications. It stands on the right Bank of the Danube, which is grown broad
and rapid, though at this place, it be very far distant from its main strength.
We past it over a Bridge to go up into the City, at our entry we had a view of
the Castle, which is seated on a Rock. Though the outsides are without
Ornaments, yet they make a handsome appearance. Within there are great
Appartments, even with the Ground, which are very convenient. But the Elector
Palatine, to whom this Duchy of Newbourg belongs, was constrained to send all
the Furniture of this Castle to that of Heidelberg, this last being stripped,
as I have already told you: There remains only one Cabinet, which is full of
rare Pictures and other Curiosities, which we had not time to examine
particularly. I remember to have observed a round piece of very hard Stone,
which weighs four pound, and was found in the Body of a Horse: I believe we
might justly call this Stone a kind of Bezoar, since according to the report of
Tavernier, the Bezoar is found in the Paunches of Cows and Apes, as well as in
those of Goats.

The Church of the Jesuits is the fairest in the City, but there is a pleasant
thing to be seen in that of St. Peter, Mark d'Aviano, the Capouchin, famous for
the Miracles which are attributed to him, was at Newbourg, about five Years
since. As he went into St. Peter's Church, he perceived in a corner an old
Nostradame of Wood, which was all mangled, and covered over with Dust. The
zealous Father could not without Grief behold our Lady in so unbecoming a
condition. He prostrated himself before her, and began to thump his Breast, and
to break out into Lamentations. As he was in the midst of his Groans, he
suddenly cried out. A Miracle! and protested that the good Lady had moved her
Eyes, and looked on him. There were then many old Women in the Church, who ran
together at the cries of the Capouchin, and with joy embraced the occasion that
they were able to say, that they had been witnesses to a Miracle: There was no
need of many Arguments to convince them, for they all cried out with the
Capouchin, that our Lady had looked upon him: Immediately he went out with
them, and filled all the City with the noise of the pretended Miracle. He was
supported by the great ones, and after certain Preambles, which it is needless
to relate, they went to St. Peter's in Procession: They cleaned the Statue,
took the Sacrament off the great Altar which was dedicated to it, dressed our
Lady in a splendid Habit, and placed her on that Altar, where she works
Miracles by Millions. The Princes and the People load her with Presents, and
People come from all parts in Pilgrimage to her.

AUSBOURG, an Imperial City. Galeazzo Gualdo Pr. pretends that it was built
presently after the Deluge.
The whole Country is very agreeable and extraordinarily good, between Newbourg
and Ausbourg, except when you draw near to this last City, where the Lands are
boggy and barren. Those of Ausbourg pretend that their City is the fairest of
all Germany; they say also that it is greater than Nuremberg, but confess that
it is not so well Peopled. If the Streets be broader and straiter, it is
certain, that generally the Houses are not so fine; they are commonly plaster'd
and whited without, or adorned with Pictures, I saw but very few of hewn Stone.
All the floors of the Chambers are paved with a certain yellowish Marble which
comes from Tirol; and the Ceilings are either of Joyners-work, with
Compartiments, or of a certain Cement, which polishes very well, and is very
durable. But there is one great Irregularity in all their manner of Building.
The greatest part of their Chambers are formed into Figures, which have no
name, and are also spoiled by the ill placing of the Stairs, which take away
great Corners of them.

Ausbourg is the Capital City of Suabia. You know Augustus sent a Colony
thither, after he had much enlarged and embellished it: It was called, Augusta
Vindelicorum, to distinguish it from Augusta Treverorum, Augusta Taurinorum,
and other Cities which likewise bore the name of Augusta. I observed somewhere
among the Paintings of the Houses, the Anagram of Augusta Vindelicorum, which
is Orta Dea vulgum vincis. The People of this Country were called Vindelici,
because they Inhabited about the Rivers of Pergis ad Augustam quam Vindo,
Licus;que fluentat.
Respicit and late fluvios Vindonque Licumque
Miscentes undas, and nomina littoris, unde
Antiquam gentem, Populumque, Urbemque, vocarunt
Vindelicam. Ricchardus.

Vindo and Licus, which are at this day called Werda and Leck, and between
which the City of Ausbourg is seated. It has been pillaged so often,
particularly in the time of Attila, that there are scarcely any remains of its
Antiquities to be found. It is I know not how long since, they dug out a Pillar
five or six Foot high, over which was the figure of a Pineapple. There were
also found some Medals of Augustus, on the Reverse of which the like Pillar is
to be seen. As it was the usual Custom, to mark out by some bounds, the
increase of the Empire, on the Frontiers of the Conquered Countries, and to
join to those limits some representations of the things which were most common
in the new Provinces: It is very probable, that this was the use of the Pillar
I just now mentioned, and of the Pineapple which is over it; for all this part
of Germany is full of Pines and Firr-Trees. There is also a great deal of
appearance, that for this reason Ausbourg bears a Pineapple in its Arms.

Though there be hardly any thing good or regular in the Fortifications of this
Town, yet has it sometimes sustained very rude Assaults with much vigor. It
is now Forty three Years, since the Swedes and French besieged it, and reduced
it to Famine, without being able to take it. It is an Imperial City, and its
Senate are half Lutherans, and half Roman Catholics: But this Senate is not
the sole Master of the State; five or six Sovereigns share it among them. A
good part belongs to the Bishop: Almost all the Territory is his Demesne; and
he has his Palace in the City, though he resides at Dillengen, where also the
University is. You know that all the Bishops of the Empire are Temporal Princes
in their Diocesses, except those of the Hereditary Countries of the House of
Austria.

The Roman Catholics here make public Processions, and carry the Host
publicly. The Lutherans commonly pull off their Hats when they cannot avoid
meeting the Host.

They do all they can possibly, to avoid giving scandal to either Party. The
Poor of both Religions are put into the same Hospitals, and are there assisted
by their own Ministers without any opposition.

The Jews have a separate place in the City; they are obliged to pay, when they
resort thither, a Florin per hour, which is a piece of Money worth about three
Shillings English.

The Townhouse is a great apiece Building, of very fair hewn Stone. The
Portal is of Marble, and almost all the Rooms are Wainscoted and Ciel'd with
Ash of Poland, which is very fine. The great Hall is extremely Magnificent. It
is one hundred and ten foot long, fifty eight broad, and fifty two foot high;
the Pavement is of green Marble. The Walls are covered with Paintings, between
which there are many Devices and Emblems, which relate to the Government; but
the Roof excells all the rest in Beauty. It consists of Compartments, the
Squares and Pannels of which are enriched with gilded Sculptures, and filled
with Pictures and other Ornaments. And this is all so well ordered and
performed, that it deserves a particular Observation.

The Arsenal is very great: The two Halls below are full of Cannon, of which
the greatest part are of Brass. There is a Culverin of Leather twenty six foot
long, which is a six Pounder. The upper Stories are filled with good Arms.

During the Wars of the Neighboring Princes, in this last Age, the People of
Ausbourg were careful to shut the Gates of the City early at Nights, which
Custom was troublesome to Strangers, as well as to themselves. Wherefore they
invented a kind of secret Gate, by which there was Passage to come in, without
fear of surprise or other danger. This Gate remains still with all its Locks
and Machines, and is a thing very singular. I have drawn a design of it, which
I could show you, but the description would at present be too difficult and
tedious.

The Trade of Ausbourg decayed, as that of Holland increased. Almost all
Merchandises which come from the Mediterranean, were formerly Landed at Venice,
and from thence brought to Ausbourg, from which place they were dispersed
through all Germany. But Holland has taken away all, and distributes all: And
Ausbourg suffers as well as Venice, Milan, Antwerp, and an infinite number of
other Cities, which are at present as Poor as they were formerly Rich.

Three Years after Gustavus the Great had made himself Master of Ausbourg, it
was retaken by the Duke of Bavaria, who took away all the Churches from the
Lutherans; in which case they remained from the Year Thirty five, till Forty
eight, at which time all things were restored by the Peace of Munster. During
which interval, the Lutherans had no liberty to assemble but in a College, from
the Window of which they Preached to the People in the Courtyard. This College
is still in their Possession; and I have seen a long Inscription, which is
Graved under the Window, and begins thus: Praeclusis omnibus Evangelicorum
templis, coelum tamen ipsis patuit, etc. All the Churches of the Professors of
the Gospel being shut, Heaven was yet open to them, etc.

You may see in the Bishop's Palace, the Chamber where the famous Confession of
Ausbourg, was In the Year 1540. by Melancthon and Luther; Melancthon drew it up.
presented to the Emperor Charles V. From thence we went to the Cathedral,
where there is a Gate of Brass, over which many places of the Sacred History
are represented in basso relievo, and they made us observe in the History of
the Creation, that it was the Virgin Mary who created Eve, and formed her out
of one of Adam's Ribbs.

They are no less ingenious at Ausbourg, than at Nuremberg, and even they excel
particularly in Clock and Goldsmiths-work, and in works in Ivory. We saw
several Clocks which were valued at fifteen or twenty thousand Crowns, they are
placed in cases that are very richly wrought. And besides what relates to the
motion of the Stars, and the Division of the Times and Seasons, they adorn them
with many other things, which would be both pleasant and profitable, were they
a little more lasting.

Their way of turning in Ivory is very curious, and deserves to be taken notice
of with admiration. But one of the rarest Works which I saw here, I shall give
you an account of: They are Glasses made hollow and well shaped, with a Ring
made of the same piece in turning, which plays between the bottom and the bowl
of the Glass, without possibility of taking off. There are an hundred with
their Rings in a grain of Pepper of an ordinary size. These Glasses are in my
hands.
I often examined this little Miracle of Art, and observed the stripes and
traces of the Tool with which they are turned, so that I found no secret in it,
but that it was the pure work of the Eyes and the Hand.

They have here another very pleasant Bauble, which are Fleas fastened by the
Neck with Chains of Steel. This Chain is so fine, that though it be near a Span
long, the Flea will lift it up when it leaps. The Animal, Chain and all is sold
for Ten Pence.

The variety of Habits, and difference of their Colors, is yet greater here
than at Nuremberg. This is an Affair regulated by the Policy of the
Magistrates, and you may know the Quality and Religion of the greatest part of
the People, by the difference of their Clothes. I will only represent to you
the manner after which the Widow of a Roman Catholic Merchant wears Mourning
for her Husband. She has a Christning Kercher, well whited and starched, with
Wings and Cornets ordinary for this Dress, a black Petticoat, and a black
Cloak, made like that of a Man, which comes to her Knees. A great white Veil
behind, which hangs at the tail of the Kercher, down to her Heels, enlarging it
self by degrees; a piece of the same Linen with the Kercher, four foot long,
and at least two broad, which is very much starched and stretched on a square
of Wire-thred, fastened by the middle of one of its ends, just below the Lips,
and covers all the fore part of the Body.

They have turned a little branch of the River Leck, and made it pass through
the Town; the Waters are so clear and good, that they need seek for no other;
there are four or five Towers upon this Arm of the River; on the tops of which
they have made Fish Ponds, and the Mills which are below cause Pumps to play,
which lift up Habits of the Women at Ausburgh.
Vol. 1. P. 86.

A Country Wife

A Pesant

A Tradesman's Wife in mourning

A Burgher's Daughter

A Burghers Wife in mourning

A Doctors Wife

A Woman in mourning

depiction of women the Water, and fill those Ponds or Cisterns, so that it is
distributed throughout all the City. I ought not to forget to mention the
Fountains of Ausbourg, which are one of its principal Ornaments. There are many
of them which are almost as magnificent as the fine Fountain at Nuremberg.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
At Ausbourg, Dec. 2. 1687.
LETTER XI.
SIR,
I Observed at my going out of Ausbourg, in many Gardens, that they cover all
their Vines and Fig Trees, carefully with Straw or Mats, to preserve them from
the Frost; the Cold being sharper in this Country than in England, where we are
not obliged to make use of these Precautions, though we lie nearer the North.
It is certainly true, that the diverse degrees of Heat and Cold, are not always
proportioned to the diversity of Climates: There are terrible Winters in Canada
in the midst of the temperate Zone, whilst every where else, under the same
Climate, they enjoy a sweet and pleasant Air.

MUNICH.
The Country is level enough between Ausbourg and Munich, but it is not very
good; it is every where a mixture of Wood and Fields, and Firr-Trees. Munich is
not above half so big as Ausbourg. It is a fine City, but ill fortified, and
has no Trade; and without doubt little notice would be taken of this place, if
the Elector's Residence were not there, and if that Prince's Palace were not
extraordinarily Magnificent. Almost all the Houses of the City are painted on
the outside, but instead of Painting in Fresco or in Oil, they make use of a
kind of bad Plaster, which is liable to all the Injuries of the Weather: It
wears off quickly, and rises hollow in many places, which maims all the
Figures, and renders them very ugly.

We had heard some Persons boast so much of the Jesuits Library, that it was
the first thing we would see when we came to Munich; but it did not answer our
Expectations. For, besides that, it is neither very good, nor well conditioned;
they ordered a Brother Cut-Cabbage, who knew better what belonged to the
Kitchen than to Books, to show it us. I confess I could not believe such gross
Ignorance could lurk under the Habit of one who called himself a Jesuit. It
was absolutely impossible for us to make him understand, what those Authors
were whom we called the Fathers. He presently named all the Fathers of his
Convent, to try if he could find out whom we looked for. And at last, with a
scowling look, he prayed us to talk of something else. This is all I can tell
you of the Library, and the Library Keeper, or at least of his Deputy: For it
is not very probable that all the rest of this Society are of the same Stamp.
However, they carry four fair and high Corners in their Caps; and their House
may be said to be a stately Palace. Their Church is also extremely fine; it is
of but one Body, very high, large, and strongly roofed; the Vestry is full of
Riches, and they want no Relics: They showed us a Joint as big as that of an
Elephant, or some huge Animal; and this great Bone, as we were informed, is in
great veneration with them, as being one of the Joints of great St.
Christopher's Backbone.

Leaving the Church of the Jesuits, we went to that of the Augustines, where
are Pictures of great value.

We went thence to the Cajetans, who have a great and fair Church. I observed
in a Map of Munich, that this City bears a Monk for its Arms, This City was
built in the Year 962. by Duke Henry. Otho enclosed it with Walls, in 1157.
and that it is called Monacum, or Monachium, because there was a Monastery on
the place where it is built. We also went to see in the Church of Nostre Dame,
the Tomb of the Emperor Louis IV. This Sepulcher is adorned with many fine
Marble and Brass Figures. Having advanced Ten or Twelve Steps from the entrance
of the great Door of this Church, you behold one of the Stones of the Pavement,
on which is a double Cross; and it has been observed, that when you stand
upright in this Place, the Pillars of the Church are so placed, that you cannot
see one of the Windows, though they are very many. All that come to Worship in
those Churches have a lighted Wax-Candle in their Hands; and that Candle is
bigger or lesser, according to the Quality of the Saint, or their Devotion.

There is an ample and exact Description of this Palace written in Italian by
the Marquess Ran. Pallavicino. This Royal House contains, says he, Eleven
Courts, Twenty great Halls, Nineteen Galleries, Two Thousand Six Hundred great
Glass Windows, Six Chapels, Sixteen great Kitchens, and Twelve large Cellars,
Forty vast Apartments, which are even without one lower than the other, and in
which you may distinguish Three Hundred great Chambers, richly Painted,
Wainscoated, Paved, Furnished, etc.
The outside of the Elector's Palace is not suitable to the Magnificence
within; and though the greatest part of its Apartments are well contrived, it
may be said that they are all irregular: The reason is, that this great Mass of
Building was not erected at the same time, every one wrought according to the
Fancy of his Time, or his own private Judgment; and that has been the cause of
the dis-proportionableness of its Parts: But if it be taken altogether, it may
certainly pass for a very beautiful Structure. You must not expect that I
should give you an ample Description of a Place that is so vast, and so full of
Rarities. I tell you in general, that all sorts of Beauties and Riches are
found there in abundance. The great Hall of the Emperor's Apartment is One
Hundred and Eighteen Foot in length, and Fifty Two Feet in breadth. We may
justly say, that it is in every respect Magnificent. All its Pictures are
highly esteemed: They are Histories, the Sacred on one side, and the Profane
on the other; there are Latin Verses to every History. I will set down the
Distick for Susanna, because I think it one of the best: Casta Susanna placet,
Lucretia cede Susannae;
Tu post, illa mori maluit ante scelus.


The Inscription over the Door runs thus: D. O. M. ad cultum virginum Principis
salutatae genetricis genitoris sui, jam geniti, gignendi sacrum dicatum.
The little Chapel which is in the Apartment of the Electress, is full of
precious things: There is nothing but Gold, Pearls, and Gems of all Fashions.
They keep a a great many Relics there, among which I took notice of a piece
of Gold Mohair, which, they say, was part of one of the Virgin's Robes.

The Parlour of Perspectives is one of the finest things of this Palace: But
the Hall of The greatest part of these Antiquities were brought from Rome.
Antiquities is famous all the World over. I counted One Hundred Fourscore and
Twelve Busts, and above Four Hundred other Pieces: All these are choice and
rare, for the Beauty of their Workmanship, as well as their Antiquity. The
greatest part of the Furniture of the Palace is very rich; and they affirm that
there are Eight Millions of Crowns-worth of Tapistry in the Wardrobe, The Sum
perhaps is a little too big.
besides what is in ordinary use. But the Treasury infinitely exceeds all the
rest. There are many Services of Vessels of Gold, and many other precious
Vessels. A prodigious quantity of great Pearls, Diamonds, Rubies, and other
oriental Stones of exquisite Beauties; and an infinite number of excellent
Pictures, curious Works, Medals, and other Rarities. I cannot forget the
Cherry-stone, upon which you may distinctly perceive the graving of One Hundred
and Forty Heads; nor the Boat of Palm-Wood turned into Stone, on which they
have inscribed these two Verses: Palma fui coepi lapidescere, cymbala nunc sum
Si non Neptunus navita Bacchus erit.


Marble is to be found every where in this Palace, yet we must not cheat our
selves; for they have the secret with a certain Composition to make it; which
becomes so hard, and polishes so well, that those who are not very skillful,
take it for true Marble.

They have made diverse Walks under Ground.
Galleries of Communication, which cross the Streets and Houses, by which they
can go privately from the Palace to all the Churches and Convents of the City.

I will say nothing of the Arsenal, because they have carried the Cannon, and
most of the best Arms, into Hungary. We saw there the Tent of the Grand Vizier,
which was taken in the last Battle, in which the Elector did so remarkably
signalize his Valor. This Tent was vastly great, but no way fine: It is made
of Cotton-Cloth printed, with the Strings, as they seem to me, of fine Satin,
covered with Silk Bread, and the Lozenges of the same, placed from one place to
another, between the Strings.

I cannot tell you why this Country is not proper for Vines; there are none in
it, and their ordinary Drink is Beer.

They know no other Religion here but that of Rome: And they look upon Men as
Wolves, that are not of that Profession. Their principal Devotion is for the
Virgin: She is painted on all their Houses; every place is full of her Chapels
and Oratories, and they bestow Divine Titles on her.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
At Munich, Dec. 4. 1687.
LETTER XII.
SIR,
AFter we had for some time followed the Banks of the Iser, which is the River
of Munich, we entered into a Forest; at our coming out of which, we saw
distinctly the beginning of the Alps: Their Snowy tops are mingled with the
Clouds, and resemble very much the swelling and foaming Waves of a tempestuous
and raging Sea. If the Courage of those has been admired, who first exposed
themselves to the Fury of that Element, here is matter enough of Astonishment,
that any one should venture himself among the Cavities of such frightful
Mountains.

The same Day we departed from Munich, we came to a Village called Lagrem,
which is at the Foot of the Mountains, and near to a little Lake of very fresh
Water; there they gave us Fish, whose Names we knew not. The first thing our
Host treated us with, was a Chafing Dish full of Incence, with which he
perfumed our Chambers; and truly we found more neatness in this little solitary
Habitation, than in many great Cities in our Journey. After we had coasted the
Mountains about Two Hours, we entered there, and for a long time mounted amongst
the Rocks, Firr-Trees, and Snow. Nothing is more wild and dismal than these
places. Sometimes you find some Fisher-men's Cottages, on the Banks of two or
three Lakes, which are between the Mountains: But there is no sign of any
tilled Land; and probably a little Goat's Cheese, with some Fish, is the
principal Diet of these poor People. Their Cabins are made of the Roots of
Firr-Trees, well joined together, and their Boats are framed of the same Trees
hollowed. They gave us Goats Flesh, and great Salmon-Trouts in the Village of
Mittenwald, which is Three Leagues farther. This Village is in the middle of a
pleasant Plain, and the Rocks which environ it are extraordinary high. Our Host
showed us some Balls, or brown Masses, about the bigness of a Hen's Egg, or
less, which are a kind of soft and imperfect Bezoar, and are commonly found in
those Parts, in the Stomachs of the Goats. The good Man assured us of their
great Virtues, and that he often sold them to Travelers. He valued them at Ten
Crowns a-piece; and I believe we should have done him a Courtesy, if we had
taken Five or Six which he had, at that price.

A little farther we met a very pleasant Troop of Beggars; when they perceived
us at a good distance, one of them, who carried a Tree laden with Red Fruits,
planted it in the middle of the Way, and sat down by the side of it; a little
Demi-Devil in the shape of a Crocodile, fastened himself to the Tree, and a
Girl with long and disheveled Hair, approached to it; an old Fellow clothed in
Black, with a Peruke and Beard of Moss, stood at a little distance, with a
young Boy clad in White, who held a Sword. When they thought we were near
enough, the little Devil opened the Comedy with a Balderdash Song, and we could
without difficulty Divine, that all was to represent the History of the Fall.
One of us as he passed by the Old Man, asked him, since he kept at a distance
from them, whether he was of the Company; the poor Mortal answered coldly, That
he was God the Father, and that if we would stay a little, we should see him
act his part, with his little Dagger-carrier, which was St. Michael the
Archangel. Behold the Product of the representations which they make of the
Deity!

A quarter of an Hour after this fine Rencounter, we passed by the Fort of
Chernitz, which is built between two inaccessible Rocks, and which separates
the County of Tirol from the Bishopric of Freisinghen. This Bishopric is in
Bavaria; and Tirol is one of the Emperor's Hereditary Provinces. We came very
late to the Village of Seefeld, after we had made many Turnings and Windings
among the Mountains. There is a Convent of Augustines in this Village, and you
may see in their Church two or three pretended Miracles, with which they make
no small noise.

They tell of a certain Gentleman, named Milser, who lived at the Castle of
Schlosberg, about a quarter of a League from thence; and was very much dreaded
in this Village, that he was so vain as to desire to communicate with the great
Host, which is only for the use of the Clergy: They endeavored to persuade him
out of this Fancy, but all in vain. When they had put the Host into his Mouth,
it cast out, as they say, a Flood of Blood, and at the same time the Legs of
the Communicant sunk into the Pavement up to the Knees: He would have supported
himself on the Altar, but the Stone gave way, and softened under his Hand, and
the poor miserable Man had been swallowed alive, if he had not been retrieved
by a speedy Repentance. The Augustines show this pretended Host, chewed, and
bloody, in a Repository of Glass. They show also the print of a Hand on one of
the Stones of the Altar, and a Hole in the Pavement of the Church near the same
Altar, as of two Legs sunk into soft Ground. They say that this Host works
Miracles; and they find it not inconvenient to their Convent.

Two good Leagues on this side Seefeld, we began to descend, and three quarters
of an Hour afterward, we arrived in a deep Valley, which was at least a Mile
in breadth. The River Inn glides pleasantly along; and waters many not
unhandsome Villages. We turned to the left in this Valley, and followed always
the Foot of the Mountain. And a little League farther, they made us observe a
straight and cragged Rock, which they said was above an Hundred Fathom high,
and was called The Emperor's Rock. About three quarters of the height of this
Rock, there was a Nich dug, See Stephen Pegius in his Hercules Prodicius.
in which there was a Crucifix, and a Statue on each side of it. They say that
Maximilian I. being in chase of a wild Goat, alighted just at this place from
the top of the Rock, which joins to the Mountains behind; and that the Emperor
not daring to remount his Horse, was feign to have recourse to Machines to get
down.

Inspruck is but Two short Hours beyond the middle of the Valley, INSPRUCK.
upon the River Inn: You pass this River over a Bridge before you enter the
City; and it is therefore called Inspruck, that Word having the same
signification in High Dutch, as Aenipons, or Aenipontum in Latin.

There are very fine Houses at Inspruck, but the manner after which they cover
them, seems at first to be troublesome to those who are not acquainted with
them; for not only the Roofs are flat, but instead of the Rafters rising to a
Point, they are reversed, and the Rain falls into the middle of the Roof.

After the Duke of Lorrain had the misfortune to lose his Estates, the Emperor
gave him the Possession of Tirol; and the Residence of this Prince was at
Inspruck, in the Palace which was formerly the Arch-Duke's. This Palace has
many Conveniences, and is of a sufficient extent, but it was built at several
times, and has neither Beauty nor Regularity.

They showed us here one thing singular, of which I will endeavor to give you
the most certain Account I could any way learn; though all my Industry to that
purpose signified but little. The House which they call the Chancery, is on the
Place in the midst of the City. The Portrait of this House is like a little
Porch without, to a Roof which is supported by the Wall of the House; and they
assure us that this Roof is covered with Plates of Gold. This is what they told
us of it. A Rebellion, and almost general Sedition being raised against an
Archduke called Frederick, whom they particularize no otherwise; that Prince
was forced to hide himself, but not being willing to go far off, that he might
be ready to Act, in case his Affairs should be in a better Posture; he engaged
himself, say they, to serve a Miller in a Village of the neighboring Mountain.
In effect, the Troubles happened to be appeased, and Frederick was recalled.
But there was still an Evil Spirit amongst some of them, that jeered him, and
gave him the Nickname of Empty Purse; to show therefore that he was not so
poor as those People imagined, he affected to be prodigal of Gold, in employing
that precious Metal on so vile a thing as that you now heard of.

This History contains nothing impossible, and it was related to us for a
certain Truth, by People who seemed to me Wise and Sensible: nevertheless, to
speak freely, I cannot but suspect it. I believe no Author ever writ of it, and
so singular a thing could not have been omitted. Perhaps something not unlike
to this did really happen, which might give occasion to this Tradition.

I could not touch the Roof, because it is a little too high, but I have
attentively looked upon it, and saw distinctly that the Plates of Brass are
placed on the Timber, and serve for Tiles; and I perceived also that each of
these Plates is covered with another thin one of other Metal, which seemed to
me to be about a Line in thickness. If these last Plates are not of Gold, I am
sure they are gilded; but if there be but a simple Gilding, why Metal upon
Metal? and why could they not also gild the Brazen Tiles?

The Roof may be about Fifteen Foot square; and if it be of Gold, I find by
calculation that it cost about Two hundred thousand Crowns.

It was, as they say, the same Frederick, who caused Twenty eight fair Statues
of Brass to be made, which are in the Church of the Cordeliers. There are
Emperors, Archdukes, Dukes of Burgundy, Two Empresses, and Two Princesses,
whom they knew not who they were: All are bigger than the Life. There is also
to be seen in this Church a magnificent Tomb of the Emperor Maximilian I.

We went also to see Amras, which is a House of Pleasure of the Arch-Duke's;
This House is a good half Hour from Inspruck, at the Foot of the Mountain; it
has no Beauty on any side, that we could observe, and its Situation is the
only thing that makes it pleasant. They have taken away all the Furniture of
ordinary use, but we found Galeries full of fine and very rare things. They led
us presently into a large Hall, where truly the Arms were more curious than
useful. They made us take notice, amongst other things, of an extraordinary
great and heavy Lance, which the Archduke Ferdinand used in Tournaments. They
said that Prince The same is related of Lionardo du Vinci, a Painter of
Florence.
could stop a Coach and Six Horses, by taking hold of a Spoak of the Wheel; and
that he broke with his Hands, two Crown-Pieces joined together: and I know not
how many other prodigious things, more difficult to be believed than the
History of Frederick.

We went out of this Hall into a Galery, where were to be seen many Princes
upon their best Horses, with all their Armor, and all the Ornaments they used
in Tournaments. They also kept there the Skin of a Serpent, which is Fifteen
Foot long, and which was taken near Ulm, on the Bank of the Danube. At the end
of the Galery you go into a Chamber, filled with Spoils and Arms taken from the
Turks. A Bassa and an Aga of the Janisaries, are represented on their Horses,
with the same Equipage they had when they were taken. Their Habits are very
rich; and the Harness of their Horses is yet much richer; they are loaded with
Ornaments of Gold and Silver, Precious Stones, Damask-Works, and other Arabian
Embellishments.

From this they brought us into another Galery, in which was a double Rank of
great Cupboards, which were joined by the Backs and Sides, and which filled the
middle of the Galery, even to the top, so that there was but a little room left
to walk round. The Three first Cupboards were full of Works of Alabaster,
Glass, Coral, and Mother of Pearl. In the Fourth were Medals and Money of Gold
and Silver. The Fifth was garnished with Vessels of Porcelane, and Sealed
Earth. In the Sixth were many little Cabinets very rich, of curious inlaid
Works; the Boxes were filled with Medals, and little Works of Agat and
Ambergreese: There are Seven great Volumes covered with Black Velvet, with
Plates and Clasps of Silver; and instead of Leaves they contain flat Boxes,
which enclose a great number of Medals, so that these seven Volumes contain a
complete History. In the seventh Cupboard are ancient or curious Arms: I I
observed a Cross-bow which included four and thirty Bows, and discharged thirty
four Arrows at a flight. The eighth is full of Animals, Plants, and other
Productions of Nature. That which is esteemed the greatest Rarity, is the Horn
of an Ox, which is six Inches diameter. There are also Works of Wood, of
Ivory, and of the Pen, in the three following Cupboards. The twelfth is filled
with Manuscripts, and curious Books. It would grieve one to pass this over
slightly, because those who show it know not its worth. In the thirteenth are
only works of Steel, and particularly mysterious Padlocks, and other Locks of
curious Invention. You see in the fourteenth, Stones which represent Trees,
Fruits, Shells, and Animals, all which are the pure product of Nature. The
fifteenth and sixteenth are full of all sorts of Clock-work, and Instruments of
Music. That which follows is full of precious Stones, but unwrought, and with
a great deal of unprepared Metals and Minerals. In the eighteenth are many
small Vessels of different Materials, and a very great number of the finest
Shells in the World. The nineteenth is the most precious of all, it is full of
Vessels of Gold, Crystal, Agat, Chalcedony, Onyx, Cornelian, Lapis Lazuli, and
other precious Stones, all of it enriched with Gold and Diamonds, in basso
releivo, and other Ornaments of most curious Workmanship. The twentieth and
last is filled with Antiquities, Sepulchral Lamps, Urns, Idols, etc. They also
keep here a piece of a Rope about the length of your hand, and tell you, that
it is a piece of the Rope with which Judas hanged himself.

There are an infinite number of things fastened to the Cieling and the Walls.
The Bow of Noah, of the Bassan, is the most esteemed amongst the Pictures, and
it effectually is an admirable Piece. They say the last great Duke of Tuscany
would have given an hundred thousand Crowns for it. Besides the Medals which I
have told you of, and whose number is infinitely great, there is above a great
Mule's Load, that lie huddled together in a Chest. When we parted from hence
they brought us to the Library, which we found in very bad order, and our Guide
could tell us nothing at all. From the Library we passed into a Galery, where
there is a great number of Statues, Busts, and other Pieces of Antiquity, and
we saw afterward a great many Chambers hung round with Pictures of great Price.

This Bill of Parcels is a little long, but I hope it will not be tedious to
you. At last I must not forget to tell you of a Servant at our Inn, At the
Golden-Hart.
who deserves to be ranked with these Rarities. This Fellow stretches his Arm
on the Ground, and a Man of good Stature stands upon his Hand; he lifts him up
with this Hand only, and carries him from one end of the Room to the other.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
At Inspruck, Dec. 7. 1687.
LETTER XIII.
SIR,
A Small League from Inspruck, we reenter'd into the Mountains, and for seven
hours together did nothing but ascend; this was the most troublesome day's
Journey we had all the way. A place seemed to us to be amongst the Clouds,
which a little while after we saw below us. At length we came very late to a
little Village, which is not yet at the top of the Mountain. It is called
Grusse, that is, the Salutation; and it was so named because Charles V. and
Ferdinand his Brother met in this place: you may find the Story about two
hundred Paces from the Village, on a Marble Stone, which was placed exactly
where these two illustrious Brothers embraced each other.

We had for Supper diverse sorts of Wild-Fowl and Venison: almost all the Hares
here, as well as the Foxes and Bears, are white; the Patridges are likewise so
for the most part: there are a great many Heath-Hens, Pheasants, and other
great Fowl, which they call Schenhakn, or Cock of the Snow. All these sort of
Wild-Fowl have their Feet velvetted about the Claws, with a kind of Furr, which
I cannot call either Hair or Feathers, but so thick as the Snow cannot pierce
it.

The Mountain is called Brennerberg, which signifies a fiery Hill; and the
reason is, that besides the Thunders which are frequent in Summer, there are
Winds sometimes which pierce and burn. They force themselves into the Throats
or Passages of the Neighboring Mountains, as into Pipes; and these various
Torrents of the Air shock one another so impetuously, that they produce roaring
and furious Hurricanes, which tear up both Trees and Rocks by the Roots. They
say, that Travelers are sometimes constrained, to wait many days till these
Storms are over. As for us, we left this unpleasant Quarter the next day, and
about two hours from thence, came to the highest accessible part of this
Mountain. There we saw a thing very remarkable: It was a great Spring which
falls upon a Rock, and straightway separates it self into two Currents, which
in a little time after became two considerable Rivers. The one turns to the
South, and disgorges it self into the Inn, near Inspruck. The other runs
Northward, and after it has passed Brixen and Bolsane falls into the Adige, a
little above Trent. We dined the same day at Steertzingen, where they gave us
Oysters of Venice, and some Flesh of a certain Beast called Steinbokt, which is
between a He-Goat and a Do, and is most delicate Food. At this Town we turned
out of the direct way to Trent, because it is dangerous, by reason of the
Precipices, and took that of Brixen, which is not so rough, and is the most
frequented.

This day we met more than an hundred Wagons which came from the Fair of
Bolsane; they were almost all drawn by Oxen. I observed that the Cloven Feet of
these Cattle were both parts shod with Iron. The Peasants of these Mountains
have little Carts with two Wheels, which they draw themselves, and which they
make use of to fetch Salt from Hall, which is a little City in the Valley of
Inspruck. There are Salt Pits there, the Water whereof being boiled, turns to
Salt.

The Habits of these Mountaineers are the most pleasant in the World: Some of
them have green, others yellow and blue Hats; and in some places it is
difficult to know the Men from the Women. But as we change Countries, we may in
all things observe the variety which reigns in the World. We find not only new
Languages and new Customs, but also new Plants, new Fruits, new Cattle, and a
new Face of the Earth. Almost quite throughout Tirol, the Sheep are black, in
some places they are of a red tawny, and in others altogether white. There are
some Provinces in which they have Horns; and others, where a horned Sheep would
be looked upon as a Monster. We observed also many differences in Beasts of the
same kind: Nor are the Humors of Men without their Varieties. Not to leave the
example of the Sheep; I know some Provinces, as that of Poitou, where the Milk
of these Creatures is preferred before that of the Cows. Montague says, the
Tartars prefer Mares-Milk to all other Milk.
In most others they will not trouble themselves to Milk them, so little do
they value their Milk. I once lived a considerable while in a Country, where,
when a Sow Pigs, if there be any white ones they drown them, because they
believe, that all the white Pigs are Meazled. I have been also in another
Country, where the black Hogs were in less esteem than others. In Normandy the
Milk of a black Cow is looked on as a specific Remedy; the Doctors prescribe
it for such, because the black Cows are less common than the red. And in some
places of your Country it is quite contrary, they most highly esteem the red
Cows Milk; the cause is plain, because the Cows are almost all black. Some can
endure to look on nothing but what they are accustomed to see; and others value
nothing but what is rare and unknown. Custom and Prejudice domineer over the
World, and fantastical Humor reigns every where with them.

BRIXEN.
Brixen is yet in Tirol, it is a very little City, notwithstanding it is a
Bishopric, and the Bishop resides in it. I cannot tell you the reason why the
best Lodgings in this Country are always in the uppermost Story. It is true,
that there you have less noise, but the trouble to get up to them is an
inconvenience.

From Brixen to Bolsane, which are but seven hours distant, we pass almost
always between the River and the Mountains. Here the Rocks are so high that
they pierce the Clouds; and when the Snow meets, or a sudden Thaw comes, it
occasions such a rolling of these Rocks as makes the way very dangerous: A
Traveller is pent up there as in a straight, or amongst many streights, and has
not room enough to go either forward or backward, without danger, which is
alike either way. The Accidents which happen, and the Coaches which are
overturned, often in these uneven ways, have occasioned these little Oratories
with which these Ways are lined. There they paint the misfortunes which befall
them: And in the Picture you see, every one invoking that Saint, or that
Nostradame, in which they have the greatest Confidence: For such a one has a
profound Veneration for our Lady of such a place, who would not spend a denier
upon all the rest. When they are grievously Wounded, or any one is Killed,
there is nothing for either He or She-Saint; but when any one has a fortunate
Escape, they The Lady of Newburgh
Vol. 2. P. 109

depiction of the Lady of Newburgh erect these little Monuments I told you of.
It is after this manner that some Churches are filled with Presents, which they
say are the effects of Vows. Those who are in any kind of danger, implore
either their Saint or their Relic, or their miraculous Image, If they are
delivered they call their Preservation a Miracle, and accomplish their Vows.
There have been already more than a Cart-load of Heads, Arms, and other Members
of Silver, offered to our new Lady of Newbourgh. You may see great Churches all
furnished and hung round with the like Monuments. They every day bring new
ones, and the old give place to them, but you may be sure nothing is lost.

When we entered into the Valley of Bolsane, we were astonished to find the Air
as sweet as could be imagined. The Vineyards were all green, as well as the
Willows, the Roses, the Mulberies, and a great number of other Trees. A true
Spring in the middle of Winter. This proceeds from its being sheltred from ill
Winds, or from some other circumstance of the Country.

Bolsaner is in the Bishopric of Trent; BOLSANE.
it is a very little City, and its Fairs are all it can boast of. There are
four in the Year, and each lasts fifteen days; in which the Merchandises of
Germany and Italy are exchanged. We observed in the Roof of the Body of the
great Church, a round Hole about three foot diameter; round about which is a
kind of Garland, which is tied with Ribbons of several Colors, and on which I
know not how many great Wafers hang. They told us, that on Ascension-day, there
was a kind of Opera in this Church, and that a Man which represented Jesus
Christ, was lifted up to Heaven through this hole.

All the Valley of Bolsane is full of Vineyards, and the Vines are highly
esteemed by the People of the Country; but Strangers are not pleased with them,
because of their sweetish Taste. It is but a good days Journey between Bolsane
and Trent, through the Valley which is very fruitful and pleasant. From place
to place, near the Vines, are little Huts of Straw, which are supported by
three high Firr-Poles, placed like a Trevet; there they hide themselves with a
Carbine, in one of these little Baracques, and kill the Bears which come down
from the Mountain to eat the Grapes.

TRENT.
Trent is a little City, not much bigger than Bolsane, and is almost situated
after the same manner. It is founded on a flat Rock of a kind of white and
reddish Marble, of which most of the Houses are solidly built. This City has
many times been laid waste, by the Inundations to which it is subject. The
River often overflows, and the Brooks of Levis and Fersena, tumble sometimes
from the Mountains with such a terrible impetuosity, that they drive before
them great Rocks, and roll them even into the Town. Trent is begirt with a
single Wall, and the Adige runs by the side of it. They boast of the Bridge
which is built over this River, without having any thing extraordinary to show.
They recommended to us the Bishop's Palace, as a great and splendid Edifice;
and I remember I have formerly heard the same things said of it: But these
Reports created in us false Notions of that House, which is low, and but of a
very indifferent size. The Bishop is a Temporal and Spiritual Lord in his
Diocese, which is of a large extent. Some place it in Italy, others make it
part of Tirol: But these last deceive themselves, if we may believe the People
of the Country, for they say Trent is in Italy, though the Bishop be a Prince
of the Empire; and the common Language of Trent is Italian.

They showed us in a Chapel of the Cathedral, the Crucifix under which the
Synod was sworn, and promulg'd: It is as big as the Life, and, they say, it
bowed its Head, to testify the Approbation which it gave to the Decrees of
that Assembly. They add, That no Man ever knew what it was made of; so that
many doubt whether it were made with Hands. They are about to take it from the
dark Place in which we saw it, and place it in a magnificent Chapel, which will
shortly be finished; where they expect it will do more Miracles than ever: It
is called by way of Eminency, The Holy Crucifix. From thence we went to St.
Mary Major, which yet is but a little Church. It is built of a kind of base
Marble, whose Squares are only cut a little less; and it was in this place the
Council sat. The Organs of this Church are extraordinarily great. They played
to us many new Airs, and counterfeited the Cries of a great many Animals: They
beat a Drum, and did I know not how many other things, which have little
relation to this place, or to the gravity of the Council, which is represented
in a great Picture hard by. Rigord, Physician and Historiographer of Philip
Augustus, writes that in 1180, the Jews of Paris tore by Whipping, and
Crucified a Boy of 12 Years old, named Richard, the Son of a Citizen; that the
Criminals were put to death; that all the Jews were driven out of the Kingdom,
and young Richard was canonzied. R. Dumont continuer of of the Chronicle of
Sigibert. Rob. Gagum, Library Keeper of Louis XII. Duplerick, and many others,
report the same Story. Mezeray says, that Louis Hattin recalled the Jews, and
that Nation being accused for poisoning the Fountains and Wells in 1321, were
banished for ever by Philip V. the Edict yet remains.
Afterward they carried us to the Church of St. Peter, to see the little Saint
Simonin in his Chapel. They say that in the Year 1276, the Jews stole the Child
of a Shoemaker, whose name was Simon, and after they had shed his Blood in a
most cruel manner, to serve at the Celebration of one of their Feasts, they
threw the Carcass into a Water-Pipe (which passed at present to the House where
the thing was done, and where their Synagogue was at that time), and that the
Body was carried by the Current into the River, and taken up by Fishermen. In
a Word, the whole Villainy was discovered; the Jews were convicted, Thirty nine
of them hanged, and the rest banished the City for ever. Sixtus IV. who was
then Pope, being informed of the whole matter, thought fit to Canonize the
Child, and gave it the name of Simonin, the diminitive of Simon, the Father's
Name. The Body was embalmed, and is to be seen openly in a Case which is upon
the Altar of the Chapel dedicated to him. They keep also in an adjoining
Cupboard, the Knife, Pincers, and Four great Iron Needles, with which his
Butchers tormented him; and Two Goblets of Silver, in which they drunk his
Blood. Thus the Jews were expelled. But some Years after they obtained
permission to abide in the City Three Days to do Business, and they assured me,
that these Three Days were reduced to Three Hours, for their obstinate Defense
of Buda in the last Siege. They have painted this Story at Francfort, under the
Bridge Gate, to load these miserable People who live in that City, with new
Reproach; they have added other infamous Figures, where the Devil and Swine are
represented mocking and laughing at the Jews. I forgot to tell you that the
little Simonin was but Twenty eight Months old when he was thus Martyred. I
remember the two last Verses of an Epitaph on the Tomb of a young Lady in the
Church of St. Mark; I believe they will not displease you. This young Wife says
to her Husband, Immatura peri, sed tu diuturnior annos
Vive meos, conjux optime, vive tuos.


I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
At Trent, Dec. 13. 1687.
LETTER XIV.
SIR,
ROVEREDO.
WE passed through the little City of Roveredo, where there is a great Trade of
Silk. Bourguetto is not far off, which is the last Village of the Trentin, and
Ossenigo the first of the State of Venice; a little Cross of Wood makes the
Separation between these two Sovereignties. A little on this side of Roveredo,
we traversed a Country all full of loose Rocks, scattered here and there, as if
an Earthquake had thus sowed them from the Ruins of some Mountain: This is
called the Wood of Roveredo, though there be not so much as the Branch of a
Tree in it. The Passage is sometimes dangerous, by reason of Thieves, as well
as the Forest of Vergnara, which is between Ossenigo, and the Fort of Guardara.
Our Messenger advised us to take a Convoy in this last Passage. When you are
come into the States of Venice, you find no more of those Stoves, of which
Germany is full; and you find a sensible change in every thing.

CHIUSA.
We were constrained to lodge in a little Village called Seraino, because it was
too late to get to Scluse. That is a very considerable Fort, whose Situation is
something like that of the Scluse which we met between Geneve and Lions, on the
River Rhosne; I fancy I have seen the Description of it in your Closet. The
first is at the Foot of a high Rock; the way which leads to it is dug out of
the craggy part of the same Rock; and on the other side is a Precipice, at the
bottom whereof rowls the Adige. After we had passed this Fort, and had for some
time followed the Banks of that River, which glides along among high Rocks, we
found the Heaven opened, and entered into a vast Plain; whereas ever since our
Departure from Munich, we had been enclosed between the Mountains.

This Plain is stony and barren in diverse Places: There are in it some
Olive Trees, and White Mulberries for the Silkworms; the Vines ate planted at
the foot of Cherry-Trees, and young Elms, and they join themselves in Garlands
from Tree to Tree. We passed the Adige in a Ferry-Boat, two good Leagues from
Seraino; and a quarter of an Hour after, VERONA.
we plainly perceived Verona, where we arrived the same Day. By what we saw at
our entrance into it, we judged it to be but thinly Peopled. There are great
void places on this side, and Grass growing in the Streets, and the greatest
part of them not paved: It Is true, the rest of the City is not like this part;
but putting all together, Verona looks like a poor place; and indeed there is
but little Trade in it, and those which live on their Rents make no great
Figure. If there be some fine Buildings, it is certain that the Houses in
general are very low and unequal. The greatest part of the Balconies are of
Wood, so loaded with little Gardens in Pots and Cases, that it seems dangerous
to pass under them: The Streets are dirty, and almost all narrow. In a Word,
This City is not at all fit to please the Eyes of a Traveller. Nevertheless it
is very great, in a good Air, and its Situation is admirable. As it yields but
little satisfaction when you behold it near, and take a particular view of it;
so much the more will you admire it, when you look upon it from some eminency.
We went up to the Castle of St. Peter, which is on a rising ground, within the
Compass of the Walls, and we could not give over viewing it from this Place;
where we had a full prospect of it, and were charmed to behold that admirable
Garden of Pleasure, in the midst of which it is seated. The Adige crosses it,
and Four fair Stone Bridges make the Communication between the two Parts, into
which the River divides it. The Castle of St. Felix is behind that of St.
Peter, and both together command the City. The other Fortifications of this
place are much neglected, and very irregular.

The Amphitheatre of Verona is a thing so much the more surprising, because we
do not frequently meet with such Monuments of antiquity. The outward Wall or
Front.
The Enclosure is all destroyed, but they have taken care to repair the
Benches, according as they fell to decay; there are Four and forty of them, and
I counted Five hundred and thirty Paces in the highest round, and Two hundred
and fifty on the lowest. Every Step is near a Foot and a half high, See the
little Treatise which Justus Lipsius has writ of Amphitheaters.
and is about Twenty six Inches in breadth: This last Distance could not be
less, that so those who sat behind might not be troublesome to the others with
their Feet. At every end of the Arena, between the Benches, there is a Portal
of Twenty eight Foot high, by which the Entrance is to the Arena out of the
Street; and above every Portal a kind of Tribune or Platform of Twenty Foot
long, and Ten broad, closed before and on the sides with a Balcony of Marble.
Others attribute it to the Emperor Maximin. Eusebius.
It is commonly said that this was the work of Augustus, but I find but little
Proof of it. You see still remaining a Triumphal The Inscription of this Arch
can no more be read. See how it is related by N. Vignier, in his Historical
Library. Colonia Augusta Verona Gallieniana. Valeriano. II. Et Lucilio Coss.
muri veronensium Fabricari, and die III. Non. April. dedicati. pride. no.
December. jubente sanctissimo Gallieno. Aug. N.
Arch, and some Ruins of Ancient Monuments.

The Cathedral is a little dark Church. Pope Lucius III. is interred there; and
they have written for an Epitaph on his Tombstone, Ossa Lucii III. Roma pulsus
invidia. I expected to have found another, which is more ingenious, which I
remember I have read somewhere: Luca dedit tibi Lucem, Luci; Pontificatum
Ostia; Papatum, Roma; Verona, mori.
Immo Verona dedit tibi Lucis gaudia; Roma,
Exilium; curas, Ostia; Luca, mori.
You know this Pope had great Broils with Frederick Barbarossa, as well as
Alexander III. his Predecessor. But these were not the only Cause of his
leaving Rome: He was driven out by the Magistrates, and by the Lucius est
piscis rex, atque Tyrannus aquarum
A quo discordat Lucius iste parum.
Devorat ille homines, hic piscibus insidiatur:
Esurit hic semper, ille aliquando satur.
Amborum vitam si laus aequata notaret,
Plus rationis habet, qui ratione caret.

People, because he would be too Imperious.

It is said that Pepin the Son of Charlemain, and King of Italy, built the
Church of St. Zeno at Verona. It must be confessed the Carvers of that time
were miserable Artists. Never were there seen such wretched Figures as these in
the Front of this Church. I observed in the Frontispiece of the great Portal,
two kind of Birds, which by their Combs somewhat resembled Cocks. They hold an
Animal with a long Tail, between them, which we suspected was designed to
represent a Fox; this poor Beast had his Feet tied together, and hung over a
Pole, the ends of which were supported by the Cocks. I cannot forbear searching
into the meaning of this little Mystery; and if you please, I will adventure to
tell you my Thoughts of it. The allusion of Gallus a Cock, to Gallus a
Frenchman, is a thing so familiar, that I fancy the two Cocks may signify
two Frenchmen, and the Animal thus bound, must be some crafty Fellow, cheated
nevertheless, and supplanted by the Cocks. The Crane has formerly been too
hard for Renard. But to apply this Emblem to some particular Event: Supposing
it to be true, that this Chuch was built under Pepin, as it seems very
probable, it may be conjectured, that his Father Charlemain and he were the two
Cocks, and that the unfortunate Didier, the last King of the Lombards, was the
Fox: You know Charlemain caused himself to be crowned King of the Lombards,
after he had dispossessed Didier, and Pepin was crowned King of Italy some
Years after: Didier then vanquished, stripped, shaven, and put into a Convent;
too nearly resembles the Fox: Except you had rather it should be his Son, whose
Name, I think, was Adalgise; who in the end was taken and killed, after he had
vainly employed all his Wit and Force to regain the Possession of his Father's
Dominions. I will not say that Pepin amused himself with such a Trifle, but it
was perhaps the Fancy of the Carver. On the side of the same Portal they have
put this fine Hieroglyphick. There is a Man on Horseback in basso relievo,
over whom these Three Verses are written in Characters, half Roman, half
Gothic: O Regem stultum, petit infernale tributum.
Moxque paratur equus quem misit Demon iniquus.
Exit aqua nudus, petit infera not rediturus.


Though I have given you some Conjectures concerning the Fox, I confess I can
make nothing of this Divel's Horse; you may think of both as you please.

Returning from thence, we passed by the little Church of St. Mary the Old,
near which are to be seen many magnificent Tombs of the Scaligers, who, as you
know, were Princes of Verona, before that City belonged to the Republic of
Venice.

The Rarities which we saw in the Cabinet of the Count Mascardo, deserve that
some learned Man should undertake their Description: And it may be cause of
Admiration, that those who have had the Curiosity, and the Means to amass so
many fine things together, should not have had the care to procure Stamps of
them, and to add Explanatory Remarks on such as are most considerable; scarce
any thing more remarkable can fall within the Observation of a Traveller, nor
any thing that deserves better to be studied and described. There you find a
Gallery, and Six Chambers, all filled with the most admirable Productions of
Art or Nature. But as it is not possible for me to give you a particular
Account of so many things, so will I not engage my self in such a Task, neither
at present, nor for the future: You need but call to mind all that you have
already seen in my Letters, and particularly that which I writ from Inspruck.
Of Pictures, Books, Roman Rods or Fasces.
Rings, Animals, Plants, Metals, monstrous or Extravagant Productions, and
Works of all Fashions; and, in a Word, all that can be imagined curious, or
worth inquiry, whether for Antiquity or Rarity, or for the Delicacy and
Excellency of the Workmanship; the Catalogue of them would alone amount to a
Volume; only to satisfy you in some measure, I assure you, that whenever I
shall meet with any thing that I have not taken Notice of before, and which
shall seem worthy of particular Observation, I shall take care to communicate
it to you.

There are here many The Vessels which they name are, enclabria, paterae,
prefericula, ollae sympullae. Many sorts of Knives, dolabra, cultri, seva,
secespita. Axes, Mallets, Candlesticks.
Instruments and Utensils, which were used in the Pagan Sacrifices. They also
showed us Figures of Brass, that represent all sorts of things, which they hung
up in the Temples of their Gods, when they had received any Assistance from
them.

We saw also many pieces of Workmanship, framed out of the Stone Amianthos,
which is the (...), so famous among the Naturalists; this Stone, as hard and
weighty as it is, is easily divided into Fibers or Threads, which are so strong
and flexible, that they may be spun like Cotton. Before I leave this Head, I
must acquaint you with this Remark concerning the Instances of Petrefaction,
which I have observed either here or elsewhere; that there is many times a
great deal of Error and Uncertainty in them, and that there are several
Persons who scruple not to use a little Artifice to multiply and diversity the
Rarities with which they design to fill a Cabinet. It cannot be denied that
Nature seems to divert herself sometimes, with such fantastical Changes; but it
must also be confessed, that they are often counterfeited by Art. I know not
whether you ever saw any of those pretended Animals, called Basilisks, which
have a little resemblance of a Dragon. The Invention is prettily contrived, and
has cheated many; for they take a small Ray, and having turned it after a
certain manner, and raised up the Fins in form of Wings, they fit a little
Tongue to it, shaped like a Dart, and add Claws and Eyes of Enammel, with other
little Knacks, curiously ordered; and this is the whole Secrecy of making
Basilisks. I am not ignorant that some Authors mention another sort of
Basilisk, without either Feet or Wings, which they represent like a crowned
Serpent, and many Naturalists affirm that it kills with its Breath and Looks.
Galen takes notice of it as the most Venomous of all Serpents, and tells us
that the Wezel only fears not its Poison, but on the contrary, poisons it with
its Breath. But I believe this Serpent is found only in the Land of Phoenixes
and Unicorns.

The Curious may learn in Matthiolus how they make the Mandrakes.
I might allege to you many other little Cheats, like that of the first
Basilisk; but to return to our Account of Petrefaction, I shall fix only on one
of all those Observations that might be brought to Illustrate this Subject.
There is a certain natural Production, according to some, a kind of imperfect
Plant, or a Coralline Matter, which extremely resembles a Mushroom. I know not
whether they do not sometimes cheat themselves, or are willing to cheat others.
Be it as it will, this is that which they call Petrified Mushrooms, which
indeed were never Mushrooms. The Question depends on the matter of Fact; but
one may yet say, that the little solidity, and the little hardness of a
Mushroom, makes it a thing the least in the World Petrifiable, the
Metamorphosis must be done in a trice.

I remember I observed in this Cabinet many of those Barks of Trees, on which
the Ancients wrote, before they knew the use of Paper; two Trees of black
Coral, three Foot high each; a Hen's Egg which was of this Figure; a Knife of
Stone extremely sharp, which some Jews made use of for the Circumcision of
Children who died before the Eighth Day. The Ceremonies of the Jews are
different, particularly between the Oriental, the German, the Italian, and the
Portugueze. I remember I have read in Buxtorf, an infinite Number of their
Customs that are not used in this Country. Some make use of the Cutting-Stone
It is said according to the Hebrew, in Joshua Chap. V. that they Circumcised
the Children of Israel with Knives of Stone; and in Exodus IV. That Zippora
circumcised her Son with a Stone. Joseph Scaliger says, there were Jews who
took off the Prepuce with their Nails; and others who cut it a little, and tore
away the rest. I have seen them cut with a kind of Razor at London and Rome.
, according to the ancient Practice: But in Italy, they generally use to bury
the dead Child without Circumcision; and if they circumcise them, they use a
Knife made of a Cane: The ordinary Circumcision is performed with a Steel Knife.

We saw a Burial lately, of which I must give you some Account: The Body was
dressed in Black, with a White Linen Cloak, a fine Peruke, on the Head a Hat,
and above that a Garland of Flowers. The Corpse was laid on a Quilt, with a
Counterpane of Flowered Silk, Yellow and Red, and supported with a Pillow of
the same Stuff. Four Men carried it thus all open, and the Company followed Two
and Two, of which only those wore Garlands who were never Married. This was
also the Custom of the Ancients, and they called it Corona pudicitiae, The
Crown of Chastity. Some Hours before, we had another Rencounter: It was a Woman
richly dressed, who walked through the City between two Nuns, and was going to
take the Habit. It is ordinary in this Country to go thus in public, whereas
in France, and many other places, this Ceremony is performed in the Convent. M.
Montel.
A French Merchant who dwelt here many Years, has just now given me an Account
of a Procession, which he had often seen, and which I have a great mind to
relate to you before I finish my Letter. Mark 11.7.
They at Verona believe after that Jesus Christ had made his Entrance into
Jerusalem, he gave a Key of the Fields to the She or He-Ass, which he made use
of to ride on, being willing that the Beast should pass the rest of his days in
quiet and liberty. They add, that the Ass, weary with having so long gnawed on
the Pastures of Palestine, resolved to visit foreign Countries, and to
undertake a Voyage by Sea; he had no need, say they, of a Ship, the Waves
became smooth, and the liquid Element as hard as Crystal. After he had visited
the Islands of Cyprus, Rhodes, Candie, Malta, and Sicily, he passed over the
Gulf of Venice, and staid some days in the place where that famous City was
since built: But the Air seeming to him to be unhealthful, and the Pasturage
bad among the Salt and Marish Isles, Martin continued his Voyage, and mounted
the River of Adige dry-shod, and coming up to Verona, he made choice of that
for his last Residence. After he had lived there some Years, like an Ass of
Estate and Quality, he died at last, to the great Grief of the Con-fraternity.
So lamentable and universal a Braying, made the Echoes resound through the
Country, and never was so sad a Melody heard at the Funeral of such an Animal,
not even in Arcadia it self. But they quickly found a way to alleviate their
Grief, for all the Honors imaginable being rendered to the blessed Deceased, the
Devotees of Verona carefully preserve the Relics, and have put them into the
Belly of an Artificial Ass, made for that purpose, where they are kept to this
day, to the great Joy and Edification of Pious Souls. This Holy Statue is kept
in the Church of Nostre Dame of the Organs, and Four of the lustiest Monks of
the Convent, in Pontifical Habits, carry it solemnly in Procession two or three
times in the Year.

You know Catullus was of Verona.

Tantum magna suo debet Verona Catullo,
Quantum parva suo Mantua Virgilio.
I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
At Verona, Dec. 16. 1687.
LETTER XV.
SIR,
THE Country between Verona and Vicenza is fruitful, well manured, and almost
every where level: The Trees are planted in Chequers, on which the Vines are
raised, and spread themselves among the Branches; and the Ground is carefully
tilled. We dined at a little Village called La Torre, where are the Bounds
between the Veronese and Vicentin. The Wine of this Country is of so faint a
Sweetness, that it is noxious to the Stomach. Yet there are Wines at Verona
that are much esteemed, and I think I have read in Suetonius, that Augustus
made them his ordinary Drink. The Bread is as if it were Earth, though very white
and excellent Flower; it is because they know not how to make it: Together with
this, they treated us with a Dish of gray Pease, fried in Oil, and this was all
our Feast. Is it not very strange that we should be in danger to die of Hunger
in a good Country, after we had fed plentifully among the Rocks and Mountains?
The Soil is fat, and consequently the Ways bad; insomuch that at this Season,
there was need of Seven or Eight Horses to draw the Waggon-Coaches; they put
them all together under the Coachman's Whip, that he may drive them without a
Postilion.

Vicenza is less by half than Verona, VICENZA.
and is only encompassed with tottering Walls. Three or Four little Rivers meet
there, by which diverse Commodities are imported, but none of them are
Navigable. Our Guide carried us to some of the Churches: The Coronata is well
paved and wainscotted: That of the Religious of St. Catharines, has Three fair
Altars. There are some good Pictures in the Cathedral; and they show us,
likewise, in the Choir a Work of carved Stones, which the Sexton praised very
much, though the matter be of little value; the Performance is better than the
Design. The Townhouse is very indifferent, yet they boast of it as a rare
Piece. For to tell you the truth, it is a difficult matter to accommodate one's
self to the high-flown Discourses of the Italians. It is impossible for them to
speak modestly; for when they would praise any thing, they do it with
exaggerations; and he who has the good fortune to please them, is always
Wonderful, Marvelous, and Incomparable. We have already seen I know not how
many pretended Eighth Wonders of the World. When we complained that we saw at
Verona, so few considerable Buildings in so great a City, and which had
formerly been so famous; they promised us that we should find Mountains and
Miracles at Vicenza. They told us Vicenza was full of stately Palaces, of an
extraordinary sumptuous Architecture. These were indeed big Words; but it is
certain that never any found themselves more disappointed than we were when we
came to see these pretended magnificent Palaces of Vicenza; for we must use the
Phrases of the Italians, who must be allowed to call whatsoever they please, a
Palace. A little Citizen's Hall, which you in England call a Parlour, in Italy
has the Title of The Chamber of Audience, when you may as well give the Title
of Embassies to a Footboy's Message. It is all one to me, whether they call the
Lacqueys Ambassadors, or all their Houses L'Ouvres. This is the best in the
World in Italian; but for us, or others, who are no Italians, we cannot suffer
our selves to be surprised with their Palaces, nor their most Sumptuous. I know
not very well what the Word Palace signifies in your Tongue; but those who are
somewhat versed in our Language, ought to have no regard to the resemblance of
the Word Palais, to that of Palazzo, as if they signified the same thing. The
Word Palais is not used so prodigally amongst us, as that of Palazzo is amongst
the Italians; it imports a great deal more, and excites another Idea in the
Hearer. In a Word, I find that they give the Name of Palazzi to an infinite
Number of ordinary Houses, to which that of Palais does not at all belong. And
to apply all that has been said to the lofty Palaces of Vicenza. I maintain in
general, that they may be called handsome Houses, and no more. Perhaps there
are Three or Four for which that Name might seem too mean; but I cannot tell
how they can be termed very fine; for to speak properly, they are but
well-disguis'd, not fine Houses: That is to say, there is nothing fair but the
Frontispiece, and that is no more than indifferent, for they are often built
with Plaster instead of hewn Stone. I insist the more on this, because it is
hard to root out the old Mistake, with which many People are possessed, about
the multitude of Palaces in Italy; and I would endeavor always to represent
things as they are.

Our Guide finding that we were no great Admirers of his Palaces, fansi'd
however, that he knew a way to surprise us; and having insensibly obliged us to
follow him, he drew us on through the Dirt, a good half League from the City,
to show us a little Country House, which belonged to the Marquess of Capra. It
is a square Building, in the midst whereof is a little Hall, under a small
Dome, and at each Angle of the square two Chambers and a Closet. There are some
good Pictures in it; and the situation being on a little ascent, contributes to
render the place very agreeable.

Coming back from this House, he carried us to our Lady of Montheric. It is
famous in this Country, and the Prior told us the whole Story of it very
seriously. You are to know only that this Image of our Lady came out of the
Earth, in the very place where you see her: And that they have often in vain
endeavored to transport her to Vicenza; Ten thousand Men together, as the
Prior told us, were not able to carry her. The Picture by Paul of Verona, which
is in their Dining Room, is the best Piece in the Convent, it represents St.
Gregory at Table with some Pilgrims.

There are some Ruins of an ancient Amphitheatre at Vicenza, but they told us,
they were almost all hid under new Buildings. The Theater which is in the
Academy of the Olympicks, is of the famous Palladio. The Fabric is none of the
largest, and they use it but on certain occasions, which rarely happen. The
Triumphal-Arch, which is without the Gates, at the entrance of the Plain, which
is called the Field of Mars, is in imitation of the Antic way of Building, by
the same Palladio.

The Garden of the Count of Valmanara, is a thing much boasted of in this City,
and the Inscription which we read over the Garden-Gate, put us in great
expectations. You have here the Contents of it: Stop, dear Traveller, thou, who
searchest for rare things, and enchanted places, for here thou may find
satisfaction. Enter into this delicious Garden, and taste abundantly of all
sorts of Pleasures: The Count of Valmanara gives thee leave, etc. In effect,
they once designed to have made this a very agreeable place. There is a Canal,
Divisions or Knots, and Closets; besides an Alley of Citrons and Oranges, which
is indeed a fine thing.

This Mounsieur the Count puts me in mind of a pleasant Story, which I have
read in several Authors. They say that Charles the Fifth being at Vicenza, a
great number of Gentlemen and rich Burgesses of that place, pressed him very
much to grant them the Title of Counts: Charles still drew back, but in the
end, to be rid of these troublesome People, said aloud, Well, well, I make you
all Counts, both the City and Suburbs. From this time, says the History,
nothing is more common than the Counts of Vicenza.

The way from Vicenza to Padua is not unlike to that between Verona and
Vicenza. We passed the Tezenza about three quarters of an hour from Vicenza,
and the Brenta an hour from Padua. I know not whether the Antiquaries are
agreed concerning this Brenta: Some pretend it was the Timavus, and others,
that it is one of the Medoacus's: The first opinion seems least probable,
because of the River Timavus, Bologna la grassa venetia la guasta, ma Padoa la
Passa.
which passes by Friuli, and which is apparently the true one; but let us
leave them to end their difference, and come to Padua.

The Paduan is a level Country, and extremely fruitful, yet Padua is a poor and
ill-peopled City. The Circuit of it is great: but there are large places in it
that are void of Buildings, and many Houses void of Inhabitants. PADUA, called
the Learned. This City was subjected to the Venetians, in the Year 1406. In
1519. they pulled down the Suburbs, in which were 10 Monasteries, 6 Churches, 7
Hospitals, and about 3000 Houses. Schrad.
The ancient Padua has still retained its first Walls; but since it fell into
the hands of the Venetians, they have comprised the Suburbs in the City, and
compassed it with a Fortification, which was never good, and is at present
ready to fall.

There are Porches or Piazza's, almost throughout the whole City, which are
very convenient to shelter People from Rain, but otherwise make the Streets
narrow and dark, and give opportunity for those frequent Robberies and Murders,
which they call at Padua, the Qui va li? What can be more strange, than that
the Scholars of Padua, should be priviledg'd to knock down those whom they
meet, and to break Legs and Arms, without any hope of Justice? For, as soon as
Night falls, they arm themselves, and going out in Companies, hide themselves
between the Pillars of the Porches; and while the poor Passenger is struck with
terror at the hearing of the Question, Qui va li? without perceiving who makes
it; another at the same time cries, Qui va la? without giving a Man an
opportunity to go forward or backward; the unhappy Creature must perish between
the Qui va li, and the Qui va la: of which these Sparks make but a Sport. This
is what they call the Qui va li of Padua.

It often happens that these Scholars kill unknown Persons, or some of
themselves, to maintain the privilege that they have assumed. It Is true, these
Indignities are not daily committed, for People keep themselves as close as
they can out of harms way. But it may be said, without exaggeration, that not a
Month passes, in which two or three Mischances do not happen. Not but that
this unbridled License might be easily restrained; but Venice, which insists on
the fineness of her Politics, and pushes them to the utmost, would have this
Scourge for the Paduans, and this Petrolle which costs nothing. I will tell you
the rest another time.

I had yesterday a long discourse with some Persons, who believe that Padua was
formerly a Seaport, both because the Ancients speak of it, as a very rich
Place, and because when they dig Wells or Foundations of Houses, they find in
diverse places Anchors and Masts. I know not if this Opinion may seem reasonable
to you; but since History has given us no account of it, I should rather have
recourse to a more easy way, to explain how Vessels come up to Padua, which
is, that there was formerly some great Canal.

They affirm also, that Padua was built by Antenor, and they show there a great
repository for Bones, in which they have placed the pretended Bones of this old
Trojan, and it is commonly called Antenor's Tomb. But this Tradition is not
very certain: it cannot indeed be denied, that See the 1st Book of the Eneids.
Antenor came into this Country: And it is no less certain, that he built a City
which was called Patavium. But the question is whether our Padua be the
Patavium of Antenor, Messala Corvinus says, that the Arms of Troy were placed
by Antenor in the Temple of Padua; and that they were a Sow in a Field Or.
for this Opinion is not improbable, yet there are Arguments against it, as
well as for it.

As for the Tomb it is a mere Bauble. It is about four hundred and odd Years,
that they were working on the Foundations of an Hospital, and dug up a
Leaden-Coffin, near which they found a Sword. The Coffin had no Inscription,
and upon the Sword were some Leonin Verses of barbarous Latin. Judge, I pray
you, whether this may not as well agree with the Trojan Horse as Antenor. In
the mean time the immoderate love which some People have for every thing that
bears the Stamp of Antiquity, has made some Persons dream, that they had found
the Tomb of Antenor. A certain Man called Lupatus, who was then Magistrate, and
a Man of some Learning, had also his Reasons or Prejudices in favor of these
Bones: And he it was, who some Years after, put them in that renowned Tomb,
which they call at this day the Tomb of Antenor, and which is to be seen at the
entrance of St. Laurence's-street. He caused four Verses to be Engraved on it,
and which, as you may believe are in Gothic Characters: C. Inclytus Antenor
patriae nisa quietem
Transtulit huc Enetum Dardanidumque fugas
Expulit Euganeos Patavinam condidit Urbem,
Quem tenet hic humili marmore caesa domus.
There are some who read, Patriae vox, and others, Patriam. But they are both
in the wrong, for the ae of the word Patriae is plain; and if one would join
the m, which follows with Patriae, it must be read Patriaem. This m is nearer
to vox than Patriae, nor can it be doubted to be an m, because the same
Character is found in diverse words which follow. I confess that Muox signifies
nothing no more thin Patriaem; and turn these Verses which way you please, you
will never find any good sense.

To conclude the account of this Inscription, there are some who have made a
false Remark upon the word caesa, as if it were writ with a single e, but they
have not observed the ae
eciril, which serves for an ae; besides, there are, you know, old Impressions,
which never regard this Dipthong. Enetum is written without an h, and there is
no punctuation observed throughout. I know not what to say of the C. which is
put to the beginning of the Verse. You must further know, that Doctor Lupetus
would have his own Tomb placed near that of his dear Antenor, and they remain
at present side by side.

The Church of St. They call him St. Anthony of Padua, because he died there,
and was there buried, but he was a Franciscan of Lisbon, and Cotemporary with
St. Francis d'Assise. Spond. Bellarmin, Trithemius, etc.
Anthony of Lisbon, is very great, and full of fine things, as well in Carving
as in Painting. There are many magnificent Tombs in it, among which we observed
Made in the Year 1555. by Augustine Zotto.
that of Alexander Contarini, Admiral of the Republic, and Procurator of St.
Mark, and that of Count Horatio Sicco, who was killed at Vienna, in the last
Siege. There cannot be seen a fairer Picture in Fresco, than that of the Chapel
of St. Felix, it was done by the famous Giotto, who excelled in that sort of
work. But that which is the most considerable in this Church is the Forty foot
long, and twenty five broad. Ang. Port.
Chapel of St. Anthony, the great Protector of Padua, whom, by way of eminency
they call the Saint. His Body lies under the Altar, which is enriched with a
thousand precious things. They say that the Bones of the Saint cast forth a
very sweet Odor; those who have the Curiosity to smell them, go behind the
Altar to a certain part which is not well joined, and where it were easy to
thrust in some Balsam, or such like odoriferous thing. All the Chapel is
covered with a Basso relievo Work of white Marble, in which are represented the
principal Miracles of St. Anthony. Almost the whole work was done by Tullius
Lombardus, and Sansovin. There are also six and thirty great silver Lamps,
which burn Night and Day round the Altar: I will not trouble you with that
medley of Stories, which those who show this Chapel, are wont to relate
concerning their Saint.

From this Church we went to that of St. Justina, which is very great and
beautiful, though it be far from the Perfection to which they design to advance
it. It is paved with Marble-squares, of red, black, and white; the Roof of the
great Body of the Church has seven Domes, which give it both Light and
Ornament. There are also two on each Arm of the Cross. Besides the great Altar,
which is a stately Work, there are twenty four others of fine Marble, and all
different in Color. And whereas the Church of St. Anthony is full of
Monuments, they will not suffer any in this: There is only one Inscription,
which says, That the Church was built at the only charge of the Convent. The
This Work was performed in 22 Years, by a Frenchman called Ricard.
Basso relievo of the Benches of the Choir is admirable, and the design is fine
throughout: which represents the Prophecies of the Old Testament, relating to
Jesus Christ, with their accomplishment in the New. The Martyrdom of St.
Justina, which is over the great Altar, was done by Paul of Verona.

I will not undertake to give you a particular description of this Church. The
Monastery is also vastly great, it has six Cloisters, and many Courts and
Gardens. I will not trouble you with an account of the Image of the Virgin See
Baron. an. 726, and 730.
, which flew from Constantinople when it was taken by the Turks: Nor will I add
any thing concerning the Bodies of the Saints, or the other Relics, of which
this Church is full, for so we should never end its Story.

The great place which is near to it, was formerly called the Field of Mars. I
cannot imagine why People, 256 Foot long, and 86 broad, Angelo Portenari
who love names of Honor so much, have robbed it of its ancient Title, to call
it simply, Prato della valle, the Meadow of the Valley.

This Hall is of the Figure of a Rhomboides, and is not sustained by any
Pillars. Peter Aponus who was the Architect, and a famous Necromancer, says
Cardan, wrought the Vault with Constellations and Astronomical Figures, which
remain still to be seen.
The Hall of the Townhouse is very large and dark; it is one hundred and ten
Paces long, and forty broad, and there are to be seen in it many Monuments
which have been erected for illustrious Persons. Padua had a happy chance to
redeem its Founder out of the obscurity in which he had lain for near three
thousand Years: It was but just also, that the first unknown Tomb they met
withal in this City, should serve to honor the Memory of Titus Livius, the
famous Historian who was born there.

The discovery of this Tomb, in the Year 1413. was attended with the universal
joy and acclamations of the People. There was found in the Gardens of St.
Justina, a shrine of Lead, not unlike to that of Antenor; and they presently
concluded, that it was the Coffin of Titus Livius, because that Historian was
the Priest of Concord; and the Convent of the Benedictines of St. Justina, is
built on the Ruins of a Temple, which was of old Consecrated to that Goddess.
When the noise of this discovery was spread abroad, all the City run thither,
with transports of an inexpressible Joy and Zeal. The People touched their
Beads on the Shrine of the supposed Titus Livius, as if he had been some new
Saint. Many private Persons offered to be at the Charge of a Mausolaeum,
provided they might erect it in their own Houses; and every one rejoiced that
he was born in that happy Age, when this precious Treasure was discovered. In
fine, Titus Livius, after he had been robbed of his Jaws by a People greedy of
Relics, was put into a Coffin of Wood, that he might more easily be carried.
They loaded it with Branches of Laurel, and the best of the City carried it in
Triumph to the Palace of Justice; in which place, after many Deliberations and
Ceremonies, they erected the Monument which is now to be seen, and to which
they afterward added this Inscription, which was found in the Neighborhood of
the place where the Temple of Concord formerly stood.

Vivens Fecit.
V. F. Titus Livius Liviae. T. F. Quartae L. Halys Concordialis Patavi Sibi and
suis Omnibus.
Over this Inscription, they have placed a Head of Marble, which goes for the
Head of Titus Livius, though Men of Learning know the contrary. It is true, the
Inscription is ancient, as well as the Head, but there has been a By L' Orsato.
Dissertation lately Published concerning this subject; which, in my Opinion,
clearly proves, that the Titus Livius of this Inscription, was only a freed Man
of one of the Daughters of Titus Livius the Historian: So that the Bones, the
Head, and the Inscription, are only borrowed Pieces.

To leave the Fables and Incertainties of Antiquity, and come to something that
is new and real; I shall give you an account of another Monument, which we saw
in this same Hall, and which is worthy of Observation. Some have exalted
Susanna beyond Lucretia, but it may be justly said that the Marchioness D'
Obizzi, of whom I shall presently speak, has surpassed Susanna and Lucretia
both; since when she saw Death present before her, she resolved to bear it
courageously, rather than to suffer her Chastity to be Injured. A Gentleman of
Padua, was passionately in love with this Lady, who was young and beautiful,
and found an opportunity to get into her Chamber when she was in Bed, in the
Absence of the Marquess her Husband. Probably the Gentleman first used all the
ways of sweetness and persuasion, before he proceeded to acts of Violence. But
however, when he saw he could prevail neither way, his Love turned to Fury, and
Rage so transported him, that he stabbed this Virtuous Lady. See the
Inscription:

Venerare pudicitiae simulachrum and victimam, Lucretiam de Dondis ab Horologio
Pyaeneae de Obizzonibus, Orciani Marchionis Uxorem. Haec inter noctis tenebras
maritales asserens tedas, furiales recentis Tarquinii faces, casto cruore
extinxit. Sicque Romanam Lucretiam, intemerati tori gloria vincit. Tantae suae
Heroinae generosis manibus hanc dicavit aram Civitas Patavina Decreto. Die 31.
Decembris Anni 1661.

Are you not satisfied, Sir, that Padua has done a most just Action, by taking
care to eternize the Memory of so rare a Virtue, that met with such a barbarous
Treatment? But perhaps you would not take it amiss to have the whole Story
related to you.

When the Marchioness was surprised in her Bed, her only Son, about five Years
old was with her; but the Murderer having carried him into a Neighboring
Chamber, before he perpetrated his horrid Villainy, the Child could not see all
that passed. The thing being brought to light, the Gentleman was taken into
Custody, upon suspicion: It was known that he had an Inclination to the
Marchioness. The Child gave some Information; some Neighbors affirmed, they
had seen the Gentleman in that Quarter: They found a Button of his Sleeve on
the Bed, fellow to that which he still wore; and these things were strong
Arguments of his Guilt. They put him to the Torture, both ordinary and
extraordinary, but he still denied the Fact; and after fifteen Years
Imprisonment, his Friends wrought so hard, that they saved him, and even, as I
suppose, obtained his Liberty; which yet he enjoyed not long, for some Months
after his Deliverance, the young Marquess, which was the Child I spoke of, shot
him with a Pistol in the Head, and so revenged the Death of his Mother. He is
at present in Germany, in the Emperor's Service.

There are here many Cabinets of Curiosities, and a great number of skilful
Antiquaries. But it must be acknowledged, that Mr. Patin, Professor of Physic,
excels all the Critics in the World, in explaining the Intricacies of
Antiquity. For it is certain, that never any Man was Master of a truer and more
judicious Taste for these Curiosities, of a more extensive Knowledge in all
other respects, or of a more obliging and communicative Temper.

The Amphitheatre of Padua was greater than that of Verona, but there remains
nothing of it but miserable Ruins. I must further tell you, before I end my
Letter, that I went lately into the Tennis-Court, and was very much surpised
to find the Walls white, and the Balls black, and Rackets as large as Sieves;
but it is the Custom of this Country.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
At Padua, Dec. 1687.
LETTER XVI.
SIR,
IT was an extraordinary satisfaction to me to meet with your Letters in this
place; besides the pleasure I had to learn good news of you; you have done me a
singular kindness, in proposing Questions to me, about those things concerning
which you desire to be most particularly informed. Assure your self, Sir, my
best endeavors shall not be wanting to answer your Demands exactly: I entreat
you to continue the same Method hereafter, that I may be better enabled to send
you such Accounts as may be acceptable to your self, and those of our Friends,
to whom you communicate them.

You desire me to tell you sincerely, whether our present Travels be really
pleasant to us, or at least whether the pleasure we take in them be not
over-balanced by the trouble which they give us. I am not at all surprised that
you should entertain such a doubt of it; for though we are not among Wild
Bears, or in the Deserts of Arabia, yet are we not without some difficulties.
The Weather is very rough; the way of Traveling ordinarily unpleasant, and the
days so short, that we get late in at Night, and rise very early: We oftentimes
meet with hard Lodging, and worse Diet; and besides, we are exposed to many
dangers. Nevertheless, with a good Stock of Health, Money, Cheerfulness and
Patience, we have surmounted these difficulties, even almost without taking
notice of them. Custom makes all things easy, and is a sovereign and universal
Remedy. We take some days of rest when we think we want it: The variety and
perpetual Novelty of Objects recreates the Spirits as well as the Eyes. A
little weariness supplies the want of a Bed, and Exercise sharpens our
Appetites. Offa and torus herbaceus, famis and laboris dulcissimae medullae
sunt. With good Furrs we defended our selves against the Cold, in spite of all
the Frosts and Snows of the Alps: In fine, without alleging those general
Reasons, which render Travels profitable and pleasant, I will positively tell
you, that the tenderest and most delicate Persons of our Company, have easily
overcome all those Obstacles, which might hinder the satisfaction which we
expected. Our stay at Venice will perfectly recruit us, and when we shall
proceed on our Travels, the sweetness of the Spring will insensibly begin to
succeed the rigours of the Winter.

As to the rest, I have let a whole Month pass without writing to you, since we
arrived in this City, that I might more certainly inform my self of the things
with which I intend to entertain you. I will tell you nothing but what I have
seen my self, or of which I have had particular Information. You are in the
right to conclude, that I will not undertake to give you a description of
Venice; that would be a work too tedious, and foreign to my design. Yet I will
not affect to tell you only such new and singular things as were never
mentioned by any other. Being willing to be ignorant what others have written;
I will speak as an Eyewitness, and represent to you, as naturally as I can,
the principal part of such things as I shall judge worthy of observation,
without giving any heed to what others have said. You will perceive, that I
take care throughout to answer your particular Questions: If you have forgotten
any thing, you may acquaint me with it in your next Letters. Venice is so
singular a place, look on it which way you please, that I have proposed to my
self to consider it with care: I have filled all my Memorials; and I hope I
shall be able to give a satisfactory answer to most of your Questions. But I
must advertise you of two things, before I put an end to this little Preface.
The first is, that I reserve some of the most notable Observations, to be
communicated to you on some other occasion. The other is, that I will not
oblige my self to any order in my Observations, but relate things as I chanced
to meet with them, as I have already intimated to you in another place.

We parted from Padua on the twentieth of the last Month, and came hither
betimes that Evening: There are many good Villages on the way, and a great many
Houses of Pleasure, which belong to noble Venetians, and were built by
Palladio. The Ausbourg-Post brought us to Mestre, which is a little City on the
Bank of the Gulf, Five Miles from Venice. I have read somewhere in Mezeray's
History, that the Adriatick-Sea was frozen in the Year Others say in 859.
860, and that they went in a Coach from the main Land to Venice. As for us, we
were obliged to take Gondola's at Mestre, and were about an Hour and an half on
the Water.

That I may give you a true Idea of Venice, VENICE, called the Rich.
I must in the first place describe those Waters in the midst of which it is
seated. The general Opinion of Geographers is, That Venice is built in the Sea,
and this in some measure is true; nevertheless it requires Explication: It is
certain it is not the Main Sea, but drowned Lands, yet such as were drowned
before the Building of Venice; that is, at the least Thirteen or Fourteen
Hundred Years ago. The greatest Vessels float in some places on those Waters,
and there are Channels by which those that are of no greater Burden than Two
Hundred Tuns, can go up to Venice it self. The Sea there has a free
Communication with the Main Sea, by the Ebbing and Flowing Tides. The Oysters
and other Shellfish stick to the Foundations of the Houses of Venice and
Murano, as they do in other places to the Rocks; so that I think it may be
truly said, that Venice is in the Sea. Yet since it is plain that this drowned
Country was formerly a Marish; these Waters have but very little depth, and
after all, this is not the true and ancient Sea: This Extent of Water is at
Venice called only the Lake or Marish, and they gave it the Name of Lacuna; I
observe that the greatest part of Strangers adopt this Word, every one
disguising it according to his own Language, for want of a fit term to express
it. Lacune has another signification in French, which perhaps is the reason
that they change here the C into G and call it Lagune. Though this be a barbarous
Word, and newly invented, yet I am resolved to make use of it, such as it is,
rather than give my self the trouble to frame a better.

They have Mills, and other Machines, to empty the Mud and Ouse, which gather
continually, and discover themselves in several places, when the Sea is at the
lowest Ebb: They have turned the Mouth of the Brent, and some other Rivers, to
prevent their throwing of Mud and Sand into the Lagunes; and that the Earth may
not regain from the Sea, which would be very prejudicial to Venice, whose
Strength and Security consists in its Situation. It is true, that if this City
is obliged to labor incessantly, to keep the Waters which environ it at a
certain depth, to prevent its being reunited to the Continent; so it would not
be for its advantage in every respect, that these Waters should have a great
and general depth; because while things remain in or near the same Posture they
are now in, it, is, in a manner, impossible to approach to Venice, either by
Sea or Land. When Pepin, of whom we spoke not long since, undertook to expel
the Doge Maurice, and his Son John, who was his Associate. He parted from
Ravenna with his Fleet, imagining with full Sails, to pass everywhere. But
whilst the Doge's Ships steered their Course through the navigable Channels,
without meeting with any Misfortunes, Pepin's Vessels stuck, and sunk in the
Mud on all sides; so that after a great loss, he was constrained to fly with
the Remainders of his wrecked Fleet. It is manifest, that could this Fleet have
passed every where with full Sails, this Expedition had succeeded better. It is
about Three hundred and odd Years since the Genoeses received the like
treatment.

I believe you do by this time sufficiently comprehend what is meant by these
Lagunes of Venice: Represent then also to your self the City of Venice, which
rises out of the midst of these Waters, with Thirty or Forty large Steeples,
and is at least a League and an a half distant from the Land. It is certainly a
very surprising Object to see this great City without any Walls, or Ramparts,
to be beaten on every side with the Waves, and yet to remain on its Piles as
firm as on a Rock.

I know very well that all Geographers have written, that Venice is composed of
Seventy two Isles; I will not controvert so generally received an Opinion: But
I must confess, that I can by no means conceive what these Isles should be; and
I dare assure you, that this Account gives a false Notion of the Platform and
Situation of this City. It would seem by this Description, that there were
Seventy two little Hills, one near the other, and that these little Eminencies
being all inhabited, had at last formed the City of Venice, which is not at all
probable. Venice is all flat, and built on Piles in the Water. The Water washes
the Foundations of almost all the Houses, to the height of Four or Five Feet,
and the Canals are always of equal breadth. It Is true, they have made the best
use of several spaces, of a reasonable bigness, which may, indeed, give
occasion to believe, that there was formerly some Land there, but not Seventy
two Isles.

For the Streets, they are very narrow, and seem to have been filled and raised
with Mud and Rubbish; for it is not at all probable that they have natural
Foundations; and besides, if all the Divisions which the Canals make, were
reckoned for Isles, we should find near Two hundred instead of Seventy two. It
might be farther observed, that the number of these Isles might be infinitely
increased, and new ones made in any place, by fixing Poles, and building Houses
upon them. There are Eighteen, or Twenty such like Islands scattered up and
down in the Lagunes, without counting Palestrina, Mamalocco, and Eight or Ten
others, which consist of solid Earth, and are truly Isles.

We are not to take notice of what is commonly said of the greatness of Venice;
some give it Eight Miles circuit, others allow but Seven. As for me, I assure
you Venice is neither Eight nor Seven Miles in compass. They reckon Five Miles
from Mestre to Venice, which way we came in an Hour and an half, with Two
Rowers; and we sailed round Venice in the same space of time, with Two other
Rowers, who made neither more nor less haste than those of Mestre. Judge then
by this, of the Circuit of that City: Consider too, that our Gondola, was many
times obliged to fetch a Compass, to avoid the little Capes which the City
makes in several places, and by consequence the Line that it made was greater
than the true Circuit of the City. Besides, to mark the Circumference of a
City, without considering its Figure, is not a competent way to determine the
largeness of its Content. This is what made Polybius say, That Sparta, which
had but Forty eight Stades in compass, was twice as big as Megalopolis, which
had Fifty. [A Stade contained 125 Geometrical Paces.]
A very indifferent Mathematician may demonstrate clearly, that a City which is
near Eight Miles in compass, for Example, may contain a less number of Houses,
than another City which is only Four Miles, or less if you please. This depends
upon the regularity or irregularity of the Figure. This Truth, which is
undeniable, is the reason that I never will never pretend to represent the
bigness of Cities by the measure of their Circuit, for that might betray you
into very considerable Errors. I shall ordinarily content my self with telling
you, that a City is Great, or very Great; Little, or very Little: And I am
persuaded that such Expressions as these, may give you a sufficient Idea of its
Greatness.

The number of Inhabitants is another thing which is hastily determined, but
seldom well examined. It is commonly reported at Venice, that there are Two or
three hundred thousand Souls in the City, and some have advanced the number to
Four hundred thousand; but we must not rely upon these Computations. When the
Trade of Venice flourished, it is probable that the number of its Inhabitants
was much greater than it is at present: But if we may give credit to the Report
of a Person who has been settled here for a long time, and assured me, that
his Calculation is very exact; Venice does not at present contain more than an
Hundred and forty thousand Souls, comprehending therein the Isle of Giudeca.

Those who please themselves to represent Venice as a very populous City, take
great care to inculcate, that it has neither Gardens, nor void Places, nor
Churchyards, and that the Streets are very Narrow: But when, on the other
hand, they would describe the Beauty of Venice, they magnify its Gardens, its
Places, and the breadth and number of its Canals. I read the other Day in a
Venetian Author, that he counted in Venice Fifty three Public Places, and
Three hundred and thirty five Gardens. Thus you may see how variously things
are presented. But to speak the Truth, there is both Truth and Falsehood in
either of these Reports; I will not dispute but that there may be Fifty three
Spaces, great and small, to which this Author has thought fit to give the name
of Places; and the same may be said of his Gardens. But if we consider these
Places and Gardens particularly, we must conclude him too prodigal of his
honorable Titles. To speak properly, there is but one Place at Venice, the
famous and magnificent Place of St. Mark. But let us allow him the liberty to
bestow that Name on Five or Six void Spaces more, which have some small Extent;
yet all this comes far short of Fifty three Places. There are also some Gardens
here and there, particularly on the side of Santa Maria del' Orto; but if we
set aside Fifteen or Twenty, or should allow Thirty, or Thirty five, to deserve
to be so called, I can positively averr, that the Three hundred which remain,
would not, one with another, be Ten Foot square; and are not these very noble
Gardens? Nor is the other Account exactly true; for besides that Venice may
have Gardens and void Spaces, there are many parts of it very slenderly
inhabited. It is true, indeed, there are no Churchyards: And as for the
Argument that is brought from the narrowness of the Streets, it is a petty
Sophism, that may be easily refuted, by saying, that it is nothing but a bare
Assertion. The Streets are straight and narrow, I confess, and so narrow, that
the jostling of Elbows in the most frequented Places, is a great inconvenience;
but I am of Opinion, that the Canals ought to be reckoned instead of Streets;
and if the Canals were filled and paved, there would be no reason to complain
of narrow Streets in Venice.

But I must tell you, since we are on this Subject, that all the City is so
mangled with these Canals and Streets, that there are almost no Houses but what
you may go to by Water as well as by Land. Not that every Canal is bordered
with a double Quay, as in Holland, for the convenience of those who go on Foot:
There are, indeed, some of these; but very often the Canal occupies all the
Space from one Range of Buildings to another. The Streets are in the little
Isles that are formed by the Canals; so that there is not any part of the City,
to which one may not go either with or without a Gondola. It Is true, all these
little Passages, and all the Turns that must be made to find the Bridges, do
make Venice a true Labyrinth.

The famous Place of St. Mark was the first Place which our Curiosity prompted
us to visit, after our Arrival at Venice; and it is really the Soul and Glory
of that City. The Church of St. Mark fronts one of the Ends of this Place, and
that of St. Geminian the other; and the Procuraties or Lawyer's Offices and
Lodgings, which are built with Marble, and are both very fine and regular,
border the two sides of it with great Piazza's; which much enlarge the Place,
and at the same time contribute to its convenience. This Place is Two hundred
and fourscore Foot long, and One hundred and ten broad. When you come from the
Church of St. Geminian toward that of St. Mark, and instead of entering there,
turn to the Righthand; the Place turns also in form of a Square; and this
Second Place, whose extremity reaches to the Sea, is Two hundred and fifty
Paces long, and Fourscore broad: This is that which they call the Broglio. The
Palace of the Doge is on one side of it, and the Procuraties are continued on
the other. All this considered together, makes an admirable Show, and may pass
for a most magnificent Place.

The Tower of St. Mark is near the Angle of the Square within, and does in some
measure spoil the Symmetry of the place: This Tower is Three hundred and sixty
Foot high, comprehending the Angel, which serves for the Weathercock. It was
formerly all over gilt, and when the Sun shined upon it, those at Sea might
perceive it at Thirty Miles distance; but now the Gold being gone, it scarcely
appears. You ascend this Tower by Stairs, without Steps, like these which I
have elsewhere described; which is to be seen at Geneva. You may easily judge
of the Beauty, Variety, and Rarity of the Landscape, which is discovered from
thence.

The Broglio is the Walk of the Nobles: they take up always one side of the
Place; sometimes for the Sun, and sometimes for the Shade, according to the
Season. As their Number is great, and they are ordinarily to be seen no where
else, the Broglio is the general Rendezvous, where Visits are made, and most
Affairs treated of. It is not permitted to mingle amongst them on that that
side of the Promenade which they occupy; but the other side is free. This place
is so particularly destined, and set apart for them, that when a young
Nobleman is come to the Age required for admittance into the Council, and to
take the Robe, the first Day he puts it on, Four Noblemen of his Friends do
ceremoniously introduce him into the Broglio; and when any of them are banished
the Council, the entrance into the Broglio is likewise forbidden to them.

It was about the beginning of the Ninth Age, that the Merchants of Venice
brought the Corpse of St. Mark thither; they had, as is said, by I know not what
chance, dug it out of the Earth, in the City of Alexandria in Egypt. And as
there is a certain Tradition, which tells us, that this Evangelist being in
Prison, Christ appeared to him, and saluted him in these Words; Peace be to
thee, Mark, my Evangelist. The Senate of Venice received also the Body of the
Saint with the same Words, when it was brought to their City: It is for this
that you see them written upon the open Book, held by the Lion of St. Mark, in
the Arms of Venice. You may imagine, there was great rejoicing for the
possession of the Relics of this Evangelist; which it seems they could give no
greater Testimony of, than by preferring him, as they did, to poor St.
Theodore, the ancient Patron of the Republic, who had not given them the least
cause of Complaint. But they stopped not here; for besides diverse other Honors
which they paid to the Bones of the New-comer, they built the abovementioned
Church to his Honor, where they placed that Sacred Treasure. It is true, they
took so little care to distinguish the Shrine or Tomb, that they know not at
present precisely where it is; which is no small Affliction to those who bear
an extraordinary Devotion to this Saint.

I will not stop to tell you the History of his Apparition, (which, say they,
happened Two Hundred and seventy Years after they had brought him to Venice)
when he showed his Arm to the Doge, and gave him a Ring of Gold, which is
carried every Year in Procession, on the Twenty fifth Day of June. Nor will I
tell you an infinite number of other Stories, which are made on this Occasion.

The Patriarchal Church is dedicated to St. Peter; and that of St. Mark, as
rich as it is, is but a Chapel; it is the Doge's Chapel. The Primicerio, who is
the Dean of the Canons of St. Mark, wears a Miter and Rochet, as Bishops do,
and depends not on the Patriarch. I have seen him officiate on Christmas Day in
great Ceremony; the Altar being adorned with most rich Pieces of the Treasury:
He is always a noble Venetian, and his Yearly Revenue amounts to almost a
Thousand Pounds Sterling.

The Church of St. Mark deserves an exact Description; but that is too great a
Work for a Traveller: I shall therefore content my self with giving you some
general Account of it. It is a Building Square, or almost Square, of a The
Church is a Cross shortened, Greek-wise. There are many Gothic Ornaments.
Greek Structure, obscure, and indifferent high, but extraordinarily enriched
with Marble, and Mosaic Work. The Roof consists of several Domes, and that in
the midst exceeds the rest in greatness. Of all the Statues which are on the
outside of the Church, there are but Two good ones; The Adam and Eve by Riccio,
which you see when you descend the great Stairs of the Palace. I speak not of
the Four Brazen Horses which are over the great Portal, because they are
foreign Pieces which came thither accidentally. I learned from one skilled in
Antiquity, that these Horses belonged to a Chariot of the Sun, that served for
Ornament to a Triumphal-Arch, which the Senate of Rome erected for Nero, after
the Victory of that Prince over the Parthians; which may be still seen, says
he, on the Reverse of some of his Medals. Constantine the Great carried them
from Rome to Constantinople, where he placed them in the Hippodrome; and at
last the Venetians having made themselves Masters of that City, brought hither
many of its rich Spoils, of which number were these Horses. One may still
perceive in some places that they were gilded.

One of the things which seems to me most remarkable in the Church of St. Mark,
is the vast quantity of Mosaic Work, with which it is adorned. All the
Pavement is made of it, and all its arched Roofs are covered with it. Because
you have not seen this kind of Work, and would have me to say something of it,
I will explain it to you as well as I can. Mosaic Work came from Greece, but
they tell us that the use of it has been in Italy for near Two Thousand Years
past. Vitruvius who lived in the time of Augustus, speaks of it under the terms
of opus sectile, pavimenta sectilia, opera musaea and musiva: It was likewise
called tessellatum and vermiculatum opus.

All Works composed of little inlaid Pieces, whether they be of Stone, Wood,
Ivory, Enamel, or any other Matter; or whether they be Representations of
Things Natural, or only Morisk or Japan Figures; all these are comprehended
under the name of Mosaic: So that there are many fashions of it. You know what
Inlaid Work is; you have also seen the fine Works of Florence Stone; and to
speak after a looser manner, all these are Mosaic. And that which makes the
greatest Ornament of the Church of St. Mark, is, that almost all the Work is of
this nature. For want of Natural Stones, which would be hard to find for a Work
so vast, and which would take up an immense time to polish and prepare; They
have recourse to Pastes, and compositions of Glass and Enamel, which they make
in a Crucible or Melting-Pot; this takes a most lively and shining Color,
which never wears nor stains. Every Piece of the Mosaic of St. Mark is a
little Cube, which is not above Three Lines thick, or Four at the most. All the
Field is of Mosaic, gilded with most bright Gold, and incorporated in the
Fire, upon the Superficies of one of the Faces of the Square: And all these
Figures with their Draperies and Ornaments, are colored according to nature,
by the due laying together of all the Pieces of the Work. All these little bits
are disposed according to the Design which the Workman, has in view, and are
strictly adjusted together in the compound Matter, or Plaster prepared to
receive them; which presently after becomes hard. The best of this Work is its
solidity. It is more than Eight hundred and fifty Years that it has lasted,
without the least diminution of its Beauty.

The Pavement of the Church is also exceedingly Curious; and though it has been
in many places very much spoiled, and in some places worn, it may be thought a
kind of Miracle that such great pieces remain still entire, after they have
been trod under Foot for so many Ages. They are little pieces of Jaspar, of
Porphyrie, spotted green Marble, and Marble of diverse Colors, which make also
Compartiments different from each other.

I pass by the Relics, the miraculous Images, and the other Holy Rarities
which are in this Church; only I shall mentition one of them, which seems to me
the most curious, viz. the Rock which Moses struck in the Wilderness; It is in
the Chapel of -- at the end of the Font; it is a kind of greyish Marble:
Nothing is more pleasant than the Three little Holes out of which they affirm
the Water issued: They are placed Triangularwise, about Two Fingers from each
other, and the Bore of each hole is no bigger than the hollow of a Goose-Quill.
I assure you, it is a double Miracle, that so much Water, in so little Time,
should issue out of such narrow Holes, as should suffice to quench the thirst
of an Army of Six hundred thousand Men, with all their Wives, Children, and
Cattle.

They made us observe a Piece of Porphyrie, enchas'd in the Pavement, in the
middle of the Portico of the Church, overagainst the great Door; it is to mark
out the Place wherein Pope Alexander III. set his Foot, as they say, on the
Neck of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, when that Prince came to submit to
him for the obtaining of a Peace. I am not ignorant that Baronius and some
others, have criticized this History, and rejected it as a Fable: But I must
tell you, by the by, since Opportunity presents, that whatever probability may
seem to be in the Reasons, they allege, they cannot pass for more than
Suspicions and Conjectures, and can never amount to a convincing Refutation of
a Story attested by so great a number of Authors.

Alexander III. was a haughty Man, his Enemies had provoked him, and he at last
had the Pleasure to Triumph over an Emperor, and Four Anti-Popes. At the very
time of his flight into France, he was so proud as to suffer Louys the young
King of France, and Henry II. King of England.
Two Kings who met him, to alight, and both to take the Reins of his Bridle,
and lead his Horse to the Lodging prepared for him. If he did this in his
Disgrace, what might he not do in his Prosperity?

From the Church of St. Mark, we went into the Treasury; Three Procurators of
St. Mark are the Administrators of it; and it is never opened, but in the
presence of one of them. In the first place, you see there the Relics, Pieces
of the true Cross; the Bones of the Dead; the Hair and Milk of the Virgin, etc.
From thence you pass into another Chamber, where the real Treasure is kept. The
greatest part of the things to be seen there, were brought from Constantinople,
at the same time with the Brazen Horses, which I mentioned before. I shall only
name some of the most considerable Pieces.

The two Crowns of the Kingdoms of Candia and Cyprus; many fine Vessels of
Agat, the Root of an Emerald, and of Crystal of the Rock: These Vessels, say
they, belonged to the Cupboard of Constantine; a kind of Seal Eight Inches
deep, and as many diameter, made of one only Granat; a very fair Sapphire,
which, they say, weighs Ten Ounces; Twelve Croslets of Gold, garnished with
Pearls; Twelve Head-Tires in form of Crowns, which served in certain Ceremonies
for the Maids of Honor of the Empress Helena to wear; a Cup of one only
Turquoise, with Egyptian Characters; this Cup is Seven Inches in diameter, and
Three and a half in depth: a Picture of St. Jerome, in fine Mosaic, consisting
of Pieces that are not above one Line square; and many other most rare and rich
things: Camerarius says this Coronet is not esteemed worth more than Two
hundred Thousand Crowns.
The Duke's Coronet is, in my Opinion, the finest of them all; the Circle is of
Gold, the Bonnet of Crimson Velvet, and the whole enriched with Stones and
Pearls of great price. Charles Paschal pretends to prove, that this Coronet is
nothing but the Phrygian Bonnet, or Trojan Miter, which Antenor brought into
this Country, the form whereof may yet be seen in diverse Antic Pieces, as in
the Statue of Ganymede, which is in the Porch of the Library of St. Mark; upon
some Medals of the God Lunus; in some others where you see Aeneas carrying the
good Man Anchyses; You may see the form of this Coronet in the Figure of the
Duke.
and in Miniatures of the Ancient Manuscript of Virgil in the Vatican.

This Manuscript puts me in Mind of that which they call The Gospel of St.
Mark, Mr. Payen has written that it is of the Bark of a Tree; he has been
misinformed, as well as P. Mesrie, who said they were Leaves.
and is here esteemed one of the most precious things in the Treasury. I had
time to consider it by a particular Favor. It consists of old Leaves of
Parchment, loosed from each other, worn, torn, defaced, and so rotted with
Moisture, and other injuries of Time, to which this Book, without doubt, has
been exposed, that one cannot touch it without some bits sticking to one's
Fingers; and it is a hard matter to discern any thing in it: This Manuscript
was in 4to, about Two Fingers thickness. The Remainders of it are shut up in a
Box of Vermillion, gilded, made in form of a Book. There remain still some
traces of imperfect Characters, but so little that scarce any thing can be
distinguished; but by turning over the Leaves, I found Three or Four Letters
well formed: I also met with the Word KATA, written as you see. I was with the
Abbot Lith, Library Keeper of St. Mark, and we searched as much as we could,
without being able to discover any thing, only that the Margent was broad, and
the Lines at a great distance, and ruled with Two little Parallel Scores, to
make the Writing straight and equal: This KATA. with one D and one S, which I
also observed in it, prove that it is a Alfonsus Ciaconi^s positively affirms,
that this Manuscript is Latin; and this was one of the Reasons upon which
Baronius grounded his Opinion, that St. Mark wrote his Gospel in Latin.
Greek Manuscript. But the bare Tradition is not a sufficient Demonstration
that it is the Hand of St. Mark: The manner of Writing which I observed, makes
me fancy that it is rather the Work of some professed Transcriber. As to the
rest, we must rely on common Fame, to believe it a Gospel rather than any thing
else, since it is difficult to decypher any Letters in it This History is
reported by Sabellicus, Garon, Larutti, and many others.
. The Treasury was robbed in the Year 1427, by a certain Candiot named Stamati
having made known his designed Robbery to one Zachary Grio, that Grio
discovered the Affair, and received a great Reward; but the Theif was hanged
between Two Columns or Marble Pillars which are at the Entrance of the Palace,
over against the Loggietta. Louis Garon affirms the Theft was valued at Two
Millions of Gold. They say, that the Well in the Court of this Palace cannot be
Poisoned, because Two Vnicorn's Horns were cast into it. See To. II. Let. XXXVI.
Stamati, who broke through the Wall; they recovered every thing, but the Thief
was sentenced to be hanged; and, they say, he begged the Favor of the Judges,
that he might have a Golden Halter, which Civility they granted him. Against
the Wall, over the first Door of the Treasury, are two Figures in Mosaic,
which, as they tell you, represent St. Dominick, and St. Francis, and which,
they add, were made a long time before either of them was born, according to
the Prophecy of the Abbot Joachim.

The Palace of St. Mark joins to the Church: It is a great Building, after the
Gothic manner, yet it is very Magnificent: It has been burned four or five
times; and the various Reparations of it have spoiled the Uniformity of the
Structure. The side which is on the Canal, is built of a kind of hard Stone,
brought from Istria, and the Architecture of it is highly esteemed: Were the
rest of the Building suitable, it would be a most excellent Piece. The Duke is
lodged in this Palace; and here it is that the Council of State and all the
Magistracy do meet. The Apartments are large, lofty, and well wainscotted, but
dark in comparison of the Light now adays required in Buildings. The Hall
where the Body of the Nobles assemble, which, as you know, composes the Grand
Council, in which the Sovereignty of the State resides, is extraordinary large,
and adorned with Pictures; among which are the Portraitures of the Dukes; the
History of the Conquest of Constantinople, which was taken in the Year 1192,
and lost about Threescore Years after; the Picture of Frederick and Alexander
is there also, of the largest size, and they have not forgot the Circumstance
of the Foot on the Neck. What I observed on this Picture, gives me opportunity
to add something to what I have already told you on the same Subject. I think
we ought not to take it in a rigorous and strictly literal Sense, what is
commonly said; That the Pope set his His Clothes of Gold being laid down at the
Feet of Alexander, he begged Pardon, and the Pope putting his Right Foot on his
Neck, said the Words of the Psalm, Super Aspidem and Basiliscum ambulabis, and
conculcabis Leonem and Draconem: At which Provocation the Emperor answered,
Non tibi, sed Petro. And the Pope treading harder, said, Et mihi, and Petro.
Theodor. Valle Lit. di Pip. chapter 10. The same Story is unanimously related by a
Thousand other Authors.
Foot on the Emperor's Neck. This Action would become less odious, and easier
to be believed, when it shall be compared to what is represented in this
ancient Picture. The Pope therein appears to put his Foot lightly on the
Shoulder of the Emperor, without showing any Motion of Passion: And though the
History of the Popes mentions a great Number of 'em as outrageous in their
Pride, Brutishness, and Rage; and though this Alexander, Proud as he was, and of
a revengeful Spirit, might then be guilty of any thing; nevertheless an act of
Violence on such an Occasion, amongst Strangers, in a Public Place, and in the
sight of all the People, would have been, if well weighed, contrary to the
Policy, as well as the Gravity of God's Vicar; whereas, it was not only a noble
Briskness, but also the Duty of him who supplies the Place of the Master of the
Universe, and whose Government extends it self over all the Kings of the World,
on such an Occasion to maintain the Dignity of his Character. It is true, that
the Submission and Repentance of the Vassal, ought to have been received with a
Spirit of Meekness; but it was just that he should not be acquitted for a
single Reverence. It was requisite, as I have said, that the Lieutenant of
Jesus Christ, should maintain the Interest of his Master, and that, at least,
he should make his Power be known at the same time that he granted his Pardon.
And if it be objected, that all this Discourse is founded only on the Fancy of
a Painter, who has represented this Story as he thought fit; I will answer
first, that this is a mere precarious assertion. Painters do not always give
themselves a latitude, nor do they ordinarily do it to the prejudice of an
important circumstance. And I must tell you in the second place, that it is
more reasonable to believe this Picture, than to form chimerical Notions to
contradict it.

Some will perhaps allege, that the Shoulder is not the Neck, but It hink it
not worth the while to reply to so frivolous an Objection. I hope you will
pardon this little digression, to which I have been insensibly engaged, by
reason of the discourse we had on this Subject.

I have yet two things to relate to you, of the Palace of St. Mark, which,
amongst others, seem very remarkable. The Rebellion of Bajamonte, Bajamonte
Tiepele, in the Year 1210.
the Story of which you know, was the occasion of setting up a little Arsenal
in the Palace, to which there is a Passage from the Hall of the Grand Council,
by a Gallery of Communication; to the end, that if there should be a Plot of
the People against the Nobility, and they should enterprise any thing against
them whilst they are sitting, they might readily find Arms to defend
themselves. It is also, as I may tell you by the by, to provide for their
Security, that they have built the little Judgment Seat called the Loggietta,
which is at the foot of the Tower of St. Mark, in sight of the Palace, and of
the Chamber of the Grand Council. There are always some of the Procurators of
St. Mark there, upon the Watch, whilst the Grand Council is assembled, and at
the same time are doing other business. This Arsenal is furnished with a
competent number of Fusees and Muskets, which lie always ready charged, and a
great many other good Arms. There is a Machine which serves to light five
hundred Matches at a time. Besides these, they keep there a quantity of curious
ancient Arms, amongst which they preserve with great care, the Sword of the
Valiant Scanderbeg. I observed also there the Bust of Strangled at Padua with
his four Children, by order of the Senate of Venice, in the Year 1405.
Francis Carrara, the last Lord of Padua, so famous for his Cruelties. They
show there a little Trunk or Toilette, in which are six little Guns, which were
so ordered with Springs adjusted in such a manner, that upon the opening of the
Trunk, the Guns fired, and killed the Lady, to whom Carrara had sent it for a
Present. They show also with this, some little Pocket Cross-Bows, and Arrows of
Steel, with which he made Sport to kill those he met, without their perceiving
the Stroke, or him that gave it. There are also Locks, and sundry kinds of
Bolts, with which that beastly Monster locked up his Whores. I must not forget
the two little Statues of Adam and Eve, which Albert Durer made in Prison, with
the point of a Penknife only, and for which he obtained his Liberty.

The other particulars which I shall yet observe of the Palace of St. Mark, are
the Antic Mouths under the inner Portico; and in several places of the
Galleries there are several Heads jutting out, The Discoverers are sometimes
rewarded. They make themselves known by a bit of Paper torn from the Billet and
put into the Box.
into the Throats of which any Body may cast a Letter or Note, as into a Trunk,
to give what Advice he thinks fit to the Inquisitors of the State. They have
the Keys of these Boxes, and make use of the Notices they find, according to
their Judgment and Equity. This is what they call the Secret Accusation.

The Library is in the Procuraties overagainst the Palace, and on the other
side of the Broglio; there are several Greek Manuscripts in it, which were
given by the Cardinal Bessarion, who you know was a Grecian. I could not learn
that there was any thing rare in this Library, only another Manuscript, De
consideratione Dei, which they attribute to St. Augustine. I cannot tell what
reasons induce them to believe it, but it is very certain, that the Title of
this Treatise is not in the Index of Possidius. A Friend of mine, who has
traveled into Spain, told me, that there is in the Escurial, a
Manuscript-Treatise of Baptism, which also passes for St. Augustine's, and
which is different from that which we have of this ancient: Doctor against the
Donatists. They say in that Country, that Charles the Fifth refused fifty
thousand Pistols for it. I believe that poor Prince would have gladly taken
them, when at his latter End he was forced to sell his Jewels. But to return to
the Library; though it be none of the most numerous, rarest, and best conditioned
Libraries in the World; yet, to make amends, it is adorned with Pictures, by
Titian, and some other famous Masters, which are infinitely esteemed. There are
also many Greek Statues of admirable Beauty, particularly the abovementioned
Ganymede, carried away by Jupiter, transformed into an Eagle; a Venus; an
Apollo; and two Gladiators. They give out, that there are as many fine Pictures
at Venice, as at Rome, and we have already seen good store of them: But this is
a subject I pretend not to enter upon: I will only tell you, that the three
most celebrated Pieces that are to be seen in the Churches, or in public
Places, are the Wedding of Cana, by Paul Veronese, in the Refectory of St.
George Major. The Presentation of the Virgin by Titian, in the School of
Charity. And the This St. Peter was a Dominican, and Inquisitor-general in
Lombardy. He was knocked on the Head with his Companions by some Sectaries whom
he Persecuted. This happened near to Balassina, in the way from Como to Milan.
St. Peter Martyr in St. John and St. Paul's, by the same Titian. Venice is
perhaps the only City of Europe, where young Painters may best Study Nature it
self. There are two Academies, where there are always naked Persons of both
Sexes to be viewed, and which are often on the Stage together, in what posture
they please to put them. Every body may come in there, and you cannot believe
with what boldness these little Creatures will endure to be gazed on by all the
World.

I shall answer in a few words your Question concerning the Flux and Reflux, by
confirming, without doubt, what you have learned elsewhere. The Sea flows six
hours, and ebbs as much: It is later every day by three quarters of an hour, or
thereabouts, as upon the Coasts of the Sea you are acquainted with; and the
Tide rises ordinarily at Venice four foot, or four foot and an half. But it is
sometimes more, and sometimes less, as in all other places; and it agrees with
the Moon, after the usual manner: I shall take care to impart to you the
Observations I made all along the Gulf from Ravenna to Loretto.

The Shore is extremely pleasant beyond those long and narrow Isles, which make
as it were Banks on the East side, and which form a kind of Semicircle from
North to South, round about Venice. This is properly called the main Sea: There
you find Shellfish, and the Walk is very divertising when the Weather is Calm.
They get store of Oysters there, but they want the excellent savor of ours.
They are looked upon as hurtful, and Strangers abstain from eating so many as
in other places.

You have reason to say, that Policy and Liberty are two Words, which are in
high esteem at Venice. But it must be allowed, that it is not the Venetians
only who magnify their own Policy. All the World, in my Opinion, does
acknowledge, that they endeavored to refine this Study, and have gained the
point. This is an Opinion which I neither can nor will contest; I shall only
offer two Observations touching this Subject: The first is, that when we speak
generally of the Policy of Venice, we run immediately to a consideration which
fills our Minds with Prejudices. Before we proceed to take a nearer and more
exact view of this boasted Policy, we judge of it by a deceitful appearance of
a false and ill-grounded Experience. The Republic of Venice, say they, has
maintained it self for these twelve or thirteen hundred Years. What a wonderful
thing is this, add they, and what greater proof can be desired of the
Excellency of its Government? I say, that by resting here, without further
scrutiny, they draw a false Consequence from an ill-grounded Principle. To
reason justly, after this manner of speaking, the Republic of Venice must
really have always maintained it self under one and the same Government: One
might then admire the wise and happy Conduct of its Counsels, which, by the
various results of their Prudence, had preserved their State for so long a
succession of Ages. But the business will not go that way. To what purpose is
it to dissemble, what is obvious to the sight and knowledge of all the World?
The truth is, that the Government of Venice has often changed its
Constitution, without affirming what some maintain, that this Republic has
rendered Homage to the Kings of Italy. It is in vain to deny, that the Dukes
were for a long time absolute Sovereigns; whether by Right or Usurpation, it
matters not. The Republic of Venice was no more a Republic, when their Dukes
commanded there with an Arbitrary Power, than the Commonwealth of Rome was a
Commonwealth, under the first Caesar's, or during the Triumvirate. And
therefore we must carefully observe the differerence between these two
Propositions: The Republic of Venice maintained it self for twelve hundred
Years; or, Venice was a State, or the Head of a State for twelve hundred Years.
The first of these Propositions, in a strict sense, is really false; for the
Reasons I alleged. The second is true; but nothing can be concluded from it.
One might as well say, that Rome has been the Head of a State, for above two
thousand four hundred Years, but could not from thence conclude, that the State
of Rome had maintained it self during all that time; for to change its face and
constitution, is not to maintain it self.

My second Remark upon this Policy, which makes so much noise, is, that the
Signiory of Venice being confined within so narrow limits, in comparison of the
great States of the World, and all the ambition of this Republic; I speak
principally as it stands at present, being only to live quietly and peaceably
with all the World; I see no necessity it has of such great activity of
Spirit, or high efforts of Wit, to maintain it self in quiet. When the
Republic of Rome aspired to the Empire of the Universe, when it endeavored to
fill the World with its Colonies, and had already made so many Kings its
Tributaries, and was to find out the Secret, to make it self both feared and
loved by the Provinces it had newly subdued; then it was that Policy was
necessarily required. But there is no such occasion for it at Venice. If the
little Republic of St. Marin should make Rhodomontades of its Policy on the
Broglio, do you not think it would justly be laughed at? And, without
derogating from the Glory and Power that Venice has several times acquired; it
is certainly true, that Venice is no more to be compared to old Rome, than St.
Marin can come in competition with Venice.

I might add, for a third Remark, that the wonderful Policy of Venice has not
hindered the many declensions into which that Republic has fallen.

The Commonwealth's-men talk of nothing but their Liberty; yet these poor
People are Slaves to their Masters, as all other People are, under what
Government soever they live: And, in the mean time, they stuff their Heads,
with I know not what pretended notions of Liberty, as if every one of them were
a little Prince. But it must be confessed, that the Inhabitants of Venice, have
more reason than any to boast of theirs. I will tell you in two words, what
that Liberty is: You must never in the least meddle with the Affairs of State:
You must commit no enormous Crimes punishable by Justice, which may render you,
by their notoriety subject to be taken notice of; and for the rest, you may do
what you please, without troubling your Head with what People talk of you. This
is the sum of the Venetian Liberty. I might tell you many things on this
Subject, very particular and scarcely to be believed: But these reflections
having already carried me too far, we will deferr the further consideration of
'em to another opportunity.

To answer your Questions about the toleration of Religions, I can tell you,
that the Greeks, the Armenians, and the Jews, are allowed the public Exercise
of their Religions; all other Sects are suffered or connived at, but they order
their Meetings after so secret and prudent a manner, that the Senate has no
reason to complain of the Abuses or Indiscretion of any Person.

Moreover, though the Worshipping of Images and Relics, and many other
Superstitions reign at Venice, it is only amongst the common People, to whom
they are willing to grant these amusements. The eminent Wits care neither for
this, nor any thing else. Formerly the Venetians were as simple as the rest of
the Popish World. The Excommunications of the Pope scared them, and sometimes
did them a great deal of Mischief. That of Clement V. for example, made a
terrible pother among 'em, and spoiled all their Trade: But now they trouble
not themselves about 'em, and the Liberties of the Venetian Church are at
present as great as those of the Gallican. They take notice of the Pope as a
Prince, but do not much regard him as Pope. When the Jesuits, who are the most
potent support of that which they call the Holy See, would have submitted
themselves to the order of Suspension, which all the Clergy of Venice had from
Pope Paul the Fifth, they were drawn out as Enemies and Disturbers of the
State. And though for some Reasons at the instant solicitations of the Court of
Rome, they were afterward recalled; it was on condition that they should not
raise Seditions as they formerly had done. And even though they continued still
to entertain such designs, the Republic knows how to order them: but
considering the Precautions that are used, the toleration of the Jesuits at
Venice can produce no ill Consequences: For, as I am told, they suffer none
there but such as are born subjects to the State; and they assure me, that the
Superior must be a Native of the City. In a word, it is certain that Messieurs
of Venice suffer themselves to be Governed neither by the Priests nor the
Monks. Those Fathers are permitted to wear Masks during the Carnival, to treat
their Concubines, sing on the Stages, and do what they please, but they dare
not thrust their Noses into the Affairs of State. The Senate is wise enough to
be sensible of the disorders which happen when they are permitted to meddle
with the Government: Nor do they consult them when any thing comes under
deliberation.

I have taken particular care to examine the Creed of the Greeks which are
here, touching the Articles of which you write. But to speak freely, though I
find them professed Enemies of the Roman Religion, and that they declaim
furiously against the Usurpations of the Bishop of Rome, when they speak with
freedom: I perceive by their Discourse, that whether by Contagion, or by some
other reason they differ very much in many points from the other Greek
Churches, which are at present under the Dominion of the Turk; at least if we
may believe the relations of those Countries. So that the Opinions of these
ought not to make us conclude any thing concerning the belief of the Greeks in
general. To deal plainly with you, they declare that they believe
Transubstantiation, which is not enough to determine the Question, which has
made so much noise, and at the bottom makes nothing against those who will not
admit that Doctrine. They make use of common Bread, they mingle Water with the
Wine, and communicate under both kinds. There are two Altars in their Church,
one which they call the Altar of Preparation, and the other of Consecration. On
the first they cut the Bread with a Knife, like the Steel head of a Spear.
There also they mingle the Water with the Wine, and the Priest takes it with a
Sponge out of the Vessel in which it was first mixed, and afterward squeezes
it out into the Chalice. They embrace one another before they receive the
Sacrament: And the Communicants receive the Bread steeped in the Wine, the
Priest putting it with a Spoon into their Mouths: All this we saw. The
Archbishop who officiated, had a Mitre fashioned like an Imperial Crown, and
all his other Ornaments were magnificent; and they were changed from time to
time, according to the several parts of the Service.

There are amongst them an infinite number of Ceremonies and Mysteries. When
the Bishop blesses the People, he holds in his Right Hand a Candlestick of
three branches, with the Tapers lighted, which is as an Emblem of the Persons
of the Trinity. The Candlestick which he holds in his Lefthand, has two
Branches, to denote the two Natures of Jesus Christ. I will not engage further
into the confused number of these mysterious Representations. Their Churches
are divided into four Parts; the Altars are in the place which they call Holy,
at one end of the Church. There are none but he who officiates, and those who
serve him who commonly enter there. The second place is appointed for the other
parts of the Service: The Men are in the third place, which is separated only
from the second by little Balisters, and the Women are behind a Lettice, at the
other end of the Church, or in the Galleries. All the Service is performed in
vulgar Greek, which is their natural Language, and understood by the People.
They highly condemn the use of unknown Languages in the Church: They worship
standing, bowing the Head, and putting their Hands on their Breast. Those who
are married, may come to Ecclesiastial Preferments without quitting their
Wives: But those that are received before Marriage, are not afterward suffered
to marry. They say decency permits not a Person to marry above thrice; so that
they forbid fourth Marriages. They deny Purgatory, and you know by what
Principles: They pray for the Dead. There are very few here who believe a
Temporary Hell from which the Elect are delivered; but they pray for the Souls
which they say are in a separate State, expecting the last Judgment. The use of
Confession is much practiced amongst them, but not after the Roman manner. The
Article of the proceeding of the Holy Ghost, they put in the rank of those
which are more curious than edifying; insomuch that it is now passed over with
as much silence as formerly it made noise. They keep certain Relics as
precious and sacred Memorials, but render no Worship to them. I remember I have
read in Thevet, That the Greeks of Athens solemnly excommunicate the Pope on
Good Friday. And the Monk Surras reports, That at Jerusalem they pray to God
every day in a certain part of the Public Service, that he would keep them
still under the Dominion of the Turk, rather than suffer them to fall under
that of Rome.

I have used all my endeavors to obtain some particular Information,
concerning the Creed and Worship of the Armenians, that I might know it from
the first hand; but I have not hitherto had an opportunity to get acquaintance
with any of them, nor have I yet been present at their Public Worship, because
they are at present at Work in the repair of their Church, and so cannot yet
assemble there. One of my Friends, among other things, assured me of these four
or five Articles. That they Communicate under both kinds: That they give the
Sacrament to little Children: That they believe the sequestration of Souls as
the Greeks do: That they give a Bill of Divorce: That they believe there will
be no difference of Sexes after the Resurrection. And after all, there are so
many particular Opinions among all these People, that it is not easy to tell
positively what they believe.

There are yet many particulars in my Journal, with which I might entertain you
at present; but I had rather join them to those other Observations which I
shall make hereafter, that I may have occasion to add also such new
Instructions as I hope to receive.

I was just now with the Abbot Lith, whom I mentioned before; and it comes into
my Mind to inform you, before I finish my Letter, of a thing which he assured
me of, and I should have been sorry to have forgotten, though it has no
relation to Venice. We were discoursing of the few numerous Families which are
taken notice of here, in comparison to other places; and he told me, on this
occasion, that one of his Kindred had twenty four Sons by one Wife, who were
all married; and that all the twenty four with their several Wives, had been
seen in a Company together: Though there is nothing in this but what is very
possible, yet is it a thing extremely rare.

I hope I shall quickly receive one of your Letters: As for me, I will not fail
to write to you before I depart from hence.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
At Venice, Jan. 20. 1688.
LETTER XVII.
SIR,
THere are some Observations which I cannot forbear adding to what I have
already sent you, concerning the City of Venice: For Example, the Bridge of the
Rialto is a Piece so famous, that I must not forget to say something of it.
Venice is divided by a great Canal, which is disposed in form of an S, and
about the middle of this great Canal, is the Bridge I am now to speak of. When
they praise here the Structure of this Work, they breathe forth nothing but
Admirations, and can find out no Terms but what are too weak for expressing
their Thoughts; but all this is purely the effect of Prejudice. This The Bridge
of Rialto
Vol. 2. P. 182.

depiction of the Bridge of Rialto Bridge has but one Arch, and all the
Miracle consists in the Greatness of this Arch. I took care to measure it, that
I might give you a certain Account of it. The Compass of the Arch makes exactly
the third part of a Circle, and there are Ninety Foot from one End, or one
Extremity of the Arch to the other, on the level of the Canal: from which we
may gather, that the Arch is near Twenty four Foot high. No Person will deny,
as I conceive, that a great Building of any kind soever, deserves more
consideration than an indifferent one; but in my Opinion, it must also be
confessed, that when they are both of the same nature, and there is not a very
remarkable difference in their Greatness, there is nothing more
incomprehensible in the one, than in the other. This here ought not to stand in
Comparison with those The Bridge of Civenchu in Japan is Three hundred and
sixty Fathom long, and Six and a half broad. It is all built of a black Stone,
which is hard, and polishes like Marble; it is supported by Three hundred
Piles. Every Stone of the Arches is Eighteen Foot in length, and Four in
breadth; and there is a Range of Lions of extraordi^ary bigness, on each side.
The Bridge of Tinsem is not so long, but is more curious, as consisting but of
one only Stone. Dutch Embassy to the Emp. of Japan. Part I.
great Works, of which the bare undertaking, is, in some measure surprising: It
is an Arch of a Bridge, which is somewhat bigger than those that are usually
made; and this is all the Miracle. I might also put you in mind of a Fault in
the Structure of this Bridge, according to that Maxim in Architecture, That to
give the greater strength to an Arch, it is necessary that its Compass make an
entire Semicircle, whereas this makes but a Third part of a Circle, as I have
already told you. But to speak freely, I cannot find any solidity in the
Reasoning of those who established this Principle. And I conceive clearly, that
when an Arch makes any part of a Circle, let the Portion be never so little, if
the Semicircle do not wholly appear, yet it must be supposed, and really is,
in the Piles or other Foundations which resist the Weight or Bearing of the
Arch; and so comes to the same thing. To be fully convinced of what I say, one
need but consider, that if an Arch which would describe an entire Semicircle,
were walled up, and filled to such a height, that only the Sixth Part of its
Circumference should appear; or if you will, a Sixth part of a Circle, this top
of the Arch would loose nothing of the force it had before. The Bridge of the
Rialto is very solidly built, with great pieces of a kind of white Marble;
there are two Ranges of Shops which divide it into Three Streets, the great one
in the midst, and the little ones between the Rails and the back-sides of the
Shops. Generally the other Bridges have no Buttresses; they are single Arches.
You go up to them by Steps, which are almost all of a certain white Stone, hard
and slippery; which partly gave occasion for the Proverb that advises to beware
of the Four P's of Venice, Pietra Bianca, Putana, Prete, Pantalone; the white
Stones, Whores, Priests, and Pantaloons.

The best Houses of Venice are upon the great Canal; and there are some which
appear very Above all the Palaces of Pisani, Morosini, Lorodano, Rosini,
Vandramino, Grimani.
magnificent: These are great Bulks, which would have no Beauty, were it not
for the Mask which I told you of in my Letter from Vicenza; I mean that
Frontispiece which commonly consists of Two or Three Orders of Architecture,
and which covers the Building on that side which is most in view; and the rest
is ill ordered, and no way pleasing to the Eye, I mean the rest of their
outsides.

The Lagunes may cause you to judge, that the Air of Venice is unwholesome; but
they assure us of the contrary. However they cannot say the same of the Water,
which is almost all very bad. Of more than One hundred and fifty Wells which
are here, there are but Two or Three good for any thing; and the best Water is
the Rainwater which some private Persons reserve in Cisterns. The common Wines
are also very unpleasant; that which they call (dolce) sweet, is of a palled,
disgustful taste; and the (Garbo) or sour, on the contrary is extremely sharp.
After they have drawn off the pure Liquor, they mix Water with the Husks, that
they may squeeze some sharpness from the Grapes, which give it some piquant
briskness, but makes it very harsh; otherwise this mixture palls the Wine very
much, and weakens it, which never had much Strength in it self. They have also
a very ill way of making their Bread; Let it be as fresh as you will, the Paste
is so hard, that you must break it as they do Biscuit, with a Hammer. In other
things you are well enough treated.

Strangers have so little Commerce with the Natives of this Country, that it is
difficult to learn their Customs, and Manners of Housekeeping: Wherefore I can
say very little concerning these things. I read the other day in a Preface of
Henry Stephens, that in his time, they had an ill Opinion in France, of a Woman
who went Bare-Neck'd; whereas in Italy, and particularly at Venice, every old
Hag exposed her withered and swagging Breasts to view. But things are much
There are none but professed Whores who show their Necks bare.
changed since his time. At present the Women of Quality are shut up so close,
that you can scarcely see their Face; not even in the Churches, which are the
only places where they appear in Public. When they go abroad, they are shut up
in their Gondola's, and accompanied with Two or Three old Women, who never
leave them. The ordinary Women cover themselves with a great Scarf, which opens
only a little before their Eyes; and they go abroad but rarely, because the Men
make Provision, and take care of all Business without Doors.

They send the Girls to the Convent in their tenderest Infancy; and when grown
up, they conclude their Marriages without their Knowledge; nay often without
letting them see their future Husbands. That you may not be surprised at this,
you are to know that they make not Marriages here on the same Accounts they do
in other places. They never trouble themselves with Love, Affection, or Esteem.
If any of those things happen, it is good luck; but they mind nothing but
Kindred and Riches, not regarding the Person. The use of Concubines is so
generally received, that the greatest part of the Wives live in good
Correspondence with their Rivals; and that way the Men remedy the personal
Faults of the Women which they marry. There is also another sort of keeping
Concubines, very much used by those of tender Consciences; a thing in truth
very rare at Venice. It is a kind of clandestine Marriage, the Ceremony whereof
is not performed a long time after the Consummation; and commonly some Days, or
some Hours perhaps, only before the death of one of the Parties. The Men find
this Method convenient, because it keeps the Women in perpetual awe, and
constant complaisance, being in daily fear of being turned off. I know a rich
Merchant who has lived thus for above Twenty Years with his Female Companion;
when he is in a good Humor, he will promise to marry her before he dies, and
make their Children his Heirs. But the most usual practice is, to live on the
Common, at so long kept, so much paid, until the first desire of change,
without fixing on any certain Person either for Wife or Concubine. Those who
have not the Means singly to keep a Whore, join with Two or Three Friends; and
this Plurality, which would in other places be insupportable, does here make
the Knot of Friendship firmer between Companions of equal Fortunes.
Libertinism, in respect of Women, is turned to so common and general a Custom,
that, to speak truly, it takes away all sense and remembrance of the Sin. As
one of their finest Strokes of Policy here, is to bring up all Persons in
Effeminacy, and especially the young Nobility: The Mothers are the first who
find out Courtesans for their Sons, that they may be sure to hinder them from
falling into Contagious Pits; and when they have agreed with the Father and
Mother for some young poor Maiden; all her Kindred come, and in cold Blood,
wish her Joy, as if it were for a Marriage lawfully contracted. You would be
surprised to see a Mother deliver up her Daughter, for a certain Sum of Money,
Monthly or Yearly paid; and swear solemly by God, and her own Soul, that she
cannot afford it for less. We must not say that all Mothers will do the same,
but certainly it is a thing commonly practiced. I was informed by a good
Catholic, that the Confessors will not trouble themselves with little Stories
of this Work, they will not hear such Trifles, but ask presently, quatite altra
cosa, something else. Besides, there are none but some Fools of Foreign
Courtesans, who by a kind of nice Scruple which they bring from their own
Country, have accustomed themselves from time to time to hear a Mass. It is
true, this costs them but little, because those they employ have reciprocally
need of their Assistance; they are not unkind to each other; and it is not
difficult so to order Affairs, that they may have no occasion to be out of
Pocket. There are whole Streets of Ladies of Pleasure, who entertain all
Comers; and whereas the Habits of other Persons are black and melancholy, these
are clothed in red and yellow, like Tulips; with their Breasts open, their
Faces painted foot deep, and always a Nosegay above their Ears: you may see
them by Dozens at the Gates or Windows; and the Passers by seldom 'scape them
without a torn Sleeves.

The Carnival always begins the second Holiday in Christmas; that is to say,
from thence they are permitted to wear Masks, and to open the Play Houses and
Gaming-Houses: Then they are not satisfied with the ordinary Libertinism, they
improve all their Pleasures, and plunge into them up to the Neck. All the City
is disguised; Vice and Virtue were never so well counterfeited, and absolutely
change both Names and Customs. The place of St. Mark is filled with a Thousand
sorts of Jack-Puddings. Strangers and Courtesans come in Shoals from all parts
of Europe: There is every where a general Motion and Confusion. You would
swear, that all the World were turned Fools in an Instant. It is true, that the
fury of these Bacchanals comes not presently to the height; there is some
moderation in the beginning. But when they begin to be sensible of the dreaded
Approach of the fatal Wednesday, which imposes an universal Silence, then it is
that they celebrate their great Feasts, and all without revel on Shrove-Tuesday
Masquerade. Since it is true, that every thing must be attributed to the Policy
of Venice, you must suppose there are particulr Reasons for the permitting this
Licentiousness of the Carnival; and perhaps we need not search for any great
Mystery. I shall intimate Two things which come into my Head on this Occasion:
The common People always love Sports and other Divertisements. As abominable as
that Monster Nero was, he was lamented by the Mobb, because of his Shows. I
imagine then, that the Nobility, who otherwise are not well beloved, are very
glad to find some cunning ways to please and amuse the People. There is yet
another thing which seems to me of some moment. I am credibly informed, that at
the last Carnival, there was an account of Seven Sovereign Princes, and Thirty
thousand other Foreigners. Consider how much Money all this Multitude must have
brought to Venice.

I must, according to your desire, give you my Sentiment of the Opera's and
Comedies acted here; though in the mean time, I must confess my averseness to
meddle with this particular; because I fear I shall in your Opinion be esteemed
too singular in mine. You seem to me to be possessed with great Prejudices in
favor of these famous Shows; and I fancy you expect something which may
exceed the Idea you have already seen of them. I entreat you then, to set aside
all your Prejudices, and to believe I will do as much; that I may be able to
give you an impartial Account of things as I found them. I will do it in few
Words, without criticizing on Opera's in general, in which I have always been
offended at some Passages which seem contrary both to Probability and Reason.
But since you will have it so, we will suppose that all the Representation of
an Opera, is the best contrived thing in the World; and I will keep my self
within the Bounds you have prescribed me, which is to speak to you with
relation to Opera's which you have seen at Paris: It is undeniable matter of
Fact, that the Ornaments of those here fall extremely short of these; the
Habits are poor, no Dances, and commonly no Machines, nor any Illuminations,
only some Candles here and there, which deserve not to be mentioned. It Is
dangerous not to magnify the Italian Music, or to say, at least, any thing
against it. Neither will I insist on this Subject, but confess, in the general,
that they have most excellent Airs, and that there are some good Voices
amongst them. Thus, for Example, the Vicentin Songster of the Hospitalettes is
a little charming Creature. But I cannot forbear telling you, that I find I
know not what Confusion and Unpleasantness in several Parts of the Songs in
their Opera's: They dwell many times longer on one Quavering, than in singing
Four whole Lines; and often they run so fast, that it is hard to tell whether
they Sing or Speak, or whether they do either or both together. Every one has
his Humor for me; I confess, amongst other things, the over-strain'd Shrill
agrees not with me, though there be much trouble to reach it, and it be
wonderfully grateful to the Ears of those People. The Concert is much less than
at Paris, but perhaps it is never the worse for that. There is also one thing
which charms them, which I believe would not please you; I mean those unhappy
Men who basely suffer themselves to be maimed, that they may have the finer
Voices. The silly Figure, which in my Opinion, such a mutilated Fellow makes,
who one time acts the Bully, and sometimes the Passionate Lover, with his
Effeminate Voice, and wrinkled Face, is not to be endured. It is impossible
that Fellows of this Make can have Spirits necessary for the Beauty of Action;
and indeed there is nothing more cold and feeble than the manner after which
they act their Parts.

There are at present Seven several Opera's at Venice; and one cannot choose
but be there every Evening, if it were only but to find Company: But since you
would have me speak ingenuously, I I must tell you, that we impatiently expect
the end of the Piece, before we have heard a quarter of it. You must know there
is a Buffoon in every Opera: You may imagine what a Figure this Actor makes
with his Fooleries in the most Serious, and even sometimes most Tragical part
of the Play. I will say little of their Comedies; all the World knows they are
but ridiculous Fustain, and wretched Buffooneries, scurvily performed.
Nevertheless, let them be never so silly, there is always some Grimace, with
some Posture or Trick of Harlequin, that makes the Spectators laugh; the most
luscious Bawdy is pronounced in the most expressive terms, and the little
Damsels of those Societies never mince the matter. When they are just ready to
begin, they commonly open the Doors for the Messieurs, the Watermen, who make a
considerable Body at Venice, and are vrey necessary Persons. Their Office on
this Occasion is to clap their Hands, and bawl out like Madmen, to give from
time to time Applause to the Actors. I cannot either express, or make you
conceive what Terms they use when they congratulate the Women; who receive also
other Applauses, by Sonnets made for them, and printed, which you shall see fly
from all sides of the Theater. Before I finish this Article, I must tell you,
that these Theaters belong to some Noblemen, who get considerably by them,
though they continue no longer than the Carnival lasts.

The places which they call Ridetti, are properly the Academies of Basset: They
are opened at the same time with the Theaters; there are none but Noblemen who
cut. They dismiss the Gamesters when they please; and they have so much good
Fortune joined to their Privileges, and good Play, that the Bank is almost
always Fortunate. There are Ten or Twelve Chambers on a Floor, with
Gaming-Tables in all of them. You can scarcely turn your self in them; but though
the Throng is so great, yet is there a profound Silence. To come into these
places you must necessarily be masked. The Courtesans come thither in Shoals;
and the other Ladies also, who under their Masks may enjoy all the public
Pleasures of the Carnival; but they still are followed by Spies, or by their
Husbands. Besides the Chambers of Play, there are some for Conversation, where
they also sell Liquors, Sweetmeats, and such like things. They put not off
their Masks; and by the Privilege of this Disguise, provided they be in good
Clothes, they may speak to the Ladies, even to those whom they may suppose of
the highest Quality: But you must injure no Body. Beside that the Mask is
Sacred, one will seem to take no notice, who hears all that is said to his
Wife, and who has a great many Bravo's at his Heels, for by that name they
call the Hectors and professed Murderers. Not that it is impossible to act a
piece of Gallantry In the business of the Ladies, it suffices at Venice to have
good Breeding, and Money, and sometimes to give a noble Treat. Anc. Des. of
Venice.
with the best guarded of them, when they are not over severe. As the
Difficulty augments the Desire, so this Desire invents the Means; and those who
understand the Practice of this Country, will do more with the Wink of an Eye,
than in other Countries we can perform by the longest Assiduities: But all
these things are out of my Sphere, therefore I must beg your leave to go on.

The greatest Masquerading is in the place of St. Mark; where the Crowd is
sometimes so great, that one cannot turn himself: You may put your self in what
Equipage you please, but to do it well, you must be able to maintain the
Personage you represent. Thus, for example, when the Harlequins meet, they jeer
one another, and act a thousand Fooleries. The Doctors dispute. The Bullies
vapor and swagger; and so of the rest. Those who are not willing to be Actors
on this great Theater, take the Habit of Noblemen. Some Polonian Dress, or the
like, which obliges them to nothing. Maskers are not permitted to wear Swords.
The Women are Habited as they please, and are to be seen there in most
magnificent Dresses. In the mean time the place is filled with Puppet-Plays,
Rope-Dancers, and all sorts of such People as you see at Bartholomew-Fair. But
those which in my Opinion are the pleasantest of all, are a kind of
Almanack-makers and Fortune Tellers, who have their little Stages environed
with Spheres, Globes, Astronomical Figures, Characters, and Conjuring-Books of
all sorts: these Pronouncers of Oracles have a long Pipe of Tin, with which
they speak in the Ear of the Curious, who stand below the Scaffold. They speak
more or less according to the Persons, and observe, without any notice taken,
the Countenance of the Consulter: when they perceive he Smiles, and by some
other gesture denotes his Approbation, they give over speaking a little, and
ring a little Bell with wondrous Gravity, to make known, that by virtue of
their Art, they have dived into a very secret Affair, or else that they have
hit extraordinarily right. When they swear only By God, it signifies nothing;
that is only a common Road of speaking, which no body regards. But when they
would be believed, they call to witness the Saint of Padua, or the most blessed
Lady of Loretto, and then all the standers by look seriously and devoutly, and
pull off their Hats, as when a Psalm is sung at the Gallows. It is pleasant to
see the Priests and the Monks of all Orders, who take up the Tubes three
quarters of the time.

I will say nothing of the Bull-baitings, Consult the Book of the S. Didiers.
Goose-catching, Combats at Fifty-Cuffs, Balls, Races of the Gondola's, or of
their Feasting on Shrove-Tuesday, on which day they cut off a Bull's-Head,
before all the Senate, in memory of a Victory in Friuli. These Stories are too
long to be related; neither am I particularly acquainted with them.

Moreover, you must know, that the Carnival is not the only time in which they
wear Masks at Venice. They use 'em in all Feasts of Pleasure; with the Mask
they run to the Audiences of Ambassadors: And on Ascension-day all are masked
from the Noblemen in the Bucentaur, to the Mobb in the City. All these are
admirable Times for the Gondoliers; not only because of the profit it brings
them by their Gondola's, but because it is a time of Intrigues; and a Gondolier
will undertake any thing. They know all the turns and by-ways; they pretend to
know the critical Minutes, and the private Stairs, and to hold correspondence
with the Waiting-Women: they furnish Ladders of Cords on occasion; they promise
in your Ear, to bring you to places esteemed otherwise inaccessible; they are
for all uses, and would perform the Trade of Bravo's, if necessity required.
Their great business is Pimping: They offer, without asking, to deposite a Sum
of Money, and lose it, if their Wares prove unsound.

You may have Gondola's, either for so much to such a place, or at so much an
hour, as you hire Coaches at London or Paris. But it is more convenient to keep
one for your own use, and this costs but little: You may have one of the best
for the value of five or six Shillings a day. They are from 30 to 32 feet long,
and broad from 4 to 5.
The Gondola's of Venice are very pretty things, they are light, and of a
pleasant Make; you are very conveniently seated in them, under cover, as in a
Coach, with Glasses on every side. The Left is the place of Honor; and the
reason which they give, is, because he who sits on the Right Hand, cannot see
the Gondolier before, and consequently cannot so easily command him. These
People are excellent Masters of their Trade; they turn, stop, and avoid, with
surprising readiness and facility: They stand up and manage the Oar in such a
manner, that they have their Faces toward the Place they go to; whereas the
Wherry-men on the Thames, and almost every where else, sit down and advance, by
going backwards. All the Gondola's are black, by an Act of the State; and the
little Chamber is also covered with black Cloth or Searge. But Strangers may
have others, if they will be at the Charge, which seldom happens; few staying
at Venice longer than the time of the Carnival. Lent is no sooner come, but all
that multitude begins to dislodge: Travelers, Puppet-Players, Bears, Monsters,
and Courtesans; I mean by the Courtesans, those whom Devotion brings from the
Neighboring Kingdoms; for they take care that none of their own Country prove
Deserters. Before A Common Gondola
Vol. 2. Page 198

depiction of a gondola I leave the Gondola's, I must tell you, that those of
the Ambassadors are extremely fine; they are greater than ordinary, and their
Ornaments are as sumptuous as those of the most magnificent Coaches. These
Ministers have commonly four or five; and it is in these Gondola's they make
their Public Entries.

The Arsenal of Venice passes for one of the fairest and greatest of Europe;
and all the World agree, that it is a most important Piece. But it is to be
considered, that it is the only one which the Venetians have in Italy; and all
the Ammunition they have is stored up here: And besides, half the Stories that
are told of it are not true. They show a Piece of Cannon which was made whilst
a Duke was at Dinner, it is in the 22 d. Lodge. Henry the Third was Treated in
the 23 d. and during the time of the Collation, they built one whole Galley,
and cast six Cannon. Payen.
Those who show it would have you believe, that there are two thousand five
hundred Pieces of Cannon, good Arms for one hundred thousand and Foot, complete
Equipages for twenty five thousand Horse: These are words soon spoke, but not
so easily made good. You must further observe, that the enclosure of this
Arsenal comprehends also the Magazines for the Vessels, Casting-Houses,
Rope-Yards, Forges, Lodges for the Galleasses, Galleys, and the Bucentaure,
besides the Havens and Docks for building and refitting of Vessels. This is
what makes the extraordinary greatness of the Arsenal, they have some Ships of
War, of which the greatest, which is called the Redeemer, has, as they say,
fourscoure Pieces of Cannon mounted, and fourteen Pateraro's; it is at present
at Sea. The Galleasses have three Batteries in the Prow, and two in the Poop;
the Crew ought to be one hundred ninety two Galley-Slaves, at six on a Bench.
The Bucentaure is a kind of very great Galleasse, very much adorned with
Sculptures and Gilding. The Duke, accompanied with the Senate, and a great
number of the Nobility, every Year, on Ascension-day, goes on Board this Vessel
with great Pomp As if they became the Husbands of Thetis, or the Wives of
Neptune, they marry the Sea every Year. Lewis Helian. Henry III. went from
Venice to Murano, in the Bucentaure. Mezeray.
to marry the Sea. That which they made use of when Alexander III. instituted
this Ceremony, in confirmation to the Venetians of that Empire, which they said
they already had over the Gulf, was called the Bucentaure; and since that they
have kept this name, and consecrated it to all the Vessels destined to that
Ceremony. The Captain of the Bucentaure makes Oath the day when he is received,
and engages his Life that he will bring her back safe and sound, in spite of
all Winds and Tempests whatsoever.

It was burned before in 1507.
The Arsenal was in great part burnt, in the Year, 1565. and they say, that the
cracks of the burning were heard at forty Miles distance. There are three
Noblemen who govern it; and the Galleasses are also commanded by Noblemen: All
considerable Employments passing through their hands.

I acknowledge it is not an easy matter to return particular Answers to the
several Questions you propose, concerning their Dignity, and the great Figure
they made in the World. You know that at Venice, A Bucentaure
Vol. 1. Page 200

depiction of a Bucentaure as well as elsewhere, that which they call Nobility,
according to the common Expression, consists but in Fancy and Opinion, as all
other things in the World do. It is true, that the Noble Venetians are born
with some Character of Sovereignty; because they compose the Grand Council,
which forms and animates all the other Councils; and on this score they deserve
some consideration. But after all, this reason is not satisfactory; for the
Nobles of Genoua may boast of the same Privilege; Things become of Worth, by
the value which is put upon them: And the Noble Venetians are distinguished,
because they knew how to distinguish themselves. They have found it worth their
wile, to push on the value and honor of their Nobility, beyond all estimation.
They have sometimes compared it with that of Princes of Royal Blood. They
pretend that it swallows up all the Titles that are assumed by others: Henry
III. of France received the Quality of a Noble Venetian. Alexander likewise
accepted the Title of Burgess of Corinth.
And even some Crowned Heads have ennobled it, by not disdaining to receive it.
See by what methods they arrived to this degree of Honor. Moreover, though
there are not two sorts of Noblemen at Venice, yet they bear not all equally
the Grande supercilium, which Juvenal speaks of; the Commands, the Offices,
great Wealth, and ancient Extraction, make new distinctions among them. And
though, as I told you, they value their Nobility at an infinite rate, yet
nevertheless you must not from hence conclude, that this Title may not be
communicated for a certain Sum, when the great necessities of the Republic
require it.

The Nobles never appear publicly at Venice, but in their Robes of black
Cloth; these they wear at all times, and they ought to be lined with greyish
Cloth in the Winter, and Ermins in the Summer. The Stole is of the same Cloth.
The Girdle is black also, four Fingers broad, and garnished with Plates and
Buckles of Silver; and their Bonnet is only a kind of Cap of black Worsted,
with a little Fringe of the same: But they wear great Perukes, and commonly
carry their Cap in their hands. The Procurators of St. Mark, the Savii grandi,
and the others, who are possessed of the highest Offices, have Habits to
distinguish them. Those amongst the Nobles, who have been Ambassadors may wear
a Stole of Cloth of Gold, and put Buckles of Gold to their Girdles: But
ordinarily they only adorn their black Stoles with a little Gold Galloom. The
Physicians, Advocates, Notaries, and all those which are called Cittadini, are
habited like the Nobles, without any distinction. It would not always be
pleasing to these to be known by their Habits; for such a distinction might
expose them to great dangers, should any disorder happen. They cause themselves
to be treated with Excellency, and the manner to salute them with great
submission is to kiss their Sleeve. The Elbow of this Sleeve is like a great
Sack, and into that, those who go to Market put their Provision. They are not
followed by any Servant, and no Person salutes them, but he who knows them,
except those who wear the same Robe. The People fear them and love them but
little; but I will not say that this proceeds from any ill Treatment they
receive from them. Friendship grows commonly from Converse; we may then suppose
it is because the Nobles make themselves familiar with no body. They dare not
make themselves popular, for fear lest they should be accused of Caballing
against the State. This same reason hinders them to visit each other; and
renders them inaccessible to Foreigners. You must confess, that this savage and
sower Policy is very troublesome. It is hard that a Government cannot be happy
without destroying the bands and communications of Society, which are the chief
Pleasures of this Life! I must further tell you, on this Article, that the
Nobility is not entailed to the Elder Sons only, as in England. They are not
permitted to Trade, nor to marry with Foreigners.

I am not surprised at the trouble those Titles of Marquesses and Counts give
you, which you hear spoken of in the Countries depending on Venice. I will
explain the matter to you. The Noble Venetians pretend to be equal to Princes,
but never qualify themselves by any particular Title: And the Marquesses and
Counts which you tell me of, are no Noblemen of Venice. These Gentlemen are of
three sorts; Some of them really enjoyed these Dignities, before they became
Subjects to this State, but they have lost the Privileges of their Titles, and
keep only the Name. They have always taken care at Venice to humble them, and
to take from them all means of thinking to shake off the Yoke, or return under
the Dominion of their ancient Masters; and one of the ways which they have
observed for this, has been to create Counts of a new Stamp, who make head
against the others, and so take away the distinction by a confusion of Titles,
which have the same sound. The other advantages which Venice draws from this
Invention, would make here too long a digression; only I have informed you what
are the Marquesses and Counts of the second Order. Those of the third are
founded on some Pretensions of their Ancestors. If they were not altogether
Counts, in the time of the ancient Government, they had at least a great desire
to be so. And when the face of Affairs was changed, they made themselves
Counts, I know not how, without any endeavors used to hinder them, because
they got no real advantage by it.

I find that you are misinformed in some particulars relating to the Duke. You
must conceive, that the Duke, considered as Duke, is but a mere Figure of a
Prince, an animated Statue, and a Chimera of Greatness. It puts me in mind of
those Two Persons which at the Coronation The Doge of Venise
Vanitas Vanitatum

depiction of the Doge of Venice of your Kings, bear the Name of the Dukes of
Aquitain and Normandy. It is so far out of the Duke's Power to Pardon any
Criminal, as you have been persuaded, that you may assure your self his new
Quality diminishes his Credit very much, if it does not absolutely reduce it
to nothing. It is true, that the Duke is encompassed with many Marks of Honor,
but none of those properly relate to him: They belong only to his
Representative Quality, like the Privilege which Ambassadors have to be covered
when they speak to Kings to whom they are sent. The Duke is the Representative
of the Republic, whose pleasure it is to reflect its Glory upon him, as it
were to ease it self of the trouble of it; yet appropriating to it self all the
Honors he receives. And those Honors which the Quality of Duke brings with
it, fall not upon him who is invested with it, but to be immediately transferred
to the State, which seems to have only set him up for this Purpose. This is so
true, that to hinder the Duke from abusing those Honors which are only to pass
from him, as through a Canal, they give him Counselors, who have a constant
Eye over him, and can visit his Closet every Hour. He cannot take a Journey to
the Continent, without permission of the State; and when he goes, though with
leave, all his Honors vanish there, and he has no more Authority than another
Nobleman. From the first Moment of his Election, all his Kindred who were in
Offices are immediately turned out: And when he dies, the State wears no
Mourning. See, Sir, what Idea you ought to have of the Duke of Venice. I will
farther add, that if, maugre all the Care they take to curb his Power, he
should endeavor to break out beyond his Sphere, such Orders are taken as would
presently restrain him. The Duke is as much subject to the Laws, as the meanest
Person; and the Inquisition of the State is a Scourge, which seems to threaten
him more particularly than others. I suppose you are acquainted with the
unlimited Power of this Tribunal, which you must reckon to be as rigorous and
severe, as the other Inquisition at Venice is patient, and free from rigor and
severity.

To return to the Duke: You must know, that notwithstanding all his Slavery,
and his little Authority, his Quality of Duke allows him two or Three small
Privileges. He has two Voices in the great Council: He bestows the little
Offices of the Palace; and he has the Nomination of the Primicerio, and Canons
of St. Mark. As for his other Honors, they are given to the Republic, in the
Person of the Duke. In this sense he is called Prince, and treated with
Serenity, which is a term of Honor above that of Highness, according to their
Interpretation. There are some Marks of Royalty in his Apparel. When he marches
in State, they carry a Torch before him, This Chair has two Arms, and no Back.
a Folding Chair, the Cushion which belongs to it, and Eight Silver Trumpets,
some Hoboys, and Eight Standards, on which are the Arms of Venice: There are
Two White, Two Red, Two Violet, and Two Blue, which, it is said, signify Peace,
War, Truce, and the League. They made us take notice, that the Two Red ones
marched first; because the Republic was at present in War. When it was at
Peace, the White ones have the precedence; and so the rest in order. They carry
also near the Duke, a kind of Cloth of State, made like an Umbrello. The Duke
is ordinarily accompanied with the Nuncio, and the other Ambassadors which are
at Venice, except the Ambassador of Spain, who never assists at any public
Ceremony, since this State gave the Precedence to the Ambassador of France.
These Ministers have their Hats on their Heads. As for the Duke, he never pulls
off his Coronet but on one of these two Occasions; either at the moment when
the Host is elevated, or when he receives a Visit from a Prince of Royal Blood,
or from a Cardinal. I must tell you, that the Cardinal sits in the same great
Chair with the Duke; this Chair having a Spring and Machine made on purpose to
let it out so as Two may sit together: The Duke gives the Right Hand to the
Cardinal. But to return to the Procession: The Principal Senators march after,
and the Sword of State is carried before them, to denote that the Authority
resides in the Council, not in the Duke. I am not well enough informed of the
particulars of the rest of this Procession, to give you an exact Description of
it; but it is not very material. I must farther acquaint you, that the Money
bears the Name of the Duke: That the Letters of the Confederate Princes and
States are addressed to him: That he gives Audience to Ambassadors, and that
Declarations are published in his Name. These last Particulars need some
Explanation: The Name of the Duke is, in truth, on the Money, but his Arms are
not; and his Image is there only Historically. This Money is properly the Coin
of Venice. On the Reverse is the Duke on his Knees, at the Foot of the
Primicerio, who sits and represents St. Mark. The Duke takes an Oath of
Fidelity to him, having one Hand on the Mass Book, and with the other receiving
the Banner of the State. By this you may perceive that this is no Honor to the
Duke; and that his Image has no more Marks of Authority than that of the
Primicerio. As for the Letters of Princes, the truth is, they are directed and
presented to the Duke; but it belongs not to him to open them, without first
communicating them to the Council; that is to say, the Council receives them by
his Hands. And it is much the same thing with respect to Ambassadors; For the
Affair is consulted before, and the Answer is so well put, Word for Word, into
the Mouth of the Duke, that if any of them happen to forget, or perhaps to make
a willing Mistake, they are astonished to find themselves corrected on the
Spot. As to what concerns Acts of State, he is but tht Herald; the Senate
enacts, and the Duke publishes.

It must then be confessed, that if in any case Gold and Purple are but glaring
Pageants; and if the Grandeurs of the World are but Chimera's and stately
Yokes; the Duke of Venice is an Eminent Instance of these Truths.

I have, in obedience to your Desire, insisted the longer on this Particular:
Do not think that I have revealed to you any Mystery, in the things which I
have said of the Duke: Though they are not conformable to the Idea's you had
conceived, nor, perhaps, to those of the greatest part of the World; they are
all generally known here. See what Mr. Amelot has written of it.
I will not meddle with the Article of Government, that would be too tedious
and difficult a Subject for me to undertake; who neither have Time, nor
Intelligence sufficient to be fully instructed in so many things.

I will briefly answer your Questions concerning the Patriarch. He is elected
by the Senate, and confirmed by the Pope; and his Quality gives him, as you may
believe, a very eminent Rank; but his Authority is extremely bounded. The
Curates are chosen by the People; The Curates are elected by the People of each
Parish. The Day of Election, the Competitors present themselves, exalting their
own Merits, and defaming their Antagonists. G. Burnet. If the Election be not
made in Three Days, the State nominates.
the Patriarch can nominate only to Two or Three Benefices: And the Clergy in
general, to speak properly, acknowledges no Superiority but that of the State.
This Prelate is clothed in Violet Color; he is always chosen out of the
Nobility: I am assured that he only styles himself at the beginning of his
Orders; N -- divina miseratione Venetiarum Patriarcha. N -- by the Mercy of
God, Patriarch of Venice: And adds not, as others do, and sanctae sedis
Apostolicae gratia; And by the Grace of the holy Apostolic See. The Venetians
desire nothing more, than wholly to free themselves from the Authority of that
which they call the Holy See. As to the rest, there needs no more Knowledge,
nor Personal Merit, to be Patriarch, than to be Pope: these are things not
required in this Case; it is Interest and Intrigue by which this Dignity is
obtained, as it is the Habit which makes the Monk. It is also incredible how
much Ignorance and Disorder reigns in this Country, among all those who call
themselves Clergymen. The Cardinal Barberigo, Bishop of Padua, who is a
venerable Old Man, and a wise Person, sometimes take the Pains, as they say at
Padua, to preach himself against these Abuses. He introduces as much as he can,
the Custom to make the Priests understand a little Latin. And his Zeal has
extended so far as to double the Grates of some Nunneries in his Diocese, in
hopes they will follow his Example at Venice, where the Parlours, or
Speaking-places are of too easy Communication: But all this produces but
little; they do not willingly give Ear to such Spoilers of good Company.

I must in the mean time tell you, that I remember a very pleasant Secret which
was found out here, in behalf of some Priests that are Musicians. You know it
is a Law without Exception, that a Priest must be a Complete Man; nevertheless,
it has been observed, that this Perfection of the Body is sometimes a cause of
the Unpleasantness of the Voice; and, on the other side, the Sweetness of the
Voice is of great use to insinuate things the better into the Minds of People,
both in the Church, and at the Opera: They have found a Mean to accommodate the
Affair, and have concluded that a Priest fitted for Music, may exercise the
Priesthood as well as another; provided he has his Necessities, or, if you
will, his Superfluities in his Pocket. I will not be bound to produce the Act
for this Regulation, which certainly was only given viva voce. But let that be
as it will, I can positively assure you from my own certain Knowledge, that
what I have told you is Truth.

Father Mark Aviano, Mr. Scheibler a Lutheran Minister, in the County of
Juliers, has writ a Book concerning the Miracles of this Capuchin. And you may
see some Stories of him in the Treatise of J. Zwingerus Prof. in Divin. at
Basil, de festo Corporis Christi.
whom I mentioned in my Letter from Ausbourg, is at present here: I went twice
or thrice to hear him preach, but could not get admittance. One must go three
or four Hours before, if one intends to get a Place. The Devotion of the People
is so great for this pretended Miracle-monger, that at first they tore his
Cassock, and pulled off the Hairs of his Beard, and had certainly pulled him to
Pieces, that they might get some Relics of him, if his Friends had not
bethought themselves to make a Hole in the Church-Wall; by which he enters in a
Chair through a Galery, which leads directly thither from a neighboring House,
and so preserved him from these foolish Devotees.

It is just I should add something of the famous Friar Paolo: All that I could
learn concerning him among the Friars Servites, was, that they hold his Memory
in great veneration. But to tell the Truth, those who spoke of him to me, knew
but little of him, as I might judge by their Discourse; they telling me, that
they knew not where his Body was, but God would discover it in due time. They
have preserved the Dagger, which this great Man called the Roman Style, on so
just and true an Occasion. This Dagger is to be seen at the Feet of the
Crucifix which is upon the Altar of St. Magdalen.

I should never make an end, should I undertake to speak of the Churches, the
Cabinets of Curiosities, See diverse other Remarks upon Venice, at the beginning
of the Second Tome. Among the Cabinets, you may particularly see those of the
Palace of Rosini; of the Procurator Justiniani; of the Family of Capello; of M.
G. Barbaro; of Messeur Morosini Grimani, Justiniani Garzoni, and Zani; of the
Baron de Tassis; of Dr. Bon; and of Francisco Rota. Spon.
and an hundred other things; but I shall content my self with what I have said
at present. We are resolved to lie to morrow Night at Padua, where we have
secured a Coach to carry us to Loretto. The Frost, which has continued for two
whole Months, has so dried the Ways, that we hope to jogg on easily. I expect
at Rome to hear News from you: Pray let me not be disappointed of my Hope;
believe that I am sincerely,

SIR, Yours, etc.
At Venice, Feb. 14. 1688.
LETTER XVIII.
SIR,
THere is not any thing worth Observation between Padua and Rovigo, only that
the Country is Plain and Fruitful, watered with many Rivers, and well
cultivated. It is every where full of Meadows, Groves, Vineyards, and
welltill'd Spots of Ground. The Venetians have there some Houses of Pleasure;
but the common Habitations, when you draw near to Rovigo, are but Huts made of
Reeds, which a Fire would reduce to Ashes in less than an Hour; yet are they as
merry there as in a Palace. We saw often come out of these Cabbins, whole
Troops of Maskers, dancing Gambols to the Tunes of the Violin and Bagpipe.
These Country Crews perhaps are to be preferred before the Rabble of Venice.

ROVIGO.
Rovigo is a poor little City, begirt with a Wall just falling to ruin: Yet it
is the Residence of the Bishop of Adria. That ancient and famous City, which
gave name to the Gulf, being now but a pitiful halfdrowned Village.

FERRARA.
Ferrara is very great, and pretty handsome, though ill peopled. Some say it was
called Ferrara, as if fere auren, half Golden, because of its rich Trade: But
at present it is so poor and desolate, that it cannot be viewed without
Compassion. In the Year 1570, in Forty Hours time Ferrara suffered One hundred
and sixty ^olts of an Ea^thquake, and was almost all destroyed. Schrad.
In a place where Four great Streets meet, we made a short stop, without
perceiving any one Person in any of them. It is generally acknowledged, that
this City has more Houses than Inhabitants. In the mean time, the Ferrarese is
one of the best Parts of Lombardy; it is a plain and fat Country, which wants
nothing but Tillage. You know this Desolation is an effect of the Severity of
the Government. Servierent tibi, Roma, prius Domini Dominorum.
Servorum Servi tibi sunt, jam Roma Tyranni.

All that falls into the Hands of the Popes, presently becomes Miserable.
Commonly these old Princes are constrained to do a great deal of Work in a
little time, to enrich their Families; they care little what becomes of the
Estate after their Death. When Ferrara was united to their Demesnes, under the
Pontificat of Clement VIII. that Pope built a very strong Du Val writes, that
this Citadel cost Two Millions of Crowns of Gold.
Citadel, which is still in good Order. As for the other Fortifications, they
are wholly slighted. The ancient University of Ferrara is at present reduced to
a paltry College of the Jesuits.

Near the Cathedral, there are some Statues on Horseback, of Brass, of which
one, they say, represents a Duke of Bozzolo. Over Against the Palace of the
Nobility, you see also the Statue of Duke Hercules II. on Horseback; on the
Pedestal of which, there is a Decree engraved, which grants a Refuge or
Sanctuary to Criminals for Twenty Paces round about.

They carried us to the Ducal Palace, to the Marquis de Villa's House, to the
Cathedral, and many other Churches and Convents. But though all these places have
their own Beauties, I believe the Description of 'em would not be very pleasant
to you; yet will I not forget to send you the Epitaph of poor Ariosto: They
have lately repaired his Tomb in the Church of the Benedictines.

Notus and Hesperiis jacet hic Ariostus and Indis,
Cui musa aeternum nomen Hetrusca dedit.
Seu Satyram in vitio exacuit, seu Comica lufit,
Seu cecinit grandi bella Ducesque tuba.
Ter summus vates cui summi in vertice Pindi,
Tergamina licuit cingere fronde comas.
They carried us also to the Opera, where we saw nothing extraordinary. The
principal Actress was a little pretty Songstress, of Twelve or Thirteen Years
old; who that day was to make the first Essay on the Theater; and according to
common Report, was that Evening to enter into the Service of one of the
principal Gentlemen of the City. All the chief Boxes were filled with Jesuits,
and such like People.

RAVENNA.
It is fifty Miles from Ferrara to Ravenna; the Way continues good for the first
Day's Journey, but afterward becomes low, and full of Water, between the
several Branches of the Adige and the Po. The Towns and Villages which we saw
on the Road, deserve not to be mentioned. Ravenna is but half as big as
Ferrara, yet it appears at a great distance, being situated in a flat and open
Champion Country. You are not ignorant that the ancient Geographers represent
its Situation like to that of Venice, upon Piles in the midst of Waters. And
all the World knows that it was formerly Classem Myseni alterum Ravennae ad
tutelam superi and inferi maris. Suet. in Octav. c. 49.
the Principal Haven which the Romans had on the Adriatic Gulf: But this Place
has suffered great Alterations since those times; for not only the Lagunes are
dried up, but the Sea is also retired Three Miles from it; and these Plains,
formerly drowned and barren, are at present the most fruitful Fields in Italy.
It is not to be doubted but that the present Ravenna is in the place of the
ancient Ravenna; as it appears evidently from several ancient Monuments. There
are in the Walls toward the Seaside, many great Rings of Iron, which formerly
served to fasten the Vessels: And you may yet see the remainders of the Beacon.
This City has been so often ruined by the Wars, that there are but few Marks
left of its first Antiquity: It is at present poorly built, and very thinly
peopled, as well as Ferrara; nevertheless I found it in many things worthy of
Observation. Its Situation alone, in respect of the wonderful Change which has
happened in its Territory, I think deserves a Man's traveling this way.

Without the Walls, near the ancient Haven, there is a Mausolaeum, which
Amulasuntha erected for her Father Theodoric, King of the Ostrogoths; who, as
you know, made his Residence at Ravenna. They have turned this Building into a
little Church, which they call the Rotonda. The most remarkable thing about it
is, the hewn Stone with which this Church is covered: I measured this Stone,
and found it to be thirty eight Foot in Diameter, and fifteen in Thickness. The
Tomb of Theodoric was on the top, in the midst of this little Dome, between the
Statues of the Twelve Apostles, which were placed on the sides round about.
These Statues were broken during the last Wars of Louis XII. and the Tomb which
is of Porphyrie, was also over-thrown: They have since set it in the Wall of an
Ancient Palace in the City, where we saw it.

The Cathedral is an old Church, the Body of which is supported by fifty six
Pillars of Marble, of the Archipelago, which make a double Range on each side.
The Choir is vaulted with fine Mosaic; and they keep there in great
Veneration, one of the Stones with which St. Stephen was stoned. But the
greatest Curiosity in this Church is the great Door: It is made of Planks of
Vines, some whereof are twelve Foot high, and fourteen or fifteen Inches broad.
The Ground hereabouts is so agreeable to the Vines, in that very place which
the Sea formerly covered, that it makes them grow prodigiously big. I have
read, as I remember, in the Voyage of Olearius, that he found near the Caspian
Sea, the Bodies of Vines of the thickness of a Man.

They show in the Church of the Theatines, a little Window over the great
Altar, in the midst of which is the Figure of a White Pigeon, which is placed
there for a Memorial; that after the death of St. Apollinarius, first Bishop of
Ravenna, the Priests being assembled to choose his Successor, the Holy Ghost,
as they say, came in at that Window in the Shape of a Dove, and perched upon
him who was to be Elected: They add, that the same thing happened Eleven times
after, successively; but since that time, they have done their Business without
supernatural assistance. Platina after Eusebius, tells the like Story of the
Election of Pope Fabian.

There are very fine Pieces of Marble and Porphyrie in the Churches of St.
Vital, St. Apollinarius, St. Romualdus, and St. Andrew; all these were brought
from Greece, and probably during the time of the Exarchie.

The Tomb of Galla Placidia and Daughter to Theodosius the Great. There is
another Tomb of this Princess in the Church of St. Aquilin at Milan. She it was
who founded this Church. G. Tor.
, Sister to the Emperors Arcadius and Honorius, is in the Church of St.
Celsus, between those of Valentinian and Honorius. They assured us, that this
is a very fine Monument; but we could not see it, he who had the Key being
absent. We saw the Tomb of the Poet Dante Dalighieri, a Florentin, a Man of
Quality and great Merit, died in Exile at Ravenna, in the Year 1321, and the 56
Year of his Age.
Dantes, in the Cloister of the Conventual Franciscans. I transcribed the
Epitaph, principally for the Curiosity of the Rhimes, which is as follows: Jura
Monarchiae, superos, Phlegetonta, lacusque
Lustranda cecini, voluerunt fata quousque
Sed quia pars cessit melioribus hospita castris,
Factoremque suum petiit felicior astris:
Hic claudor Dantes, patriis extorris ab oris,
Quem genuit parvi Florentia matter amoris.


Another: Exigua Tumuli Danthes hic sort jacebas,
Squallenti nulli cognite pene situ.
At nunc marmoreo subnixus conderis arcu,
Omnibus and cultu splendidiore nites.
Nimirum Bembus musis incensus Hetruscis,
Hoc tibi, quem imprimis hae coluere, dedit.


There is in the grand Place a very fair Brazen Statue of Pope Alexander VII.
And you may see at the other end of the same Place, Two Columns, upon which
were the ancient Patron, and the Arms of Venice, whilst Ravenna belonged to
that State; it being their Custom to erect the like Columns in all the Cities
of their Demesnes: But the Pope has put on the same Pillars, the Statues of
St. Victor, and that of Apollinarius, which are the Patrons of Ravenna. They
made us observe near this, under a Portico, the Gates of Brass, and some other
Spoils which those of Ravenna took from Pavia; and which they preserve for a
Memorial of the happy Success they had there.

A good Hour from Ravenna we entered into a Forest of Pines, which is Four Miles
long, and whose Pine-Apples, they told us, are distributed all over Italy. The
Sea is not far off, on the Left Hand; and on the Right are those Marshes, which
reach out of sight toward the Appennine. After we had passed the River Savio
in a Ferry-Boat, we traversed the little City of Cervia, CERVIA.
which is in the midst of a miserable Boggy Country, where they make nothing
but Salt. We stopped to Dine at Cesenate, Cesenate.
on the Seaside; and Three Miles from thence we found our selves on the Banks
of the Rubicon, which they also call Others say this is the Frumicino, about
Two hundred Paces from the Pisatello.
Pisatello. I confess I was not a little surprised when I saw our Coach pass
that famous Brook without any stop; though I had learned also from Lucan, that it
was no great River.

Font cadit modico, parvisque impellitur undis. An Hour after we took our way
by the Seaside. The Sand is firm and even, without any Rocks or Shells: We
pursued this Way till within a Mile of Rimini; where we were obliged to go
within Land, that we might pass the River formerly called Ariminum, of the same
Name with the City whose Walls it washes: But at present it bears the name of
Marechia.

Rimini is a little poor City; RIMINI.
yet the Country is rich, and well tilled. Sigismond Pandolphus Malatesta
formerly fortified it; but its Wall is at present in great disorder. You know
the Malatesti's were formerly Lords of many places in this Province. The Bridge
of Marble, on which there are two very entire Inscriptions, by which it appears
that it was built by Augustus and Tiberius, and the Triumphal-Arch erected by
Augustus, are the two principal Monuments of this City. There are also to be
seen the Ruiues of an Amphitheatre, behind the Gardens of the Capuchins. And
Five hundred Paces farther, without the City, there is a Tower of Brick, which
was the Pharos of the ancient Haven; but the Sea is fallen back half a Mile
from this Place, and the Pharos is at present encompassed with Gardens. P.
Malatesta finished the Destruction of the Harbor, which was once accounted one
of the best in Italy, to build the Church of St. Francis, with the Pieces of
Marble which he took from thence. This Church, were it finished, might pass for
a fine Structure. They keep there a Nostre-dame, which serves for nothing but
to bring Rain, or stop it, when there is either too much or too little. She
never is asked any thing but on one of these two Occasions.

The Library of the Count de Gambalonga is very numerous, but there are no
Rarities in it, if we may give credit to him who showed it to us. They made us
observe in the midst of the Market, a kind of Marble Pedestal, on which these
words are engraved: Caius Caesar Dict. Rubicone superato civili bell. Commilit.
suos hic in foro Ar. adlocutus. The Statue of Paul V. in Brass, is in another
Place; and near to that a Fountain of Marble of excellent Workmanship.

Departing from Rimini, we marched on the Downs for Fifteen Miles, between the
Sea and the Fields. I observed as we passed through the Village Catholica,
Catholica.
over the Portal of the great Church, an Inscription, which says, That a
Council of Bishops, almost all Arrians, being assembled at Rimini, in the Year
359, the Orthodox performed their Devotions in this Village, which has ever
since born the Name of Catholica. You know the History of this Council, if it
may be properly so called. We perceived Ten or Twelve Miles from thence,
toward the Appennine, the City and Republic of Marin; on the top of a
Mountain, at the Foot of which are the Limits of that State. This little Swarm
of Bees has maintained it self very happily for many Ages; not being exposed
to the Envy or Jealousy of any of its Neighbors. It is about Six or Seven
Miles from Catholica to Pesaro: All this Country is strewed with fine Houses,
and is very pleasantly cultivated.

Pesaro is greater, better built, PESARO.
neater and pleasanter than Rimini: Its Situation is upon a small Ascent, which
gives it a purer Air, and better Light: Nothing can be more pleasant than the
little Hills which surround it: It is a delicate Mixture of Pastures,
Vineyards, and Orchards: The Olives are admirable; but the Figs in goodness and
esteem surpass all other Fruits: The Figs of Pesaro are famous over all Italy.
The best Meat costs not above three Bayoques the Pound, which is Eighteen
Ounces; that is to say, somewhat less than two Farthings. The Bread and the
Wine are proportionably cheaper; and so of the rest. The Sea and the Rivers
furnish it also with all sorts of excellent Fish; so that in all respects this
City is excellently provided with all things necessary for Life. It is
tolerably well fortified, though something after the old fashion; and the Houses
are generally handsome. We found no old Monuments in it. There is a very fair
Fountain in the great Place; and a Statue of Pope Urban VIII. under whose
Pontificat, this City, and all the Duchy of Urbin, were reunited to the
Ecclesiastical State.

At our departure from Pesaro, we coasted along the Shore for Seven Miles, as
far as Fano: FANO.
It continues, still as I represented it on the other side of Rimini, excepting
that the Sea brings thither great Heaps of Walnuts, Chestnuts, Rushes, Leaves,
and diverse other things which probably come from the Rivers, and are driven
back from time to time by the Wind. One of our Company found on the Strand one
of those little Fishes which they call in this Country Cavaletto; some call it
in France, Cheval Marin, or the Seahorse; and others the Little Dragon. I have
often seen it in the Cabinets of Curiosities; and I believe you also know it.
It becomes dry in a little time, by which means it is easily preserved,
without farther trouble. It is certain this little Creature has something of
the Head and Neck of a Horse. They attribute many Properties to it; and they
assured us, amongst other things, that it cures Madness from biting by a
Mad-Dog, being eaten roasted, and applied to the bitten place, skinned and
beaten with Honey and Vinegar.

Fano is a pretty little City: We found nothing remarkable in it but one
Triumphal-Arch; the Inscriptions of which are almost quite defaced. This Arch
has Three Gates, whereas that of Rimini is only a single Arch. They boast of
the Pignuts of Fano; and pretend that the Women there are the handsomest of all
the Country; but I fancy this pretended difference may be a little suspected.

A Mile from hence, we passed on a Wooden Bridge, about Five or Six hundred
Paces long, over the several Branches of the Pongio, which drowns all this
Extent, when the Snow on the Appennine begins to melt: And afterward we took
the Way on the Sea side, for Fifteen Miles, to Senegallia. Though this be an old
City, SENEGALLIA.
yet could we find no Marks of its Antiquity; it is enclosed with good Walls,
which are defended by some Bastions, but all very irregular.

By good fortune, and rather because of our weariness than any thing else, we
refused to go to see a Play, which was acted at the Governor's House. The next
Morning, which was the Day before Yesterday, they came to tell us, that a
little before the end of the Play, the Arch which supported the Theater, with
part of the Stage, and the first Seats, fell under the weight with which it was
over-loaded: That thirty Persons were killed on the spot, and a great many
others wounded; and all that little City was in a great disorder, and
unspeakable affliction on this occasion: There scarcely being any considerable
Family which had not its share of this misfortune.

Departing from Senegallia, we entered again on the Shore, and traveled
seventeen Miles, without finding any Houses but an old Castle, and some Taverns
about an hundred paces from the Sea. Near the little Village called the Turret,
we fell back into the Land-way for three Miles to Ancona, ANCONA.
where we now are. This City is seated on a double Hillock, at the point of the
Promontory. It is bigger than any one of the four or five Towns last mentioned,
but not much richer; though its Haven be very good, Traders of all Religions
may dwell at Ancona, provided they make no public Exercise of any, besides the
Religion of the Country. They whiten Wax very well at Ancona. Du Val.
and the Country about it very fruitful. It is a wonderful thing that the Trade
is quite ruined, in a place which was formerly so famous for it.

It Is true, that after the like example of Antwerp, we ought not to be
surprised at any accidents of this nature. The Streets of Ancona are narrow,
and consequently dark: There are neither fair Houses, fine Churches, nor
considerable Places in it; and its situation, up Hill and down Hill, renders it
very inconvenient. The Citadel, which is on the first ascent you come to,
commands both the City and the Haven. And on the other Hill which makes the
point of the Cape, is the Church of St. Cyriack, to which we ascended with a
great deal of trouble and little satisfaction. It is a low and dark Edifice, of
which the Front is covered indeed with fine Marble, but without any order or
ornament of Architecture. That which is principally esteemed in this Church by
the People of the Country, are the Bodies of the pretended Saints, and the
number of Relics. They boast they have St. Ursula, as well as those of
Cologne. As for us, what pleased us best, was the prospect which we had of the
Sea, of the City, and of a pleasant Country. At the entrance of the Mote there
is a Triumphal-Arch of very fine white Marble. This Arch was erected for
Trajan, by order of the Senate. The Inscription, which is still very entire,
let us know, that it was in acknowledgment of this, that that Prince repaired
the Harbor at his own charge. They told us, whilst we were considering this
Monument, that, I know not what Monks had oftentimes earnestly requested, that
they might employ the Materials for some use in their Convent: And that at last
they were fain to drive them away with Threats, to be rid of their Importunity.

The Exchange where the Merchants meet, resembles a Portico of a reasonable
bigness. There were at the four Corners of the Arch, four Statues, which
represented Faith, Hope, Charity, and Religion. But there happened an
Earthquake some Years since, which shook all these Statues, and threw down that
of Religion.

I cannot forbear giving you some account of the Habits, which, thanks to the
Holy Day, we saw here to day. The principal Burgesses usually wear a black
Cloak, lined with green; blue or fillamott Stockings, Shoes whited with Chalk,
and tied with colored Ribbon; the Doublets unbutton'd, adorned with Embroidery
of several Colors, and great Sleeves to their Shirts, which hang down to their
Fingers ends. The ordinary Citizens Wives and Daughters wear a kind of Coif on
their Heads, with a long Fringe which covers their Faces, and drives away the
Flies like Horse-trappings. The body of their Gown is red or yellow, fastened on
four sides with Laces, and all overlaid with colored Galoon: The Wastcoat
short, their Petticoats of the same size, and all of fifty Colors: The great
Madams are decked and trimmed up as much as they can after the French Mode: But
to say truth, their Apishness is more ridiculous than the others natural
Dressing. All this does neither good nor hurt; but there is another Custom
which, as we were informed, runs from Ferrara almost all over Italy, and is
very inconvenient, especially at this time of the Year. They know not what
Glass is, and their Chamber-Windows are made of Linen or Paper, always torn; so
that they are fain to invent Machines every Evening, to shelter themselves from
the Weather. This made us sometimes bewail the loss of our Straw in Germany,
where, if we wanted Beds, we had at least a good Stove, well heated and closed.
To complete our Misfortunes, they commonly brought us a Fricacy of three Eggs,
or as many Pilchards, for the Supper of five or six Persons. You must Fight for
your Victuals, and yet pay as much as for the best Cheer. The set Price was at
so much a Head, three Julio's for Dinner, and four for Supper, which comes to
about About fifty Sols, French Money. Polybius relates, that in his Time (about
the Year 550.) they had a good Meal in Italy for a Denier. Hospites, viatoribus
honest acceptis, and omnibus ad victum necessariis abunde subministratis non
amplius quam siliquem capiunt; haec oboli tertia pars est.
four Shillings a day.

I am informed the Post is just going, which makes me finish my Letter, that I
may not miss the opportunity of sending it to you. I will add only one word,
touching the flux and reflux of the Sea. You must know, that it is more or less
observable, according to the distance from the bottom, or extremity of the
Gulf. At Venice the Tide rises four foot and an half, or thereabouts, near to
Ravenna three, at Pesara two, and one almost at Ancona; so that at last it
decreaseth to nothing.

I hope we shall arrive at Loretto to morrow about Noon. You may assure your
self, I shall use all means necessary to give you an exact account of the Santa
Casa.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
At Ancona, Feb. 24. 1688.
LETTER XIX.
SIR,
I Believe there is not in Italy a better Country, and worse ways, than between
Ancona and Loretto; we got thither yesterday like poor Pilgrims, weary and
dirty, having been forced many times to alight to ease the Coach.

All the World has heard of our Lady of Loretto: But since discourses
concerning her are various, and the matter of it self very curious; I intend to
give you an abridgment of all that I saw or learned on this occasion.

The House which they here call, Sacratissimo Sacello Gloriosa Cella. Domus
aurea. Domus sapientiae. Vas insigne Devotionis. Sanctuarium Dei.
Propitiatorium Altissimi. Civitas refugii. Puteus aquarum viventium. Terror
Daemonum. Spes desperantium. Gloria Jerusalem. Tabernaculum foederis. Solium
gloriae Dei. Sacrarium Divinitatis, etc. Sacrosanta Casa, is, say they, the
same in which the Virgin Mary was born, where she was betrothed and married to
Joseph, where the Angel saluted her, and where the Son of God was Incarnate.
John Cartageno, in the Book, Entitled, Arcana di Maria.
E tanta e la dignita di questo luogho, cosi sublime la Maesta, ch'a a tutti i
sacri luoghi, che sono sotto il Cielo, e preferito, il sacello di Loretto. That
is, And so great is the Dignity of this place, so sublime is its Majesty, that
before all the Holy Places under Heaven, the Chapel of Loretto is to be
preferred. This House being at Nazareth, was transported by the Angels, as they
say, into Dalmatia, Terribile e questo luogho quali altro non e che casa di Dio
and porta del Paradiso. Jacobin, l. 1. c. 1.
and there placed on a little Mountain called Tersatto, the 10th. of May, in
the Year 1291. It had remained there but three Years and seven Months, when the
Angels took it away again, and brought it to the middle of a Forest, in the
Territory of Recanati, which is in the Marquisate of Ancona. The celestial
Melody awakened the Inhabitants of the Neighborhood, who run from every side,
and saw the Miracle, by the favor of a great Light, with which the little
House was surrounded. Nature her-self leaped for Joy, and the very Oaks of the
Forest, bowed themselves to pay Homage to it; they wanted only Tongues like
those of Dedona. After this House had been there Eight Months entire, it was
displeased with the Thieveries and Murders committed thereabouts continually;
so that it was carried the third time a Mile further to the same Hill, on which
it now stands: but it was no sooner come thither, than a Controversy arose
between two Brothers to whom the Land belonged, each being willing to have it
in his Lot. This was the cause, that four Months afterward the Angels lifted
it up the fourth time, and placed it some paces from thence, in the very midst
of the Road-way; from whence it has never stirred since. It is true, to
prevent the inconveniences to which this place, as well as the others, exposed
it, and perhaps also to prevent the misfortune of a new change: They built in
this very place a magnificent Church, in the midst whereof it remains free from
all manner of Insults or Injury. And for its better preservation, they have
since erected four Walls, which encompass it, and close it up as in a Box,
without touching it at all, for fear, lest the two Walls being united, they
should one day be confounded together. Some allege another reason of this
Separation; and say, That the Stones recoiled with violence, and wounded the
Workmen, when they would have joined it to this Holy Building; so that they
were constrained to leave some space between them. All the beauties of
Paintings, Sculpture, and Architecture, were displayed on that occasion; or at
least all the most curious Workmen in the beginning of the last Age, were
employed in this Work. It is of Corinthian Order, and of white Marble of
Carrara, with extraordinary fine Basso relievo's, in which all the History of
the Virgin is represented: There are also two Niches, the one above the other,
between the double Columns. In the ten Niches below, are the Statues of the ten
Prophets, and in the Niches above, the ten Sybils.

It is within this that the Santa Casa is enclosed, which consists of one only
Chamber, or rather one single Hall. It is forty four Palms long within,
eighteen broad, and thirteen high; a Palm and an half making just thirteen
Inches, English measure.

They would have those very People who live on the place, believe, that this
House is built of some unknown Stones, to make its Voyages seem more probable;
but this is an absurdity that can only be swallowed by such as are willing to
be deceived. I examined the thing twice very nearly, and at leisure. It Is true,
they have purposely made choice of Bricks of different shapes and unequal
bigness, yet I perceived very distinctly, that these Walls are made of Brick,
and true Brick; together with some flat and greyish or reddish Stones, which
are all common. The whole is built with Lime and Sand, as our ordinary Houses,
but the Pieces are ill joined, and ill ranged, which seems to evince, that this
work was done in haste.

I will here make a little digression, to acquaint you with a thought which
comes in my Head concerning it. It was under the Popedom of Boniface VIII. that
this pretended Miracle happened It is he who, they say, raised himself to the
Papal Dignity like a Fox, lived like a Lion, and died like a Dog.

It was he who invented, and first wore the Triple Crown. Intravit ut vulpes,
regnavit ut leo, mortuus ut canis.


. And if you make any reflection on the Life of that famous Fox, which all
Histories represent to us as the most Cunning, the most Ambitious, and most
Covetous of all the Men in the World, and add to these Considerations, that of
his Power and Authority, you will grant, without difficulty, that he was a Man
fit to undertake such a Cheat as this: After he had feigned Angels who frighted
the good Man Celestin, his Predecessor, and obliged him to return to his
Hermitage, after his Abdication of the Popedom: And it is not at all
improbable, that he made use of the same Angels for the Expedition of Loretto.
But let us return to the Santa Casa.

You may comprehend, by what I have said, that you cannot see the outside; and
consequently what I speak of must be within. The Mason's Work is almost all
open to view, but there are some fragments of Plaster covered with Painting,
which might make one guess, that all the Walls were covered with it. The Image
of the Virgin holding the little Jesus between her Arms, appear in five or six
places in the remainders of the Painting. This Holy Tabernacle is situated from
East to West, though this manner of building Churches is but little in fashion
in Italy: Toward the East is the little Chimney of the Chamber, and over it,
in a Nich, is the great Lady of Loretto. They say this Image of our The Lady of
Loretto.
Vol. 1. Page* ^^^

depiction of the Lady of Loretto Lady is of Cedar Wood; and they have been
informed by a thousand Revelations, that it was the Workmanship of St. Luke;
she is four foot, or thereabouts in height She has a great number of Robes for
change, and seven different Mourning Habits for the Holy Week. When ever they
dress or undress her, they do it with a great deal of Ceremony.
. The Ornaments with which she is decked, are of an inestimable value. Her
Triple Crown, which is all covered with precious Stones The King also gave a
Crown to the Infant.
, was the Present of Louis XIII. King of France. They told me this Distich was
Engraved thereon.

Tu Caput ante meum cinxisti, virgo, Corona,
Nunc Caput ecce teget nostra Corona tuum.
On each side of the Niche, there are Presses full of ancient Ornaments of the
Statue; and in the other little Window, which is made in the Wall on the South
side, they preserve some earthen Dishes, which served for the use of the Holy
Family. There are many of these Vessels which have been since covered with
Plates of Gold; but we could see but one of 'em, which is covered underneath
with Silver. They would make us believe, that this Porringer, which might have
been discovered by the bottom, is made of strange Earth, but it is
Potter's-Ware, the Enamel of which is not so carefully pared off, but that it
appears still in some parts. Over against our Lady, at the end which looks
Westward, is the Window at which they say the Angel entered. This Window seemed
to me about three foot in height, and a little less in breadth.

They could not tell me what was become of the old Roof, nor the little Bell,
which has been observed in the ancient Pictures which represent this House:
For the present Arch is of a later Fabric. As for Bells they have some, and
their proper use should be to appease Storms immediately with their sound; but
they never use them for fear of wearing them.

I must not forget two considerable things, which, they say, were transported
at the same time with the House: the Altar made by the hands of the Apostles
themselves, and the Stone on which St. Peter celebrated his first Mass. This is
covered with Silver, and has place among the Relics, under the Altar where
they usually officiate. The Pavement is of squares of white and red Marble.
This is not the old Floor, for, they say, the Angels left that at Nazareth,
with the Foundations of the House. To prove this History of the Translation,
they insist on this Argument, that, as they affirm, it appears, that it really
has no Foundation, but was fixed on the Earth, just as it fell from Heaven.

None are permitted to come in with offensive Arms, B. Bartoli. It is pemitted
to lick the Walls, but they assure you, that terrible things happened to those
who have been so bold, as to take away the least Particle.
You enter this sacred place at three doors, two of which are at the end, which
looks to the East, and give passage to cross from North to South: And through
this door the Pilgrims are let in. The other is also on the South side, but
toward the East, and leads to the place called the Sanctuary; that is to say,
the space made between the Altar and the end of our Lady's Chamber.

I will not undertake to represent to you the Riches which are in this place:
For that would be a thing too tedious and difficult. I will only tell you, that
it is an amazing sight to behold the infinite number of precious Stones, with
which the Mantle of the Statue is adorned; there is nothing all about but
Lamps, Statues, Busts, and other Figures of Gold and Silver: without mentioning
the Candlesticks of Silver and Vermillion, which are eight and twenty in
number, there are twelve of massy Gold, of seven and thirty pound weight each.
The last rich Offering is always left for some time in a place framed on
purpose, before the Eyes of our Lady: That which at present occupies that
honorable place, is an Angel of Gold, holding a Heart bigger than an Egg, all
covered over with Diamonds of great value. The English Jesuit who conducted
us, told us, it was a Present from the Queen of England. This Reverend Father
also told us a great piece of News, concerning which, you ought, in my Opinion,
to have given us some account. He assured us, that Princess was big with Child,
and added, that undoubtedly it was by Miracle; since they had calculated, that
the very moment in which the Present entered, was the happy Minute in which she
Conceived.

See the Verses which he made upon this Subject, and of which he would needs
give me a Copy. He introduces the Angel speaking to the Lady, and the Lady
answering.

(Ang.)
Salve, virgo potens: En supplex Angelus adsum,
Reginae Anglorum munera, vota, fero.
Perpetuos edit gemitus moestissima Princeps,
Sis pia, and afflictae quam getit affer opem
Casta maria petit sobolem; petit Anglia; summi
Pontificis To wit, in Great Britain.
titubans Relligioque petit.
Inculti miserere uteri: Sitientia tandem
Viscera, foecundo font rigare velis.
(Virg.)
Nuncie Caelestis, Reginae vota secundo:
Accipiet socii pignora chara tori.
Immo, Jacobus, dum tales fundo loquelas
Dat, petit amplexus; concipit illa. Vale.
(Ang.)
Sed Natum, O REGINA, marem Regina peroptat,
Nam spem jam Regni The Princesses of Orange and Denmark.
filia bina foret.
Dona, VIRGO, marem. (Virg.) I am condunt ilia natum.
Fulcrum erit Imperii Relligionis honos.
(Ang.)
Reginam exaudit REGINA MARIA mariam
Alleluja! O foelix, ter, quater, Alleluja!
Never were Verses repeated with a more luscious Tune, or pleasant Air. The
Jesuits Companion thought them so well pronounced, that he humbly begged a
Repition, though he knew them already by Heart: And this favor was presently
granted him. My smiling Countenance seemed also to applaud them, but my silence
did not please the Reverend Father. He suspected there was something which I
disliked, and entreated me so earnestly to tell him my Thoughts, that I could
not possibly refuse him. At first, I praised several Passages of them, as the
foecundo font, fruitful Spring, which the Angel begged, and the Dat, petit
amplexus, which appeared to me very significant. Yes, said he, the manner of
expressing the thing, is not less sweet and fine, than emphatical and
demonstrative; for it denotes a mutual fervency. I added, that since he
permitted me to speak freely, I could not forbear telling him, that the
beginning of the seventh Verse offended me as much as that of the twelfth
seemed excellent; that the Uterus (Womb) of which he spoke, needed no culture,
according to all outward Appearances; that such an Epithet was injurious to her
Royal Spouse; and, in a word, that I could by no means endure the Word Inculti,
Untilled, which besides did not well express his thought. At first he would
have defended himself, but he submitted at last; and it was concluded, that
instead of Inculti miserere uteri, it should henceforth be, O humilem spectes
uterum, or something to that purpose. I would have past over the Vale, but he
confessed, of his own accord, that he put it there only to fill a Gap. He
admired the Alleluja beyond measure, and imagined, he could never have made a
more happy conclusion. It is true, said I, Alleluja is an angelical Word, it is
an exclamation of Praise and Joy, which comes very seasonably where you have
placed it: But you must remember, added I, that the three first Syllables of
Alleluja are long, whereas you have made it a Dactyle, and this Hebrew Word is
written in Greek, (...): He excused himself for the Antepenultima, by citing
Amen reddidit; Alleluia dixit, which is a Phaeleucian Verse.
Prudentius, who had made it short, notwithstanding the Greek e, which
signified little, the Word being Hebrew, and confessed the Penultima was
naturally long. But he concluded, that the beauty of a thought might excuse the
neglect of such niceties of quantity; and he resolved at any rate to keep his
Alleluja. We had already altered our Discourse, when the young Brother desired
permission to criticize on the Natum of the fifteenth Verse. He said, the Son
was not yet born, and therefore ought not be called Natum: And that he could
not think it possible, the Name Natus or Filius should be given to an Embryo of
half a Minute, or at least to the informed matter of a Foetus. But the
Father-Poet laughed at him for this, and told him, that the Word of the most
Holy Lady was a sure Word; that Born or to be Born, signified the same thing on
this occasion; that it was properly a Question of the Gender, and that we may
speak of things that will infallibly happen, as of those that are already in
Being. The Friar had yet another Objection to make against Natum marem, but he
only muttered a little, saying, there never was Natus foemina, for he was
afraid of giving Offense: And thus ended our Conference.

There are a great number of Candlesticks, with Branches and other Luminaries,
all round the House without, that is, round the Walls which enclose it. But one
of the greatest Rarities we observed, was the Processions of those who surround
this House on their Knees, some compass it five times, others seven, and some
twelve, according to the Mystery they search for in the number. Represent to
your self forty or fifty Persons, Men, Women, and little Children, all creeping
on their Knees, as they turn from one side, and a like number meeting them, as
they go to the other; every one is furnished with Beads, and mumbles
Pater-nosters: in the mean time they all strive to creep next the Wall, both to
shorten their way, and to be nearest to the Holy Place; which makes them jostle
each other, and causes no small confusion. This is never done, but when there
is but a little Company there. The great resort of Pilgrims is at Easter, and
about the Festival of the Virgin's Nativity, which they solemnize in the Month
of September; at which times they are obliged to take other Measures. I cannot,
without reluctance, mention a thing, which may seem incredible, yet is affirmed
by them for a certain Truth; which is, That in the Years of the greatest
Concourse, they have several times counted two hundred thousand Pilgrims and
upwards, during these two Feasts.

One can scarcely imagine a pleasanter sight, than the Caravans of He and She
Pilgrims, when these Caravans come together, as bodies of Confraternities: Many
Societies of Bologna, for Example, join together to go on Pilgrimage in
Company. Each Society have their Saccola.
Frocks of ordinary Linen-Cloth, with a Cowl of the same Linen, made like a
Strainer for Hippocras, which quite covers their Heads, and leaves only three
Holes for their Eyes and Mouth. There are Fraternities of all Colors: They
forget not their Beads, Girdles, Pilgrims Staves, and the Arms of the Society,
which are painted, or embroidered, before and behind, on the Back and Breast of
every Brother. These Pilgrims thus equipped, ride upon Asses, which are reputed
to have some smack of Sanctity, by often going on Pilgrimage. They seldom fall;
and if they happen to do so, they say it is without danger to the Pilgrim. So
much for the Men. The Women's Habits are as rich as possibly they can procure:
And they fix to the Body of their Gowns, a little Pilgrim's Staff, of the
length of a Hand Some are of Gold, Silver, Ebony, Ivory, Artificial Flowers,
and many are enriched with Pearls, and Precious Stones, etc.
A Staff, which gives occasion for many pleasant Thoughts, and serves for
Diversion to all the Company on the Way. These Societies of Ladies ride in
Calashes, surrounded with whole Squadrons of Ass-Troopers. Is it not pretty to
see these Morrice-Dancers thus mounted and dressed, make an hundred Rounds, and
Antic Postures, accompanied with foolish Songs to divert the Lady Pilgrims?
Let not this Liberty of the Women surprise you. The Pretense of Devotion to our
most holy Lady, is a Reason sufficient to release them from their usual
Prisons: And besides, I doubt not but every one has a Brother, or some other
Spy near her.

I might tell you a great many things of the Church, but I fear you are cloyed
with such Stories: Only you must know, that all that is rich in the House is
but of small value, in comparison of what we saw in the Treasury-Chamber. This
Chamber is a spacious place: Ten great Presses, with folding-Doors, serve as
Wainscot to the Walls; the vaulted Roof is of a fine sort of Plaster, with
gilded Compartments, adorned with fine Pictures. The Silver-work is not thought
worthy of admittance into the Presses; it was allowed at the first, but at
present it is confusedly heaped up in private places, till they have occasion
to use it. These Presses are therefore filled only with pure Gold, remarkable
Jewels, or Vessels and Ornaments more precious than Gold Among these Jewels,
they set the highest esteem on a Pearl wrought after the fashion of a Gondola;
which they say was naturally marked with the Figure of our Lady. B. Bartoli.
: I will not attempt a Relation of the Particulars, for they exceed Imagination
it self. To comprehend how these vast Riches were thus accumulated, you need
only remember, that all the People, Princes and States, who acknowledge the
Supremacy of the Pope, have continually for these four hundred Years brought
them thither, and vied to outdo each other: You must also consider, that this
Treasure is but a small part of the Presents they have received. They have
built a Church, and a most magnificent Palace. They have settled Revenues, and
purchased Lands beyond all view; and it is not to be doubted but they have
Chests full of Money. This is not all; the Boxes furnish them with prodigious
Sums, and one of the Secrets they make use of, to stir up the Devotees to fill
them, I think very well deserves a Relation. They distribute a Printed Paper,
by which they endeavor to persuade the People, that the Holy House has no
more than twenty seven thousand Crowns in Revenue; The Crown is worth near Five
Shillings Six Pence English Money.
and by another Computation which they annex to the former, they show, that
they are obliged to disburse thirty eight thousand six hundred and thirty four
Crowns, to pay the Officers Salaries, and other Annual Expenses. See then above
eleven thousand Crowns, which according to this pretended Account, they fall
short every Year. This is a ready way to take Opportunity to make pathetick
Representations of their Poverty, and to move the Compassion of devout
Pilgrims, in favor of our good Lady, who, say they, loves nothing more than
the Virtue of Liberality.

As we left the Treasury, they carried us to the Arsenal, which is not
considerable: There they showed us some Arms taken from the Turks, and relate,
that these Barbarians having made a Descent to plunder the Treasury, Mahomet
II. and after him Selim his Nephew.
about fifty Years ago, our Lady struck them all blind just at the very
Entrance; at which time they seized on part of their Arms. From the Windows of
this Arsenal, you behold the part of the Sea, over which, as they say, the
House was brought: They add, that ever since, there is a certain White Way on
the Water; and our Jesuit made use of the highest Asseverations, to protest to
us, that he had often seen it. Yesterday when we came hither, the Rabble
flocked about us, and told us, That we must make haste to confess and
communicate; without which, those who should dare to enter into the Holy House,
would be shaken even to the Marrow in their Bones, and be in danger of sudden
death. There must be as well Impudence on one side, on such Occasions, as there
is a great deal of Prejudice and Stupidity on the other.

After we had seen some Apartments of the Palace, they led us into the Cellar,
where we found one hundred and forty great Tuns, full of good Wine. From thence
we went to the place where the Drugs were kept; where they showed us three
hundred and forty five Vessels of Earthen-Ware, which they said were painted by
Raphael, and are infinitely esteemed. On five of the largest, are St. Paul, and
the four Evangelists; and on the others, the History of the Saints, the
Metamorphoses of Ovid, and Plays of Children.

Loretto is a very little Place, though it be well fortified, and has the
Title of a City and Bishopric. There is in the great Place, an admirably
Beautiful Fountain of Marble, enriched with Statues of Brass. There is also one
to be seen of Sixtus V. in the same Place: The Inhabitants of Loretto erected
it for him, in acknowledgement of the Privileges they received from him. The
principal Trade of this little City, consists in Medals, Rosaries, sanctified
Beads, Images, Agnas Dei's, Measures of the Height of our Lady, and such like
Wares.

Chaplets of Beads were invented by Urban II.
We saw Chaplets whose Beads were like Goose-Eggs; these are for the great Days
of Devotion. You must know, moreover, that there is no Person there, who
affirms not himself to be descended from the Race of one who saw the arrival of
the Holy House. All of them have heard their Grandfathers relate, that their
Ancestors heard it from their Great-Great-Grandfathers; as those who live now
fail not to tell it to their Children, and their Childrens Children. After this
Traditition, can you still be incredulous?

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
At Loretto, Feb. 26. 1688.
LETTER XX.
SIR,
AS we passed through Recanati, RECANATI.
which is a little City on the top of a Hill, three Miles from Loretto, I
alighted for a while to see the great Church: I discovered nothing there worthy
of Observation, but the Tomb of poor Gregory XII. Pope of Rome; who, as you
know, was deposed from the Pontificate by the Council of Pisa; together with
Peter de Luna, who assumed the Name of Benedict XIII. and was Pope of Avignon.

Ten Miles from thence, in a most fruitful Country, on the Bank of the Potenza,
we past through the Ruins of the City formerly called Helvia Ricina, HELVIA
RICINA.
where there are yet to be seen great Fragments of an Amphitheatre, which was
built of Stone and Brick mingled together, like that of Rimini. On this side
the River, we were enclosed among Hills for two Miles, after which we arrived
at Macerata, MACERATA
where we lay. They told us this City was indifferently large, and very
pleasant; but it was late, and besides foul Weather, so that we walked not
abroad. Between Macerata and Tolentino, there is a fat, and well cultivated
Plain, though the Country be slenderly inhabited: They plant great Reeds, to
prop up the Vines, The Buffalo's were brought to Italy, An. 595. Ciacon.
and make use of Buffalo's to draw their Ploughs: These Animals are far
stronger than Oxen, and eat much less.

TOLENTINO.
Tolentino is seated on a Rising Ground; I could not learn there was any thing
remarkable there, but some Relics, which are things that we take little notice
of. From thence we came to the Town of Belfort, which I may tell you, by the
bye, is the first place built with Stone which we had seen in Italy. A good
Mile on this side, we came into the Province of Umbria, where we began to enter
into the Confines of the Appennine.

A Gentleman of the Neighborhood, who was going to Foligno, our way, accosted
us near to Macerata. I was glad of his Company, hoping to get information of
several things relating to the Country; we presently discoursed of our famous
Lady, of whom he related a hundred Stories. The Discourse being turned to
Religion, he told me, amongst other things, that there was great rejoicing in
Italy, that our King was become a Christian: when I desired him to explain his
meaning; I found he had so many strange Notions, as I thought it impossible for
any Person to conceive. The Extravagancies he accused us of, were no less than
those which the Pagans laid to the charge of the Primitive Christians. He would
sometimes look upon me with some satisfaction, when I said any thing which
pleased him: but he still suspected that I dissembled; and all my Rhetoric
could not persuade him we were christened.

You must know that this is the general Opinion of this Country. They know no
more of our Religion than they who live among the Tobinambouz. But those
Gentlemen of the Frock, who are best acquainted with News, think it meritorious
to scandalize us, and render us odious, by the Follies and Impieties they
impute to us.

Between Tolentino and Foligno, for near forty Miles, we were almost always
amongst the Rocks, which made the ways often difficult. The principal Villages
which we saw in our Passage, are Valcimara, Ponte di trava, Mutia, Dignano,
Colfiorito, and Casa Nuova. At our leaving the Mountains, near to a little
Village called Pala, we discovered from a height, the Plain of Foligno, which
from thence makes one of the finest Prospects in the World. Hic ver Assiduum.
Virg.
This great Bottom is encompassed with rich Hillocks, watered with many Rivers,
strewed with many pleasant Houses, and extraordinarily improved. We had
scarcely escaped from the Snows, the Rocks, and the cold and piercing Winds,
but on a sudden we found our selves fanned by the Air of a sweet Climate. The
Almond-Trees were already blossomed, which in a moment succeeded to the Frosts
of the Mountains: This, added to the Beauty of a fair and calm Day, gave us the
delicious Prospect of a fine Summer. We could not give over contemplating this
delicate Garden, whose extraordinary Charms deserved the highest Praises.

After we had insensibly jogged on three or four Miles in a continual descent,
we came into a straight and level Way, on the side whereof runs a small River
exceedingly clear; FOLIGNO.
and we arrived at Foligno, which is but a Mile farther, at the end of this
way. Though this City be seated in a Terrestrial Paradise, it has nothing else
considerable: Yet they say, that Trade flows thither more abundantly than to
most of the other Cities of the Ecclesiastical State which we have seen. Their
Trade consists in Draperies, Gold and Silver Lace, some Silks, and Spicery. The
Goths plundered it several times; and there are no old Monuments remaining.

A little while after we left Foligno, we saw on the other side of the Plain,
upon an Eminence, the Town of Montefalco, where the miraculous S. Clara lies
enterred. They show there, as they told us, three Stones about the bigness of
small Nuts, which were found in the They show all the Instruments of the
Passion, which are found there with the Stones.
Heart of that Saint, and upon which the History of the Passion is engraved.
But that which is most admirable, is, that all the three Stones together, weigh
no more than one of 'em singly; and consequently one weighs as much as all the
three:

Not far from thence is the City of Assisa, where they keep the Bones of that
Saint, who preached to the Swallows, and made himself a Wife and whole Family
of Snow; and whose Legend is stored with Fables. You know the Man. They pretend
that his Body, and that of St. Dominick, are side by side standing on their
Feet. At Porciuncula, five Miles from hence, they boast to have the first of
these Saints, (St. Francis); and at the great Convent of Bologna they affirm
also they have the Body of St. Dominick.
His Relics are under the great Altar of the Cathedral; but no living Soul is
permitted to see them. It is said, that a certain Bishop of the Isle of
Corsica, who believed himself to have a greater Privilege than others, about
sixty Years ago, obstinately resolved to see them, and that by Divine
Permission, he was presently struck with sudden Death. It is true, so much
intercession was made to this Saint, that a little after the Prelate came to
life again.

Near the Village of Pesignano, between Foligno and Spoletto, and at the Foot
of the Hill which surrounds the Plain, a plentiful Spring runs out of four
Outlets under a Rock, and instantly makes a little Lake. There the four
Rivulets being united, make from thence a pleasant River, which afterward
forms an infinity of Meanders; which, without doubt, contribute very much to
the fruitfulness as well as Ornament of the Country it waters. About two
hundred Paces from this Spring, there is on the Way-side, a very little Temple
of Corinthian Order. One who seemed to have some skill in Antiquity, told me at
Spoletto, that this little River is the Clitumnus, spoken of by some ancient
Authors, and among others, by Virgil in the Second Book of his Georgicks: and
the Reasons alleged for this Opinion seem very probable. But that which the
vulgar Opinion adds, that the little Temple, consecrated to Clitumnus, was made
a Deity, is a Story without any appearance of Truth. For besides that this
Temple is built Cross-wise, and Eastward, as the most part of the Christian
Churches are; and that there are Crosses carved in diverse places of the
Pediments, which agrees not with the fashions of Paganism: The three following
Inscriptions are engraved on the Frises of the Front, and on both sides. (1) S
C S Deus Profetarum qui fecit Redimptionem. (2) Deus Angelorum qui fecit
Resurrectionem. (3) S C S Deus Aposto * * * *, the rest is broken off. The
Characters are not in the least Gothic, nor any other part of the
Architecture. Perhaps this Temple was built out of the Ruins of that of
Clitumnus. It is now called S. Salvatore; and the Bishop of Spoletto says Mass
there once a year.

From Pesignano to Spoletto, SPOLETTO.
which is but seven Miles, you coast the plain Country at the foot of the
Hills; there are in all these Parts a considerable number of Villages and
Houses, scattered here and there. Spoletto lies within the Mountain, over the
rich Plain which I described before. It is a poor City, thinly peopled, ill
built, and in a very uneven Situation. They carried us to the Cathedral, after
they had boasted much of the height of the Body of the Church; but after all,
we found nothing extraordinary in its height. The Pavement is made of little
Pieces of Marble, inlaid, like the Church of St. Mark at Venice; and all the
Pediment of the great Portal, is fine Mosaic, on a Golden Ground. From thence
we went to the Castle, which is in the highest place of the City. It is only
strong by its Situation; but we found nothing in it to recompense the trouble
we had in going up to it. They showed us from this height, about five hundred
Paces from the City, a Church which had been consecrated to Concord, and is now
called The Chapel of the Crucifix. There are at Spoletto some other old
Fragments, a Triumphal-Arch half ruined, some Remainders of an Amphitheatre,
and diverse loose Marble Stones, but without any Inscriptions, except the Arch,
on which we may yet distinguish some Characters. The Aqueduct which joins the
Mountain of St. Francis to that of Spoletto, is the more considerable, in that
it is entire, and has always been in use since it was first made: But this is
a Gothic Work; it is three hundred and fifty Paces in length, and two hundred
and thirty Foot high, measuring from the top of it to the bottom of the Valley.

Three Miles on this side Spoletto, we passed the Somma, which is the highest
Mountain on this Road. And after we had been for five or six Miles amongst the
dry and desert Rocks; those Rocks were on a sudden changed into Embellishments.
During the space of four Miles, we found Nature had employed all its endeavors
to cover these Mountains entirely with Laurels, wild Olive Trees, Tamarinds,
Junipers, Ever-green Oaks, and a wonderful variety of other Trees or Shrubs,
which preserve their Verdure all the Winter. If you pass that way in January,
or July, you find it still almost the same. It Is true, that as the Plain of
Foligno looks cheerful and pleasant, this seems to have a sad and melancholy
Beauty. At our approach to Terni, those Mountains which had always confined us
in a straight Passage, on the Brink of the Torrent, which runs at the bottom of
the Valley, left us by degrees, and we found our selves in a great Forest of
Olive Trees. These Trees were laden with Fruits, it being the Custom to let
them ripen till they fall off themselves, or with the least shaking. The green
Olives which they preserve in Pickle, are gathered before they are ripe, and
they take away their bitterness by Art. Those which are ripe have no less
bitterness than the green ones. And it is very strange that the bitterest of
Fruits should produce the sweetest Liquor. As we left this Wood of Olives, we
traveled about a Mile in a Plain, whose agreeable Air, and Fruitfulness, was
little inferior to that of Foligno; and then came to Terni, which is on the
River Nera, in the midst of this excellent Country.

Terni is less than Spoletto, TERNI.
but appeared to us somewhat better peopled. Its whole Trade consists in Oil.
They told us, that during six Months of the Year, Pliny praises the Cabbages
and Turnips of Interamnia. (It has been called Interamnia, Interamnia, and
Interamnium.)
they make there an hundred Charges of Oil every Day. The Charge weighs six
hundred Pounds, and is worth near twelve English Crowns. This City is very
Interamnia anno ante Christum 671 condita, vivente Numa Pompilio.
ancient. It appears by an Inscription which we observed in the Porch of the
Seminary, near the Cathedral, that its Foundation is not of much later date
than that of Rome. This Inscription was made for Tiberius, and the date is,
Post Interramnam conditam DC C IIII. Terni was called Interamna, or
Interamnium, by reason of its situation inter amnes, between the two Arms of
the River which Waters it. There is also another Inscription which was put on
the Bridge in the time of Urban VIII. in which, it is said, that this Bridge
was built by Pompey the Great.

We went- to see the famous Water-fall of Mount del Marmore, which is three
Miles from Terni. The Way is rough and pleasant both together. You must ascend
very difficult Rocks, and sometimes light from your Horse for fear of
Precipices: But, in recompense, we had the pleasure in these Mountains to meet
with some Nooks to the Southward, which never felt the Winter. We found amongst
the Bushes, Jasmins, Laurels, Myrtles, Rosemary, and Nature smiling in
February, (though it had been a very hard Winter) as much as you find it in
April in your Island. At the third part of the Way, ascending the Hill Papinio,
I observed below on the River side, a great space of Ground, planted with
Orange Trees. I counted at least seven hundred; and this was the first time we
saw them in them in the plain Field without any Shelter. But let us proceed to
the Water-fall.

The River called Velerio, has its source in the Mountains, twelve or thirteen
Miles from the place where it falls down. It passes into the Lake of Or Piede
Luco. The Trouts of this Lake have no Back-Bones. Du Val. Peter Tolentin a
Sieneze, having rid into the River on Horseback above the Fall, was hurried
away by the Current, and took leap with his Horse; but having time to call on
our Lady of Loretto, he escaped, being only soundly we^. Balt. Bartoli
descript. of Loretto.
Luco, at the distance of nine Miles from its Head, and goes out bigger by half
than it entered into it. When it comes to the place of its Fall, the Valley which
it quits, proves to be on a high Mountain, considering the depth which attends
it; there then this River which already marched with a swift Current, all in an
instant throws it self down from a craggy Rock, three hundred Paces high, and
falls into the hollow of another Rock, against which its Waters break
themselves with such Violence, that it rises like a Cloud of Dust, double the
height of the Fall, which makes a perpetual Rain in all the adjacent parts.
This pulverized Water forms in the Sun an infinite number of Rain-bows, which
are always diminishing and increasing; which cross themselves, and flutter
about, according to the various rebounding and spurting up of the Surges, and
as this Watery Smoke is thicker or thinner. I can assure you, the sight of this
Object fills the Spectator with an Astonishment that I cannot express. The
River seems to hasten its Course, before its Precipitation, because of the
sloping of its Chanel: These Surges press on as if they strove for precedence.
Du Val has written, that there is a certain Land near the Nera, which in dry
Weather turns to Dirt; and when it Rains, moulders into Dust.
Whilst they are still in the Air, they foam, dash against, encounter and shock
each other, and seem to be entangled together: At last they fall into an Abyss,
which they themselves have made; from which they break forth impetuously, some
through the Crevices of one Rock, others through the Jaws of another; after
which they run on, grumbling and murmuring, a little farther; and at last
mingle themselves with the Waters of the little River Nera, which they enlarge
by at least three quarters. And so ends the poor Velino.

NARNI.
From Terni to Narni, is a plain Way, and a good Country; it is but seven Miles.
This last City promises something at a distance, because of the pleasant little
Hills which we see about it, when we come from the side of Terni: But when we
entered it, we were surprised to find it in a manner desolate: Its Streets are
dirty and narrow, and the situation so rough and uneven, that one cannot go
scarce three Steps without mounting or descending. According to the sordid
custom of the Country, you can see nothing in the Windows but torn pieces of
Paper, which is a sign of beggary, and makes the Houses appear as if they were
uninhabited. I observed, as we passed, two pretty handsome Fountains of Brass.
The Emperor Nerva was a Native of Narni.

We turned aside, a little before we went into the City, to see the Ruins of a
Bridge, which, as they say, was built under the Empire of Augustus, and which
they look upon as a thing worthy of Admiration. The great pieces of Marble with
which it is built, are joined dry without any Cement, and without Hold-fasts of
Iron. Its height is extraordinary; it joins the Mountain of Spoletto to a
neighboring Mountain, and ends in the Way that leads to Perusa. Of four or
five Arches, there remains but one entire; the top of the Mold of the greatest
is broken. Many Persons, who I believe are well informed, have told me, that
this Arch is one hundred and seventy foot in breadth; and one may by the Eye
guess it near so much; which far exceeds the famous Bridge of the Rialto.

Departing from Narni, we found our selves again between the Mountains, which
continue for eight Miles, to the Town of Otricoli: Near that on a Plain,
OTRICOLI.
are the Ruins of the ancient Ocriculum. We went a little aside to take a
nearer view of these dismal Remains, but we could find nothing which might
afford us any Instruction. A while after we passed the Tyber, over a fair Stone
Bridge, which was begun under Sixtus V. and finished under Urban VIII. as
appears by an Inscription engraven on it.

It was late before we arrived at Citta-Castellana; CITTA-CASTELLANA.
and our intention being to part thence early the next Morning, we willingly
gave credit to the Report of those, who told us we should find nothing
remarkable in it.

Near to Regnano, we found the old Via Flaminia, with its Pavement of nine
hundred Years continuance, which remains entire in this place to Admiration; we
not having perceived any Footsteps of it since we left Rimini, to which this
Way extended it self. I shall give you a more particular Account of it on some
other Occasion.

We dined at Castle Nuovo, which is but a Paltry Town, as well as Regnano.
Almost all the rest of the Country hitherto, is untilled, and without
Inhabitants: The Soil is bad and the Land generally flat, but uneven. We saw
every where an infinite Number of ancient Ruins. After we had repassed the
Tyber upon the Bridge, which by Tacitus, and other ancient Authors, is called
Pons Milvius, and at present by corruption, Ponte-Molle; we met with a paved
Way for two Miles, which lead us between Gardens and Houses of Pleasure, to the
famous City of Rome.

I am, SIR, Yours, etc.
At Rome, Mar. 4. 1688.
LETTER XXI.
SIR,
IT is so pleasant to travel in good Company, that for this reason we readily
engaged in a Journey to Naples, somewhat sooner than we had designed. There are
many surprising Rarities in this excellent Country, which may be observed by
those who have the Patience to wait till the Spring is a little advanced.
Besides, in this Season the Fields begin to put on a more smiling Countenance;
and all the Journey is extremely pleasant. It Is true, it has been so hard a
Winter, that we could not expect a forward Spring; and we now find, that though
we had taken their Counsel, who advised us to put off our Journey till April,
we could not have expected any considerable Advantage by so long a delay, by
reason of the continuance of the Cold. And besides, this would have spoiled all
our Measures at Rome, where we intend to remain without interruption, since we
design not to make any long stay there.

They commonly account it five Days Journey from Rome to Naples: The Road is
bad, and we met with but few things worthy of Observation in it: But we find
what may make us amends at Naples, at the Mountain of Vesuvius, and amongst the
Rareties of Bayae, Puzzolo, and other neighboring places.

Wherefore after we had rambled about Rome for two or three Days, and run over
the principal things which our Curiosity thirsted after, we left it in order to
our Journey for Naples. Twelve Miles from Rome, we came to Marino, a great Town
belonging to the Prince Colonna, formerly known by the Name of the Villa
Mariana. Here we left the level Country, Marino, or Villa Marii.
and departing from Marino, ascended a stony Mountain, where are nothing to be
found but Wood and Buffalo's. I shall say nothing at present of the Lake of
Castle-Gandolfo, which we coasted for near an Hour, it being our intention to
visit it at our return, when we shall have more leisure for Observation.

As we descended the Mountain four or five Miles on this side the Lake, we
discovered the Sea, and saw on a little Hillock on the Right Hand, the City
called Citta de la Vigna, which is the ancient Lanuvium; a Municipal City, and
the place where Antoninus Pius was born; and not the Lavinium of Aeneas, as the
vulgar Opinion is. Lavina Litora are ten or twelve Miles from thence, toward
that part where Prattica is now seated.

VELITRI.
In the Evening we reached Velitri, a little City enclosed with a Wall, and
seated on a little well-cultivated Hill. It was formerly an important place,
and troublesome to the Romans, but at present it is inconsiderable.

It Is the general Opinion here, and even the Servants at the Inn informed us at
our Arrival, that the City of Velitri was honored with the birth of Augustus.
Some one of our Company asked who that Augustus was, and were answered, that he
was the first Christian Emperor. I expected to have heard him call him St.
Augustus; for I observe here, that the People easily canonize all the
Illustrious Men of old, Pagans as well as others. Finally, Augustus was born at
Narus est Augustus M. Tullio Cicerone and Antonio Coss. regione Palatii ad
capita bubula.
Rome, as Suetonius positively affirms. It is true that his Gentem Octaviam
Velitris praecipuam olim fuisse multa declarant.
Family was originally of Velitri, and that he was put to nurse in the
neighborhood of that City. The same Author relates, that in his time, they
spoke of the Chamber where that Prince was nursed, as they are wont to do at
present of the Holy House of Loretto: Huc introire nisi necessario and cast
religio est. Temere adeuntibus, metus and horror objiciebatur.

In the midst of the great Place of Velitri, there is a very fine Statue of
Brass of Pope Urban VIII. I observed that the Statues of the Popes always
represent them sitting. This is done, without doubt, to denote the Empire which
they have over all other Princes in the World. They carried us to the Marquess
Ginetti's House; the situation of which is very agreeable, and the Apartments
adorned with a great number of Antiquities.

Coming down the Hill of Velitri, we observed a great number of Caves, and
Cellars dug, under the Rocks, to preserve the Wines cool. After which we entered
into a Country poorly inhabited, and all open, for about fifteen Miles, unto
the very foot of the Mountain, on the top whereof we saw the little City of
Built upon the Ruins of the old; Sora. Sermoneta, quasi Sorella della Citta di
Sora, says Th. Valla.
Sermonetta.

About four Miles on this side, they made us observe, on the Left Hand about
fifty Paces from the Highway, some old Ruins, which, as they say, are the
Remains of the place called by St. Paul, the three Shops, in the twenty eighth
Chapter of the Acts. This place is commonly called, the three Taverns; the
reason whereof is, without doubt, because the Words (...) in Greek, The Word
(...) is a Latin Word adopted by the Greeks.
and tabernae in Latin, have more relation to the Word Taberna, than to that of
Bottega. It is something after this manner that they derive S. Longinus from
(...), and St. Tiphines from (...),

On the Right Hand we saw the Promontory, at present called Mons Circaeus,
antiquis famosissimus, in quo Circes habitasse fertur, and herbis
efficacissimis ibi natis homines in bestias commutasse. Ant. Magin.
Monte Circello, which by the Report of some Naturalists, was formerly an
Island. It was there, say the Poets, that the jealous Circe changed poor Scylla
the Mistress of Glaucus into a Sea Monster, and the Companions of Ulysses into
Hogs.

Credibile est Circen mutasse potentibus herbis,
In Monachosque sues, inque sues Monachos.
SETIA.
The little City of Setia is on a Mountain a little on this side the Three
Taverns. It was formerly famous for its Wines. Setinum ardebat in auro, says
Juvenal. But at this Day the Mountain is become of another Nature; it produces
scarce any thing at all. I observed amongst the Woods with which these
Mountains at present are covered, many of the Plants called Ficus Indica. Some
of them grow up to the height of thirty or forty Foot, with Trunks as thick as
a Man. The Laurels and the Myrtles are common in the Hedges; and here we begin
to find Orange Trees frequently in the open Fields. Near to Setia, at the
Village Casa-Nuova, is a great Marish, on which you may take Boat, and go
straight to Terracina. But we turned to the Left, into a Valley which led us to
the Mountain, and City of Piperno, where we lay. PIPERNO.
I observed in our Way, a pretty large Churchyard, all planted with
Orange Trees, which is doubly contrary to the usual Custom. For first, there
are no Churchyards in Italy; every Family has its Chapel or Vault in some
Church or Convent; and if there be any public place where they bury those who
are very poor, which I have not yet seen; It is only some Corner of Land, in a
private place without the City. And besides, it is the Custom where there are
any Churchyards, to plant Pines, Yew-Trees, or Cypresses; but no Orange Trees.

Piperno is a new City, built near the old Privernum, the Metropolis of the
Volsci, and Residence of their King Metabus, Father to the famous Camilla,
(Virg. lib. 11.) Some say that Privernum was called Piperno, because (when they
built it out of the Ruins of the other) they found in the place where Piperno
now stands, a Tree which bore Pepper: From whence it comes, say they, that this
City has a Tree in the Scutcheon of their Arms, with the Head of Camilla born
by a Lion. Others are not of this Opinion: They believe that Piperno is so
called by corruption for Priverno, or Privernum; and that the Tree now
discoursed of, is no Pepper-Tree, but a Laurel: from whence they draw great
Consequences of the Bravery of the old Privernates.

The Bishopric of Piperno was reunited to that of Terracina (by Honorius
III.) because of its Poverty; ob indecentem paupertatem, says Favonius Leo.
The Bishop's Chair is still kept in the Choir of the old Cathedral.

They have in the Church of St. Benedict, a famous Image of our Lady by St.
Luke, which would not be burned at the Saccage of Privernum, and which is the
grand Object of the Devotion of Piperno; together with St. Sebastian, St.
Thomas Aquinas, and the Illustrious Camilla.

Lillies and Daffodils grow naturally, as they say, on the Hillock of Piperno,
called Colle Rosso. There is a certain fine Earth found there, named Buccaro,
excellent for making Potter's Ware. From the top of this Hill, you discover the
little City of Mayenca; near which is a Lake, the Waters of which, by the
Report of P. Paolo Benvenuti, rise considerably on a sudden two Days before
Rain.

Leaving Piperno, we passed over some sandy Hillocks, full of those various
sorts of Shrubs which are Green in all Seasons. In the Wood which we go into
afterward, are a great Number of Cork-Trees. This Tree extremely resembles an
Ever-green Oak; and I believe we may very well call it a kind of Oak, since it
bears Acorns. When you strip other Trees of their Bark, you at the same time
take away their Sap and Life, whereas far otherwise, when you take away the
Bark from this Tree, it grows stronger, and presently produces a new Coat, as
Sheep after shearing bear a new Fleece.

Departing from the Wood of Piperno, we went out of the Way two or three
hundred Paces, FOSSA NUOVA. This Abbey is on the Ruins of the Forum Appii, of
which Benvenuti assure us, some Footsteps remain.
to see the Abbey of Fossa Nuova. The Monks who led us into the Church, told
us, That Thomas Aquinas going from Fondi to the Council of Lions, and finding
himself ill, alighted from his Mule, stuck his Stick in the Ground, and
fastened his Mule to it, and afterward fell asleep in a Corner of the Wood,
near the Church. It is said, that the Mule getting loose, run furiously into
the Church, those who were there not being able to hinder it: They add, that
the Beast was so insolent, as to set his Feet in the Choir; but immediately he
sunk into the Pavement, Others say, that the Mule wandered some days in the
Wood, and that running to the Tomb of his Master, he died there for Grief.
and was presently punished with sudden death. They show the pretended print of
his Feet, and have put little Iron Grates over them, to preserve them.
Moreover, as they searched for the Master of the Mule to punish his negligence
in not tying him better, they were surprised to see that it was Villani, and
others, write, that he was poisoned by order of Charles I. King of Naples.
St. Thomas, who was ready to expire, for want of his Mule to carry him to seek
for Relief. They brought him to the Convent, where he died some Days after, and
his Body was laid for some time in this Church; from whence it was afterward
removed to Fondi, and from Fondi to Toulouse.

About ten Miles on this side Fossa Nuova, we found the old Way called Via
Appia, Appius Claudius Censor, Aquam Claudiam induxit. and viam Appiam stravit.
Entrop.

Appia Longarum teritur Regina viarum. Statius.


which was made by Appius Claudius, when he was Censor. The Alterations which
time makes on the Surface of the Earth, is the Cause that the Ways are many
times changed also, as it is plain from daily Experience; but nothing more
evidently demonstrates this truth than this part of the Via Appia which we met
with. You see it come out of a deep Marish; and at present wholly inaccessible,
whereas formerly it was the direct Road from Capua to Rome. You are obliged to
make a great turning, when you leave this Way to go into that of Piperno. I
observed the same thing between Citta-Castellana and Rome, on occasion of the
Via Flaminia, of which we find great pieces preserved on this side Regnano; and
in some places, and particularly toward Castle Nuovo, fifteen Miles from Rome,
this ancient Pavement may be observed, which sometimes mounts on Ascents now
inaccessible, and in other places loses it self in deep Valleys, which cannot
be descended into, and afterward appears again some Miles farther. It Is
certain, that by Winds, Rains, great Floods, Earthquakes, and other Accidents,
Plains are raised up, and Hills fall down; Valleys are filled up; the Earth
gains upon the Sea, and the Sea on the Earth; the Sea makes the Earth Lakes,
and the Earth turns the Sea to Islands; Rivers are dried up, and change their
Course; Mountains swell, and become level; and the Figure of the Globe is in
perpetual variation. I could produce Examples of all this. It is true, these
Changes are not universal. The length of the Pavement, for Example, which
continues for two Miles or thereabouts, to Terracina, is exactly level with the
circumjacent Lands.

Of all the Antique Monuments I have seen hitherto, there is nothing in my mind
deserves so much to be admired, as these famous Roads. The Buildings which are
preserved, have been exposed to few Accidents; and all things being well
considered, it is rather matter of Astonishment, that Edifices so exceedingly
solid, were so soon ruined, than to see them still remaining. But that an
innumerable Number of Passengers, Horses, and Chariots, should incessantly
tread on a Pavement for so many Ages, and yet so considerable Fragments of it
should still be found entire, is a thing which seems incredible. The Procopius
says they were all Square, but he was mistaken.
Stones of this Pavement are of unequal bigness; their Color Greyish and
Reddish, almost like rusty Iron, extremely hard, and ten or twelve Inches
thick. To speak generally, the greatest, in their largest Dimensions are little
more than two Feet, and the least not less than one. Though the shape of these
Stones be irregular, they are all so exactly joined, and closely united, that
it is impossible to thrust a Sword's Point between them, in those places which
have still kept their old situation. I have measured the breadth of these two
Ways, Via Appia, and Via Flaminia, and I found them throughout twenty Roman
Palms broad, with very little difference; which makes fourteen Foot, less by
four Inches, English Measure: This is not too much for the meeting of two
Chariots. These Ways which they call Viae Consulares, had on each side Borders
of the same Stone with the Pavement; and these Borders stood up two Foot, or
thereabouts: I have seen them in some places very well preserved. These were
called the Cippi. It Is true, they were sometime called Marginationes. But
Lipsius pretends that these Marginationes, were Pavements on the sides, which
were made bigger than the other. I remarked that in this sense the Cippus and
Marginatio are sometimes of the same piece.
Margines, or Marginationes Viarum; it is between these Borders the Ways are to
be measured at a certainty. The Chariot Wheels have in some places made deep
Ruts, at the most three or four Inches; and the manner after which the Canal of
this Rut is followed from one Pavement to another, is one of the Proofs of its
ancient situation. The rest of the Pavement is even and whole, without any
appearance that the Horse-shooes have worn it in the least. They told me, that
there is another very thick Lay of Stone, placed on a Bed of Sand, which serves
for the Foundation of this Pavement, and hinders it from sinking. When we
approached to Terracina, we saw on both sides, the Ruins of many ancient
Monuments, which, according to Custom, were erected near these great Roads,
both for Ornament, and to give Travelers some Idea of the Roman Magnificence.
After all if on the one side these Ways were beautiful and advantageous; on the
other so hard and slippery a Pavement, was not without its inconveniences: and
we took care to avoid it, at the same time we admired it.

The ancient Anxur, Scopulosi verticis Anxur. Sil. Ital.
which was afterward called Trachina, because it is upon a Rock of difficult
access, is at present by corruption called Terracina. It is little, TERRACINA.
poor, and ill peopled; and all the Country about almost uninhabited. A little
on this side Terracina, they were forced to cut the Rocks, to continue the
Pavement of Appius, between the Sea and the Mountains; this is in many places
to be seen within the space of one Mile. The Rock is called Pisca Marina:
Terracina was besieged by the Turks. The Inhabitants made a Vow to give twenty
thousand Eels yearly to St. Bennet, if by his intercession they should be freed
from this danger. The Turks raised the Siege a few days after. Their Vow was
accomplished, and the Eels are carried every Year to the Benedictines. Theod.
Valla, and Ostiensis
It is near twenty six Foot high; and the ancient Ciphers are marked from ten
to ten, in a Capital Roman Character, on the Face of this Rock, which is cut
perpendicular; so that the Cipher on the top is CXX. But an Antiquary no less
exact than curious and learned, told me at Rome, that ^he had measured these
Distances, and that he found them almost all unequal. Some conjecture, that the
principal end of the Undertaker, was to measure his Work, and that he marked
the Divisions only slightly, it being no advantage to him. Others believe that
every Distance is the Work of ten Days; and that the inequality of the
distances was caused by the more or less ease the Workmen found in cutting the
Rock. And that which gave occasion for this Thought is, that the distances
above are greater than those below, the Rock still growing narrower toward the
top. But I find one main Objection against this Sentiment; for probably they
began to work at the top of the Rock; so that the first Tenth should have been
marked above, and the Number CXX. found below; all this seems to me not easy
to be understood.

After we had traversed Hills covered with Cork-Trees, having on the Right Hand
the Marish and the Sea, and always following the old Pavement, we came in the
Evening to Fondi. And an old Wall which is three Miles on this side Terracina,
makes the Separation between the Ecclesiastical State, and the Kingdom of
Naples.

FONDI.
Fondi is in a flat Country, near a Lake which bears the Name of the City, and
which takes great Circuits in a Moorish Bottom, between the Hills and the Sea.
They say this Lake produces Eels of an extraordinary bigness. Others say
Chairadin, Caratin, and Cheireddin.
Hariaden Barbarossa, King of Algier, and Admiral to the Grand Signior,
finished the desolation of this poor little City of Fondi, in the Year 1534.
They have painted the History of its Destruction, in the Church of the
Annonciata. Barbarossa had a particular design on Julia de Gonzaga, Wife to
Vespasian Colonna. Barbarossa would have made a present of her to the Grand
Signior. She was very beautiful. He destroyed the City out of spite, because
he missed his aim. Schrad.
a Princess of the House of Gonzaga, who was then at Fondi: But that Princess,
being advertised by a Gentleman of the City, of the Design the Pirate intended
to execute, got immediately out of her Bed, and saved her-self, naked to her
Smock, by that Gentleman's assistance. The History adds, that not enduring to
remember without indignation, that a Man had seen her in that Posture, she
caused him to be stabbed some time after.

Fondi is all paved with Stones of the Via Appia, but we do not find that they
are joined so well as heretofore. Near the Castle, there is a great Garden,
which, according to Tradition, belonged to Cicero. I believe there are no other
Proofs of it. The Dominicans have a great veneration for the Chamber of Thomas
Aquinas, and for the Auditory where he taught. They also keep with
extraordinary care, an old Orange-Tree, which, they say, this Doctor planted.
He died anno 1273, or according to the old Legend, 1274; by which you may judge
of the Age of this Tree. There is a Story of a certain Tree of Cochin-China,
which lived two thousand Years; and we have a Relation of China, which tells us
of a Tree so old and so big, that twenty Men could scarcely embrace it: But
Orange Trees are not of so long continuance. It is an incredible thing, for
every body assures me here, that never any of these Trees attained to the Age
of four hundred Years. It was necessary the Dominicans should have some
miraculous memorial of the Angelical St. Thomas, as well as of their great
Patriarch St. Dominick, of whom they have another Orange-Tree, at St. Sabina,
on Mount Aventin: But what may not a Man believe on this Subject, after what
Surius relates of the old Olive Trees of Nazareth, and of the accursed
Fig Tree, which was to be seen within these two and thirty Years? That this
Trunk has lasted so long, after the Curse it received, is a thing not easy to
be understood, without taking notice of the nature of the Tree, which allows it
not so long a Life.

They would persuade us at Terracina, that we should find the Leaves of the
Orange-Tree of St. Thomas, of another shape than those of other Orange Trees;
as they talk of the Almond-Tree of St. Francis, which is yet to be seen on
Mount Luco, and of which the Leaves grow, as they say, with Crosses well
shaped. But we could not perceive this pretended difference; nor could we find
that the Winter had been more favorable to the Oranges of this venerable Tree;
for they were all frozen, as well as those of the Garden of Cicero, who, I may
tell you by the bye, passes at Fondi for a kind of Saint, as well as Augustus
at Velitri: When this Tree shall die, if at least it ever must, they propose to
themselves to make a Shrine of it, to contain some Relics of the Saint who
planted it. This is no ill Thought. It is thus that they keep somewhere in a
Village of Tirol, one of the biggest Nails of St. Christopher, in a Case which
is made of the Palm Tree which grew from his Pole, after he had planted it in
the Earth, when he carried over the Child Jesus from one side of the River to
the other. Leaving Fondi, we were oftentimes forced to pursue our Way on the
old Pavement, for ten Miles, to Mola. One is almost always amongst the
Mountains; and this unevenness of the Soil joined to the hardness and
smoothness of the Stones, renders the Way very troublesome. The Horses shiver
as they go, as if they were upon Ice; and must be every Foot new shod. At our
approach to Itru, which is a little City on a Rock, six Miles from Fondi, I
observed in diverse places of these Mountains, large Trees, called in this
Country Soucelles, which bear Cods of half a Foot long, or thereabouts, and
thick as Bean-Cods. These Fruits are dried, and taste of Honey, somewhat like
Manna; I learned here that their true name is Carobba.

MOLA.
We arrived about ten a Clock in the Morning, at the little City of Mola, on the
Seashore. There are to be seen store of Marble-Stones, and other Ruins of
Hormiae antedictum, Plin.
Formiae, that famous City which was built in this very place by Antiphinanes,
King of the Lestrygons. It was a sad thing, that one of the most O temperatae
dulce Formiae Littus, etc. Martial.
delightful places of the World should be inhabited by Man-Eaters. The Air
there is extremely sweet, the Fruits are admirable upon all the sides of the
Hills watered by the Gulf, between Cajeta and Mola; there are most excellent
Wines; Sugarcanes are also planted here. Schrad.
all things are plentiful, and the Sea very full of Fish. We took a Walk
amongst the Ruins of an old Palace, which, they said, belonged to Cicero. It
was the Sea partly which destroyed it. We found on the Shore many little pieces
of Mosaic, which sufficiently demonstrate it had been formerly a remarkable
House. It goes for truth, that they have taken away some Inscriptions that made
it appear to be Cicero's. I could not without Grief remember the sad destiny of
that Great Man, who being drawn from this House where he believed he might have
been sheltred, during the last fury of Anthony against him, was at last by the
Centurion Popilius Lenas, whose Life Cicero had saved by his care and eloquent
Orations. Cicero died sixty four Years old. The Murderer, (says Calvis.)
received of Anthony the Sum of 44000 Crowns of Gold, for his Reward. Appian
Alexandr. makes the Reward far greater.
murdered in his Litter, endeavoring to find some other Refuge. I Am persuaded
that the sight of a Place where a Disaster happened, does very much heighten
our Sorrow for it.

After we had considered a little whether we should go to Cajeta, which is on
the Point of the Promontory, over against and in sight of Mola, the Sea being a
little too brisk for the little Barks which waited for us: We at last concluded
on the Passage. But to tell the truth, the Voyage was made with a great deal of
dancing, though some of the Company had little mind to the Sport. The Rain that
over-took us, and a great deal of bad Weather, obliged us to stay but a little
time at Cajeta; besides, we were to travel that Day, and to lodge about fifteen
Miles from Mola. The Passage over the Gulf is about four Miles.

Cajeta appeared to us of a reasonable largeness, and very well Tu quoque
littoribus nostris, Aeneia nutrix,
Aeternam moriens famam Cajeta dedisti. Aeneid. 7.

fortified: CAJETA.
Its Haven is good, and the Situation of the City on a high Rock, renders the
Approach difficult. There is to be seen the Tomb of His Epitaph is thus related
by Arnold Ferron:

Aucto Imperio, superata Italia, devicto Gallo, pontifice obsesso, Roma capta:
Borbonii hoc marmor cineres continet.

Another: Francia mi dio la leche,
Espanna suerte y ventura,
Roma mi dio la muerte,
Y Gaeta la sepultura.



Charles of Bourbon, Constable of France, who was killed at the sacking of
Rome, and the ancient Mausolaeum of Munatius Plancus, by whose advice, (as
Suetonius reports) Octavius Caesar preferred the Name of Augustus to that of
Romulus; which some would have given him, as to the Restorer of the City of
Rome. This Mausolaeum is commonly called The Tower of Orlando.

Our Guide carried us in the first place, to a cleft Mountain, which has no
other Name than that of La Spaccata. That great Rock is separated both above
and below, from the Top, to the Sea. The distance of this Separation is four or
five Foot at the Entrance, but enlarges it self a little toward the Height.
It is manifest from the meeting of the Concavities and Convexities on each side
of the Rock, that it was really divided. They say this was one of the Prodigies
which happened when our Savior gave up the Ghost. And they show against one
side of the opening of the Mountain, the print of a Hand on the Rock which
softened under it: They affirm it softened on the Challenge which an Unbeliever
made; and they have graved this Distich below it: Improba men's, verum renuit
quod fama fatetur
Credere; at hoc digitis saxa liquata probant.
They have made steps to go down into this double Rock, All the Barks, Galleys,
and other Vessels, which pass that way, never fail paying their respects to the
Holy Mountain. It is a famo us Pilgrimage.
and have contrived a small Chapel, which is dedicated to the Trinity. The
Curate of the Chapel took the pains to find out a Hammer to break off some
pieces of the Rock, to bestow on us as Relics; but we told him we were already
troubled with too much Baggage; and the poor Man was highly offended at our
refusal.

Returning from thence, we visited the Cathedral, where they showed us, amongst
other things, a pretended Pillar of the Temple of Solomon. There are four of
the like at the great Altar of the Chapel of St. Mark at Venice. P. Rosetto
writes, that this Vessel was found at Mola. It is supported by four Lions, made
of the same pieces of Marble.
The ancient Vessel of White Marble, which serves for a Font, in the Baptistery
of this Church, is a curious Piece of Work, and most entirely preserved: It is
made in the form of a Bell, and is four Foot high, or thereabouts. The Basso
relievo's, with which it is adorned, are admired by skillfull Men. The little
Bacchus fresh come out of the Thigh of Jupiter, is by Mercury put into the
Hands of Ino; and all round the Vessel are represented Satyrs and Bacchanals.
There is a Faun which plays on two Pipes at once. I have seen a Shepherd of
Tirol do the same. They have observed the same thing of Herodotus of Megara.
The Workman has put his Name on the Vessel, (...).

Near the Garden of the Franciscans Zoccolanti, there is a Bush of Thorns,
which are most without Pricks, which, they say, has grown so ever since the
Seraphic St. Francis rolled himself there, to extinguish his Concupiscence.
Toward the Place named Della Foglia, they also show us the place whence he
Uscissero el capo dell' acqua, says Rosetto, and they heard him.
preached to the Fishes.

Going up by the little Door of the Bishop's Palace, over against the Altar of
the Holy Sacrament, there is a Marble Statue of an old Man, who sets his Feet
on a little Dog; under the Dog is a Death's Head; a Serpent, whose Tail is
placed on the Dog, wraps it self about the Legs of the old Man, rests on his
Head, and has an Eagle on his. There are an hundred different Opinions
concerning this Piece. That which is most generally received is, That the old
Man represents Aesculapius, with his Serpent: That the Dog signifies the
Vigilance and Attention required in Physicians; and that the Eagle represents
the Empire of GOD over Men, perhaps the God of Physic particularly.: And the
Death's Head is an Emblem of Humane Nature, sadly subjected to that Deity. The
Sculpture is four Palms in height.

When we landed at Cajeta, the Officers of the Garrison made strict inquisition
whether there were any Frenchmen amongst us; and after they had assured
themselves that we were all English, they told us, that since the quarrel of
France with the Pope, they were always apprehensive of those Men-devouring
French. This puts me in mind of what happened two Years since, at our coming to
Mons, another Spanish City. There was a Report that an Army of French was
coming, under pretense of guarding the Post of Namur, to make an irruption into
the King of Spain's Territories: Upon this, the People of Mons opened their
Sluices, drowned all the Meadows, and spoiled all the Ways: The French knew
nothing of all this; the poor Travelers were the only sufferers: We were fain
to undergo a Thousand Fatigues, to get out of their drowned Ways.

Departing from Mola, we coasted the Sea for some Hours, always following the
Appian Way, for eight Miles together, to the Ruins of the City of Minturna.
MINTURNA.
We saw in our Passage the Remains of an Amphitheatre, Marius pursued by Sylla,
hid himself among the Reeds, in the Marish which is between the Sea and
Minturna. A Soldier who was sent to kill him, not daring to undertake it,
Marius put himself into a Bark, which cast him on Africa, where he stayed till
he was recalled.
and a considerable length of an Aqueduct, which came from the little City of
Tajetto, two Miles farther, on the Left Hand. The River which was formerly
known by the Name of Liris, and which at present is called Garigliano, washes
the Walls of Minturna. We passed this River in a Ferry-Boat, and took a new way
over the Meadows, leaving and quitting altogether the old and troublesome
Pavement, which loses itself in those places, which are no more frequented.
We came the same Day to the Village of St. Agatha, and there we lay.

CAPUA.
From St. Agatha to Capua is sixteen Miles. The Country is level enough,
particularly when we come near to Capua, and the Fields are fair and fruitful.
Leaving St. Agatha, they showed us some Hills a few Miles to the Left, where
grew, as they say, the famous Falernian Wines. The Volturnus, which is the
principal River of the Kingdom of Naples, though of but indifferent bigness,
washes the Ramparts of Capua, on that side we entered into it. This City is
small and inconsiderable in all respects. There you may see several
Inscriptions, Ipsa caput urbium, quondam inter tres maximas, Romam,
Carthaginemque numerata. L. Florus. Omnium felicissima Civitas. Polyb.
and many Marble Stones, which were brought thither from the ancient Capua, and
we turned aside to visit some Ruins of that. It is two Miles from the other
near the Mountains to the Eastward. And the Town which is called St. Mary's, is
almost wholly built of the deformed Ruins of that delicious and proud City. We
saw there many little Temples, an old Castle, the Remains of two Amphitheatres,
one of the Gates of the City, with a great number of broken Pillars, and other
Fragments of Architecture.

Urbs Capys hoc campo? ambitiosa hic aemula Romae,
Parvula quam magni corporis ossa jacent!
The Country People brought us many Medals, which we took without looking on
them, because we were in haste, and they asked but little for them: But we
found afterward nothing rare amongst them. They dig them often up here, and in
diverse other places which they showed us, as well as toward Mola. But being
informed of the search that is made for such things, they are not so simple to
give all to the first Comer, at the same price; they know the curious Persons
of the neighboring Cities, from whom they receive Rewards, when they bring
them Pieces, which are not common: So that these Peasants bring nothing to
Travelers but what is ordinary, or the Refuse of others.

From Capua to Naples is sixteen Miles; and this Campaign, as you know, makes a
part of the Provence called Terra di Lavoro. It is really an admirable Soil.
Dives arat Capua -- said Virgil. They pretend it is the most fruitful Soil in
the World; and they also called it Campagna Stellata, to signify, that it is
highly favored with the benign influences of the Stars, and let you know that
the Air which they breath has a constant sweetness. We passed through the
little City of Aversa, AVERSA.
which was, as they tell you, Of the Ruins of Atella.
built by the Normans, when they drove out the Saracens and the Greeks, and
seized on the Kingdom of Naples.

NAPLES, called the Gentile.
I will not spend much time in giving you the Etymology of Naples. It was
destroyed, says the History, and afterward rebuilt by the Cumani, who called
it (...), to distinguish it from the Remains of the high City; which they
named, or became so at the same time, (...); you know both of them formerly
bore the Name of Parthenope, because, some say, that Ulysses and his
Companions, having escaped the enchanting Songs of the Mermaid Parthenope, that
Sea-Nymph in despair, threw her self down headlong, The Council of Lateran,
under Innocent III. in the Year 1215, took away the Greek Bishop, who was
Colleague to the Latin Bishop.
and was enterred at Palaeopolis. Others pretend that one Parthenope, Daughter
of Eumelus King of Thessaly, and Granddaughter of Admetus and Alcesta, brought
a Colony thither from her Father's Estates, and gave her own Name of Parthenope
to this City, which had then another Appellation, now unknown. Let it be as it
will, it appears by these Greek Names, that Naples was built by the Grecians.
It is very large, and well peopled, but I cannot tell you exactly the Number of
its Inhabitants, nor any thing satisfactory of its Circuit, the Figure of it
being most irregular. The Curious, who have walked round the Walls, reckon that
it is nine Miles in compass, and that it is eighteen if you include its seven
Suburbs. Although it has endured terrible Assaults, One of their Poets
pleasantly said, That Naples seems to have fallen from Heaven.
it is still one of the most noble, and perhaps finest Cities in the World. It
is paved throughout with great square Stones, cut to a Pattern. The Streets are
strait, and most of them broad. The Houses are high, with flat Roofs, and
uniform Building. London, Paris, Rome, Venice, and a great number of other
Cities, have, in truth, fine Noblemens Houses; but these Houses are mixed with
great a number of ordinary ones, whereas Naples is generally all very fair. The
Sea makes a little Bay, which washes it to the South. To the North it has rich
Hills, whereby you rise insensibly into Campagna Felice. Eastward is a Plain
which leads to Vesuvius; and in the West is the high Town, where are the
Chartreux, and the Castle of St. Erasmus. The Prospect which we have of this
Ascent is very charming: I will give you an Account of it in the sequel.

Besides, that the Houses of Naples are commonly great, and well built, there
is a considerable number which deserve the Name of Palaces. For Example: Those
of the Dukes of Matalone, Gravina, Airola, and de la Tour; of the Princes of
St. Agatha, Mont-milet, Botera, and Cellamara. The Palace of the Viceroy is in
a great Place; the Front is regular, and adorned with three Orders of
Architecture. It is near four hundred Feet in length, of English Measure, and
is the Work of the famous Montana. The three Castles which defend Naples; the
Academy, which they call Studii Nuovi; the Academy for riding the Great Horse;
the Convents; the Hospitals; the Arsenal, and the Magazines for the Galleys,
are so many Edifices of very great Note. There are many Fountains, which
contribute as well to the great Convenience, as Embellishment of the City: And
three of these Fountains are of an incomparable grandeur and beauty. But that
which seemed to us most extraordinary at Naples was the Number and Magnificence
of the Churches. It may be justly said, that in this respect it surpasses
Imagination. If one would take a view of the fine Pieces of Architecture, the
Churches must be visited, you must behold the Frontispiece, the Portals, the
Chapels, the Altars, and the Tombs. If you would look upon rare Pictures,
Sculptures, and the rarety of Vessels of Gold and Silver, you need but go to
the Churches; the Arches, the Wainscots, the Walls are all covered with pieces
of precious Marble, most artificially laid together, or with Compartiments of
Basso Relievo, or of Joyners-work gilded, and enriched with the Works of the
most famous Painters. There is nothing to be seen but Jasper, Porphyrie,
Mosaic of all fashions, and the Quintescence of Art. I visited five and
twenty, or thirty of these stately Edifices, where one still finds him self
surprised afresh. If it were possible to unite eight or ten together, and make
a regular Composition out of 'em all, I believe it would be the most
magnificent Structure in the World.

I dare not venture on an exact Description of so many Particulars, yet cannot
forbear to mention at least some of these Churches, which we found most
remarkable, since perhaps it may be of use to you hereafter. The Church of the
Jesuits is an admirable Piece: The Dome was painted by the Chevalier Lanfranc;
and which way soever you turn in this stately Temple, all parts are enriched
with most costly Ornaments, from the Pavement to the Roof. It is the same in
St. Mary's of the Annonciata, which we may justly say, is of most splendid
beauty. The Religious may purchase from right to left, all the neighboring
Houses, til they come to be bounded by some Street; so that there being no
Street without a Convent, they may purchase the whole City. G. Burnet.
There you may see also that famous Hospital, whose Revenue amounts to above
two hundred thousand Ducats of Gold. All is very rich and surprising; St.
Philip of Neri, Santa Maria la Nuovo, St. Severin's, St. Paul's, St.
Dominick's, the Church and Monastery of Mount Olivet; at the Church of the Holy
Apostles, St. John Carbonare, the Cathedral, the little Hospital, and St.
Mary's of Health. I omit above three hundred others to avoid a tedious
prolixity: Nor will I take notice of their Treasures and Vestries, which are
replenished with prodigious Riches. Two of the Theatines having led us into
their Church of the Holy Apostles, those good Fathers declared to us by the
manner of their Discourse, the poor condition of their Order, who have, say
they, more reason than any others to complain: For if the Mendicants, for
Example, have no proper Goods, yet, at least, they have liberty to beg:
Whereas, the poor and unhappy Theatines live only on God's Providence,
possessing nothing, and not daring to ask any thing. Arguing after this manner,
after they had made us observe the various Magnificencies of their Church, they
brought us into the Vestry; where we found fourteen great Cupboards, with
double Doors, all filled with Vessels of Gold and Silver, and other precious
Ornaments: A Treasure of poor People, sufficient to satisfy the most
inordinate Ambition.

The great Convent of the Chartreux at St. Martin's, is extraordinary full of
rare and magnificent things: The Monks who conducted us thither, affirmed to
us, that under one Priorate, there were laid out amongst them five hundred
thousand Ducats in Silver Plate, Pictures, and Sculptures only. Their Church is
none of the greatest; but every part of it deserves Admiration: Nothing can be
added either to the value of the Matter, or excellence of the Workmanship; all
is complete, and exquisitely beautiful. The Nativity of Christ, by Guido, is an
excellent Piece: The four Pictures of the last Supper, which are to be seen in
the same place, were done by Espagnolet, Ann. Carache, Paul Veronese, and
Cavalier Massimno. -- -- has thought fit to represent Jesus Christ standing,
giving the Sacrament to his Apostles, and putting the Bread into their Mouths,
they being on their Knees. There are a great many other Pieces highly valued,
too many to be here recited.

The Cloister is one hundred Paces square: All the Pavement is of Marble,
inlaid, representing Boughs, and other Ornaments of the like nature; and the
four Galleries are supported by sixty Pillars each, of one entire piece, of
fine White Marble of Carrara. The Monks are pleasantly lodged; every one has
his Chamber, his Closet, his Library, and his little Garden. The Prior's
Apartment might well befit a Prince: There, amongst other things, you may see
the famous Crucifix of Michael Angelo, drawn, as is said, from Nature to the
Life, by a certain Peasant, whom that Painter crucified for that purpose: This
smells like a Fable; but here it goes current for a great Truth. This Picture
is of Wood, and is not above half a Foot high. I observed that the Crucifix
holds his Head exactly straight, which agrees not very well with the Posture of
a Man expiring on a Cross. They have also a Saint Laurence by Titian, and some
Designs of Ruben's and Albert Durer, which they prize very highly.

The various Prospects which are discovered from this Ascent, strike the
Beholder with Admiration. You behold the Sea, and many Islands, amongst which
is that of Capreae, the famous Seraglio of Tyberius. From thence you may
distinctly view the Greatness, and Ground-Plot of Naples, with its The Castle
of the Egg, the new Castle, and the Castle of St. Elmo. In the Castle of the
Egg, there is a Brass Cannon, called the Magdalen, which carries a Ball of
six-score Pound weight; and weighs twenty one thousand Pounds. Bulif.
Castles, Haven, Mole, and Lanthorn. It is a pleasure to look on the Gardens
which surround it, and the Fruitful Hills which ascend to Campania the Happy.
If you cast your Eyes on the other side, along the Seashore, the small Bays or
Inlets which reciprocally mix with the little Capes, washed by that peaceful
Sea, and the pretty Villages, with which the Coast is strewed, render a
perfectly agreeable Object. A little farther the Air is thickened by the
horrible Smoke of Vesuvius, and you may take a full view of this terrible
Mountain.

I shall not spend much time in describing either the Relics, Statues, or
miraculous Images, as they call 'em: But it is reasonable you should have some
Account of 'em, according to my wonted Method, of saying somewhat of every
thing. They keep at St. Louis of the Palace, a reasonable quantity of the
Virgin's Milk, which becomes liquid on all our Lady's Festivals. At St. John
Carbonnara, the Blood of St. Januarius boils up, when any one comes near the
Shrine in which his Body is kept; and the Blood of St. John Baptist, which is
at St. Maria Donna Romita, does the same thing whilst they say the Mass for the
beheading of that Saint. I will say nothing of the Pieces of the true Cross,
the Nails, the Branches of the Crown of Thorns, the Images of the Virgin, made
by St. Luke, nor an infinity of suchlike Rarities, whose Number would tire
you. At St. Dominick the Greater, you may see the Crucifix, which said one Day
to St. Thomas Aquinas, Thou have written well of me, Thomas; What Reward will thou have? To which St. Thomas answered, None but thy self. The Legend adds,
That this Holy Man being then in a Rapture, the fervor of his Zeal lifted him
three Foot from the Earth, and so sustained him. They say, another Crucifix,
which is in the Church of the Benedictines, had twice a long conversation with
his Vicegerent, Pope Pius V. That of St. Mary of the Carmelites, bowed his Head
at the sight of a Cannon-Bullet which was shot at him; this was in the Year
1439, when D. Pedro of Arragon, besieged Naples. The Bullet only beat off the
Crown of the Crucifix; they show it every Year on the first Friday in March,
and the second Holiday in Christmas. At the Church of St. Agnello, in the
Chapel belonging to the Family of the Monaci, another Crucifix which spoke, is
to be seen; the Story of which you have in the following Inscription:

Anno Domini, M CCC. in the Reign of King Charles II. this Holy Image of the
Crucifix, whilst the Comperes wrangled about Money lent, shining with Divine
splendour, declared the Truth of the Matter by Speech; which the Person guilty,
being angry at, denied himself to be the Debtor, and presently struck the Image
with a very hard Stone, on the Face, which instantly becoming Black and Blue,
was a notable Miracle to all; and the Sacrilegious Person after so great a
Crime, becoming immovable, by the Prayers of the Creditor put up to God for
him, was brought again to himself, and as long as he lived, did Penance for it.

In the same Church, the Image of St. Mary of Intercession, has often held
long Discourses with the blessed Jane, Mother of St. Agnello, A Crow which
^^^uted Tiberi^s, Drusus, (...) Germani^us Caesar's, was killed by a certain
Tailor, and was ordered to be buried with a solemn funeral ^o^p Plin. 10. c. 44.
and with St. Agnello himself. Furthermore, it is not now adays only, that
such things have happened. Do you not remember you have read, that amongst the
Prodigies which appeared at Rome, sometime before the Triumvirate, many Statues
of the Gods sweat Blood and Water, and that there was an Ox which spoke?
without doubt they were not less astonished under the Empire of Caligula, when
the Statue of Jupiter, which was at Olympus, burst forth into such loud fits of
Laughter, that those who were taking it down to carry it to Rome, fled away
affrighted, and left their Work. You know the History of the Crow, which
prognosticated Misfortune to Domitian, by its (...).

The great Number of Churches which we visited, and the Multitude of Tombs I
observed there, gave me opportunity to transcribe many Epitaphs; if you will,
to vary our Subject a little, I will communicate to you some part of my
Collection: It Is true, they are written in a mournful Style, but, in my
Opinion, agreeable, because so pathetical.

In the Church of St. John the Evangelist, there are six or seven Epitaphs,
made by the famous Poet Johannes Jovianus Pontanus. I fancy you can find
nothing more tenderly, nor more happily expressed: Take Four only:

On the Tomb of his Daughter Lucia.
Liquisti Patrem in tenebris, mea Lucia, postquam
E luce in tenebras, filia rapta mihi es.
Sed neque tu in tenebras rapta es, quin ipsa tenebras
Liquisti, and medio lucida sole micas.
Coelo te natam aspicio, number nata Parentem
Aspicis? an fingit haec sibi vana Pater?
Solamen mortis miserae, te nata Sepulchrum
Hoc tegit, haud Cineri sensus inesse potest.
Si qua tamen de te superat pars, nata, fatere
Felicem, quod te prima juventa rapit.
At nos in tenebris vitam luctuque trahemus,
Hoc pretium Patri, filia, quod genui.
Musae, Filia, luxerunt te in obitu, at lapide in hoc luget te Pater tuus, quem
liquisti in Squallore, cruciatu, gemitu, heu, heu! Filia, quod nec morienti
Pater adfui, qui mortis cordolium tibi demerem; nec sorores ingemiscenti
Collachrymarentur misellae; nec Frater singultiens, qui sitienti ministraret
aquulam; nec matter ipsa, quae collo implicita, ore animulam acciperet,
infelicissima; hoc tamen felix quod haud multos post annos revisit, tecumque
nunc cubat. Ast ego felicior, qui brevi cum utraque edormiscam eodem in
Conditorio. Vale Filia. Matri frigescenti cineres, interdum caleface, ut post
etiam refocilles meos.

Joannes Jovianus Pontanus L. Martiae, filiae dulciss. P. quae vixit. Ann.
XIIII. Men's. VII. D.XII.

Pont. Pater. L. Franc. Fill. infelic.

Lucili, tibi lux nomen dedit, and dedit ipsa
Matter stella tibi, stellaque luxque simul.
Eripuit nox atra, nigrae eripuere tenebrae:
Vixisti vix quot litera prima notat.
Hosne dies? breve tumne tibi lux fulsit, and aurae
Maternum in nimbis sic tenuere jubar?
Infelix fatum, puer heu male felix, heu! quod
Nec puer es, nec lux, nec nisi inane quid es.
Floreat ad pueri tumulum, ver halet, and urnae
Lucili, and cineri spiret inustus odor.
Dies L. non implesti, Filiole, breve naturae specimen, aeternus parentum
moeror, ac desiderium.

For his Wife.
Illa thori been fida Comes, custosque pudici,
Cuique and acus placuit, cui placuere coli.
Quaeque focum castosque Lares servavit, and arae
Et Thura, and lachrymas, and pia serta dedit.
In prolem studiosa parens, and amabilis uni
Quae studuit caro casta placere viro,
Hic posita est Ariadna; rosae, violaeque nitescant,
Quo posita est syrio, spiret odore locus:
Urna crocum Dominae fundat, distillet amomum,
Ad tumulum, and cineri sparsa cilissa fluat.
Quinquennio postquam uxor abiisti, dedicata prius aedicula monumentum hoc tibi
statui, tecum quotidianus ut loquerer, nec si mihi non respondes, nec
respondebit desiderium tui, per quod ipsa mecum semper es: aut obmutescit
memoria, per quam tecum non loquor. Ave igitur, mea Hadriana, ubi enim ossa mea
tuis miscuero, uterque simul been valebimus. Vivens tecum vixi. Ann. XXIX.
D.XXIX. Victurus post mortuus aeternitatem aeternam. Joannes Jovianus Pontanus,
Hadrianae Saxonae, Uxori opt. ac benemerentiss. P. quae vixit Ann. XLVI. men's.
VI. obiit Kalend. Mart. Ann. M.CCCC.LXXXX.

For Himself.
Vivus domum hanc mihi paravi, in qua quiescerem mortuus. Noli obsecro injuriam
mortuo facere, vivens quam feceram nemini. Sum etenim Joannes Jovianus
Pontanus, quem amaverunt bonae Musae, suspexerunt viri probi, honestaverunt
Reges Domini, scis jam qui sum, aut qui potius fuerim: Ego vero te, hospes,
noscere in tenebris nequeo, sed te ipsum ut noscas Rogo. Vale.

At Sancta Clara, for a Maid who died at the time of her Espousals:
Nata, eheu miserum! misero mihi nata parenti,
Unicus ut fieres, unica nata dolor.
Dum tibi namque virum, taedas, thalamumque parabam,
Funera, and inferias, anxius ecce paro.
Debuimus tecum poni materque, paterque,
Ut tribus haec miseris urna parata foret.
In the same Church, for King Robert, who was the Founder, and was Surnamed the
Good, and the Wise: Cernite Robertum regem virtute refertum.

This Panegyric is a little brief, for a Prince of such Wisdom and Knowledge,
and so great a Captain: But the longest Elogies are not always the best: There
are two others of the same Style, at St. Pietro d' Ara.

D. O. M. Fabritio Francipano, oui nec viventi Romani virtus, nec morienti vera
pietas defuit. Haeredd. ex testa. B. M. etc.

At St. Domin. Maj. for a Lord of the House of Caraffa: Huic
Virtus Gloriam,
Gloria immortalitatem
comparavit
M.CCCC.LXX.


In the same Church, for a Person who is not named: Terra tegit terram.

In the same Church, for the Cardinal d' Ariano, of the Family of Caraffa:
Vivat adhuc quamvis defunctum ostendat imago,
Discat quisque suum vivere post tumulum.


In the Vestry of the same Church, are many Tombs of the Kings and Queens of
Naples. They have there represented Death, under whose Effigies these Words are
written: Sceptra ligonibus aequat.
Memoriae Regum Neopolitanorum Arragonensium, etc.


For King Ferdinand II.

Ferrandum mors saeva diu fugis arma gerentem,
Mox, illum positis, impia, falce necas.
Obiit anno Domini 1496.
For Isabel of Arragon, Daughter of Alphonsus I. and Wife of John Galeas, Duke
of Milan; Hic Isabella jacet, centum sata sanguine Regum,
Quacum majestas Itala prisca jacet.
Sol qui lustrabat radiis fulgentibus orbem
Occidit, inque alio nunc agit orb diem.
Obiit die 11. Febr. 1524.


In the same place, for the Marquess of Pescara, by Ariosto: Quis jacet hoc
gelido sub marmore? Maximus ille
Piscator, belli gloria, pacis honos.
Numquid and hic pisces coepit? Non. Ergo quid? Urbes,
Magnanimos Reges, oppida, Regna, Duces.
Dic quibus haec coepit Piscator retibus? Alto
Consilio, intrepido cord, alacrique manu.
Qui tantum rapuere ducem? Duo numina, Mars, Mors.
Ut raperent quisnam compulit? Invidia.
At nocuere nihil; vivit nam fama superstes,
Quae martem, and mortem vincit, and invidiam.


For John Alefelt, a Danish Gentleman, who died at Naples, in his Travels: His
Sepulcher is at Mount Olivet: Ut flos mane viret, tepida productus ab aura,
Languescit flaccus vespere, nocte cadit.
Sic nos mortales orimur, morimurque miselli,
Certaque vivendi, non datur ulla dies.
Praesentis vitae est cursus labyrinthus, in illum,
Ex utero intravi, morte vocante abii.
Erravi hic quantum Deus, and mea fata volebant:
Lustraque transmisi quinque diesque december.
Nobilibus tribui stadiis haec tempora vitae,
Ut sic nobilior, nobilis ipse forem.
Horum and Liligeri me visere Regna Monarchae,
Fecit, and in Latium bis pius egit amor,
Nunc jaceo, Patriae long tumulatus ab oris;
Judicis expectans acta suprema Dei.
Cimbrica me genuit Tellus Arctoa, sub Austro,
Parthenope rapuit, Parthenopeque tenet.
Obiit XVI. Kal. Jul. an. M.D.LXXXI.


In the same Church:

Constantia Davila, and Beatrix Picolominea filia, redditis quae sunt Coeli
Coelo, and quae sunt Terrae Terrae, ut semper uno vixere animo, sic uno condi
tumulo voluere. O beatam and mutui amoris constantiam!

I forgot the Epitaph of Joan the First, Queen of Jerusalem, and both the
Sicilies. Charles de Duras, whom she had first adopted, and who afterward
rebelled against her, caused her to be strangled in Prison, accusing her that
she had strangled Andrew of Hungary, her first Husband; concerning which
Historians vary. The Intrigues of a Landress and a Cordelier, were the cause of
all her Misfortunes. The Tomb of Andrew is in the Cathedral. This is the
Epitaph of Queen Joan: Inclyta Parthenopes jacet hic Regina Joanna
Prima: prius felix, mox miseranda nimis:
Quam Carolo genitam, mulctavit Carolus alter,
Qua morte illa virum sustulit ante suum.
M.CCC.LXXXII. 22. Maii.
She was the Daughter of Charles of Sicily, Duke of Calabria. I remember I have
read somewhere, of a certain Fortune Tellers, who looking in her Hand, told her,
when she was very young, Maritaberis cum ALIO; and that it was observed
afterward, that the Word ALIO, was composed of the first Letters of her four
Husbands Names, Andrew of Hungary; Louis, Prince of Tarentum; James, Prince of
Majorca; and Otho of Brunswick.
Andrew, Louys, James, and Otho.

At St. Mary of the Concord, for a King of Fez, who embraced the Roman
Religion, and died one Hundred Years old.

D. O. M. B. M. V.

Gaspar ex serenissima Benemerina familia, vigesimus secundus in Africa Rex,
dum contra Tyrannos a Catholico Rege arma rogat auxiliaria, liber effectus a
Tyrannide Machometi, cujus impiam cum lacte hauserat legem, in Catholicam
adscribitur; Numidiam proinde exosus, pro Philippo III. Hispaniarum Monarcha,
pro Rodulpho Caesare quibus carus, preclare in haereticos apud Belgas,
Pannonosque saevit armatus. Sub Urbano VIII. Eques commendator, Immaculatae
conceptions, Deiparae creatur, and Christianis, Heroicis, Regiis virtutibus ad
immortalitatem anhelans, centenarius hic mortale reliquit, and perpetuum censum
cum penso quater in hebdomade, incruentum missae sacrificium ad suam offerendi
mentem. Anno Dom. M.DC.XLI.

Pope Innocent IV. died at Naples, in the Year 1254. His Tomb is to be seen at
the Cathedral, with two Epitaphs, too long to be here recited: The first is in
Leonine Verses, and has no great Spirit in it: The other is in Prose, and
therein it is observed, that this Pope, Purpureo primos pileo Cardinales
exornavit; First adorned the Cardinals with a purple Cap: He thought fit to
make them this Compliment, the more to engage their Friendship, during his
Broils with Fr. Barbarossa. About fifty Years after, Boniface VIII. bestowed
the Purple Robe on them. Paul II. the Red Cap, and some other marks of
distinction: And Urban VIII. the quality of honor to be styled, Their
Eminencies. I observed in the same Church, on the Tombs of many Canons, that
they have not had the Titles of Cardinals for above two hundred Years.
Raymundus Barrilius, Neapo. Presbyter, Canonicus Cardinalis, etc. Do. Petrus
Nicolaus de Marchesiis Neap. Sacerdos, almae Ecclesiae Canonicus, Diaconus,
Cardinalis, etc. anno 1472. You know that this formerly signified, Presbyter
Cardinalis, or Presbyter Principalis. There is some appearance that the Canons
of this Church had the privilege to make use of this Term, according to old
Custom, for a considerable time after it was altered.

In the Chapel of the Family Alesia, at St. Agnello: Quae miser imposui
lugubria saxa Sepulchro,
Mi pater innumeris accipe pro meritis.
Quod si marmoream licuisset sumere formam
Te natus tegeret non alio lapide.
Incisaeque notae legerentur; Gratus ALEXIS,
Reddidit ossa Patri, fitque Patri Tumulus.


It is so rare a thing for a Bishop to prefer his Condition to that of a
Cardinal, that I must not forget the following Epitaph.

Sigismundo Pappacudae Franc. F. Tropejensium Praesuli; viro opt. and
Jurisconsulto, qui cum in coetum Cardinalium fuisset a Clemente VII. adscitus,
maluit in Patria Episcopus vivere. Haeredes pos. Vixit. An. 80. M.VI.D.X. obiit
1536.

Does not this Man put you in mind of John Angelico de Fiesola, that good
Brother Dominican, who was skilful in painting, and chose rather to work in his
Cell, than to be promoted to the Arcbishoprick of Florence? The Church which
has the Tomb of Sigismond, is called St. John of Pappacodi's, because it was
built by one of his Ancestors. They tell us, That that Gentleman, being buried
for dead after a Fit of the Apoplexy, one of his Kindred, who was in the
Country, hearing of it, came Post immediately, and caused the Tomb to be
opened. The Body was found dead; but it appeared that he had shifted his
Posture.

At S. Severin of the Benedictus, for J. Baptist. Cicaro.

Liquisti Gemitum miserae lachrymasque Parenti,
Pro quibus infelix hunc tibi dat tumulum.
For Andrew Banifacia, a young Infant in the same Place. The Verses were made
by Sannazarius.

Nate Patris Matrisque amor, and suprema voluptas,
En tibi quae nobis te dare sors vetuit.
Busta, eheu! tristesque natas damus, invida quando
Mors immaturo funere te rapuit.
Both Tombs are Magnificent. The Chapel that belongs to the Family of
Sanseverino in the same Church, is an exquisitely beautiful Structure. There
you may see the Tombs of the Three young Lords, Brothers, who were poisoned by
their Uncle, and all three died in the same Hour. There is something so
exquisitely feeling in this, that I cannot forbear to send you their Epitaphs,
together with that of the Countess their Mother.

1. Hic ossa quiescunt Jacobi Sanseverini, Comitis Saponariae, veneno misere ob
avaritiam necati, cum duobus miseris Fratribus eodem fato, eadem hora
commorientibus.

2. Jacet hic Sigismundus Sanseverinus, veneno impie absumptus, qui eodem fato,
eodem tempore, pereuntes Germanos fratres nec alloqui nec cernere potuit.

3. Hic Situs est Ascanius Sanseverinus, cui obeunti eodem veneno, inique atque
impie, commoririentes fratres nec alloqui nec videre quidem licuit.

4. Hospes, miserrimae miserrimam defleas orbitatem. En Hippolita Montia, post
natas foeminas infelicissima, quae Ugo Sanseverino conjugi, tres maximae
expectationis filios peperi: qui venenatis poculis (vicit in familia, pro
Scelus! pietatem cupiditas, timorem audacia, and rationem amentia) una in
miserorum complexibus parentum, miserabiliter illico expirarunt. Vir;
aegritudine sensim obrepente, paucis post annis in his etiam manibus expiravit.
Ego tot superstes funeribus, cujus requies in tenebris, solamen in lachrymis,
and cura omnis in morte collocatur. Quos vides separatim tumulos ob aeterni
doloris argumentum, and in memoriam illorum sempiternam. Anno M.D.XLVII.

Here is an instance of another afflicted Mother in the Chapel of the Family of
Coppola, in the Church of St. Aug.

O Fata prepostera! o miserrimam pietatem! Clarix Rynalda Tiberii Coppulae
Jures-Consi and camerae Regiae Praesidis Uxor amantissima, sepultis turbato
Ordine VII. dulcissimis infantibus filiis, post habito paterno tumulo, simul
cum iis sepeliri voluit. Et materni Amoris officium, quod viventibus maluisset,
saltem in communi sede cineribus paranda, exiguum doloris ingentis solatium
praestaret, M.D.LXXXXI.

Over Against the great Church of the Carmelites, in a place of the People,
there is a kind of Chapel, which was built by order of Charles I. King of
Naples, in the same place where that Prince caused the Head of the unfortunate
He was not sent to the Holy Land, because he was excommunicated.
Conradin to be cut off, And five or six Lords more.
and at the same time his Cousin Frederick's, Marquess of Baden, and Duke of
Austria. This Tragedy is painted in Fresco, on the Walls within the Chapel,
They have there also the Pillar of Porphyrie, which was erected in the middle;
and round about this Distich is written; Asturis ungue Leo, pullum rapiens
Aquilinum
Hic deplumavit, acephalumque dedit.
The Body was presently put into the little Chapel, and afterward removed into
the Church of the Carmelites.

They showed us in the Convent of the Carmelites, the place where the famous
Rebel Thomas Aniello was killed, Vulgarly called Massaniello.
eighteen Days after the Establishment of his Commonwealth. I have a piece of
the Money that was coined at Naples in the time of those Disorders, with this
Inscription, S. P. Q. N. Senatus Pop. Que Neap. A just Comparison might be made
between Massaniello and Cromwell: there is only this difference, that Cromwell
was a Gentleman, and Massaniello but a Fisherman.

Our Guide told us, as we passed before the Church of St. Mary Major, That the
Devil appeared formerly in the shape of a Hog, in the place where that Church
was since built; whicy so affrighted, and drove away the Inhabitants of Naples,
that the City almost became desolate: But that the Virgin answering the Vows of
Pomponius, then Bishop of Naples, ordered him to build a Church for her, in the
place where they most frequently saw the infernal Hog; which being done, it
never appeared afterward. They add, That in memorial of this Event, the Bishop
caused a Hog of Brass to be made which is now kept in a part of the said Church.

You have not here all I intend to tell you concerning Naples. But because we
now write to London, I thought fit to join this Letter to the Packet. Do me
the Honor to love me still, and believe that I am,

SIR, Yours, etc.
At Naples, Mar. 14. 1688.
LETTER XXII.
SIR,
THE City of Naples has been so many times ransacked, and has gone through
the Hands of so many Masters, that the greatest part of its Antiquities have
been buried in their own Ruins. The Front of St. Paul Major is the Frontispiece
of the old Temple of Apollo, was afterward dedicated to Castor and Pollux, by
one Tiberius Julius Tarsus, a Freed-Man of Augustus: His Name is distinctly to
be read on one of the Frieses of this Frontispiece, (...). The Portico is
supported by eight channelled Pillars, of the Corinthian Order; and on the
Pediment are some Basso Relievo's, which represent the Deities.

They say that the Columns of St. Restituta were taken from a Temple of
Neptune. There also remain some Ruins of an Amphitheatre. We often took notice,
as we passed, of an ancient Statue of the Nile, supported by a Crocodile. The
House of D. Diomodes Caraffa is exceedingly full of Sculptures and ancient
Inscriptions. You may see in the Court, the Head, and all the Crest of a Horse
of Brass, which had no Bridle, and which was sometimes in one of the Places of
Naples, as an Emblem of the Liberty of that City, when it was governed as a
Commonwealth. But King Conrad caused a Bit to be put on this Horse, as now
appears, and wrote, as they say, these two Verses, on the Pedestal which
supported it.

Hactenus effraenis, Domini nunc paret habenis;
Rex Domat hunc aequus Parthenopensis equum.
There are also a great many old Ruins found on the Hill; where, as the
Antiquaries say, was (...), toward St. Cosmus and St. Damian. And besides
that, several curious Persons, as amongst others, M. Richetti has picked up
diverse Antiquities, and particularly made Collections of Medals; from some
whereof, great Light has been drawn for the History of Naples. I refer the
speaking of the Catacombs to another time.

You know with what exactness and success Pope Sixtus V. extirpated the
Banditti out of Rome, and all the Ecclesiastical State. But you also know that
the other Princes of Italy had not the same good Fortune, though all with
common consent undertook the Work. These Bands of Thieves were more numerous
than ever in the Kingdom of Naples; and some Years ago, to travel securely,
they were forced to go in Caravans. At present there is nothing to be feared,
the Marquess del Carpio, last Viceroy of Naples, has at last freed that
Country from the Robberies and Murders of that wicked Gang: Many of them have
been put to the Sword, and others executed. There is a great number of them yet
in Prison; we saw five hundred of them in the Arsenal, who surrendered
themselves some Months since, on condition their Lives should be saved, and
they not sent to the Galleys.

Futhermore, if they have exterminated all the Banditti by Profession, there
are still remaining a great number of others who are little better. To speak in
general, the People of Naples are a very wicked People; the Prisons swarm with
Malefactors; and they affirmed to us, that there are at present, in two Prisons
only, about four thousand who deserve death. They did not hit amiss, who said,
That Naples is a Paradise inhabited with Devils.

The City is extremely fine, as I have already told you; but there are many
things which are not suitable to its Beauty, and which cloud the pleasant
Countenance it would otherwise have. First, you can see no Women in it; it has
this fault in common, with all the other Cities of Italy. You must not think I
am become too much a Gallant, when I say, this is to hide ridiculously the
fairest half of the World. Secondly, the Habits and Equipages of Naples are of
black and dark Colors, which are apt to inspire Melancholy. You are forbidden
to wear Gold or Silver, or Silk upon Silk. The greatest Lord can have but two
Staffieri.
Footmen: And the greatest part of the Coaches being drawn slowly by Mules, are
both uneasy and unpleasant. The Spanish Dress is generally used. The Viceroy
is seldom seen; and his Court looks dull and melancholy like the rest. The
Trade of Naples is much decayed: They make there a great deal of Soap, Snuff of
Tobacco, Stockings, Wastcoats, and other worsted Commodities.

We yesterday made a Voyage to Vesuvius; Mount Vesuvius. See Letter XXXIII.
the Journey was somewhat troublesome, and the sight of it dreadful. I will
endeavor to give a more distinct account of it than you can receive from the
Descriptions already made.

They reckon it eight Miles from Naples to the top of Vesuvius. During the
first four Miles, we past through many good Villages, following the Seacoast:
These places are well tilled, and seem to have received no damages from the
Eruptions of the Mountain, notwithstanding they have happened so frequently.
There are only from place to place great Stones, which have been rolled thither.

Going out of this last Village, called Resina, we turned to the Left, and
began to ascend; and you may still travel on Horseback two large Miles, or two
Miles and an half further, amongst loose Stones, and heaps of baked Earth,
which the Vomitings of the Mountain have spread all about. The more you
advance, the more you find the Soil cracked, dry, burned, and covered with
several sorts of calcined Stones, which are so many Monuments of those furious
Eruptions. You may also observe in several places, the Channels of the Torrents
of Sulphur and Bitumen, which have run down from the Mountain. In fine, the
Ascent becomes so rough and difficult, that you must be forced to go on Foot;
you may believe there are neither Taverns, nor other Houses, nor Boys to hold
the Horses.

I assure you there is a great deal of Pains and Trouble, which must be endured
before you can mount to this prodigious Furnace. You are for the most part
plunged amongst the Ashes, if one may properly give that the name of Ashes,
which rather resembles Brick-dust. Sometimes you fall back instead of
advancing, because the Ashes give way under your Feet; and at last, after
diverse little restings, you come to the brim of the ancient Gulf; I say the
ancient Gulf, because you will perceive by and by that things have some time
since suffered great Alterations.

This first height on which we now are, makes a Circle round the Gulf: The top
of the Mountain having been worn, you may easily conceive what kind of Horns
and rugged Elevations have been made in the circuit of its height. As near as
we could guess, this vast melting Pot has near a Mile Diameter; you may go
down into it several ways, about an hundred Paces below the steep Circle of the
brim of the Mountain, which is all the depth of this old Mouth.

By an extraordinary Eruption, this vast Abyss was almost quite filled, in one
of its last breakings out, with a mixture of Sulphur, of Bitumen, of Minerals,
of Allom, of Nitre, of Saltpeter, and of Earth melted, or vitrified; all these
matters giving over boiling, have formed a kind of thick Crust, or hardened
Scum, which made a level in the Gulf, an Hundred Paces below its Brims. A
furious shaking of the Mountain did afterward break this Crust, or thickness of
hardened Matter, and tumbled the pieces one upon another, as when after you
have broken the Ice of a Pond, a sudden Frost presently cements all the pieces
together. This rugged Superficies is every where equally uneven; and there are
here and there burning Funnels; from whence the Fumes continually exhale: In
some places you feel the Heat through your Shoes, only walking over it.

This is not all: Just in the middle of this Extent of the Mountain, which, you
must know, is almost round; a furious Eruption has forced its Passage, and
formed a new Mountain. This Mountain is also round, and is about a quarter of a
Mile in height. I could not count the Paces, because it was impossible to make
them equal, by reason the Ashes hinder it; which, as I have already told you,
make one sometimes slide back.

After we had traversed that rough space, which is like a low Trench, about
Three hundred Paces broad between the Bounds of the greater and lesser
Mountains, as I have already described them. You mount the last with as much
pains as you did the first. It is all full of smoking Chinks. In many places
you see Sulphur almost pure, with a kind of Sal Armoniack, which is almost of a
Citron Color. In others, there is a reddish and porous Matter, like the Scum
of Iron, which comes from Smiths Forges: There are pieces of all Colors,
Fashions, and Weights: All this having been baked and re-baked by so vehement a
Fire, and this Composition of so many different Matters, having been melted and
incorporated together, you may easily imagine what it is.

The top of the little Mountain has its opening as well as the great one,
which at present is the Throat of this vast Abyss; we guessed it to be about an
hundred Paces in breadth. There issues out a flood of Smoke, which almost fills
its Capacity; but there come sometimes Gusts of Wind from above, which drive
away this Smoke, sometimes one way, and sometimes another, which permitted us
to view clearly the height of the Mouth, though at several times.

The Brink is perpendicular within, except in one place, where it is sloping
enough to descend into it. Our Guide going first down, three or fourscore Paces
before, we followed him; which (I must tell you by the bye) was unnecessarily
done, and which I would not advise any body to do. We were then on the Brink of
this dreadful Precipice, and we rolled down many Stones, or hard Masses, which
we loosened about us: Sometimes they stopped at the first or second falling; at
other times they made a long continuation of boundings with a great noise. It
had been to no purpose to have computed the time these Stones took up in their
leaps or descents, because there is no bottom can be guessed at where they must
stop at last; the noise ceasing sometimes, only in respect of those who heard
it, the distance alone rendering it insensible.

We could not perceive that what we tumbled into this Gulf did any way increase
its Smoke. It is true, greater Masses were necessary for such an Experiment;
and yet it would have been very uncertain whether they would have produced any
effect; there being nothing to oblige us to believe that there is a Lake of of
boiling matters, which perpendicularly answers to the Mouth of the Mountain.

Some bring with them Gunpowder, and make Mines, to have the pleasure to blow
up great Rocks: But to speak freely, I think it a great folly to carry their
Curiosity so far, in so dangerous a place; and I think it wisely done not to
stay there too long. The sudden disgorging of the Flames, is not what is to be
most feared: But the quaking of the Mountain always precedes the great Claps,
and always comes very suddenly. Many have been surprised there; and you know
how poor Pliny was surprised by it, though he was at a considerable distance.

The following Inscription is to be seen about three Miles from Naples, in a
Village on the Way to the Mountain.

Posteri, posteri, vestra res agitur. Dies facem praefert Diei; nudius
perendino. Advortite vicies ab satu solis, ni fabulatur historia, arsit
Vesuvius immani semper clade haesitantium: Ne posthac incertos occupet, moneo.
Uterum gerit mons hic bitumine, alumine, ferro, auro, argento, nitro, aquarum
fontibus gravem. Serius ocius ignescet, pelagoque influente pariet; sed ante
parturit, concutitur, concutitque solum: fumigat, coruscat, flammigerat, quatit
aerem, horrendum immugit, boat, tonat, arcet finibus accolas. Emigra dum licet.
Jamjam enititur, crumpit, mixtum igne lacum evomit, praecipiti ruit ille lapsu,
seramque fugam praevertit. Si corripit, actum est, periisti. Anno salutis 1631,
etc. -- Tu si sapis, audi clamantem lapidem, sperne larem, sperne sarcinulas;
mora nulla, fuge.

Every body knows what Baronius, and many other Authors have reported, of the
burnings of this Mountain, whose Roarings have been heard to Rome, and and its
Lightnings even to Egypt; the thickness of whose Smoke has, as it were,
ecclipsed the Sun, and made dark Nights at Noonday; whose Streams of Brimstone
have run into the Sea, so that the very Sea has swelled and boiled with heat.
But without having recourse to old Stories, we need but ask the present
Inhabitants of Naples, in the Year 1682, from the fifteenth of August, to the
twenty seventh of the same Month, in the Year 1685, at the end of Semptember,
and the last Year in the Month of April: They have been Witnesses of the same
Tragedies.

Though I might mix my small Philosophy with that of the learned, who have
written on this Subject, yet would I not undertake it for the present: My
Design is only to represent the Matter of Fact to you as it is.

I find my self in a manner overladen with the number of Curiosities which we
saw about Puzzoli; the little time we had to view them axactly would not suffer
me to take particular Notice of them all. I know these things have been many
times described; but I am well assured that you never read in any Relation,
such a Description of Vesuvius, as that which I have now made you. I am also
persuaded that you will find something new, in what I have to say of the
Journey we lately made. Going out of the Suburbs of Naples, in the way to
Puzzoli, you meet with the Hill, which bears the Name of Pausilypus, Pausilypus.
(...), say some Etymologists.

Pausilypus noster qui nunc dat nomina monti,
Sic dicta a magno Caesare villa fuit.
Quod foret insanis requies fidissima curis,
Et portum fessa redderet illa rati.
In effect, this delicious Hill has a charming Situation: It is well
cultivated, sprinkled with Houses of Pleasure, and abundance of excellent Vines.

It is daily found, that Travelers are obliged to march up more difficult
Ascents than this; which naturally was only an easy sloping Ascent, and might
have been made almost insensible, by filling up the Ways with Earth, supported
by Walls: But out of an extravagant Humor, they pierced the Mountain, and
through this Hole, made indeed a shorter Way, and of a more extraordinary
Structure, but an hundred times more troublesome than the Ascent of the Hill:
This Cave is commonly called, The Grotta of Puzzoli, or Pausilypus.
The Grotta of Puzzoli: It is cut in some places through the Rock, and in other
places through the Sand. It is near a Mile in length, thirty or forty Foot in
height, and about eighteen in breadth; so that two Coaches may easily pass by
each other: There is no Light but at the two ends, and a little Hole in the
middle, over an Oratory, which is made in the Rock, by enlarging that part of
the Way a little. This Light is very small; and the Mists of fine Dust, which
are raised by every Step we make, almost blind the Passengers: You must wrap up
your Head, or cover your Face very well with a Handcherchief, if you will avoid
breathing Earth instead of Air. You can see so little in this obscure Cave,
that when you hear Company coming at a distance, you must cry out to them, To
the Right, or, To the Left, that they may take the opposite side, and nor fall
foul on each other as you meet.

This is an ancient Work: Seneca makes mention of it, and complained, as well
as we, of its Dust and Darkness. P. Razzani; P. Jovius; L. Alberti; F.
Lombardo; and many other Authors.
It Is attributed to one Cocceius, without mentioning who he was; and some
affirm that he was only the Undertaker; others speak of him as of a Prince or
Governor of the Country; and they allege some ancient Annals, wherein it is
said, Schraderus has also written the same thing.
that an hundred thousand Men, finished this Cavern in fifteen Days, by the
Orders of Cocceius.

The Lake of Agnano is between two Hills, a little beyond Pausilypus: The Lake
of Agnano.
This Lake is almost round, and is about a Mile in circuit: The Water is very
clear, and has no ill taste; you may observe it boil every where, without
perceiving any heat. Tench and Eels are there in great abundance. On the sides
of the Lake are two things considerable; the Caves which are called, The Baths
of St. German; and The Grotta di Cane. The Baths of St. German.
They tell us a long and fabulous Story, which occasioned the Denomination of
these Baths, which, in my Opinion, is not worth the relating: You must know,
after the third or fourth step which you make to descend into them, you are
seized with a heat, which smells of Brimstome, and which puts you into a sudden
sweat. Gouty Persons, and those that are troubled with some other Distempers,
which are brought thither from all parts, receive, as they say, great benefit
from them.

Grotta di Cani: See the Instructions to a Traveller.
The Grotta of the Dog, is, as it were, the beginning of a Cave, at the Foot of
a Hill: It is nine Foot long or deep, four and an half broad, and five high: It
is not an effect of Art. The bottom is nothing but pure Earth, or Stone covered
with Dust, as the middle of a Highway; and the sides have nothing that is
polished or wrought, or any way remarkable: I considered the whole very
carefully. They cause you to observe some Drops which fall from above, and
which, they say, are caused by the condensation of the Steams raised from
below, of which I will speak presently. The thing deserves a particular
examination; but it is more natural to say, that this Water distills from the
Mountain, and pierces the top of the Grotto; you may see the like in all such
places. There arises out of the Earth in this Grotto, a thin and piercing
Exhalation, without any Smoke; this seizes on the Breath, and choaks one in a
Minute. This Vapor is vulgarly accounted to be deadly Poison, though in
appearance it is only a Sulphurous Steam. We need not dispute about Words; we
may call all that kills, deadly; and in this sense, there is not a more deadly
Poison than a Musket Bullet; we shall therefore give this Vapor what Name you
please, and proceed to give you an account of what happened, and what we saw.

He who has the Key of the Baths of St. Germans, has also that of this
Grotto; for I must tell you by the way, that they do not leave it open. This
Man enters standing as upright as he can, to the middle of the Grotto. He bows,
and kneels down by degrees, holding his Head always upright; he sits down on
his Heels, so that his Hands may touch the Earth: Then he holds the Dog by all
his four Feet, and lays him down suddenly on his Side on the Ground; in an
instant, the poor Creature falls into Convulsions, turns his Eyes, lolls out
his Tongue, stretches himself out without crying, and becomes stiff, and he
that holds him, throws him for dead out of the Cave: He is presently put into
the Lake, which is not above twenty Paces distant, where, in less than a
Minute, he reassumes his Spirits, and swims out of the Water; he runs about
crying, as it were to express the Joy for his deliverance. Charles VIII. King
of France, made trial with an Ass; and the Viceroy D. Pedro de Toledo, with
two Slaves, who died.

The Sieur Villemont speaks in his Travels, of a Gentleman, named Tournon, who
stooping in the Grotto, to take up a Stone, was seized by the Vapor, and
presently carried to the Lake, and in a short time recovered his Spirits: But
the Author adds, that Tournon died a few Moments after. Samelli.


They have made this Experiment upon Men, and all sorts of Animals, with the
same effect. Two Foot from the Earth, and even nearer, there is nothing to be
feared, for the Spirits grow thin, and are dispersed; but the lower you stoop,
the greater is the danger: These Spirits are subtle and violent; they sparkle,
and break forth impetuously, and in abundance. We cannot light a Match, without
perceiving some appearances of the like Nature.

The Keeper of the Grotto made also another Experiment: He went in with two
great lighted Torches, and when he bowed one near the Ground, it not only
ceased to flame, but was quite extinguished, without any Fire or Smoke: He
lighted it again with the other, and thus put them out, and kindled them by
turns.

They tell us of the like Vapors in a Cave at Zoli in Hungary; and Pliny
making mention of this, concerning which I am speaking, calls it Spiraculum
Puteolanum, and ranks it with those which he calls Scrobes Charoneae. All the
adjacent Country is nothing but Brimstone. We passed by Monte Secco, and
Solfatara, which are all full of Brimstone, Allom, and Holes underground,
whence Flame and Smoke exhale, with Noise and Stink, at least as much as we see
at present in Vesuvius: They prepare Roch-Allom on the Solfatara. See, at the
end of the Second Volume, the Instructions to a Traveller.
Solfatara; which is a dry, Yellow and White Mountain, all baked and worn by
its own Fire. They erect little Cabbins there, in which they labor at that
Work, and the sole heat of the Vents makes the Caldrons boil.

This Hill, the highest part whereof is worn out by the Fire, is in form of a
kind of Oval Basin, about twelve hundred and fifty Foot long, and a Mile in
breadth. The Fumes which continually issue out, are often smelt at Naples. They
assure me, that by them the Marble is blackened, and the Ornaments of their
Churches sullied, as well as the Goods in their Houses. All these Spirits of
Sulphur, Allom, Vitriol, etc. with which the Earth is filled, do also corrupt
the Waters. The Capuchins of St. Januarius, who are near to it, have been
constrained to lift up their Cisterns into the Air, upon a Pillar, to hinder
its having such Communication with them, as might spoil their Water.

The greatest part of the People in and about Naples, no way doubt, but that
the fuming Holes of the Solfatara, are, in a literal sense, the real Chimneys
of Hell. Capaccio, who has very nicely examined the whole matter, is of the
same Opinion: He assures us, that the abovementioned Capuchins, from time to
time, hear most frightful Howlings, and are often plagued with Hobgoblins
(Spesso sono stati travagliati da il Diavoli, e spesso sentono ullulati, and
terrori di grandissimo spa vento.) He adds many Stories on this Occasion, which
he gives out for certain Truths, and says further, that many People believe
that this Country is full of Treasures, which would be easily discovered, but
for the wicked Spirits, which domineer there, and keep them.

Going down from thence we came to Puzzoli: PUZZOLI.
This City, formerly so famous, is now very inconsiderable. I will say nothing
of its ancient Names, nor of its Antiquity, or Etymology, which may be found
amongst Geographers; Wars, Earthquakes, Insults of the Sea, and Time which
devours every thing, have almost totally destroyed it: But a great quantity of
stately Ruins, demonstrate its ancient Magnificence. Almost adjoining to St.
James's Church, you see the Ruins of an The Arena or Bottom was 172 Feet long,
and 88 broad. Capaccio.
Amphitheatre, which was built of hewn Stone. Tradition will have it, that St.
Januarius, and Sosius, Proculus, Euticetes, Acutius, Festus, Desiderius, in the
Year 299. Others say 305.
six other Christians, were here given for a Prey to wild Beasts, but the
Beasts adored, instead of devouring them. Some time after, these seven
Champions had their Heads cut off near the Solfatara, in that place where now a
Church is built, and dedicated to St. Januarius. These Words are written on the
Altar: Locus decollationis S. Januarii, and sociorum ejus.

Close to the Amphitheatre, Those of Puzzoli give to this Amphitheatre the Name
of Colliseum, though they have not the same reason for it, as that of Rome.
Sarnelli has written, that it remained entire not long ago, and that the
Earthquakes at last destroyed it. It was in the midst of the old City.
are great Ruins, almost wholly buried, which they believe are the Remainders
of a Labyrinth; but there is more reason to believe it has been a Fish Pond,
like the Piscina Mirabilis.

The Cathedral is built on the Ruins of a Temple of Jupiter; and of part of
the Materials of that Temple, particularly the Frontispiece, where it appears
by an ancient Inscription, that it was built by Calphurnius Luc. Fill.

Between the City and the Amphitheatre, you may observe the Ruins of a Temple
of Diana. Toward the Dominicans of Jesu Maria, when the Sea is extremely
turbulent, it throws on Shore some new Marks of the old Magnificence of the
Palaces of Puzzoli; amongst which are many times found diverse sorts of fine
Stones, Cornelians, Agats, Jaspars, Amethysts, etc. The Antiquaries pretend,
that about this place, there were formerly a great Number of Jewellers and
Goldsmith's Shops. The Sea also brings up other sorts of Stones, upon which, as
well as the others, are several sorts of Figures graved; as Cocks, Eagles,
Swans, Hares, Serpents, Grasshoppers, Ants, Vine-Branches, Grapes, Ears of Corn,
Heads of Men, and others, Motto's of Greek and Latin, etc. Some People fancy,
that Nature has formed all these Figures on them; and Superstition attributes
several Virtues to them.

The Sand which they use for Building at Puzzoli, deserves to be taken notice
of. Vitruvius commends it extremely; and Pliny also boasts much of it: It
enters the Composition of a certain sort of Mortar, which grows as hard as
Marble, even in the Sea itself.

Taking Boat to go to the Lake Lucrin, which is two Miles from Puzzoli, we had
time to consider the famous Arches, which, according to the vulgar Opinion, are
some Remains of the Bridge which Caligula caused to be built from Bayae to
Puzzoli: This is the common Opinion; and those Arches are usually called
Caligula's Bridge, The Bridge of Caligula.
by the People of the Country: They admire this Miracle, and treat Strangers
with it, as the rarest, and most surprising thing in the World: And, without
doubt, there would be reason for it, considering so bold a piece of Work, as
well deserves to be placed amongst the greatest Prodigies. But by misfortune,
this pretended Bridge is a mere Chimaera. Suetonius has so positively related
the History of Caligula's Bride, which was a Bridge of Boats, and not of Brick
or Stones, that I cannot but wonder, how so many People, have run into such
false Notions. The History relates the Matter of Fact clearly: Bajaram, In the
Life of Caligula, 19
says he, medium intervallum, and Puteolanas moles trium millium, and
sexcentorum fere passuum ponte conjunxit, contractis undique onerariis navibus,
Per hunc pontem ultro citro commeavit, biduo Continenti.
and ordine duplici ad anchoras collocatis; superjectoque aggere terreno, ac
directo in Appiae viae formam. Primo die phalerato equo -- Postridie
quadrgiario habitu, etc.

The reasons which the Author adds, for this Humorous Prince's undertaking such
a Work, signify nothing to the present purpose. Observe, I pray, the term of
Puteolanas Moles, he does not say Puteolos, but Puteolanas Moles. This clearly
explains what those Arches were, which we see at present. This was properly
what we call a Mole in our Language, There are 1 Arches.
a Rampart against the violence of the Waves, that Vessels might ride in safety
in the Harbor. It is a thing commonly practiced in Seaports. It is true, that
this Mole was made in the form of Arches, which is not agreeable to the fashion
of modern Times: But this ought not to raise any Scruple; for besides that it
is in vain to contest against a thing so well confirmed; we ought to consider,
that things are not always done after the same manner. And moreover, one might,
in my Judgment, allege many substantial reasons to prove, that a Mole with
Arches might be more durable than another; and that it may be sufficient to
break the Waves, and abate the great Shocks of the Sea.

The Lake of Lucrin, a Lucro dictus, The Lake Lucrino.
says Charles Stephens, because of the great number of Fish found in it, is
now but a little Pond, of a quarter of a Mile long, and about one hundred Paces
broad. The new Mountain, which I shall presently speak of, has almost filled
it up. This little Lake is not above three or fourscore Paces from the Sea: It
was formerly joined to it; and Pliny reports, that they were fain to make use
of a great many Machines, to separate them; Mare Tyrrhenum a Lucrino molibus
seclusum. Suetonius tells us, that Augustus employed twenty thousand Men, to
make a Communication between the Lucrino, and the Averno, and the Sea. He adds,
that they made it a Haven.

The Water of this Lake is always Salt: It was renowned for its Oysters, as
well as Mount Gaurus. Nuptiae videbant ostreas Lucrinas, says Varro.

Concha Lucrini delicatior stagni. Martial. One can hardly mention the Lake
Lucrino, without calling to mind the Dolphin, which Pliny, and other Authors
mention. The Story is thus: A Dolphin became familiarly acquainted with a young
Boy, who went every Day to School from Bayae to Puzzoli, and used sometimes to
give him Bread: One Day the Dolphin offered his Back to the Schoolboy, and
carried him into the Bay, and at last accustomed himself to carry him over to
and from School, as often as he desired. Appian affirms, he was an Eyewitness;
and adds, that People came from all parts to Puzzoli to see it. Mecaenas and
Egesydimus, Authors ^^ntemporary, ^^d cited by Th. Garzoni, with Flavianus and
F. Alphius relate the same thing.
Solinus averrs, that this continued for so long time, that at last it was not
looked upon as an extraordinary thing. Aristotle tells us so like a Story,
that, had he not lived above four Ages before these Authors, one might have
concluded it the same. If we should take notice of all that the Naturalists,
both Ancient and Modern, have said of the Dolphin, we should have enough to
allege, perhaps, to make the Story credible. All Animals are capable of being
taught; and some amongst them may have a more than ordinary inclination to a
Man. That which implies no Contradiction, ought not rashly to be There is a
difference between believing a thing, and not denying it.
denied. I have seen a Sea-Calf so very tame, that it would show most of the
Tricks which they teach a Spaniel. Camerarius relates a great number of such
Examples, in his Historical Meditations, of Dolphins, and other Fishes, taught
to a Miracle. I will not contend about the Word Dolphin, or enquire into the
modern appellation of the Fish, formerly known by that Name.

In the Night, between the 19th and 20th of September, in the Year 1538. the
Earth was brought to Bed of a Mountain, which has ever since been called the
New Mountain: Those who have measured it affirm, Monte Nuovo, or di Cencre.
That it is Four hundred Toises high perpendicularly, and three Miles and
something more in Circuit. Naturalists have observed many ways by which
Mountains are formed; sometimes by Earthquakes; sometimes by Winds; other times
by subterraneous Eruptions; as when a Mole heaves up the Earth, and makes those
little Hillocks which we call Mole-hills. It was after this last manner this
new Mountain was formed, as well as the other new one which I have represented
to you in the midst of the ancient Gulf of Vesuvius. The new Mountain has a
Gulf of fifty Paces diameter in the middle of its top; which sufficiently
proves it was produced by Eruption: But it has never cast out either Fire or
Smoke since those, which were the Causes of so prodigious and dolorous a Birth.
The Earth quaked; the Sea recoiled; the Lucrin Lake was almost filled up;
Churches and Houses were set on fire, and swallowed up; great numbers of Men
and Beasts perished; and there was a general and dreadful Consternation through
all the neighboring Country.

In the County of Hereford.
Your Mountain of Markle Hill came into the World after a more calm and pleasant
manner; about three and thirty Years after Monte Nuovo. I remember I have read
with a great deal of Pleasure, what your Naturalists have written of it. A
space of Earth, containing about thirty six Acres, on a sudden broke loose from
the neighboring Fields, and softly walked on for about four hundred Paces from
thence: Pliny reports, that under the Emperor, Nero in the Kingdom of Naples, a
Meadow, and a place planted with Olive Trees, loosened themselves from their
places and removed.

In Thuringia Cespes longitudine 50. pedum, latitudine 14. sine manibus
Sublatus, a suo loco 20. pedum spatio trajectus, in Saxonia terra in aggeris
modum intumuit. Aimon, Ann. 822.


These loosened Fields lifted up with them the Trees and Houses: On both sides
the Earth opened it self, and withdrew, to give it passage: It marched a slow
and regular pace for three Days and Nights, with little noise or disorder. At
last, having chosen a new Mansion, it was pleased to swell and become a
Mountain, now called Markle Hill. This must be allowed to be more pleasant than
the thundering noise of Monte Nuovo.

On the other side of the Lucrin Lake you may behold the Mountain of Christ,
Monte di Christo.
another famous Hill, whose Adventure was briefly thus; The Earth formerly
being seized by an extraordinary quaking and trembling, was shaken to its
deepest Entrails, and cracked from the Superficies to the very Limbo Patrum;
and the entrance into this Cavern, or rather the Mouth of this opening, remains
to be seen to this very Day. Jesus Christ entering into this dark and sorrowful
Abode, where he had been so long waited for, by those Souls which were destined
to Heavenly Felicity, he led them in Triumph through this Subterranean Passage,
and from the top of the Mountain lifted them up to Heaven. I know not what
modern Alcadino.
Poet has expressed this pretended Story in these two Verses.

Est locus effregit quo portas Christus Averni,
Et sanctos traxit lucidus inde Patres.
The Lake of Averno, that other Gulf of Hell, is but a good Mile from the Lake
of Lucrino; it is near about the same bigness as that of Agnano. It is certain
that now Birds fly and swim there; though Virgil, Lucretius, Lucian says the
same thing of Acheron.
Silius Italicus, Pliny, and several other Authors, have written, that it
exhaled formerly a deadly Vapor which killed those Animals.

Aneid. Gr. (...), avibus carens.
Quem super haud ullae poterant impune volantes,
Tentere Iter pennis
Cum venere volantes, Remigii oblita pennarum velae remittunt, Precipitesque
cadunt, Lucretius, lib. 6.
Unde locum Graii diuerunt nomine Aumon.
The difference between what we now see of this place, and the Description
which the Ancients make of it to us, causes some to tax them commonly for
Cheats, without any deliberation; particularly Pliny, whose Credit being
cracked on a great many other occasions, is on this, looked upon as a great
Liar. Without undertaking here to make an absolute Apology for him, I must
defend him in this particular, and boldly affirm, That he is no Liar in what he
says of the Lake of Averno. He quotes Varro, as relating a thing which
formerly was, but says of himself nothing positively. Pliny, a most curious
Man, without doubt had many times visited this place. I think he was at Cumae,
not far from thence, when Vesuvius burnt so terribly under the Empire of Titus;
and that going toward that raging Mountain, he was so unfortunate as to lose
his Life. It is then probable enough that Pliny would have spoken positively,
and as an Eyewitness of the Birds of Averno, if in his time the Air of the
Lake had been so fatal to them: But he says nothing like it. In his Discourses
of the Lakes which have extraordinary Qualities, he cites Clesias the Greek
Historian, who speaks of a Lake of the Indies, on which nothing swims; and
afterward produces the Testiomony of Varro touching the Averno. Strabo
relates, that the Stench of this Lake was partly caused by the Trees that hung
over its Sides, which covered and compassed it round about; and he adds, that
these Woods being cut down by Augustus's Order, the Air became pure, and left
off producing its usual effects.

If this matter be true, as it cannot justly be doubted, since this Author was
Contemporary to Augustus, and spoke without question, as a knowing Witness, we
are not to admire at the positive testimony of Varro, or the Quotation of him
by Pliny, since the one lived both before, and in the same time with Augustus,
and others came not till some time afterward. Without being too ready to
believe these Writers, we may easily conceive, that things may have received
Alterations since their times. Boccace, who lived three hundred years since,
relates in his Treatise of Lakes, That some subterraneous stream of Sulphur,
mixing with the Averno, the Waters of that Lake became stinking, and killed a
great many of the Fish; which, he says, he saw with his own Eyes. This makes
it plainly appear, that this Lake has not been always in the the same
Condition: And the thing may be easily explained, if we will but a little
reflect on the bituminous and sulphurous Matters, of which the adjacent
Country is full. Some Earthquake may have obstructed the Canals of
Communication, by which they spread themselves into the Lake Averno, which
formerly poisoned its Waters, and caused it to exhale a subtle Matter, and the
more dangerous because the Source was shut up under the shelter of those great
Trees which environed it. To imagine that the Birds which fly in the middle
Region of the Air over the Lake, should be offended with its Exhalations, would
be to frame a Chimera to ones self, and make the Historians say what they never
intended. There is a great deal of Appearance, or rather it is plain and
certain, that if the Grotto of the Dog were but four or five times bigger than
it is, a Swallow which should fly there, sweeping the Earth, could never rise
again: And why must it be reckoned impossible, that some such thing might
formerly happen on the Lake of Averno? One of those places is greater than the
other; but that alters not the Matter of Fact. If you would have another
somewhat like this, and not so easy to be believed, I will quote your Natural
History of England, where it is related, that the Wild Geese fall dead, when
they fly directly over a certain place of the Plain of Withay in Yorkshire.

Furthermore, I will here repeat what I have often said, that let things appear
to be never so improbable, provided they imply no Contradiction, they ought not
hastily to be condemned for false, without due examination. It must be
acknowledged, that the Ignorance of Men conceals more things than their
Knowledge could ever discover. We may please our selves with acting the
Philosophers, and laugh at occult Qualities, but the Phenomenon of Nature, to
speak sincerely, are almost all incomprehensible. We pretend to understand, and
to be able to explain the Abstrusest Appearances that happen before our own
Eyes, and would be ashamed to own our Ignorance: But if we are told of any
thing which surpasses our Understanding, or we have not before heard of, we
immediately conclude it to be either a Miracle or a Lie.

Though the Word Avernus comes from (...), as Virgil said; there are so many
Lakes which bear this Name, that we may look upon it as a general Appellation
for those Sulphurous Gulphs, which the Ancients call the Gates or Throats of
Hell; Ostia Ditis; Orci Janua; Inferni Janua Regis, as Virgil calls them. I
fancy one might say the same thing of another Lake not far from this, which is
one of the Acherons. And it is apparent that this made Lucretius call these
kinds of Pools Averna Loca. Silius confounds our Averno with Styx and Cocytus,
and the other Rivers of Hell; which may contribute to our believing, that these
Names became common to many Lakes or Rivers of the like Nature.

The Ruins which appear in many places on the side of the Hills about the
Averno, show that this place was extremely well cultivated, after they had cut
down the Wood of tall Trees which surrounded it.

It is uncertain whether the Ruins which are next to the Lake, are of a Temple
of Mercury, or of Neptune; but Antiquaries agree, that it was not of a Temple
of Apollo, as the Vulgar suppose.

I must not forget to tell you, that when one comes near the Averno, he is
suddenly assaulted by a noisome Smell; but am not sure that it proceeds from
the Lake; for its Waters are fresh, and clear enough, though they incline
something to a dark Blue. I tasted them in severa places, and found they had a
little sharp tang of the Mineral; notwithstanding which, the Lake abounds with
Fish.

That which they commonly call the Grotto of the Sibyl is hard by. The Grotto
of the Sibyl.
The chief entrance, as they say, was near to Cumae, about four Miles from
Averno, but it is all filled up on that side: We went into the great Grotto by
a narrow Passage, pestered with Briars and Thorns, every one with a lighted
Torch in his Hand. The Cavern is dug under the Hillocks, without Ornaments, or
any thing remarkable, except the place I will presently describe to you. It is
about ten Foot broad, and twelve high. After you have gone about two hundred
and fifty Paces, without turning, the Grotto has a square place on the Right,
and seventy or eighty Paces farther you find a little Cell of fifteen Foot in
length, and eight or nine in breadth: The Roof was formerly painted, and the
Walls covered with Mosaic; of which there are still some Remainders: The Earth
being fallen some paces beyond the Chamber, the Passage is dammed up, and you
can go no further.

I remember that after I had read the learned Treatise of Mr. Blondel,
concerning the pretended Sibyls, and their supposed Sibylline Writings, I
easily freed my self from the power of vulgar Prejudices, and was fully
persuaded that all was chimerical and supposititious: Whatsoever a considerable
number of learned Men had formerly said, or some of those honest Doctors of
Antiquity, whom we usually call Fathers. I was afterward confirmed in this
Opinion, by studying this Matter with a competent degree of Application; and
therefore you may easily think, Some pretend that the Cave of the Sibyl was at
Cumae, and they cite the description Justin Martyr makes of it. What he said
has some relation to what Virgil speaks. But at the bottom, the opinion of
Justin Martyr is no proof; he tells you what he heard said, which signifies
nothing.
that I give little credit to what they talk here of this Sibyl's Grotto. Many
ancient Authors have spoken of a Sibylla Cumaea, and of a Den to which she
retired; and People have imagined that this may agree with it, and have
consecrated it to her without any other reason than bare imagination, and
without alleging any tolerable Arguments. The Passage of Virgil, Excisum
Euboicae, etc. signifies nothing at all: For besides, that in Virgil's time,
the Fable of the Sibyl was accounted an old Error; of which that Author spoke
only by Tradition: I cannot see that what he said has any relation to this
Cavern.

Quo lati ducunt aditus centum, ostia centum,
Unde ruunt totidem voces, etc.
There is no appearance that this Cave ever had centum aditus, or centum ostia;
but why, I pray, must there be a Cave above a League in length, for the lodging
a Sibyl? And what Workmen had she to employ in so prodigious a Task? It is also
ridiculous to think that she had her Chamber wainscotted with Mosaic; a deep
and dark Den, hanged with Bats and Cobwebs, is what more properly belonged to
this pretended mad Woman, than Chambers adorned with Painting and Mosaic,

If you will know what is my Opinion of this Den, I must answer you, That
perhaps it was a Passage like the Grotto of Pausilypus, and perhaps also the
Painted One may also suppose that there were Baths there for some great Lord.
Chamber was for some Deity, as the Chapel of the same Grotto of Pausilypus is
for a certain Image of our Lady. Strabo relates upon the Testimony of Ephorus,
an ancient Historian and Geographer of Cumae, That the Cimmerians of Italy (I
call them so, that I may not confound them with those of the Bosphorus) did
inhabit between Bayae and the Lake of Averno; that they had no other Dwellings
than subterraneous Dens, where they hid themselves all Day, and at Night issued
out to perpetrate their Robberies and Murders. We will, if you please,
attribute the digging of this Cave to them; only the Mosaic agrees little
better with them than with the Sibyl. To conclude, though I should tell you,
that I neither know the use of this Grotto, nor when it was made, nor who were
the Workmen, it would by no means follow that it was the Sibyl's Grotto.
Without going further than near to Miremont in Perigort, there is a great and
famous Cave, called the Clouseau; of which the Country People tell diverse
Stories: They say, that there are great Halls, Pictures, and Altars, and are
persuaded, that the Pagans there sacrificed to Venus, and the infernal Gods.
Moreri.
France or England, I might name you a great many such like Caverns, where a
Sibyl never was.

Departing from this Cave we took a turn to Bayae; this was formerly, BAYAE.
as you know the most pleasant and magnificent place in the World. Horace and
Martial give it that Character; and Josephus exceeds them both. Martial has
some Expressions on this occasion, that are very soft, and yet very strong.

Littus Beatae Veneris aureum Baiae,
Baiae superbae donum naturae.
Ut mill laudem, Flacce, versibus Baias,
Laudabo digne non satis Baias.
He calls Venus blessed, because she ruled and triumphed in this delicious
Rendezvous of the Roman Nobilty.

Littora quae fuerant castis inimica Puellis, said the Poet Propertius. If you
would know any thing more particularly touching the Pleasures of Baiae, you
need but read the 51st Epistle of Seneca, and what Albinus has written.

Tu qui Baianas venisti liber ad undas
Aligeri fies praeda cruenta Dei:
Miscuit his ardens Circe lethale venenum, etc.
Omne nefas atque omne malum his emersit ab undis, etc.
The Bay of Bayae is extremely pleasant; the Air admirably sweet; and nothing
more charming than the little Hills, which insensibly rise about it. You may
there behold the Ruins of many Temples, That which the people call Fruglio,
and which many Men take for a Temple, are but the remains of the Baths.
Baths, and Palaces, and some of these Remainders of Antiquity appear even in
the Sea itself. All the neighborhood of the City was in those times
replenished with Houses of Pleasure. At present there are heaps of dismal
Ruins, which have changed these formerly charming places, into a mere
frightful Solitude.

Between Bayae and Miseno, in the little Precinct called Bauli, near the Tomb
of Agrippina, are to be seen the Remains of the Fishpond of Qu. Ort.
Hortensius, Colleague of Q. Cecil.
Metellus. That Senator took extreme delight in keeping Fishes, and used some
of them to take their Food from his Hands. I have read somewhere, that one of
his Friends, desiring him to give him two Mullets out of his Pond, he told him,
he would sooner part with two Mules out of his Litter.

Near to this, are very great Ruins, commonly called Mercato di Sabbato.
Mercato di Sabbato.
Some pretend them to be the Remains of a Circus; and those who deny it, know
not what to determine.

On the Sea side are great Remainders of the Country House of Hortensius.

Near the Fish Pond, are the Ruins of a Temple, which, they say, belonged to
Diana.

In the Neighborhood, they dug up some years ago, a very fine Statue of Venus,
twice as big as the Life: It holds a Globe in its Right Hand, and three Oranges
in its Left. I have read in Capaccio, who has given a Description of it, that
this Statue was found in the place where formerly was the Temple of Venus
Genitrix.

The Elysian Fields.
From Bayae it is but a large Mile to the Elysian Fields: This is a little, but
extraordinary delightful Plain, between the Sea and Acheron, Lago della
Colluccia.
that stinking Marish, which Virgil calls tenebrosa palus. Epirus and Calabria
have also their Acherons; and I am not ingorant, that the Elysian Fields of
Boeotia, as well as those of the two Atlantic Isles, or Gorgades Islands, which
we place between those of Cape Verd, cannot come in competition with the
Elysian Fields, in the Neighborhood of Bayae.

The Academy of Cicero.
I might farther speak of the Academy of Cicero, which serves at present for a
Stall for Oxen; The Baths of Tritoli.
of the various Baths of Tritoli, which the Physicians of Salernum, endeavored
to render useless, because they were grown so themselves, by reason of the
Virtues of these Baths; of the Tomb of Agrippina, The Tomb of Agrippina.
Mother of Nero, who was stabbed by Anicetus, between Bayae and Miseno; of the
Fishpond of Some pretend it was the Work of Lucullus. Piscina mirabi^is. Cento
Camerelle.
Agrippa, called Piscina Mirabilis, whose inside is as hard as Marble; of the
other Fishpond called Cento Camerelle; and of a great number of Temples,
ruinous Palaces, and other Remains of Antiquity: But to say Truth, I had not
time to observe all these things, with sufficient attention to make an exact
Description of 'em.

We took Boat at Bayae, and came directly to Puzzeli, where we took Horse
Virgil's Tomb
Vol ^ P ^41

depiction of Virgil's tomb to return to Naples. To Morrow Morning we resolve
to depart, and return to Rome.

I have but one Word more to tell you, of the Tomb of Virgil, Tomb of Virgil.
and that of Sannazarius, before I end this long Letter. On the Pausilypus,
just at the Entrance of the Grotto which leads to Puzzoli, is to be seen an
ancient Monument, made in form of a Pyramid, and half destroyed; this, they
say, is the Tomb of Virgil. Alfonso di^ Heredia, G. C. Cappaccio, P. Sarnelli,
etc.
Some Historians of the latter Ages, have written, that in their Time, there
was nine small Columns of Marble in the little Chamber of this Mausolaeum,
which supported an John Villani, a Neapolitan Chronologer, says, this Vrn was
carried to Mantua. Heredia says, it was at Genoua: Others have written, that
the Lombards took it away: But all this is without Proof or Appearance of
Truth. If the Vrn were at Mantua, or at Genoua, or any where else, they would
not fail to show it.
Urn of the same Substance, upon which this Distich was engraven: Mantua me
genuit; Calabri rapuere; tenet nunc
Parthenope; cecini, pascua, rura, duces.


At present there are neiter Urn nor Columns. Though this Mausolaeum be built
of great squares of Stone, yet is it almost totally covered with Bushes and
Shrubs, which have taken Root amongst them. There is amongst others, to be
observed, a Laurel on the top of it, and the common Opinion is, that though they
have often cropped, and plucked it up, yet it still grows again; but nothing
has been yet determined of the occult Virtue, which causes this surprising
Effect. Virgil passes among these People of Naples, sometimes for a M. Spon
observes, that Nostredamus is buried in the Cordeliers at Marseilles, half in
the Church, and half without; perhaps because they could not tell whether he
was a Wizard or a Prophet.
Conjurer, and sometimes for a Saint. Some Paces from the Tomb, there is a
little old Building, which the Gardener, who is Master of the place, told us
was the Chapel where Virgil every Day heard Mass. Others pretend that he was a
Sorcerer, and affirm, that he pierced the Mountain Pausilypus by Art Magic.
And besides, they relate that by the same Art he made the Brazen Horse, of
which I have spoken, whose Head is still to be seen at D. Diomedes Caraffa's.
They were so much infatuated with this Fancy, that they attributed a Power to
this Horse, of curing Horses of all Diseases, and of preserving 'em from all
manner of Accidents, which should go about it a certain number of times. In
effect; There were formerly a vast number of Pilgrim Horses, which came from
the farthest parts of the Kingdom to Naples, and which they led in Procession
round this House of Virgil. But at last, a certain Archbishop being displeased
with this Extravagance, obtained permission to take away the Horse; out of
which he cast the great Bell, which is now in the Cathedral.

The House which Sannazarius had on the Seaside, at the foot of Pausilypus,
being destroyed by the War, he built a Church in the same place; which he
dedicated to the most Holy Birth of the Great Mother of God; and his Tomb is
now to be seen in one of the Chapels of that Church. It is of White Marble, The
Tomb of Sannazarius.
and of exquisite Workmanship, by the Hand of And partly by Friar Gianangelo
Poggibonzo of Montursolo, a Friar Servite.
Santa-Croce. On it you see the Bust of Sannazarius, crowned with Laurel: The
two great Statues which are placed on each side, are Apollo and Minerva; but
they choose rather to call 'em David and Judith, that scrupulous Persons may
not be offended, to find the Representations of false Gods, in a Christian
Church.

Sannazarius made this Epitaph for himself: Actius hic situs est, cineres
gaudete sepulti,
Jam vaga post obitus Umbra dolor vacat.


His Friends say that he spoke as a Poet: But they assure us, that on other
Occasions, he showed, that he had a sense of Religion. Bembus made the Distich
which they have put on his Tomb:

D. O. M.

Da Sacro Cineri Flores; hic ille Maroni,
Sincerus Musa, proximus ut Tumulo.
Vixit Ann. LXII. A. D. M D. XXX.
James Sannazarius took the Name of Actius Sincerus. at the request of his
Friend Joannes Jovianus Pontanus, who had also changed his own Name.

I know not whether you have read the Epigram which Sannazarius made for the
City of Venice. It is said, the Senate of that Republic presented him with a
thousand Sequins for every Verse Others write that he had but Six hundred
Crowns of Gold for all.
. A Sequin is worth about Ten Shillings.
Ariosto would have been contented with less for his whole Orlando: Take the
Epigram; Viderat Adriacis Venetam Neptunus in undis,
Stare Urbem, and toti ponere jura Mari.
Nunc mihi Tarpeias, quantumvis Jupiter arces
Objice, and illa tui Moenia Martis, ait.
Si Pelago Tiberim praefers, Urbem aspice utramque
Illam homines dices, hanc posuisse Deos.


I must at last conclude my Letter. Please to give my Service to all our good
Friends, and believe I shall always remain,

SIR, Yours, etc.
At Naples, Mar. 17. 1688.
The End of the First Volume.
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS OF THE First Volume.
A.
ACademies of Painting at Venice, 171 Academy of M. de la Vallee at the Hague,
12 Academy of Cicero, a Stall for Oxen, 340 Adriatick-Sea married by the
Venetians, 200 Agnano Lake, 317 Agrippina murdered, 340 Alexander III. sets his
Foot on the Neck of the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, 161, 166 Alexander III.
instituted the Ceremony of Marrying the Sea at Venice, 200 Alps, 93 Almond-Tree
of St. Francis, 274 Altar on which St. Peter celebrated his first Mass, 236
Ambassadors make their Entries in Gondola's at Venice, 199 Amphitheatre of
Verona, 116 Amras, 100 Amsterdam, 21 Number of Catholics, Lutherans,
Anabaptists, and other Sectaries which are at Amsterdam, 24 Its Burse, or
Exchange, 27 Its Illustrious School, Ibid.
Ancona, 226 Andernach, 42 Andrew King of Hungary, 299 Angel Gabriel passes
through the Window of the Holy House, 235 Aniello, Thomas, Rebel of Naples, 305
Antenor's Tomb, 134 -- Bonnet, 163 Antic Pieces, 91 Antiquities of Naples, 307
Ape with Wings, 16 Apparition of St. Mark, 157 Apartments principal at the tops
of Houses, 108 Applauses of the Gondoliers of Venice, 193 Arch of Trajan at
Ancona, 227 Archbishop eaten by Rats, 44 Ariosto's Epitaph, 215 Armenians,
their Religion, 180 Arms of Cologn, 39 Arms of the Electorate of Mentz, 48 Arms
of Ausbourg, 81 Arms of Venice, 156 Arms of Naples, 307 Arnheim, 31 Arsenal of
Nuremberg, 69 -- Of Ingolstadt, 77 -- Of Ausbourg, 83 -- Of Munich, 92 -- Of
Venice, 168 -- Another, 199 -- Of Loretto, 245 Arsenals of France, 77
Artillery, 74 (...), 121 Ash-Tree of Poland, 131 Averno Lake, 330 Aversa, 284
Augustus, 262 Ausbourg, 80 -- The Confession, 84
B.
Baccharach. 43 Baiae, 337 Banditti of Naples, 308 Barbarossa, Frederick I.
161, 166 Barbarossa Hariaden, 273 Basilisks, 122 Baths of St. German, 318 Baths
of Tritoli, 340 Chaplets of Beads, 246 Bears which devour Grapes, 110 White
Bears, 105 Feather-Beds, 31 Beer ordinary Drink in Bavaria, 93 Beguines, 25
Bell makes a Tempest cease, 236 Bezoar, 78, 95 Bishops in Germany Sovereign
Princes, 82 A Bishop raised from the Dead, 251 A Bishop refuses to be made a
Cardinal, 302 Blasphemies, 85 Boats of Trunks of Trees made hollow, 94 Boccace,
332 Boccoldus, or John of Leyden, Head of the Anabaptists, 18 St. Mark's Body,
156 Bolsane, 109 Boniface VIII. 234 Bonn, 42 A Book of the first Impression
that ever was made, 69 Bourgomaster of Palemberg, 64 Bravo's of Venice, 195
Brennerberg Mountain, 105 Bread at Venice bad, 185 An ancient Bridge, 221
Bridge of Caligula, 324 Bridge Milvius, 260 Bridge of Ponte-Molle, 260 Bridge
of Rialto, 182 Bridges of Venice, 184 Brixen, 108 Broglio at Venice, 155 24
Brothers with their 24 Wives at one Table, 181 Three Brothers poisoned, 303
Buffalo's, 248 Buffoons in the Opera's, 193 Bull Golden, 51 Burial, 124 A Man
Buried alive, 302
C.
Cabbins of Trunks of Willows, 94 Cabinet of Curiosities at Leyden, 15 -- Of M.
Viati at Nuremburg, 70 -- Of the Elector Palatine at Newberg, 78 -- Of the
Emperor at Amras, 101 -- Of Count Mascardo at Verona, 120 Cajeta, 277
Caligula, 324 Cento Camerelle, 340 Campania the Happy, 283 Canals of Holland, 3
-- Of Venice, 154 Grotta di Cane, 318 Cannon very great, 69 Cannon Powder, 74
Cannon, the Invention, Ibid. Cannon, a Piece made whilst a Duke dined, 199
Canons called Cardinals, 301 Capua, 282 Cardinal Barberigo preaches himself,
210 Cardinals, their Privileges, 301 Carnival of Venice, 189 -- The same, 197
Carob-Tree, 276 Carrara Franc. a cruel Man, 169 Santa Casa, 231, 236, 263
Cascade of Terni, 257 Castle of Zeist, 30 Castles on the Rhine, 42 A Winged
Cat, 16 Cathedral of Ravenna, 218 Catholica, 223 Cavaletto, a little Fish, 224
Caves great, 71, 245 Cellars to keep Wine fresh, 263 Cavern which leads to the
Limbus Patrum, 329 Celestin, Pope, driven out by Boniface VIII. 234 Ceremonies
of the Greeks, 177 Cervia, 221 Cesenate, ibid. Chairadin Barbarossa, 273
Chamber where the Election of the Emperor is made, 50 -- Where Augustus was
nursed, 263 Chamber of Thomas Aquinas, 273 Changes happened to the Surface of
the Earth, 268, 269 Chapel, a fair one, 137 -- Of the Virgin, 342 Cariot with
Wheels and Sails, 11 Charles IV. Emperor, 51 Charles I. King of Naples, caused
Conradin's Head to be cut off, 304 Curious Cherry-Stone, 308 Church Common to
the Lutherans and Papists, 55 Church common for three Religions, 60 Church with
eight Doors, 75 St. Justin's Church, 137 Churches of Naples very fine, 286 St.
Christopher's Pole and Palm Tree, 275 -- His Nail, 275 Chiusa a Fort, 114 A
large Churchyard, 75 Churchyards rare in Italy, 265 Cicero's Palace, 276
Circello, Mountain, 264 Circumcisions different, 123 Citta Castellana, 259
Cities frequent in Holland, 2, 30 Cities ruined by Beasts, 45 Citta di la
Vigna, 262 Civenchu, a Bridge in Japan, 183 St. Clara, 250 Climats, 87
Clitumnus, 252 Clousea, a Cavern in Perigort, 337 Coaches drawn by Mules at
Naples, 309 Coblentz, 42 Cocceius, 317 Coffer, little one furnished with
Pistols, 169 Cologn, 33 Columns brought by the Devil, 67 Columns in the State
of Venice, 220 -- Of the Temple of Solomon, 279 Comedies of Venice, 193
Comedians crushed to pieces, 226 Companions of Ulysses, 264 Concord Church of
the Palatinate, where there are Three Religions exercised, 60 Concubines, 188
Confession of Ausbourg, 84 Cord or Rope of Judas, 103 Golden Cord or Halter,
165 Coronet of the Duke of Venice, 163 Corona Pudicitiae, 124 Cork-Trees, 266
Corselets of Gold, 163 Coster, Inventer of Printing; first Book which he
printed; his Statue, and Inscription at Harlem, 19 Council of Trent, 112 -- Of
Rimini, 223 Counts Palatine, 43 Countess of Henneberg brought to Bed of 365
Children, 13 A large Cross-Bow, 36 Cross-Bow which discharged 34 Arrows at
once, 102 Pocket Cross-Bow, 169 Crown of Charles the Great, 67 Crown which
spoke, 292 Crowns of Cyprus and Candie, 163 Crown of our Lady of Loretto, 235
Cruelty, 141, 169, 273 Crucifix with a Peruke, 39 -- Which approved of the
Council of Trent, by bowing its Head, 111 -- Made of an unknown Matter, Ibid.
Crucifix drawn from a Man crucified, by Michael Angelo, 289 -- Which spoke to
Thomas Aquinas, 291 -- Which spoke to Pius V. Ibid. -- Which bowed its Head,
seeing a Cannon-Bullet coming, Ibid. -- Which spoke to a sacrilegious Person,
294 A long Culverin, 83 A large Cup of a single Torquoise, 163 Courtezans at
Venice, 87, 88, 89
D.
Dantes, 219 Delf, 10 Description of Holland, 1, 2, etc. -- Of the Holy House,
230, etc. Devil appears in the shape of a Hog, 305 Doesberg, 31 Doge of Venice,
204 Door of the Wood of a Vine, 218 Dove: See Pigeon. Drunkards, 71 Drusus, 47
Duisberg, 32 Dukes of Aquitain and Normandy, 205 Duras, Charles de, 299
Dusseldorp, 33
E.
Ehrenbreistein, 43 Election of the Emperor, 50, 51 Election Miraculous, 218
Electorate of Mentz, 48, 49 Elysian Fields, 340 Cardinals when first called
their Eminencies, 301 Emperors, how Elected, 50, 51 Epigram for the City of
Venice, 344 Epitaph of Pope Lucius III. 117 -- Of Titus Livius, 140 -- Of
Conradin, 305 -- Of Ariosto, 215 -- Of Sannazarius, 343 -- Of Dante, 219 -- Of
a Maid who died just before Marriage, 295 -- Of Robert, King of Naples, 296 --
Of the Marquess of Pescara, 297 -- Of Three Brothers poisoned by their Uncle,
303 -- Several Epitaphs at Naples, 293, etc. -- Of Joan I. Queen of Naples, 299
-- Of a King of Fez, 300 -- Of Innocent IV. Ibid. -- Of a Bishop who refused
the Cardinal's Hat, 302 Equites Liberi, 42 Statues erected in honor of
Erasmus, 8 Etymology of St. Longin, 264 -- Of St. Tiphines, 264 Eve created by
the Virgin Mary, 85
F.
Fabian Pope, how elected, 219 Fano, 224 Fancies of Men, 107 Ferrara, 214
Feasts of the Carnival at Venice, 197 Feast of the Ascension, 200 Ficus Indica,
264 Fisherman makes himself Head of a Commonwealth at Naples, 305 Way
Flaminia, 259, 268. Flux and Reflux, 171, 229 Foetus's of all Ages, 30 Foligno,
250 Fondi, 272 Fountains fine, 66, 67, 246 Fountains salt, 106 Fountains of
Brass, 258 Forest of Olive Trees, 255 Fossa Nuova, 267 Foxes White, 105 Friar
Paulo, 212 Francfort, 50 Frenchmen feared, 281 Francis of Assisa called St.
Francis, 251 Frankendal, 59 Frederick I. called Barbarossa, at the Feet of Pope
Alexander III. 161, 166 Frederick Archduke, 98 Funeral Pomp, 124
G.
Galeasses, 200 Garigliario, a River, 282 Gates of Brass at Ravenna, 220 Geese
fall dead flying over a Plain in Yorkshire, 333 Gelt Persons, 211 Germans great
drinkers, 71 Holy Ghost in form of a Dove, 218 Giant, 9 Giants Bones, 59 Girls
sent to the Convent in their Infancy, 186 Glass as big as a Bell, 72 Glasses
honored in Germany, Ibid. 100 Glasses in a Pepper-Corn, 85 Glass-Windows rare
in Italy, 229 Glaucus, 264 Globe used at the Emperor's Coronation, 68
Goldsmiths Work, 85 Golf Adriatic frozen, 146 -- Belongs to the Venetians, 200
-- Its Shores, 224 Gondola of the Wood of a Palm Tree turned into Stone, 92
Gondola's of Venice, 197 Gondolier's of Venice, Jacks of all Trades, Ibid.
Gospel of St. Mark, 164 Government of Venice often changed, 174 Grates of the
Venetian Nuns, 210 Greeks of Venice, their Ceremonies, Religion, etc. 178
Greeks excommunicate the Pope, 180 Grotto of Pausilypus, 316 -- Of the Dog, 318
-- Of Sibylla Cumaea, 335 Grotto's cool, 263 Grusse, 104 Gueret Bastiense, a
Giant, 9 Gueux, 36
H.
Habits extraordinary, 86, 101 Habits of the noble Venetians, 202 Great Halls,
82, 90, 138, 166 White Hares, 104 Hariaden, or Chairaden Barbarossa, King of
Algier, and Admiral to the Turk, 273 Harlem, 18 -- PRINTING first invented
there, 19 Red Hats, when given to Cardinals, 301 Hatton II. Archbishop of
Mentz, eaten by the Rats, 44, 45 Hague, 10 Heidelberg, 62 Helvia Racina, 247
Hermeistein, 43 Herod, 45 Hieroglyphics, 56, 118 History of the Rhine, 17 --
Of Milser, 96 -- Of a Lady stabbed, 141 -- Of the Holy House, 230, etc. -- Of
the Bishop of Corsica, 251 -- Of Three Brothers poisoned by their Uncle, 303 --
Of a Brazen Horse, 342 Holland, 1, 2, 3, etc. -- Of the Number of its
Inhabitants, of its Cities and Towns. Its Cities are of Three different Ranks:
Neatness of its Houses, Ships, Stables: Number of Ships in Holland:
Inundations, Imposts, 1, 2, 3, etc. Honors given to the Duke of Venice, 206
Horns used for Ornaments in Germany, 75 Horn of an Ox very large, 102 Horses
in a Garret, 40 Turkish Horses richly harnassed, 101 Four fine Horses of Brass,
158 Seahorse, 224 A Story of a Brazen Horse, 342 Pilgrim Horses, Ibid.
Hospital of Four hundred thousand Crowns Yearly Rent at Naples, 287 Hungarians
come to Cologn, 37
I.
John Angelicus of Fiesola, a Dominican, refuses the Archbishopric of
Florence, 302 Joan I. Queen of Naples, 299 Jesuits slighted and humbled, 177
Jesuits go to Opera's, 216 Ignorance most gross, 245 Image of the Republic of
Venice, 204 Image of Jesus Christ which spoke, 291 -- Of the Virgin Mary, which
spoke, 292 Impression first, 69 Informers rewarded, 170 Infula, or Crown for
the Coronation of the Emperor, 67 Ingoldstadt, 76 Innocent IV, 300 Inquisition
of State at Venice, 206 Inquisition concerning Religion, Ibid. Inscription
touching Vesuvius, 314 Inspruck, 97 Interamna, or Interamnium, 255 Invention of
PRINTING, 19 -- Of Cannon Powder, 74 Isselburg, 31 Itru, 275 Jews of Amsterdam,
23 -- Of Francfort, 53, 113 -- Of Worms, 56 -- Of Nuremberg, 75 -- Of Ausbourg,
82 -- Of Trent, 112 Jews, why driven out of France, Ibid. St. Justina, a fine
Church, 137
K.
Keiserswaert, 32 M. Ker kringius, 30 King of the Romans, 52 The Three Kings,
36 Knife of Stone, 123 Knife taken out of a Man's Stomach, 15
L.
Lagunes of Venice, 147 Lake of Agnano, 317 -- Of Lucrin, 325 -- Of Averno,
329, etc. Lance of St. Longin, 68 Lanuvium, 262 Lavinium, Ibid. Laurel-Tree of
Virgil, 341 Laurel-Trees in the Hedges, 265 Lent makes Venice desolate, 198
Leyden: Number of its Scholars; Anatomy-Hall; Cabinet of the Indies, 14, 15
Liberty of Venice true Licenciousness, 175 Library at Heidelberg, 63 -- At
Nuremberg, 69 -- Of St. Mark, 170 -- Of Count Gambalonga, 222 Limbo Patrum, 329
Lirts, a River, 282 Loggietta, what it is, 168 London, 22 St. Longin, 264
Loretto, 230, 246 Losdun, 12 Lucius III. Pope, 117 Lucrin Lake, 325 Lucullus's
Fish Pond, 340 Luther, 58
M.
Macerata, 248 Machine to light Five hundred Matches all at once, 169 Maid a
Soldier, 9 -- A Drummer, 26 Maids hired and sold, 188 A Maid sold, 216 Marquess
de Capra's House of Pleasure, 130 Malatestes, a Family, 221, 222 Manheim, 60
Marbles false, 92 Mark d' Aviano, a Capuchin, 78, 211 St. Mark's Body, 156 --
Gospel, 164 -- Apparition, 157 Markle-Hill, a new Mountain sprung up in
England, 328 Marino, 261 Marquesses of the State of Venice, 203 Marchioness of
Obizzi, Story of her, 141 Masquerades at Venice, 195 Masks or Visors worn at
Venice at other times beside the Carnival, 197 Mausolaeum of Theodoricus, 217
See Tomb.
Maximilian I. 97 Mazaniello, 307 Maze, 16 Medals, 91, 101, 103, 283 Mein
River, 49 Mentz, 47 Mentz, Archbishop, 48 Mothers who let to Hire, and sell
their Daughters, 188 Metamorphosis of Scylla, 264 Milser, his History, 96
Minturna, a ruined City, 281 Mitre, Trojan, 163 Maenus, 49 Monks curious
People, 196 -- Ignorant, 212, 249 Monk, refused the Archbishopric of
Florence, 302 Mola, 276 Mole of Puzzoli, 325 Monastery, a great one, 138 Money
of Venice, 208 Mount Berick, its Nostre-dame, 130 Mount Vesuvius, 309 Fiery
Mountain, 105 Mountain cleft on the Day of the Passion, 278 Mountain of
Markle-Hill, 328 Monte Circello, 264 Monte Nuovo arose in a Night, 327 Monte di
Christo, Ibid. Mosaic, what it is, 159 Moses's Rock, 161 Mule of Thomas
Aquinas, 267 Mules draw Coaches at Naples, 309 Munich, 88 -- Description of its
Palaces, 90 Mushrooms turned to Stone, 123 Musick-Houses, 26 Musicians of
Manheim, 61 -- Gelt, 211 Music Italian, 192 Myrtles, 265
N.
Nail of St. Christopher, 275 Naples, 284 Narni, 258 Neckar River, 62 Nero
lamented, 190 Newburg, 78 Noble Venetians, 155, 201, 203 Nobility, according to
the Vulgar Expression, consists only in Opinion, 201 Nostre-dame of Newburg,
79, 109 -- Of Mount Berick, 130 -- Of Rain, 222 -- Of Loretto, 231 See the Word
Image,
Nuremberg, 65 Sea-Nymph, 20
O.
Obizzi, Marchioness, a Lady of extraordinary Virtue, 141 Olives, 255
Olive Trees, 254 Olive Trees of Nazareth, 274 Opera of the Ascension, 110
Opera's of Venice, 193 Orange Trees of St. Thomas Aquinas, 274 Orange-Tree of
St. Dominick, Ibid. Oratories of the Virgin in the Alps, 108 Organs very fine,
112 Ornaments at the Coronation of the Emperor, 67 Otricoli, 259 Oxen shod,
106 Ox which spoke, 292 Oysters at Venice, not very good, 172
P.
P's four of Venice, 184 Padlocks for Women, 169 Paduan a good Country, 132
Padua, Ibid. Peasants, Burgomasters, 64 -- Which sell Medals, 283 Palace of the
Elector of Cologn, 42 -- Of the Elector of Mentz, 44 -- Of the Elector of
Palatine, 90 -- Of the Elector of Triers, 43 -- Of the Duke of Venice, 165 --
Of Cicero, 276 Palaces of Italy criticized, 128, 129 Palatine Counts, 43
Palemberg, 64 Palm Tree of St. Christopher, 275 Fra. Paolo, 212 Paper-Works, 7
Parthenope, 284 Passage dangerous, 108 Mr. Patin, 143 Pattens of Holland, 3
Patriarch of Venice, 210 Partridges White, 105 Limbo Patrum, Pavement rough,
275 Pausilypus, 316 Pearl, a singular one, 244 Peruke miraculous, 39 Pesaro,
223 Peter de Luna, 247 Dr. Peter's, 53 People of Naples very wicked, 308
Phantome, 240 Pharaoh, 45 Philosophy vain, 333 Physicians of Salerno, 340
Pictures, 78, 130, 143 -- By Giotto, Titian, and others, 171 -- At Naples, 288,
289 See the Instructions to a Traveller.
Pictures criticized, 57 Pigeon miraculous at Cologn, 38 -- At Ravenna, 218
200000 Pilgrims at Loretto in one Year, 242 Pine-Apples of Italy, 220 Piperno,
265 Pisca Marina, a Rock, 271 Piscina Marabilis, 154 Place of St. Mark, 195
Plain of Withay in England, 333 Poignard of Friar Paulo, 212 Politics of
Venice, 172, 190 Poppiel King of Poland eaten by the Rats, 46 Poor Noblemen at
Venice, 202 Potenza, a River, 247 Powder for Cannon, 74 Present of the Queen of
England to the Lady of Loretto, 237 Priests, and other Ecclesiastical Persons
are excluded the Counsel of Venice, 177 Priests who have Concubines, 189 --
Ignorants, 210 -- Gelded, 211 Priapus, vegetable, 16 Primicerio of Venice, 157
Print of the Feet of a Horse, 67 Print of the Feet if a Mule, 267 Procession of
the Hungarians, 37 Fine Prospects, 34, 93, 155, 249, 286, 290 A fine Prospect,
23 Psalftz, 43 Puteolanum Spiraculum, 320 Puzzoli, 322
Q.
Qui va li of Padua, 133
R.
Rarities Natural, 15 See Cabinets of Curiosities.
Rats which eat a King, and an Archbishop, 45 Ravenna, 216 Recanati, 247
Religious Women, or Nuns of Venice, 211 Religion of the Greeks, 177, etc. -- Of
the Armenians, 176, 180 Relics curious, 290 Republic of St. Marin, 175, 223
Rhine River, 16, 46 Rialto Bridge, 182 Riches of the Holy House, 243 Ridotti of
Venice, 194 Rimini, 221 Ring of St. Mark, 157 Robert of Naples, 296 Rock of the
Emperor Maximilian I. 97 Rock of Moses, 161 Another Rock, 97 Rock softened, 279
Rodomontades, 128 Roof covered with Gold, 98 Rovigo, 214 Rotterdam, 6 Roveredo,
114 Rubicon, 221
S.
Sacrificing Utensils, 121 Salernum, Physicians of, 340 Salmon, 8 Sannazarius,
342, etc. Savii grandi, 202 Scepter of the Emperor, 68 Scholars of Padua, 133
Scrobes Charoneae, 320 Scylla Metamorphos'd, 264 Sea retreated from Ravenna,
216 -- From Rimini, 222 Senegallia, 225 Serpents Skin with Arabic Characters
naturally figured, 16 Serpent fifteen Foot long, taken near Ulm, 101 Setia, 264
Shirt made of Guts, 15 Miraculous Shiverings, 245 Sibyls, 335 St. Simonin, a
Child martyred by the Jews, 112 Sixtus V. undertook to extirpate the Banditti
out of St. Peter's Patrimony, 307 Sleeves of the Noble Venetians, 202 Solfatara
Mountain, 320 Somma Mountain, 254 Sorcerer, 67 Soucelle, a Tree, 275 Spaccata,
a Mountain cloven in two on the Day of our Savior's Passion, 282 A Spring from
whence two Rivers flow, 15 Spring in the Winter, 109, 250, 254 Spiraculum
Puteolanum, 320 Spoils of Pavia, 220 Spoletta, 253 Starling with great Ears, 16
Statue of Erasmus, 8 Statues, many of Brass at Inspruck, 100 -- Of Adam and
Eve, 158 -- Greek ones, 171 -- Animated, 204 -- Of Alexander VII. 220 -- Of
Paul V. 222 -- Of Urban VIII. 224, 263 -- Of Popes represented sitting, Ibid --
Of Gods sweating, 292 -- Of Jupiter, who thundered with Laughter, Ibid.
Steinbokt, an Animal in the Alps, 105 Bezoar-Stone, 95 Miraculous Stones, 251
Stone Knife, 123 The Devil's Stone, 37 Stoves of Germany, 114 Prodigious
Strength, 100, 103 Superstition Popular, 263 Susanna, 91 Sweetness out of
Bitterness, 255 Sword used at the Emperor's Coronation, 68
T.
Tobacco, 30, 65 Tent of the Grand Vizier, 92 Terracina, 271 Terni, 255
Theatines, 288 St. Theodore neglected at Venice, 157 Thief hanged with a Golden
Halter, 165 Treacle, 53 Thomas Aniello, 305 St. Thomas Aquinas, 267, 274 Thomas
Schuweiker wrote with his Foot, 59 Thorns without Pricks, 280 Treasury of
Munich, 91 -- Of St. Mark, 162 -- Of Loretto, 243 Tyber, 259 Titus Livius, 139
Tolentino, 248 Tomb of St. Ursula, 38 -- Of a Daughter of a Duke of Brabant,
Ibid. -- Of the Electors of Mentz, 49 -- Of Drusus, 47 -- Of the Counts
Palatines, 63 -- Of the Emperor Louis IV. 89 -- Of Maximilian I. 100 -- Of the
Scaligers, 120 -- Of Antenor, 134 -- Of Lupatus, 136 -- Of Titus Livius, 139 --
Of Ariosto, 215 -- Of Theodoricus, 217 -- Of Placidia Galla, 219 -- Of
Valentinian and Honorius, Ibid. -- Of the Poet Dante, Ibid. -- Of Gregory XII.
247 -- Of Charles of Bourbon, Constable of France, 278 -- Of Munatius Plancus,
Ibid. Tombs, many at Naples, 293, etc. Tomb of Agrippina, 340 -- Of Virgil, 341
-- Of Sannazarius, 343 Torrents of Sulphur kill the Birds that fly over Averno,
332 Tower gilded, 155 Tower of Orlando, 278 Trachyna, 271 Treaty between the
Elector of Brandenburg, and the Duke of Newburg, concerning the free exercise
of the Protestant and Roman Religions, 31 A Tree Two thousand Years old, 274
Trent, 110 Three Taverns, or the ThreeShops, 264 Cunning Trick of the Priests
of Loretto, 244 Trunks of Vines very great, 218 Troop of Beggars, 95 A
monstrous Tun, 62
V.
Valmanara, Garden of the Count of that Name, 131 Vanity of Vanities, 209
Velino, a River which throws itself down near Terni, 256 Velitri, 262 Venice,
147 -- Often falln from its Constitution, 173 Vessels of the Virgin Mary, 235
Verdure perpetual, 254 Verona, 115 -- Original of a Procession made there every
Year, 124 Verses on the Conception of the Prince of Wales, 238 Virtue
sacrificed, 141 Vesuvius, 309 Via Flaminia, 259, 268 Via Appia, 268 Viae
Consulares, 270 Vicenza, 127 Vines, 115, 218 Villa Marii, 261 Virgil of the
Vatican, 163 Virgil's Tomb, 341 Virgil sometimes a Saint, sometimes a Witch,
342 Virgin Mary created Eve, 85 11000 Virgins, 38 Union of Utrecht, 29
University of Utrecht, Ibid. -- Of Duisbourg, 32 -- Of Mentz, 49 -- Of
Heidelberg, 63 -- Of Dillingen, 82 -- Of Ferrara, 215 Voyages pleasant, 144
Volturno River, 282 St. Ursula, 38, 227 Utensils of Sacrifices, 121 Utrecht, 29
W.
Prince of Wales's Conception, and Verses on that Occasion, 237, 238, 239 Deep
Wells, 67 Wesel, 31 Wiligise Elector of Mentz, and Son of a Cart-Wright, 48
Wimpsen, 64 Wind-Gun, 70 Wine of Venice, 185 Wine cheap, 65 Winsheim, 64 Withay
Plain in Yorkshire, 333 A Woman raised from the Dead, 38 A Woman brought to
Bed of Six Boys, 9 -- Of 365 Children, 12, 13 -- Of 36 Children, 14 A Woman in
Mourning, 86 A Virtuous Woman, 141 Women common, 188 -- Enslaved, 186 -- Oddly
clothed, 47 -- Padlock'd, 169 Curious Works in Paper, 7 -- In Ivory, 85 Worms,
55 Woorburg, 10 Curious Writing, 59
Z.
Zeist, a fine House of the Count Nassaw Odyck, 30
The End of the Table of the First Volume.
A New Voyage TO ITALY, With a Description of the Chief Towns, Churches, Tombs,
Libraries, Palaces, Statues, and Antiquities of that Country.

Together with Useful INSTRUCTIONS for those who shall Travel thither.

By MAXIMILIAN MISSON, Gent.

Done into English, and adorned with FIGURES.

Vol. II.

LONDON: Printed for R. Bentley, at the Post House in Russel street,
Covent Garden; T. Goodwin, at the Queens Head; and M. Wotton, at the Three
Daggers in Fleet Street; and S. Manship, at the Ship in Cornhill, 1695.

A NEW VOYAGE TO ITALY. To D. W.
VOL. II.
LETTER XXIII.
I Cannot express the Pleasure with which I read your long Letter, that part of
it especially which assures me that my Letters have given you some Satisfaction.

I do not intend to trouble you with Reflections on the present Occurrences in
your Country, of which you have given me an Account: For besides, that such a
Design would engage me into long and useless Digressions, I am persuaded, that
an Answer to those new Questions which you propose concerning Venice, will be
more acceptable to you. I will endeavor then to answer them succinctly, and in
the same order in which you have ranked them; and afterward proceed to
entertain you with my Observations concerning Rome.

I. Your Venetian Gentleman may affirm as positively as he pleases, That Venice
contains Two hundred and fifty thousand Souls; but you must not imagine, that
because he is a Citizen of Venice, he must be a competent Judge of the number
of its Inhabitants; that is a thing which neither his Eyes nor mine can ever be
able to determine, nor can it be known without a very diligent and nice
Enquiry: And therefore I am still of the opinion, that this Controversy ought
to be decided by the Authority of those who have grounded their Calculations on
a careful and particular Examination. I told you, that the Computation which I
follow, comprehends the Inhabitants of la Giudeca, for I look upon that Island
as a part of the City of Venice; but I do not include the Isle of Murana. In
the mean time you must give me leave to tell you, that you carry the point too
far, when you pretend, that it is impossible to make a judgment of the number of
the Inhabitants of a great City; for, if you consider what has been done by Sir
William Petty, you will be convinced, that there are rational methods to make
such a computation, without any considerable Error.

II. The two great Columns of Granite, which are near the Sea, at the end of
the place called the Broglio, were brought from They might have been brought
from Egypt to Constantinople, and from thence to Venice.

It was one Nic. Baratier who undertook to fix them in the place where they
still remain. He asked no other Recompense, but that he might have leave to set
up a Priviledg'd Gaming-house between the two Columns; which was granted him.


Egypt, or, as some say, from Constantinople. The Lion of St. Mark holding an
open Book, with the Inscription of Pax tibi, Marce, etc. is upon one of these
Columns; and those are the Arms of Venice. The Statue of S. Theodore is on the
other Pillar. I think I told you, that it is the Custom of the Signiory to erect
such Columns in all the Cities under its Dominion.

Your Friend has misinformed you, who told you, that the three great Banners,
which on Festival days are set up on the Brazen Pedestals over against S.
Mark's Church, represent the State of Venice and the two Kingdoms of Cyprus and
Candia. This, I confess, is the generally-receiv'd Opinion, but it is as false
as common; for the Republic's Arms are to be seen, without the least
difference, on all the three Banners; nor is there any Design to represent
either Cyprus or Candia, which are not so much as named. I cannot comprehend
the meaning of those who have assured you, that the Republic has no Coat of
Arms, and that the abovementioned Lion is too highly respected at Venice to be
put in a Scutcheon. That same Lion is to be seen in all those places where the
Arms of the State ought to be: And it is no less ridiculous to say, that it
serves instead of Arms, but really is no such thing, than it would be to
pretend that the Venetians wear no Shirts, but that they make use of certain
pieces of Linen, that are cut and sewed exactly like our Shirts, which only
serve them instead of Shirts. It cannot be reasonably supposed, that the
Respect they have for their Lion should hinder them from using it for their
Arms, since we commonly see Saints and Crucifixes applied to the same use. And
you know the story of a Venetian Ambassador, who told an Emperor that asked
him, in what part of the World the Republic had found those winged Lions which
are to be seen in its Coat of Arms, That he believed they found them in a
certain Country where all the Alluding to the Arms of the Empire.
Eagles have two Heads. Moreover, the Lion of St. Mark derives its original
from Ezekiel's Vision See Vol. 1.
, which I have already mentioned in another place, and not, as you have been
informed, from a pretended Metamorphosis of St. Mark, who was turned to a Lion,
to extinguish the incestuous Love of his Sister.

III. I remember I told you, that the Air of Venice is good; but I must confess
that it is very bad in the Lagunas. And even I am credibly informed, that the
Inhabitants of the little Isles are forced to leave their Habitations during
the great Heats.

IV. It Is so universally known, that the Doge of Venice continues for Life,
whereas the Doge of Genoua is changed every two years, that I thought it
needless to inform you of a thing which I presumed you knew as well as I.

The Revenue of the Doge of Venice amounts to near Near Forty thousand Livres
Tournois.
Three thousand Pounds Sterling. according to my best information. The present
Doge is not married. The Dogesses are excluded from having any share in those
shadows of Honor which are paid to their Husbands, which is an Effect of the
Frugality of the Government; and indeed, the Republic has no need of two
Mock-Soveraigns.

V. In my former Letters I said nothing, or very little, concerning the
Libertinism and Debauchery that reigns in the Monasteries, because I am not
particularly acquainted with the Fashions of those places. I can only tell you
what is generally known and acknowledged, That the Nuns receive Persons in
Masquerade at the Grate; that they put themselves into all manner of Disguises,
that they go incognito to see Plays, and elsewhere; that they join in public
Feasts, and have Tables made for that purpose, of which one half is within and
the other without the Grate; that they are concerned in a thousand Intrigues,
and are often the Principal Actors in them. I leave you to judge of their
private Employments, for I am resolved not to pry into them. As for the
bouncing Brothers of the Cowle, they are such horrible Debauchees, that it is
impossible to fancy any Excess of which they are not guilty.

VI. I am not at all surpised at your Friend's Exclamations against the
Account that I gave you of the Venetian Government, and particularly against
the Sovereignty of the ancient Doges; but let him strut and swagger as he
pleases, it is folly either to deny or strive to conceal a thing which is known
to all the World.

VII. According to the Estimate which some judicious and well informed Persons
have made of the Revenues of this Republic, it has been computed, that
reckoning one year with another, the total sum of all their Revenues,
comprehending also the sale of Offices, and of Nobility, Confiscation of
Estates, and all other casual Profits, amounts to no more than Six millions of
Crowns. I will not undertake to warrant the exactness of this Calculation, but
when you propose a Question, you must content your self with such an Answer as
I am able to return.

VIII. There are some Jews as Venice who drive a great Trade, especially the
Portuguese, who are very rich here, as well as at Amsterdam and elsewhere. That
part of the City which is allotted to them is called il Ghetto, or the Jewry.
They wear Hats covered with Scarlet, doubled and edged with Black; but the
poorer sort use waxed Linen instead of Cloth.

IX. The number of those Noblemen who are capacitated by their Age to be
Members of the Great Council, may, as I am informed, amount to about One
thousand and Three hundred; but almost one half of them reside in other places,
being employed either in Civil and Military Offices, or on Embassies to foreign
States; so that the Great Council is usually composed of Six or Seven hundred
Persons at most: Yet even these are too many, and it is partly the numerousness
of this Assembly that has given occasion to this Proverb concerning Venice,
Troppo Test, troppo Feste, troppo Tempeste; Too many Heads, too many
Festivals, and too many Tempests. Nor are the two last parts of this Apophthegm
less true than the first; for the number of Festivals in Venice exceeds those
that are observed in France by above a third part; and I am assured that Storms
happen very frequently here in the Summer.

X. The Great Council was established in the Year 1289. and all the Noblemen
were registered in that List.
The Golden Book which you mention is a bare Catalogue of Names, in which all
the Sons of the Noblemen are enrolled as soon as they are born. All the
Brothers have an equal Title to Nobility, and enjoy the same Privileges.

Before I leave this Head, I must answer the Objection that was proposed to you
against the account that I gave you of the Venetian Noblemen, in which I
represented them as very haughty and almost inaccessible persons. Justice
obliges us to give a reasonable Interpretation to every thing, and it is a
ridiculous Victory that is obtained over imaginary Foes. It Is certain, that the
Noblemen of Venice are extremely conceited of their Nobility; nor will the
Politics of that Country permit them to be very affable. It Is not an easy
matter for a Stranger, whose Quality distinguishes him from the Vulgar, to get
access to them at their Houses, for they are only willing to be seen at the
Broglio: Besides, though they cannot be accused of sparingness in their
Salutations, yet they usually treat the Citizens with a great deal of coldness,
and appear always very reserved in their company: Neither are they wont to give
and receive Visits, even among themselves. Thus you see that the Character that
I gave of them was not so injurious to them as some persons would have
persuaded you; for all these are shrewd signs that they do not abound in
Courtesy: Nevertheless it must be acknowledged, that in private, when their
Convenience permits them, or at least when their Interest obliges them, they
can be as kind and civil as any Men whatsoever. Neither is it altogether
impossible for a Stranger to obtain the Favor of a familiar Conversation with
them, especially when both the Nobleman and the Foreigner are persons of no
great note. Moreover, I would not have you imagine that I designed only to break
a Jest when I told you that the great Sleeve does sometimes serve instead of a
Basket, when a Nobleman goes to the Market; for I once saw a large Sallad, and
at another time a delicate Tail of a Cod thus honorably lodged. I know not
whether I did not forget to tell you, that there are Two or Three hundred poor
They are called Barnabotes from the name of the place where they live, which is
in a remote corner of the City, where the Houses are to be let at low rates.
Barnabotes, who beg about the Streets, and instead of being at the charge of a
Penny for the carriage of their small Provisions, would willingly turn Porters
themselves, and earn a Penny by carrying the Provisions of others. These poor
Gentlemen serve for a Foil to the rich Noblemen.

It is true, that in the Summer the Noblemen take away the Furs from that which
you call the Vest, and we in French la Robe; but the Edges, and that part which
is turned up, remain still furred.

XI. It was not Ignorance of your Inclination, or rather Love to Painting, that
made me guilty of that Negligence with which you upbraid me, in giving you so
imperfect an account of those curious Pieces that are to be seen at Venice;
however, in obedience to your desire, I shall endeavor in some measure to
supply that Defect, by adding some new Observations, though I Am afraid my Memory
will not furnish me with many.

There were formerly in the Hall of the Great Council some Pictures, done by
Gentilis Bellini, and John his Brother, which excelled the best Pieces of that
Gentilis Bellini died in the Year 1501, being 80 years old. And John died 1512,
aged 9^ Years.
Age; but they were all lost in the Fire, which consumed almost the whole
Palace in the year 1577. The same They represent the Wars of Alexander III.
with Frederick Barbarossa.
Histories were copied five years after, by Frederick Zucchero, and set up
again in the same order in which they still remain.

Pordenone's Pictures in Fresco, in the Cloister of St. Stephen, are very much
esteemed; as are likewise his S. Sebastian, and S. Roch, at S. John de Rialto.
Pordenone was an excellent Painter; his Designs are esteemed very judicious,
and his Colors admirably well laid. He emulated Titian.

The St. Peter Martyr of Titian is reputed to be one of the finest Pictures
that ever was made, but it begins to be much defaced. The best Judges are
charmed with this Piece, though it has lost almost all that luster which is wont
to ravish an unskilful Eye. They think they can never enough admire the Beauty
and Richness of the Colors, the judicious Disposition of the Lights, the
Roundness of the Figures, the Passion and Life that is observed in the Face,
and that strength of Expression which reigns through the whole piece. There are
several other Pictures by the same hand in the Churches, St. Mark's Palace, the
Library, Convents, and Fraternities.

There are also some Pieces by Schiavoni, in the Library, which have been
frequently taken for Titian's: Horace Vecelli his Son has almost equaled him on
some occasions; and the Picture in the Hall of the Great Council, which
represents the Battle fought by the Romans against the Troops of Frederick, is
the Work of Horace, though it be commonly ascribed to his Father.

The Picture of the Marriage at Cana, by Paul Veronese, in the Refectory of the
Benedictine Monks in the Isle of S. George, is esteemed to be the Masterpiece
of that Painter, who, you know, is famous for the same Excellencies that we
admire in Titian: His Works are particularly remarkable for the beautiful
disposition of the Figures, judicious Choice of Colors, a great Genius, vast
Ideas, the greatest Easiness imaginable, and the most charming Variety. The
Piece that I mentioned is Two and thirty Foot broad, and contains a Hundred and
twenty five Figures.

In the Church of S. Sebastian, the Feast of Simon the Leper is one of the most
celebrated Pieces of the same Artist. There are also three other Pictures, by
the same Hand, in the Arch of S. Mark's Library, which, if my Memory do not
deceive me, represent Geometry, Arithmetic, and Glory acquired by Learning.

The Paradise, by Tintoret, in the Hall of the Great Council, is a famous
Piece. It was said of Tintoret, That he united the Designs of Michael Angelo
with the Colors of Titian; which certainly was a very noble Character.
Besides, he had the most fruitful Invention, and the quickest Hand of all the
Artists of that Age. A Painter who was with me in the Fraternity, or (as they
call it at Venice) the School of S. Roch, made me observe with admiration that
rare Picture which Tintoret finished almost in a moment, while Paul Veronese,
Salviati, and Frederick Zucchero his Competitors in the same Work, were still
busy on the rough Draught, which was to be presented to those who designed to
employ them. I have seen several other Pieces by the same Hand in the
abovementioned School, S. Maria dell' Orto, S. Mark's School, and other places.

There are some of Bassani's Works at S. Mary major: Schiavoni's Pictures in
the Library are, I think, Emblems of Valor, Sovereignty, and Sanctity.

XII. I told you, That the Gondola's are covered with black; and I think I also
informed you, That none here are allowed to give Liveries to their Servants,
which may be reckoned among the Doge's peculiar Privileges. It Is true, the
Noblemen's Wives, during the first, and, I suppose, also the second year of
their Marriage, are permitted to please their own Fancy in the choice of
Colors for the Habits of their Gondeliers: This little Favor is granted them
at the same time that they are suffered to adorn themselves with their Jewels;
but as soon as the limited time is expired, this Mark of distinction ceases,
and they are never suffered to resume their Jewels, unless on some high
Festivals, and during the Carnaval. The rich Curtezans choose rather to pay the
Fine, than submit to so rigorous a Law.

No Man that is not in love with Contradiction will dare to affirm, That the
Venetian Ladies enjoy greater Liberty than those of England or France; and it is
impossible to allege the least shadow of a Reason in confirmation of such a
ridiculous Assertion. The Ladies of Venice are sometimes permitted, during the
Carnaval, to walk abroad in disguise, to go to see a Play or an Opera, or
perhaps to visit the Fairs or Gaming-houses: But, what does all this Liberty
signify? Their Vizards and Disguises are more prejudicial than advantageous to
them, which serve only to hide what they would willingly show, and to confound
them with the worthless and ignoble Crowd. Besides, this time of Diversion is
very short lived: And after. all, how can they be capable of enjoying Pleasure,
while they remember a thing that they ought never to forget, that it is
impossible for them to stir a Foot without the attendance of those cursed Spies
which are more insupportable to them than the heaviest Chains; not to mention
their Husbands? What is all this pretended Liberty, but a continuation of that
Confinement which they are forced to undergo for ten or eleven months in the
year? And is not their Condition more tolerable, when they are suffered to walk
without disturbance from one end of their Chamber to the other? I will not
aggravate their Slavery by the opposition of that entire Liberty which is
enjoyed by our English and French Ladies, their Walks, Visits, Meetings, and
all the other Divertisements which are allowed to them without the least
constraint or limitation of Time; for it would be altogether needless to insist
on this Parallel.

XIII. The young Noblemen are suffered to gratify their own Fancies in the
splendor of their Equipages; nor do they usually spare any cost in Gold or
Silver Stuffs, Laces, Plumes of Feathers, Purflings, and Embroideries of all
colors. At fifteen years of age they put on the Gown, though they are not
permitted to enter the Council before five and twenty. On the Continent they
wear what Habits they please, and enjoy a full and uncontrolled liberty; for
the Jurisdiction of the Tribunal that regulates the Habits reaches not beyond
the Lagunas.

XIV. When we visited the Treasury, we heard no mention of St. Mark's Thumb,
neither did our Guides acquaint us, that this Saint was dismembered to prevent
his being chosen Priest. The truth is, we never asked them about it, and
perhaps they forgot to speak of it. They have a Tradition, that his Ring was
unfortunately lost, not long after he gave it, but they assured me that it was
since recovered. The Story will perhaps divert you, which is briefly thus:

In the year 1339. the Sea being furiously agitated, three Men accosted a
Gondolier, who was endeavourieg to preserve his Boat from the extraordinary
Violence of the Waves; they constrained him to carry them two miles from
thence, near to a place called The Lido: when they arrived there, they found a
Shipful of Devils, who were raising a Tempest by their Hellish sorceries; but
as soon as these three Men had chid the Fiends the Storm ceased. The first of
the three made the Gondolier carry him to the Church of S. Nicholas, the second
to that of S. George, and the third to that of S. Mark. This last, instead of
paying the Boat-man, gave him a Ring, with orders to carry it to the Senate,
who, he assured him, would not fail to satisfy him for his pains. And at the
same time he informed the Gondolier, that he that went ashore at St. Nicholas's
was Mr. St. Nicholas himself, that the second was St. George, and that he
himself was St. Mark, in proper Person. The Gondolier, full of astonishment at
so many Wonders, related the whole story to the Senate, who not only believed
him, but gave him a bountiful Reward.

XV. Protestants are suffered to be interred in the Churches, if the Parents of
the deceased desire that Privilege: The reason is, because it is not known that
there are any Protestants at Venice; for all those that are neither Jews,
Greeks, nor Armenians are reputed to be Roman Catholics.

XVI. Your Admirer of the Venetian Palaces mistakes the state of the Question.
I do not deny that there are stately Buildings in that City, which deserve to
be called Palaces; and you may remember that I mentioned some of 'em; but every
ti^^ (...) what I told you in general concerning the Palaces of Italy is most
certainly true; and all his Objections against it amount to no more than a bare
wrangling about Words: besides, you ought not to depend on his Opinion, since
you tell me, that he has no skill in Architecture. Neither ought you to rely on
the account he gives you of the Machins of the Venetian Opera's, since he never
saw any others. And I can assure you, that he errs prodigiously, when he
compares the Neatness of Venice to that of Holland.

XVII. You do well not to take that part of the account which I gave you of
this City, according to the utmost rigor of the literal sense of the Words, in
which I assured you that there is a passage by Water to all the Houses in
Venice: There may perhaps be five or six in a thousand that cannot be
approached but by Land; though I would not be obliged to make good that number:
But your young Traveller speaks at random, when he affirms so positively, that
there is not a Canal within five hundred paces of the House where he lodged;
and, that there are twenty such places in the City: for, by his leave, this is
a monstrous Absurdity. How many spaces, at this rate, would there be in Venice,
of a mile in diameter? You may easily judge, by the Platform of that City which
I send to you, of the truth of my Assertion, in which I still persist, and
which is grounded on undoubted Evidence.

ROME called The Holy.
The City of Rome has been often described by Persons who had all the
Opportunities and Qualifications that were necessary to fit them for so vast an
Undertaking. I will not pretend to give you a particular account of all that I
observed in it, but only endeavor to represent to you a general Idea of that
famous City, and afterward proceed to communicate to you some particular
Observations: I will entertain you with nothing but what is either new or
little known, unless when I am obliged to resolve your Doubts, or answer your
Questions. We see every day an infinite number of things which have no
coherence, nor any other relation than that of the Neighborhood of the Places
where we find them; so that you must not expect any methodical connection or
conformity of Matter in those Observations which I promised to impart to you.

You are not ignorant that Rome was known by the name of Septicollis, or the
City on Seven Hills: Before the Reign of Servius Tullius it had no more; but
since that time it has been much enlarged, and at present contains Monte
Capitolino, Palatino, Aventino, Celio, Esquilino, Viminale, Quirinale or Monte
Cavallo, Janiculo Pincio, Vaticano, Citorio, and Giordano.
Twelve: You must not imagine that these Hills are so many considerable
Mountains, they are only small Hillocks, the ascent to which is scarce sensible.

Vopiseus, who lived under the Reign of Dioclesian, asserts positively, That
the Walls with which Rome was enclosed by Aurelian were fifty miles in compass.
But this is either not well expressed, or misunderstood, or it is absolutely
false; for it has been clearly demonstrated, that the present Walls are in a
great measure the same which Aurelian caused to be erected, and yet they are
not above thirteen little miles about, which is the largest compass that ever
Rome had. It Is true indeed, the Suburbs extended very far on all sides, and
made the City in a manner infinite.

There is not above a third part of that extent which is comprehended within
the Walls, inhabited at present; for the other two thirds on the East and South
side are nothing but Gardens and Ruins: so that if, during the splendour of
ancient Rome, Propertius had reason to say, Hoc quodcunq, vides, Hospes, quam
maxima Roma est
Ante Phrygem Aeneam, Collis and Herba fuit.
Atque ubi navali stant Sacra Palatia Phoebo;
Evand^i profugae procubuere Boves.
We may now use the words of another Poet concerning the present condition of
that City, Haec, dum viva, sibi septem circumdedit Arces;
Mortua nunc, septem contegitur Tumulis.


The Houses are for the most part built of Brick, plastered and whited over on
the outside. The Roofs are ridg'd, but the Angle at the top is very obtuse, and
many of them are also fashioned, as we say in France, a la Mansarde. Neither
the Houses nor Streets are equally beautiful, and the Pavements are neither
large nor neat. I shall have occasion hereafter to speak of some of the most
remarkable Buildings.

Which way soever you come to Rome, you still perceive St. Peter's Dome, which
appears above all the Spires and the tops of the highest Structures in the City.

The Tiber makes a little Insula Tiberina olim excrevisse dicitur ex segetibus
Tarquinii superbi, in alv^um fluvii conjectis. J.J. Boiss. See Tit. Livius.
Island here, and the course of that River is from North to South. That part of
the City which stands on its right Bank, is not above a fifth or sixth part of
the other; it is called Trastevera.

The first and general Prospect of Rome does not present any surprising
Beauties to the Eye of the Beholder, especially if he has already seen several
other famous Cities; but the longer he stays in it Grata Roma tam sapientibus
quam insipientibus: sine amore esse nullo modo potest. Bern. Sacca.
, he will still make new discoveries of things, that deserve to be considered
with attention. It Is impossible to walk fifty paces in or about that City
without observing some Remainders of its ancient Grandeur. You know that
haughty Mistress of the Universe was wont to enrich her self with the best
Spoils of her conquered Provinces. Porphyries, Granites, and the finest
Oriental Marble, were more common there than Bricks, or the Stones that were
dug out of the neighboring Quarries. Statuas primum Thusci invenisse
referuntur, quas amplexa posteritas paene parem populum Urbi dedit, quam Natura
procreavit. Cassiodor.
The Statues of Rome have been called a Great Nation; and we may add not
unfitly, that the Colosses were the Giants. This proud City was adorned with
Temples, Palaces, Theaters, Representations of Sea fights, Triumphal Arches,
Baths, Cirques, Columns, Fountains, Aqueducts, Obelisks, Mausoleums, and other
magnificent Structures; but now all these things may be truly said to be buried
in their own Ruins, though these Ruins, as dismal as they are, seem still to
retain a great deal of their ancient splendour.

The Country about Rome, for ten or twelve miles, ill peopled, extremely
unhealthful, and even altogether barren in some places: It is generally flat,
but very uneven.

I could not make an exact estimate of the number of the Inhabitants of this
famous City; Lampridius tells us, that Heliogabalus made a collection of the
Cobwebs in Rome, which weighed Ten thousand pound. From which passage some
would draw Inferences to confirm the Computations of the prodigious number of
the Inhabitants of that City; but this is a very lame way of reasoning.
It Is generally believed, that it contains Two hundred thousand Souls, but in
such cases there are always various Opinions; it is even very difficult to
reconcile the passages of ancient Authors concerning the numbering of the
People of Rome under the Reign of Augustus; some tell us of Three millions One
thousand and Thirty seven, and others have raised the number to Four or Five
millions; but these Calculations do not at all agree with the account of
Suetonius, who computes only One million and Six hundred thousand, or a few
more, under Tiberius, who was the immediate Successor of Augustus; and, how can
it be supposed with the least shadow of Reason, that such a prodigious
alteration could happen within the narrow space of a few years? Some Critics
will perhaps endeavor to elude the force of so pressing an Argument, by
botching the Text of Suetonius, or, at least, by starting new Difficulties
concerning it; but all their studied subtilties will never amount to a certain
decision of the Controversy. This brings to my mind a passage in Wernerus
Roolwinck.
Fasciculus temporum, where the Author, speaking of the Reign of Augustus, has
these words; Roma in flore, and numerati sunt ejus cives and descripti
nonagesies Tricentena millia, and Octoginta millia. The number of the Citizens
of Rome amounted to Seven and twenty millions and Eighty Thousand: A jolly
company indeed! but perhaps he meant all those who had a right to the
Privileges of Roman Citizens, throughout the whole extent of the Empire.

Two days after our return from Naples, we had the fortune to see a pleasant
Ceremony, which I cannot forbear relating to you: You must know that a Club of
sixty Gentlemen did voluntarily agree to raise a sufficient Fund to make either
Wives or Nuns of Three hundred and fifty Maidens every year. Now the Ceremony
is performed thus: On the Festival of the Annunciation, the Pope and the sacred
College meet at the Minerva, where the Pope says a high Mass, or at least some
Cardinal is appointed to officiate in his absence, and all the Girls confess,
and receive the Sacrament, being clothed in white Serge, and muffl'd up, like
Ghosts, in a great piece of Cloth which covers their Head, leaving only a small
passage for their sight, and oftentimes only a little peep-hole for one Eye;
then they enter by two and two into the Quire where all the Cardinals are
assembled, and prostrate themselves at the Feet of the Pope, or of the Cardinal
who officiates for him, at whose side stands a certain Officer appointed for
that purpose, with a Basin full of little white Bags in his Hand, each of which
contains either a Bill of Fifty Crowns for those Maidens who choose Marriage,
Pope Clement IV. gave a Hundred Crowns in Marriage with his eldest Daughter,
and only Ten Crowns to her that went into a Nunnery. Plat.
or a Bill of a Hundred Crowns for such of them as are willing to enter into a
Nunnery. Each Maiden having humbly declared her Choice, receives her Bag
hanging by a little String, and having kissed it, makes a low Courtesy, and
files off, to make room for the rest. The future Nuns are distinguished by a
Garland of Flowers, which crowns their Virginity, and they are ranked in the
most honorable place at the Procession. Of all the Three hundred and fifty,
there were but Two and thirty who chose St. Paul's better part, and the rest
contented themselves with doing well.

Give me leave to trip from the Minerva to the Borghese Palace, You must see at
the Minerva that famous Statue of Christ embracing the Cross, by Michael Angelo.
without obliging me to give you any other reason why I do so, than that I must
follow my Journal thither. This Palace is very beautiful, and contains many
Rarities. The Portico's are supported by fourscore and sixteen Antique Pillars
of Egyptian Granite. Among the Pictures in the lower Apartments, there are
seventeen hundred Originals by the most celebrated Masters: The Venus
blindfolding Cupid, while the Graces bring him his Arms, is Titian's, and is
esteemed the best. Paul the Fifth, who was of this Family, is painted in such
fine Mosaic Work, that his Picture is said to contain above a million of
Pieces: My Calculation assures me, that this cannot be true, but, without
Criticizing upon a Trifle, it must be acknowledged that it is an excellent
Picture. Here they showed us a Crucifix of the same bigness with that of the
Carthusians at Naples, and assured us, that this is that famous Original of
Michael Angelo, which I mentioned before. To reconcile this Difference, I think
I may affirm, without any scruple, that the whole story is a mere Fable.

It was the common People that gave the name of Rotonda to the Pantheon,
because of the roundness of its Figure. When Boniface the Fourth dedicated this
ancient Temple to the Virgin and all the Martyrs, he named it S. Maria ad
Martyrs. Afterward some other Pope would have all the Saints in general
comprehended with the Martyrs. I must ingenuously acknowledge, that I cannot
give you the satisfaction you desire concerning the true reason why this Temple
was of old called the Pantheon. Some say, that it had that name from the
resemblance between its Figure and that of the Heavens, Quod forma ejus convexa
fastigiatam Coeli similitudinem ostenderet. Others think that it was
consecrated by Agrippa to Jupiter and all the Gods; or, perhaps to Jupiter
only, and to Cybele the Mother of the Gods: but after all, my opinion is, that
this Controversy is not well decided.

It Is true, there are Niches all round the inside of the Temple, and I think we
may reasonably conjecture, that these Niches were formerly full of Idols, but
this is the only Inference that we can draw from them. Varro tells us of Thirty
thousand Deities that were worshipped at Rome; and the Philosopher Bruxillus, in
his dying Speech to the Senate, assured them, that he had left Two hundred and
Eighty thousand; so that there must have been a great number of Niches indeed
to accommodate all those Deities. Your Niches then will not furnish you with
one Argument to prove that the Pantheon was consecrated to all that multitude
of Gods that were adored at Rome. Though this Temple has lost its fairest
Ornaments, it is still one of the most beautiful and entire antique Edifices in
Italy. There is to be seen at Castle St. Angelo, of which I shall quickly give
you some account, a Cannon which is a seventy pounder, that was made, as well
as the four Columns of the great Altar, only of the brazen Nails with which the
Roof of the Portico was fastened. The two Lions of Porphyry which are under the
Portico of the Pantheon, did heretofore serve to adorn the Front of the Temple
of Isis. F. Nardin.
The Columns of this Portico are of Granite, of the Corinthian Order, and all
of one piece. I measured them with as much exactness as you could desire: they
are not all equally big, but I found that they were fifteen foot in compass,
within a few inches more or less: I give you the measure of them in English
feet, and you may judge of the rest by the proportion that is between each
part. That piece of Granite, in which the opening of the great Gate is cut, is
also of a very considerable bigness; for it is forty foot high, and very near
twenty broad.

The illustrious Raphael lies interred in this Church: Bembus made this
beautiful Distick to serve for his Epitaph; Ille hic est Raphael timuit quo
sospite vinci
Rerum magna parens, and moriente mori.


La Guillitiere says, that the Pantheon at Athens seemed to him to be a far
more magnificent Structure than that of Rome. But Spon has censured this Author
for fancying the Temple of Minerva to be a Pantheon. Meursius had fallen into the
same Error, and their common Mistake is grounded upon the faulty description
which Theodosius Zygomala, whose words they only transcribe, gives of that
famous Temple, in his Letter to Martin Crusius, or perhaps on the name of
Parthenion, which Pausanias gives it. I will not exercise your patience with
tedious descriptions of Churches, but shall content my self to communicate to
you some particular Observations concerning them, as occasion shall offer. That
of St. Peter is generally esteemed to be the largest and most magnificent
Temple in the World: He that would make a right judgment of it, must go thither
often; he must even walk on the top of the Arches, and into the very Ball which
is over the Dome, and must also view the Church which is under Ground. At your
first entrance you see no surprising Objects; the harmony and proportions of
Architecture are so judiciously observed, and every thing is placed so exactly
where it ought to be, that this unparalled Order does rather compose the Mind
than disturb its tranquillity; but the longer you consider this vast Structure,
the more indispensably you will find your self obliged to admire it. Since you
are willing to rely on my Fidelity and Diligence, rather than on those who have
already given you some dimensions of this Edifice, I will send you the
principal of them, as I measured 'em my self more than once, with the
assistance of skilful and experienced persons. You will very much oblige me, by
giving me an Account of what resemblance or difference you shall find between
these Dimensions and those of your St. Paul's.

St Peter's Church
Vol. 2d. Page 24

depiction of St. Peter's Church

Engl. feet. inch 1. The length of the Church, measured on the outside,
comprehending the wideness of the Portico, and the thickness of the Walls, 722
2. The length of the Church, measured within, without comprehending either the
Portico, or the thickness of the Walls, 594 3. The length of the Cross of the
Church, on the outside, 490 4. The length of the Cross within, 438 5. The
breadth of the Body of the Church, 86 8 6. The perpendicular height of the
Body of the Church, 144 7. The bigness or outward circumference of the Dome,
620 8. The diameter of the Dome within 143 9. The breadth of the Front of the
Church, 400 10. The entire height of the Church, from the Floor to the top of
the Cross which is over the Ball, 432 11. The diameter of the Ball, 8 4 12. The
height of the Statues which are on the Cornish of the Second Order of the
Front, 18

Bramanti, under Julius II, and Michael Angelo, under Paul III, were the two
principal Architects of this Building: And indeed, there is no part of it which
is not noble and majestical.

The Chair of St. Peter, supported by the four Doctors of the Church, whose
Statues are of Brass gilt; the Tombs of Urban VIII, Paul III, Alexander VII,
and the Countess Maud, who, you know, was Gregory the VIIth's Poene comes
individua.

Lamb. Abbot of Hirtzaw.

By the Tomb of Paul III. there are two Marble Statues, which they were forced
to cover with a Drapery of Brass, to remove the occasion of Scandal that was
given by two Spaniards, who were enamored of these Figures.


dear Friend, are Works of a finished beauty and magnificence.

There is nothing to be seen in this admirable Structure but gilt Work, rare
Pictures, embossed Work, Statues of Brass and Marble, and all these things are
disposed in their proper places by so wise and happy a Contrivance, that the
abundance of them does not cause the least Confusion. The inside of the Cupola
is of Mosaic Work, the Arch of the Nave is of a certain fine Clay, with
Compartments of raised work gilded; and all the Pilasters will be shortly
overcast with the same matter, as well as the remaining part of the inside of
the Church.

The great Altar is directly under the Dome, in the middle of the Cross; it is
a kind of a Pavilion, supported by four wreathed Pillars of Brass, that are
adorned with Foliages, and strewn with Bees, which were the Arms of P. Urban
VIII. Over every Column there is an Angel of Brass gilt, seventeen foot high;
and there are Figures of Children playing and walking on the Cornish. This
Piece is extremely valued; and the height of the whole amounts to ninety feet.
Under this Altar there is a pair of Stairs, which leads to the Chapel where St.
Peter's Body is pretended to be kept, and to the other holy places in the
Vaults of this Church.

At the entry of these Grottoes I observed a Bull engraved in Marble, Huc
mulieribus ingredi non licet, nisi unico die Lunae post Pentecosten: quo
vicissim viri ingredi prohibentur. Qui secus faxint, Anathema sunto.
by which Women are forbidden to enter into that place, save only on
Whitsun-Monday, on which day it is declared unlawful for any Man to come there;
and whosoever shall act contrary to either of these Prohibitions, are
anathematized. These places are dark, and the Sexton told us, That this Order
was occasioned by a certain amorous Adventure. There is an Indulgence of seven
years for every Step of the Stairs that lead to St. Peter's Chapel, granted to
such as descend them with Devotion.

The double Range of Pillars which encloses the great Place that is before the
Church, 286 Pillars.
and leads to the same Church, by a double Portico on each side, is an unusual
sort of Ornament, which surprises the Beholder. There are in the Place two
magnificent Fountains, which cast forth very large Streams. The Obelisk which
stands in the middle is of one entire piece of Granate, it is Saxum mirae
magnitudinis. Petrar. lib. Ep. 2.
seventy eight foot high, without reckoning either the Pedestal or the Cross,
which Sixtus V. caused to be placed on the top of the Obelisk, when he set up
that ancient Monument. It Is commonly, but falsely, reported, It was set up in
the year 1586. It weighs without reckoning the Base 956148 pounds. See J. J.
Boissard.
That the brazen Globe which was there formerly contained the Ashes of
Augustus. Dominicus Fontana the Architect, that was employed by Sixtus V,
having examined that Ball, found that it could not have served for that use;
and it was nothing else but a simple Ornament. It Is true, the Obelisk was
consecrated to Augustus and Tiberius; as it appears plainly by this
Inscription, which is still very conspicuous, and may be read distinctly, Divo
Caesari, Divi Julii F. Augusto:
Tiberio Caesari, D. Aug. F. Augusto, Sacrum.


The Palace of the It was believed that the God Vaticanus gave his Oracles or
Vaticinia in this place.
Vatican is adjacent to St. Peter's Church: This is certainly a convenience to
the Pope; but it must be acknowledged, that the too near Neighborhood of that
Palace is by no means advantageous to the Church, but rather occasions a very
unpleasnat confusion; for, the prospect of that Church would be infinitely more
glorious and delightful, if a great part of it were not hid by other Edifices,
and if it were on all sides exposed to the unobstructed view of the Beholder.
The Vatican is not a regular Building, but rather a heap of beautiful Pieces
ill tacked together: It is said to contain Twelve thousand and Five hundred
Chambers, Halls, and Closets; and this computation may be easily examined on
the Model which is showed of it in Wood. The Belvedere is a part of the
Vatican; you know, without doubt, that it derives its name from the lovely
prospect which is discovered from this place.

The excellent Pieces of Raphael, Michael Angelo, Julius Romanus, Pinturicchio,
Polidorus, John de Vdina, Daniel Volterra, and several other famous Masters,
found us more Employment than all the other Beauties of the Palace: The History
of Attila, by the incomparable Raphael, is always surrounded with Admirers.
Raphael was born on Good Friday, 1483. and died on another Good Friday 37 years
after.
I have several times observed with pleasure the earnestness and attention with
which the most competent Judges are wont to examine all its Beauties. Look,
says one, what a graceful mixture of Strength and Sweetness there is in that
Figure: Would you not swear that this other were alive? Does it not seem to
breath? Is it possible to express a more lively Passion, or to imagine a more
charming posture? Admire, cries another, that prodigious variety of Faces, and
that admirable disposition of Light and Shades. Did ever Michael Angelo design
better, or Titian lay his Colors more happily? Never was there any Piece more
noble and exquisitely beautiful throughout. But it is time to leave them to
their Raptures; neither would a whole day suffice to relate all that I have
heard on this occasion. The Merit of Raphael, and his glorious Reputation, sets
the Wits on work every day to invent new Expressions to praise his Works. But,
after all, even the greatest Examples of Perfection are not See page
faultless, and Raphael himself is guilty of a considerable Error in the same
Picture, where Pope Leo the First, and two Cardinals that attend him, are
represented in the same Platina writes, That Pope Constantine, and the other
Popes of that Age, ( 250 years after Leo I) wore only a plain Chamlet Garment.
Concerning the Cardinals, see Vol. 2. It has been observed, that Albert Durer
seldom made a Face without Whiskers. At Soest in the County of Mark, in
Westphalia, there is a Picture of our Savior's last Supper, on a Glass Window
in a Church, in which a Gammon of Bacon is put for the Paschal Lamb. Since
Images are the Books of the Ignorant, it is to be wished that they were made
agreeable to the Truth.
Habits that are now usually worn by persons of their Rank; which is somewhat
too bold a violation of the Truth of History. This puts me in mind of Titian,
who forgot himself so far as to hang Rosaries at the Girdles of those two
Disciples, whom Christ met in their way to Emaus; and of another famous
Painter, I mean Rosso, who introduces Monks in their Frocks, as Guests at the
Virgin's Wedding. But leaving the Vatican, was there ever any Painter guilty of
a more ridiculous design and fantastical disposition of the Parts in a Picture,
than Michael, in that of the Last Judgment? There you may see Angels without
Wings, and the old Ferry-man Charon transporting a Boatful of Souls; there you
may behold the Resurrection of Persons of all Ages, with brawny Muscles like so
many Hercules's, shoals of naked Persons huddl'd confusedly together, and
Bodies exposed in unseemly postures. Michael Angelo designed boldly, and
painted whatsoever his heated Fancy suggested to him.

Since I am upon this subject, I cannot forbear taking notice of the Murder of
Admiral The Parliament of Paris had promised Fifty thousand Crowns of Gold to
any person that should exhibit him alive or dead. The word in the French is
representer.
Coligny, the History of which is described in three large Pictures, which are
to be seen in the Hall where the Pope gives Audience to Ambassadors. In the
first Coligny is represented as he was carried to his House, after he was
wounded by the Ruffian Morevel, and at the bottom of the Picture is this Motto,
Gasper Colignius Amirallius accepto vulnere domum refertur. Greg. XIII, Pontif.
Max. 1572; that is, Gasper Coligny the Admiral is carried home wounded: In the
Pontificate of Greg. XIII, 1572. The second exhibits him murdered in his own
House, together with his Son-in-law Teligny, and others, with these words,
Caedes Colignii and Sociorum ejus; i. e. The Slaughter of Coligny and his
Companions. And in the third, the News of the Execution is brought to the King,
who seems pleased with it, as it appears by the Inscription, Rex Colignii necem
probat; The King approves of the Slaughter of Coligny.

The Pope did not content himself with setting up the History of this Massacre
as a Trophy in his Palace; but the better to eternise the memory of so
remarkable an Action, he caused Medals to be coined, with this Inscription
about his Image, Gregorius XIII, Pont. Max. An. 1. and on the reverse a
destroying Angel, holding in one Hand a Cross, and in the other a Sword, with
which he seems to thrust, with these words, Vgonottorum Strages, 1572; i. e.
The Slaughter of the Hugonots, 1572. These Medals are become very scarce, yet I
obtained some of them by the assistance of my Friends.

I shall say nothing of the Gardens of Belvedere, nor of the Statues with which
they are adorned: You have heard that the Sea the History of Laocoon, in the
second Book of the Aeneids. The Laocoon is of one piece of Marble; it is the
Work of Agesander, Pylodorus, and Athenodorus, three Grecian Sculptors.
Laocoon is infinitely valued; and the It Is a Body without Head, Arms, or Legs:
the Sculptor's Name is engraven on the Pedestal, (...), Apollonius the Son of
Nestor, an Athenian.
Trunk, the Antinous, the Apollo, and the Cleopatra are also particularly
admired.

There are very different Opinions about the number of Books contained in this
Library. And I am so little able to decide the ^ Question, that I choose rather
to say nothing of it.
The Vatican Library has been increased not only by the addition of that of
Heydelberg, but also of the Duke of Vrbin's. The Pictures with which it is
replenished represent the Sciences, Councils, most celebrated Libraries,
Inventers of Letters, and some passages in the Life of Sixtus the Fifth. The
old Manuscript The Virgil and Terence of the Vatican were written a thousand
years ago; Spon.

They showed us here a Volume of Letters of Henry VIII. to Ann of Bolen, which
is in quarto, about the thickness of a Finger.


Virgil is in quarto, of greater breadth than length, in capital Letters,
without distinction of Words, or the use of Points. The Character is somewhat
Gothic, which does not at all agree with the first* Ages of Antiquity, in which
some pretend it was written, no more than the Miniature which is the product of
an ignorant Age.

I observed among the Manuscripts of the last Ages some Letters written by, and
to Cardinals; in which they style one-another Master Peter, or Master Julius,
without further Ceremony.

I saw the German Bible which you mention; they pretend that it was translated
by Luther, and written by his own Hand; but the credit of that Story is
destroyed by the extravagant Prayer at the end of it, which is apparently of
the same hand with the rest. Thus it is in the Original: O Got, durch deine
gute,
Bescher uns kleider und hute,
Auch mentel und rock,
Fell kalber und bocke,
Ochsen, Schafe, und rinder,
Viele weiber, wenig kinder.
Schlechte speis und trank
Machem einen das jahr lang.


That is, O God, be graciously pleased to grant us Clothes and Hats, Cloaks and
Gowns, fat Calves and Goats, Oxen, Sheep, and Bulls, many Wives, and few
Children* Bad Meat and all D^^^k make Life uneasy. It must be acknowledged,
that they who would persuade us that Luther was the Author of this Prayer, must
have a very earnest desire to make him pass for a Debauchee.

From the Library we went to the Arsenal, where, if you will believe them,
there is a sufficient number of Arms for Twenty thousand Horse and Forty
thousand Foot. But I can assure you, that there are not half so many; and
besides, the Arms that they have are in a bad condition. And it is no wonder,
for these are not the principal Thunders of the Vatican.

If on one side the Pope may descend from this Palace to S. Peter's Church, on
the other he may escape unseen to the Castle of St. Angelo. Alexander the Sixth
built a Gallery of Communication for this very purpose: and indeed, such a
wicked man as that Pope was, had reason to provide for his security. Urban
VIII. fortified the Castle with four Bastions, and gave 'em the Names of the
four Evangelists. There is a Picture in the Chapel, which represents Gregory
the First with his triple Crown prostrating himself before an Angel that
appears to him on the top of Adrian's Mausoleum, and puts up his Sword into its
Sheath. This was done, says the Story, to advertise the Pope of the approaching
Deliverance of Rome from a raging Plague that had wasted the City for a long
time: and from hence that Mausoleum had the name of the Castle of St. Angelo.

In the little Arsenal that belongs to this Castle we saw an Armory full of
prohibited Arms, and were informed, The Pope's triple Crown is kept in this
Castle.
that almost all those in whose possession they were seized had been put to
death. Among the rest, they showed us Ranuccio Farnese's Pistols; I believe the
Story of 'em will not be unwelcome to you, of which you may take the following
brief Account, as I have heard it related by several persons here.

Sixtus the Fifth having by repeated Orders expressly prohibited the carrying of
secret Arms, was informed; that the young Prince Ranuccio, Son and Heir of
Alexander Farnese Duke of Parma and Governor of the Netherlands, went usually
armed with Pocket-pistols. Asperius nihil est humili qui surgit in altum.
The Pope, who was naturally the most rigid and severe man in the World,
joyfully embraced all occasions to display the greatness of his Power, without
regarding who might be sufferers by it. Besides, the Duchy of Parma being a
Fief of his Demeans, he looked on that Prince as his Vassal: He commanded
Ranuccio to be arrested, and to aggravate his Guilt, ordered his Pistols to be
taken from him in one of the Chambers of the Pope's Palace, as that Prince was
going to desire an Audience of his Holiness. Ranuccio was immediately carried
to the Castle of S. Angelo, and the Cardinal Farnese his Uncle left no means
unessay'd to procure his Liberty, but all in vain. Whether the Pope had
resolved on the Death of that poor Prince, or only intended to terrify him, is
a Question which I cannot determine. However, about Ten of the clock at night,
at the same time that the Cardinal was returned to renew his solicitations,
Sixtus sent an express Command to the Governor of the Castle to cause Ranuccio
to be beheaded; and not doubting but that his Orders had been instantly
executed, he rid himself of the Cardinal, by granting him a new Order to the
Governor, by which he commanded him to set Ranuccio (whom he concluded to be
already dead) at liberty at Eleven of the clock. The Cardinal, who was ignorant
of the first Order, ran to the Castle without losing a moment, and was
extremely surpised to find his Nephew all in Tears, in the Arms of a
Confessor, and to hear that his Death had been only delayed, because he had
begged a little time to prepare himself for it. The Governor seeing this new
Order, and concluding that the Pope had at last yielded to the importunate
solicitations of the Cardinal, delivered up his Prisoner, who, by his Uncle's
Command, immediately took post, and so escaped from the very Jaws of Death.

The Cavalier Borri, a Milanese Gentleman, who is a great Chemist, and expert
Physician, is at present a Prisoner in the Castle of St. Angelo; he is accused
of some Heretical Opinions, but at the same time it is believed, that he is not
perfectly Master of his Reason, which is the cause that he is not kept under a
very close confinement, and even is sometimes permitted to visit persons of
Quality in the City, who desire his assistance for the cure of their
Distempers. We were informed, that he pretends to revive the Errors of the
Collyridians in the Fourth Age, who paid a sort of Adoration to the Virgin; and
it is even reported, that he makes her a fourth person in the Godhead.

This man puts me in mind of Dr. Molinos, of whom you desire me to send you
some certain News, which it is impossible for me to do. It Is true, I have seen
those Propositions that are either heretical, or pretended to be so, of which
he is said to be the Author; nor would it be very difficult to obtain a Copy of
his Accusation; but all this signifies nothing. I must hear Molinos himself,
before I can judge of the merit of his cause: for, it is certain, that all the
accounts that we have of him are guilty either of Aggravation or Alleviation.
Of these Propositions, which I mentioned, some are dangerous, several are
ambiguous, many indifferent, and others very reasonable and orthodox. However,
I can assure you, that his Reputation is generally very bad in this place: He
is esteemed a Villain, a lewd Fellow, and a Seducer, who has so cunningly
insinuated himself into Nunneries by his Cant of Insensibility, Ecstasy, etc.
that a great number of these poor Creatures have been deluded by him. They
relate a thousand Stories to confirm the Opinion they have of him, but I must
tell you once more that they are of doubtful Credit. We may easily perceive
that it is their Interest to blacken the Character of that unhappy Man, and to
load him with Reproaches, since they have condemned him in so ignominious a
manner to pass the rest of his days in a Cell. Besides, I observed, that even
his bitterest Enemies are wont to make a distinction between him and his
Followers. Molinos, they say, is void of all Religion and Virtue; he is a man
of no Principles, and believes nothing at all, but there are some well-meaning
Molinists, who are unacquainted with their Master's Heart, and are sincere
Professors of that Quietism, and those other Opinions, which you have heard so
often mentioned*

I am, Sir, Your etc.
Rome, March 30, 1688.
LETTER XXIV.
SIR,
THAT I may observe some Order in that variety of Matter which is the Subject
of my Letters, I follow sometimes my own Journal, and sometimes yours. Some
days ago M. B. made his Court to the Heroin, whom you mention, and was received
with a great deal of Civility and Respect. The Company began immediately to
talk of England, of its Court, the Excellency of the Country, the various
Customs of the Inhabitants, and particularly the Liberty that is allowed to the
Women; the opposition of their easy and pleasant manner of living in that
Country to the perpetual confinement of the poor Italian Ladies, made the
condition of these last seem doubly miserable. It was however alleged, That
this Custom which appears to be so injurious to the beautiful Sex, is a
necessary piece of Caution in Italy, where three quarters of the Men living
under the insupportable restraint of a forced Celibacy, would make a dreadful
havoc of their Neighbor's Property, if some means were not used to prevent
such Disorders. Why do we not then take St. Paul's Advice, replied one of the
company, who exhorts every Man to have his own Wife, and every Woman her own
Husband? But lest we should have been insensibly engaged in Controversy, by
continuing to talk on that Subject, the Discourse was dexterously charged: And
the Queen being informed, that there was a French Gentleman in the company,
asked News concerning the late Mission of Dragoons; and after she had
attentively heard his Answer You may see the Letter which that Princess wrote
on this Subject to the Chevalier de Terlon. It is inserted in the Nouvelles de
la Republique des Lettres, May 1686.
, I knew all that you have told me, said she, and have learned much more from
the Mouths of Eyewitnesses; and even Jesuits themselves have given me an
account of Not many months ago some German Jesuits told me, said the Queen,
that they had seen Dragoons, Priapos suos immanes in os faeminarum
intromittentes, ibique urinam fundentes. I chid 'em severely, added she, for
suffering such horrible Insolency, but they only laughed at it.
infamous Villainies; They have added Scoffing and Insolency to Treachery and
Barbarity. After these words, and some particular Stories relating to the same
Subject, we discoursed of the Pope, of his Health, and of his famous Difference
with the Court of France about the Immunities, and at length the Queen withdrew.

You are not ignorant of the Learning and Merit of this Princess, but since you
desire me to give you some account of her Person, I will make her Picture in
few words. She is above sixty years of age, of a very low stature, extreme fat
and thick: her Complexion, Voice, and Countenance are masculine, her Nose is
great, her Eyes are large and blew, and her Eyebrows yellow; she has a double
Chin strewn with some long Hairs of a Beard, and her under Lip sticks out a
little. Her Hair is of a bright Chestnut color, about a hand-breadth long,
powdered and bristl'd up, without any Head-dress; she has a smiling Air, and is
very obliging. As for her Habit, imagine a Man's Justaucor of black Satin,
reaching to the Knee, and buttoned quite down; a very short black Coat, which
discovers a Man's Shoe; a great knot of black Ribbon instead of a Cravat, and a
Girdle above the Justaucor, which keeps up her Belly, and makes its roundness
fully appear.

After the Queen had left us, we visited the principal Apartments of her She
lives in the Palace Riari.
Palace, where we found a great number of Pictures and other Antique Pieces of
rare and exquisite beauty; I shall only name some part of 'em to you at
present; as, the Augustus, of Oriental Alabaster, transparent as Amber; the
Head and Feet are additional Pieces, of Brass gilt, but the rest is very
entire. The sixteen ancient Columns of Giallo, with two Pillars of Oriental
Alabaster seven foot high, the finest Agat cannot look fairer. The Venus, which
might contend for the Golden Apple with that at Florence, if her Legs had not
been mangled by that general Devourer, Time. It Is true, they have supplied
these Defects by the addition of new pieces, which are so admirably well fitted
to the rest, that it is almost impossible to perceive that they have been added.
The Castor and Pollux on each side of their Mother Leda, all of one piece of
Marble; the Sons are bigger than the Mother, and she has but one of her Eggs.
The Altar of Bacchus of fine white Marble, and adorned with excellent
Sculptures in Basso relievo. I took notice of the old Silenus, who has carous'd
so briskly at the Festival of his Foster-child, that he is not able to walk
without Supporters. I observed also the Bacchantes in the posture of mad Women,
some of which are playing on Pipes, like the Fawn on the Vessel at Cajeta. In
another corner there is a Baccho Caper omnibus aris Coeditur. All Bacchus's
Altars reek with Blood of Goats. Of old humane Victims were offered to him; but
after his Voyage to India, that Custom was abolished, and instead of Men, they
sacrificed only Asses and Goats.
Goat flayed alive for brousing on Father Liber's Vines; and a Boar, who is
washed in order to be sacrificed.

Among the Pictures, I shall only take notice of the Amors of Jupiter in the
shape of a Swan, with Leda, which is one of the finest pieces of Correge. The
Virgin, with the Infant Jesus, and the little St. John by Raphael, and Danae by
Carachio. There are also many other Pictures by the same Hands, and some by
Titian, Paul Veronese, Guido, and several other famous Masters.

It would be an endless Labor to describe all the rare Medals that we saw in
this Palace, but since I promised to leave no subject wholly untouched, I shall
only name the Otho of Brass an Egyptian Medal, which has on the reverse the
Image of Serapis; the Pertinax, a little Latin Medal, on the reverse of which
that Emperor is represented offering a Sacrifice; the Antoninus Pius, having on
the reverse Hercules sitting and Diana standing; another Antoninus Pius, being
a little Latin Medal, which has on the reverse the same Emperor crowned by
Victory and Abundance, bringing him Fruit: this Medal has been well kept, and
is in very good condition, in which its value principally consists: a third
little Latin Medal of the same Antonin, which M. Bellori calls l' Anno nuovo,
or the New Year, by reason of the four Letters on the reverse, A. N. F. F.
which he interprets Annum novum, faustum, faelicem: and the Nero, a Latin
Medal, with Hercules on the reverse.

The Cicero a Brooch of Onyx being a white Head on a brown Ground, is one of
the most valuable pieces in this Cabinet.

I shall pass from these Rarities to others of a different sort. In St.
Sabina's Church on Mount Aventine they show a great Stone, which the Devil of
Colen hurled from the top of the arched Roof, with a design to knock out poor
St. Dominic's Brains: which he did out of spite, if our Informers do not belly
the Devil, because he had failed in his attempt to beat down the Chapel of the
Three Kings.

Regum Reliquias quas sancta Colonia servat,
Cum torvus Satanas laedere non valuit:
Orantem voluit Sanctum trucidare; sed ecce,
Declinat rupes, and Patriarcha valet.
Beelzebub spied a holy Bone,
Which set his Guts a grumbling;
He leer'd, but durst not filch, for one
Who over his Beads lay mumbling,
Pox take the Rogue, cried Pug, e're I
Be starved, I Will spoil his Whoring:
But Satan hurled the Stone awry,
And Dominic 'scap'd a scowring.
You have heard of the It was made in the year 1360.
Crucifix at St. Paul's which spoke to St. Bridget; and therefore I shall only
tell you, that it was made by P. Cavallini, and that this is not the only Image
in Rome that has learned to prattle. Another Crucifix at St. Mary Transpontin's
has discoursed several times with St. Peter and St. Paul: And our Lady This
Church was formerly the Temple of Remus, or of Remus and Romulus.
of S. Cosme and Damian chid S. Gregory very sharply for passing by without
saluting her: Besides, I know two others at St. Mary's the Empress, and St.
Gregory's on Mount Celio, whose Tongues upon occasion have wagg'd very briskly:
and how many more, d' ye think, there are whom I do not know? There are others
also who have wept and bled, at St. Mary's of Peace, St. Mary's in Vallicella,
and another St. Mary's called del Pianto; besides that in the Church of the
Holy Ghost, which shed whole Floods of Tears a little before the last sacking
of Rome, insomuch that all the Monks in the Convent could hardly dry its Eyes.

If you desire a more particular account of St. Gregory's Adventure with the
Image that found fault with his clownishness, you will find the Story in the
following Verses, which some ascribe to the Abbot Joachim, and others to the
Venerable Bede; however, it is certain that the Author of 'em was very little
acquainted with St. Gregory, yet I hope they may serve to divert you.

Heus tu! quo properas, temerarie Claviger! heus tu!
Siste gradum. Quae reddita vox mihi percutit Aures?
Quis Coeli Regis me sceptra vicesque gerentem
Impius haud dubitat petulanti laedere lingua?
Siste gradum; converte oculos, venerare vocantem.
O mirum! O portentum! effundit imago loquelas!
(At forte illudunt sopitos somnia sensus)
Mean vocas? O Effigies! hanc labra moventem,
Flectentemque caput video. Quid quaeris, Imago!
Nomen, Imago, tuum liceat cognoscere. Matter
Sancta tui Domini, libidine est ignota Gregori?
Virgo parens, ignara tori, taclusque virilis;
Regia Progenies; Rosa mystica; Faederis Arca;
Excelsi Regina Poli; Domus aurea; sponsa Tonantis,
Justitiae speculum and Clypaeus; Davidica Turris;
Janua Coelorum, tibi ne est ignota Gregori?
Ignaro veniam concede, insignis Imago.
Virgo Maria prius nunquam mihi visa: loquentem
Nunquam te prius audivi: quis talia vidit?
Parco lubens: posthac sed reddere verba salutis
Debita, mente tene. Quo te nunc semita ducit?
Supra Altar tuum, Missam celebravit odoram
Presbyter Andreas; animam liberavit, and ecce,
Impatiens Semicocta jacet prope limina clausa
Gurgitis, ille viam petit a me. Perge Gregori.
Image. Hark ye, Mr. Turnkey, whither so fast, you boldface you?


Pope. What profane noise invades my sacred Ears?
Who dares revile with his unhallowed tongue
The great Vicegerent of the King of Heaven?

Image. Stop, turn thy Eyes, and worship her that calls thee.


Pope. O Miracle! O Prodigy! a speaking Image!
Some Dream perhaps my drowsy Senses cheats:
No, it is no Dream; but did thou call me, Image?
What art thou? or, what would? speak, I
conjure thee.

Image. Do thou not know the Mother of thy Lord;
The Virgin Mother never touched by Man;
Offspring of sacred Princes; Mystic Rose;
Ark of the Covenant; Queen of the Starry Sky;
Temple of Gold; the Thund'rers much-loved Spouse;
Mirror and Shield of Justice; David 's Tower;
The Gate of Heaven; do thou not know her Gregory?

Pope. Pardon, illustrious, sacred, much-wrong'd Image;
Forgive an Injury ignorantly done
My Ignorance caused; let it excuse my Crime.
I never saw thy glorious Face before,
Nor ever heard thy Heavenly Voice till now:
What Mortal ever saw or heard such Wonders?

Image. I do forgive thee, willingly forgive thee;
But ask not pardon for a second Error:
Still with a decent Salutation greet
Me, in thy passage. -- Whither was thy Journey?

Pope. My Brother Julio lately on thy Altars
Atoned Heavens Anger, saved a Soul; and lo,
The half-boyl'd Ghost, impatient of delay,
Lies at the close-shut Gates of Paradise,
And, longing, waits my coming for admittance.

Image. Go thy ways, Gregory.

The rarest Picture in Rome is at S. Sylvester's, in the Field of Mars, which
is an They affirm, That this is the Image mentioned by J. Damascen, which
Christ sent to K. Abgarus. Eusebius recites the Letters that past between
Christ and Abgarus but says nothing of an Image. See Reiskii Exercitationes de
imaginibus Christi.
Image of Christ, done, as they say, by himself.

If you desire Relics, I can furnish you with some that are very curious. The
Ark of the Covenant, Moses and Aaron's Rods, and the Foreskin of Christ, are
kept at S. John de Lateran. One of the pieces of Money that Judas received, the
same person's Lanthorn, by the good leave of another Pretender at S. Denis in
France, and the Cross of the St. Good Thief are at the Church of the Holy Cross
of Jerusalem, with the Tail of Balaam's Ass, and St. Paul's Thorn. And S.
Roch's Bowl may be seen at S. Marcel's. They tell us also, that some Beams of
the Star that conducted the Wise Men were formerly preserved, with the Horns of
Moses; but it is long since these Rays were eclipsed or evaporated, as well as
the sound of the Jerusalem Bells; and Moses's Horns were transported to Genoua,
where (if we may believe the common report) they are still safely preserved.

The Navel of Christ is at S. Maria del Popolo: The story of that Church's
Foundation is very pleasant. In the very place, say they, where it now stands,
there was formerly a large Walnut-tree, on the Branches of which a great many
Devils did constantly perch, to guard the Ashes of Nero, that were enclosed in
an Urn near that place. Now, the People, as you must needs suppose, were
extremely plagued by such troublesome Neighbors. Pope Paschal II, moved with
compassion at their Miseries, endeavored by Fasting and Prayer to drive away
this Hellish Fry; and it was revealed to him, That he must pull up the Tree by
the Roots, and in the very same place erect a Church to the Honor of Mary.
This Advice was put in execution with a great deal of solemnity; all the People
contributed to the work, which gave occasion to the Name of St, Mary of the
People.

I must also say something of S. Giacomo Scossacavalli.
S. James Shake-horse, where they show the Stone On the Altar of the
Presentation,
on which Christ was circumcised, with the impression made by one of his Heels
upon the Marble; and also On St. Ann's Altar.
another Marble Table, on which Abraham designed to have sacrificed his Son.
The Empress Helena, says the Story, sent these bulky Relics to be placed in
St. Peter's Church; but as soon as the Wagon came over against St. James's,
the Horses stopped suddenly, and could not be made to go one step further: This
unexpected Freak of theirs, you must needs think, surpised the Drivers, but
they perceived at last that the Stones were really grown heavier, which made
'em imagine that these Relics had a secret inclination to lodge at St.
James's, rather than at St. Peter's. At first indeed this Fancy did not appear
very reasonable; but there being by chance one in the company who remembered
that St. Paul calls St. James as well as St. Peter, The Pillar of the Church,
they were all confirmed in the Belief, that this Accident was not brought to
pass without some mysterious design: However, though all the Buffalo's in Italy
had been there, the Wagon would have sooner pulled them backwards than they
could have drawn it forwards; and therefore they were even forced to leave 'em
at St. James's; and to preserve the memory of so great a Miracle, they gave
that Saint the surname of Shake-horse.

You have reason to believe that I have had the Curiosity to hear some of their
Preachers; neither are you deceived when you suspect, that I am no Admirer of
their way of Their finest Discourses are those which give the Hearers most
diversion. It Is true, every Order has a particular Way of Preaching: The
Jesuits are esteemed very good Declaimers, and their Gesture is not so
extravagant as that of other Monks; but their Style is the most fantastical.
The Capuchins are everlasting Thunderers, and preach nothing but Death and
Destruction, if it be not a day set apart for Buffoonry. Hell, Purgatory, and
the Last Judgment are the Subjects of almost all their Discourses. They pull
their Beards, clap their Hands, and roar out hideously. I found the other day a
very pleasant Remark, in a Book that treats on this Subject; the Author of
which assures us, that always when a Capuchin preaches the Dogs run out of the
Church.
Preaching, and, you might have added also, of their Sermons. The Preachers
here, generally speaking, are mere makers of wry Mouths and ugly Faces. They
have indeed some natural Endowments that have a tendency to some parts of
Oratory, but they are perfectly ignorant of sublime Eloquence. All their
Motions are extravagant Agitations of the Body, or apish Tricks; the variation
of the Tone of their Voice throws 'em from the loudest Treble to the lowest
Base twenty times in a quarter of an hour; and their Discourses have neither
Strength nor Gravity. They bawl, they torment themselves, their Pulpits are for
the most part like so many Balconies, where they run about with a great deal of
Noise and Hear, but there is neither Senee nor Reason in all this. They are
perfect strangers to that admirable way of pronunciation, which by an agreeable
and well-ordered mixture of softness and vehemence does at once charm, and
move, and ravish the Souls of the Hearers: And besides, their whole Discourses
do usually consist of a ridiculous Medley of insipid Jests and childish Tales.
I heard a Carmelite the other day, who in a Sermon that he preached before the
penitent Whores of the Holy Cross, concerning Mary Magdalen, set his Fancy on a
furious gallop. In order to display the Merit of that Sacrifice which his
Penitent made of the Pleasures of the World, he spent at least a quarter of an
hour in painting her forth as the most charming Creature under Heaven. He
forgot not the least Feature of the compleatest Beauty, and spoke rather like a
skilful Painter than a Preacher. Perhaps also he imitated Perrin del Vague, who
was wont almost always to make the Picture of his Mistress, when he had a mind
to describe any beautiful Lady in a History.

You must address your self to some other person for a satisfactory Answer to
that Question which you propose, Whether there are more Curtezans at Rome or at
Venice. I must acknowledge I do not see so many of 'em here as at Venice: but
that is no Argument of their scarcity, especially since I am assured by several
persons that their Urbs est jam tota Lupanar. Rome now is one vast Brothel.
Bapt. Mantuan.
number is almost infinite. As bold an Undertaker as Sixtus V. was, and how
eagerly soever he strove to purge Rome of that kind of Cattle, you know he was
never able to compass his Design; and even after he had banished the lewdest of
'em, he was forced to recall 'em, and settle them again, with as much solemnity
as they had been by his Namesake Sixtus IV. This was done, they say, to prevent
greater Roma quid est? quod te docuit praeposterus ordo. Quid docuit? Jungas
versa elementa, scies: Roma Amor est. Amor est qualis? Praeposterus. Unde hoc?
Roma mares -- Noli dicere plura, Scio. These Verses cannot be englished without
losing the Pun.
Disorders. St. Paul says, That it is better to marry than to burn; the Romans
indeed are not willing to burn, but they find the best Extinguishers at the
Bawdy House.

This puts me in mind of the ancient Picture of a Wedding at the Aldobrandin
Palace: It Is a piece of a Or the broad Band under the Cornish.
Frize, which has been brought hither with that part of the Wall on which it is
painted. It is a famous and much valued piece, both for its Antiquity, and the
excellency of the Workmanship. You know that the Ceremonies of Marriage were
very different, and subject to many alterations among the Romans: here the
Bride is seated on the side of the Bed, whereas she was sometimes wont to sit
on a Sheep's Fleece, or on a Figure of the God Priapus; she bows down her Head,
and counterfeits a certain Grief and Coyness, whilst a Pronula,
Matron with a smiling countenance comforts, instructs, and persuades her, and
labors to make her sensible of her Duty. The Bridegroom, crowned with Ivy, and
undressed, sits near the Bed, with a brisk Air, waiting with a great deal of
impatience, I warrant ye, till his whining Spouse has made an end of all her
simperings. In the mean time four or five Maids are busied in several places,
in preparing Baths and odoriferous Ointments; and a She-Musician plays on a
Harp, whilst another seems to sing some Hymen io, O Hymenaee, some Epithalamium
or luscious Song to dispel the Charms.

The Pictures on the Pyramid of Cestius, and the abovementioned Frize, are the
only Remains of the Ancient Painting which I have yet seen in Rome. I doubt not
but this Mausoleum of Caius Cestius has been already described; yet since it is
a very rare and beautiful Monument, I cannot forbear giving you some account of
it. The Pyramid is square, and ends in a very sharp point; it is a hundred and
twenty foot high, and ninety four foot broad at the Base. The Body of the
Monument is of Brick, but covered over with square pieces of white Marble. It
was repaired by Alexander the Seventh, in the year 1673, and almost entirely
restored to its primitive Beauty. It appears, by the fair C. Cestius. L. F.
Pob. Epulo, Pr. Tr. Pl. VII. Vir Epulonum.
Inscriptions that are still to be seen upon it, that it was erected in memory
of Blondus pretends that this Sepulcher was common to the whole Society of the
Septemviri Epulones. But he is the only person that I know who is of this
Opinion.
C. Cestius, one of the seven Officers who were appointed to take care of
Religious Feasts. We entered this Mausoleum by a low and narrow passage, which
pierces through the thickness of the Building to the middle of it, where we found
a little arched Room nineteen foot long, thirteen broad, and fourteen foot
high. This Chamber is plastered over with a certain white and polished Mortar,
on which there are still seen several Figures of Women, Vessels, and other
Ornaments. I will not undertake to describe all these things particularly; much
less will I attempt to write a Dissertation on so difficult a subject; I will
only tell you, that having had the fortune to discourse several times with
learned Antiquaries concerning these Pictures, I found their Opinions very
different: some pretend, that in respect to the Monument they represent the
Preparatives for a Funeral Show; and others think, that they contain a
representation of a Banquet, as a Memorial alluding to the Office of the
Deceased. One of the Figures holds a Vessel, in which some pour Lustral Water,
and others Wine Another Figure bears great Pipes, which, according to the first
Opinion, were designed for Mirth, and according to the last, for Mourning; and
both the disagreeing Parties pretend, with equal probability, to confirm their
Suppositions by this Distick in Ovid's Fasts: Cantabat Fanis, cantabat Tibia
Ludis,
Cantabat moestis Tibia funeribus.
The Pipe, with sovereign and resistless Art,
In Temples, fans Devotion's sacred Fire;
With Songs it warms, with Dirges chills the Heart,
While those expel the Grief which these inspire.


But one thing especially seems to confirm the latter Opinion, if I may be
permitted to declare my Thoughts on this subject, namely, That the Habits of
the Figures are of several colors, which does not at all agree with the
Funeral Ceremonies that were used in those times. It appears by the Inscription
of a Pedestal that was dug up near the Pyramid, and on which a Statue of
Cestius seems to have been placed, that this Roman died in the beginning of
Augustus's Reign; and those who have inquired into the Customs of that Age,
assure us, that the Women who assisted at Burials were clothed in white, and
that the Fashion of Mourning in black was abolished about the beginning of
Caesar's Dictatorship. Besides, I know not what should hinder me from
adventuring to maintain that these Pictures were only designed for an Ornament
of the Tomb, without regard either to Feast or Funeral. The Sepulcher of the
Nase's, so exactly described by Mr. Bellori, is also full of Histories and
other Ornaments, which are the mere product of the Painter's Fancy. And the
same Observation may be made concerning several other Tombs, and especially
Urns, which are adorned with Sculptures in basso relievo, that represent an
infinite number of indifferent things.

The durableness of these Pictures, and the lasting beauty of their Colors,
deserve to be considered. You know that It was inven^^^ by John de ^^^ge, a
Native (...) Guelderland, in the year 1450
Painting in Oil is a late Invention; and it appears that the Colors on this
Monument have been only moistened with Water, and even do not penetrate the
Plaster; though there are some places in which they seem to have lost nothing of
their first liveliness.

This Pyramid is Two hundred paces distant from the little Hill commonly called
il Doliolo, or Monte Testacio, that is, The Hill of Potsheards. This Hillock is
about half a mile in compass, and a hundred and fifty foot in perpendicular
height. Those who treat of such Curiosities differ much in their suppositions
concerning this great heap of broken Pots, but the most general Opinion is
this: The Hillock being near the Tiber, it is supposed that all the Potters
wrought in this place, both for the nearness of the Water, which is of
necessary use in their Employment, and for the convenience of transporting
their Ware. It Is also believed that they threw all the broken pieces of their
Vessels into one place; and this supposition is confirmed by another
Conjecture, That they might have an express Order for so doing, to prevent the
inundation of the River on that side. And they conclude, that if we consider
the vast number of Idols, Ornaments of Temples, Bathing-tubs, Statues, Vats,
Tyles, and all sorts of Vessels that were made in the great City of Rome, it
will not appear strange, that the abovementioned Hillock was raised out of
their Fragments. This supposition seems reasonable at the first view, but, in
my opinon, it is not well grounded, because the Authors of it have not examined
the matter with due attention.

Some Wine-Merchants have thought fit to dig Cellars under this Hill, to
preserve their Wines cool: and I have been present several times, and in
several places, when they were at work in digging these Caves, so that I had
both Time and Opportunity to consider all that they drew out of them, yet I
could never find any Fragments of Images, Tyles, or Ornaments, nor any
Remainder, or the least appearance of those things that I mentioned. And in
more than twenty Cartloads of these broken pieces, I observed only Fragments of
Urns, or at the least of Vessels that seemed to have been Urns; which being
supposed, we must proceed to establish more probable Conjectures.

It Is well known, that in ancient times only the poorest sort of People were
buried without the City, in certain Pits called Puticuli. The Custom of burning
dead Bodies continued very long, during which time there was made a prodigious
quantity of Earthen Urns for the ordinary sort of people; and it is impossible
to conceive that all the care that was taken to preserve 'em could prevent
their being frequently broken. May it not then be supposed, that out of
reverence to those Vessels, which had been employed to so sacred an use, and
might still contain some part of the Ashes of the Dead, that superstitious
people esteemed it a Duty of Religion to gather all these Fragments, and lay
'em in heaps together? Neither should such a Custom appear strange to us, since
it is so little different from the common practice of Christians at this very
day: for, instead of suffering the Bones of deceased persons, that are dug up
when a new Grave is made, to be scattered about, do we not endeavor to
preserve 'em with some sort of Honor and Respect, by piling them up in heaps?

Since the Reputation of the famous There was a certain Tailor, called Pasquin,
who lived near this place, and whose Shop was the usual Rendezvous of
Newsmongers. This Tailor was a man of Wit, of a jovial Humor, Satirical, and a
great lover of Jests; his Lampoons were usually called Pasquinades, and all the
satirical Libels about the Town were ascribed to him. To persuade the World
that he was the Author of all those cutting Jests, they took care to affix them
on the Statue that is here described, which was at his Gate, and by degrees
came to be known by the Name of Pasquin.
Pasquin makes you desirous to be informed more particularly concerning him and
his Companion Marforio, I will endeavor to satisfy your Curiosity. The first
is a mangled and disfigured Statue, which, some think, was made for a Roman
Soldier; it stands leaning against the Wall of a House, at the Ad angulum
Arianae redis. Boiss.
corner of a place where several Streets meet. I know not whether you have
heard of that pleasant Answer which Alexander VI. is said to have given to
those who advised him to throw Pasquin into the Tiber, because of the continual
Vendit Alexander Claves, Altaria, Christum.
Emerat ille prius, vendere jure potest.
Sextus Tarquinius, Sextus Nero, Sextus and ipse,
Semper sub Sextis, perdita Roma fuit.
Conditur hoc Tumulo Lucretia nomine, sed re,
Thais Pontificis Filia, Sponsa, Nurus.

Satyrs which Pasquin
Vol. 2. P. 54.

Pazzia Sapienza

^o dico Altrifanno

^e Diis quidem parco

^on dir may mal Sevoi viver ^n Corte

(...) comio sto (...) cantar unpoco il vero

Vivere qui sancte cupitis,
discedite Roma:
Omnia cum liceant,
non licet esse bonus.
depiction of Pasquino Marforio
Vol. 2. P. 55

depiction of Marforio that critical Statue made against him; This Thought is
by some ascribed to Pope Adrian IV.
I should be afraid, said he, lest it should be turned to a Frog, and trouble
me both day and night with its croaking.

Marforio is another maimed Figure, by some said to have been a Statue of
Jupiter, or, according to others, of the Rhine, or of the Nera, which passes by
Terni; but all this is uncertain, as well as the Etymology of the Names of our
two Censurers. It Is very probable that it was formerly the Mode to affix the
Pasquinades on the Statue of Pasquin, but that Custom is laid aside, and all
the Satirical Invectives are still fathered on Pasquin, though they never come
near him. It Is usual to make him answer the Questions that are proposed to him
by Martorio, which stands in one of the Courts of the Capitol.

The Apophthegms of this sincere and impartial Statue put me in mind of those
which I read at the Villa Benedetti; all the Walls of that House are lined with
Proverbs and Sentences on all subjects, some of which I transcribed, and have
here subjoined.

Chi non s'avventura, non ha ventura.
He that nothing ventures, nothing wins.
Regia, creed mihi, res est succurrere lapsis.
To succor the distressed, is sovereign Virtue.
Inter cuncta, leges, and percunctabere Doctos,
Qua ratione potes traducere leniter aevum.
Consult the Dead and Living wise,
And square your Life by their Advice.
Per mangiar assai, convien mangiar puoco.
He that would eat much, must eat little.
Cum fata sinunt
Vivite laeti, --
Stygias ultro quaerimus undas.
Let Us live while we may,
And husband to day,
E're we have passed its Noon;
For we may prodigally waste,
But never can enjoy too fast
A Life that ends so soon.
Splendida magnificis Paupertas regnat in Aulis.
Courtiers are but gaudy Beggars.
Chi paga debito, fa capitale.
He that pays his Debts gets an Estate.
Qui procul a curis, ille laetus:
Si vis esse talis,
Esto ruralis.
Mirth and Care can never agree
Where this is absent, that appears;
The Country only boasts to be
The Seat of Mirth, and void of Cares.
Donna virtuosa, non sa star otiosa.
A virtuous Lady can never be lazy.
Si qua voles apt nubere, nube pari,
Elige cui dicas, Tu mihi sola places?
How happy's the Man, and how happy is she
Who are equally yoked, and would never be free?
Vive tibi, and long Nomina magna fuge.
Let not Ambition rob thee of thy self.
Donna che duona, difficilimente e buona.
A Woman that gives is easily gotten.
Si Fortuna juvat, caveto tolli.
Si Fortuna tonat, caveto mergi.
When Fortune shines, let not its Beams
Raise Vapors in thy Breast;
Nor let its thundering Hurricanes
Disturb thy peaceful Rest.
Fortiter ille facit, qui miser esse potest.
That man is brave who dares be miserable.
Un nemico e troppo, and cento amici non bastano.
One Enemy is too much, and an hundred
Friends are not enough.
Decet timeri Caesarem, at plus diligi.
A Prince displays the Glory of the Sovereign Power
Much in his People's Fear, in their Affection more.
Sequitur superbos, a tergo Deus.
The Wrath of Heaven pursues the proud.
Grand pazzia il viver povero, per morir ricco.
He Is a Fool that lives poor, that he may die rich.
Quis Dives? qui nil cupiat: Quis pauper? Avarus.
What Man is happy, great and rich?
He that nothing does desire:
And who is a miserable Wretch?
He who still does more require.
Qui nihil potest sperare, desperet nihil.
He that can hope for nothing, should despair
of nothing.
Pax optima rerum:
Pax Materia Gaudii,
Dulce Paeis nomen,
Candidas pax homines, trux decet Ira feras.
Lasting Bliss and true Delight
Peace, and only Peace imparts:
While jarring Brutes contend and fight,
Let humane Minds seek humane Arts.
Nobilitas sola est atque unica Virtus.
Virtue alone is true Nobility.
Omnes una manet Nox
Et calcanda semel via Leti.
It Is appointed for all Men once to dye.
I Am sorry that I cannot relate to you so many Wonders of Tivoli and Frescati
as you seem to expect. They are indeed very pleasant places, and rather than
give offense, I will even adventure to call 'em fine places. But, if once this
Maxim be established, That when we consider things which are reputed beautiful,
we ought to proportion the Esteem that we have for 'em, by comparing 'em one
with another; as, the beauty of Roses and Gilliflowers does so darken the
fainter luster of a Field-Daisie, that we pass by it without reflection. If, I
say, this Principle be laid down, I must sincerely acknowledge, that if we
compare Frescati to Versailles, or even to several other pleasant Seats in
France, that are not Royal Houses, I am persuaded, and dare positively affirm,
that the celebrated Wonders not only of Frescati, but also of Tivoli, and all
the most beautiful places about Rome, I mean as to Gardens and Waterworks,
deserve no higher Title than that of Pretty Toys.

Frescati is a very small Town, FRESCATI, anciently called Tusculum.
seated on the Brow of a Hill, twelve miles from Rome. There are several Houses
of Pleasure in it, of which the three principal are Monte-dracone, belonging to
the Prince Borghese, Belvedere to the Prince Pamphilio, and the Villa Ludovisia
to the Duchess of Guadagnola the Constable Colonna's Sister; and all deserve
no more to be compared to Versailles, than Frescati to Rome, or two or three
Trees to a fine Landscape.

Monte-dracone is a large Structure, situated on a rising Ground, from which
you may discover Rome and the whole extent of the interjacent Plain; but that
City is at too great a distance to be seen from hence with pleasure, and the
Verdure of the Plain is too uniform and unadorned with that variety of Beauties
with which a Landscape ought to be embellished. The view of Paris from S. Clou
is infinitely more charming. It Is true, the Prospect is more diversified on the
side of Monte-Porcio, but it is also much more limited. The Avenues of this
House are very difficult; and, to speak plainly, there are at present neither
Fountains nor Gardens about it, that merit a particular description.

The situation of Belvedere is not unlike to that of Monte-dracone. There is a
pretty Cascade in it, and a Grotto, where you may see Apollo with the Nine
Muses on Mount Parnassus. We were informed, that all these Statues played on
Pipes, when the Machins were in order.

The Cascade at the Villa Ludovisia is also the principal Ornament of its
Garden. The Furniture of all these three Houses is mean; and every thing about
'em appears neglected.

TIVOLI, of old Tibur. That which by the ignorant People is called Tivoli
Vecchio, is the Villa Hadriani of the Ancients.
Tivoli is another little Town, seated on a Hillock, eighteen miles from Rome;
the Duke of Modena has a House of Pleasure in it, which is commonly called the
Cardinal d' Este's Palace, because it is set apart for the use of the Cardinals
of that Family, when there are any. This Palace is large, and makes a handsome
show, but has neither fine Apartments nor Furniture. The greatest Rarities that
it can boast of, are three Chambers painted in Fresco, by Raphael, with some
ancient Statues. The Garden is not very large, but it is embellished with
pleasant Terras-walks and Waterworks, which far exceed those at Frescati, and
are even thought to excel all the Works of that nature in Italy: but the
greatest part of the Canals are unfortunately stopped, the Machins out of
order, and the whole House appears April 8. 1688.
at present in so forlorn and neglected a condition, that it is impossible to
behold the remainders of its Beauty without a Pleasure mixed with Grief.
'Twould be certainly very unjust to refuse the Praises that are due to a place,
which if it be considered singly and by its self, must be acknowledged to have
a great many Charms, and to contain a great number of Curiosities: Neither do I
pretend in the least to derogate from its true value: My design is only to give
a just Idea of it, and to remove those Prejudices with which many persons are
possessed concerning it. I will not strive to refute the Opinion of those who
believe that the Gardens and Waterworks of Italy did formerly surpass those of
France; but since the Face of Affairs is altered, we ought also to change our
Language. I must confess I was strangely surpised at the sight of the trifling
Curiosities of this Country, after I had heard the Waterworks of Italy so
extravagantly commended, as if there had been nothing in the Universe that
could with Justice be compared to 'em. They tell us, that the Palace and
Gardens of Este cost Three millions, and I will not pretend to contradict 'em,
but I must beg leave to assure them, that Versailles has incomparable Beauties;
that the Waterworks of that place exceed a million of such as those that are
at Tivoli; and that the very Lead of the Canals at Versailles cost ten times
more than all Tivoli.

The Cascade of the In this River are found little white and smooth Flints,
which are called the Hail-shot of Tivoli. Du Val.
Treverona is the most remarkable thing in this little Town. This River forms a
very large and pleasant Pool, but the Fall is not very high. Not far off are
the Ruins of an ancient Building, said to have been the Sibyl's Others pretend
that it was a Temple of Hercules.
House; but that is a fabulous Story, which might be refuted by good Arguments.
There are in the Court two ancient Statues of a reddish Granite speckl'd with
black, which, in M. Spon's Opinion, do both represent the Goddess Isis. The
same Author supposes that Adrian caused 'em to be brought from Egypt to adorn
his Pleasure-house at Tivoli.

The Hill of Tivoli has furnished, Time out of Mind, the greatest part of the
Stones that are used at Rome. This Stone is usually called Travertin, by
corruption of the word Tyburtin. The Collisea was covered all over with it, and
the Front of S. Peter's Church is built with the same. It Is plain, that this
Stone is excellent for some uses, but it is yellowish and porous, and your
Portland Quarry, as well as those at Paris and Caen, are better for service.

These Quarries put me in mind of a memorable Accident related by Alexander
Tassoni, in his Various Thoughts, an account of which will not be unpleasant to
you. Not many days He wrote about Fifty years ago.
ago, says that Author, the Workmen that were employed to dig Stone at Tivoli,
having cleft a great Mass, observed in the middle of it an empty space, in
which they found a living Crayfish that weighed four pounds, which they boiled
and eat. I have read in another Alexander, Alexandr. Bapt. Fulgosus mentions a
living Worm that was found in the middle of a Flint.
Alexander, That he found a wrought Diamond in the heart of a great piece of
Marble, and a considerable quantity of sweet and odoriferous Oil in another
piece of like Marble. Tassoni also relates, That the same year a Cat suckl'd a
Rat in Tivoli. If these Stories were well attested, I believe you would not be
less pleased with 'em than with the Cascades in the Gardens of Este.

Three miles from Tivoli, Lacus Albuneus.
in our way homewards, we passed by a little Lake called Lago de Bagni, or
Solfatara, and by the People named the Sixteen Barges, because of a like number
of floating Islands that are upon it. It resembles a Pond, being almost round,
and Two hundred paces in diameter: its Water is extreme clear, and seems to be
of a very blew color. It sends forth a pretty large Brook, which, after a
short and rapid course, loses it self in the Anieno. Both the Lake and Rivulet
exhale a sulphurous odor, which is very strong, They pretend that the Water
of the Anieno is endowed with a singular Virtue to whiten the Teeth, and Ivory.
Schrad.
and is smelt at a great distance. The late Cardinal d' Este having in vain
attempted to sound the depth of this Lake, persuaded two Diverse to enter into
it, one of whom was never afterward seen, and the other related, that he found
the Water so hot, though at the surface it is cold, that he was not able to
descend to any considerable depth. The Land is dry and hollow underneath about
the Banks of the Lake, as it appears by the deaf sound made by the treading of
Horses upon it. It Is probable that the visible part of the Lake is only a
narrow Mouth of a vast Abyss, which widens and extends it self under Ground
very far on both sides. And I think it may be conjectured concerning the first
Diver, that either he ventured too deep, and was surpised by the heat of the
Water, or that having wandered into some subterraneous Gulf, he struck his Head
against the impending Arch, instead of rising at the Mouth of the Lake. But not
to insist upon the first conjecture, we must necessarily conclude, that the
Body was carried into some subterraneal Vault, since it never afterward
appeared on the surface of the Water.

On the Bank of this Lake we saw certain old Ruins, which Antiquaries call the
Baths of Agrippa. The largest of the floating Islands makes a perfect Oval, and
is about fifteen foot long; they are still crowded together on that side
whither the Wind drives 'em; and the least touch puts 'em in motion. Two of our
Company went into one of the smallest of 'em, and pushed it from the Land only
by thrusting against the Bank with the points of their Swords.

I have several other Observations to communicate to you concerning the
principal Houses of Pleasure in Rome, though I do not design to describe 'em
particularly, as I intimated to you before.

The Villa Borghese is, in my Opinion, kept in better order than any that I
have hitherto seen. It Is certainly a very pleasant place, and fit for a great
Prince. The House is almost covered over on the outside with Antique Basso
relievo's, which are disposed in so natural an order, and with so much
Symmetry, that you would be tempted to think they had been purposely made to
fill those places where they are now set. Of all that multitude of Statues with
which the Apartments of this Palace are replenished, I shall only take notice
of the On the Base it is written, (...). Made by Agasias Son of Dositheus, the
Ephesian.
Gladiator, of which you have a Copy in Brass at the end of the Canal in St.
James's Park, the Juno of Porphyry, Romulus's Wolf of fine red Marble of Egypt,
the Busts of Hannibal, Seneca, and Pertinax, the Hermaphrodite, and the old
Silenus holding Bacchus in his Arms.

The David throwing a Stone out of a Sling at Goliath, the Aeneas carrying his
Father, and the Transformation of Daphne, are three modern Pieces made by
Bernin, which deserve to be ranked among the first. It would be an endless
Labor to enumerate all the fine Pictures. The St. Anthony, by Caracchio, and
the Dead Christ, by Raphael, are esteemed the two principal.

I cannot forbear repeating once more, That the Villa Borghese is a delicious
place. If all the Royal Magnificency which adorns some other places does not
appear in this with so much Splendour, yet it must be acknowledged, that its
Beauties are more soft and charming, such tender and natural Beauties as touch
our Hearts more sensibly, if they do not inspire us with so much awe. And even
I will add, That Rome being the Source of Antique Statues and Sculptures, some
of which are inimitable, all the rest of the World must yield the precedence in
this point to the House of a Roman Gentleman.

As we were walking in the little Flower-Garden, the Gardner made us take
notice of a double white Hyacinth, the Root of which, he assured us, cost Five
hundred Crowns a year before. I know that Tulips have been sold in Flanders for
Four or Five hundred Pistols, so great was the Fondness that some Persons had
for these Flowers. We need not longer wonder at the great price of Jewels,
since the least durable Beauties in the World are valued at so high a rate.

The Villa Ludovisia is very much out of repair, by reason of the absence of
the Prince of Piombino, who is Lord of it. There is a prodigious multitude of
ancient Statues to be seen in this place. The Faustina in love with a
Gladiator, whom she embraces before he goes to fight; the two Gladiators, one
He is usually called the Dying Mirmillo. There were three principal sorts of
Gladiators; Andabates, Retiarii and Myrmillones. Galtruch.
expiring, and the other resting himself; the Statues of Bacchus, Mercury, and
Concord, are all admirable Pieces. The best Pictures have been carried to other
places, with the richest Furniture; yet they showed us a Bedsted enchas'd with
several sorts of precious Stones, to the value, as we were informed, of Twenty
thousand Pistols, but at present it is out of order. In the same Chamber we saw
a heap of Bones which, they assured us, was the Skeleton of a petrefy'd Man;
but they are mistaken, for the Bones are not turned to Stone, only they are
covered over with a candy'd Film, or stony Crust, which has given occasion to
their Error: Not that I imagine Bones incapable of Petrefaction, as well as
other things, for I believe there is nothing in the World that may not be
subject to such an alteration. In the several Cabinets of Curiosities that I
have seen in my Travels, I have observed a prodigious Variety of petrefy'd
Bodies, Fruits, Flowers, Trees, Wood, Plants, Bones, Fishes, Bread, pieces of
Flesh, and Animals of all sorts. Pareus relates an Instance of a Child that was
turned to a Stone in the Mother's Belly: And which is far more surprising, we
are informed by the Histories of our Age, that an entire The Town of Biedoblo.
See Kircher's Mundus Subterraneus.

Aventinus in his Bavarian Annals speaks of several Persons in that Country,
who as they were milking their Cows were suddenly transformed into Statues of
Salt, by the force of certain spirituous Steams, that broke forth in the place
where they were, during a great Earthquake in the year 1348.


City in Afric was petrefy'd in one night, with Men, Beasts, Trees, Household
Furniture, Tools, and every thing that was in the Town, without exception.

The Villa Chigi abounds with little Waterspouts, which never fail to
besprinkle the Curious, if they do not take care to prevent those Showers, by
feeing the Gardener when they enter. There is also a Cabinet of Curiosities, of
which the little Adrian of Oriental Jasper is the most celebrated Piece.

The great Alleys of the Villa Montalto or Savelli, with its Statues and
Pictures, make it vye with the finest Country-houses about Rome. Here is still
to be seen Sixtus the Fifth's little gray Chamber, while he was yet only
Cardinal Montalto, and, as you know, a Franciscan. The Germanicus, the
Pescennius Niger, the Scipio, the Goddess Naenia, the Adonis, and the
Gladiator, are reckoned among the principal Antiquities: And among the
Pictures, the Dead Christ by Raphael, the S. Francis by Caracchio, the Virgin
and the Bacchus by Guido, with the S. John by Pomarancia.

The Gardens of the Villa Pamphili, would be in my Opinion the fairest that I
have seen, if they were kept in better order: for here I observed a more
judicious design, more Symmetry, and a more regular disposition of all the
Parts than any where else. The House is adorned on the outside with fine
Antique Basso relievo's, like that of the Villa Borghese, and it is no less
replenished within; but the best Statues were very much disordered by an
Accident which I shall relate to you. The Prince Pamphilio, while he was yet
very young, was importunately solicited by the Jesuits to enter into their
Society. He was not altogether averse to this motion, and those designing
Fathers employed all their Cunning to gain him under a Pretext of Devotion, to
which they knew he was very much inclined. Among other Stratagems which they
used, they exclaimed loudly against the Indecency of those naked Marble Figures
which he kept in this Palace; and the tender Consciences of these rigid
Casuists obliged him at length to order several parts of these Statues to be
covered. This poor young Prince, to humor his ghostly Fathers, caused Shirts
of Plaster to be put on all his Marble Subjects, Men, Women, and Children. This
Reformation was very grievous to some persons, especially to Painters,
Sculptors, and Antiquaries, but no humane Consideration could prevail with the
Priest-ridden Prince to desist from his pious design to hide so many tempting
and dangerous Objects. They were all daubed and plaster'd over without mercy,
save one little Bacchus, who had the good fortune to escape this holy Fury as
the young He was afterward made a Duke.
Lord of Force was preserved from that of the Parisian Massacre. A poor Venus,
one of the Masterpieces of the famous Caracchio was smutted all over from head
to foot, and transformed into I know not how many Figures, which fill at
present the corner of a Picture of which she was formerly the fairest Ornament.

But the Prince having at last changed his Mind, and being resolved to prefer
the Company of his Princess to that of the Society, was desirous to redress all
these Disorders, and to restore his good People to their ancient Privileges. In
pursuance of this design, he ordered the nasty Clay with which they were
covered to be taken off; but the clumsy-fisted Masons had unfortunately mangled
several parts of the Marble to make their Plaster stick the better; so that the
greatest part of these curious Pieces were very much damaged.

I must not forget to tell you, that I observed at the Villa Savelli, an
unusual Figure of Abraham's Sacrifice by l'Espagnolet; for, whereas Isaac is
commonly painted on his Knees, and blind-folded, and his Father with a short
two-handed Sword, like a Switzer's, or with a Turkish Scimitar, ready to cut
off his Son's Head like a Frenchman; L'Espagnolet has only given him a plain
sacrificing Knife, as if he were going to cut Isaac's Throat; which certainly
agrees better with the Truth of the History.

Julius Romanus was the Architect of the Duke of Parma's House of Pleasure,
commonly called Vigne Madame. This Building is neither great nor magnificent,
but its beauty is regular and unaffected, and its situation extremely
delightful. On one side it enjoys a prospect of Rome, with several Gardens, and
many pleasant Seats; and on the other the Eye is ravished with a beautiful
Landscape of little and well cultivated Hills: over against it the Tiber creeps
through the Fields and Meadows; and at a distance the Snowy tops of the Appennin
do insensibly mingle with the Clouds: behind it is a shady Wood of tall Trees,
adorned with cool and solitary Walks, which are incomparably charming. The
Gardens rise into Terras-walks, and want neither Fountains nor Statues.

I might add several other Observations concerning the Pleasure-houses of
Medicis, Matthei, Lanti, Caesarini, Justiniani, and some others; but I ought to
pity you, for I Am confident you could not much longer have Patience to hear of
nothing but Statues and Pictures. And besides, it is time to put an end to this
long Scroll. I am,

SIR, Your etc,
Rome, April 11. 1688.
LETTER XXV.
SIR,
I shall begin this Letter by answering the Questions you Propose concerning
the Tiber. The Tiber was formerly called Rumon, Terentus, and Albula. It
receives forty Rivers before its arrival at Rome, Martian.
It Is certain that this River has nothing in its self that could have rendered
it so famous as it has been; and without doubt it ows the Honor it has to be
so generally known, to the Reputation of that Noble City which it waters,
unless perhaps some part of its Fame may be ascribed to the noise which its
frequent Inundations have made in the World: Nevertheless it must be
acknowledged that it has been often treated with too much contempt; the great
Rivers are jealous of its Glory, and would have it pass for a muddy Brook, such
as I perceive it has been represented to you. But you may reckon that, The
Bridge of S. Angelo is 330 foot long; and that of Sixtus 300. Some Antiquaries
affirm that it was not lawful to build Houses on the Banks of the Tiber, out of
respect to that sacred River. But this is an Error, which might be easily
refuted. Clandian and several other Authors have left positive accounts of the
great number of noble Structures that were erected on the Banks of this River.
The greatest Inundation happened under Clement VIII. in the Month of December
1598.
by a general Computation, the breadth of the Tiber at Rome amounts to about
three hundred Feet; and besides it is rapid and of a great depth. Suetonius
relates, that Augustus caused it to be cleans'd, and somewhat enlarged it is
Chanel to facilitate it is Course. Other Princes have also endeavored to
prevent the Disorders that attend it is Inundations, but with little or no
Success. The Sirocco Levante, which is the South-East of the Mediterranean, and
is here called the Sea Wind, does sometimes blow with so terrible an
Impetuosity, that it drives back, or at least stops, the Waters of the Tiber at
it is Mouth. And when it happens at the same time, that the melted Snow of the
Apennins swells the Torrents, which fall into that River, or the same effect is
produced by continual Rains; the Conjunction of these various Accidents must
necessarily increase its Waters, and cause those Inundations, which may be
termed the Scourge of Rome, as the fiery Eruptions of Vesuvius are called the
Scourge of Naples. There are Inscriptions fastened in several Places against
the Walls to denote the Year and Height of the Inundations.

The Water of this River is always thick and yellowish; but if it be suffered
to stand a whole night it grows clear and limpid, and they assured us also that
it is very good. Nevertheless I perceive that some Persons in all Ages have been
at prodigious charge to bring other Waters to Rome, in order to which they have
diverted the course of Rivers, pierced Mountains, and built great Aqueducts.
And they continue still to make new Attempts to compass the same design. The
Aqua Felice was twenty Miles distant from Rome, and cost Pope Sixtus the V.
near four hundred thousand Crowns to bring it thither. And it is probable that
Paulus V. Pont. Max. aquam in agro Braccinensi saluberrimis ^ fontibus
collectam, Veteribus aquae Alseatinae ductibus restitutis, novisque additis,
XXXV. ab Urbe Milliario duxit. An. Dom. 1612. Pontificatus sui septimo.
Fountain of Montorio cost a great deal more; since its Waters are brought from
a much greater distance.

Since I have mentioned the Montorio, I will add some other Remarks concerning
it. There is to be seen on the high Altar of the Franciscan Church, that
admirable Picture of the Transfiguration which is the last Work and Masterpiece
of Raphael. And not far from hence they visit with great devotion, the Chapel
which is built on the very same place where they believe St. Peter was
crucified. In the middle of this Chapel they have made a deep hole where they
affirm the Cross was fixed. You know what Platina and others have related that
St. Peter desired to be crucified with his Head down-ward, not esteeming
himself worthy to suffer in the same manner with Christ. The Picture of this
Crucifixion is to be seen at St. Paul's at the three Fountains, by the hand of
Guido: And in the same Church they show the Pillar, on which they pretend St.
Paul was beheaded. This may serve to exercise the Wits of those Critics, who
are lovers of such Curiosities, to show how a Man could be beheaded on a Pillar.

This Column puts me in mind of another, which we saw some days ago in the
Cloister of St. John de Lateran: It Is that on which St. Peter's Cock crew. In
the same place there is another, which was cleft asunder from top to bottom on
the day of the Passion. They show also the Measure of Christ's Height, to which
they pretend that never any Person was yet found exactly equal. And here they
also keep the It is of Porphyry, four foot long, and three bread.
Stone on which Pilat's Soldiers cast lots for Christ's Garments; the Dice, they
say, are at Vnbriatico in Calabria. I will not trouble you with a description
of the Altar, that was pierced by a Host which flew out of the Hands of an
Incredulous Person, nor of the other Curiosities that are to be seen under the
Portico's of this Cloister. But I cannot forbear telling you that I have seen
the bored Chair, about which you desire to be imform'd, that was formerly made
use of in the Ceremony instituted to prevent all doubts concerning After the
Examination of the Witnesses, they cried with a loud voice, (...) Mas nobis
Dominus est. We have a Male Lord or Pope, Leo Calchond. -- alta voice
exclamabant Testiculos habet, dignus est Papali corona. -- at nemo jam ad
Pontificatum promovetur, qui suae Virilitatis, non dederit antea satis efficax
testimonium. I. I. Boissard. They proclaimed aloud, says that Author, He has
Stones, and is worthy of the Papal Crown. But, adds he, none are now advanced
to the Pontifical dignity, who have not already given sufficient Proofs of
their Virility.
the Pope's Sex. It Is a kind of armed Chair of one single Piece of Porphyry.

Whether the Reason and End of that search gave occasion to the ancient use of
this Chair; or it was made only to put the Popes in mind that they were not
Gods, but Men, and subject to all human infirmities; or whether that Ceremony
was ordained for both these ends together, as Platina seems to think, who
speaks very obscurely on this occasion, is a Controversy which I am as willing
as you, to leave undecided. But as for the She-Pope I am resolved to take
another Course, and since you have given me a fair occasion to add some
Reflections to all that has been said, by so many different Persons on this
subject, I must tell you freely, that I find not the least solidity either in
your Objections, or any of those that have been raised by others against the
Truth of this History.

It Is true, some Protestant Authors have rejected it as a Fable, as well as the
Roman Catholic Doctors of these last Ages: Whether the Former did really esteem
it to be such, or were acted by a Spirit of Singularity, or a certain sort of
Complaisance which might have been very well spared, I will not pretend to
determine; but every Man will have his humor: And you must not blame me, if I
am resolved to believe my own Eyes. Let us consider the matter of Fact then,
and examine the Arguments on both sides, with all possible Brevity.

I cannot perceive the least shadow of a Reason, that should hinder us from
ranking this Adventure among an infinite number of other extraordinary Events
recorded in History, to which we cannot without Injustice refuse to give
credit. We find Blondel acknowledges Seventy one Greek and Latin, Canonized
Writers and others.
Seventy or Eighty Authors, who have at several times related the same thing.
These Authors are Men of Sense, whom no consideration, either of Profit or
Honor, could have prompted to make such a Declaration: Quite the contrary, the
Interest of their Religion, and Fear of Punishment might have detered 'em from
publishing that Adventure. What Folly then, or rather Madness must we suppose
so many grave Authors to have been seized with, which could entice 'em to
invent a Fable of this nature, with all the Circumstances that attend it: And
what Evidence or Authority can henceforth persuade us to believe that which we
never saw.

I must acknowledge it to be my Opinion, that the aerie and humorous Wit of
Incredulity never made a worse Figure than on this occasion. But you will
perhaps tell me that they do not insist upon a bare Negation of the matter of
Fact, but that they allege several weighty Arguments to confirm their Opinion,
which deserve to be considered, and that after a careful and serious
Examination of the whole Controversy, they find reason to conclude that the
History of the pretended She-Pope is an ill-contriv'd Fable.

Very well, Sir, I will hear these boasted Arguments, immediately, and perhaps
confute 'em too; but first give me leave to tell you, that when a matter of
Fact which does not imply a Contradiction, is positively attested by sufficient
Authority; we must not pretend to call the Truth of the History in question,
merely on the Score of certain Criticisms, on some intricate and not common
Passages in it. In the present case we produce a multitude of Authors of
undoubted Credit, who confirm the Truth of our Assertion; and all your
halfdifficulties can never invalidate the Testimony of so many credible
Witnesses. The controversy must he decided by the force of Authorities; and
whatever reluctance you may have to confess your self foiled, you must either
quit the Cudgels or defend your self better.

The Question is not whether it would be an easy matter at this time of the We
must also consider the difference of Times. That was an Age of Ignorance,
Stupidity and Confusion. But the Times are altered; and men are not now so
easily bubbl'd as formerly. We live in an Age that is wonderfully improved in
Craftiness and Subtlety; how little reason soever we have to boast of our
Improvements in Probity and Goodness.
Day, to set the triple Crown on the Head of a disguised Wench. Without doubt
such an Attempt would be ridiculous; and the Non-impossibility of the success,
would be an ill Argument to justify the Prudence of the Undertaker: But we must
not reason concerning what is already past, as we do of that which is still to
come. We daily see long Series's of extraordinary and unexpected Adventures,
the truth of which we do not at all question, though none but a Madman would
fancy himself able to atchieve such Enterprises.

It Is certain then that the word Difficulty is equivocal; and that the
Arguments that are grounded upon it, are for the most part mere Sophisms. There
may be a great deal of Difficulty in the performance of a thing, and yet the
very same thing may be sometimes easily done, and as easily believed after it
is done. See afterward page.
The Switzer William Tell had reason to say it was a very difficult Task to
shoot down with an Arrow, the Apple that was placed on the Head of his Child.
Yet if we consider attentively the nature of the thing, we must acknowledge
there was no reason to suppose that the motion of the Arrow should be guided to
any other particular part, than to the Apple. Should I desire you to find out
some simple Shepherdess, and to persuade her to take a Helmet and Sword, to ask
of the King the supreme Command of an Army, and afterward to fight and rout
his Enemies, you would be apt to imagine that I were either mad or had a design
to abuse you. But if you call to mind the Story of the Joan of Arc, a poor
Shepherdess of the Village of Damremy on the Meuse at the Age of 18. or 20.
years, she was entrusted by Charles the VII. with the Command of part of his
Forces. She relieved Orleans, beat the English, reconquer'd Champaign, and
caused the King to be solemnly inaugurated. See Mezeray in the Life of Charles
the VII. Ann. 1429.
Maid of Orleans, who was both a Shepherdess and a great General; you must
change your Opinion, and own that the Possibility of the thing is a sufficient
Reason why you should not contradict the Truth of it.

All that has been said may be easily applied to our Popes; but without
insisting longer on the Comparison, I challenge you to renounce all those
shadows of Arguments which you ground on some pretended difficulties, if I can
make it appear that these difficulties are not unanswerable* and that the
controverted Story is probable or (...) least possible.

Rid your Self I beseech you of your unju^^ Prejudices against the Capacity of
the Female Sex. A thousand Examples of lllustrious Women might suffice to
convince us that it is only the want of that Education which we enjoy, that
makes 'em seem incapable of the Management of Affairs; tho there were not other
Reasons to force our Assent to so evident a Truth.

See afterward page
Let not the Beardless Chin of Her Holiness perplex you: For a Beard has not
always bee^ thought a necessary Qualification for a Pope* And even the Papal
Throne has been sometimes filled by Benedict the IX. was made Pope at the Age
of ten years; some say eleven; and others twelve; but however it is certain that
he was a Child; all agree that he was one of the most monstrous and abominable
Creatures that ever lived in the World. John the XII (alias XIII) was also
chosen Pope before he was eighteen years old.
Youths that could not have been distinguished from Women by their Chins.
Besides, you know I might easily make a long Catalogue of Women who have
discharged all sorts of Offices, and have past for Men.
Semiramis performed the Office of a King, in the Quality and Habit of a Man*
and why might not our German Lady act the Pope under a like disguise. And what
do you* or I know, whether they were not both of the number of those Virago's
who have a Masculine mien, and are not destitute of Beards. S^ long as your
mind is full of the Idea of a Maid Young, Soft, Pleasant, Innocent, Fearful,
without Knowledge and Experience, and Clothed as other Women are, you will never
be able to lay aside your Prejudices. But if instead of that young Idiot, you
represent to your self some bold Virage, some CHRISTINA with a Masculine Voice
and hairy Chin; some learned, witty and daring Creature disguis'dlike a Man,
all your Prejudices will vanish, and you will quickly acquiesce in the Truth
and Evidence of our History. Aristotle tells us that the Prophetess of Caria in
Asia minor, were bearded Women.
And after you have made these Suppositions which are certainly very
reasonable, you will find it as easy to advance a Woman so qualified to the
Papal Chair, as a begging Vagabond, such as Adrian the IV. or a Swine-herd like
Sixtus the V. And several other Popes who have been raised to that Dignity from
the lowest degree of Meanness.

But, you proceed, how can it seem probable that a Woman could so long hide her
great Belly, and at last be so much a Fool as to expose her self to the Danger
of being delivered of a Child in the midst of a solemn Procession.

I answer, in the first place, that probable, or not probable it is all one to
me, so long as the thing is Possible. But secondly, as to the first part of
your Objection, I say, that a Woman may contrive several ways to prevent the
Discovery of such a Secret, especially when she is generally believed to be a
Man: And if any of your Friends should be troubled with a swelling in his
Belly, would you presently imagine him to be with Child. In the third place, I
shall offer two considerations in answer to what you allege concerning the
Imprudence of our Female Pope. The first is, that we sometimes meet with
unavoidable Difficulties, through which we must force a passage over all the
dangers that attend 'em. And the other is, that we have no reason to believe
that she was come to the end of her ninth Month, when this Misfortune happened.
It Is not improbable that she was delivered before her due time, or at least the
thing is possible; which being allowed, she can neither be accused of
Imprudence, nor we have any reason to wonder that she was able to conceal her
great Belly.

If Chronological Difficulties amount to a sufficient Argument against the
Existence of Pope Joan: By the same reason we may conclude that several other
Popes are mere imaginary Names.
But you tell me, that Chronologers do not agree in their calculations about the
Time of this accident. It Is true they do not, and the reason of their
difference is obvious. They who expunge our Popess's Name out of the Catalogue
of Popes, are obliged dexterously to lengthen the Lives of her Predecessors to
fill up the Breach which they have made. But as you have Chronological
Supputations that are accomodated to your Opinion, so I have others that are
agreeable to mine: And therefore our Controversy must be decided by other
Arguments.

The Objection which is grounded on her Voyage to Athens, under pretense that
the Studies that were prosecuted there at that time, were not suitable to a
young Scholar, is a mere frivolous Cavil. For in the first place you suppose
without the least proof, that she was a young Scholar at the time of her
Voyage; and what reason can you allege, why I may not suppose that she was old
enough to be admitted among the Hearers of the Athenian Philosophers, or other
Professors in that Academy? But secondly, I observe that some of those Authors
who relate this History, carry her straight to Rome without mentioning Athens.

You will perhaps look upon this Concession as very advantageous to your Party,
and reproach me with the Contradictions of my Authors; but I can easily ward
this Blow. Consider, I beseech you, that the same Action as to the Main is not
always related with the same Circumstances; and even Sacred History might
furnish me with several Instances of such Variations. I acknowledge indeed, that
we ought not to rely upon the Testimony of a Historian who contradicts himself:
but tho we should observe some circumstantial differences between two Authors
who relate the same thing, but live perhaps in different Countries; we could
not in Justice give these Variations the ignominious name of Contradictions,
but only conclude that they were occasioned either by forgetfulness, want of
necessary Intelligence, or some Ambiguity in the Expression. Besides, if there
had been a Combination of false Witnesses to cheat the World, and if they had
deliberately invented the pretended Fable of Pope Joan; they would certainly
have taken better measures, and agreed upon the Circumstances of the story.
It Is plain then, that such petty Variations do not destroy, nor so much as
weaken the Credit of a Relation. A remarkable Event makes a great noise in the
World, and Men both talk and write variously concerning it.

Your last and (in your opinion) strongest Argument is grounded on the silence
of those Authors, who were Joan's Cotemporaries: This seems to make a great
Impression upon you; but you must give me leave to tell you, that it is as weak
and trifling as the rest. A Scottish Monk who died in the Abbey of Fuld in
Germany, about the 58. year of his Age, 1086. Bellarmin gives him the Character
of a diligent Writer.
Marianus Scotus A very learned Monk of the Abbey of Gemblours, who died about
the beginning of the Twelfth Age.
Sigebert, and some other more Several Authors related this History before
Marianus Scotus.
ancient Authors who relate this History, five or six hundred years ago, did
probably take it from those who wrote before 'em; Anastasius, called the
Bibliothecary, was a Roman Abbot, a Man of learning and great Merit: And Pope
Joan's Cotemporary.
for it is not at all credible that they invented it, for the Reasons that I
alleged before. But besides, your Argument is grounded upon a false
supposition; for the Editions of Anastasius that have escaped Gelding give an
exact account of the whole story. And I must likewise add, that tho we could
not find the least mention of a Female Pope in any Author of the Ninth Age, you
could not from thence infer, that they were all silent in this case. For before
the Invention of Printing, the Monks left no means unessay'd to suppress all
that seemed contrary to their Interest; and several other Accidents have
occasioned the loss of a great number of good Books.

Besides, we have no reason to wonder that a History of this Nature was kept
very secret: since Fear and Shame were Motives strong enough to impose silence
on the Writers of that Age. There are some things which are never divulged till
after a certain time; Some Princes that are detested by all the World, have
been flattered during the Age in which they lived, whom Posterity, not awed by
Fear, has See the Beginning of the next Letter.
painted forth in the most hideous colors.

After all, I cannot conceive what should make the Church of Rome so unwilling
to own her She Pope, as if Monstrous Popes were Rarities. I am sure Cardinal
Baronius makes no scruple to bestow that Title on a great number of 'em. And as
for Vacancies, there have been some that have lasted longer than the whole time
of her Pontificate: You know there was an Interregnum of almost nine Years
between Nicholas the I. and Adrian the II. Nor can they want a remedy for the
Nullity of Administration; for the Ministers of the Court of Rome have Salves
for all Sores.

But, all things being duly considered, I would willingly know, what it is in
this Adventure that appears so strange and surprising. Is there any
Contradiction or Prodigy in it, or even any thing that is rare and wonderful?
As for me, I assure you, I can perceive nothing but what is very natural and
easy. If, as I intimated before, instead of an innocent Agnes, you suppose a
Creature, whose Manners, Capacity, Humor and outward Behavior represent a
Man; I cannot imagine upon what grounds you can raise the least shadow of an
Objection.

If I thought it necessary to imitate Henry Stephen in the Introduction to his
Apology for Herodotus, I could quickly find a sufficient number of stranger
Events, than that for which I contend, to fill a whole Volume. But without
wandering from the Subject of our Controversy, or leaving the Holy See, tell me,
I pray you, whether any Person that were a perfect stranger to the History of
the Popes, would suffer himself to be persuaded, that these Gentlemen retaining
still the quality of Priests, have notwithstanding raised themselves to the
Empire of the Christian World, and to the Power, and even the Practice, These
are all Historical Instances of unquestioned Truth.
of distributing Scepters, treading Crowned Heads under their Feet, inflicting
ignominious Punishments upon 'em, as on guilty Slaves, and LEWIS, the Great
Subverter of the World,
Who spared no Crime to please his frantic Humor;
A wicked Son, and an unnatural Father,
An unjust Brother, and a Faithless Husband,
A thankless Master, and a dangerous Friend;
Reigned without Counsel, Piety, or Justice,
Fraud was his Sport, his Virtue was a Cheat, etc.
Mezeray, concerning Lewis XI.

driving 'em out of their Kingdoms by the Terror of their Anathema's? Or could
our supposed Stranger, do you think, be made to believe that some extravagant
Flatterers have presumed to ascribe to those Priests a Power to turn Virtue
into Vice, and Vice into Virtue; to excommunicate Angels, and to dispense with
the Apostolical and Evangelical Laws? I would also desire you to employ some
hours in perusing the old Legends, for the new ones are not so curious; and
there you will find a numerous Medley of Stories related as sacred Truths, that
will not only appear incredible to you, but such monstrous Fables, as Posterity
will hardly be induced to believe that ever any persons in the World were
capable of inventing and writing 'em.

I shall add but one word more: When People in after-Ages shall read the
History of what has lately happened to the Protestants of France, written by a
Maimbourg, a Varillas, a Bishop of Meaux, and others of that Gang, who strive
to out do one-another, in exalting the sweetness and extreme Moderation with
which those unfortunate Creatures were used in that Execution; can it be
supposed that these future Readers will believe, or even imagine that there are
no Cruelties so barbarous which these poor Protestants did not suffer?

Prostat Liber palam ac public hic (scilicet P^risiis) impressus, and hodie ut
olim venalis: Taxa Camerae seu Cancellariae Apostolicae, quibus plus scelerum
discas licet, quam in omnibus vitiorum Symmystis and Summariis. Claud. Esp. Ep.
^d Tit. c. 1.
I cannot forbear mentioning another incredible Prodigy, which just now comes
into my Mind. I mean the Book entitled, The Rates of the Apostolical Chamber.
Who could have believed that the Vicar of Christ would compose a List of
enormous Crimes and unheard of Impieties, with the Price of Gaude Matter nostra
Roma, quoniam aperiuntur Cataractae Thesaurorum in terra, ut ad te confluant
rivi and aggeres nummorum in magna copia. Laetare super iniquitate filiorum
hominum, quoniam in recompensationem tantorum malorum, datur tibi pretium.
Jocundare super adjutrice tua discordia, quia erupit de puteo infernalis
abyssi, ut accumulentur tibi multa pecuniarum praemia. Habes quod semper
sitisti, decanta canticum, quia per malitiam hominum* non per tuam Religionem
orbem vicisti, Ad te trahit, non ipsorum devotio aut pura conscientia, sed
scelerum multiplicium perpetratio, and litium decisio pretio comparata. Cour.
Abbas Ursp. -- Venalia nobis
Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria, Sacra, Coronae,
Ignis, Thura, Preces, Coelum est venale, Deusque, B. Mant.

Absolutions to be granted for 'em? I bought this Book three days ago in Rome.
It Is true, they are ashamed of it, they have endeavored by all means to
suppress it, and it is inserted in the Index Expurgatorius of the Council of
Trent; but the Blot will never be wiped off; and after all these Grimaces,
Dispensations are sold here daily.

Before I bid adieu to Pope Joan, I must not forget to put you in mind of what
Mezeray in the Life of Charles the Bald.
Mezeray writes concerning the Story that is the subject of our Controversy,
That this Opinion was generally received as an undoubted Truth, for the space
of Five hundred years.

If you desire to know the reason why the Use of this Chair is laid aside, the
following Epigram by John, Bishop of the Five Churches in Pannonia, or Hungary.
Pannonius will satisfy your Curiosity.

Non poterat quisquam reserantes Aetherae Claves
Non exploratis sumere Testiculis.
Cur igitur nostro mos hic nunc tempore cessat?
Ante probat quod se quilibet esse Marem.
Or this: Les petits Enfans qu'ils font,
Sont preuves assez r^e^es,
Que les Saints Peers ne sont
Ni Coquatres, ni Femelles.
The Sense of both which may be thus expressed; Of old, e're Popes had learned
to kiss,
None were (then sure they kept no Miss)
Made Porters of the Bower of Bliss,
Till Reverend Fist had grop'd 'em:
But now, thank Heaven, we have surer Signs;
For the Offspring of their Sacred Loins
Displays the Vigor of their Groins
Before they claim the Popedom.


Pasquin's Verses on Paul II, and Innocent VIII, are much to the same purpose:
Pontificis Paul II.
Pauli Testes ne Roma requiras;
Filia quam genuit sat docet esset marem.
Octo Innocent VIII.
Nocens Pueros genuit, totidemque Puellas
Hunc merito poteris dtcere, Roma Patrem.


The Church of So called from Plan. Lateranus, a Roman Lord, who had Gardens in
this place. He was killed by Nero's Order, after he had been nominated to the
Consulship.
St. John de Lateran is very large and magnificent; She assumes also the lofty
Title of the These two Verses are engraved on the Portico;
Dogmate Papali, datur simul Imperiali,
Ut sim Cunctarum Matter, Caput Ecclesiarum.

Head and Mother of all Churches. Sixtus V. built a vast Palace near this
Church I hear that it was since made a Hospital.
, which was never inhabited.

Near adjoining to that Building is the Lodge called Sancta Scala, from the 28
Steps that were transported thither. They are of white Marble, very much worn;
and they pretend that these are the Steps by which Christ ascended to Pilate's
House. At present none are permitted to ascend 'em but There are two little
Stairs, one on each side, by which those that please are permitted to walk up
to the Sancta Sanctorum.
kneeling, which cannot be done without trouble; but to make amends for that,
they obtain at every Step Indulgences for Three years and as many times Forty
days. The Chapel at the top of the Stairs is called Sancta Sanctorum, or the
Holy of Holies, from an Image of Christ, which, they believe, was made by
Angels, and is religiously preserved there. I have seen this Piece, and can
assure you, it is very ugly and ill shaped. Women never enter into this most
Holy place.

In our return from the Sancta Scala, we passed by St. Mary major, which is a
vast and magnificent Structure A certain Roman Lord full of Devotion to the
Virgin, being one night warned in a Dream to go next morning to Mount Esquilin,
and there to build a Church to the honor of the Mother of God, in the place
where he should find Snow; and Pope Liberius having also had the same Vision,
they walked together to the place appointed. It was on the Fifth of Ann. 355.
August, yet they found Snow, which they removed with their own Hands, and
immediately laid the Foundations of this Temple.

You never saw any thing more rich or finely built than the Chapels of Dominick
Fontana was the Architect of this Chapel We were informed, that it cost Seven
hundred thousand Roman Crowns
Sixtus V. and Paul V. in the last of which they preserve the Manger of
Bethlehem, and an Image of the Virgin made by St. Luke, about which they have
several times found Angels singing Litanies.

Not far from thence is the little Church of St. Anthony, whither all the
Horses of the City are brought on that Saint's Festival, to receive a
Benediction at the Door of the Church.

Castel-Gandolfo is 16 miles distant from Rome.
But to change the Subject of my Observations, that their Variety at least may
please you, I shall in the next place give you some account of our Voyage to
Castel-Gandolfo. This House has nothing remarkable in it, though it belongs to
the Pope. Cardinal H -- has an Apartment in it; and sometimes goes to pass a
few days there, where he may be free from the Encumbrances of the Ceremonies of
Rome, than which nothing can be more troublesome to a Cardinal.

During our short stay at this place, we took several turns into the adjacent
Country: About a mile from the Castle we visited the little Town of Albano,
ALBANO.
where the famous City of Alba was formerly seated, extending, according to the
common Belief, from the brink of the Lake of Castle Gandolfo to the new Town of
Albano; but this Opinion is controverted, and I will not undertake to decide
the Question.

We saw at Albano a kind of Tower or ruined Mausoleum, commonly called the Tomb
of Ascanius; but this Opinion seems only to be grounded on a very uncertain
Tradition.

But I may speak more positively of another ancient Tomb near Albano, which is
generally believed to be the Sepulcher of the Two Horatii, and the Three
Curiatii. It Is plain, that the Five Pyramids which are on the Tomb have given
occasion to this Opinion; but this Reason is of no force, for Titus Livius
expressly affirms, That the Sepulchers of these Heroes were erected in the same
places where each of 'em expired; those of the Horatii toward Alba, and those
of the Curiatii nearer Rome.

The Lake of Castle Gandolfo is, as we were informed, six or seven miles in
compass; and the rising Grounds which environ it form an exact Amphitheater.
There are two parts where the depth of the Lake cannot be sounded; but, which
is more wonderful, its Waters do from time to time suddenly swell, and rise to
the very top of the Banks, which doubtless proceeds from its communication with
subterraneous Gulfs, that disgorge themselves into it.

Half a mile from thence, near Gensana, we saw another little Lake, called by
the Moderns Lago di Nemi, and by the Ancients Speculum Dianae, from a Grove and
Temple consecrated to that Goddess, which were formerly on the Bank of this
Lake.

Between Albano and Castel-Gandolfo, we observed the Ruins of an Amphitheater,
and were surpised to behold certain great Trees among 'em, that had formerly
taken root, and, in a wonderful manner, wrought a passage for themselves
between the best cemented Stones and Bricks, which they have cleft asunder, and
pierced the Walls, where they are grown great in spite of all opposition.

Mittit praecipuos nernoralis Aricia Porros. Mart.
The whole Country about Albano and Gensana is fruitful; the Wine especially and
Fruits which it produces are much esteemed. The Inhabitants do still observe
their ancient Custom of cultivating Leeks and Onions with a great deal of care.

Since I have already entertained you with an account of the Houses of Pleasure
in the Neighborhood of Rome, I will also add some Observations concerning the
chief Palaces in the City. But I will not insist long upon 'em, that I may
avoid telling you what you know already.

The Catalogue of the Antiquities which we saw at the Palace Justiniani,
amounts to 1867, and that of the rare Pictures to 638. Nero's Head, the
Minerva, Venus coming out of a Bath, and the three little Cupids sleeping and
leaning upon one another, are the most esteemed Pieces.

Cardinal Chigi's Palace is one of the finest Houses in Rome. All the Gates are
overlaid with Antique green Marble. Among the Statues, the two Venus's, Marsias
flayed, and the dying Gladiator, are chiefly remarkable.

Ant. de St. Gallo begun it.
You have heard, without doubt, that Michael Angelo was the principal Architect
of the Tertius has Paulus struxit Farnesius aedes,
Quarum forma oculos ponitur ante tuos.
Aspicis immensos, Hospes, qui frontis honores,
His similes dices, Roma nec Orbis habet.

Farnesian Palace. The Front of this beautiful Structure is 180 foot broad, and
90 foot high. The Gates, Corner-pieces, Cross-bars of the Windows, Cornish, and
all the principal Stones were taken from the Colliseum. I shall take this
occasion to tell you, that a great part of this admirable Monument has by such
means been destroyed. The great Palace of the Chancery, as well as St. Lawrence
in Damaso.
St. Lawrence's Church, is almost wholly built with its spoils: and even some
parts of the City-walls have been repaired with the same. Instead of repairing
and preserving those precious Remainders of Antiquity after the Example of
Sixtus V, to whom Rome owes the greatest part of its beauty, some brutish
persons endeavor to complete the destruction of its Ornaments. Innocent VIII.
broke the Arch of Gordian to build a Church. Alexander VI. demolished the
beautiful Pyramid of Scipio, to pave the Streets with its Stones. The Marble
Steps which serve for an Ascent to the Church of Ara Coeli, were taken from a
Temple of Romulus. St. Blaise's Church was erected out of the spoils of a
Temple of Neptune; St. Nicholas's of the Soul is built out of the Ruins of the
Circus agonalis; and I might easily add several other Instances.

All the World knows, that the Farnesian It is the Work of Glycon a Grecian
Sculptor. (...).
Hercules and Bull are two famous Pieces. The Gallery by Caracchio, the Hall by
Salviati, the Venus and the Adonis by Titian, are also universally known.

The Library in the Palace Altieri is numerous and in good order. The
Staircase is very fine: At the foot of the Stair there is a Statue of a
Captive King, which was found four or five hundred years ago in the Place
called Navona. Spon.
The Apartments are great, and adorned with rare Pictures and magnificent
Furniture. Here I observed a Looking glass of Crystal of the Rock ten inches
long, and six broad, in a golden Frame, covered all over with Jewels of great
value.

They also magnified extremely a little Earthen Dish, which is carefully
preserved in a very rich Frame, as being painted by Raphael. It is of the same
kind of work with those Vessels at Loretto, which I mentioned before. And I saw
some more of 'em here that are preserved with equal Esteem, or rather
Veneration.

Perhaps I should not have had the Courage singly to attack that common
Prejudice that puts the Reputation of Raphael in a Threepenny Dish, which he
never saw or touched; though I am pretty well acquainted with the History of that
Artist, and had several good Arguments to confute that Opinion. But having had
the Fortune to discourse with the famous Carlo Marotti on the same subject, I
dare confidently assure you, that Raphael never drew a stroke on any of these
Dishes, notwithstanding the great value that is set upon 'em, and the
commonness of the contrary Opinion. I acknowledge indeed, that these Pictures
have some resemblance to Raphael's way of working, from which we may probably
infer, that either they were made by some of his Scholars, or in imitation of
some of his Designs.

The Palace contaons Four thousand Chambers.
The Palace Barberini, called the Palaestrin, is reputed to be the greatest in
Rome next to the Vatican. Among its Antiquities, which are very numerous, the
little Diana of Oriental Alabaster is particularly esteemed. The Tullia,
Daughter of Servius Tullius, and Wife of Tarquin the proud, is a very rare
Piece, and said to be the only one of the kind in Rome. I observed also the God
Osiris, with his Hawk's Head on a Human Body, which was found with the Obelisk
of Minerva, under the Ruins of Isis's Temple.

In this Palace also I took notice of a Marble Bust of Pope Urban VIII, which
was made by a blind man, and yet is the best Representation we have of that
Pope.

The other Palace Barberini toward the four Fountains, is a heap of Rarities,
Antiquities, and all sorts of Curiosities. They assured us, that its Library
contains Forty thousand Volumes.

The first Halls of the Palace Colonna are adorned with the Pictures of Adrian
I. and Martin V, two of the honestest Popes that ever filled the Chair.
two Popes, nineteen Cardinals, and fifty four Generals of Armies, all
descended from the noble and ancient House of the Colonna's. There are in the
same Palace nine great Apartments, Eight thousand original Pictures, a little
Arsenal, Busts, antique Basso-relievo's, Statues, and a great deal of rich
Furniture.

I will not insist upon the Architecture of these Palaces, for I Am persuaded I
cannot inform you of any thing of that nature, with which you are not already
acquainted. I think I told you before, that it is much more usual in this place
to cover the Houses with ridg'd than flat Roofs, though people generally differ
much in their Opinions concerning these two ways of building. Those
sharp-pointed Roofs that are almost equal in height to the Body of the
Edifice, are in some measure contrary to Reason, by destroying the symmetry and
decent proportion that ought to be between the whole, or at least the main
body, and the other less remarkable parts of a Building. But, since you are
desirous to know my Opinion, I must tell you, that I prefer the middle way
found out by our famous Mansard before your flat Roofs.

Besides, you must give me leave to entreat you to lay aside that partial
Opinion you seem to have of the Roman Architecture in general. It must be
acknowledged, that there are in this place very beautiful Structures, both
ancient and modern, but you must not imagine that every thing is in perfection;
for here, as well as in other places, there are certain modes of Building
peculiar to the Age and Country, and not at all conformable either to the
Regularity or Magnificence of Architecture.

I thank you for your excellent Remarks on those admirable Egyptian Obelisks,
which are at present to be seen in this City, and ought, in my Opinion, to be
reckoned among its noblest Ornaments. I have learned many curious things from
what you have written on this subject, and therefore am obliged in Justice to
answer the Questions you propose, and at the same time to give the best
solution I can of some of your Doubts concerning those rare Monuments.

All the Obelisks in Rome are quadrangular, and end in a sharp point. They
resembl'd the Rays of the Sun, that great Divinity adored by the Egyptians
under the name of Osiris, and esteemed by 'em to be the Habitation of Beings,
Genius's, and the Souls of the Universe. Their Angles respected the four
Corners of the World, and denoted the four Elements.

The Hieroglyphic Characters on these Obelisks have been supposed by some to
contain the Elogies of some Princes, or Histories of certain memorable
Transactions; and they believe that these Monuments were erected by the
Egyptians, both to serve for Ornaments, and to honor the Heroes of their
Nation: but those who have penetrated furthest into these Mysteries, have, in
my opinion, demonstrated clearly, that these were open Books, which exposed to
the Eyes of the public the Secrets of their Divinity, Astrology, Metaphysics,
Magic, and all the other Sciences that were cultivated by the Egyptians. It Is
certain, that the Vulgar was not capable of unriddling the Mysteries of these
Oracles; but then, as well as now, the unthinking part of Mankind amused
themselves with Shadows and Obscurities.

All these Obelisks are of Granite, which is a kind of very hard and lasting
Marble, and able, as they assured us, to resist the Fire for a considerable
time. There is not one of 'em that was made at Rome.
Without doubt the solidity of the Matter was one of the Reasons that
recommended it to their choice. The Obelisk of St. John de Lateran has
subsisted Three thousand years; and that of We were informed, that it weighs
956148 pounds.
St. Peter is Nine hundred years older. The first is the greatest of 'em all,
being 108 foot high, without reckoning either the Pedestal or the Cross. There
are also some Granites of Corsica in this place, but they have not so fine a
Grain as those of Egypt. I am,

SIR, Your etc.
Rome, April 24. 1688.
LETTER XXVI.
SIR,
YEsterday, upon a second perusal of your Letter, I observed a marginal Note
that I had not taken notice of before, in which you desire me to consider what
Mr. Chevreau has written concerning Pope Joan, in the second part of his
History of the World, and to give you an account of my Thoughts of his
Arguments against that Story, which makes me conclude that you have a good
opinion of 'em. However, Sir, I am ready to obey you; for I have read Mr,
Chevreau's Book, and have made some Reflections on that passage in it.

In the first place he acknowledges, that a considerable number of famous
Authors have mentioned that Story, and positively asserted the Truth of it.
Now, according to the known Rules of Justice and Reason, this concession alone
is sufficient to decide the Controversy; for when several Witnesses of
unquestioned credit do unanimously attest a Matter of Fact, we are obliged to
believe their Testimony, if the thing be possible, and we have no Evidence to
the contrary, more especially if these Witnesses speak against their own
Interest.

These Authorities, says Mr. Chevreau, have made a strong impression on
credulous Minds* but the more judicious and cautious part of Mankind, relying
on the Silence of several other Authors, have examined and rejected this Fable.
This is certainly a very strange and surprising Maxim, Seventy or Eighty Men,
who cannot with the least appearance of Justice be suspected of a Design to
cheat the World, who were all of the Roman Religion, almost all Clergy men, and
even some of 'em Canonized Saints; all these Authors, I say, This is
acknowledged by the Roman Catholics.
do positively affirm, That there was a Female Pope. Other Authors make no
mention of her; and the Silence of these must invalidate the Testimony of the
former. May we not probably suppose, that That Pope was made a Cardinal at the
age of fourteen years. It is agreed by all Historians, that he was an impious
Person.
Leo X. reasoned after the same manner, when he called the Gospel The Fable of
Christ. Some Authors bear witness to the History of our Savior; others who
lived at the same time do not mention it, and that judicious and cautious Pope
relying on the Silence of so many Writers, examined and rejected the Story. I
will not lose time to demonstrate the weakness of this way of reasoning, it
destroys it self, and does not merit a serious confutation.

Mr. Chevreau assures us, that Anastasius the Bibliothecary makes no mention of
our Popess; which is also the great and boasted Argument of Onuphrius, but they
are both mistaken; you may consult Mr. le Sueur's Ecclesiastical History, and
Colomesius's Historical Miscellanies, where you will find an Anastasius of the
French King's Library, containing an exact account of the Female Pope; besides
two other Copies of Mar. Freher and Salmasius saw these Copies: nor does
Blondel disown 'em.
the same Author at Augsburg, and one at Millain, which relate the same Story.
These Books will also inform you how the Jesuits of Mentz having suffered only
two Copies to be wrought off, conform to the Original, had the Impudence to
This they themselves confess to be true.
suppress all that displeased 'em in the rest of this Edition.

Anastasius wrote the Lives of the Popes to Nicholas ^, who succeeded Benedict
the Third.
Before I take leave of Anastasius, I must entreat you seriously to weigh the
Authority of his Testimony. He was a man of Learning, he lived at Rome, and was
co-temporary with our Popess: He speaks as an Eyewitness, and two words of
such an Author are sufficient to destroy all the frivolous Objections and
little Shifts of those who contradict the Truth of this Relation.

In the next place I shall proceed to consider Mr. Chevreau's Reflections on M.
Polonus flourished in the middle of the Thirteenth Age.
Martinus Polonus, or the Polander, Archbishop of Cosenza, and Penitentiary to
Some Authors write, That he discharged the same Office under Nicholas III.
Innocent IV. M. Chevreau calls him a silly Monk, and alleges three or four
poor Reasons to prove his Simplicity. Since that Monk, says he, in his Treatise
of the Wonders of Rome, mistakes the Gate of Ostia, or of St. Paul, and of
Capena, and St. Sebastian, for another which he calls Collina, instead (as we
may probably suppose) of Collatina or Pinciana, the Pantheon for a Temple of
Cybele, and the Amphitheater for a Temple of the Sun, we may the more easily
forgive that Blunder in his History, where he mistakes a Pope for a Popess. In
answer to these Reflections, I say in the general, That though M. Polonus were
really guilty of some Errors in giving an account of things of little
importance, or in explaining some hard and obscure Questions, we could not from
thence infer, that he had given us a false Relation of the Female Pontiff. He
took one Gate for another, and therefore he took a Pope for a Popess, is rather
a Jest than an Argument; or, if it must pass for an Argument, it may be easily
retorted upon its Author; for, I may with equal reason affirm, that if Mr.
Chevreau's Reflections on M. Polonus be false and groundless, therefore all his
Arguments against the Story that is the subject of our Controversy are mere
Sophisms, and he mistakes a Popess for a Pope. That the Antecedent is certainly
true, will appear from the following Considerations.

(1.) It Is plain, that Mr. Chevreau knew not that there was a Gate called
Collina, when he wrote, That Polonus takes the Gate of Ostia, and the Gate
Capena for another which he called Collina* instead of Collatina or Pinciana.
But it is certain that Collina was the name of a Gate as well as Collatina; it
took its name a Colle Quirinali, and is mentioned by Ovid; Templa frequentari
Collinae proxima portae
Nunc decet; --
Fast. 4.

This Gate is now called Salara.

(2.) The Gate Collatina, so called from the Town of Collatium, is different
from the Pinciana, as F. Nardin has clearly demonstrated.

(3.) Mr. Chevreau had no reason to find fault with Martinus Polonus, for
calling the Pantheon a Temple of Cybele, since several learned Antiquaries are
of the same opinion. It Is true indeed, and I think I have already told you,
that Authors are not agreed in their Conjectures concerning the Denomination of
the Pantheon: But there are many who believe that it was so called because it
was consecrated by Agrippa to Jupiter Jupiter the Avenger.
, and to It Is not altogether improbable that Cybele her self was a multiplied
Deity: for she was worshipped under the several Names of Ops, Rhea, Vesta,
Berecynthia, Dindymena, Tellus, Magna Pales, and Magna Matter. She was also
called Natura rorum Parens.
Cybele the Mother of all the Gods. However, since Opinions are divided, and
the Question is at the best problematical, Polonus cannot without Injustice be
accused of an Error, for what he has written on this subject.

(4) Mr. Chevreau is not easily to be understood, when he talks of the Roman
Amphitheater, for there were several Amphitheaters in that City, and the Ruins
of some of 'em are still remaining. I suppose he meant the great Amphitheater
called Colliseum, which was built by Vespasian, and dedicated by Titus.

(5.) I confess I have not read Polonus's Treatise concerning Rome, but it is
very improbable that he took the Colliseum for a Temple. This is certainly too
great an Absurdity to be believed, and I vehemently suspect that some of his
Expressions are misunderstood. He might indeed speak of a Temple of the Sun
near that Amphitheater, but he could not possibly imagine, that the Colliseum
was its self a Temple.

I must further tell you, that what you relate concerning a Manuscript Polonus
which you have seen, where this Story is written on the margin, and by another
Hand, does not at all reach the bottom of our Controversy. You may easily
conceive that some interess'd Person having gelded our Author, that Defect was
afterward supplied by a more equitable Hand: And thus your Manuscript is only
a particular Instance, from which nothing can be concluded against the Credit
of other Copies. If some person should think fit to restore the History of our
Popess, by way of a marginal Note, in the mutilated Copies of Anastasius, this
could not destroy the Authority of those Originals where the same Relation is
to be found in the Text. Thus we may reasonably suppose, that the Story of Pope
Joan was left out in your Manuscript, and afterward restored by another Hand:
And even Bellarmin confesses, that Martinus Polonus wrote the History of our
Popess.

But to return to Mr. Chevreau. You may observe how much he was puzzled to give
some probable account of the first occasion of that Controversy, since he is
forced to have recourse to the Opinion, or rather Evasion, of Onuphrius, though
he conceals the Name of the Author. He pretends that Pope John the Twelfth had
a Concubine called Joan, who was his Favorite, and governed him so absolutely,
that he was usually nick-nam'd Joan. Besides, he goes further than Onuphrius;
for whereas that Author speaks only conjecturally, Mr. Chevreau asserts
positively, That John the Twelfth was called Pope Joan, because of the blind
Complaisance that he had for his Concubine. Onuphrius's Conjectures are mere
airy Notions and groundless Suspicions: and Mr. Chevreau's Assertion is rash
and precarious; he can produce no other Argument to prove, that John the
Twelfth was called Pope Joan, but his own bare Authority; and neither Onuphrius
nor he can make it appear, that Platina calls him the most pernicious and
infamous of all the Popes that preceeded him. Some Writers relate, adds that
Author, That he was slain in the act of Adultery.
ever Pope John had such a Concubine. It Is true, they both cite Luitprand to
confirm their Hypothesis, but they cite him falsely. The Name of the Widow
mentioned by Mr. Chevreau was Ann, not Joan; and without doubt he was ignorant
that our illustrious M du Plessis Mornay.
Du Plessis had already discovered the Forgery which Onuphrius made use of to
strengthen his Conjecture. Besides, it may be observed, that this Pope John was
advanced to the Papal Chair a hundred years after Pope Joan, which is another
Absurdity that attends Mr. Chevreau's Opinion.

He adds, That the Story of the pretended bored Chair is not better grounded,
and that the Chair is not bored. But, by his leave, I have seen it more than
once, and if I may believe my own Eyes, it is bored, and that after the usual
manner of Close stools. I have already told you that it is of Porphyry; but
there are two of 'em, one broken and the other entire, and they are both made
of the same matter, and after the same fashion.

Platina affirms positively, after Laonicus Chalcondylas an Athenian, who
flourished about the middle of the Fifteenth Age.
Chalcondylas and other approved Authors, That the new elected Pope is placed
on the bored Chair, and that the youngest Deacon thrusts his Hand through the
hole, to feel whether he has the surest marks of Virility. Such, probably, was
the primitive use of this Chair; for, what Reason could have prompted these
Authors to invent such a Fable? It Is true, this Custom was by degrees laid
aside, but they continued for some time to set the Popes on the same Chair, to
put 'em in mind, The Groping Chair
Vol. 2. Page 102

depiction of chair as Mr. Chevreau affirms after Fauchet, that they were still
subject to the common Infirmities of Humane Nature. However, I will not insist
longer upon this subject, since it is altogether foreign to our Controversy.

To proceed to Mr. Chevreau's last Argument, he tells us, That the Fathers of
the Council of Soissons having written to Pope Leo the Fourth, to desire his
Approbation, their Deputies found that he was deceased before their arrival,
and returned the same year from Rome to France, with the Subscription of his
Successor Benedict III. You have seen with how little certainty this Author has
proceeded hitherto; and his End is suitable to his Beginning, He mentions a It
was the second Council or Conventicle held at that place, which Nicholas the
First would never be persuaded to approve.
Council of Soissons, without any other Mark of Distinction: He tells us a
Story without the least proof, and, which is worse, he cannot prove it; for we
must not rely upon the Testimonies of Sirmond and Binius, or on the Authority
of the late Editions of the Councils. To prove his Assertion, especially in
such a doubtful Case as this, he ought to produce Manuscripts of uncontroverted
Antiquity and Credit; but we must excuse him, since his Story is not to be
found in such authentic Originals. If he could certainly fix the time of the
departure of that Council's Envoys to Pope Leo, and of their return after his
death, the duration of his Pontificate might be also determined, which none of
all those who deny the Story of Pope Joan have hitherto been able to do. This
is an important Remark, and deserves to be considered with attention.
Onuphrius, and the rest of his Party, are forced to lengthen the Lives of the
Popes that preceeded and followed our Popess, and by confounding the order of
their succession, have thrown themselves into inextricable Labyrinths.
Bellarmin, one of the most subtle and dextrous of all these Chronologers, in
his Treatise of Ecclesiastical Writers, extends the time of Nicholas the
First's Pontificate to Platina computes Seven years, Nine months, and Thirteen
days.
Ten years, which in his Chronology he reduces to Nine years and a half.
Examine all these Authors, and you shall not find one who does not contradict
himself, so difficult a Task it is to counterfeit the Truth. Bellarmin has not
forgot to calculate the time of the Pontificate of any one Pope, but only of
Leo IV, which is a shrewd sign that he was strangely puzzled how to dispose of
the Two years during which the Papal Throne was filled by Joan, alias John
VIII. But this is not the only Inconvenience with which his Opinion is clogged;
for he and his Companions, by expunging that Woman out of the Catalogue of
Popes, have entangl'd themselves in new Difficulties. And whereas they who make
Truth the Standard of their Relations reckon four and twenty Popes that bore
the Name of John, the rest count only twenty three, and by so doing confound
the whole History. Thus their John the Twelfth, whom we mentioned before, is
John the Thirteenth, according to Platina, Or Bartholomew Caranza, called also
Miranda, Archbishop of Toledo, in his Abridgment of the Councils.
Garenza, and all faithful and unbiased Historians.

I have nothing more to add concerning Mr. Chevreau, for I will not trouble you
with an account of all the Faults that I have observed in his History. And
indeed, it is no great wonder that he was not able to carry on so vast and
general a Work without falling into some Errors.

I shall only subjoin three or four short Remarks for a further illustration of
our present Controversy.

You must not be surpised to find our Popess called both Anglicus and
Moguntinus, as if that were a plain Contradiction; the Werner Roolwinck a
Westphalian.
Author of Fasciculus Temporum has unriddl'd the whole Mystery in these words,
Joannes Anglicus cognomine, sed natione Moguntinus. Her Name was Joan English,
and she was born at Mentz.

The Variations that are observed in Manuscripts ought not to trouble you. I
acknowledge, that this Story is to be found in some of 'em, and not in others;
but you are not ignorant of the Forgeries of Transcribers, or how they were
wont to mangle the Books with which they were entrusted. I might easily fill a
large Volume with Instances of their Impostures.

I see no reason why it should appear strange that some of those who relate
this History seem to speak doubtfully of it; for, besides that it seems at
first view to be encumbered with some odd and intricate circumstances; it is
certain that they could not express much Zeal in defending the Truth of such a
Relation, without exposing themselves to visible Dangers. The Force of Truth
prompted and compelled 'em to speak; and the Fear of giving Offense to the
Court of Rome was a Bridle to restrain 'em. All this may be easily conceived;
however, we see several Authors have broken through all these Difficulties, and
have given us such clear and exact accounts of that Event, that we could not
have deserved a more positive confirmation of it.

Two or three such Testimonies as these would be sufficient to convince any
reasonable Person of the truth of our Assertion. And, what though they are
contradicted by Hundreds, and by Millions? Truth can never be overpowered by
the numbers of its Enemies* The History of the Popess does not imply the least
contradiction; it is attested by several Men of Honor, who were constrained by
the Evidence of Truth to speak against the Interest of their own Party; our
Adversaries themselves cannot pretend that it was foisted into the Writings of
these Authors by the Enemies of Popery; and it was received without
contradiction during the space of Five hundred years, by the confession of
those very persons who call it a Fable. It Is plain then, that all the Negative
Authorities in the World are not capable of invalidating the Credit of so many
Authentic Witnesses, and of a Relation so solidly and generally attested.

I have already given you an account of my Thoughts, in answer to that part of
your Letter where you mention some of our Doctors, who deny the Story of Pope
Joan; but since I perceive you insist on this Argument, I must tell you
plainly, that it is a very unwarrantable piece of Partiality, not to give it a
worse name, blindly to embrace the Opinions of any Man not divinely inspired,
whatever figure he may make in the World. A Man of Sense will never suffer his
Judgment to be biased either by the Voice of the Public, or by the Numbers or
pretended Authority of Writers that are dignified by great Titles. Three
quarters of the Christian World are mere Slaves to those ancient Writers whom
they call The Fathers; though, it is certain, the good Instructions they have left
us are mixed with a great number of dangerous, false, insipid, and ridiculous
Opinions.

I thought to have ended our Controversy here, but I believe it will not be
improper to remove another Difficulty before I leave this Subject. I must
confess, I was somewhat surpised to find that, instead of Mr. Chevreau, you
had conjured up against me so terrible an Adversary as the famous David Blondel.
Blondel, who is the Pillar and Bulwark of Antipopessism, and whose bare Name
has gained abundance of Proselytes to his Opinions. He was a man of Learning
and Wit; besides, he was a Protestant, and consequently was believed to have no
other Interest than that of Truth in the Success of the Quarrel which he had
espoused. It Is certain, his Authority has been always a Stone of Stumbling to
those who are wont to make Prejudice their Rule of Faith. The Name of the
Author is the strongest Argument in his Book, and it is that alone which has
given the greatest Blow to his Enemies.

I have read this Piece over and over with attention, and can assure you it is
written after a manner very proper to blind the Eyes and confound the Judgments
of the generality of Readers. But those who will not suffer themselves to be
imposed upon, and still look for something that is solid and material, will not
find any thing in the whole Book worthy of that Character.

I could fill a Volume with Observations and Criticisms on this Work, for I
have made some Reflections on every Page, and perhaps every Period in it. This
is not a proper place for 'em; but I may find an opportunity hereafter to
communicate 'em to you; in the mean time I shall content my self with giving
you a general Idea of it, accompanied with a few particular Remarks, according
to the method by which I have anatomized it.

Mr. Blondel begins with a Declaration that gives a wound to his Cause, which
all his Artifices can never palliate. The Force of Truth and of authentic
Testimonies, which he received from He means Salmasius.
those to whom he neither would nor durst refuse to give credit, extorted this
ingenuous Confession from him, That the History of the Female Pope is contained
in the Augsburg Copies of Anastasius; which I mentioned before. You see what
Advantage he has given to his Enemies; and, what Stratagem d' ye think he uses
to recover his Ground? Could you imagine that a man of his parts would have
recourse to the poorest Evasion that ever baffled Author was guilty of? or,
that he would start an imaginary Difficulty, that he might afterward the more
easily grapple with this Windmill in his own Brain? He is sensible there is
nothing but dry Blows to be got by meddling with these original Manuscripts,
and that they would be too hard for all his Rhetoric, and therefore he even
very fairly leaves 'em as he found 'em, without ever mentioning 'em afterward,
and finds out another Anastasius at Paris, written about Two hundred years ago,
which contains also the same History, but accompanied with some circumstances
which, he assures us, imply several Contradictions. And, It seems, adds he,
that the Parisian Anastasius should give light to those of Augsburg. At first
he dares not advance such a Paradox, but with an it seems, and without
considering whether that which seems to him does also seem so to others; he
builds his Discourse on this uncertain Foundation, and at the same time, though
tacitly, establishes his Supposition for a certain Truth. Thus, with his
Anastasius of Two hundred years, he has found the Secret to confute all the
other Copies of that Author, without citing one of 'em.

But, what is still worse, his Anastasius is a private Piece, which he shows
only by Shreds, and dares not produce. If I were not restrained by fear of
injuring Mr. Blondel's Sincerity, I should be strongly tempted to suspect that
his Manuscript was never seen by any Man but himself: and at least I think I
may be allowed to suppose that he durst not quote the whole passage, lest it
might furnish his Adversaries with Weapons against himself.

In the first place then, we must believe Mr. Blondel upon his own single
Testimony, that there was really such an Anastasius, and such a Passage in it,
as he cites; but his Manuscript might have been supposititious, or at least a
modern and even, by his own confession, an uncertain Copy, since he tells us it
had been often taken for a Platina. It Is strange, that any man that can read
should not be able to distinguish Anastasius from Platina.

Secondly, After we have blindly believed all that this Author is pleased to
tell us concerning his pretended Anastasius, we must extend our Complaisance
further, and, upon the credit of his bare it seems, either believe or suppose
his tacit Inference, that this Manuscript not only may serve to illustrate the
Anastasius's of Augsburg, as he pretends at first, but is a true Copy of these,
and even of the most ancient and exact Anastasius's; for, if this supposition
be false, all his Arguments must fall to the Ground.

I may venture to affirm, that this Consideration alone is sufficient to
discredit Mr. Blondel's famous Book, the main design of which should have been
to destroy and confute, by clear and solid Reasons, the positive Testimony of
such a learned and uninteress'd Eyewitness as Anastasius.

Before I proceed to communicate to you some other Remarks on Mr. Blondel's
Treatise, I must desire you not to expect to find 'em all accompanied with
Demonstrations; I may perhaps, for brevity's sake, omit the Proofs of some of
my Assertions, but I shall be ready to supply that Defect when you please.

In the general it is certain, that this Book may be entirely and unanswerably
confuted out of it self; and that far from destroying the History of the
Popess, the Truth of that Event may be solidly demonstrated by Reasons drawn
from this very Treatise. These are two Positions which I dare confidently
assert, and undertake to maintain.

Among all the Contradictions with which this Discourse is stuffed, I shall
only desire you to observe, that two thirds of it are spent in litigious
Chronological Cavils, and vain Rhodomontadoes against the Authors of our
History. After which he forgets himself so far, Above all, the Chronology of
the Bishops or Popes of Rome is a dreadful Labyrinth.
as to make a long Harangue to demonstrate the uncertainty of Chronology, and
the weakness of those Arguments that are drawn from it, either to confirm or
invalidate the Truth of a Relation. When he finds that Chronology may be
accommodated to his Hypothesis, he flies at it greedily, and triumphs as in the
Testimony of an Oracle; but every thing that looks a skew upon his Calculation,
is a Trifle or Mistake.

There is a certain Air of Ostentation spread over all his Book, which makes
him on all occasions leave the subject of his Discourse, that he may at any
rate make a vain Show of his Reading. And even, not unfrequently, this itching
Desire to show his Learning makes him utter things extremely disadvantageous to
the Interest of his Opinion; but he must display all that he knows, whatsoever
it may cost him.

He heaps up a multitude of needless and impertinent Quotations, not only to
satisfy his Vanity, but also to confound his Readers, and to stun 'em with a
multitude of noisie Authorities? It Is plain, that he endeavors to weary
People, and to bar the access to his Book with heaps of useless Digressions and
empty Cavils, which serve only to increase the Obscurity and Intricacy of the
controverted Question. He very seldom pursues his Design closely, and
oftentimes picks up some trivial Story which Chance throws in his way, and
makes as great a noise with it, as if it were tne main Point for which he
contends. He triumphs out of season, and confutes petty Circumstances with a
great deal of Solemnity, to amuse his Readers. He exaggerates Difficulties, and
when he meets with one that pleases him, splits it perhaps into half a score.
He fills his Refutations with scurrilous and injurious Reflections. He commonly
gives the Lie to his Adversaries, and upbraids 'em with Impostures and
Blunders, that he may insensibly accustom those that will suffer themselves to
be influenced by so bad an Example, to rail perpetually against the Asserters
of the opposite Opinion. His Jests are also too spiteful and biting, and he
lays about him on all hands without Mercy. This Peevishness and ill Humor is
an evident sign that he was non-pluss'd; and sometimes he visibly bewrays a
great deal of Fear and Hesitancy in the management of his Attacks: Neither is
he very sollicitous to be understood, if he can but hoodwink his Readers, and
draw 'em after him into the Labyrinth in which he has engaged himself.

It Is certainly very pleasant to observe how these doughty Critics, after they
have exhausted their Wit in Reflections on the History of our Popess, are
puzzled to divine the original occasion of that pretended Fable. Some, with
Baronius, run as far as Constantinople, to find out an Imaginary Patriarchess
of that See, without considering that by so doing they confirm the probability
of Pope Joan's Adventure. Others, as Onuphrius and Mr. Chevreau, transform an
Ann to a Joan, as I intimated before, and by a second Metamorphosis turn this
Joan into a Maud, or an Olympia, who governed Pope John the Twelfth; and at
last they squeeze a sort of a Popess out of this Concubine, whom, after all,
they are forced to bury a hundred years before she was born, that they may
bring her again upon the Stage in time and place convenient. Allatius has also
forged a certain Thiota, a pretended Prophetess of Mentz, whom he transfigures
as dexterously as he can into a Female Pontife. Mr. Blondel relates several
other Conjectures, and confutes 'em all; he is wonderfully modest on this
occasion, and acknowledges that this is a Mystery which he is not able to
unriddle. But this is not the only place where he displays his Candor; for he
imploys fourteen or fifteen Pages of his Pamphlet in a Panegyric on Truth and
Justice; and while the Fit of Generosity is upon him, he cannot suffer those
unjust Calumniators of the Papal See to escape unpunished; which, he assures
us, was the only Motive that obliged him to draw his Pen. Let us only make two
short Reflections on this Pretense, and then, if you please, we will proceed to
some other subject.

Whether there ever was a Woman-Pope, or not, it is certain things are otherwise
in such a posture, that this Circumstance singly considered can neither be
advantageous nor prejudicial to the Interest of the Church of Rome. I never
could endure to insult over 'em upon this account, as some among us are wont to
do, for I Am persuaded that it is impossible to draw any Inferences from this
Adventure more to the disadvantage of that Party, than those that may easily be
deduced from the Stories of several Popes who were far worse than our Popess.
If, excepting only this Creature, all the rest of the Popes had been Men of
Probity, good Christians, and vigilant and faithful Pastors; had their Lives
and Morals been unblemished, and their Doctrine pure and uncorrupted, I should
not be surpised that those of that Profession could not bear so scandalous a
Reproach. But since the most bigoted Authors of the Roman Communion
acknowledge that there has been a prodigious number of abominable Popes, why
should our She-Pontife be esteemed a more hideous Monster than the rest, merely
because she was of another Sex? The Church of Rome then ought not to make such
a terrible pother about an affair of so little consequence: and certainly Mr.
Blondel had much less reason to take Pepper in the Nose on the same occasion:
his Zeal is at best but impertinent, and his Charity unprofitable. Such an
insignificant Remedy as that which he administers can never purify the whole
Mass of the Papal Blood, which, by the unanimous confession of Historians of
all Religions, is extremely foul and corrupted. And it must be acknowledged,
that Mr. Blondel's Harangue on those Principles of Generosity that prompted him
to undertake this Work, is too tedious and full of Affectation, to persuade a
judicious and unbiased Reader of the Author's Sincerity.

But I must at last conclude this Subject, by telling you all I think, and even
all that I know of my Adversary. And, to speak freely on this occasion, I may
venture to assure you, he was acted by Interest as well as by Ostentation. A
Man of Honor who lived at Paris, and knew that Writer particularly, informed
me, that he learned from the first hand that he was hired to write a Treatise
against the Story of Pope Joan. My Author is in all respects worthy of Credit;
nor is Mr. Blondel the only Man in the World who has been persuaded by Silver
Arguments to act such a part.

It Is not without Reluctance I mention any thing that may be made use of to
blacken the Character of a Man, who, to take him in the general, was certainly
a Person of Merit; and you must give me leave to say in his justification, that
perhaps he really believed the Story to be doubtful: Besides that, all things
considered, he did a Favor to the Church of Rome, by writing against the
Popess, without doing the least Injury to Ours. Our Religious Differences do
not at all depend on the Truth or Falsehood of that Story; and therefore Mr.
Blondel might look upon it as a matter of Indifference.

I can say little or nothing in answer to your Questions concerning the Greeks
and Armenians that are in this City. They have each of 'em their particular
Ceremonies, and officiate according to their peculiar Rites; but they are
forced to subscribe to the Pope's Supremacy, before they can obtain leave to
settle at Rome. Antiquaries believe, that the little Armenian Church was
heretofore one of the Temples of the Sun and Jupiter.

The Jews at Rome enjoyed some measure of Liberty, and lived somewhat easily
before the Pontificate of Paul the Fourth; but that Pope was a terrible Enemy
to 'em: For whereas before they were permitted to live in any part of the City,
he confined 'em to one corner of it, whither he ordered 'em to retire at the
close of the Evening. He forced 'em to sell their Possessions, and suffered 'em
only to trade in old Clothes. He commanded 'em, for a mark of distinction, to
wear yellow Hats, and issued out an express prohibition, That no Christians
should either eat or converse with 'em. I am informed, that by a Decree of
Gregory XIII, they were obliged, or at least a certain number of 'em, to hear a
Christian Sermon every Saturday in the Afternoon, but I have not yet had an
opportunity to see that Assembly. The Italian Jews, and particularly those of
Rome, as some of themselves assured me, do scrupulously observe the Law that
enjoins 'em to marry at Twenty years of age at farthest, under the pain of
Ignominy, and being treated as persons living in Sin. The number of the Jews at
Rome may at present amount to between Six and Seven thousand.

When any Jew, or other Infidel, is willing to embrace the Christian Religion,
the Solemnity of his Baptism is put off to Saturday in the Holy Week, unless
some urgent Consideration require greater haste. This Ceremony is performed in
the Church of S. John de Lateran, where, they believe, Constantine the Great
was baptized. We saw six Turks baptized in this Church; they wore a Cloak of
white Damask, and a Lawnband, with a Silver Cross hanging at their Neck. The
Cardinal that was to officiate being come with the Canons of that Church, the
Ceremony was begun with blessing the Water; after which the Proselytes,
presented by their Godfathers, advanced, every one in his turn, and declared
their desire to be baptized; then they leaned over the Font, and the Cardinal
baptized 'em, and gave 'em their Names, by pouring Water on their Heads out of
a large Silver Spoon; afterward taking Wax Tapers in their Hands, they were
confirmed in the Chapel of the Baptistery, and from thence went to hear Mass in
the same Church.

We were present also, the Thursday before, at the Ceremony of washing the Feet
of Thirteen Pilgrims, in one of the Chapels of the Vatican; they were likewise
clothed in white, and besides had a kind of Hood, with a square Cap. Being set
all in a row upon a Bench, they pulled off their Shoes and Stockings, and a
Priest came to see whether they were ready; afterward a great Basin was
brought in, and Ewers of Vermilion, one for every Pilgrim: Then the Cardinal
that officiated in the Pope's absence washed their Feet in the Basin, rubbing
'em with his own Hands, and then wiped and kissed 'em. After which every
Pilgrim received two Gold Medals, and all in a body went to one of the Chambers
in the Palace, where a magnificent Entertainment was prepared for 'em: all the
Thirteen Pilgrims were placed on one side of a Table, and the Cardinals sat at
another in the same Room.

I will not trouble you with a particular Account of the rest of the Ceremonies
that we saw during the Holy Week, since they have been exactly described by
others.

The Innocent XI.
Pope is really old and infirm; but, it is plain, that he makes his want of
Health serve for a Pretext to excuse his absence at all those numerous
Ceremonies. I am very credibly informed, that he did by no means approve of the
French Dragooning; and I learned from a good hand, that he could not be brought
to take notice of those Steps that were lately made by that Crown toward a
Reconciliation. The Minister that was entrusted with the management of that
Affair could never obtain a positive Answer to his Proposals, nor so much as a
free Audience.

The extreme Privacy of that Retirement in which this Pontife spends his days,
not only hides him from the Eyes of Strangers, but they are even hardly able to
perceive that he is in Town; for they never meet with any Lacqueys, Coaches, or
Retinue that belong to him: when he goes abroad, which he does very rarely, he
is carried in a Litter. These Litters are very large, lined with crimson Velvet
without and within, with Gold Galoons and Fringes; and the Harness of the Mules
are adorned after the same manner. The Pope is always alone in his Litter, in
the forepart of which there is a little Table instead of a Seat. All Popes
have the same Livery, which is scarlet, with a double Velvet-Galoon of the same
color. Almost all the Apartments of the Vatican and Monte-Cavallo are likewise
hung with red Damask, adorned with Bands of Gold-Galoon, and above with
Gold-Fringes.

The situation of the Gardens of Monte-Cavallo is very pleasant, but the
contrivance of 'em is irregular, and they appeared to us to be very much
neglected.

The two Marble Horses that stand before the Palace were by Sixtus the Fifth's
Order brought from Constantine's Baths. It is, and has always been, the general
Opinion, That one of 'em is the Work of Phidias, and the other of Praxiteles,
the Names of those two famous Sculptors being engraven upon 'em. It Is also
said, Opus Phidiae, Opus Praxitelis.
and many Authors have written, That these Horses are the Statues of
Alexander's Bucephalus, which these Artists made in Emulation of one-another,
but there must certainly be some Mistake in this Tradition. Phidias flourished
a whole Age before Praxiteles, and Alexander the Great lived Fifty years after
Praxiteles. It Is plain then, either that these Statues are not the Work of the
abovementioned Sculptors, or that they were not made for Bucephalus.

The two other Horses of Marble, that are to be seen in the Court of the
Capitol, were taken from Pompey's Theater; and the Statue on Horseback of Brass
which stands in the same place, was erected there by Paul III. it is thought to
be the Statue of Marcus Aurelius.

The Capitol is a modern Structure, raised upon the Ruins, and even on part of
the The old Foundations appear.
Foundations of the ancient Edifice: it would require a whole Volume to
describe all the remarkable Antiquities in this place; I shall only name some
of the principal. The She-Wolf of Brass, giving suck to the Illustrious Twins,
on which may be seen the mark of the Thunderbolt mentioned by Orat. 3. contra
Cat.
Cicero; the four great Bassorelievo's, which represent several Passages of the
History of Marcus Aurelius; the Columna rostrata of the General, or Admiral and
Consul Duillius, the first that was honored with a Naval Triumph in Rome; the
Courier pulling a Thorn out of his Foot after he had delivered his acceptable
Message to the Senate, who chose rather to endure that pain during his Journey,
than to retard the public Joy; the Bust of Cicero, with his Vetches; the One
for Oil, two for Wine, and the fourth for Grain.
four ancient Measures; the Bust of Virgil; Nero's Nurse holding that little
Monster by the Hand; the Goddess of Silence; the God Pan; the three Furies; a
Statue of Caesar with his Cuirass; another of Augustus; those of Castor and
Pollux; the Fragments of the Colosses of Apollo, Domitian, and Commodus; the
Lion devouring a Horse; and the Trophies which some think are Trajan's, though
others ascribe 'em to Marius.

The Pictures in Fresco in the great Hall are by the Hand of Cavalier Joseph; I
am of opinion that they represent the first Battle between the Romans and
Sabins.

I know not well what account to give you of the Pillar called the Milliarium,
for I Am persuaded that it would not be an easy Task to explain the true
meaning of it; It is of white Marble, Primus, Secundus, Tertius ab Urbe Lapis.
eight foot and a half high; the Cipher I is marked on the top of it, and on
the Chapter a Brass Globe about two foot in diameter: The common Opinion is,
That this Column is in the Center of Rome, and that from hence they began to
compute the distances from that City, which were divided into Miles by other
Pillars that were erected on all the great Roads in Italy; but there are two or
three Difficulties that destroy the probability of this supposition. The Column
in the Forum Romanum mentioned by Suetonius, Tacitus, and some other ancient
Authors, was, according to their Representation of it, of Brass, or Brass gilt,
and the Names of the great Roads were engraved upon it, with the computed
distances of the principal Cities; but no such thing appears on the Milliarium
in the Capitol. You will perhaps tell me, that the brazen Column might be lost,
and the Milliarium set up in its place; but you do not consider that this last
was found adjoining to the Appian Road, as it appears by the Columnam
Milliariam primi ab urbe Lapidis Indicem, ab Imperatore Vespasiano and Nerva
restitutam, de Ruinis suburbanis Viae Appiae in Capitolium transtulit.
modern Inscription engraved on one of the Faces of its Pedestal: nor is it at
all probable that this Pillar was transported from the middle of the City to a
mile's distance from the Walls. Besides, how is it possible to explain the
meaning of these Expressions Primus, or Secundus ab Vrbe Lapis, if these Stones
or Columns were not without the City, since the word ab urbe does evidently
imply that they were not in it? If I had never heard or read of the gilt
Milliarium in the heart of the City, where some Authors pretend that all the
Consulary Roads met, I should have certainly concluded from the words Ab Vrbe,
from the City, that Primus Lapis, the first Column, or Milliarium, such as that
in the Capitol, had been erected at the distance of one Mile from the Walls of
Rome. Since this Milliarium was found in one of the Suburbs of the City, and
near to one of the Highways, I should have believed that its proper place was
there, and that the number of those First Columns equaled that of the great
Roads. Whether we suppose that the gilt Milliarium was the only first Pillar,
and that the second Columns were placed at the distance of one mile from it,
which nevertheless seems to imply a contradiction; or that the gilt Column in
the center of the City was only a Mark from which all the Distances were
computed, and that the nearest Columns were called first Milliariums, and
distinguished by an Inscription like that in the Capitol: it is obvious from
either of these Suppositions, that, considering the Greatness of Rome, none of
all these first or second Columns could be within the City, and consequently
that this Expression Primo ab Vrbe Lapide was very improper, and even false;
for the primus Lapis must have been in Vrbe, and not ab Vrbe.

I am confirmed in this Opinion by another Circumstance. There is an ancient
Inscription in the Palace called Palaestrinum, which contains the Statues of a
College of Aesculapius, and of Health, to which one Salvia Marcellina
bequeathed a Temple, a Place or Court, and a Walk, the whole being situated on
the Appian Way, near the Temple of Mars, Intra Miliarium primum and secundum ab
Vrbe euntibus; that is, Between the first and second mile as you go from the
City.

It Is the common Opinion of Antiquaries, that there was a Temple of Mars
without the City, and on the Via Appia; and all these Considerations put
together, do almost fully convince me, that Since the first Edition of this
Book, I find that Holstenius is of the same Opinion.
the gilt Milliarium was erected only to mark the place where all the great
Roads begun, and to compute the Distances of the chief Cities; but that all the
First Columns were each One Mile distant from the Walls of Rome.

The Information I received from those whom I consulted on this occasion, was
not very material to confirm either of the opposite Opinions; however, I will
think of some other way to clear my Doubts, and in the mean time you will
oblige me, by sending me an account of your Thoughts on this subject.

To complete the Description of the Milliarium in the Capitol, I shall subjoin
two Inscriptions that are engraved on the Body of the Pillar.

IMP. CAESAR VESPASIANUS PONTIF. MAXIM. TRIB. POTESTAT. XVII. IMP. XVII. P. P.
CENSOR COS. VII. DESIGN. VIII.

IMP. NERVA CAESAR AUGUSTUS PONTIFEX MAXIMUS TRIBUNITIA POTESTATE COS. III.
PATER PATRIAE REFECIT.

Adjoining to the Right Wing of the Capitol, there is a Church called Ara
Coeli; it is said, that Augustus having consulted the Oracle at Delphos, to know
who should succeed him in the Empire, could not for a long time obtain an
Answer to his redoubled Solicitations; and, that at last the Oracle desired
the Emperor to retire, declaring, that it was not able to satisfy him, because
its Mouth was stopped by the Hebrew Child, who was the Son of God, and true God
himself. The Story adds, that Augustus finding this Declaration to agree with
the Sibyllin Prophesies, immediately ordered an Altar to be built in the
Capitol, to the honor of the Hebrew Child mentioned by the Oracle, calling it
Ara Primogeniti Dei, The Altar of the Firstborn of God. The Church called Ara
Coeli is built in the same place, so that Augustus's Altar remains still near
the Quire.

The Prison to which, they believe, St. Peter and St. Paul were sent, after
they had received the Sentence of Death, is very near this place: It is at
present a Chapel, by the name of S. Pietro in carcere. It Is the general Opinion
of Antiquaries, that this is the Tullianum which was finished by Servius
Tullius, or Tullus Hostilius, where only condemned Malefactors were imprisoned.
Here they show a little They pretend that the Water of this Spring has a milky
taste.
Spring, which, they say, gushed out of the Rock at the Prayer of St. Peter,
that he might baptize certain Proselytes. They made us also take notice of the
Impression of that Apostle's Face on the Wall, which they told was made by the
yielding of the Stone, when he was thrust against it by a Blow which he
received from a Soldier.

There is a prodigious multitude of ancient Ruins scattered about behind the
Capitol, but I dare not engage in these Labyrinths; I shall only touch upon
some short Remarks by the by.

So called from Tarpeia a Roman Damsel slain in this place by the Sabines.
The famous Rupes Tarpeia, that Precipice formerly so dreadful, is at present an
inconsiderable Rock about twenty foot high.

The Triumphal Arcb erected for Titus, after he had taken Jerusalem, is
remarkable, among other things, for the Basso relievo's which represent the
Candlestick, Table, Trumpets of the Great Jubilee, and some Vessels that were
taken out of the Temple.

Constantin's Arch is almost entire, only some of its Statues have lost their
Heads, which they say Lawrence de Medicis stole, and carried to Florence. It
has been observed by curious Inspecters, that the Basso relievo's on this
Monument are not equally beautiful, which makes 'em suspect that the best
Pieces were taken away when it was erected.

The Lake of Curtius was in the middle of the Forum Romanum. Ovid tells us,
that even in his time there were no marks of it to be seen.

Curtius ille Lacus siccas qui sustinet aras,
Nunc solida est Tellus: sed fuit ante Lacus.
Fast. 6. The prodigious Amphitheater Because of a Colossus that was near it.
Hic ubi conspicui venerabilis Amphitheatri
Erigitur Moles, Stagna Neronis erant.
Mart.
called Colliseum is round on the outside, though the Arena or Place of Combat is
oval. It contained Without reckoning the Excuneati, who stood in the Passages,
to the number of Twenty thousand.
Eighty and Five thousand Spectators, four times more than the Amphitheater at
Verona. I observed, that the Pillars of the Third Order, and the Pilasters of
the Fourth have Corinthian Chapiters.

You must excuse me for not satisfying your Curiosity by answering the
Questions you propose concerning the Senate of Women established by
Heliogabulus. The little Building at Monte-Cavallo, by some thought to have
been a Temple of the Sun, and by others a Temple of Health, is suspected to
have been the meeting place of that Sage Assembly; but this Conceit is grounded
only on some uncertain Conjectures.

The Columns of Trajan and Antonin are so famous and magnificent, that I cannot
forbear mentioning 'em, though doubtless they have been sufficiently described by
others. Both these admirable Monuments are adorned with Basso relievos,
ascending in a spiral line from the Base to the Chapter, which represent the
Wars and memorable Actions of those Princes.

It consists of 24 Stones, each of which contains eight Steps. Boiss.
The first was erected by the Senate to the honor of Trajan, and also served
him for a Mausoleum, his Ashes having been placed in a golden Urn on the top of
it. This Urn was succeeded by a Statue of St. Peter, of Brass gilt, which
Sixtus the Fifth caused to be put in its place. The height of the Body of the
Pillar amounts to 128 Roman, or almost 124 English Feet, and is ascended by One
hundred and Twenty three Steps.

This Column consists of Eight and twenty Stones. Idem.
The second was also built by the Senate to the honor of Antoninus Pius. The
Statue of that Emperor was placed on the top of it, where that of St. Paul
stands at present, which is of Brass, and gilt like St. Peter's. The Stairs
consist of Two hundred and six Steps, and the Trunk of the Pillar is One
hundred and sixty Roman Foot high, which are equivalent to One hundred and
Fifty five Feet of your measure.

I have several times enjoyed the learned and delightful Converse of the Abbot
F. We visited together some of the Caves called Catacombs, and several Ruins of
the old Edifices, besides other Antiquities. I shall take this occasion to
acquaint you, that we entered one day into the Capo di Bovi.
Mausoleum of Cecilia Daughter of Metellus, sirnam'd Creticus. At the entrance
of this Monument he showed us a hole, into which, some weeks ago, a D.
Malatesta Strinati, of Cesena.
Gentleman dropped, unperceived by those who accompanied him. His Friends were
seized with astonishment when they missed him, and could not imagine what was
become of him. The Pit was deep, and either he was so stunned by his Fall, that
he could not cry out, or if he did call none of 'em heard him, and at last they
returned without him. About sixty hours after, the poor Gentleman having
fortunately scratched open a passage, clamber'd out of the Pit, and, though not
without difficulty, got to the next House, his Legs being scarce able to
sustain his pale, weak, starved, and spent Body, The People of the House where
he entered, moved with Compassion, prepared some comfortable Broths for him,
and assisted him so effectually, that he quickly recovered his Strength.

Never were there so many subterraneous places seen, as there are in and about
Rome; the Earth is fallen down in some parts, and has stopped the Entries of many
of those famous Caves so universally known by the name of Catacombs, but there
is still a prodigious number of 'em remaining. You must not fancy those Vaults,
I mean every Catacomb, if I may be allowed to use that Expression, to be one
single Room; for the Catacombs of St. Agnes, for example, or those of St.
Sebastian are Labyrinths of subterraneous Lanes, which turn, wind, and cross
one another like the Streets of a City, Such of these Caverns as seem never to
have been made use of for Sepulchers, as those of the Gate Pinciana, and those
others near St. John and St. Paul's, are only named Grottoes, and the rest are
called Catacombs, which is a modern Name without any signification, for all the
various Etymologies that are given of it are mere uncertain Conjectures.

The Roman Catacombs spread themselves under all the Suburbs, but at Naples
they are found only under one part of the City. These Caves are dug out of the
Rocks, and extend very far on every side; each Vault is commonly about fifteen
or eighteen foot wide, and the height of the Arch amounts to twelve or fifteen
feet: on each side there are hollow Niches in the Walls, framed like Chests of
all sizes, placed in rows above one another, without any regular Symmetry,
where the Bodies were laid without Coffins, and covered with flat Stones or
large Tyles, cemented with Chalk and Sand, as it appears distinctly in some
places to this very day. Besides the Niches in the Catacombs of Naples, there
are some Tombs of a reasonable bigness, adorned with diverse Pictures, among
which there are many Figures of Heads and half-Bodies, with the Names of the
Persons, Paulus, Nicolaus, Proculus, etc. and sometimes a hic jacet, or hic
requiescit, is added to the Names.

On one of these Tombs I took notice of a yellow and blew Cross, after this
fashion, and accompanied with these Characters: (...). Jesus Christus vincit,
Jesus Christ overcame.
The Greeks formerly wrote their S almost like our Latin C, as you may observe
particularly in the Inscriptions of the Three First Ages; but though Custom has
again introduced the ancient S, yet they still retain the other in the
contractions of these words, ISOYS and PISTOS, as you may see on the top of
this Cross, and as I have often observed in modern Inscriptions.

Of all the Catacombs we viewed at Rome, those of St. Sebastian are the
grearest; the Arches are commonly as high as those of Naples, but the Vaults
are but about two foot and a half broad. In several places we saw a great
number of covered Niches in the higher rows. A Priest, whom we happened one day
to meet there, had the Curiosity to open one of 'em, in which we found a
Skeleton almost moulder'd away into whitish Ashes, yet we might perceive that
the Body had been laid on its Back. The reason why these Catacombs were not
made wider, is because the Ground is sandy, and could not be underpropp'd,
whereas those of Naples are hewn out of the solid Rock.

They pretend here, that these Vaults were dug by the Christians; that during
the First Ages of Christianity, Divine Service was performed in 'em; that these
burying-places were peculiar to the Christians, and never used by the Heathens;
that a great number of Saints and Martyrs were interred in 'em; and
consequently, which is the Cream of the Story, that they are inexhaustible
Storehouses of Relics.

Though these Suppositions were true, they could not justify the Practice of
those who pick up every Bone they meet with in a Catacomb, and merely because
they found it there, conclude that it ought to be ranked among those things
called Relics. But this Consideration would lead me into a Controversy which
I am not willing to examine at this time; neither will I undertake to write a
long Dissertation concerning the first part of the abovementioned Hypothesis,
which would require more time and Books than I am Master of at present; only in
obedienee to your desire, I shall make a few short Remarks on these
Propositions.

Since we are not obliged to give credit to the single Testimony of any man in
his own Cause, It Is a general Rule that admits of no Exceptions, that every Man
that expects to be believed must prove what he affirms. It Is plain then, that
they who maintain so positively, That the Catacombs were made by Christians for
their own peculiar use, ought to demonstrate the Truth of their Assertion. This
they have not done, and therefore I might justly reject their Opinion without
being at the charge of an Argument to confute it. Yet, by way of
supererogation, and out of complaisance to you, I shall subjoin some
Considerations which will very much weaken, if not entirely destroy, their
Hypothesis.

(1.) The first thing that comes into my mind on this occasion, is a Passage
which I observed not long ago in Horace, where that Author speaking of the
Puteculi, or public Burying-places, where the poorer sort of People in Rome
were usually interred, makes a description of 'em which agrees exactly with the
account I have given you of the Catacombs.

Huc prius angustis ejecta Cadavera Cellis
Conservus vili portanda locabat in arca:
Hoc miserae plebi stabat commune Sepulchrum.
Thomas Goodwin an English Author has represented 'em after the same manner in
his Anthology of the Roman History; see the Chapter that treats Of Funeral
Ceremonies.

(2.) I am not ignorant that the Christians were wont to imitate the Heathens
on many occasions, but the words Fata, diis Manibus, Domus aeternae, and
several other such like Expressions, that are often found in the Epitaphs on
these Tombs, were so peculiar to the Heathens, that it is not conceivable they
were ever used by Christians. I might, if it were necessary, confirm my Opinion
by the Authority of no less famous an Antiquary than Mr. Spon; for you may
observe in the Collection of ancient Inscriptions with which he has enriched
the account of his Voyage to Greece, that he could not be persuaded to believe
that the Epitaph on a Tomb at Thebes, which they assured him was St. Luke's
Sepulcher, was made by a Christian, merely because of the word MOIPHC, which he
found in it, though it also mentioned the Immortality of the Soul. The same
Author speaks more positively to this purpose, when he refutes the common
Opinion concerning the pretended Tomb of a Saint near Valentia. He says
expressly, that the words Aethera and Superis mentioned in the Inscription are,
in his opinion, sufficient Arguments to prove that it is the Tomb of a Heathen,
and subjoins this Maxim, That the Style of Epitaphs ought to be distinguished
from that of Poesy, by reason of the liberty claimed by Poets of all
Religions; whereas he assures us that he has always discovered evident marks of
the Piety and Simplicity of the Primitive Church in the Inscriptions on ancient
Tombs. What opinion then do you think this learned Antiquary would have had of
the Gods Manes, and Eternal Houses of the Catacombs?

(3.) The Glass Vials and little Metallic Vessels that have been frequently
found in those Sepulchers are also marks of Paganism. The Assertors of the
common Opinion concerning the Catacombs pretend that these Vessels served to
contain the Blood of the Martyrs; but this is a bare Conjecture, without the
least Proof or Illustration. And besides, we have reason to conclude, that
these are true Lachrymatories, such as the Heathens were wont to put both into
their Urns and Tombs. You know that they were not only desirous to be lamented,
which made 'em hire Women to weep at their Funerals, but also took care to
gather these Tears, and to preserve 'em with their Ashes or Bones.

I confess, this Reason alone could not have convinced me, since it is certain,
as I intimated before, that the Christians borrowed several less innocent
Customs from the Heathens. But this Observation may serve to illustrate and
confirm the first.

(4.) There is a Passage in Tertullian's Apologetic that does not at all agree
with the Opinion of those who believe that the ancient Christians were usually
buried in the Catacombs. That Author complains of the Fury of the Heathens who
took the Bodies of the Christians out of their Tombs, and dragged 'em about the
Streets; and it is probable, that if once those Persecutors had discovered these
Caves, they would have for ever deprived the Christians of 'em.

(5.) If I should enquire how the Christians were able to dig and empty these
Caves without alarming their Neighbors, and how they disposed of all the
Rubbish, my Adversaries would doubtless tell me, That this Work was not done in
secret; and, that the Peuzzolane or Sand of the Catacombs was sold by the poor
Christians, who, for this reason, were nicknam'd Arenarii; that in the mean
time they performed the Duties of Religious Worship in these holes, under
pretext of burying their Dead. But this Answer is by no means applicable to the
Catacombs of Naples, that are hewn out of a Rock.

And as for the Nickname of Arenarii, it may be observed, that this Derision
of the Misery and Poverty of the Christians does not prove that they were the
only Persons in Rome who were reduced to trade in Sand, which is the thing that
ought to have been demonstrated, to remove the Difficulty which may arise from
our supposing that other persons besides the Christians were employed in
digging these Holes. Though the Jews of Frankfort, for example, are obliged to
run to any part of the City where a Fire happens to break forth, and to carry
Water to quench it; it does not follow, that the Christian Inhabitants of that
City remain idle Spectators of their Labors.

(6.) The Ciphers of the Name of Christ, Palm branches, Doves of Peace,
Crosses, Crowns, and other marks of Christianity, that are found on the Stones
which cover these Sepulchers, instead of proving what our Adversaries pretend,
That these Burying places were peculiar to the Christians, seem rather to
evince, that they made use of such Symbols for Marks of distinction, to prevent
their being confounded with the Infidels.

It Is the common Opinion here, That these Ciphers represented in the Margin are
composed of a Latin P, for Pro or For, and a Cross, which signifies Christ; so
that these Characters are called Pro Christo's. They conclude from hence, that
such Figures are the sure Marks of the Tomb of a Martyr, or of one that
suffered Pro Christo, for the Name of Christ, and accordingly raise the price
of the Relics. But it is plain, that these Ciphers consist of a X, Chi, and a
P. Rho, which are the two first Letters of PISTOS; as A and THY signify APIA
THYGATP, as I observed in the Mosaic Work on the Front of St. Mary major, and
in several other places.

The Christian Epitaphs that are found here serve as little to confirm the
adverse Opinion as the above mentioned Symbols; for the Question is not,
whether the Bodies of some Christians were buried in the Catacombs, which is a
certain and undoubted Truth. Not only Eusebius and Miltiades Bishops of Rome
under the Empire of Constantine, but Cains and Marcellus their Predecessors,
who suffered Martyrdom with some other Christians, by the express Order of
Dioclesian, were all interred in these Vaults, if we may believe Platina.
Besides, it appears by the dates of a great number of Epitaphs, that several
Christians were buried here during the First Ages: And I have sufficient ground
to believe they appropriated these Sepulchers entirely to themselves in the
succeeding times of Peace and Liberty.

Thus we may easily comprehend how those Christian Epitaphs are to be found in
these Cells, but after all the Controversy remains untouched; for the burying
of Christians here, is not a Reason to exclude others from being interred in
those Holes that were set apart for the Dregs of the People.

The Pictures of diverse sorts and ages in the Catacombs at Naples, the
Fashions of the Altars both there and at Rome, and several other Circumstances
from which some pretend to draw Inferences, give no light to the Controversy,
and deserve not to be considered. The reason of which is, because the Popes of
these last Ages having always looked upon their Catacombs as a profitable
Source and Magazine of Relics, have repaired 'em in several places, and made
such alterations as they thought most proper to strengthen the Opinion of the
People, and especially of the Pilgrims, who come from all parts to visit these
Holy Places. Panciroli makes a long description of these Reparations, by the
help of which we may easily resolve the Difficulties that might arise from
several things that are observed in these Catacombs.

I must not forget to tell you, that during the time of the Plague which raged
at Naples, about forty years ago, the Catacombs were the most usual places of
burial; and all the Bodies that are to be seen there at present, are such as
were interred on that occasion.

Near the Church and Catacombs of St. Agnes there is an old round Temple, which
some think was a Temple of Bacchus. This Conceit is grounded only on certain
ancient Representations of Vines and Vintages which are on the Roof, and on the
Figures of Grapes, Vinebranches, little Cupids gathering and pressing the
Grapes, Vessels, Tuns, Panniers, and such other Appurtenances of Bacchus that
are to be seen on a Tomb of Porphyry in the same Temple. But all these
Circumstances are not sufficient to prove, that this Temple was consecrated to
him, or that the abovementioned Tomb is his Sepulcher, especially if we call
to mind that Bacchus died not at Rome.

Since this Temple is but a hundred or sixscore paces distant from St. Agnes
Church, which was undoubtedly built by Constantine, it may with much greater
probability be conjectured, that the former was built at the same time to serve
for a Baptistery to the latter, according to the general Custom of those times;
and there is also another like Building, which was erected by the same Emperor
for a Baptistery to S. John de Lateran. Neither the Ornaments of the Roof, nor
those of the Tomb, are inconsistent with this Opinion, since they are also
Symbols of Christianity.

But I need not insist longer on these Conjectures, since the Controversy was
decided long ago by Pope Alexander the Fourth, who taking it for granted, that
the Bones of Constantia Daughter to Constantin, were enclosed here, Ann. 1255.
took 'em out, and having placed 'em as Relics under the Altar which he built
in this little Temple, dedicated both to St. Constantia.

The Tabernacle of the high Altar of St. Agnes is supported by four pretty
large and extreamly-well polished Pillars of Porphyry. We were informed, that
the little Statue we saw there, was formerly the Statue of a Pagan Deity, but
has since been adopted, and consecrated to be for the future the Statue of St.
Agnes. Its Mantle deserves to be attentively considered.

I might entertain you with an account of many other Antiquities which I
observed in the Cabinets we have visited, and particularly in that of the
Cavalier Pietro Paulo Manini, but my Letters are already so stuffed with such
Descriptions, that I shall content my self with mentioning some of those that I
had time to consider in the Cabinet of Mr. Bellori. The Curiosities it contains
are not extraordinarily numerous, but they are all well chosen, and every thing
in it is absolutely rare and perfect. His Fortuna Panthea is a little Signum of
Brass half a foot high, and extremely well preserved. How odd were the
Imaginations of the Heathens! The Gods governed the World, while they
themselves were subject to the fantastical Humors of Fortune! This little
Goddess is surrounded with, or to speak more properly, composed of all the
Marks and Characters of Divinity that were proper to other Deities; She has the
Beauty of Venus, Juno's Crown, Diana's Crescent, the Miter of Isis, Ceres's
Horn of Abundance, Minerva's Robe, the Wings of Fame or of Victory, Cupid's
Quiver, the Goats-skin of Bacchus, Esculapius's Serpent, Fortune's Rudder, and
several other marks of Gods and Goddesses.

I observed also the Deify'd Faustina, with her blown-up Veil strewn with
Stars; the Magna Matter, or Natura rerum parens, who suckles different Animals
at all her Breasts; the Goddess Fortune, holding in one Hand the Horn of
Abundance, and in the other the Nail of Necessity; the Bust of a young Roman
Nobleman, with his Bulla aurea hanging at his Neck; the Cistrum, an Instrument
which the Egyptians used, before the Romans, to assemble the People to the
Sacrifices. This is a rare Piece, resembling a little Racket, the Wood pierced
with four pieces of Brass like Cords or Rods, which play and make a noise: This
Instrument denoted the four Elements and the Hurry of the World.

The ancient Vessel of brown Earth, but fine, and sounding like Porcelane, is
another of the Rarities in this Cabinet. The Pictures about the Vessel contain
Representations of their Customs in bathing; and among others there is a Woman
holding in one hand a Strigil or Instrument for rubbing off sweat, and in the
other a Vessel called Guttum, which contained odoriferous Waters. Besides,
there are Vrns, Sepulchral Lamps, Lachrymatories, rare Pictures, and a hundred
other things, which I have not time to describe.

Father Kircher's Cabinet in the Roman College was formerly one of the most
curious in Europe, but it has been very much mangled and dismembered: yet there
remains still a considerable collection of natural Rarities, with several
mechanical Engines.

It may be justly said, That the Roman College, which is the great College, and
principal House of the Jesuits at Rome, is one of the finest Palaces in the
City; the Library is good and numerous, but there are no ancient Manuscripts,
nor other considerable Rarities in it.

In a great Hall, which is adorned with the Pictures of the Jesuits that have
suffered Martyrdom, we took notice of the famous Garnet, that bold Servant of
the Society, who was drawn, hanged, and quartered for the Gunpowder Treason.
At his side there is the Figure of an Angel, who encourages him, and shows him
the Heavens opened.

During the three last days of the Holy Week, we met with almost nothing else
in the Streets of Rome but Processions of Penitents of all sorts, and in all
shapes, who were seeking after Paradise by another way than that of Garnet.
They had tapering Hoods which covered their Heads, leaving only two holes
directly opposite to their Eyes: some of these Penitents were clothed in
white, others in Violet color, blew, yellow, and several other colors; some
It Is well known that several of 'em are hired to play these Tricks.
lashed their own naked Backs with Whips of small twisted Cords, which made
more noise than they did execution: these are only the puny Scholars of the
Druids and Brachman's, or, if you will, of the Indian Faquirs; but they come
very far short of the Scotopitae or Circumcelliones of the Fourth Age, who were
wont to burn themselves, to cut their own Throats, or to break their Necks for
the love of God. There are, and always have been, Fools of all Professions;
This puts me in mind of an Accident that I cannot forbear relating to you, and
of which I was an Eyewitness. In June 1683. there was an unhappy Creature
hanged at The second City in Poictou.
Niori, for murdering her own Child; immediately after the Execution was over,
a certain comical Fellow started out of the Crowd. He was about Thirty years
old, and wore the Habit of a Franciscan Hermit; he lodged in holes under
ground, where he lived on Roots and Wild-Fruit, and was the Son of a Called La
Vallee.
poor man in the Town. He went straight up to the top of the Ladder, which was
not yet taken away, and untying the Rope that served him for a Girdle, he put
it about his Neck with a running Knot, and fastened it to the Gibbet: after
which he began very gravely to harangue the Spectators, alleging several
Reasons to excuse the dead Wench, for whose Ransom he said he had offered his
Life. He added, That his Crimes exceeded hers, and that he was resolved to
expiate 'em by a sudden and voluntary Death: in the mean time the People
laughed at him, not imagining that he was Fool enough to hang himself; for he
was generally known, and the Bigots had a good opinion of him. However, he
ventured on the fatal leap, and his Tongue hung out of his Mouth a large minute
before any person came to his assistance; but at last Bourdin a Turner, and
Keeper of a Billiard Table on the Castle-ditch.
one of the Company, more charitable than the red, cut the Cord, and, though not
without some difficulty, saved the extravagant Wretch. I had almost forgot one
material circumstance; his Mother was present, and would not suffer those about
her to baulk her son's Humor; she entreated 'em to let him alone, For, said
she, I Am sure the Rope was blessed, and no harm can come on it.

There was not so numerous a concourse of Pilgrims this year as has been
formerly. I have read in a Description of Trinity Hospital, that in the year
1600, which was the last of the great Jubilee, that House received, according
to the usual Custom, or took care to provide for Four hundred and Forty
thousand and Five hundred Men, besides Five and twenty thousand and Five
hundred Women. The Italian Pilgrims are lodged and entertained here three days,
but those who come from beyond Sea, or from the other side of the Mountains,
are allowed one day longer. Princes, Princesses, Cardinals, and the Pope
himself, wash their Feet, and serve 'em at Table.

I must not forget to tell you, that we never yet met the Sacrament in Rome,
nor in any other Town in Italy, save only at Venice, where we saw it twice,
under a magnificent Canopy not unlike to the Doge's Ombrella, and surrounded
with a great number of Torches. The People of this Country are not at all
possessed with a spirit of Hatred or Persecution against Strangers of what
Religion soever; and I must do 'em the Justice to acknowledge, that in our
Travels through Italy, and even at Rome and Loretto, we were never in the least
molested by those Adorers of Relics and Images; for they are accustomed to see
Strangers enjoy a great deal of Freedom, and the roughest treatment we ever
received from 'em was, to be greeted now and then with a Non sono Christiani.

It Is impossible for a Traveller to leave Rome without reluctance, but he must
not stay there for ever; we are resolved to depart to morrow, early in the
morning, and I have still some little Affairs to dispatch; I must beg leave
therefore to conclude my Letter, and to assure you that I am,

SIR, Your etc,
Rome, May 4. 1688.
LETTER XXVII.
SIR,
WE found little or nothing worth our Observation between Rome and Viterbo,
only there are some Toward the Wood of Baccano.
Pieces of the Via Emilia still remaining, which I measured and found to be of
equal breadth with other Consulary ways. The ancient Lake Cyminus, now called
the Lake de Vico, is at the foot of a Hill of the same name, from the top of
which we discovered the Sea. This Mountain is very high, but the ascent to it
is easy. It is almost all covered with Sycomores and Chesnut-trees, and we
observed a great number of Primroses, Narcissus's, Hyacinths, and other Flowers
now in season growing upon it.

Viterbo is a City of indifferent bigness, almost wholly built of Stone, and
enclosed with a Wall. VITERBO.
Beside the Steeples of the Churches, there are eight or ten square Towers
which are seen at a distance, and make an odd kind of prospect: These were
Forts or Retiring places, built by the richest Inhabitants, adjoining to their
Houses, during the Fury of the Guelph and Gibelin Factions.

Schrader relates, That he saw in this City an ancient Inscription, which
deserves to be inserted here: Marcum Tullium Ciceronem ob egregias ejus
virtutes, singularesque animi dotes, per totum Orbem nostris Armis virtuteque
perdomitum, Salvum and incolumem esse jubemus.
You may find an Account of the Restoration of the ancient Tuscan Name Viterbo,
in the following Inscription, of which I took a Copy at the Townhouse.
Desiderius ultimus Insubrium Rex, Longulam, Vetuloniam, atque Volturnam,
moenibus cingit, and Etruriae priore nomine inducto, Viterbium mulcta capitis
indicta appellari jubet. Sal. An. DCC. LXXIII.

There is another Inscription in the same place, which confirms the Donation
made by the Countess Maud, of her Estate to the Papal See; Aeternae memoriae
inclytae Mathildis, quae ob praestabile Religionis studium ac pietatem sedi
Pontificiae suum hoc Patrimonium Divi Petri in Thuscia dein nuncupatum
elargitur; and in veteran Vrbis ejus splendorem intuens Paschalis II. Bledem
Pontifex Maximus, ejus Metropolim ut ante Viterbium constituit. An. S. 1113. It
would be a hard task to produce such an authentic Testimony for the You may
find a Latin Version of it in Barth. Picerna and Aug. Steuchus, which is said
to be a Translation of the pretended Greek Original at the Vatican. It is also
inserted in Gratian's Decretals; but St. Antonin of Florence proves, that it is
not mentioned in the old Decretals. And besides, N. Everard, L. Valla, R.
Volaterranus, A. Alciat, J. Aventin, F. Vasquius, Cardinal Cusa, and Pope Pius
II. himself, have solidly refuted this Fable. See also the Figmentum Donationis
Constantini, by the Jesuit Jos. Cantelius, in his Treatise of Metropolitan
Cities.
Donation of the first Patrimony by Constantine. I remember I have somewhere
read a pleasant Repartee of a Venetian Hieronymo Donato.
Ambassador concerning this pretended Donation: The Alexander VI.
Pope being one day in a merry humor, asked him, in what part of the Venetian
Annals their Title to the Adriatic Gulf was recorded: If your Holiness, replied
the Ambassador, will give your self the trouble to look upon the Contract of
the Donation made to the Holy See by Constantine the Great, you will find our
Title written on the back of it.

Though Desiderius's Inscription mentions only three Cities that were united
under the Name of Viterbo, I have observed that this City is sometimes called
Tetrapolis, and its Inhabitants Quaterni Populi. And you will find the Names of
all the four Cities in the following Distick, which is on the top of the
Staircase of the Townhouse.

Hanc Fanum, Arbanum, Vetuloni, Longula quondam
Oppida dant Vrbem: prima Elementa F.A.U.L.
Thus they pretend that the ancient Etrurian Viterbium was built by Isis and
Osiris; and to confirm this Opinion, they produce some Greek and Latin
Inscriptions, which mention the Antiquity of their City. But having been
informed at Rome, that these Inscriptions are Suppositious, and that it is
generally believed they were made by John Annius the Dominican, commonly called
Annius Viterbiensis, who made a Trade of such Joannes Annius dum Gloriam
quandam aucupari conatur, cudit novum Metasthenem (pro Megastenem) Berosum,
Manethonem and Philonem, quos commentariis auctos in publicum emisit, and
pretiosis hisce veterum Autorum titulis, toti Mundo fere imposuit. -- Megasteni
historias attribuit, de quibus nunquam cogitavit. Calvis Isag. Chron. c. 28.
Forgeries, I would not lose time in transcribing 'em: and besides, they are
very long, and written in a small and difficult Character.

In one of the Halls of this House there is a Picture that was made to preserve
the memory of a very extraordinary Accident. It represents innumerable swarms
of Grasshoppers; the Sun is darkened, and the Earth covered with thick Clouds of
these Insects, which Ann. 1576.
gnaw and devour every thing about Viterbium. All the People are in the Fields,
endeavoring by several means to deliver themselves from that Egyptian Plague.
And the Cross and Banner are carried in procession, with the Holy Water, to
conjure and curse these destroying Animals.

You may find an account an Orosius, of an Accident of the same nature that
happened in Afric, in the year of the World 3825. He adds, That this Judgment
was succeeded by so terrible a Plague that in Numidia alone there died Eight
hundred thousand Men, and Thirty thousand Roman Soldiers. Surius, Baronius, and
all other Writers of Chronicles, have stuffed their Works with such Relations.
I remember Mezeray relates an Instance of the same kind: In the Year 873, says
he, about the Month of August, a prodigious number of flying Locusts made an
incredible havoc in France. They were an inch in thickness, and their Teeth
were harder than Flints. They laid waste the blooming Fields in an instant, and
devoured even the Barks of the Trees. They were driven by a strong Wind into
the Britannic Sea, where they were drowned; but the Waves throwing 'em upon the
Shore in great heaps, their Corruption raised a Plague in the neighboring
Provinces. This Story is related at length in the Life of Charles the Bald.

MONTEFIASCONE.
As we drew near to Montefiascone, a little Town seated on a Hillock, eight
miles from Viterbium, the Children came out to meet us, asking whether we would
see the Est, Est, Est. Perhaps you have already heard the Story; but it is so
singular, that I Am resolved at all Adventures to give you an account of it. A
certain Gentleman, or perhaps an Abbot or Bishop, as you will afterward
perceive, traveling from Germany to Italy, used to send his Servant before
him, says the Tradition, to taste the Wine in all the Taverns on the Road, with
Orders to write the word Est over the Door, where he found the best Liquor.
Now, it happened that the Moscatello of Montefiascone pleased Mr. Taster's
Palate to such a degree, that he thought it deserved a triple Encomium, and
therefore wrote three Ests over the Door. And, it seems, the Master was no less
pleased with it than the Man, for he drank so much of it, that he fell sick and
died on the spot. We went to see his Monument in St. Flavian's Church, about
Two hundred paces from the Town, where he is represented with a Miter on his
Head, and on each side of him there are two Quarterly in the first -- a Lion,
-- in the second -- two Fesses. -- The Shield is not blazoned.
Scutcheons, with as many Drinking-glasses. At his Feet are these words in worn
and half- Gothic Characters; Est, Est, Est, propt. nimium Est, Jo. de Fuc. D.
meus mortuus est; that is, Est, Est, Est, for taking too much Est, my Master
His Name, according to the Tradition, was John de Fucris. This is the Name of
one of the greatest Families in Augsburg.
Jo. de Fuc. lost his Life. It Is plain that this Epitaph was made by his
Servant; I remember I have seen it quoted in three or four places, but never
without some Error.

In our Journey from this Town to Bolsena, we coasted, though at some distance,
the Lake that bears its Name. This Lake is almost of an oval figure, and, as we
were informed, forty miles in compass. There are two Islands in it called
Martana and Passentina, to the first of which the unfortunate Amalasuntha
Daughter of Theodoric King of the Goths was banished: she was afterward Or
poinarded.
strangled there by the order of her ungrateful Cousin Theodat, whom she had
associated with her in the Government.

BOLSENA.
Bolsena is a little inconsiderable Town; it was formerly an Episcopal See, but
the Bishopric was afterward transl^ted to Orvieto. On a rising ground behind
it are the Ruins of the ancient Or Vulsinium.
Volsinium, which, as Pliny relates, was reduced to Ashes by a Thunderbolt.

There cannot be a worse Country seen than all the way between Bolsena and
Aquapendente. AQUAPENDENTE.
The last-nam'd Town is very poor, and ill Peopled; yet it has enjoyed the
Title of a Bishopric ever since the destruction of Castro.

The utmost limit of the Pope's Dominions on this side is at the little Village
Centino, at the foot of the Hill Radicofani. Radicofani.
The Town and It was first built by Desiderius the last King of the Lombards.
Citadel which bear that Name, if you take the whole year round, are half the
time wrapped in Clouds on the top of that high Mountain. A furious Storm forced
us to lie there; and we heard the Thunder as it were rumbling under our Feet
during the whole night. Leaving Radicofani to proceed on our Journey toward
Siena, we saw nothing but bare and almost wholly barren Mountains; but about
eight or ten miles further the Land begins to grow better, toward the Borough
of St. Quirico: It Is true, this lasts not long, for about Torrinieri the Land
is worse than ever, and we observed the same variety in all the Country through
which we passed, till we approached Siena, which stands on a little and very
rich Hill.

Siena is an Archbishopric, SIENA.
the third City in Tuscany, and one of the most pleasant places in it. Its
situation being high and low, makes it somewhat incommodious; but it enjoys a
good Air, and its Streets are near, and almost all paved with Bricks laid
sidewise: besides, the Houses are handsome, and the Waters excellent. Here the
Tuscan Language is spoken in perfection, without the roughness of the
Florentines; and Strangers oftentimes choose to reside here, when they apply
themselves to the Study of the Italian Tongue.

The Cathedral is a Gothic Structure, There is a Corridor that runs about the
Body of the Church on the inside, adorned with the Statues of the Popes. Among
the rest, there is one smoothchin'd young Creature, said to be placed in the
room of Pope Joan. I remember I saw these Statues, but I must confess I did not
examine 'em carefully. They are somewhat too high to be viewed without
difficulty; and besides, I had not time to observe 'em. All the Authors I have
yet seen, who deny the Story of the Popess, and mention this Statue, affirm
unanimously, either that it is still remaining, or did really subsist
heretofore. Baronius says, that it was taken away, and broken to pieces.
Launoy, who wrote in the year 1634, assures us, that it was to be seen at that
time. Blondel acknowledges the same as to the main, neither does he deny the
Story of the other Statue at Rome, mentioned by Theodore de Niem, which was
erected in the place where Pope Joan was delivered, and afterward thrown into
the Tiber by Sixtus the Fifth's Order; but he forgets to tell us what became of
the first. Father Mabillon, who is the latest of all these Authors, not only
confesses that there was such a Statue, but informs us that the Name of the
Popess was expressed (Adpositum Statuae nomen fuit; Johannes VIII. Foemina de
Anglia). But he adds, That under the Pontificat of Clement VIII, it was
disfigured and transformed into a Prophet Zachary, whose Name was written at
the side of it.
yet its beauty is so much the more remarkable that it is complete in all its
parts; for very few great Churches are ever perfectly finished. This is all
covered over with Marble without and with in; and the Ornaments of its
Architecture are not inferior to any of their kind. The Pavement is of white
and black Marble, the pieces of which are joined together in the Quire after
the manner of Inlaid or Mosaic Work. This Building was begun by Duccio, and
finished by Dominic Beccafumi. The part next the Quire is the least damaged,
and is adorned with the Pictures of Abraham's Sacrifice, and the Passage through
the Red Sea. The Arched Roof is azur'd, and strewn with Stars of Gold.

From the Church we entered, without ascending, into the place where the
Library was formerly kept, to see those fine Pictures in Fresco, which
represent the whole Story of Pope Pius the Second. They were designed by
Raphael after his first way of Drawing, but the Painting was performed by
Pietro Perugin his Master, Most of these Faces represent Persons who were then
alive.
with Bernardin and Pinturicchio; they are finished Pictures, and inferior to
none of that nature in the World. Peter Damian says, That Souls fly every
Sunday out of the Lake of Purgatory, in the shape of Birds, to take the fresh
Air.
The Pope's Soul flying up under the figure of a Bird of Paradise, and the
honest Hermit gazing on it, is a much esteemed Piece.

If you are a stranger to the History of St. Katherine of Siena, you must first
learn the Etymology of her Name, which, according to the Legend, is derived
from Katha; that is, says my Author, All, and Ruin, which signifies a falling
down; because all the Devil's Edifice fell down in her: so that St. Katherine
was formed by a corruption of the word from St. Katharuine. I hope this will
please you who are a Lover of Etymologies.

You must know, in the second place, that this Saint, while she lived at her
House in Siena, was frequently visited by Christ, in propria persona, who after
he had for some years entertained a holy and intimate correspondence with her,
at last married her according to the usual form of Matrimony, and would have
his Wedding solemnized with a great deal of Ceremony. He made a Present to his
Bride of a Gold Ring set with a Diamond between four Pearls. He invited his
Mother to the Feast, with St. Peter, St. John, and St. Dominic, and ordered
King David to entertain 'em with some Tunes on his Harp. I read this Story at
Rome in a Description of the Church of St. Katherine in Strada Giulia, and I
have seen the Picture of it in several places. At Siena they showed me the
Saint's Chamber, and the very Window through which Christ was wont to enter, when
he designed to visit her incognito.

A Painter coming by chance into St. Dominio's Church, where she lay entranced,
made bold to draw her Picture, without leave asked or given. They showed me
this Image, and assured me, that it wrought abundance of Miracles, and that it
has a singular Virtue to drive away Devil's, when it is presented to such as are
possessed with 'em.

You know, without doubt, that it was this Saint who gave the fatal Blow to the
Scotists, in their Controversy against the Thomists, concerning the Immaculate
Conception of the Virgin. For, besides several Arguments which they alleged to
confirm their Opinion, they produced a Revelation of St. Bridget's, which had
almost put their Adversaries to silence; but as ill luck would have it, up
starts St. Katherine in the very nick, with a contrary Revelation, declaring
positively, That the Virgin was conceived in Sin as well as other Women; and
therefore she has been ever since as much slighted by the Scotists as she is
honored by the Thomists.

There is a good Citadel at Siena, and fifteen or twenty square Towers like
those at Viterbo. The Tower called Mangiana is particularly taken notice of by
some for its extraordinary height, but they are only such who never saw any
other that make this Observation.

The City of Siena bears for Arms the famous She Wolf giving suck to the Royal
Twins; and the same Animal is represented in several places on a Column. This
proceeds from the fabulous Relations of some Authors, who pretend that Siena
was built by the Children of Remus. The great Place is hollow like a Boat or
Scollop-shell, and may upon occasion be filled with Water when any Fire happens
in the City.

In our Journey from Siena toward the River Arno, we observed that the farther
we proceeded, the Country grew still more level and fruitful. About Camiano,
Granayola, Ponte d'Era, and between Pontgibon and Pisa, we found a second
Campagna felice, where there is abundance of every thing, and the Ways are
extremely pleasant. Pongibon.
Poggi-bonzi is only famous for its Tobacco.

The Palace of the Signiory, and that of the Piccolomini built by Aeneas
Sylvius, deserve a Traveller's Observation.
The present season of the Year inspires all the World with Joy and Good Humor;
and this Month is every where particularly remarkable for Sports and Holy Days;
but I never saw a more diverting Object than the Troops of young Girls, who
regaled us with Dances and Songs on all this Road, though perhaps the Rarity of
the Sex might in some measure contribute to heighten the Pleasure we took in
seeing 'em. Five or six of the prettiest and best attired Girls of the Village
meet together, and go from House to House singing, and wishing every where a
Merry May. All their Songs consist of a great number of Wishes, which are
commonly very pleasant; for they wish you may at once enjoy all the Pleasures
of Youth, and of the blooming season; that you may be still possessed with an
equal Love, Morning and Evening; that you may live a hundred and two years;
that every thing you eat may be turned to Sugar and Oil; that your Clothes and
Lace may never wear old; that Nature may smile eternally, and that the goodness
of its Fruits may surpass the beauty of its Flowers, etc. And then come their
spiritual Wishes; That the Lady of Loretto may pour down her Favors upon you;
that St. Anthony of Padua may be your Guardian Angel; that St. Katherine of
Siena may intercede for you. And for the Burden of the Song, after every
Stanza, A merry, merry May.

I observed near Certaldo, according to the Advertisement you gave me, several
Hills of Sand stuffed with diverse sorts of Shells. Monte-mario, a mile from
Rome, is also full of 'em; besides, I have found some of 'em on the Alps, in
France, and elsewhere. Olearius, Steno, Camden, Speed, and many other Authors,
both ancient and modern, have taken notice of this Phenomenon; and I read with
a great deal of Pleasure the Dissertation you sent me on this subject: yet,
since you desire me to deal plainly with you, I must tell you, that I am not of
your Opinion as to the main.

If these Shells were the Remainders and an Effect of the Deluge, I would
willingly be informed why it did not rather leave 'em in deep Bottoms and
Valleys, than throw up whole Mountains of 'em; and also, why they are so rarely
found: for, it seems more agreeable to Reason, that they should have been
scattered more universally upon the Face of the Earth, and not gathered into
heaps, as the few that are left are always found. I confess, it is not
impossible that these Shells might be preserved ever since the Deluge, and
therefore I will not insist on that Difficulty; only give me leave to tell you,
that you seem to have a false notion of the Waters of the Deluge: for, to give
a reason why those Shells, which you imagine to be Seashells, are found in the
middle of the Land, you suppose that the Deluge was a Sea. But as for me, I
conceive that the Water of that Inundation which fell from Heaven, and was
consequently sweeter and lighter than Salt Water, was not so thoroughly mixed and
confounded with the Waters of the Sea, but that the one still preserved its
freshness, and the other its saltness or bitterness, and each of 'em their
particular Qualities. Which being granted, this Consideration alone will
furnish us with Inferences (which I leave you to deduce) that are sufficient to
destroy all your Conjectures.

Nor is it less in vain to have recourse to Winds, Storms, and Inundations for
a solution of this Mystery. The way of Eruption, by which the new Vesuvius or
Monte-nuovo was formed, is not, I confess, to be altogether rejected; for such
Hills as are composed of Mud or Slime, and of sandy Earth mixed with Shells,
and other Marine Bodies, especially in Countries subject to Earthquakes, may
well admit of such an Explication. But after all, I see no reason that should
oblige us to take so wide a compass for a satisfactory solution of this
Phenomenon; for, to give you my thoughts of it in few words, I think it may be
easily comprehended, that the same Virtue and Properties by which Shells are
generated in the Sea may also form 'em in the Land, since there are Substances
equally fit for their production in both, and all the circumstances and means
required for their formation may be found in the latter as well as in the
former. I will not enter into a nice enquiry, whether they are formed by
Vegetation, or to use the Phrase of some Authors, by Intro susception, almost
after the same manner as Plants are supposed to be nourished; or by Juxta
position and Incrustation, as Bezoar (whether Fossile or otherwise generated)
is produced, or Stones grow in the Kidneys. But choose which Hypothesis you
will, and after you have diligently examined the Formation of Shells in those
places which you call their natural Beds, it will appear, that the same account
may be given of the Shells on the Hills of Certaldo as of those that are found
on the shore at Leghorn, excepting only those that are said to be generated
with the Animals by the Seed in the Eggs.

I foresee one Objection which you will infallibly urge against me, if you be
not prevented by a timely Answer. You will tell me, that Shells are inseparable
from Fishes, Snails, or other such like Animals, for whose use alone Nature
produces 'em, according to the common Axiom, That Nature does nothing in vain.

To dispatch this pretended Difficulty without wandering from the subject of
our present Controversy, I shall only put you in mind of those Shells that are
sometimes found in the Kidneys, Imposthumes, and Stomach, of which we have such
See the Nouvelles de la Republique des Lettres for December 1686. See also
Pareus, and other Anatomical Writers.
exact and late accounts, that the Matter of Fact is undoubtedly certain: for
if I should ask you for what Creatures these Shells are generated, you must be
forced to have recourse to some Distinctions of your Aphorism, which may be
easily accommodated to my Hypothesis.

If you think to elude the force of these Instances, by saying, That a Shell in
an Imposthume is a sort of Monster, from which we must not draw a general
Conclusion; I answer, That I will neither dispute about Words, nor make too
general Conclusions. If Shells in the Kidneys, or in Imposthumes, be called
Monsters in your Dictionary, you may, if you please, bestow the same Title on
those of Certaldo. Neither must you start new Difficulties, by comparing the
multitude of these with the small number of those others; for if the Kidney
were as big as a Mountain, and contained as great a quantity of Matter fit for
the formation of Shells, as the Hill of Certaldo, we should doubtless find Ten
thousand Shells instead of one in that part of the Body; and Ten thousand
Monsters of the same nature, formed at the same time, in the same place, and by
the same Accident, ought not to be reckoned more than One.

I could easily answer all your Objections after the same manner, but, for a
further illustration of my Hypothesis, I shall consider more particularly the
word in vain, Nature does nothing in vain, it is true; but that Shells without
Fishes are useless Productions of Nature, I deny. The variety of the Works of
God in all his Creatures is universally acknowledged, and the reason of it is
plain. Thus those Fossil Shells that are found in the Heart of Stones and
Marble, were not made in vain; though they never enclosed a Fish, nor any other
living Creature. The Stones called Ammon's Horns, were not formed in vain; though
they never graced the Forehead of a Ram. The Tongue-like Stones, or Or
Calchariae. The German Journal for the year 1661 makes mention of a Turnep that
exactly resembled a Hand; and of a Mushroom from which six half-body'd Human
Figures issued out.
Glossopetra's of Malta, were not produced in vain; though they never wagg'd in
the Mouth of an Animal. The same may be also said of the Stones called
Astroites, Belemnites, Dactyli Judaei, and an infinite number of other
variously shaped Fossils resembling Plants, Fruits, Flowers, Animals, and Human
Faces. And why then should Nature be confined from sporting her self in the
production of Shells, and at the same time suffered to act on all other
occasions with an uncontrolled Liberty, or, to speak more properly, with a
perpetual and admirable Variety.

Pisa, the second City of Tuscany, PISA.
Seat of an Archbishopric and University, and formerly a potent Republic, is
situated on the River Arno, in an even and exactly level Plain. It is a great
City, and once deserved the Name of a very lovely place. The Streets are large,
straight, and paved with great Stones; and, generally speaking, the Houses are
still well built. The Arno is navigable, twice as broad as the Tiber at Rome,
and divides the City into two almost equal parts: it is pity that so fine a
place should be so poor and ill inhabited; for the Grass is pretty high in
several parts of it. This desolate condition of Pisa is doubtless an Effect of
the Miseries it suffered during its last War with the Florentins, for it was
pillaged and almost wholly ruined by those pitiless Conquerors. And it is plain,
that the City of Leghorn lately built at the Haven of Pisa, has robbed it of a
great number of its Inhabitants*

The structure of the Cathedral is not much unlike to that of the Church of
Siena, but the former is greater than the latter, and much more advantageously
situated in the middle of a fine Court or Yard. The Baptistery and famous
leaning Tower are two considerable Buildings, in the same Court, about thirty
or forty paces from the Church, on each side of it, and in the same line. It is
overlaid with fine Marble, and of an uniform Architecture.

By an Inscription engraved on a Pillar in the Baptistery, it appears, that the
Church was finished Anno 1153. The Baptistery is 180 foot round. There was
formerly a Pillar in the Baptistery, in which all the private Machinations
against the State were discovered, as in a Mirror.
The Baptistery is round and arched, ending in a Cupola like St. Peter's Dome,
or the Domes you have seen at Paris. There is an Echo here that magnifies a
Noise extremely; and the sound of a Blow or Cry lasts as long in it as the
tingling of a great Bell.

As for the Tower, some Authors are of opinion, that it was the Mason's Fancy
to build it thus leaning; others say, That it does not really lean; but that
the Eye is cheated by a secret and artificial contrivance of the Architect: And
there are some who pretend, that it seems to lean to all sides, according to
the different position of the Spectator. But they are all equally mistaken, and
in vain strive to find out a Mystery where there is none; for any reasonable
and attentive Considerer will be easily convinced by his own Observation,
without further Proof, that the Tower does really lean, and that its
inclination was accidentally occasioned by the sinking of part of its
Foundation. The height of this Tower amounts to One hundred eighty and eight
feet, The Stairs that lead to the top of the Tower consist of 193 Steps.
and it has the Figure of a perfect Cylinder: The Platform or Balcony on the
top is surrounded with Rails, from whence having let fall a Plummet on the side
that enclines most, after several Trials to the right and left hand, I found
that my Lead touched the Ground exactly at the distance of fifteen feet from
the Foundation.

The Burying-place called Campo Santo, because of the Earth which the Pisans
When they assisted Frederic the First, called Barbarossa, who took Jerusalem.
brought from the Holy Land in the year 1228, is a kind of Cloister, 190 paces
long and 66 broad, comprehending the breadth of the Portico's. It contains a
great number of Tombs: Here I observed an ancient Inscription fixed against the
Wall under one of the Portico's, which is a Decree of the City of Pisa,
occasioned by the death of Caesar, ordaining the People to wear Mourning a
whole year, and in the mean time to abstain from all public Divertisements.

I will not trouble you with a description of the Garden of Simples, or of the
Collection of Natural Curiosities in the School of Physic; for I could not find
any Rarities in 'em which I had not already seen in other places.

The They wear a red Cross on a black Cloak, and a flamecolour'd Collar.
Knights of St. Stephen have their resisidence at Pisa. You are not ignorant
that this is the Great Duke's Order, and that it was instituted by Cosmo I, in
the year On the 6th of August, after he had gained the Battle of Marciano. The
Knights must be of Noble Blood, and born in lawful Wedlock. They vow Conjugal
Chastity. Their Cross is like to that of Malta. Every one of 'em is obliged to
say a hundred Pater Nosters, and as many Ave Maria's daily, and on certain
occasions they double the Dose.
1561. The Church of the Order is very full of Standards, Ship-Lanthorns, and
other Spoils taken from the Turks; and over against it, in the Place, is the
Statue of the Founder.

LEGHORN.
Pisa is fourteen miles distant from Leghorn: The interjacent Country is flat,
and the Way lies for the most part through Woods of ever green Oaks,
Cork-Trees, and Wild Myrtles. It Is said, that all these Forests were formerly
covered by the Sea, which reached within three miles of Pisa, to a place where
there is now a great Church, at the entry of the Woods. They tell us, That one
day, as St. Peter was fishing, there arose a Tempest, which drove him to this
very place, where he was shipwrecked. And they add, That he erected an Altar
there, about which the Church was built by a certain Pope some Ages afterward.
It would be needless to relate the rest of the Story.

I have already told you, that Leghorn is a modern City; it is situated on a
flat Ground, and surrounded with handsome Fortifications covered over with
Brick: the Streets are large, straight as a Line, and parallel; the Houses are
generally of equal height, and almost all painted on the outside. Most of the
Painting was done by Aug. Tasso, a Native of Bologna.
The Harbor is not so well stored with Ships as several others, but the Trade
of the Bank is very considerable. This is the only Seaport in the Dukedom of
Tuscany, and the station of the Great Duke's Galleys. There is a House built on
purpose for the Slaves, or a kind of Hospital, in which they lie, contrary to
the Custom of all other places.

In our Journey from Leghorn to Lucca we were forced to pass a second time
through Pisa, three miles on this side of which we saw the rugged Mountain of St.
Julian, which divides Tuscany from the Signiory of Lucca.

Lucca is situated in the midst of a fertile Plain, which extends fifteen or
twenty miles, LUCCA.
according to its various dimensions, and is surrounded with very rich and
well-inhabited Hillocks. The Fortifications of the City are pretty regular, and
well lined, but their Foundations are level with the Plain. We walked round the
Ramparts in one hour, which is an Argument of the smallness of the Town; but to
make amends, it contains many great Houses, and exceeds Pisa in the number of
its Inhabitants by almost one half.

Here they carried us to see the Palace of the Republic, where the Vexillifer,
or Standard Bearer.
Gonfalonnier lodges with his nine Counselors called Anziani. We were
informed, that these Magistrates do also usually eat together in this Palace,
while their Wives and Families in the mean time live at home. The State of
Lucca is a Fief of the Empire, and under its protection: The Government is
purely Aristocratical, for the Sovereignty is lodged in the Council of Two
hundred and forty Nobles, who are divided into two Bodies, which succeed one
another every six months, with the Gonfalonnier at their Head. The Office of
this Chief Magistrate of the Republic is not unlike to that of the Doges of
Venice and Genoua, save only in this respect, that he continues but two months
in the possession of the supreme Dignity, by which he receives no other
Advantage than the maintaining of his Table at the public Charge, during that
time. He wears a Bonnet and Stole, with a Robe of Crimson Velvet, and has the
Title of a Prince, though he is only styled His Excellency. He may be chosen
again to the same Dignity, after an interval of six years; and his ordinary
Guard consists of threescore Switzers.

From the Palace we entered into the Arsenal, where there is a considerable
quantity of Arms for so small a State, and besides, they are kept in good order.

From thence we went to the Cathedral, to see the Chapel of the Volto Santo.
It Is said, That Nicodemus having often attempted in vain to paint a Crucifix,
the Angels that beheld his fruitless Labors took his Pencil from him, and
finished this Piece. They cannot give a positive account how this Picture was
first brought to the Church of St. Fredian, but they assured us, that it
removed from thence to the Cathedral, and remained hanging in the Air in the
same place where we saw it, till they had built an Altar under it, on which it
rested, and about which they afterward built a magnificent Chapel. This Image
does not work so many Miracles as several others; but every thing that it does
is wonderful in the highest degree. It Is the principal Object of the Devotion
of these People, and they stamp it on their Coin with the Arms of the Republic.

You may easily imagine that this Crucifix met with a very kind reception at the
Cathedral; The Cathedral is dedicated to St. Martin.
yet it is hard to divine the Reason why it preferred St. Martin to St. Fredian,
since it is certain that this City was much more obliged to the latter than to
the former. The number of the Favors and good Offices it received from him is
almost infinite; but his saving it from the Inundation of the Cerchio deserves
to be particularly remembered. One day, when St. Fredian was at Lucca, The
River is at present two or three miles distant from Lucca.
the River began to swell prodigiously, and threatened the City with a dreadful
Inundation; but the holy Man commanded it immediately to change its course, and
to follow him without murmuring whithersoever he should conduct it; and his
Orders were instantly obeyed, to the great Joy and Astonishment of all the
People.

In the same Saints Church there is a Marble Table seventeen foot long, about
six and a half broad, and fourteen inches thick, the Story of which is
contained in the following Inscription. O quisquis legis, lapis es, ni lapis
hic te moveat in admirationem and culium D. Frediani, qui templo huic
construendo, molem hanc in montibus ad quartum lapidem nactus, viribus impar,
sed spiritu fervens, mira facilitate manibus humerisque suis and Canonicorum in
plaustrum binis indomitis vacculis trahendum impositum, sexto salutis saeculo,
hac in Aede statuit sacrum Monumentum.

In the middle of the same Church we took notice of a Tombstone with these
words inscribed upon it, Hic jacet corpus Sancti Riccardi Regis Angliae: Here
lies the Body of St. Richard King of England. I cannot imagine who this Royal
Saint should be, Sirnam'd Coeur de Lion.
Richard I. if my Memory does not deceive me, died in France of a Wound, after
his return from his Voyage beyond Sea, and was interred in the Abbey of
Fontevraut. Richard II. was dethroned by the Parliament and the Duke of
Lancaster, and afterward stabbed at Pomfret, from whence his Body was carried
first to St. Paul's, then to Langley, and at last to Westminster, where his
Tomb still remains. And Richard III, who was no more a Saint than his two
Predecessors of the same Name, but rather a very wicked man, was slain at
Bosworth in Leicestershire, and buried in the City of Leicester. Besides, I do
not remember that ever there was a King Richard in England before the reunion
of the Heptarchy. So that this Epitaph puzzled us all: However, I will not at
present entertain you with our Conjectures concerning it, but you will do us a
singular pleasure by communicating yours to us.

I cannot forbear relating to you the Story of our Lady of St. Austin's, for
perhaps you never heard of a more pleasant Trick played by an Image. A certain
Soldier having lost considerably at Dice, fell into a rage, and at last laid
the blame of his ill Fortune on our Lady, who was then placed against the Wall
of the Court of Guard, and after he had called her a thousand hard Names, to
crown his Insolency, he threw a Stone at her, which was levelled directly
against the Head of the little Jesus. But our Lady, says the Story, perceiving
the danger, prevented the blow, by tossing her Child so nimbly from her right
Arm to her left, that he received not the least hurt.

To preserve the Memory of this Event, the little Jesus stuck so close to his
Mother's left Arm, that she could not with all her strength bring him to his
former place; so that she was even forced to let him have his Humor, and he
remains upon her left Arm to this very day, which is looked upon as an
undeniable Argument of the Truth of the Story, by the devout Pilgrims who come
to visit this Image. To make an end of the Story, the Earth opened on a sudden,
and swallowed up the impious Soldier. The Hole is still there, and these
charitable Devotees are very careful to admonish the curious Stranger not to
come near it, because it is, in their Opinion, the very Mouth of Hell: but
certainly such a dangerous place ought to be railed in.

You are not ignorant that several noble Calendrini, Burlamachi, Turretini,
Micheli, and some others.
Families of Lucca retired to Geneva, about the time of the Reformation.

The Country between Lucca and Florence is fertile and well cultivated. PISTOYA.
Pistoya is in the middle, twenty miles distant from each of 'em. This is a
very poor and desolate City, especially since it lost its liberty; for though it
can make a shift to live on the fat of the Land, it can never grow rich without
Trade, of which it is wholly destitute. It is bigger than Lucca; its Streets
are large and straight, and the Remainders of its ancient Beauty are sufficient
to convince us that it was formerly a fine City.

The Inhabitants of Pistoya have a particular veneration for St. James, because
they were formerly assisted by him, and have still a great number of his
Relics. He has a Chapel in the Cathedral, The Altar is covered with Plates of
Silver, and surrounded with Lamps of great value. Citta Pistoyese, chiare case,
oscure Chiese. The City of Pistoya has light Houses and dark Churches.
where I observed a Prayer directed to him, in which he is called the First or
Chief of the Apostles; Tu qui primatum tenes inter Apostolos, imo qui eorum
primus, etc.

Some think the Factions of the Guelphs and Gibelins were so called from Guelph
and Gibel, two Brothers and Gentlemen of Pistoya, of whom the elder espoused
the Quarrel of Pope Gregory the Ninth, while the second asserted the Interest
of the Emperor Barbarossa. But I should rather embrace the Opinion of those who
derive the Names of those Factions from the illustrious and potent About the
Confines of Italy and Germany, on the Upper Rhine. See Maimb. of the Decadence
of the Empire, l. 5.
Families of the Guelphs and Gibellins, who were at enmity with one another,
long before their Jealousies and Animosity were raised to the utmost height,
by their declaring, one for the Emperor, and the other for the Pope.

The abovementioned Etymology of St. Katherine will, I Am afraid, appear so
ridiculous to you, that you will perhaps be tempted to susp^ct I invented it;
but I assure you I took it from the famous Golden Legend: and both to clear my
self of such a suspicion, and to divert you after so long a Letter, I shall
subjoin some other Etymologies of the same stamp, which I read not long ago,
and remember pretty exactly.

To begin with St. Christina, my Author tells you, That her Name signifies
anointed with Cream, because she had the Balm of Sweet Odor, and the Oil of
Devotion. Would you not have discovered this rare Etymology at the first glance?

Damian, he proceeds, had his Name from the Hand of God, Main de Dieu, because
he wrought divinely. Beatrix is an Abridgment of two Words, Blessed and Sad,
Benoiste and Triste. Martin was so called, because he kept the Field of Battle
against Vices; or as one should say, Ung des Martyrs, des Martyrs ung, d'
Martyrs in, Martyrin, Martin. And is not this as plain as the derivation of
Equus from Alfana, or of the word Lackey from Verna? George comes from Ge or
Earth, and Orge, Barley, that is a Cultivater of Barley. Siphorian is derived
from Symphony, for he chanted the sweet Tunes of Virtue. Maurice comes in a
straight line from Amen and Cis, that is Vomiting hard, and Us, which signifies
Counselor, or Hasty. Vomiting, by reason of his throwing off Superfluities;
Hard, because be endured Torments; Counselor, because he admonished the
Knights his Companions; and Hasty, from the ardour of his Zeal. This is as
clear as a Sunbeam. S. Gorgonian is originally derived from Gorgos, which
signifies Subject, or from Gonos, that is, an Angel, and Denan, which is
interpreted Fruit, for he was Subject to God without an Angel, and was
afterward made new Fruit by Martyrdom. Alexis is as one should say issant de
Loy, issuing out of the Law, for he issued from the Law of Marriage to preserve
his Virginity. Jerome comes from Norma, a Rule; Cecilia from Lis du Ciel, the
lilly of Heaven; Cyprian from Cypris; Saturnian from Saturace nuce, because the
Pagans and Heathens glutted themselves with his Torments, as the Crow gluts her
self with devouring Nuts. When you have a mind to a second Service, my
venerable Legend will furnish you with a plentiful one; but I believe you have
enough at present. I am,

SIR, Your etc.
Florence, May 17. 1688.
LETTER XXVIII.
SIR,
I Would not neglect the occasion of writing to you the day after our arrival
at Florence, though I could not then give you any account of this lovely City. We
have seen so many things in it since, that my Journal would furnish me with
sufficient matter for a Volume. But, in pursuance of my wonted method, I shall
in the first place give you a brief description of it, and afterward proceed
to communicate some particular Observations, which perhaps will be new to you.

Florence, the chief City of Tuscany, Seat of an Archbishop, and Residence of
the Great Duke, FLORENCE the Fair.
is situated on the River Arno, as it were in the middle of the Arena or bottom
of an Amphitheater. At the distance of four or five miles, excepting only the
side that looks toward Pistoya, it is surrounded with very fertile Hillocks,
which rise insensibly, and by degrees unite themselves to the high Mountains.
The vast number of Houses which cover both the little Hills, and the
interjacent Plain, make a very delightful and admirable Prospect. If from one
of the Towers of Florence you took a view of this large Bottom, so full of
Villages and Houses of Pleasure, you would think it were an almost infinite
continuation of the Suburbs of the Town; and it may be justly said, that this
rich and delicious Valley is the best inhabited place in the World.

I was informed by a curious and exact Person, that the Walls of this City are
just Fifteen thousand Two hundred and forty Brasses or Fathoms in compass; and
that the River Arno, which runs through it, is Five hundred Fathoms broad; so
that reckoning the double breadth of the River, with the circumference of the
Walls, the Circuit of Florence amounts in all to Sixteen thousand Two hundred
and forty fathoms. Three of these Fathoms make exactly five Feet and eight
Inches English measure; and consequently 16240 Fathoms amount to Thirty
thousand six hundred and seventy five Feet, which you may reduce as you think
fit. The City is pretty round.

The same Person assured me, that Florence contains within its Walls Eight
thousand and eight hundred Houses, Sixty thousand Souls, Two and twenty
Hospitals, Eighty and nine Convents, Fourscore and four Fraternities, a Hundred
fifty and two Churches, Eighteen Halls or Galleries belonging to Merchants,
Seventy and two Courts of Justice, six Columns, two Pyramids, four Bridges,
seven Fountains, seventeen Places or Courts, and a Hundred and sixty public
Statues. The Streets are paved with large pieces of a greyish Stone, called
Pietra forte, which is brought from the neighboring Quarries. A good number of
the Houses are built with the same Stone, and many of 'em are extraordinarily
large and beautiful. And even there are some who pretend that the Florentine
Palaces, to speak after the Italian manner are the handsomest Structures in
Italy.

The Near the great Gate of this Palace there is a large Magnet, which was
spoiled by the Fire. Spon says, that it weighs 5000 pounds.
Palace Pitti, where the Great Duke lodges, is a magnificent Building, and
extolled beyond measure by the People of the Country. Yet I observed one fault
in it, which is the littleness of the Court with respect to the Building: you
will be of the same opinion after I have told you, that the height of the
Palace to the Cornish of the third Order amounts to a hundred and twenty two
feet, and yet the Court is but a hundred and sixty foot long, and a hundred and
forty broad: so that you cannot choose a place in all the Court to view the
Palace, without lifting up your Head in a very troublesome manner.

Before we entered into the old Ducal Palace, The four Statues of white Marble
on the Bridge of the Trinity represent the four Seasons. They were made by
Michael Angelo.
where all those rare and precious things are to be seen that make so great a
noise in the World, we took a view of the Statues in the Place or Court. I
shall only name these following; the David, by Michael Angelo; the Judith, by
Donatelli; the fair Sabin Woman violently carried away, by John of Bologna; the
Perseus of Brass, by Cellini; the Hercules and Cacus, by Bandinelli; and the
Brass Statue on Horseback of Cosmo I, by John of Bologna. These are all
admirable Pieces. The three Basso-relievo's on the Pedestal of the last-nam'd
Statue represent Cosmo I. kneeling before the Pope to Obzelum Religionis,
praecipuumque Justitiae Studium.
receive from him the Title of Great Duke; the same Prince making his public
entry into Florence in a kind of triumphal Chariot; and the Ceremony that was
solemnized when the Senate of Florence resigned the Sovereign Authority to him,
by investing him with the Ducal Dignity.

The great Gallery of the Palace is almost Four hundred foot long; the
underfretting of the Roof is painted; and we walked between two Ranks of
Statues and Busts, which are almost all Antique Pieces. On the top, against the
Wall, are the Portraictures of the ancient Philosophers on one side, and those
of famous Captains on the other.

The Characters on the Hem of his Gown are thought to be of the ancient
Hetruscan Language. It is a very fine Statue.
Among the most beautiful and rare Statues they made us observe in the first
place that of Brass which is clothed and thought to be Scipio's; the Leda
receiving Jupiter's Embraces with a pleasure mixed with shame; the antique
Bacchus, accompanied with a Copy by Michael Angelo not inferior to the
Original; the Julia Daughter of Augustus, the Pomona, the Venus, the Diana, the
Apollo, another Bacchus, the Peasant striking a Boar, the Busts of all the
Emperors to Galienus, and especially those of Adrian, Pertinax, and Severus.

From this Gallery we passed through several Chambers full of Rarities. I
observed in the first a branched Candlestick of great pieces of Amber, a fair
Column of Oriental Alabaster, a Rhinoceros's Horn of an unusual bigness, many
Basso-relievo's, and other antique Sculptures; Medals, Idols, and Sepulchral
Lamps; Stones, Minerals, and other natural Curiosities.

In the second there is nothing but Pictures. Here they used formerly to show
an Iron Nail, one half of which, they pretended, was changed to Gold; but they
have left off exposing it, since 'twas discovered that the Miracle consisted
wholly in the Sodering.
The third is called the Chamber of Mathematics, where among other things there
are Globes and a Sphere, which contain seven feet in diameter. The fourth is
hung with Pictures, which exceed those of the second; besides which, I took
notice particularly of a Cabinet of Ebony, with its Ornaments of Amber, Ivory,
and precious Stones; the great rough Emerald rooted in its Rock; and the
Platform of Leghorn described on a Table of Lapis Lazuli. The Pictures of
illustrious Persons of the present Age are the principal Ornaments of the fifth
Chamber. Among the Generals of Armies and great Captains, I observed three
Englishmen, Cromwell, General Monk, and the late Earl of Ossory, Son to the
present Duke of Ormond. In the sixth there are a Hundred thirty and seven
Pictures of the most famous Painters, done by themselves. The seventh is
adorned with Vessels of Porcelain. And the five following are full of an
amazing number and variety of Curiosities. They contain also great store of
Arms of all Fashions and of all Countries, among which we took notice of a
Musket with a Golden Barrel. Here is also the great Magnet, which used formerly
to lift up fifty pounds of Iron, but at present its Vigor is much diminished.
And the This Horse was presented to the last Great Duke by the late Duke
Charles of Lorrain.
Horse-Tail, which is twenty foot long, may be justly reckoned among these
Curiosities.

The most precious and valuable Rarities are kept in the Octogonal Room, called
the Built by Buontalenti.
Tribune, which is twenty foot in diameter, and is covered with an arched Dome.
The Floor is paved with several sorts of Marble artificially laid together; the
Walls are hung with Crimson Velvet, beautified with an infinite number of rare
Ornaments; the Windows are of Crystal; and the inside of the Dome is overlaid
with Mother of Pearl. Nothing is admitted into this place but what is of great
value and exquisite Beauty. You have doubtless read, in Tavernier's Travels,
the description of that lovely This Diamond weighs a hundred thirty and nine
Carats and a half. It Is pity says Tavernier, that the Water or Luster of it
approaches to a Citron-colour.
Diamond which justly claims the first rank among the Jewels of this Cabinet.
Among other Rarities these deserve to be mentioned: an antique Head of Julius
Caesar of one entire Turquoise as big as an Egg; a Cupboard full of Vessels of
Agat, Lapis Lazuli, Cornelian, and Crystal of the Rock, the whole garnished
with Gold and fine Jewels; a large Table and Cabinet of inlaid Work, wholly
composed of oriental Jasper, Calcedony, Rubies, Topazes, and other Precious
stones admirably well wrought; a Collection of very rare Medals; a prodigious
number of antique Pieces of carved and engraved Work, very entire, and
extremely well kept; select Pictures, or, to speak more properly, Masterpieces
of the most excellent Painters; six Grecian Statues unconceivably beautiful;
two Men wrestling; the Peasant whetting his Bill, and at the same time
listening to Catiline's Conspiracy; a Fawn; a sleeping Cupid; a Venus six foot
high, and another smaller by a foot, both of white Marble.

You will quickly know the last, when I have told you, that it is the famous
Venus of Medicis. It must be acknowledged that this is the most charming Body,
and the finest piece of Workmanship in the World. The Head of this incomparable
Statue is turned a little toward her left Shoulder; On the Base, which is of
the same piece of Marble with the Statue, these are written, (...) Made by
Cleomenes Son of Apollodorus the Athenian.
she holds her right Hand before her Bosom, but at some distance; and with the
other Hand she covers the part which Ladies blush to discover, which she does
also without touching it. She bows down gently, and advances her right Knee, as
it were to hide her self better if she could. That decent bashfulness which is
so becoming an Ornament of the Fair Sex, with a spotless Modesty and Chastity
are painted on her Face, and accompanied with a Sweetness, Beauty, Delicacy,
and Air of Youth, that are altogether inexpressible. She wants nothing but
Voice and Color. Her round and tender Arm cleaves insensibly to her lovely
Hand; her Neck is admirable; and, to conclude, this rare Masterpiece is a
perfect imitation of the fairest Nature.

From this Palace we passed through a little Gallery of Communication to the
ancient Palace of the Republic, where we saw the Furniture of the Wardrobe, and
the rich Coach that was made for the solemnity of the Great Duke's Marriage.
The great Hall of this Palace is a hundred seventy and two foot long, and
seventy four in breadth.

The Cathedral is a very large and stately Building, though several parts of it
are of a Gothic Architecture. It is all covered over, within and without, and
paved throughout with polished Marble of several Colors. Its length amounts to
Four hundred and ninety feet, and its height to the top of the Cross on the
Globe to Three hundred and eighty. It Is impossible to be weary of viewing this
noble Structure; but it is pity that it has not a Frontispiece.

The finest Statues in this Church are, the St. James, by Sansovin, against one
of the Pillars which support the Dome; the Adam and Eve behind the great Altar,
by Bandinello; the Statue of God the Father, the Dead Christ, and the Angel
supporting him, on the same Altar, and by the same Hand. Critics find fault
with Eve, because she is of greater stature than her Husband.

The Painting in the Dome represents the Resurrection, and is the Work of Fred.
Zucchero. It is highly esteemed, though the Painter is blamed for representing
his Rising Bodies clothed and of different ages.

See before Letter XXIII, and XXV.
But we observed a more considerable Fault, or rather an intolerable Blunder, in
a Picture in the same Church, which nevertheless was made by Paul Vccello, a
very skilful and celebrated Artist. He has painted a G. Acutius an Englishman,
General of the Pisan Forces.
General of an Army on Horseback, and has made the Horse rest on the two Legs
on the same side, while the other two are in motion: such a Mistake might
perhaps be excused in a Venetian, who was never out of that City, where Horses
are as great Rarities as Elephants.

The Pieces of Moses's and Aaron's Rods are two of the most curious Relics in
the Cathedral, though they seem to be of doubtful credit, since both the entire
Rods are said to be at St. John de Lateran.

The Steeple is very near the Church, which is a square Tower a hundred and
eighty foot high, overlaid with square pieces of red, white, and black Marble,
and adorned with several Statues. The old bald Man, by Donatelli is an
excellent Piece. It Is said that Sculptor preferred his Zuccon before all his
other Works, for that Figure represented one of his Friends, and really merited
a particular Esteem.

The Baptistery is lined in the same manner as the Church, and its Structure is
almost like to that of the Baptistery at Pisa; it is believed that it was
formerly a Temple of Mars. After the Alterations that were made in it, when the
Cathedral was built, it was appointed to serve for a Baptistery, and dedicated
to St. John Baptist. The Mosaic Work on the arched Roof is much valued; and
among the Statues contained in this Temple, the Magdalen of Wood, by Donatelli,
is particularly esteemed. But the most admired Pieces are, the three brazen
Gates, adorned with Basso-relievo's representing some sacred Histories. That on
the Backside, with this Inscription, Andreas Vgolini de Pisis me fecit 1330.
is the least considerable, the other two are singularly beautiful. They never
forget to tell Strangers, that Michael Angelo thought he could not admire 'em
sufficiently, and esteemed 'em worthy to be the Gates of Heaven.

Dum cernit valvas aurato ex aere nitentes
In Templo Michael Angelus, obstupuit.
Attonitusque diu, sic alta silentia rupit, Near the Church of the Trinity
there is a fair Column of Porphyry, which supports a Statue of Justice greater
than the Life. It Is said, that this Column was formerly in the Pantheon, and
that it was given by the Pope to Cosmo I, Gal. Guald. Prior. There is a Proverb
at Florence, which says, That Justice stands so high that none can reach it.

O Divinum Opus! O Janua digna Polo!
In the Court opposite to the middle Gate of this Baptistery, there are two
Columns of Porphyry chained together, though they stand at some distance from
each other. The Story says, That the Florentins having assisted the Pisans to
conquer some part of the Isle of Majorca, asked two Pillars, which they found
among the Spoils of the Enemies. Some add, That the Pisans being loath to part
with these Monuments, but not daring to refuse 'em to their Allies, spitefully
tarnish'd their Luster in the Fire, and sent 'em in that condition covered with
Velvet. But this Circumstance is denied by others.

I had almost forgot to mention the other Column which stands not far from the
former: it was set up for a Memorial of a pretended Miracle which happened in
that place, when the Body of St. Zenobius was removed from St. Lawrence's to
the Cathedral. His Shrine, says the Tradition, touched by chance the Trunk of a
dry Tree which lay there, and immediately the Tree blossomed, and put forth
both Flowers and Fruit; I have forgot the rest of the Story.

St. Lawrence's Church is very large and rich; and I may venture to say,
without being guilty of a Hyperbole, that the famous Chapel, on which they have
wrought so long, and with so much assiduity, will, when finished, be the finest
Edifice of that nature in the World. I dare not undertake to describe it, but I
cannot forbear to give you some Idea of it.

This magnificent Chapel is very large and high. In the middle of each Face of
the Hexagon there rises a double Pilaster of Jasper, with a double Chapter of
Brass gilt, the Base being also of the same matter. On the Pedestal of each
Pilaster there are several Emblematical Figures composed of Precious Stones
joined together with all the Art imaginable. In the six Angles there are six
stately Tombs of Porphyry, Oriental Granate, and some other of the most
precious kinds of Marble. On each Tomb there is a great It Is said, that each
Pillow cost Sixty thousand Crowns.
Pillow of Jasper enriched with diverse sorts of Jewels, and on each Pillow a
Crown, which is yet a great deal richer. The Pedestal or Base that supports the
Tombs is overlaid with Porphyry and Calcedony, on which will be engraved the
Epitaphs of the Princes for whom these Tombs are designed. Their Statues of
Brass gilt, twice as big as the Life, will be placed in the Niches of black
Marble that are already prepared in the Wall over the Tombs. The inner Roof of
the Dome will be of pure Lapis Lazuli, with Roses and other Ornaments gilt. All
the rest of the Walls is lined in Compartments with fine Agats, rare Granates,
Onyxes, and all sorts of Stones that are esteemed precious; each Panel being
divided into squares, and embellished with other Ornaments of Copper gilt. The
Altar will surpass all the other parts of this admirable Structure; and to
comprehend the Beauties of 'em all, your Imagination must rise higher than my
imperfect Description is able to carry it.

The Library of St. Lawrence is particularly famous for its Manuscripts. It is
Fourscore Brasses or Fathom in length; and Twenty in breadth. The Fathom of
Florence is equal to two Roman Feet; and the Roman Foot is shorter by six Lines
than the English. See the Instructions to a Traveller at the end of this
Volume. In this Library there is a Manuscript Virgil, of the Age of Theodosius.
There is also a large Greek Manuscript, containing the Chyrurgery of the
Ancients, of Hippocrates, Galen, Asclepiades, Bithynus, Apollonius, Archigenes,
Nymphodorus, Heliodorus, Diocles, Rufus Ephesius, and Apollodorus Citiensis;
with the manner of curing Dislocations described in Figures painted on Vellum.
This is a great Treasure, being the only Work of this nature now known to be
extant. Spon.
I shall take this occasion to tell you, that M. Magliabecchi could not favor
me with a sight of St. Chrysostom's Letter to Caesarius, having received
express Orders from the Great Duke not to communicate it to any person
whatsoever. But you may inform our Friend, that M. Magliabecchi positively
assured me, that the Passage cited by Martyr is contained word for word in that
Manuscript.

We went also to the Church of the Holy Cross, principally to see the Tomb of
Michael Angelo; which is certainly a very considerable Monument; though, in my
opinion, not altogether suitable to the Merit of so great a person. In the
Chapel belonging to the Family of the Zanchini, in the same Church, we observed
on the Altar a Picture by Angelo Bronzini, in which Christ is represented
delivering the Souls of the Fathers; among whom there are many Female Spirits
that appear too gay and airy for an Altar-piece. And even some say, That she
who bears the Name of Eve is the true Resemblance of the Painter's Mistress.
They add also, that the Figure of a Man at the right corner of the Picture
below, looking steadfastly on the pretended Eve, is Bronzini's own Phiz. This
puts me in mind of Pinturicchio, who, in the Vatican, painted Pope Alexander
the Sixth prostrate at the Feet of Julia Farnese, under pretext of making him
adore the Virgin.

Among the holy Rarities we observed in the Churches, besides the Rods of Moses
and Aaron, which I mentioned before, I shall only name the Hood St. Francis
wore when he was stigmatized, which is to be seen in the Church of All Saints.
Two of Judas's thirty pieces of Silver which are preserved in the Annunei^^^,
and the Crucifix that spoke to St. Andrew^^ Vrsina, which is in the Church of
the Carmelites.

The Monks of St. Mark make excellent Balsams, and prepare all manner of
Perfumes: we bought some of 'em, and had sometimes the pleasure to walk in
their Cloisters and odoriferous Gardens, where we breathed nothing but Oranges
and Jesmins: But the truth is, there is not any part about Florence that is not
altogether charming. The Great Duke has several fine Houses, of which we only
saw Poggio Imperiale, and Pratinola. These are very pleasant places; and I may
even venture to say they have Beauties that are not common. But the
magnificency of Gardens and Waterworks is advanced to such a height in France,
that the best way to save the Credit of Frescati and Pratinola, is to pass over
in silence all their petty Wonders that were formerly so highly extolled.

We visited also the Arsenal, and the Citadel of St. John Baptist, which is a
strong place, and kept in good order. But the two Forts of Belvedere and St.
Miniato are in a manner wholly neglected.

The Great Duke has diverse Nurseries for several sorts of Animals. Villani
relates, In the Hospital ad Scalas there is the Tomb and Epitaph of a human
Monster who had two Heads and four Hands on one Body. This double man (named
Peter and Paul) had different Affections. One of the Heads wept, while the
other laughed; and slept while his Companion was awake. This Monster lived
Twenty years and Twenty days. Schrader.
That in the year 1331, two young Lions were cubb'd at Florence, who lived to
grow great: The same Author writes, That at another time a Lion made his escape
out of his Hole, and terrified the whole City; that having met a young Child,
whom he lifted up between his Paws without hurting it, the astonished Mother
ran with Cries and Tears to the ravenous Animal, who looking steadfastly upon
her, restored the Child, without offering the least Violence to either of 'em.

I must not conclude this Letter without mentioning those Stones found on the
Mountains near Florence, which being sawed through the middle, and afterward
polished, some of 'em represent several sorts of Trees, and others are marked
with the Figures of Towns and ruined Castles. Kircher calls the former
Dendrites, from the Images of Trees that appear on 'em; and the same Author
makes several curious Remarks on this occasion, which I will not insist upon in
this place, since doubtless you remember 'em as well as I.

There is one thing more which I must not forget to tell you; for though Florence
is certainly one of the finest Cities in the World, and has the advantage of a
most delicious situation, yet it must appear a very sad and melancholy place to
those who are accustomed to enjoy the Pleasures of Society. Sir -- D. who, you
know, has resided here for several years, is not able to express his uneasiness
under the intolerable Constraint and eternal Ceremonies of this place, and
particularly exclaims against the Invisibility of the beautiful Sex; and
indeed, these Customs can never be endured by any but such as are accustomed to
'em from their Infancy. I am,

SIR, Your etc.
Florence, May 23, 16^^.
LETTER XXVIII.
SIR,
WE could not find one Litter at Florence, to carry us to Bologna; I know not
by what Accident the whole Country was covered with a Deluge of Monks, who took
up all the easy Carriages: We had two days Journey to make through a very rough
and mountainous Country; it is true, it is not impassable in a Calash, but we
should have been oftentimes forced to alight and walk afoot, and therefore we
resolved to make use of Horses.

The Way between Florence and Bologna is a perpetual Chain of the Apennin
Mountains; the highest we met with in our passage is called Monte Juovo. The
Country, generally speaking, is barren and desert, only the Valleys of On the
third of July 1642, this little Town was destroyed by an Earthquake. Schrad.
Scarperia, and Fiorenzola was built by the Florentins, An. 1332. Villani
writes, That they laid the Foundations of it under the Ascendant of the Sign
Leo, that it might become a potent and durable City: But he adds, That these
Precautions were very unsuccessful. Some think this is the Fidentia of the
Ancients.
Fiorenzola deserve a somewhat better character: the first of these places is
famous for Cutler's Work, where for five or six pence you may buy a Knife, with
a dozen of Blades to one Handle; and you may have some of all prices.

It Is observed, that toward the Village of Pietra-mala the Air sparkles
sometimes during the night.

A little on this side, between Pietra-mala and Loyano, at the Village of Scari
calassino, are the limits of Tuscany; the Great Duke of Tuscany's Arms are on
one side of a Post, and the Pope's on the other.

From the top of the last Hills which end at Bologna, we discovered the Sea on
our right hand, and directly opposite to us we had a full view of the vast and
admirable Plain of Lombardy, which spreads its self along the Po, between the
Alps and Apennine Hills: the surface of the Sea is every where spherical, and
therefore we can see but a little part of it at once; but Lombardy being
exactly level, discovers a prodigious extent of Land, especially if it be
viewed from a rising Ground.

The Apennin sinks by degrees into little fertile Hills, BOLOGNA the Fat.
as it approaches Bologna, which is On the Via Aemilia.
seated at the foot of the Hills and opening of the plain Country: to take a
full prospect of it, you must go up to the Convent of St. Michael in Bosco,
where at the same you will have the pleasure to see one of the most magnificent
Monasteries in Italy. It Is certain, there are few sovereign Princes whose
Palaces are near so beautiful. I know not whether the Monastery of the
Dominicans, and that of St. Savior, are inferior to this; but in the general
I can assure you, the Convents in Bologna are extremely large and very
magnificent.

Bologna is the Seat of an Archbishop, The Archbishop has the Title of a Prince
of the Empire.
and the second City in the Ecclesiastical State; it is reckoned to be somewhat
greater and even richer than Florence, and to contain more Inhabitants by a
third part: it is enclosed only with a single Wall, and has no Citadel. After it
had been cruelly harassed by Foreign Wars and Intestine Broils, it was forced
at last to throw its self into the Arms of the Pope Nicholas Ann. 1278.
Pope. But though the People of Bologna surrendered up their Liberties, and
became a part of his Holiness's Dominions, yet they made a kind of honorable
composition with their new Master, and submitted only on these terms, Bolognesi
sensa Fisco and Citadella.
That he should never put 'em under the Lash of a Citadel; that the Estates of
the Citizens should never be subject to confiscation under any pretext
whatsoever; and that they should still have an Auditor of the Rota, and an
Ambassador at Rome. All which Conditions have been faithfully observed hitherto.

The University was founded in the year 425, In one of the Halls of the
University there is a Monument erected to the honor of Gabriel Tagliacozzo, an
expert Surgeon, who made artificial Noses, Ears, and Lips, of live Flesh.
Huguetan.
by Theodosius the younger, but it ows its chief splendour to Charlemain: It is
with respect to this University that the City stamps upon its Coin Bononia
docet; and the word Libertas is also added in the Coat of Arms.

The little River Arno that passes by the City could not make it a fit place
for Traffic, but for the Canal of Communication by which it is joined to the
Po. There are in this City Four hundred Silk-mills; and besides, the
Inhabitants trade in Wax, Hemp, Flax, Hams, Sauciges, Soap, Tobacco, and
Perfumes: They sold their little Dogs very dear when they were more in fashion
than they are at present. They tell a pleasant Story of a certain honest
Traveller, a Native of Limoges in France, who in his passage through this Town
observing what vast sums were paid for these little Creatures, went immediately
home to his own Country, and returned with a whole Kennel of Mastiffs, hoping
to sell 'em at much dearer rates, proportionably to their weight and bulk.

The Houses are generally built of Stone or Brick, plastered over; and there
are also some of hewn Stone. Almost all the Streets have double Portico's, as
at Padua, but here they are both larger and higher, not unlike to those in
Covent Garden. The Streets are also pretty straight, and, all things
considered, it may be said, that Bologna is both a good and a fine Town. The
Women are not so much confined as at Florence; we saw a considerable number,
and some of 'em are very handsome. The richer sort endeavor as much as they can
to imitate the French Fashions, as they do almost every where else.

General Caprara's Palace is one of the finest in the City. Here we saw many
rich Spoils which he took from the Turks.

Bonifacio VIII. P. M. ob eximia erga se merita S. P. Q. B. A. M. CCC. I.
The Cardinal-Legate, and the Gonfalonier with his Counsellor's Lodge in the
public Palace, above the Portal of which there is a Statue in Brass of Gregory
XIII, and on one side of it that of Boniface VIII. In the same Palace we saw
the Cabinet of Curiosities of Ulysses.
Aldroandus. That of the Marquess of Cospi is united to it, and the whole
belongs to the City. Every Piece in these Cabinets has its Name written upon
it. M. Lotier a Banker has an excellent Cabinet of Medals. He has two Otho's of
Brass, of uncontroverted Antiquity. They are only ignorant Persons, who pretend
that there are no ancient Otho's. Spon.
We observed the Picture of a Woman, whom Aldroandus says he saw, who had a
long and thick Beard like a Capuchin Friar.

But there is nothing in both these Cabinets so rare and surprising as what I
am going to relate to you. In a Chamber at the side of this we saw a hundred
and eighty seven Volumes in folio, all written by Aldroandus's own Hand, with
more than two hundred Bags full of loose Papers: It Is true, the Margins are
large, and the Lines at a considerable distance.

I forgot to tell you, that between the Statues of the Popes, on the Front of
this Palace, there is a Latin Inscription, which says, That the Emperor Charles
V, and Pope Clement VII. meeting together at Bologna, in November 1529, gave
Peace to all Italy; after which the Pope Charles V. had been crowned before at
Aix la Chapelle, on the 22d of October 1520. He was crowned King of Lombardy at
Bologna.
crowned the Emperor in the Church of St. Petronius; that afterward they made
a triumphant procession through the whole City, and remained all the succeeding
Winter together in it.

Another Inscription relates the Miracle wrought by an Image of our Lady, who
delivered Bologna from the Plague. It begins thus: Adeste O Sol and Luna
Testes, etc.

In another place, one named Perhaps this was Count Ugolin of Pisa, one of the
Heads of the Guelphs, whose Story and miserable End is related by J. Villani,
l. 7. c. 120, 127.
Vgolino is painted on the Wall, hanging by a Foot, with these words, Vgolino
traditore filatugliero alla Patria.

The great and beautiful Fountain over against the Palace is the Work of the
famous John of Bologna, a Flemish Architect and Sculptor.

St. Petronius's is the greatest Church in the City. Here we observed Cassini's
Meridian Line, which is drawn on a Copper Plate set in the Pavement, and is Two
hundred and twenty two foot long. The situation of the Church is almost East
and West; so that the Line beginning at the entrance of the great Body on the
left hand, passes between the Pillars without any Obstacle, almost to the end
of the little Nave. Directly over the Noon-point of this Line there is a little
hole in the arched Roof of the last Nave, through which a Ray of the Sun enters,
and marks the Solstices and Equinoxes upon the Line. This is an unerring Sign,
and the Operation may be easily performed in a convenient place; The Neptune
and other Figures in Brass were made by John of Bologna. Antonio Lupi was the
Architect, and Laureci the Designer of this Structure. L'Ascoso writes, That
the Fountain cost Seventy thousand Crowns of Gold.
for the whole Secret consists in measuring the degrees on the Line,
proportionably to the height of the hole through which the Ray enters.

At the Church of Corpus Domini they show an embalmed Body, which is black and
dry, like a Mummy, and pretend that it is the Body of a Katherin Vigri.
Saint that works many Miracles. She is seated on a Stool, and muffl'd up in a
hundred sorts of Hoods, with many Rings on her Fingers. Her Nails and Hair, if
you will believe our Informers, grow as much now as when she was alive; which
was the first and principal Mark of Holiness that laid the Foundation of her
Fame. It Is impossible to behold such a ghastly Spectacle without Horror.

They have also an extraordinary veneration for an Image of our Lady, made by
St. Luke, and are persuaded that she would infallibly come once every year to
visit 'em, if they did not go to her: But they are too complaisant not to take
a Journey of five miles to wait upon her at the place of her residence; At
Mount la Guardia. They are making a covered way to go in procession from the
City to that Mountain; and the Work is already far advanced.
and for three days afterward they carry her about the City with more Pomp and
Ceremony than was used in the Reception of Charles the Fifth, and Clement the
Seventh. The Companies of Artificers, the Fraternities, Convents, Parishes,
Magistrates, Gonfalonier, and Legate, assist all together at the solemnity of
this Procession. The Image is carried under a rich Canopy, and when she passes
by, the Spectators throw themselves upon their Knees with Sighs and Groans that
put us in mind of your Quakers in England.

We saw also the magnificent Chapel and Tomb of St. Dominic in the Church of
the Dominicans. The Benches in the Quire are adorned with inlaid Work of
several colors, done by Friar Damian of Bergamo. The same Praises are given to
this Work now, that were wont to be bestowed on it formerly; for commonly one
half of our Actions proceeds merely from Custom: Nevertheless, that Art has
been very much improved since those times; they have found out the Secret of
imprinting natural Colors on Wood; and in the general such Works are now
performed with quite another turn, a great deal more delicacy and exactness.

In the same Church we saw the Tomb of Called also Enzelin.
Hentius King of Sardinia and Corsica, Bastard Son of the Emperor Frederic II.
That young Prince was taken Prisoner by the Bolognians, as he was coming to
assist their Enemies the People of Modena. His Father left no means unessay'd
to procure his Liberty; he strove in vain to move the Bolonians, both with
Prayers and Threatenings, and at last promised to -- Cum tantum Auri pro
redimendo Filio polliceretur, quantum ad moenia Bononiae circulo aureo cingenda
sufficeret.
surround their City with a Circle of Gold; but they would never be persuaded
to deliver their Prisoner. It Is true, they maintained him at the public charge,
and treated him as a King, but as a captive King. He lived Two and twenty
years, nine months, and sixteen days in confinement, and died in March 1272.
There is an Epitaph on his Tomb that gives a particular account of the whole
Story.

When I reflect on the Emperor's Offer, and the Obstinacy of that little
Republic, I cannot forbear suspecting that there was some Mystery in the Golden
Circle: If Frederic had intended to make his promised Chain heavy, it is
probable he would have offered some particular Sum, without using the ambiguous
Expressions of Circles and Surrounding. And the Bononians would not have been
so inexorable, if they had not feared to be deceived, and perhaps imagined that
the Circle would at last dwindle into a Thread.

Near the great Tower This Tower was erected by Gerard Asinelli, An. 1109, it
is 376 foot high. The Garisenda was built by Otho, and Philip Garisendi, Ann.
1110. Its height amounts to 130, and its inclination to 9 feet. Gal. Guald.
Asinelli there is another, called Garisenda, which leans like the Tower of
Pisa. The general Opinion is, that its Inclination is an effect of the singular
Art of the Builder, whose Wit is no less admired here than the Timorousness of
certain Monks is derided, who were so terrified by the leaning of the Tower,
that they resolved to leave their Convent, which lay under it.

The Opinion of those who pretend that this Monument was purposely erected in a
leaning posture, does certainly proceed from their Ignorance. It is a square
and even Tower built of Brick, like that of Siena and Viterbo, mentioned in one
of my preceding Letters; it was not designed for an Ornament, nor erected to
display the Wit of the Architect; and, without doubt, it was more for the
Interest of those that built it to secure the stability of its Foundations,
than to affect an useless singularity in its Structure. And, after all, it
would not be a very difficult task to build an enclining Tower; you are not
ignorant of the Reasons on which such an Operation might be grounded, and you
may try the Experiment when you please, by making a pile of the Men on your
Tables. This Tower puts me in mind of a Story related by Childrey, one of your
English Naturalists, that there is a Steeple in Bristol which is variously
agitated, according to the motion of the Bells.

Before I came hither I had seen the Epitaph of that Proculus who lies interred
in St. Proculus's Church in this City; Si procul a Proculo, Proculi campana
fuisset;
Jam procul a Proculo, Proculus ipse foret.
But I always fancied, according to the common Opinion, that St. Proculus's
Bell had knocked out his Namesake's Brains; whereas I Am informed here, that
this Proculus being a very studious person, accustomed himself for several
years to rise every Morning at the sound of that Bell; which was at last the
occasion of his death.

The shining Stones so generally known under the name of the Bononian Stones,
are found on the Hill of Paderno, three miles from the City. Barthol. Zunicheli
is the only person that knows how to prepare 'em.

We find the Heats no less troublesome here than among the sandy Mountains of
the Apennins; but to make amends, we have Ice and all sorts of cooling Liquors:
through all the Country the Men use Fans as well as the Women; there are some
made of Paper, not unlike to a Fane or Weather-Flag, and sold for a penny. In
our Inn we had a Machine that played on the Table to drive away the Flies.

We were frequently entertained with Lake-Tortoises, about the bigness of
Trenchers; their Flesh is firm, and of a pretty good savor.

Last night about Sunsetting we left Bologna, and traveled ten miles to
San^ogia, a little Village equally distant from that City and Modena. We are
assured, that henceforward the whole Country, as far as the Alps, is as smooth
and even as a Bowling green, and that all the ways are bordered with tilled
Grounds, and Vines supported by Trees planted Chequerwise: we have been already
accustomed to such Objects in several parts of Lombardy, and must expect to
meet with almost nothing else: such a Disposition of the Country is certainly
good in its own nature, and very pleasant, but at last it grows offensive to
the Eye of a Traveller; for the Sight is perpetually bounded with rows of
Trees, and wants the necessary diversion of Variety.

Yesterday in the Evening, I have read in an English Relation of the American
Islands, that there are great shining Flies in Barbados, which might serve for
Candles: and that the Indians usually tie 'em to their Arms and Legs, when they
travel in the night.
as we drew near to the abovementioned Village, we saw a thing that appeared
very unusual, and not unpleasant to us, though it is not at all heeded by the
People of the Country, by reason of its commonness. All the Hedges were covered
with prodigious Swarms of Shining Flies, and every Bush seemed to be on fire.
The Fields and Trees were no less full of 'em, and the whole Air was brightened
by their luster. You would have sworn, that either it rained Stars, or that
these Luminaries flew through the Skies; at least Philo would have been of that
Opinion, who imagined all the Stars to be living Creatures.

These little They are called Lucciole.
Insects are almost of the shape of Locusts, but they are not above two Lines
and a half long, and one Line in breadth. The shining part is a little pale
yellow Hair under their Belly, which is stretched at every motion of their
Wings, and at the same time darts forth a very bright glance of Fire.

We set forwards this morning very early, and in two hours arrived at Modena.
By the way we saw the Fort of This Fort has four Bastions, which bear the names
of St. Mary, St. Peter, St. Paul, and St. Petronius.
Urban VIII, and a little on this side of it we crossed the River Panaro, which
separates the Territory of Bologna from the Duchy of Modena.

Modena is situated in a good Country, MODENA*
but it is destitute of Trade, and consequently poor. Its Fortifications are in
a decaying condition, and its Streets are little and dirty. The Portico's with
which almost all the Streets are bordered, as at Bologna, are low and narrow;
neither are any of its Churches very remarkable. Fine Houses are Rarities in
this place; and, all things considered, I may venture to assure you, that it
would be hardly taken notice of, but for its ancient Reputation, and the
residence of its Duke in i^ at present. The old Palace is an inconsiderable
Building, but the new one, which is partly founded on the Ruins of the former,
has very promising Beginnings: The Stables are handsome, and well stored. These
are all the Beauties of Modena, with its Street appointed for Races, and the
Walks on the Ramparts. I am,

SIR, Your etc.
Modena, May 28. 1688.
LETTER XXX.
SIR,
OUR Calashes brought us in four hours from Modena to Regio. REGIO.
There is nothing particularly remarkable in this City; but in the general it is
better built, and more pleasant than Modena. They boast much of their Huguetan
says there are two famous Pictures in it, one by Corregio, and the other by
Guido: but he forgets to tell us what they are.
Church of St. Prosper, but they who have seen Rome and Naples will hardly be
persuaded to admire the Churches of Regio. They strive also to gain some
Reputation by their Works in Bone, and Spurs; as those of Modena do by their
Masks; but these are poor Exploits to acquire Fame. Their finest Works in Bone
are paltry little Rings, sold for Sixpence a dozen, Death-heads, Shrines for
Relics, Agnus Dei's, and Crosses, all which are made with Tools like Hedging
Bills. They have store of Or Images of our Lady.
Madones, and Relics. I am informed, that some ancient Inscriptions have been
found at Regio, in which that City is called Regium Lepidi, without mentioning
who that Lepidus was. The other Regio in Calabria ulterior bore the name of
Regium Julium; and it is observed, that the Inhabitants of the first were by the
Latin Authors called Regienses, whereas those of the latter were named Rhegini.
And the last Regium or Rhegium is also thought to be derived from the Greek
word (...), because Italy is divided, and as it were broken from Sicily at that
place.

The Inhabitants of our Regio style their Prince Duke of Regio and Modena; as,
you know, the Scots put the name of their Country before that of England, in
the Title of the King.

Eight miles from Regio we passed over the River Ensa on a Bridge, and entered,
on the other side, into the Duchy of Parma. The Country is still plain, but we
meet with many Pastures; whereas about Bologna and Modena almost all the
Grounds are tilled.

Parma is seventeen miles from the Bridge of Ensa; we perceived the City at a
considerable distance, because of the breadth and streightness of the Road that
leads to it, which discovers its highest Spires. The entry into it is very
pleasant, and the City it self deserves the same Character. Over the Gate through
which we entered we saw the Arms of Pope Paul III. You know that Pontife
created his Bastard Son Lewis, Duke of Parma and Placenza, these Territories
having been before united to the Ecclesiastical State. The Citadel of Parma was
built on the Model of that of Antwerp; and the Fortifications of the City are
also very good. It is divided by the River of Parma, which runs through the
middle of it; but this River is not navigable.

There is nothing extraordinary in the Ducal Palace, but they are building
another which will be larger and more regular. The Stables are handsome, the
Coaches very rich, and the Wardrobe well furnished. The great Theater is a very
rare Structure, and neither Paris nor Venice can boast of the like. It is
extremely large, and yet the softest Whisper may be heard through all the parts
of it. Instead of Boxes, the Floor is surrounded with Benches, raised after the
manner of an Amphitheater: It is also much larger than the Floors of Theaters
are usually made, and may be filled with Water to the height of above three
feet. This little Lake is covered with gilt Boats, which make a very charming
Spectacle, by the help of a fine illumination.

Besides the ordinary Schools of the University, there is a large and fair
College, called the College of the Nobility. They receive Scholars of all
Nations, who are capable of being admitted Knights of Malta. Not only the
Sciences, but all manner of Exercises are taught here; and the Pensions are
different, according to the variety of the Studies. The Scholars eat together
in a Refectory, and their number at present amounts to Two hundred and thirty.

The Dome of the Cathedral was painted by Corregio; and there are several good
Pictures in the At St. John's and St. Anthony's.
Principal Churches.

We saw a great deal of good Company at the Race, especially fair and handsome
Women, but they observe the ridiculous Customs of Rome: for Persons of
different Sexes never go into the same Coach; you may see a heap of Men in one
Coach, and a troop of Women in another; and they would be as much ashamed to be
seen together, as to walk stark naked about the Streets. Is there not a strange
Medley of Humors and Prejudices in the World?

Parma is 35 miles distant from Placenza. In our Journey thither we passed by a
little dismantled Town called St. Donino; we saw neither Villages nor Rivers on
all this Road, that deserve to be mentioned.

PLACENZA.
Placenza is seated in a Plain, five or six hundred p^ces from the Po. It is a
pleasant Town, bigger than Parma; the Houses are low, but very prettily built.
The Race-street, which they call the Stradone, is straight as a Line, and of an
equal breadth throughout. Next the Houses, on each side of it, there is a
Foot-path fenced in by a row of Three hundred Posts, as at London; these Posts
are just ten foot distant from each other; whence it is plain, that the whole
Street is 3000 foot long.

The Statues of Alexander Farnese Governor of the Spanish Netherlands, and of
his Son Rainuccio the First, are in the great Place.

We went up to the top of the highest Steeple, according to our usual custom,
from whence we discovered an admirable Landscape, extremely embellished by the
course of the Po; and even saw Cremona distinctly, which is twenty miles
distant from this place.

There are some Pictures by Carache in the Cathedral; and an Image of our Lady
by Raphael, at St. Sixtus's. Hug.
I have not thought fit to mention the Churches of this City, and am resolved
hereafter to trouble you very rarely with Descriptions of that nature; for, as
I intimated to you before, when one's Head is full of the Idea's of such
magnificent Churches as we have seen, it is almost a pain to him to look upon
any others.

I shall only add concerning Placenza, that it is thinly inhabited; that the
Houses are generally built of Brick; and that its Weights, Measures, and Coyns
are different from those of Parma. Its Fortifications are not very
considerable, though they are commonly much extolled. The Pomaerium is surrounded
with Posts, without any Buildings; I know not whether I made the same
Observation concerning Leghorn, in one of my former Letters.

We followed the course of the Po, at some distance, till we came over against
Cremona, where we crossed over the River in a Ferry-boat. There are no Bridges
on the Po below Turin.

Cremona is seated on the left Bank of that River, in the Duchy of Milan.
CREMONA.
It Is a pretty large City, but even poorer and less populous than Placenza.
There is nothing at all to be seen in it, though its Tower and Castle are very
much extolled. One of their Authors has the confidence to tell the World, That
the Tower is reckoned to exceed all others in height, and for that reason
esteemed one of the Wonders of Europe; and That the Castle is the strongest and
most formidable Citadel in Italy. If I had not been accustomed to the lofty and
hyperbolical Expressions of the Italians, I should have been strangely
surpised, after all these Rhodomontades, to find nothing at Cremona worth
observation. The Castle is an old, shapeless, and half-ruin'd Mass, which in
its best state deserved not to be compared to a well contrived Fort, but
perhaps might have been reputed tolerable in the days of Cross-bows. And the
Tower is neither handsome nor very high, but inferior to a thousand that are not
so much as mentioned. It was built by Frederic Barbarossa, An. 1184. There is a
Tradition, that the Emperor Sigismond and Pope John XXIII, went up to this
Tower, with a certain Gabrino Fondulio Tyrant of Cremona. C. Tor.
Lord of Cremona, who repented afterward, as he several times declared, That
he did not throw 'em down from top to bottom, merely for the rarity of the
thing. And perhaps it was this Story that gave the first occasion to the
Reflections that have been made on the height of this Tower.

The Inhabitants of Cremona boast much of the Antiquity of their City, but they
produce not any Monuments to confirm it. The Antiquity of Cremona has a very
near resemblance to that of the Po.

In the distance of Forty miles from Cremona to Mantua, we saw nothing but
Hamlets that deserve not to be named. BOZZOLO.
Only Bozzolo is a sort of a little City, enclosed with certain Works which
pass for Fortifications. It gives Title to a Duke, who, besides this place, is
Sovereign of a Territory that ex^ends four or five miles. We passed the Oglio
in a Ferry boat, a great and rapid River, that falls from the Lake of Isseo
into the Po.

I soon perceived, that neither the Geographical Charts, nor the other
Descriptions I had seen of Mantua had given me a just Idea of its situation;
MANTUA.
for it is usually but falsely represented in the midst of a Lake, with which it
is almost equally surrounded. To rectify this Mistake, it must be observed,
that the Which comes from the Lake of Guarda.
River Mincio meeting with a flat Country, makes a kind of Marish about twelve
or fifteen times longer than broad: and that the City is built on a spot of
firm Land, within the Marish, but toward one side of it. Before we entered the
City, we passed over a Causey, The Marquisat of Mantua was advanced to the
Title of a Duchy by Charles V, An. 1530.
which is not above two or three hundred paces long; but on the other side
which looks toward Verona, the Marish, or Lake (if it must be so called) is
much wider. In some parts of it the Water is always in motion, but in others it
stagnates and infects the Air to such a degree, that during the great Heats,
the City is only inhabited by such who cannot conveniently leave it.

The situation of Mantua is not unlike to that of Peronne, but with this
difference, that the last, besides its Marish, is well fortified; whereas
Mantua is enclosed only with a Wall, though it is also defended by a strong
Citadel.

This City is of an indifferent largeness, about the bigness of Cremona, but
much superior to it both in Riches and in the number of Inhabitants. Some of
the Streets are broad and straight, but the Houses are generally unequal, and
almost all very indifferent. I have seen a printed description of the Ducal
Palace, in which that Building is extolled as the most magnificent Structure in
Italy. It Is plain, that the Author wracks his Fancy to invent new Terms, as if
those that are now in use were not strong enough to express the Grandeur of his
Subject; but such a groundless Zeal must either be an Effect of an excessive
and unwarrantable Complaisance, or proceed from an unjust Prejudice. The
outside of this Structure is neither beautiful nor regular; and I can assure
you from my own Experience, that a Stranger may pass by it, and even look upon
it and touch it, without imagining it to be a Palace. It Is true, there are many
Galleries and Apartments in it, and therefore it may be called large and
commodious, which are the highest Epithets that can be bestowed on it, as well
as on White hall.

Our Guides assured us, that this Palace was very richly and magnificently
furnished before it was The 18th of July, 1630.
pillaged by the Imperial Army. It seems succeeding Princes have been
discouraged by the greatness of that loss from endeavoring afterward to
repair it; for many of the Rooms remain still empty. Nevertheless, it must be
acknowledged, that there is not the least defect in the Duke's Apartment: the
Hall of Antiquities is full of rare and fine Pieces, and the Cabinet of
Curiosities is extremely well furnished.

Of seven or eight Pleasure-houses that belong to the Duke of Mantua, we saw
only Marmirol and la Favorite, which are very lovely Seats. Marmirol especially
is a charming place, admirably well furnished, adorned with Pictures and
Antiquities, and embellished with several Gardens, Orange-walks, Bird-houses,
and Fountains; besides which it enjoys the advantageous Neighborhood of a
Wood, and of a delicious and limpid Brook.

See Mezeray in the Life of Charlemain.
The Reverend Mr. St. Longin is the most precious Relic in Mantua, together with
some Drops of that miraculous Blood which was found in this City in the time of
Leo III, and This Order was instituted An. 1608, by Vincent Gonzaga, at the
marriage of his Son with Margaret of Savoy. He created Twenty Companions of the
Order, and put this Devise about the Collar, Nihil isto Triste recepto.
afterward gave occasion to the Institution of the Duke of Mantua's Order.
Both these venerable Rarities are kept in St. Andrew's Church, at the entry of
which I observed another extraordinary Piece; it is a Bell almost six foot in
diameter, with eight openings like Windows, three foot high, and one broad in
its circumference. They told us some Stories concerning the oddness of its
Fabric, but without the least appearance of Truth.

It Is impossible to leave Mantua without remembering Virgil, who was born in
the Village of Andes near this City.

Mantua Musarum domus, atque ad Sidera cantu
Evecta Andino. Sil. Ital. l. 8.
Besides the Cathedral, Strangers usually visit the Churches of the Jesuits,
of St. Barnabas, St. Maurice, St. Sebastian, St. Vrsula, and St. Barbara; the
Townhouse, Theater, Manufactories, Mill of the Twelve Apostles, Synagogue, and
Shambles.

Two and twenty miles from Mantua we passed over a River which separates that
Duchy from the Signiory of Venice; and eighteen miles further we arrived the
same Evening at Bressa, BRESSA.
where we lodged. The first Object that struck our Eyes as we entered into this
City, was the sight of Women in the Streets and Shops, as it is usual in France
and England; for we had seen none of that Sex since our arrival at Verona.
Bressa seems to be pretty well stored with Inhabitants, and a place of
Traffic; People stir about here after quite another manner than in most Towns
of an indifferent largeness, we have hitherto seen in Italy.

The Fortifications of this City are inconsiderable, but it is defended by a
very strong Citadel, which stands on a little Hill adjoining to the City, and
as it were on the first step of the Alps.

The Palace of Justice is a great and fair Building of a certain hard Stone
resembling Marble. On the Pediment of the Front are these words written,
Justiciae with a c.
Fidelis Brixia Fidei and Justiciae consecravit. Opposite to this Palace there
is a Portico five hundred paces long, and almost quite filled with Armourers
Shops. The Firearms that are made here are famous through all Italy.

The Neighborhood of the Alps furnishes this City with a great number of fine
Springs, and a very commodious Rivulet.

In the Cathedral they preserve with a great deal of Veneration that which they
call Constantine's Oriflame, but we could meet with none that were able to give
us an exact description of it, because it is never fully shown. The Sexton, who
entertained us with a Relation of its Virtues, told us only that it is a blew
Cross, of unknown matter, and that it is the same that appeared to Constantine
with this Motto, In hoc Signo vinces, in the Battle which that Emperor fought
against Maxentius; but we must not give Credit to this account of it. The Cross
or Figure of a Cross mentioned in that Story, was only a sign that appeared in
the Air, and not a palpable Cross; nor can it be properly called an Some derive
the word Oriflame from Flammula, a Banner or Standard, and Aurea, Golden,
because it was fastened to the end of a gilt Lance. Others think it was so
called because it was made of a sort of Gold and Flame-colour'd Stuff. It was
adorned with green Tassels. Du Cange.
Oriflame, which signifies a sort of gilt Banner or Standard. Mezeray tells us,
That under the second Race of Kings, St. Martin's Cope was born at the Head of
the French Armies. But he adds, That the Race of the Capets having a particular
Veneration for St. Denis, made use of the Banner called Oriflame, which
belonged to that Saint's Church. Perhaps then the Oriflame at Bressa may be the
The Labarum was a purple Banner, which was never made use of, but when the
Emperor commanded the Army in person. It was enriched with Fringes of Gold, and
Jewels. Constantine ordered this Cipher to be written on it, which consists of
the first Letters of the Name of Christ,
Labarum, to which Constantine added the Name of Christ, after his Victory over
Maxentius. But to speak more reasonably, give me leave to say, that this Vision
seems to be the Product of some Enthusiastical Brain, as well as that shining
Image of the Virgin, holding the little Jesus in her Arms, which the Tyburtin
Sibyl showed to Augustus in the Air.



All the way from Bressa to Bergamo we coasted the Ridge of the Alps on our
right hand, at the distance of two or three miles. We passed over the River
Oglio a second time at Palazzuolo, which is seated exactly in the middle
between the two abovementioned Cities, being Fifteen Miles distant from each
of 'em.

BERGAMO.
Bergamo is a strong Town, and a place of Traffic, seated on a little Hill at
the foot of the Alps. Besides its Fortifications, which are well lined, and in
good repair, it has a Citadel with some Forts and advanced Works, which defend
the rising Grounds that command it. It has also five Suburbs, which are singly
worth a little Town.

Ambrose Calepin lies interred at the Austin's He was born at Calepio a Village
near Bergamo.
When Travelers visit the Cathedral, they show 'em the Tomb of the brave Barth.
Coglione Commander of the Venetian Forces against Milan, and the first General
who brought Angli in oppugnatione Cenomanorum primum Aeneis Tormentis utuntur,
and Urbe potiuntur, An. 1425. Pol. Virg.
Canons into the Field. They make 'em also take notice of the inlaid Work of
the Benches in the Quire of the same Church. It is of the same nature, and done
by the same Hand as that we observed in the Church of the Dominicans at Bologna.

The Bergamese Jargon is reckoned so ridiculous, that all the Italian Buffoons
affect to imitate it. But there is another thing that makes the People of this
City far more unpleasant and disagreeable; one* half of 'em have Wens or lumps
on their Throats, which disfigure their Countenances, and in my Opinion are
very unseemly Blemishes. These Swellings are in a manner natural to 'em; and,
if we may give credit to the common Report, they doubt whether it be a greater
Imperfection to have or to want these Tumors. Henry VIII. King of England used
to bless Gold Rings, which, he pretended, cured the Cramp. But his Son Edward
slighted this kind of Talisman. William III, now reigning, has also rejected
and abolished the superstitious Custom observed by the Kings his Predecessors
since Edward the Confessor, to touch those who were troubled with Scrophulous
Tumors, or the King's Evil.
You know, without doubt, that the Princes of the House of Austria pretend to
cure this Distemper, by giving a Glass of Water to drink; and to untye the
Tongues of Stammerers by kissing 'em.

The Territories of Bergamo and Milan are watered throughout with Rivulets
which fall from the Alps, and are upon occasion divided by the Inhabitants into
an infinite number of Canals, which by moistening the Fields prevent the ill
consequences of Droughts, and make the Lands extremely fertile.

The Inundation of the River Adda, which comes from the Lake of Como, obliged
us to leave our Calashes at a Village called Canonica, twelve miles from
Bergamo, where we passed over the River in a Boat, though not without a great
deal of difficulty, by reason of its extraordinary rapidity. We embarked on the
other side, on the Canal called Navilio della Marresana.
Navilio, which begins at Trezzo two miles above Canonica, and reaches in a
straight line within half a mile of Milan, its whole length amounting to twenty
miles. It derives Water from the Adda, the course of which River is in many
places very steep, and meets with several Falls before it reaches the level of
the flat Country, so that it is lower than the Canal by five and twenty or
thirty feet over against Canonica.

It Is said, that many Engineers had in vain attempted to bring the Waters of
the Adda to Milan by way of a Canal, till at last Leonard de Vinci, the most
accomplished man of his Age, undertook and finished the work.

I read the other day with equal Admiration and Pleasure, the Account Mr.
Felibien gives of that great Man, who, I Am apt to think, had a larger stock of
Merit than ever any Man before him could boast of. I cannot forbear making a
short digression on this occasion, which I hope will not offend you. That
illustrious Florentine was a man of great stature, of a good aspect, and sweet
temper: he was prudent, courteous, full of Wit, Courage, and Generosity. He was
so prodigiously strong, that he was able with one Hand to twist the Clapper of
a Bell. He was an excellent Horseman, danced admirably well, was brave and
dextrous in managing all sorts of Weapons, and a perfect Master in all genteel
Exercises. All the World knows, that he was one of the best Painters of the
Age* and that he and Michael Angelo made Raphael leave his first way of
Drawing. Besides all these excellent Endowments, our Leonard was a skilful
Architect, a good Sculptor, a great Master in Mechanics, a learned
Mathematician, Musician, Anatomist, Philosopher, Poet and Historian. Providence
could not in Justice put an end to so rare a Life without a distinguishing
Event. At the age of Seventy and Five years he fell sick at Paris, and Francis
the First honored him with a Visit; he endeavored to express his
acknowledgment of so great a Favor, by raising himself up, and expired in the
King's Arms, who advanced to hinder him from rising.

The Merit of this great Person was the Subject of our Discourse in our passage
along his lovely Canal, which gave us the prospect of a delicious Country on
both sides, and is in many places bordered with pleasant Houses, Orchards and
Gardens, like that which leads from Delft to Leyden, or from Amsterdam to
Vtrecht.

I did not intend to have written to you before our departure from Milan; but I
could not forbear adding this to the other Letters I am obliged to write on
this occasion. I am,

SIR, Your etc.
Milan, June 7th. 1688.
LETTER XXXI.
SIR,
THOUGH the City of Milan has been often wasted, MILAN the Great.
and even An. 1162. Frederic I, called Barbarossa, rac'd it, and sowed it with
Salt, sparing only some Churches.
utterly destroyed by the terrible Scourges of War and Pestilence, it is so
well recovered at present, that it may be justly reckoned among the best and
finest Cities in Europe. Its Figure is pretty round, its Walls are ten miles in
compass, and I Am positively assured, that it contains no less than Three
hundred thousand Inhabitants. There are not many Instances of so great a City
built in the middle of the Land, without the convenience of the Sea, or of a
The Country abounds with good Springs and Rivulets. Besides, the Canal brought
from the Adda fills the Ditch of she inward Enclosure of the City wiih running
Water. The Fortifications, or outward Enclosure, were erected since the
destruction of the City by Barbarossa. Galeazzo Visconti, Father of Azzo,
attempted to make a navigable Canal between Milan and Pavia, but the execution
of that Design was prevented by the death of the Undertaker. The beginning of
that Canal is still to be seen near the Gate of Pavia.
River.

I remember a certain Latin Author informs us, That Mediolanum or Mediolana
took its name Circa annum Mundi 4809. Mediolana Civitas conditur, sic dicta
quod ibi apparuit Sus, quae pro media part portabat Lanam pro pilis, Wern.
Roolwinck. Et quae lanigera de Sue nomen habet. Sidon. Apoll.
a Sue dimidia lanata, from a Sow half covered with Wool, that was found in the
place where the City was founded.

The first thing that our Guide carried us to see was the famous There are two
descriptions of this Cabinet, one in Latin, by Paulus Maria Tarzago; and the
other in Italian, by Pi. Fran. Scarabelli.
Cabinet of the late Canon Manfredi Settala, a Person equally noble and rich,
and no less dextrous in working with his own Hands than ingenious and skilful
in all the various parts of Learning. Such a man could not but make a good
choice; neither is there any thing in this Cabinet that deserves not to be
considered with attention.

Here we observed several sorts of very ingenious Machins, contrived for
finding out the perpetual Motion, Looking-glasses of all sorts, Dials, Musical
Instruments both ancient and modern, some of which were invented by Settala
himself; Books, Medals, curious Keys and Locks, Seals, Rings, Pictures, Indian
Works, Mummies, Arms, Strange Habits, Lamps, Urns, Idols, with an infinite
number of other sorts of Antiquities; Fruits, Stones, Minerals, Animals; a
prodigious variety of Shells; Works in Steel, Wood, Amber, and Ivory; a great
piece of Cloth made of the Stone Amianthos; and, without engaging further in
those tedious Enumerations I promised to avoid, all the most rare and curious
Productions of Art and Nature, not forgetting Monsters.

The Dish of yellow Amber, two foot in diameter, is a Piece that deserves to be
particularly mentioned.

There are also several rough Pieces of the same sort of Amber, enclosing
Grasshoppers, Spiders, Ants, Flies* and several other sorts of Insects, which
appear distinctly in the middle of 'em. This, in my Opinion, is an evident
Argument, though there are many different Opinions concerning the Nature of
Amber, that it is nothing else but a kind of Gum or Bituminous Matter, hardened
in the Air or Sea, or perhaps by some other cause, which I will not examine at
present. When an Ant, for example, happens to pass over a raw and clammy piece
of this Bitumen, she is entangl'd by it, and the mass of that soft and unctious
matter growing harder and bigger by degrees, the Insect is for ever entombed in
it. And this is exactly the Opinion of Martial.

Dum Phaetontaea formica vagatur in umbra,
Implicuit tenuem succina Gutta Feram,
Sic modo quae fuerat vita contempta manente,
Funeribus facta est tunc pretiosa suis.
It Is certain that Unicorns are mere Chimera's, and that the Horns usually
ascribed to 'em are the Horns or Pricks of a certain Fish found in the Northern
Seas. Yet there are three or four of these Horns in this Cabinet, which, they
pretend, grew on that imaginary Animal. The Venetians have the same Opinion of
the Horns in their Treasury; and many others are possessed with like
Prejudices. Never any man saw an Unicorn, and yet the whole World is full of
its Horns; I Am sure, for my part, I have seen above a hundred. It Is to be
observed, that there are also Fossil Horns exactly like to those that grow on
Fishes, though of a different matter.

Montaign pretends that the Remora is a Shellfish.
The Remora that stopped the Galley of the Unfortunate Anthony, is another
fabulous Animal* which, for all its Fame, may be placed in the rank of
Unicorns. Yet this also must increase the number of the Curiosities of
well-furnish'd Cabinets, lest any thing should seem to be wanting. They choose
for this purpose certain small and rarely-observ'd Fishes, about the bigness of
Herrings. I have seen at least a dozen of 'em and am sure that of the whole
number there were not two of the same kind.

The Foundations of it were laid on the 13th of June, 1386, by John Galeas
Visconti, first Duke of Milan. There was formerly in the same place a Church
called St. Mary major, it stands in the Center of the City.
The Cathedral Church is a prodigious Work. It Is, according to my observation,
less than St. Peter's at Rome by almost a sixth part, but infinitely superior
to it in the laboriousness of its S^ructure. It Is covered all over, without and
within, with Sculptures and Ornaments in Marble; so that you cannot perceive
the Ground, nor lay your Hand on any even or unwrought part. You are not a
stranger to the Gothic way of Building; and to form a just Idea of this
Edifice, you must imagine a Medley of Roses, Boughs of Trees, Animals, Grotesque
Figures, Pyramids, Niches, Statues, and Representations of a Thousand different
things, which dazzle the Eye of the Spectator by their Variety and Confusion.

There are only some parts of this Church perfectly finished; for it is the
Interest, and very probably the design of the Chapter, to leave it still
imperfect. The Legacies and other Donations that are bestowed upon 'em for the
building of the Church, bring vast Sums into their Coffers, which they apply to
other uses. Here I observed an Inscription in Gold Letters engraved on Marble,
which says, Templi hujus frontierigendae, atque ornandae, CCXXX. Aureorum
millia legavit, Jo. Petrus Carcanus Mediol. etc.
That one John Carconus a Milanese left at his death the sum of Two hundred and
Thirty thousand Crowns of Gold, to be employed in building and adorning the
Front of this Church. They have perhaps received a thousand times as much for
the same use from other Testators; nevertheless the Front remains still almost
naked: but this is a sure Device to drain the Purses of superstitious Persons.

Besides, to speak ingenuously, I believe there was another reason that
retarded the building of this Front. If they considered the Rules of
Uniformity, they found that it ought to be made Gothic, as well as the rest of
the Church; but a nicer and more refined Judgment required it to be more
regularly built. I observed both sorts of Architecture in that part of it which
is already begun; from whence it is plain, that the Contrivers of it were very
much puzzled, and uncertain what methods to follow. But their best course is to
be still taking, and not trouble their Heads with other matters.

Martin the Fifth having October 16. 1648, above an hundred thousand Strangers
came to Milan, to see the Ceremony: and many Persons were stifi'd in the Crowd.
Morigi.
blessed the Altar, before St. Charles Borromeo consecrated the Church, the
This Statue was made by one Jacobinus, who, in the Inscription under it is said
to exceed Praxiteles.

Praestantis Imaginis Author,
De Tradate fuit Jacobinus in art profundus,
Non Praxitele minor sed major farier ausim.
The last Verse limps. Near this Statue is that of Pius IV.


Statue of that Pope was erected in the Quire. He is represented without a
Beard, and with the Face of a young Man, though he was Fifty years old when he
was advanced to the Papal Chair. Behind the Quire the Catalogue of the Relics
in this Church is engraved on two Tables of Marble, among which I observed a
piece of This Rod or Wand is said to be entire at St. John de Lateran. Besides
this Piece, there is another at Florence, as I intimated before; and Baronius
relates, after Glaber, that there was a third found at Sens, Anno 1008. Rabbi
Abarbinel, after a long dissertation, and many trifling Conjectures concerning
this Wand, concludes, that Moses carried it to the Mountain where he died, and
that it was afterward placed in his Tomb. But, after all, it was never known
what became either of this or of the Ark.
Moses's Rod. The It Is the Opinion of some Authors, That Theodosius the Great
gave this Nail to St. Ambrose; others say, that Saint went to look for it in
the Shop of a certain Ironmonger at Rome, called Paolino, where he was warned
in a Dream that he should find it.
Nail of the Crucifixion of which they say Constantine made a Bit for a Bridle,
is the most respected Relick in Milan. It Is kept on the great Altar, surrounded
with five Lights which burn night and day. In the year 1576. Cardinal Borromeo,
called St. Charles, carried it in a solemn procession to stop the Plague; he
walked barefoot, with a great Rope about his Neck, though he was also clothed
with the usual Ornaments of a Cardinal.

The This Pavement is not yet finished. The Charge of it will amount to
Threescore and six thousand Two hundred and ninety Crowns, without reckoning
that of the Quire, which has already cost Five thousand Two hundred and fifty.
Morigi.
Pavement of this Church is finer, and more solid, than that of St. Peter's at
Rome, where the Floor is laid with thin Leaves of Marble, which begin already
to cleave, and will in a short time be quite raised up, whereas here the pieces
are very thick.

There are always Masons hewing Stone, and Women spinning, sewing, and selling
Fruit in the middle of the Church: besides, it is dark, and many parts of it
imperfect. All which Considerations laid together, will easily convince you,
that the inside of it can neither charm nor surprise the Eye of a curious
Beholder.

We went up to the Steeple, from whence we had a view not only of Milan, but of
four or five other Cities in the vast Plain of Lombardy. We discovered also the
Alps, which are united to the Appennine Mountains toward Genoua. The great
Bell bears the name of St. Ambrose; it contains seven feet in diameter, and
weighs Thirty thousand pounds.

Over against the Church there is a pretty large Place, where, in the Evening,
I usually observed about thirty Coaches, which moved and stopped from time to
time, that the People within 'em might see those who passed along. The place
for taking the Air in Coaches is a great unpav'd Street, in the Suburbs, which
is sprinkled every day with water And therefore called Strada Marina.
, as the Voorhout is at the Hague.

The Ambrosian Library was so named by Cardinal Frederic Borromeo, Ph.
Vannemachero, and Chapter Torre, affirm, That this Library contains Fourteen
thousand Manuscripts; but mention not the number of the printed Books. It was
much augmented by the addition of Vincent Pinelli's Library, R. Lassels.
Rufinus's Version of Josephus is one of the oldest Manuscripts in this Library.
G. Burnet. Fabio Mangoni built it. It contains several Apartments. The great
Hall is 75 foot long, and 30 broad. It could not be made larger, because of the
Churches and Houses that surround it. Besides the Books and Pictures, it is
enriched with several Collections of very fair Medals, and with rare and
curious Pieces of antique Sculpture and Architecture, with others molded on
the Originals. Boschi wrote a Treatise De Origin and Statu Bibliothecae
Ambrosianae C. Torre.
Archbishop of Milan, who founded it, and dedicated it to St. Ambrose. I read
in a little Description of this Library printed at Tortona, That it contains
twelve thousand Manuscripts, and seventy two thousand printed Volumes; but we
must not depend on that Author's Testimony, for it appears plainly to the Eye,
that there are not so many: and besides, the Library Keeper told us, that there
were not above Forty thousand in all. This Library is kept open two hours every
Morning and Afternoon; there is a Fire in it during the Winter, and there are
also Seats and Desks, with all the other Conveniences that are to be found in
the Library of St. Victor at Paris.

They showed us a great Book of Mechanical Draughts, which they told us Leonard
de Vinci wrote with his own hand. The Writing is extremely awry, and can hardly
be read without a Perspective-glass. There is an Inscription on the Wall, which
says, That a certain King of England, whose Name is not mentioned, offered
Three thousand Pistols for this Volume.

Adjoining to this Library there is an Academy for Painting, where we saw many
good Pictures. Among the rest, I remember one of Clement the Tenth, which
resembles a Print so exactly, that we were all deceived by it.

The Citadel is a regular Hexagon, well lined, furnished with store of Cannon,
and surrounded with a good Ditch and Counterscarps; but the old Walls should be
pulled down, with all those Towers, Forts, and other antique Works which are
contained in the Citadel, besides a considerable number of Houses; for, if all
this useless Rubbish were taken away, the place would be infinitely better.
After we had walked round the Ramparts, we entered into a Hall in the
Governor's Lodgings, to see a score of Soldiers who were exercising their
Postures, and practicing Spanish Sarabands against the Solemnity of
Corpus-Christi-day, when they were to dance before the Procession.

The principal Buildings in Milan, without mentioning the Churches and
Convents, are, the Palaces of the Governor and Archbishop; the Houses of the
Marquess Homodeo, Count Barth. Arese, and Signior T. Marini; the This Structure
was founded by Charles Borromeo, and built by Joseph Mela. A double Portico 176
foot and 3 inches long, and 16 foot 10 inches and a half broad, goes round the
great square Court on the inside. The first Order is Doric, and the second
Ionic. Over the great Portal stands Piety, having on her Breast the Sun, who is
the Father of Light; and on the other side Wisdom, with swelling Breasts full
of Provision for her Children. C. Torre.
Seminary; the Colleges of the Switzers, of Breva, and of the Jesuits; the
Townhouse, and the chief Hospital; the great Court of the last-nam'd Structure
is a Hundred and twenty paces square, with two rows or stories of Portico's
about the inside, both which are supported on every side by Two and forty
Pillars of a kind of Marble found in the neighboring Alps, every Pillar
consisting of a single Piece. The Body of the Edifice is of Brick, molded and
fashioned into several Ornaments of Architecture. The old Hospital is joined to
this, and both together make but one.

The Begun 1489, by Duke Lewis Sforza, called the Moor, and finished by Lewis
XII, 1507. Bramante was the Architect of this Structure.
Lazaret or place appointed for the entertainment of those that are sick of
Pestilential Distempers, depends on the great Hospital, and is situated about
two or three hundred paces from the City. It consists of four Galleries joined
in a square, each containing Ninety two Chambers, and surrounded on the inside
with a Portico supported by Marble Pillars, every Chamber being twenty foot
broad, or somewhat less; it is plain, that the length of each Gallery
comprehending the thickness of the Walls must amount to about Eighteen hundred
Feet. The great Place within is a Meadow washed by several Brooks of running
Water; and in the middle of the square is an Altar under a Dome supported by
Columns. The Doors of the Chambers are so contrived, that all the sick Persons
may see Mass said from their several Beds.

The Church, which at present bears the name of St. Ambrose, is the same into
which that ancient Doctor refused to admit Theodosius. There are Pictures and
Sculptures in it, which are the Productions of the most ignorant Ages. They
made us also take notice of a Dragon of Brass, that stands on a Marble Column.
Donato Bossi thinks it is a Figure of Aesculapius's Serpent: Tristan Caleo
suspects that it is a Memorial of some extraordinary Event, like the Goose in
the Capitol. See the Exercitationes Sacrae of Georg. Maebius, de Aeneo Serpente.
Morigi, Besozo, and some others, say, That this is a Representation of the
Serpent that Moses erected in the Wilderness, and produce some Passages of
Chronicles that seem to favor their Opinion. Others pretend that it was cast
out of the Fragmenta of that Serpent: and the People are firmly persuaded that
this is the Serpent of the Wilderness in proper Person, II Kings 18.4.
and in that belief have recourse to it on certain occasions, as to one of the
most effectual Relics. Bossi and Charles Torre declare, That they have been
several times Eyewitnesses of the Adoration paid to this Image.

In the Church of St. Eustorgia they preserve the Tomb that contained the
Bodies of the Three Kings, before they were removed to Colen. They pretend that
the Odor of Sanctity which remains in this Sepulcher compleats the Cure of
Diseases, though it never undertakes any that are difficult. But you must not
imagine that they are destitute of Remedies in such cases, for they have as good
Madona's and as powerful Relics at Milan as any are in Italy. At St.
Alexander's alone there are a hundred and forty four thousand Martyrs of the
Catacombs of St. Sebastian.

The other Curiosities of this place are Works in Steel, and in Rock-Crystal,
which is found not far off in the Alps; they make Looking-glasses of the
largest pieces, which rarely amount to a foot square.

The Proverb says, that He that would do a Kindness to Italy must destroy
Milan; which some think alludes to the Trade of Milan, that would be dispersed
through the rest of the Country: but others believe this Apophthegm was
occasioned by reason that the most This City has been 40 times besieged, and 22
times taken. Du Val.
fatal Wars to Italy have always had their Original in this City.

We had the Curiosity to go two miles from Milan to the Marquess of Simonetta's
House, to hear an Echo that repeats the last Syllable above Lucretius extols
an Echo that answered seven times: Sex etiam septem loca vidi reddere voces
Unam cum jaceres -- l. 4.



forty times. We made the experiment in a covered Gallery in one of the wings
of this Building, and the Echo answered from the other Wing. The Sound
decreases gradually, like the reboundings of an Ivory Bullet.

In our Journey from Milan to Pavia, which is but fifteen miles distant, we
went a little out of the way to see the famous In the Plain of Barco.
Monastery founded by The same who founded the Cathedral of Milan. All the
Pictures in the Chapel of St. Michael were done by P. Perugini, Raphael's
Master. In the Vestry there is a Christ crowned with Thorns, by Passignani,
which is much esteemed. The Pictures in the Quire were made by Daniel Crespi.
John Galeas Visconti, first Duke of Milan. The Body of the Church is of a
Gothic Architecture, but the Chapels and Altars are not inferior to the
richest and finest Pieces in the Churches of Naples. The Cloister is also very
fair, and the Parks, Gardens, Rivers, Avenues, and other Ornaments of this
House, make it a very charming Solitude. There are at present Fifty eight Monks
in it.

PAVIA.
The poor little City of Pavia has lost its ancient luster. It Is impossible to
divine by what remains of it at present that it was once the Metropolis of a
Kingdom, and the Residence of twenty Monarchs. The Castle is an old neglected
Heap, and the Fortifications are in a very mean condition. A Traveller may
satisfy his Curiosity by passing through the great Street, the rest of the City
being almost desolate.

Founded by Charlemain, and reestablished by Charles IV. Boethius was a Native
of Pavia.
As far as we could judge, the University is much decayed as well as the Town.
It consists of Five Colleges, among which that of Borromeo is chiefly
remarkable for the beauty of its Building. The Scholars walk through the City in
their Gowns, and those of every College have different Robes.

Over Against the Cathedral, which is an old, low, and dark Structure, and
built awry, there is a Figure on Horseback of Brass, which is is thought to be
a Statue of Antoninus Pius; it is commonly called the Regisol, In the Life of
Pope Gregory the Second. There is a kind of Mast of a Ship to be seen in the
Cathedral, which is thought by the People to be Orlando furioso's Spear.
though for what reason I know not. I find it had the same Name in the time of
Platina, who thinks it was brought from Ravenna, when that City was taken and
sacked by King Luitprand.

It was the same King Luitprand who, according to the Tradition, brought the
Body of St. Austin from Sardinia to Pavia, and buried i^ in St. Peter's Church,
which at present belongs to the Augustine Friars; but the place where the Body
lies could never be discovered, and the magnificent Tomb of Marble in the
Chapel, at the side of the Church, is only an honorary Monument erected by the
Monks.

In a Bookseller's Shop at Pavia, I found by chance the History of that City
written by Bernard Saccus, one of its Inhabitants, who, among other things,
gives an account of the Translation of St. Augustine's Body; the Story is thus,
as I transcribed it out of the Author: In Templo D. Petri a Luitprando
edificato, conditum Augustini corpus fuit; and ne facile resciri posset, ferunt
Luitprandum tribus locis effossis, structisque sepulchris, alibi deinde nocte,
paucis operi adhibitis, jussisse corpus condi, omnibus sepulchris eadem nocte,
occlusis, ut certa corporis sede ignorata, difficilior in aevum fieret occasio,
ejus perquirendi rapiendique. Constructum deinde alio seculo Sacellum Divo
Augustino fuit, juxta Templum divi Petri, in quo Sacello, Arca marmorea ac
celebris, composita est, Augustini, Sepulchrum repraesentans. B. Sac* l. 10. c.
3.


The same Author says, That the Land about Pavia produces naturally very good
Asparagus twice every year; and, that the Country People for the most part eat
the Roots raw.

He relates also, That the Po, which at present is five or six miles distant
from Pavia, did formerly change its course; and that its ancient Channel is
still to be seen about Five hundred paces from the City. This gives light to
certain Passages in old Geographers, who place Pavia near that River. Padus,
adds that Author, saepe totus ab alveo prosiliens, alium sibi extemplo alveum
sine fossoribus eruit. Si ab Apennino aquarum copia irruat, fluctus in adversam
ripam torquet; contra vero, si ab Alpium latere, aquarum impetus fiat. Si ex
utraque part, effertur supra modum.

The Tesin is so rapid, that in less than three hours, with one Rower, we
sailed above Thirty miles, says D. Burnet.
Coming out of Pavia we passed the Tesin on a covered Bridge. This is a very
rapid River, and the greatest of all those that fall into the Po. Its
Inundations are dreaded by the People of the Country, because its Waters are
fatal to the Fields which they overflow. When these Inundations last eight
days, which happens but seldom, the coldness of the Water kills the Herbs, and
the Land hardly recovers its fertility for some years after. How different are
the Waters of this River from those of the Nile.

Pavia was formerly called Ticinum, from the name of the River that washes its
Walls. Saccus relates, That its name was changed when Odoacer, In the year 472.
after he had destroyed it, granted an Immunity of five years to the
Inhabitants, with permission to rebuild their City: they called it Papia quasi
piorum Patria, from the Piety of its Citizens; not, as some vainly imagine,
because they received the Christian Religion at that time, for they were
Christians long before, but to denote the Love, or (as the word is sometimes
used) Piety, which those Patriots expressed for their Country, who went to
Ravenna to beg the King's Mercy and Pardon. Me si audieritis, said one of those
Deputies after their return, nomen inveniemus quod nostrae pietatis officia in
Patriam restituendam, paucis Syllabis posteritati attestabitur; and Ticini
nomen aquis restituetur. Papia piorum Patria, etc.

I shall add only one Observation concerning this City; That two Kings had the
Misfortune to be taken Prisoners here: Desiderius by Charlemain, and Francis
the First by Charles the Fifth. I am,

SIR, Your etc.
Pavia, June 12. 1688.
LETTER XXXII.
SIR,
FIfteen Miles from Pavia, we dined at the Town of Voghera, Voghera.
and the same day arrived at the little City of Novi, Novi.
which is seated at the foot of the Apennine, thirty miles from Genoa, and
under the Dominion of that Republic. The way between Novi and Genoa is very
mountainous, and we met with nothing worth our Observation on all this Road.

GENOA the Proud.
You know the City of Genoa is situated at the end of a Gulf, partly on the
brow of a Hill which forms a Crescent round the Gulf, From the Year 1494 to
1528, the State of Genoa was subject to above twelve kinds of Government.
and partly on a little Plain between the foot of the Hill and the Seashore.
The Streets in the general are extremely narrow, and the Houses consist of six
or seven Stories in the lower part of the Town; but by degrees, as the ascent
rises, the Houses are lower, and built at a greater distance. This situation is
certainly very pleasant to the Eye, but in other respects very troublesome and
inconvenient, especially for Coaches, which are not much used here: the Ladies
are carried in Litters, and the Men of Quality have either Chairs or Calashes,
which they guide themselves.

The Town is surrounded with a double Fortification, which covers it behind,
and reaches on both sides to the Shore. The nearest and best of these
Fortifications properly encompasses the City, and the second encloses all the
rising Grounds that command it.

My Eyes have often convinced me of the Falsehood of what I had formerly heard,
but I never observed a wider or more remarkable difference between the Accounts
I received from others, and my own Observation, than with respect to this City.
It Is confidently reported and generally believed, that Genoa is built of
Marble. Rubens composed a Treatise of the Palaces, of Genoa.
They who live at a distance from it scarce ever mention it without adding this
Observation concerning it, which is grown so common, that it is almost turned to
a Proverb. But, which is still more surprising, several Persons that have seen
it, are so accustomed to that way of speaking, that they cannot forbear
relating the same Story, either because they have seen it without considering
it attentively, or because they choose rather to leave the World in an Error
than to disturb so pleasant a Dream. And perhaps some are willing to take
advantage of this general Prejudice, which gives 'em so fair an opportunity to
embellish that part of the History of their Voyages.

But, after all, I can assure you it is absolutely false, that Genoa is built of
Marble; Brick and Stone, or both mixed together, are the ordinary Materials of
its Houses, and they are almost all covered with Plaster.

It Is true, there are some Houses in the Strada nu^va that are richly adorned
with Marble, and even the Fronts of four or five of 'em are almost wholly built
of it, but these are all the Marble Houses in Genoa; and I leave you to judge
whether this be a sufficient Reason to pretend that the whole City is built of
Marble, or whether it might not be affirmed on better grounds, That London is
wholly built of Stone, or Paris of Brick.

But though Genoa is not wholly built of Marble it may justly boast of some very
beautiful Structures; for the Houses are extremely large and fair in the five
or six Streets that are of a considerable breadth, and in the magnificent
Suburb of S. Pietro d'Arena. And besides, Slate and Glass are as common here,
as they are rare in most other parts of Italy.

I have heard so often of the Gardens in the Air, that are to be seen in this
City, that I think my self obliged to give you some account of 'em. If the
Relations of Travelers were exactly true, and things were called by their own
proper Names, those who never saw Genoa would not form such lofty Ideas of
these pretended Gardens in the Air, as if they were Machins of an Opera, or
Imitations of the famous Gardens of Semiramis. There is so little even Ground
in this City, that, as I intimated before, they are obliged to make the Streets
narrow, and the Houses very high, from whence you may reasonably conclude, that
there is not much spare room for Gardens. To supply that Defect, several
Persons adorn the Balconies of their Houses with Flower-pots, and some perhaps
cover 'em with Earth, when the Buildings are all to bear the weight of it;
these are the Gardens in the Air that make so great a noise in the World, though
there are many other things that are not so much as heeded, which in this sense
may be said to be in the Air.

The most beautiful Edifices received no hurt by the French Bombs, which were
levelled directly at the Heart of the City, where the Houses were thickest; and
it is but too apparent they were not thrown there in vain; for notwithstanding
all the Reparations that have been made since, there are at present above Five
hundred ruinous Houses in one part of the City. And most of the private
Sufferers in that general Calamity had the double misfortune to lose all that
they had, by losing their Habitations; so that they were not only incapacitated
to rebuild 'em, but even were not able to pay the charge of removing the
Rubbish. It Is plain then, that they who have a mind to see Genoa the Proud,
must not look for it here.

In the Church of Our Lady of the Vineyards they showed us a Bomb which fell
there without doing the least execution, and I believe would gladly have told
us, that this was an Effect of its Reverence to so sacred a place, if some less
respectful Bombs had not thrown down four or five other Churches, and as many
Convents.

During that fatal shower of Fire and Brimstone, the Doge, with thirty Persons
more, took shelter in the great Hospital called the Albergo, which being very
high and large, not only afforded a safe retreat to a great number of the
Inhabitants, but preserved a considerable part of their Goods, for they brought
thither all that could be carried. They are at present working on a Third Mole,
which will stretch further into the Sea than the other two, and (they hope)
secure 'em against the danger of a second Assault.

The Haven of Genoa is large, and of a convenient depth, but it lies open to
the Lubeccio or African Wind, which is almost South West, and is the most
dangerous Wind that reigns in in this part of the Mediterranean. So that they
were forced to make a little secure Harbor within the Port for their Galleys,
of which at present they have only six; to so small a number are the once
formidable Navies of Genoa now reduced.

The Pharos or Watchtower is very high, which here, as at Rochel, is called
the Lanthorn Tower. To see the whole City distinctly, it must be viewed from
three several places; from the top of this Tower, from the Sea about the
distance of a mile, and from the top of its Hill. These three different
Prospects are sufficient to give a complete Idea of the Town.

The Palace of the Republic, or the Public Palace, called Palazzo Reale, is
extremely large. Here the Doge and Dogess lodge, and two or three Senators,
with their Families, besides some inferior Officers of the State. We visited
the little Arsenal in this Palace, where we saw a Rostrum of the old Roman
Ships, which is made of Iron, and ends in a Boar's Head: there is an
Inscription at the side of it, which says, That it The Doge of Genoa
Vol. 2. P. 229.

portrait of the Doge of Genoa was found in the Harbor of Genoa, by some that
were employed to cleanse it. They also made us take notice of some Cuirasses,
which they told us were worn by certain Genoese Ladies in a Croisado against
the Turks; and we concluded from the Figure of the Breast-pieces that they were
made for Women.

The Ladies usually appear in Gowns after the French manner; and the ordinary
Women wear little Fardingales.

The Noblemen never wear Swords. They are not tied to any particular sort of
Habit, but they are usually clothed in black, and in Cloaks. They style
themselves Dukes, Marquesses, Counts, etc. whereas the Noble Venetians, as I
told you before, assume none of these Titles.

We saw all the Members of the Senate assembled in a body, and in their
Formalities, at the Procession on Corpus-Christi-Day. The Doge was in a Crimson
Gown, with a sort of square Bonnet. Two Battel-axes and a Sword in the Scabbard
were carried before him, and a Senator marched on each side of him, in black
Gowns of the same fashion with his own.

The Doge is styled, His Serenity; the Senators, The Doge ought to be Fifty
years old complete.
Their Excellencies; and the Noblemen, Most Illustrious. It Is true, this last
Title is not very honorable in Italy, where it is usually given to any man that
wears a Ribbon in his Cravat, yet the Genoese Noblemen, as well as those of
Venice, compose the Great and Sovereign Council, both these States being purely
Aristocratical.

The Doge of Genoa has no more Authority than the Doge of Venice; yet the first
is crowned with a Royal Crown of Gold, and a Scepter is put into his Hand,
because of the Kingdom of Corsica, which is actually under the Dominion of that
Republic.

When the two years of the Doge's Administration are come to an end, Deputies
are sent to the Palace to tell him, that His Serenity's time is expired, and
that His Excellency may retire to his own House.

To return to our Procession; the Streets were hung with Tapestry, and spread
with green Herbs; all the Windows were full of Ladies dressed to the best
advantage, and decked with the richest Ornaments they could procure; they had
Baskets full of Flowers, which they strewn on the Procession, according to the
different Inclinations of their Hearts, sometimes out of Devotion to So they
call the Sacrament
the Most Holy, and sometimes out of Civility or Affection to the young
Gentlemen of their acquaintance, who followed the Procession: all their
Peruques were powdered with 'em, and for every handful of Favors they received,
they made low Reverences to their fair Benefactresses.

The Church of the Annunciata is the finest in Genoa, but notwithstanding all
its Beauty and Magnificency, it is far inferior to many that I have already
described; and therefore I will not trouble you with a particular account of
it, I shall only observe that it was built at the charge of one Of the Family
Lomellino.
Citizen of Genoa, which is the most remarkable thing that can be said of it.

I will not lose time in relating the Story of the Crucifix at St. Jerome's,
which spoke to St. Bridget; though the rare Discourse that passed between 'em
might perhaps divert you for some Moments.

At St. Mary's of the Castle there is another, In the Cathedral there is a
great Dish made of one single Emerald, in which, if you will believe the common
Tradition, the Paschal Lamb was served up when Christ eat the Passover with his
Disciples. Venerable Beda says, the Lamb was brought in a Silver Dish; but
Madam St. Bridget thought fit to substitute one of Ivory; and why might not you
or I with as much reason venture to say, that it was an Earthen Dish. Du Val
thinks this Emerald Dish was one of the Presents which the Queen of Sheba made
to Solomon.
which is particularly honored by Maids, for the following reason. A Gentleman
who had for a long time courted a young Lady with a design to deceive her,
resolved at last to have recourse to the usual Stratagem of gaining his
Mistress by a Promise of Marriage, which he did, says the Story, in a place of
the City where this Crucifix stood at that time: I will not undertake to
describe all that passed between 'em on this occasion; but the Gentleman
refused to fulfill his Promise. The abused Lady entered an Action against him,
but could produce no Witnesses to prove her Accusation. The Case was just going
to be decided against her, when she remembered that the Promise was made in the
presence of a Crucifix, to which she appealed, and begged the Judge with Cries
and Tears to go to receive the Testimony of her new Witness. Her Request was
granted, and some Persons were deputed to interrogate the Crucifix, which
answered only with a Nod; but considering the manner in which the Questions
were proposed, that Sign could not be otherwise interpreted than as a
confirmation of the poor afflicted Lady's Pretensions: and therefore the Court
ordained, that the Marriage should be solemnized the same day. Thus the injured
Lady obtained her desire, and to crown her good Fortune, the Gentleman's Heart
was touched, he obeyed the Sentence with Joy, and the happy Pair became a
memorable Instance of Conjugal Affection.

The Ashes of this Saint are kept in the Cathedral, in a Shrine supported by
four fine Columns of Porphyry, which were brought from Smyrna Ann. 1098. Gal.
Guald. Prior.
St. John Baptist and the Emperor are the two Protectors of this Republic. The
Image of the former is stamped on its Coin, which is the fairest in Italy, and
besides, of the richest Alloy.

The Trade of Genoa is very much decayed; it consists particularly in Velvet,
Point, Gloves, dry Confections, Anchoveys, and several sorts of Fruits. There
are some private Persons very rich, but the Republic is poor. Neither Corn nor
Wine are sold in the Markets, for the Government reserves that Trade for its
self: There is not a Pint of Wine sold by the Innkeepers, but what is brought
from the Cellar of the State; and since they gain nothing by the sale of
Liquors, they make the most of their other Commodities. The Bakers are also
obliged to fetch their Corn from the public Granaries.

These are the most material Observations I have made during my short stay in
this City. The Canon Ferro has a Cabinet of Curiosities. I am,

SIR, Your etc.
Genoa, June 20, 1688.
LETTER XXXIII.
SIR,
IN our Journey from Genoa to Cazal we were obliged to return by the way we
came, to Novi, where we hired a Coach to Turin, and the next day dined at the
little City of Alexandria.

The Art of besieging Towns was hardly known when Frederic Barbarossa's Army
lay six months before Alexandria, ALEXANDRIA.
without being able to take it. The Fortifications of this place are very mean.

That Emperor called it Caesarea, but Pope Alexander III. would have it named
Alexandria. It Is false that ever any Emperors were crowned in this City with a
Crown of Straw: and I believe it is hard to prove the Truth of another Story,
which says, that Frederic in derision called it Alexandria of Straw. However,
it retains that name to this very day.

Cazal is a well fortified City, CAZAL
seated on the right Bank of the Po. The old Castle is not useless, but the new
Citadel is a very important place. It has six great Royal Bastions, Half-Moons
before the Curtains, a broad and deep Ditch full of Water, and an Arsenal
furnished with Arms for Ten thousand Men. There were formerly some
Irregularities in the Fortifications, but the French have put all things in
order. I must not forget to tell you, that they have doubled all the Bastions;
for the old Bastions were so large, that there was room enough within 'em to
make a second Rampart, which without the least confusion forms a new Bastion in
the middle of the former. The Town belongs still to the Duke of Mantua, who
receives some inconsiderable Duties from it, and the French Garrison keeps it
for him.

Leaving Cazal, we passed a fourth time over the famous The Po.
Eridanus, and our Coach for a long time after followed the Banks of that
River. We passed by the Gate of Trin, a little fortified Town, in that part of
Montferrat which belongs to the Duke of Savoy. Verrua is a much stronger place,
on a rising Ground, on the right side of the Po.

Eight miles from Cazal we entered into Piedmont, the Land being still level.
As we advanced further, we found our selves engaged among the Mountains, in a
large and flat Valley almost entirely surrounded with the highest Alps. Where
this Plain is good, nothing can be better, but there are some places in it that
do not at all merit that Character.

Hail is the Scourge of Piedmont. As we passed along we took notice of two or
three large spots of Ground, where but two days before it had made a prodigious
havoc on the finest Cornfieldsd in the World. The Straw was chopped and driven
into the Ground; and even the Walnut-trees, Vines, and other Trees were half
broken.

They reckon but Five and forty miles from Cazal to Turin, but the miles in
Piedmont and Montferrat are much larger than the common miles of Lombardy.

Turin is situated in a Plain, TURIN.
on the River Doire, Three hundred paces from the Po. It Is a very pleasant
Town, all its Avenues are cheerful and delicious; and that which makes us more
sensibly charmed with the free and agreeable Humor of the Inhabitants, is our
Abhorrence and late Experience of that intolerable Sowreness and Unsociableness
that reigns over all the rest of Italy, where we conversed more with Statues
than Men. With respect to the manner of living, Turin is not inferior to the
politest Cities in France: the Language of that Kingdom is as commonly spoken
here as the Italian; the People are generally well bred and handsome, and there
is not a Court in Europe more sprightly and gay than that of the Duke of Savoy.

The old part of Turin cannot boast of much Beauty, but the new half is built
after a quite different manner. The Streets are broad, and straight as a Line,
the Houses large, high, and almost all uniform. There cannot be a finer Street
than that which passes through the two open Places, and reaches from the Castle
to the new Gate. Both these Places are large, and of a regular Figure; but the
new one is encompassed with Houses in exact Symmetry, and a large Portico runs
all about it.

There is the old and new Palace.
The Duke's Palace makes not so fine an appearance on the outside as the
Apartments within it are beautiful. The Palace of the Jesuits, and that of the
Prince of Carignan, are but just finished, and seem to be very magnificent: I
name that of the Jesuits first, because it excels the other.

Though this City was almost doubled under the late Duke, it is still of a very
indifferent largeness: the same Prince enclosed it with a regular and
well-lin'd Fortification, The Citadel is very strong and handsome, though not yet
quite finished; it is countermin'd throughout, and has the convenience of a good
Well, where Horses go down and come up without meeting, by a sort of double
Stairs without Steps, which wind about so often, that the Descent is very easy.

The Rows of Oaks on the Ramparts of the Town make a very pleasant Walk, which
has also the advantage of a very fine Prospect, especially toward the Rivers;
but the greatest Concourse of People is usually about Valentin, a House of
Pleasure on the Banks of the Po, about a mile from Turin. The Duke has seven or
eight others, all well furnished, and kept in good order.

I must not forget to give you some account of the Of Guarini's Architecture.
Chapel that is almost finished at the Cathedral, to the honor of the Holy
Handkerchief. It Is certainly very magnificent; but, instead of telling you as
some have done, that it excels the Chapel of St. Laurence at Florence, I can
assure you it is not at all comparable to that noble Structure. If you have not
forgot the Description of that Florentin Chapel in one of my former Letters,
you may easily make the parallel between that and this of Turin: after I have
told you that they are both of almost the same figure, but that the last is
less than the former, and will be only embellished with black Marble.

The Mr. Reiskius has written a Dissertation de Imaginibus Christi, where you
may find many curious Remarks on this Relick: He demonstrates, that neither
this nor several others were ever heard of, till Venerable Beda published his
vain Imaginations in his Treatise de locis Sanctis. This Reverend English
Priest died about the middle of the Eighth Age.
pretended Holy Handkerchief is the most important and valued Relic in Turin,
as you may judge by the honor that is shown to it. Though this Relic ought to be
the only one of its kind in the World, it is reproduc'd or multiplied in five or
six several places at the least, to mention only such as I know. There are, I
think, two of 'em at Rome, at St. Peter's and St. John de Lateran, one at
Cadoin in Perigort, one at Besancon, one at Compeigne, one at Milan, and
another at Aix la Chapelle. I cannot imagine how the Controversy between these
Competitors can be decided, since they all produce Papal Bulls to confirm their
Titles; but the Handkerchief of Cadoin seems to have the advantage over the
rest, as being authorized by fourteen Bulls, whereas that of Turin can only
show four.

Since we are just going to take leave of Italy, I shall take this occasion to
entertain you with some Observations which I either forgot or had not
opportunity to insert in my former Letters. Our short stay in the places through
which we passed would not suffer us to spend much time in making acquaintance
with the People of the Country, and consequently we could not be very
particularly informed of their Customs: neither do I intend to enter on that
Subject, but only to communicate some Remarks to you without any other order,
than as they shall offer themselves to my Memory.

I said nothing of the Princes or Courts either in Germany or Italy, because I
thought it not convenient to describe 'em with all that Sincerity and Freedom
which I must necessarily have used to acquaint you with their true Characters.
When a Prince is the Subject of a Discourse, it is almost impossible to avoid
Flattery and Lies, and therefore I chose rather to be silent, than to hazard
the being guilty of either. I shall only tell you, that Mr. B. was every where
received with all the Honor and Respect that are due to his Personal Merit and
High Birth; and these Civilities were sometimes redoubled, by reason of the
Acquaintance and Friendship between some of those Sovereigns and his
Grandfather the Duke of Ormond, and the Knowledge they had of his Father the
late Earl of Ossory, and several other Persons of that illustrious Family.

The Duke of Modena is of great stature, handsome, and resembles the Queen his
Sister considerably, though he is of a brown Complexion. He is Master of several
Qualifications that are able at once to inspire both Love and Respect. He
discoursed with me almost an hour concerning some particular Observations we
had made in our Travels, and especially concerning England.

I could not give you an account of those Academies of the Curious, that are
established in almost all the Towns of Italy, because I had not time to enquire
particularly about 'em; but if I may give credit to the Information I received
from several Persons, they are certainly very inconsiderable Societies. The
affected oddness of their Titles is very singular, for they are not much unlike
to the Names which the Grooms in France give to their managed Horses; I shall
only mention a dozen of 'em: Thus the Academists of Genoa call themselves
Addormentati.
Drowsy; those of Naples, Ardenti.
Burning; those of Alexandria Immobili.
Immovable; those of Rome Fantastici and Humoristi.
Fantastical or Humorous; those of Viterbo Ostinati.
Obstinate; those of Siena Intronati.
Benumbed or Sottish. At Perusa they style themselves Insensati.
Mad; at Parma Innominati.
Nameless; at Bologna Otiosi.
Idle; at Milan Nascosti.
Concealed; at Ancona Caliginati.
Obscure or Confused; at Mantua Invaghiti.
Amorous; at Rimini Adagiati.
Easy or Pliable; and at Macerata Catenati.
Chained. I perceive I have skip'd from place to place, without observing any
order, but that is not material.

We were treated with a great deal of Civility and Kindness by the Italians, as
far as we could judge by outward appearances: but, to deal plainly, their
Complaisance is a mixture of Flattery and Design. We found also by experience,
that the People of this Nation are very sober. The Inns in the little Towns,
especially on certain Roads, are very ill furnished with Provisions. The first
Course, which by way of excellence they call the Antipasto, is a Plate of
Gizerns, Ends of Wings, and Birds Feet boiled with Salt and Pepper, and mixed
with Whites of Eggs; after which course, come two or three small Dishes one
after another of different Ragou's. Between Rome and Naples the Traveller is
sometimes regaled with Buffalo's and Crows, and he is a happy man that can meet
with such Dainties: the Buffalo's Flesh is black, stinking, and hard; there are
none but the most beggarly Jews at Rome who eat it, and the Beast must be
hunted, otherwise it is impossible to chew its Flesh.

They have all the various kinds of Wine in Italy, but the best sorts are least
abundant: about Rome there is the Wine of Gensana, Albano, and Castle Gandolfo,
in all which places the Soil is the same. The Greek Wine of Naples, and the
Lacryma Christi are strong, but the small Asprino bianco, and the Chiarello
piccante seemed more agreeable to our taste, though they are much less esteemed.
At Florence and Montefiascone the richest Wines are pleasant, and have no more
Fire than what is convenient for ordinary Drink, but there is no great quantity
of 'em; the Great Duke's delicate Moscadello grows in a little Vineyard, and is
consecrated to his own use, or to be sent as Presents, but never dispersed
through the Country: there are also some good sorts of Wine near Verona, and in
the State of Genoa.

About Loretto the Casks are made short and broad like a Dutch Cheese; but
toward Pavia their length amounts to seven times their diameter.

Toward Parma and Placenza, Leand. Alberti says, he saw at Parma four Cheeses
which weighed Five hundred pounds each.
where there are excellent Pastures, they make Cheese of all their Milk. Butter
is scarce in Italy, instead of which they use Oil in all their Ragou's and
Fricasies; but though they draw it from their own Olive Trees, it is oftentimes
worse than in those Countries where none of these Trees grow; for the Fruit
that will yield the best price and keep longest is always transported.

We have not seen the chief Season for Fruit in this Country. At Venice, where
we stayed two months in the Winter, we had white Grapes of Bologna very firm,
and of a most delicious taste. At Naples we eat Winter-Melons; and at Genoa we
were entertained with all sorts of small red Fruits, and I never saw so good
and large Cherries as there. The Country about the River of Genoa is peculiarly
excellent for Fruit.

It may be truly said of Genoa, that its Hills are without Wood; but all the
rest of the Proverb is false, Men without Faith, Ladies without Shame, and a
Sea without Fishes. There are both Rogues and Honest men every where, and we
found by Experience that there are very good Fishes in the Sea of Genoa. I took
pleasure two or three times to go in the morning to see the Fishing at Naples,
where I observed several sorts of Fishes that I had never seen in other places.
The Gulf of Cajeta abounds with Sturgeon, some of which are also found in the
Tiber.

In all our Travels through Italy we never saw either a Hare or Partridge in the
Fields; and I might also add, that we saw as few in the Inns. It Is very
strange, in my opinion, that these Animals are not more plentiful, since the
Country is not wholly destitute of 'em. My Reasons are these: In the first
place, there are large extents of Ground in Italy, which are almost
uninhabited, and consequently ought to abound with Game, proportionably to the
like places in the New World. And, secondly, it might be reasonably supposed
that the Game should be more plentiful here than in other places, because the
Lords of those Grounds are never wont to reside on 'em, and yet are no less
jealous of their Rights than the Gentlemen of other Countries.

In England and France there are many Persons of Quality who pass their time in
the Country; but that is not the Custom in Italy, where all Persons of Note
live in the Cities, out of which there are neither Castles nor great Houses to
be seen, which belong to private Persons, or at least they are very rare,
especially if we compare this Country with France, for I am not so well
acquainted with England,

To return to our Game; it must be acknowledged, that Quails are not so great
Rarities here as Partridges, for when the Spring approaches they come in Flocks
from Afric, and cover the whole Country. These poor little Creatures are so
tired with their long Voyage, that they throw themselves into Ships, and
wheresoever they can find a place to repose themselves. They may be caught in
heaps without the least trouble, but since they are extremely lean, those who
take 'em usually feed 'em for some time before they eat 'em. I believe it is
uncertain whether these Birds fly over the Sea, or whether they do not
sometimes swim to take breath: it is indeed hard to conceive that the Quail
which has not a strong Wing, and flies heavily, should be able to continue its
flight so long. But, on the other side, I Am inclined to believe that the Water
would so moisten and drench its Feathers, that it could never spread its Wings
again. And, besides its leanness and weariness, the Dangers to which it exposes
its self, and its eagerness to find a resting place, are, in my opinion,
convincing Arguments that it flies all the way without intermission.

I saw but one Scorpion in Italy, and I could not learn that these Animals are
very mischievous in this Country. There are several ways to guard against 'em;
but I never saw any of those hanging Beds that are usually talked of. The
People about Verona make use of Iron Bedsteads, which they place at some
distance from the Walls, that those Insects may neither breed in 'em nor be
able to come up on the Beds; and the Feet of the Bedsteads are filled and
polished, partly for the same reason. If the Animal its self can be caught, and
bruised on the part which it stung, it is a certain Remedy; and there are also
Salts and Oils extracted out of it, which produce the same effect. But after
all, the stinging of Scorpions is not mortal in Italy; and besides, such
Instances happen so very rarely, that they who are desirous to travel into
Italy ought not to be discouraged by 'em.

The Tarantula had its Name from the Territory of Tarentum, where there is
abundance of those Animals. See the Treatise which Sanguerdius wrote concerning
'em.
There are two sorts of Animals to whom the Italians give the name of Tarantula;
one is a sort of Lizard, whose Biting is reputed mortal, it is found especially
about Fondi, Cajeta, and Capoa; but this is not that which other Nations call
the Tarantula: the true Tarantula is a Spider, and lives in the Fields. It Is
said, there are many of 'em in Abruzzo and Calabria, and they are also found in
some parts of Tuscany. They that are stung by this Creature make a thousand
different Gestures in a moment: they weep, dance, vomit, tremble, laugh, grow
pale, cry, swoon away, and after few days of torment, expire, if they be not
assisted in time: they find some Relief from Sweating and Antidotes, but Music
is the great and only Remedy. A learned Gentleman of unquestioned credit told
me at Rome, that he had been twice a Witness both of the Disease and of the
Cure: they are both attended with circumstances that seem very strange, Alex.
ab Alexandr. assures us, that he was an Eyewitness of the same; and relates
several curious Instances on this occasion. Dier. Geneal. l. 2. c 17.
but the Matter of Fact is well attested and undeniable. I think I could
produce natural and easy Reasons to explain this Effect of Music, but, without
engaging my self in a Dissertation that would carry me too far, I shall content
my self with relating some other Instances of the same kind, which may satisfy
any ingenious person. Every one knows the infallible efficacy of David's Harp
to restore Saul to the use of his Reason. 1 Samuel 16.23.
I remember Lewis Goyon, in his Lessons, has a Story of a Lady of his
acquaintance, Albert. Krantsius writes, that Henry IV King of Denmark hearing
that a certain Musician boasted that he could either vex or please those who
heard his Music, and even lay 'em asleep, or put 'em into a fury, was desirous
to try the Experiment in his own Person; which succeeded so effectually, that
the King in the height of his Fury killed several of his Courtiers with his
Fists. Theophrastus and A. Gellius affirm, That Music charms and asswages the
Pains of the Gout.
who lived a hundred and six years without ever using any other Remedy than
Music, for which purpose she allowed a Salary to a certain Player on
Instruments, whom she called her Physician. And I might add, that I was
particularly acquainted with a Gentleman very much subject to the Gout, who
infallibly received Ease, and even sometimes was wholly freed from his Pains by
a loud noise. He used to make all his Servants come into his Chamber, and beat
with all their force upon the Table and Floor, and the noise they made, in
conjunction with the sound of a Base-Viol, was his sovereign Remedy.

Highway Robbers are no more dangerous in this Country than Scorpions or
Tarantula's; for there have not been any Banditi at Rome since the Pontificat
of Sixtus V, and I think I told you, that the Marquess del Carpio has
extirpated 'em out of Naples. I do not remember that ever any person was put to
death in all the places through which we traveled, during the time we stayed in
'em. There is not a City perhaps in the whole World where Executions are so
rare as at Venice; the Hangman has a very poor Trade on it. They who are under
the Patronage of a Nobleman, which is a thing very easily obtained, may rob and
cut Throats as often as they please, only they must take care never to commit a
Villainy in a public place, or that may make too great a noise.

At our Entry into most Cities our Pistols were taken from us, but we always
found 'em at the other Gate at our departure. This is a considerable
Circumstance, for at the end of the Voyage the Charge amounts to as much as the
Pistols are worth. It Is not lawful to wear Swords either at Genoa or Lucca, but
that Privilege is readily granted to Strangers when they desire it. The Bayonet
is prohibited in Cities; but in the Country every one may wear what Arms he
pleases, and even they who travel on Horseback oftentimes carry Fusees. The
Stiletto's of Milan are famous for the genteel Stab, and they do their Work
effectually.

Love and Jealousy are the two Furies that shed most Blood in Italy. The
Italians are said to be Jealous without any reason, and the least suspicion
puts 'em into a Fit of Rage.

Not only at Venice, as I intimated before, but every where else, the Girls are
sent to Nunneries in their Infancy, and they are usually married without seeing
their future Husbands; only the Girls of the lowest rank are suffered to remain
with their Parents; and it is not without much difficulty that they are able to
find Yoke-fellows. I am not so well acquainted with the Customs of other
places, but at Rome there are several Funds established, either to marry poor
Maids, or to confine 'em for ever to a Convent. These Charities are distributed
with almost the same Ceremonies that are observed in the Minerva, which I
described in one of my former Letters.

I observed in the Churches at Rome, that in Lent the Women are shut up in a
place under the Pulpit, enclosed with Rails six foot high.

There are several Trees and Plants in Italy, which grow neither in England nor
(for the most part) in France, unless perhaps in the Southern parts of it. The
greatest Palm Tree in Rome is in the Cloister of St. Peter ad Vincula.
The Palm Tree is a Stranger in Italy, and rarely bears Fruit there. In the
Garden of Simples at Pisa there is a male and female Palm Tree planted
together, agreeably to the ancient Error of those who thought such a Marriage
was necessary to make those Trees fruitful. But this is a mere Fable; for I
observed a Palm tree alone full of Dates, at the Villa Mellena, on Monte-Mario.

We went to the Pope's Chapel on Palm Sunday, where all the Cardinals were
assembled, and he who officiated for the Pope presented a Palm-branch to every
one of the rest; these Branches were almost five foot long, and the Leaves were
woven together into Knots of several Figures. We saw that which was sent to the
Pope: all the Prelates and other Ecclesiastics had also Branches, which were
either greater or smaller, according to the Dignity of those who bore 'em. The
Laics use only Olive-branches.

I have already told you, In M. Badoueri's Garden at Verona there are
Cypress-trees a hundred foot high, and two hundred years old. The Citrons of
Florence, called Cedrats, are the most excellent of all these kinds of Fruit.
Silkworms were brought to Europe from Japan and China.
that we saw several Trees growing in this Country which I had not observed so
commonly any where else; I shall now proceed to name some of 'em besides the
Palm Tree, such as the great Maple, the Cork tree, the Jujub tree, Carob tree,
Olive Tree, Myrtle, Pomegranate tree, the Caper shrub, Scarlet-Oak, Cypress,
Sena, Lentisk or Mastic-tree, the great Indian Fig Tree, the Oak that bears
Galls, the Shrubs that bear Cotton and Fistic-nuts, and several sorts of Orange
and Citron-trees. The Ways are almost every where bordered with White
Mulberry-trees, for the nourishment of Silkworms.

Those who love Simples will find enough to gratify their Curiosity on the
Appennin Mountains between Loretto and Rome, and every where in the Alps; but
they must have more leisure than we had.

I gathered some Sponges on the Seaside toward Terracina, of which two were
in a manner rooted on very hard Flints, the rest lay loose on the Shore.

These Sponges put me in mind of Pumice-Stones; and I must not forget to tell
you, that I spent some time to no purpose in searching for these Stones on
Mount Vesuvius, though it is generally said to be full of 'em. This must certainly
be a Mistake: there are indeed many porous and calcined Stones on that
Mountain, which resemble Pumice-stones, but after I had considered 'em
attentively, I soon perceived the difference. I have not any certain knowledge
of the formation of Pumice-stones, or of the places where they are found, but I
believe they are natural Productions.

The Mountains of Italy, and particularly the Appennin Hills, are well stored
with Metals, Mineral Waters, Crystal, Alabaster, a kind of Agat, and several
sorts of Marble, but the Marble of the Archipelago has brighter colors. The
White Marble of Carrara is one of the finest sorts in Italy, and a great deal
of it is transported to France.

The Winter has been very sharp and long, almost all the Oranges and Citrons
were frozen, and the Ground under the Trees was covered with 'em in the
abovementioned places, where those Fruits are most common.

I observed that they take a great deal of care at Rome to preserve themselves
from the Inconveniences occasioned by the Heats, which are usually very
troublesome in that place. The great Lords have low Apartments, where the Sun
never appears, which are paved with Marble, and furnished with Fountains and
Water-spouts; and besides, the Doors and Windows are so contrived, that they
are never without a cool Brize. The Beds are encompassed at some distance with
a Circlet of Gawze or Tiffany, which is joined close to the Boards of the Floor
and Ceiling above and below, and hinders 'em from being tormented with Gnats.

It Is also the Custom to sleep two hours immediately after Dinner, but they
never lie down; for they have a sort of folding Chairs which are usually
garnished with Leather, and have Backs that rise and fall with a Spring.

The use of Vmbrello's is common every where.

The Serain or Evening Dew in Campagna di Roma is esteemed mortal, during three
or four months in the Summer, and great care is taken to avoid it. Travelers
double their pace to arrive at Rome in time, or stay at the distance of
eighteen or twenty miles from it.

I found the following Verses over the Gate of a House at Rome; they contain
the Rules that ought to be observed for the preservation of Health in that City.

Enecat insolitos residentes pessimus Aer
Romanus; solitos non been gratus habet.
Sospes ut hic vivas, lux septima det Mark 2.17.
Medicinam;
Absit odor foedus; sit modicusque labor.
Pelle Famem and Frigus; fructus femurque relinque;
Nec placeat gelido font levare sitim.
That is, The Roman Air is fatal to Strangers, and troublesome even to the
Natives. If you would live securely here, observe the following Rules; Take
Physic every seventh day, avoid stinking Smells, use moderate Exercise, Fence
your self against Cold and Heat, abstain from Fruit and Women, and quench not
your Thirst with cold Water.

You may observe by the bye, that the Author chose rather to run the hazard of
a false quantity, than to lose the Jingle of his four F's. He might have said
Venerem instead of Femur, the first Syllable of which is short, Et corpus
quaerens femorum, etc. Mart.

I have not given you an account of the Antiquity of several Cities. I confess,
Enquiries of that nature are very curious, but besides that they require a
great deal of time and labor, and have been prosecuted already by very able
Pens: I find that these Controversies are usually mere Questions concerning
Names of Places, for in many of these Cities there are not the least Remainders
or visible Marks of their ancient Foundations; and they have been subject to
the same Alterations which the Vessel of the Argonauts underwent of old. To
conclude, the sight of the Places might perhaps raise a Traveller's Curiosity;
but that wears off by degrees when they are only the Objects of his Imagination.

I must tell you, now I think on it, that in all Italy we observed but one
Windmill, or rather the Ruins of one at Leghorn.

They use no Tin-Vessels in this Country, because of the scarcity of that
Metal. All their Vessels are made of Earth leaded, or of (...). We have seen
(...) made in several places, but there is none that resembles Porcelain so
exactly as that of Delft.

Whereas we place the beginning of the natural Day immediately after Midnight,
The Babylonians, began their natural Day at Sunrising, and the Jews at
Sunsetting, as the Italians do at present. The Inhabitants of the Province of
Umbria, with Ptolomy, and some others in former times, reckoned the beginning
of the Day at Noon, and the Egyptians at Midnight, as we do. The ancient Romans
did also begin the Day at Midnight, but their Hours were unequal.
the Italians make it begin after Sunsetting, and their Clocks strike always
Four and twenty hours from one Sunsetting to another: you may easily perceive
that according to this computation, the Hour of Noon varies daily; for when the
Sun sets at Four a-clock according to our calculation, they reckon One when we
count Five, and consequently the next day it is Noon at Twenty hours. And in
like manner, when the Sun sets at Eight on our Dials, it is One a-clock with
them, when we reckon Nine, and it is just Noon at sixteen hours. Nevertheless,
with respect to the artificial Day between Sunrising and Sunsetting, they use
the words Yesterday and To morrow, as we do.

I cannot forbear acquainting you that we left Rome without having seen the
Pope; there were doubtless some Reasons that would not permit him to appear in
public, and there were others that hindered us from paying him a Visit.

I shall conclude this Letter with telling you, that we bought some modern
Medals at Rome, from the famous Hameranus, who is reputed to excel in that sort
of Workmanship. Of all the Medals we saw of Queen Christina, this, in my
opinion, is one of the most Heroical and most worthy of that great Princess:
Her Dominions are on the Reverse with the whole Hemisphere, and this Motto, Ne
mi bisogna, ne mi basta; I want nothing, and yet I have not enough. Alexander
the Great could use the last part of this Motto, but instead of reigning over
himself, his Ambition made him desire more Worlds.

I shall only add an Inscription, which one of my Friends transcribed just now
from the Pedestal of a Statue of Justice in the Convent of the Jesuits.

Quae Dea? Sacra Themis. Quae Patria? Regna Tonantis.
Qualis Origo? Fuit Sanctus uterque Parens.
Cur Frontem Facies aperit formosa severam?
Nescio corrumpi, non amo Blanditias.
Aurium aperta tibi cur altera, and altera clausa est?
Una patet justis, altera surda malis.
Cur Gladium tua Dextra gerit? cur laeva Bilancem?
Ponderat haec causas, percutit illa Reos.
Cur sola incedis? Quia copia rara Bonorum:
Haec referunt paucos saecula Fabricios.
Paupere cur cultu? Semper Justissimus esse
Qui cupit, hic magnas vix cumulabit opes.
What Goddess art thou? I am Sacred Justice.
What happy Region boasts thy presence? Heaven.
Whose Offspring art thou? I Am of holy Race.
What sullen Glooms hang over thy lovely Face?
I cannot fawn nor bribe, nor will be bribed.
Why have thou one Ear shut, and the other open?
This to the Good, that to the Unjust I turn.
What mean thy brandished Sword and well-pois'd Balance?
That strikes the Guilty, this gives Righteous Judgment.
Why stand'st thou thus alone?All Men avoid me.
Why in so Poor a Garb? Few Just are Rich.
I am, SIR, Your etc.
Turin, June 29. 1688.
LETTER XXXIV.
SIR,
Veillana.
WE lay at Veillana the first night after our departure from Turin, next morning
we passed by the Gate of Susa, SUSA.
a little City, seated among the Mountains, by which it is commanded almost on
every side, and dined at Novalesa, Novalesa. Mount Cenis.
at the foot of Mount Cenis.

This is the highest Mountain of the Alps, over which there is a Passage; but
you must not conclude from thence that it is another Caucasus or Tenerif;
neither must you fancy it to be a single Hill, or that the Way lies over the
top of it. For when a Traveller comes to the highest part of the Passage, he
finds himself in a Plain, or a new Valley, with respect to the lofty Mountains
that surround it.

At Novalesa we took Mules to ascend the Hill. The Way is pretty broad, and
free from Precipices, but uneven and full of Stones. On the highest accessible
part of it there is a Cross that divides Piedmont from Savoy, and consequently
is one of the Boundaries of Italy. In the middle of the Plain there is a Lake
of so great a depth, that, if we may believe the common Report, its Bottom
could never be reached by sounding; it is a large mile in compass, and sends
forth a great Brook, which falls into the little Doire near Susa.

The Snow was almost all melted on the Hill; it is true, the highest tops of the
Mountain on both sides were covered with it, but there were only some Heaps
left here and there in the passage. The tumbling of the Snow makes the passage
dangerous in some places, and in some Seasons of the Year, otherwise there is
no danger at all in it.

The side of the Hill toward Savoy is much rougher than the other, and
Travelers are usually carried this part of the way by Men, though they might
pass it on Horseback, as Charlemain's Army did heretofore. They made us sit
down in ordinary Chairs, to which they had fastened Arms like the Shafts of a
Litter. We were each of us attended by four Men, two who bore the Chair, and
two more to relieve their Fellows.

At the foot of the Hill we passed the little River Arche, on a Bridge of Wood,
to the Village of Lasneburg.

I have almost nothing to relate concerning Savoy. The Country is generally
mountainous, and we found hardly any thing remarkable in that part of it through
which we passed.

Chambery, the Metropolis of the Duchy, CHAMBERY.
formerly the Residence of the Dukes, and now the Seat of a Parliament, is a
very small and unfortified City, seated at the foot of the Mountains near the
Confluence of the Lessa and Orbana, neither of which is navigable. We were
told, that its Inhabitants are very civil and the Ladies handsome.

S. JOHN DE MAURIENNE.
St. John de Maurienne is situated in a pleasant Valley of the same name. We
passed by within two hundred paces of the City, without entering into it, being
credibly informed that it was not worth the while to go so far out of our way
to see it.

MONTMELIAN.
Neither did we stop at Montmelian, which is a little City on the right Bank of
the Isera, defended by a Citadel indifferently strong.

AIX.
Aix is much frequented by reason of its Baths. I know not whether you have
observed that the French Name of those Towns that are called Aix is derived
sometimes from Aqua, and sometimes from Augusta: Aqua Sextiae, Aix in Provence;
Aquisgranum, Aix la Chapelle; Augusta Alorum, Ais or Auchs in Annagnac.

About Annecy we found the whole Country in a general Consternation for fear of
the Vaudois; there was a Report, That above Two thousand of these poor Exiles
were entered into Savoy, toward Evian, and had already burnt five or six
Villages: but there was not the least Ground for such an Alarm.

The Duchy of Savoy is separated from the Territory of Geneva by the River
Arve, over which there is a Bridge of Wood that leads almost to the Gates of
Geneva. The Arve is a great Torrent, which falls from the Mountains, and always
brings some Gold-dust along with it, but it happens very rarely that a Man is
able to refine so much of it in a day, as he might earn at some other Work; and
therefore this Gold is almost wholly neglected.

I will not undertake to give you an account of the Antiquity, Government,
GENEVA.
or History of Geneva, of which we have had so many Descriptions. I shall
content my self with giving you a general Idea of this City, to which (since I
had occasion formerly to be pretty well acquainted with it) I shall add some
particular Observations.

The Rhone, at its coming out of the Lake, forms a little Island. On the right
Bank of the River, or rather toward its right Channel, the Land is low and
even, but on the other side there is a Hillock that rises insensibly. The
principal part of the City is seated on this Hillock, the rest of it is in the
Island, and beyond the Rhone; and the whole is encompassed with a Fortification.

The Republic of Geneva is in League with the Switzers, The Republic of Geneva
entered into a perpetual League with that of Bern, An. 1536, which has been
frequently renewed since. J. Simler.
particularly with the Cantons of Zurich and Bern, and in this their great
Strength consists. Their Ramparts may preserve 'em from a sudden Surprisal, and
might perhaps protect 'em against all the Force of Savoy. But though these
Fortifications are not contemptible, they could not long resist a more potent
Enemy, if the State had nothing else to depend on.

They have good store of Cannon, and a well-furnish'd Arsenal, where they
preserve the famous Ladders that were made use of by the Savoyards In the year
1602.
in the Scalado of which you have doubtless read an account. In the same place
they keep the Petard that was designed to burst open the new Gate. These are
two lasting Monuments of their Deliverance, in memory of which they still
continue to solemnize a December. 12/22.
Festival, with Thanksgiving, and extraordinary Sermons suitable to the
occasion, and also with little Feasts, or rather with joining the Meals of
several Families, according to the various Ties of Relation and Friendship, by
which they are united: They never part without singing a Song that was made
about the time of that Action, of which it comprehends the principal
Circumstances, and is now become an essential part of the public rejoicing.

The Republic keeps some Galleys on its Lake, and there are also others
belonging to the Duke of Savoy and the Switzers. I say its Lake, for the Lake
was given to the City by its Masters when it was a Roman Colony, and the common
way of Expression at present seems to confirm that Donation.

The Duke of Savoy keeps a Belle-rive.
Fort on the Bank of the Lake, at the distance of a large league from Geneva,
contrary to the Treaty of St. Julian, in which, among several other Articles,
it was concluded and ratified, That the Duke of Savoy should neither draw any
Forces together, nor make Fortifications, nor keep a Garrison within four
leagues of Geneva.

The Opinion of some ancient Authors, that the Rhone passes through the Lake
without mingling with its Water, is not only fabulous, but absurd and
impossible, considering the length and crooked figure of the Lake. C. Frey
After Polybus. Tarcagno is guilty of the same Mistake; and a thousand other
Authors besides, who borrowed it from that ancient Historian.
maintains the same Error in his Admiranda Galliarum Rhodanus in Lacum Lemanum
influit, and impermixtis aquis and aquarum color, ex eo effluit. But my Eyes
have often convinced me of the Falsehood of this Assertion.

The Water of this Lake is extremely pure and limpid; it affords several kinds
of excellent Fishes, but its Trouts are most famous: The pound of Geneva
contains Eighteen Ounces.

The Lake is well stocked with excellent Fish, but their numbers do sensibly
decrease, and one sort is quite lost, it is not only to be ascribed to the
ravenousness of the Pikes that abound in it, but to another sort of Fish, that
they call Moutails, which were never taken in the Lake till within these six
years last past; they are in the Lake of Neufchastel, and some other Lakes of
Switzerland, and it is likely that by some convcyance under ground they may have
come into Channels that fall into this Lake. G. Burnet.


I have seen several of 'em that weighed Fifty pounds each,and I know there
have been some found bigger than these by a third part. These Fishes are seldom
found so big in other places; but this is not a thing without Example, as some
imagine. In one of the Halls of the Arsenal at Munick I saw a Figure of a Trout
that was taken out of a little Lake in that Country, and weighed Seventy three
pounds.

Perhaps an account of the usual way of catching Trouts at Geneva will not be
unpleasant to you. You must know, that at a certain time of the year that Fish
descends from the Lake to the Rhone, and at other times returns back to the
Lake: now, to take advantage of these Comings and Goings, which constantly
happen at the usual times, they have planted Piles cross the River, where it
comes out of the Lake, at such a distance, that the great Fishes, whether
ascending or descending, cannot pass through 'em, unless at certain open places
which are the Mouths of great Weels of Wire, where they remain till they are
taken out. This Fishery is let out to Farmers by the State, and makes a part of
its Revenue. The Piles are thus disposed:



They kill great store of Fowls on the Lake in the Winter. It was frozen in the
year 1572. and sometimes it rages like a little Sea.

Geneva is neither large nor very fine; yet it may be justly called a very
lovely Town. It Is impossible for a Stranger that has staid some time in it to
leave it without reluctance. It has the advantage of pleasant Walks; and the
Conversation of the Inhabitants is very familiar and easy. The common People
are clownish, but honest; and the Persons of note are extremely kind, civil and
ingenious.

Their Academy is furnished with able Professors, and they have also several
learned Ministers. I know not whether you have heard that Mr. Chouet is
advanced from his Profession of Philosophy to the Office of a Counselor; the
public Advantage makes amends for the loss of others by his removal. Mr.
Mestrezat is so old and infirm, that the Theological Auditory is in a manner
already deprived of that excellent Person; but Mr. Tronchin is still one of its
great Luminaries; and Mr. Picctet supplies with a great deal of Success the
place of his Uncle the famous Mr. Tu^retin.

I cannot forbear finding fault with the People of Geneva, for allowing their
Ministers inconsiderable Pensions, and yet making 'em work too hard. There are
in each Church two Ministers called Semainiers, who both preach six or seven
times following, from week to week, relieving one another. Suppose a Preacher
to be one of the ablest and most diligent men in the World, yet it must be
acknowledged, that Leisure is always a great Help for making a good Sermon.
However, these Ministers preach in a very edifying manner. Mr. du Four, and Mr.
Since the first Edition of this Book Mr. Calendrin is made Professor of
Divinity, in Mr. Mestrezat's place.
Calendrin, the two indefatigable Ministers of the St. Peter's Church.
principal Church, have long undergone the toil of so rigorous a Task, and
continue still to perform the Duties or their Office with a general Approbation.

The late Revolution in France has lessened the number of Students of Divinity;
but to make amends, since all those Exercises are taught here that young
Gentlemen are wont to learn, there are many Protestants in Germany and
elsewhere, who, for the sake of Religion, choose rather to go to Geneva than
France.

The poor Vaudois, who were brought hither in a manner half dead, were received
by the Inhabitants with all imaginable marks of Compassion and Charity; and the
French Refugies were also very kindly treated by 'em.

It Is very remarkable, that before the Reformation the Citizens of Geneva, as
if they had foreseen the Day of Grace that was reserved for 'em, accompanied
their Arms with this Devise, Post tenebras spero lucem; Ephesians 5.8. Romans 11.13.
I expect or hope for Light after Darkness. But after the pure Light of the
Gospel shone upon 'em with unclouded luster, they made some alteration in their
Motto, instead of Post tenebras spero lucem substituting Post tenebras Lux,
Light succeeded Darkness.

Though the Purity of their Manners is not perhaps perfectly agreeable to that of
their Doctrine, yet if we compare Geneva, not to some abominable Towns in Italy,
but to many others that are not reputed worse than the rest of the World,
Anagram. Respublica Genevensis. Gens sub Coelis vere pia.
this City will appear to be the Seat of Sobriety and Moderation. There are
vicious Persons here as well as in other places; but Debauchery is not upon the
Throne. The Pastors and Consistories labor earnestly to suppress it, and the
Magistrates assist their pious Endeavors, by publishing Laws against Luxury in
Clothes, and severe Orders against Licentiousness. Formerly they punished
Adultery with Hanging and Drowning, as they still do in some parts of
Switzerland.

There are several rare Books and Manuscripts in the public Library, and among
others, a very old Manuscript Bible of St. Jerome's Translation.

In St. Peter's Church they show the Tomb of Henry II, Duke of Rohan. I
observed also the Sepulcher of the Great d'Aubigne, Grandfather of the
Marchioness of Maintenon, in the Cloister at the side of the Church. Calvin was
buried in the Churchyard of Plainpalais, without either Tomb or Epitaph.

I must not forget to tell you, that there is a Church for Germans, and another
for Italians in this City; and there was also an English Church formerly. The
most considerable Italian Families I know, besides those mentioned in my Letter
from Lucca, are those called Gallatin, Sartoris, Puerari, Ledger, Minutoli,
Stoppa, Diodati, Offredi, Cerduini, and Rubbati, Franconi, Malcontent, Butini,
Bartolone, Carnelli, Servini, Mirollio, Lambercier, Pelissari, Martini, etc.
I think there are eight or ten more.

The If there is any credit to be given to the little Book called Scaligerana;
the Savoyard Tongue was used in the Council in Jos. Scaliger's time; and all
Men were prohibited, under pain of being fined, to speak any other.
Savoyard Language is commonly spoken here, but all that are raised above the
Dregs of the People speak also French. It Is true, their Dialect is none of the
purest, but it is at the least as good as any that are used in most Provinces of
France.

About four small leagues from Geneva, between the Fort of Sluys and Mount
Credo, the Rhone tumbles down a Precipice among the Rocks, and disappears
entirely for some space: and therefore they who intend to go from Geneva to
Lions by Water, are forced to embark at Seissel, below the Fall and Rising
again of the River. I am,

SIR, Your etc.
Geneva, July 12, 1688.
LETTER XXXV.
SIR,
THERE cannot be a more pleasant way than the Road between Geneva and Lausanne;
for, the whole way seems to be one continued Hillock, very populous, and well
tilled. We rarely lost sight of the Lake; and sometimes on the other side we
saw Piles of lofty and forked Mountains glittering with Snow.

The first night after our departure from Geneva we lay at the little Town of
Morges, Morges.
on the Bank of the Lake; from thence we discovered the Smoke of a Fire that
did a great deal of mischief at Vevay, toward the end of the Lake, as we were
informed next morning.

LAUSANNE.
The situation of Lausanns is extremely rough and uneven. We stopped not there,
nor in any of the little Towns we met with afterward, there being nothing in
'em worth observation.

Morat.
On the Bank of the Lake Morat we took notice of a kind of Chapel, which is
quite filled with the Bones of those Burgundians that were defeated in that
place, On the 20th of July 1476, we observed the following Inscription: D. O.
M. Caroli inclyti and fortissimi Ducis Burgundiae Exercitus Muratrum obsidens
ab Helvetiis caesus hoc sui monumentum reliquit. A. 1476.
to the number of Eighteen Thousand, by the joint Forces of Lorrain and
Switzerland.

Bern is not a large City, BERN.
though it is the Metropolis of the most potent Canton in Switzerland; Only
married Persons are admitted into the Council. G. Burnet.
it is almost wholly built of hewn Stone, but the Buildings are more solid than
beautiful; the Streets are clean, parted by a Rivulet that runs in the middle,
on each side of which there are covered Walks under Portico's, but they are too
narrow. This City was built in the year Others say, 1191.

On the 6th of March 1352, this City entered into the Swiss Confederacy. J.
Simler.


1175, by Berthold IV, Duke of Zeringhen; and the common Opinion is, that it
had its name from a Bear that was taken there, when its Foundations were laid,
the word Bern signifying a Bear in the German Language, for which reason also
it bears that Animal in its Coat of Arms; and there are Bears kept and fed
here, as those of Geneva breed Eagles.

In this City we only visited the Arsenal and the great Church, the first of
which is very well furnished, and in good condition. In one of the Halls there
is a Statue of that William Tell.
Citizen of Switz, who with an Arrow shot down an Apple that was placed on the
Head of his own Child, fifty paces from him; and they are both represented in
that posture. You know that cruel and extravagant Humor of the Governor
Grisler, joined to several other Grievances of the same nature, An. 1307, under
the Empire of Albert I.
gave birth to the Swiss Republic. Childrey relates, among other English
Prodigies, That one Robert Bone of Cornwall shot a little Bird on the Back of a
Cow: but this last Archer did not run so great a hazard as the other.

The following Inscription was lately placed over the Gate of the House
appointed for Manufactories:

I Am informed this Inscription was removed in October 1692, at the desire of
the French Ambassador.
Tempore quo crassa Clericorum Ignorantia, cum gratia and Privilegio Regis, in
verum Dei cultum fureret; atque DRACONUM opera eos quos Huguenotes vocant,
ferro, flamma, and omnis generis cruce, e Regno pelleret: Supremus Magistratus
e ruderibus Coenobii olim Praedicatorum has Aedes extruxit, ut Pietatem simul
and Artem Gallia exulantes, hospitalibus tectis exciperet. Faxit Deus T. O. M.
ut Charitatis hoc opificium, sit incremento Patriae. When the blind Ignorance
of the Clergy, supported by the King 's Favor and Authority, raged against the
true Worshippers of GOD; and by a Mission of Dragoons with fire and Sword, and
all manner of Torments, drove those whom they call Huguenots out of the
Kingdom: This House was erected by order of the Supreme Magistracy, out of the
Ruins of an old Monastery of Praedicant Friars; that Religion and Art, banished
together out of France. might here find a Hospitable Entertainment. May it
please the most Great and Good GOD, that this Work of Charity may turn to the
Advantage of our Country.

In the Church that belonged to the Dominicans they preserve some Monuments of
that memorable piece of Roguery acted by the Jacobin Friars, of which you may
have read an account in Lavater's Treatise of Specters. Henry Stephen relates
it at length; and Nicholas Manuel, who translated it into the German Tongue,
says, That it has been published in all Languages. The Story, in short, is
thus: After several violent Debates between the Jacobins and Cordeliers
concerning the Conception of the Virgin, whom these last maintained to be
exempted from Original Sin; John Vetter, Stephen Boltzhorst, Francis Ulchi, and
Hen. Steniker.
four Jacobins of Bern, at the earnest solicitation of several others of the
same Order, undertook to prove their Assertion by a Miracle; to carry on which
design, they resolved to counterfeit Apparitions, and under borrowed shapes to
speak in the night to a simple John Jetzer.
Novice; and after many subtle Contrivances, they proceeded to make the Virgin
her self tell him, that she was conceived in Sin, hoping to persuade the People
by the noise of these Apparitions. The Plot succeeded for some time according
to their desire, the Novice was deceived, he related his Visions, the People
repaired to him as to a Saint or Prophet, and the Opinion of the Virgin's
immaculate Conception began to be publicly discredited: But the Monks pushed
the matter too far, Jetzer at last perceived the Cheat, and they finding
themselves discovered, at the first endeavored to gain him by Promises and
Prayers, but afterward proceeded to Threatenings, and attempted several times
to poison him; which he observing, made his escape out of the Convent, and
declared the whole matter to the Magistrate, who asked and obtained Two Bishops
and the Provincial of the Jacobins.
extraordinary Judges of the Pope to decide so intricate a Case. The four
Monks, whom the management of their Intrigue had engaged in a complication of
the most enormous Crimes, were put to the Torture, and confessed all the
Villainy; after which they were delivered over to the Secular Power, degraded
and An. 1509.
burnt in the public place. The Novice also underwent the Torture, but was at
last acquitted.

SOLOTURN. The People of Soloturn are very superstitious; they had formerly an
Image of Christ on the Cross, habited like a Switzer.
Soloturn is seated in a fertile Valley on the River Aar, which passes also by
Bern; it In Celtis nihil est Soloduro antiquius, unis
Exceptis Treviris, quarum Ego dicta soror.
Simler pretends that Soloturn was built by Ninus.
boasts much of its Antiquity, and in that respect assumes the Title of the
Sister of Triers. Its Latin Name is written several ways by modern Authors, but
in the Itinerary of Antonin it is called Solothurum, from a Tower, as some
think, that was erected here in honor to the Sun. It Is encompassed with
regular Fortifications, which are lined with great pieces of a sort of white
Marble. The French Ambassador always resides here, and it is the Opinion of the
People, that he fortified the Town.

The People of Guastalla in the Duchy of Milan are of the same opinion
concerning their Dr. Burnet assures us, that in Sept. 1685 the Fortifications
of this place had already cost the Inhabitants above Two millions.
Fortifications, on which Five hundred Men are constantly at work. It Is
impossible to persuade 'em that the Fund of that Expense is in their Duke's
Coffers: they acknowledge indeed that he might defray the Charge himself, but
they have their own Reasons to believe the contrary.

Basil is the largest, fairest, BASIL. This City was united to the Cantons
1327. J. Simler.
and richest City in Switzerland, though it is surrounded only with a Wall
defended by some Towers; and it is also famous for its University. The Rhine is
already very broad and rapid at this place; it runs through the City, dividing it
into two parts, which are joined by a lovely Stone Bridge. That part of it next
Germany is much less than the other, which is seated on a rising Ground.

The Bishop that takes his Title from this City has his Residence at Poirentru,
as the titular Bishop of Geneva resides at Annecy; but neither of those
Prelates have any Power or Jurisdiction over these Cities.

There are several considerable Libraries in this City, with some In that which
belongs to Mr. Sebastian Fesch there are many rare Pictures, and several very
singular Medals, that are not to be met with any where else. Chapter Patin. The
Cabinet of Erasmus and Amersback belongs to the University, where there are
also Twenty Original Pieces by Holben, among which the dead Christ is
particularly esteemed, and might have been sold for a Thousand Ducats. There
are four excellent Series's of Medals, Greek, Consulary, and Gold and Brass
Imperials; the Gold Medal of Photina, Trajan's Wife, is one of the most rare.
The following Epigram is under a Picture of Erasmus, that represents half the
Body: Ingens ingentem quem personat Orbis Erasmum,
Hic tibi dimidium picta Tabella refert.
At cur non totum? Mirari desine Lector;
Integra nam totum Terra nec ipsa capit.
Among the Manuscripts in the Library there is a very rare Virgil, and an
Alcoran written on China Paper. Ch Patin.
Cabinets of Curiosities. The Body of the Senators assembled in Council with
their venerable Beards and Accoutrements, is looked upon as one of the most
remarkable Rarities in this City, by those who are not accustomed to such
Sights.

Those who love Painting usually go to see the fine Pictures at the Town house,
and especially the Dance of Death, by the famous Holben, who was born in this
City, and learned his Art without the help of an Instructor: and it is observed,
that there is a certain peculiar turn in his Works. He was called to England by
Henry VIII, and it is said he embraced that occasion with Joy, to get rid of his
peevish Importance at home. His Dance is to be seen in a public place, on the
Wall of the French Churchyard; it represents a Train of all sorts of Persons,
holding one another by the Hand, and carried to the Grave by Death, who leads
the Dance: it is a Medley of Persons of both Sexes, and all Ages and Conditions.

It Is a general Custom over all Switzerland, and even in the little Towns, to
send a Present of Wine to Travelers of great Quality. They who bring it have a
set form of Speech which serves indifferently for all sorts of Persons, only
they must take care to insert the word Excellency and other Titles of Honor in
their proper places, according to the Dignity of their Guest, which is
sometimes as difficult a Task for 'em to perform, as for the Person to whom
their Complement is addressed to forbear laughing at their fine Harangue. But,
after all, they expect to be answered in Money.

HUNNINGHEN.
An easy Descent leads from Basil to Hunninghen, along the left Bank of the
Rhine. The Cavalier erected in this place, on the Bastion that looks toward
Basil, with the Battery of great Guns levelled against that City, are sufficient
Indications that it is not far from the Village of Hunninghen to the City of
Basil.

I will not undertake a particular description of the Fortifications of
Hunninghen, but content my self with telling you in the general, that no Cost
was spared to make 'em very good: the Rhine fills the Ditches, and forms a
little Island over against the place, so that they were obliged to build a
double Bridge over the two Arms of the River; and these Bridges are admirably
well fortified, both in the Island and on the side next Germany.

From Hunninghen we came to Friburg, FRIBURG in Brisgaw.
another important place four leagues from the Rhine; it is seated in a Plain at
the Foot of the Hills, and though it encloses a large extent of Ground, the
Fortifications that surround it are very good and regular. The Marshall de
Crequi took this place, after a Siege of nine days, in the year 1677. It has
oftentimes changed its Lords, but never changed its condition so much as since
the last Conquest. Its present Masters have in a manner filled the neighboring
Hill with heaps of Forts and Trenches pil'd upon each other, and by so doing
have not only possessed themselves of the high Grounds that command the City,
but covered it with the Cannon of Forts.

They make several little Knacks in this City of a sort of Agat found in the
Neighborhood.

It Is four hours Journey from Friburg to Brisack. BRISACK.
I am not at all surpised that this City was formerly called the Pillow of the
Empire, for both its Figure and Strength deserve that Title. Imagine you see a
Hillock, which seems to have been artificially raised of Beds of Earth laid on
purpose, in the middle of a Country smooth as Ice. On one end of this little
Hill or Pillow stands the Town; the Citadel is on the other; and both are
encompassed with an excellent Fortification at the Foot of the Hillock. There
is a Stone Bridge over the Rhine, extremely well fortified on the side next
France.

SCHELESTAT formerly an Imperial City.
Schelestat is in the lower Alsatia, four leagues from Brisack, and three from
the Rhine. It is situated in a flat Country, not commanded by any Enemy, and
enclosed with Fortifications that are of the same nature with those of the
last-mention'd Cities. These places cannot be described without repeating the
word Fortification a hundred times in a quarter of an hour. STRASBURG, formerly
an Imperial City.
Strasburg is a Prodigy which in that respect surp^sses all the other fortified
places on the Rhine. The Platform I have sent you will give you a clearer Idea
of it than the exactest description I could make. It was formerly an Imperial
City, and followed the Doctrine of Luther.

You may remember that this Great, Fair and Potent City fell into the French
King's Hands Sept. 30. 1682.

The Its Height amounts to Five hundred seventy and four feet. It was finished
in the year 1449. Mirabile opus caput inter nubila condit. Aen. Sylv. The Basso
relievo's on the tops of the great Pillars of the Church are not so visible,
but they are surprising, for this being a Fabric of Three or Four hundred years
old, it is very strange to see such representations as are there. There is a
Procession represented, in which a Hog carries the Pot with the Holy Water,
and Asses and Hogs in Priestly Vestments follow to make up the Procession;
there is also an Ass standing before an Altar as if he were going to
consecrate, and one carries a Case with Relics, in which one sees a Fox, and
the Trains of all that go in this Procession are carried up by Monkeys. Dr.
Burnet, from Mr. Ablancourt.
Steeple of the Cathedral is the highest Pyramid in Europe, and the Church is
at present in the possession of the Roman Catholics. The Bishop said Mass
there, and harangu'd the King, a few days after the Conquest of the City.

I can assure you (as one that has seen 'em both) that the great Clock of
Strasburg does much exceed that of St. John's at Lions, both in the variety and
curiosity of its motions. They say at Strasburg, that the last-nam'd Clock is
the best in France, but that theirs cannot be paralleled in the whole World.
There is a printed Description of it, with a very exact Figure.

The little River Ill runs through this City, and afterward is branched out into
several Channels. The Rhine is about a mile distant, toward the right hand.

The Arsenal, which not long ago was celebrated over all Europe, is now almost
quite disfurnish'd.

The Women's Habit is very odd and fantastical.

I must tell you, before I conclude my Letter, that all the Towns and Villages
we have hitherto seen in Alsatia are either wholly ruined, or half burnt, this
lovely and unfortunate Country having been several times laid waste during the
Wars. I am,

SIR, Your etc.
Strasburg, Jul. 22 1688.
LETTER XXXVI.
SIR,
SOME particular Reasons having obliged us to leave Strasburg, and make all the
haste we could to Brussels, we resolved to embark on the Rhine, though not
without some reluctance, because we had already traveled the same way between
Mentz and Colen.

Between Strasburg and the little City of Germensheim we stopped at Fort-Lewis,
Fort-Lewis.
which is another French Fort, and not inferior to the rest in Strength. Here
the Rhine makes an Island, which is covered with a Fort of four Bastions, and
the two Bridges are fortified on each side, on the Banks of the two Arms of the
River.

Night coming on somewhat sooner than our Boatmen expected, we were obliged to
land at a miserable Village, where we could neither find Beds nor Victuals: but
that was not our greatest Misfortune, for an innumerable multitude of Gnats
tormented us the whole night on our Straw in a Barn, and would not suffer us to
rest a moment.

PHILIPSBURG
We went ashore afterward to see Philipsburg, which is a small Cannon-shot
distant from the Rhine, on the German side. It was formerly a Ca^^^ Udenb^^^.
Village, fortified by Christopher Sotteren Elector of Triers, by reason of the
convenience of its situation, being naturally of difficult access, in the
middle of a Marish, and not commanded by any rising Ground. It Is a regular
Heptagon with Half-Moons before each Curtain. This Town is a Fief, and under
the jurisdiction of the Bishopric of Spire; Since the first Edition of this
Book, this place is fallen again into the hands of the French.
it was taken from the French after a long Siege, in the year 1676, by the
Germans, who relying on the Faith of the Truce, have not a very strong Garrison
in it.

Spire is a pretty little City, SPIRE, an Imperial City.
weak and without Trade, though it was famous heretofore: that which makes it
considerable at present is the Imperial Chamber, which, after it had moved from
place to place for above Two hundred years, was fixed here by Charles V. This
Chamber is a Sovereign Court, where all the Affairs of the Empire that are
brought before it, are judged without appeal, unless in some few Cases. The
Chief This Judge must always be a Roman Catholic, and has 4000 Crowns Salary.
Of the two Presidents, one is a Roman Catholic, and the other a Protestant; and
of the Fifteen Assistants there are only Seven Protestants, the rest being
Roman Catholics. The Presidents have 2000 Crowns each, and every Assistant
1000. The Chamber never meddles with the Business of the War. It Is remarkable
that the contending Parties can never discover the Names of those who state the
Case, either before or after it is decided. They who appeal to the Emperor are
obliged to consign a certain Sum, which, if they receive a favorable Sentence,
is restored to 'em; if otherwise, they lose it. Heiss.
Judge represents the Emperor's Person, and has the Imperial Scepter laid
before him, as a mark of the Dignity with which he is clothed.

There is also another great Tribunal in Germany called The Council of the
Court, because it is held at Vienna, or follows the Imperial Court. This This
Council is al^o composed of Members of both Religions.
Council is not perpetual, nor, in all respects, of equal Dignity with the
Imperial Chamber; yet Cases of the same nature are also debated, and
soveraignly determined here. No Suits can be removed from one of these Chambers
to the other; only in some cases a review of the Judgment may be obtained
before the Emperor himself.

The express Orders which the Marshall de Turenne received during the last
Wars, not to disturb or interrupt the ordinary course of Justice in the Chamber
of Spire, makes the Members of that Court believe that they shall be still
treated with the same Respect. And they are so firmly persuaded of the A little
after the first Edition of this Book Spire and Worms were plundered by the
French Troops, without the least regard to the Imperial Chamber.
French Civility, that though they lie open to an Invasion, in case of a Rupture,
they never think of removing either the Court or Original Records.

I shall pass from Spire to Colen, having nothing to add to the account I have
already given you of the Cities that lie between 'em.

JULIERS.
At our departure from Colen we took the Road to Juliers, the Motropolis of the
Duchy of the same Name. As far as we could judge by the slight view we had of
it, it is pretty well fortified. Here the Protestants enjoy the free exercise of
their Religion, by virtue of the Treaty which I mentioned before.

AIX LA CHAPELLE, an Imperial City; it is also called Royal, being perhaps
honored with that Title, because according to the Tenor of the Golden Bull,
the King of the Romans ought to receive his first Crown here. Heiss.
Leaving Juliers, we passed through a good and pleasant Country, and in four or
five hours came to Aix la Chapelle. That famous City is still large and
beautiful, though it has lost much of its ancient luster. It has also preserved
its Liberty entire; only the Duke of Newburg, as Duke of Juliers, within whose
Lands it lies, has a Right to name the Burgo-master. It Is under the Protection
of the King of Spain, as Duke of Brabant.

This This City is double: the inward City called Carolina is enclosed with its
ancient Walls, Blond.
City was almost wholly rebuilt by Charles the Great, having lain desolate for
almost four Ages, after it was sacked by Attila. The same Emperor endowed it
with several Privileges, made it the capital City of Gaul beyond the Alps, and
honored it with his usual Residence. He built also the great Church, from
which the Town took the Name of Aix la Chapelle, whereas before it was called
Aquisgranum, from a The old Tower joined to the Townhouse on the East side,
does still retain the name of Granus or Granius. Idem.
Roman Prince named Granus, a Brother or Kinsman of Nero, who having discovered
Mineral Waters in this place, built a Castle, and laid the first Foundations of
the City. Charles the Great At the age of 72 years, in the Fourteenth year of
his Empire, the Forty eighth of his Reign, and of Christ 814.
died here, and his Tomb remains to this day.

For the space of above Five hundred years, several Emperors that succeeded
Charles the Great were desirous to be Crowned at Aix; and I think I told you
that Charles IV. made a positive regulation of this Ceremony, by one of the
Constitutions of the Golden Bull, which ordained that the Emperors should
afterward receive their first Crown here; but that Custom has been laid aside
for some time, and there remain only two Marks of the ancient Privileges of
this City; first, there are Deputies sent both to Aix and Nuremburg, to
acquaint 'em with the Election of a new Emperor, that they may send the
Imperial * Ornaments and other things necessary for the Solemnity of the
Inauguration, Aix sends some Relics, a book of the Gospels written in Letters
of Gold and one of Charles the Great's Swords, with the Brit I have already
given an account of the Ornament that are kept at Nuremburg.
that are deposited in their hands. And secondly, wheresoever the Ceremony is
performed, the Emperor declares solemnly, That though for some particular Reasons
he could not receive his first Crown at Aix, that Omission shall not be
interpreted to the prejudice or diminution of the Privileges of that City. The
Emperor is always a Canon of Aix, and takes an Oath for that purpose, on the
day of his Coronation.

Some Persons here assure me, that both Religions enjoy equal Privileges at
Aix; but I must confess I forgot to enquire, when I passed by that City, and
therefore I will affirm nothing positively.

I read the other day, in a short description of the Country of Juliers, (...)
Monulsus. and St. Godulrus Bishops of Liege.
that two Canonized Prelates gave themselves the trouble of rising from the
Dead on purpose to be present at the Dedication of the Chapel of Aix, after
which they marched back to their Tombs. Does not this Story put you in mind of
L. Q. Cincinnatus, who after he had been Dictator, and gained a Battle,
returned peaceably to his Plough.

MASTREICHT.
We stayed but two or three hours at Mastreicht, a City of an indifferent
largeness, pretty well built, and strongly fortified; the Garrison consists of
between Nine and Ten thousand Men, and we saw the The present King of England.
Prince of Orange take a review of 'em. Some Battalions performed several
Martial Exercises, and they are all extremely well disciplined. The little part
of the City on the right Bank of the Meuse is called Wyek* I know not whether
you have observed that the Names of Mastreicht and Vtrecht are both derived
from the word Trajectum, which is their common Name in Latin. Vtrecht was
called inferius or ulterius Trajectum, and was the passage of the Rhine. And
Mastreicht was named Mosae Trajectum, the passage of the Meuse, and Trajectum
superius, or the upper Passage.

About Three a-clock in the Afternoon we left Mastreicht, LIEGE.
and arrived the same Evening at Liege, which we found so full of People, The
Bishop's Seat was formerly at Tongres, from whence it was transferred to
Mastreicht, and from thence to Liege. Heiss.
by reason of the Ceremony of the Bishop's Election, that we could not be
accommodated with Beds.

Liege is a pretty large City, populous, and adorned with some fine Structures,
of which the Cathedral Church and the Bishop's Palace are the two principal.
Formerly there was not a Chapter in the whole Empire so honorable as that of
Liege. The Annals of this City relate, that in the year 1131, when the Emperor
Lotharius II. was crowned in this place by Pope Innocent II, the Chapter that
assisted at the Ceremony was composed of nine Sons of Kings, fourteen Sons of
Dukes who were Sovereign Princes, nine and twenty Counts of the Sacred Empire,
and eight Barons. But now any Licentiate Doctor in the University of Lovain may
be a Canon of Liege.

This City is divided by the Meuse into two parts, of which that on the left
side of the River is the principal. They are joined by a fair Stone Bridge,
which gives a passage under its Arches to great Barks, which bring all sorts of
Merchandise, and are very convenient for Trade.

Coal is also found in France, in some parts of Auvergne, and in Forests.
There are many Armorers in this place, who are drawn hither, without doubt, for
the convenience of Coal, which is found here, and burnt as commonly as at
London. It Is called Houille, from a certain Smith named Good Man le Houilloux,
by whom, they pretend, it was first discovered. They add, that a Ghost, under
the shape of an old Man clothed in white, showed him the Mine.

The Vineyards with which the little Hills of Liege are almost wholly covered,
deserve to be taken notice of, because of the Climate, though the Wine is not
strong. The same Hills contain Quarries of very fine black Marble.

Departing from Liege we passed in sight of Tongres and Saintron, and lay at
the little City of Tilmont. Tilmont, or Tirlemont.
The next day we dined at Lovain, and arrived in the Evening at Brussels, where
we still remain.

LOVAIN, the Metropolitan See of Brabant. One of the Laws of the University
ordains, that Whoremongers should be Beheaded with a Wooden Saw, and Pimps, or
those that are accessory to the committing of Whoredom, banished. It was
formerly the Privilege of the Dean of the Canons to receive the Oath from the
Duke of Brabant, at his accession to the Sovereignty. The Well in the Castle is
remarkable for its depth, and an Echo that resounds in it. There is a Tower in
the City called Verloren Kost, or Charge Lost, because the People of Lovain
intended to have built Seven other Towers like to this, but were prevented by
some Accidents, so that they erected only one. Voyage to Flanders by a nameless
Author. There are some Vineyards about Lovain.
Lovain, the second City of Brabant, is very large, and pleasantly built; it is
said there are some Monuments in it of the age of Caesar. We visited several
fair Churches, the Townhouse, the School of Medicine, and some other
considerable Structures; but, in my Opinion, the University is its greatest
Ornament, which was founded by John IV, Duke of Brabant, in the year 1425. It
contains Five and forty endowed Colleges, with Schools of Divinity, Law and
Physic.

An Inhabitant of Lovain, who happened to be in an Inn where we were, offered
to carry us to a Convent a quarter of a league from the City, where he promised
to procure us a sight of several Curiosities, but we had not time to accept of
his Kindness. He told us, that among other things there was in that Monastery a
Genealogical Stem of the House of Crouy, by which it appeared, that the Head of
that Family now living was descended in a right line from Adam. An English
Gentleman, to whom I related the Story the other day, assured me, that he knew
several Families in Wales, who produce like Catalogues of their Ancestors. But
don't ye think they might content themselves with deriving their Pedigree from
Noah? If these Gentelmen had read See E. Pasquier, Part 2, Book 19, Letter 6.
Le Feron's Heraldry, who informs us, that Adam bore Three Fig Leaves in his
Coat of Arms, it is probable they would not make use of any other Scutcheon. I
hope we shall meet with some noble Preadamites some time or other.

At Mr. Gutschoven's House, who is a Physician and great Anatomist, we saw
several embalmed Bodies, dissected after diverse methods, and very well
preserved, in which the Veins, Arteries, Muscles, Nerves, etc. are separated
and distinguished from each other, so that almost the entire Contexture of the
Parts of a Human Body may be perfectly discerned. The Veins, Arteries, and even
the least Fibers, are filled with a certain red matter, which makes 'em appear
like so many Branches of Coral. This is esteemed a rare Curiosity.

I must not forget to mention another Rarity which we saw at Milan. Some Dutch
Mariners showed for Twopence a Sea-Calf, which they had taken on the Coast of
Greenland, and was grown so tame, that he who had the chief care of it could
make it play a hundred apish Tricks. It Is about the bigness of a Lamb fifteen
days old; its Hair is smooth, soft, and almost of an Olive color; it has a
short Head, with two Whiskers like a Cat, Pinnis quibus in mari utuntur, humi
quoque vice pedum Serpunt. Plin.
and its four Feet end in Toes or Claws joined like those of a Goose; it walks
and stands on its fore-feet, and draws the other two after it, which are always
stretched backwards. This Amphibious Creature is at present nourished with
Milk. I remember, as we passed by the Hague, almost a year ago, a Lady of
Zealand told me she had seen a tame Sea Dog at Tergoutz, who eat all sorts of
Victuals, and barked like other Dogs, but made a duller noise.

I have been long expecting, with impatience, to hear from you; I entreat you
to do me the favor to write to me as soon as you can. I am very sincerely,

SIR, Your etc.
Brussels, Aug. 12. 1688.
LETTER XXXVII.
SIR,
YOUR Reflections on my last Letters, and several other Passages in that which I
received from you, might furnish me with sufficient matter for a very long
Answer; but since I hope to have the honor to see you very speedily, I shall
defer the further consideration of these points till our meeting, and at
present only communicate to you some of those Observations I have made during
our stay at Brussels,

I need not tell you, BRUSSELS.
that this is the capital City of the Duchy of Brabant, and the ordinary
Residence of the Governors of the Spanish Netherlands.

This City is of an oval Figure, large, populous, enclosed On one side there
are some neglected Fortifications, which were never lined.
only with a Wall and Ditches, and situated partly in a Plain, and partly on
the Brow of a little Hill. The low Town is divided by great Canals, which are
filled by the little River Senne, and communicate with that of the Scheld.
These Canals are navigable by Barks of a considerable burden, and are very
convenient for Trade. The Air of Brussels is very good; the public places are
adorned with Fountains, the Streets are of a convenient breadth and well paved,
the Houses large and commodious, and the whole neighboring Country is
extremely fertile.

The People of Brussels, and generally of all Brabant, are free, kind, civil,
and perhaps a little too easy; but notwithstanding all their Simplicity, they
change their Humor when they are provoked, and have on some occasions given
sufficient Proofs of their Bravery.

The Palace, usually called the Court, where the The Marquess of Castanaga,
1688. Since the first Edition of this Book the Elector of Bavaria was made
perpetual Governor, 1691.
Governor resides, is neither regular nor magnificent, and at most can be
called moderately beautiful; but the prospect of the Park from its principal
Apartments is extremely pleasant.

Descending from the Palace to the Park, on the end of a Wall near the little
Garden, I observed a great Gun, the Story of which deserves to be related; but
that I may not detain you too long, I shall only subjoin the The sum of which
is, that one of the Enemy's Ships being blown up by a Shot, that Cannon,
together with a young Maid, were carried through the Air, and fell in the Palace,
and that the Governess of the Netherlands ordered the Maid to be educated.
Inscription which is engraved on a piece of Marble beneath the Cannon:

Dederit ne viam Casusve Deusve?
Mirabili certe casu
Hostilis navis tormentis Regiis perforata
Cum accenso pulvere crepuisset;
Hoc tormentum, and una Juvenculam
Alte sublatam in Regis Praetorio deposuit.
Adeo tutum in Rege non solum Innocentia
Sed etiam supplex hostilitas perfugium habet
ISABELLA CLARA EUGENIA
BELGII PRINCEPS
in rei monumentum
Tormentum hic deponi, Juvenculam ali jussit.
From the Garden or Flower-plot you ascend to the Park, which is planted with
Oaks, Beech-trees, and Walnut-trees, and contains a great number of Deer. Its
lovely Alleys make one of the pleasantest Walks about the City; and you may
also walk quite round the Ramparts, almost always between two rows of Trees.

On the other side of the Park there is a little House of Pleasure, which was
After he had resigned his Power he retired to this House, and stayed there five
or six months.
built by Charles the Fifth, and where among other things the Cradle of that
Emperor is still preserved. In the great Hall of the other Palace he resigned
the Kingdom of Spain to his Son Philip.

Not far from thence they showed us a large Gallery full of several sorts of
Arms and Furniture for Tournaments, besides ancient Suits of Harness or Armor
of several Emperors, Kings, Archdukes, and other Princes or great Captains.

In the same place they have also taken care to preserve the Memory of three
illustrious Horses, whose Skins are glu'd on artificial Horses of the same
stature with the Originals. They told us, That one of these Horses was sold for
12000 Crowns to Philip II, who made a Present of him to Lewis de Requesens,
great Commander of Castil, and After the Duke of Alva.
Governor of the Netherlands. The second had the Honor to bear the Infanta
Isabella, when she made her Entry into Brussels. And the third saved the Life
of Archduke Albert, at the Siege of Ostend.

One of my Friends gave me the Epitaph of the last of these Animals, whose Name
was Noble; you will find in it a Reflection worthy of a Horse of Merit.

Siste gradum, Spectator; ego de nomine dicor
Nobilis; at Virtus nomine major erat.
Archiduci Alberto prostravi terga, tenacem
Cum circa Ostendam Martia Erinnys erat.
Hunc ipsum eripui pugnantem hostilibus armis,
Cum Mors sanguineum falce parabat opus.
Me magis ardebat Miles, quia Virginis instar,
Cernebat nivea crescere front jubam.
Hinc, ut me raperet, crebro sua spicula and enses
In caput ignoti struxerat Archiducis.
Evasi, eduxique Virum, meque ipse reduxit
Incolumem. Nostrae non erat hora necis.
Ast anno vertente, die quo evasimus ambo,
Nobilis interii. Cernite qualis eram.
There is a very odd Custom in this City, that Coaches are drawn by Dogs as
usually as by Horses. These Dogs are not extraordinarily big.
They Harness three or four Mastiffs, whom they place at one another's side,
and make 'em draw prodigious weights. I am certainly informed, that, on a
Wager, two of those Animals drew five Men in a Coach from one end of the City
to the other. Besides, which is the main convenience in this way of carriage,
Dogs may be kept at a much easier rate than Horses, and here there are Eating
houses or Halfpenny Ordinaries for 'em, where they may fill their Bellies with
Flesh taken from the Dunghills, and such other Victuals.

I believe M. is guilty of a Mistake, which doubtless proceeded from his
misunderstanding the following Passage in Dionys. Halic. Mihi sane tria
magnificentissima videntur, ex quibus maxim apparet magnitudo Romani Imperii;
Aquaeductus, viae Stratae and Cloacae, reputanti non solum utilitatem operum,
verum etiam impensarum magnitudinem, quam vel hinc licet conjicere, quod ut
affirmat C. Aquilius, neglectas aliquando Cloacas, and non transmittentes
aquas, Censores mill talentis purgandas locaverint. According to F. Nardin 's
Calculation, a Thousand Talents are equivalent to Six hundred thousand Crowns
of Gold.
Since it has been observed by some Authors that the Roman Censors caused the *
Filth that was taken ex latrinis, or out of the Common-shores, to be M.
confines the meaning of the Phrase to hominum stercora, or Human Excrements;
but this is a second Error, for the Cloaca maxima was the Common-shore or Sink
of all manner of Filth and Nastiness, according to Livy, Receptaculum omnium
purgamentorum Urbis.
sold, and that the price of it in one year amounted to Six hundred thousand
Crowns, I may venture to acquaint you, that they drive the same Trade at
Brussels. They gather all the Filth of the City very carefully into one place,
and after it is duly fermented, it is bought and sold like other Commodities. I
had the fortune one day to pass by that place just as three or four Dutch Barks
were taking in their sweet Lading; this put me in mind of Juvenal's Reflection,
which I think could never be more fitly applied; -- lucri bonus ex re
Qualibet. --
You know Vespasian's Answer to Titus concerning the Imposition on Urine. As
they are great Lovers of Flowers in Holland and Flanders, they take particular
care to preserve this sort of Dung to make Beds for 'em; and I fancy the
odoriferous Smell of those Flowers might furnish matter for a Riddle, not
unlike to that of Sampson's Honey.

To change the Subject of our Discourse, I can assure you that there are few
Cities in this Country so well furnished with good Company as Brussels. Almost
all the Inhabitants speak French; there is a great number of Persons of
Quality; the Ladies are handsome, and a Stranger may be easily introduced into
the best company.

Four or five great Streets of the low Town form an Island, and at the same
time a kind of Circle, where they usually take the Air in Coaches every
Evening, and even in Winter as well as in Summer; for they choose rather to take
their Pleasure in Coaches than to walk a foot, whereas at Paris the Tuilleries
are more frequented than the Walks for Coaches.

I told you before, that at Rome, and in some other Towns of Italy, the Men
never enter into the same Coach with Women; and the same custom is also
generally observed here when they go to take the Air. But whereas at Rome they
are possessed with an opinion, that Decency will not admit the Women to be seen
in company with Men, here they separate out of pure Gallantry. Perhaps you will
imagine this to be a Paradox, but you must consider that the Men go on one side
and the Women on the other, and that they meet, and talk, and ogle as they
please. Thus their division occasions a more general Society, which would be
very diverting, if every one were not obliged to salute all that pass by, and
to repeat his Salutations as often as he meets another Coach.

There is a pleasant Ceremony observed by the Citizens on the 19th of January.
The Women undress their Husbands and carry 'em to Bed, and on the morrow the
Husbands treat their Friends. I cannot give you a positive account of the
Original of this Custom, but I had the fortune to be in a company where there
were two different Reasons given for it, and both the opposite Parties
persisted obstinately in their several Opinions.

Some alleged, that on a certain time (which they did not think fit to mention
more particularly) the City being reduced to Extremity after a long Siege, at
last surrendered on Condition, that the Women should be suffered to depart
unmolested with their little Children, and all that they could carry with 'em
besides; and that instead of packing up their Toilettes, every one marched out
with her Best-beloved between her Shoulders, and so cheated their Enemies.

Others, who laughed at this Story and called it a Fable, assured us, that a
considerable number of the Inhabitants of Brussels followed St. Lewis in his
first Croisado, and had the good fortune to suffer less than most other Troops
which composed that numerous Army when it was totally routed: For, continued
our Informers, the greatest part of 'em either escaped or were redeemed, and
afterward they joined in a Body to return home. Now their Wives hearing of
their approach, ran to meet 'em, and in a Transport of Joy caught 'em up, and
carried 'em home in their Arms. But, if I durst presume to mend the Story,
instead of overloading the Women with so unreasonable a Burden, I would content
my self with making 'em undress their Husbands the first night after their
return, by reason of the good Humor of the former, and the Weariness of the
latter.

These Warriors put me in mind of a sort of Monument that is to be seen over
the Gate of Flanders, where there are Figures of Men armed with Spits. An
honest old Man, who made me take notice of 'em, told me, that they were placed
there for a Memorial of the Valor of his Countrymen, on the following
occasion. When the People of Ghent revolted under the Government of the Queen
Dowager of Hungary, Charles the Fifth's Sister, and came to surprise and
plunder this City, the Rabble of the Town sallied out of the abovementioned
Gate, armed with Spits and Pitchforks, and bravely repulsed the Enemy.

The finest Churches in Brussels are those of St. Gudula and of the Jesuits.
These Fathers have great Bells, such as are used in Parish Churches, contrary
to the usual Custom. They made use of the Pretext of certain extraordinary
Catechizings, to obtain leave to ring a small Bell; but by degrees they left
off that troublesome Exercise, and in the mean time augmented their * Bell. This
piece of boldness stirs up the Jealousy of the other Monks, who were not
over-fond of the Jesuits before.

The Chapel of the Holy Sacrament of Miracles is particularly taken notice of
at St. Gudula's, because of the Relics that are kept in it. There is a
Tradition, that certain Jews having bought several consecrated Hosts of a
Priest, stabbed 'em with a Knife, and that a great deal of Blood flowed out of
the Wounds. The Jews were burnt on the highest Tower of the City-walls, so that
the Fire was seen at the distance of Ten miles, and the Hosties were found and
placed on the Altar of the Chapel, in a Shrine of Gold. This Story is painted
on the Wall near the Quire.

The Church of the Capuchins is one of the finest Temples that those Friars
have in any part of the World.

There are several Rarities in the Library of the Jesuits, and among other
things the Chair of Leather gilt, in which Charles V. performed the Ceremony of
his Resignation.

The Chapel of the Family of Tassis, in the Church Des Sablons, deserves to be
particularly considered.

I Am informed, that of Five and thirty thousand Acres which the Province of
Brabant contains, Nine and twenty thousand are possessed by Ecclesiastical
Societies.

There are some few Protestants at Brussels, but they are not allowed the least
degrees of Liberty, neither do they own their Religion openly; yet this Country
is not under the Power of the Inquisition, for the States would never suffer
that Tyrannical Court to be established among 'em.

I designed to have given you some account of the Academy, the Theater, the
public Place, the Town house, with its Pictures and fine-Tower, the Duke de
Bournonville's Gardens, the Count of Egmont's Hall, the Carmelites Garden, and
the Glass-house; but I am forced to conclude my Letter. You know that Lace and
Tapestry make a part of the Trade of this City.

We are just going to take a turn to Antwerp, from whence we design to return
hither, and after two or three days to proceed on our Journey homeward, by the
way of Ghent, Bruges, Ostend, and Newport, where we expect to find the Yacht. I
am,

SIR, Your etc.
Brussels, Sept. 23. 1688.
LETTER XXXVI.
SIR,
FROM Brussels we made use of the ordinary Passage by the Canal, and in five
hours came to the Village called little Villebroeck, where we embarked on the
Ruppel, and by the help of a favorable Wind and Tide, in less than two hours,
arrived at Antwerp.

At our departure from Antwerp we hired a Coach, which carried us by the way of
Mechlin to the little City of Vilvorden, where we took Boat for Brussels, which
is but two leagues distant.

MECHLIN.
Mechlin is famous for its neatness, in which nevertheless, if I may judge by
what appeared to us, it exceeds not other places. There is a great deal of Lace
made here, and the River Dyle, on which the Town is situated, fills the Canals,
which open a communication between this and most of the neighboring Cities.
The Women of the Lordship of Mechlin go frequently to Brabant to be brought to
Bed, that their Children may enjoy the Privileges of the Natives of that
Province. I have subjoined an Abstract of these so much talked of Privileges:

I. The Duke (who at present is the King of Spain) shall not call a Meeting of
the Prelates or inferior Clergy, without the Knowledge, Consent, and
particular Approbation of the Two other States, the Nobility and Common People.

II. The Duke shall not prosecute any of his Subjects or Inhabitants of the
Country, but by the usual methods of Justice, that the accused Person may
defend himself by his Counsel, and plead his own Cause publicly.

III. The Duke shall not be empowered to impose Taxes, or any other Exactions,
on his Subjects, without the Consent of the States of the Country.

IV. No honorable Office shall be bestowed on Foreigners, excepting only some
inconsiderable Employments.

V. When the Duke calls a Meeting of the States General, to require any thing
to be granted to him, those of Brabant shall not be obliged to go out of their
own Province, or to come to any conclusion, but in the same,

VI. If the Duke shall by Force, Fraud, or any other way infringe or violate
any of the said Privileges, the People of Brabant, after they have duly and
civilly protested against him, shall be held to be absolved from their Oath of
Fidelity, and may freely do as they shall think fit.

The Province of Brabant, and Lordship of Mechlin, by an ancient Custom, never
receive any particular Governor. The great Council Royal, which was instituted
by Charles Duke of Burgundy, in the year 1473, and formerly followed the Court,
was fixed at Mechlin An. 1503. It judges Soveraignly, and without Appeal, the
Knights of the Golden Fleece, nor can its Judgments be reviewed. I could not
hear of any Rarities worth observation in this City.

ANTWERP, formerly a Hans Town.
The famous City of Antwerp deserves to be more particularly described. It Is
seated on a smooth and level spot of Ground, on the right Bank of the Scheld;
its Figure approaches to a Semicircle, the diameter of which is washed by the
River, and I Am credibly informed that it contains Five thousand six hundred and
thirty five Geometrical paces in compass. The Houses are built partly of Wood,
and partly of Brick, after an unusual manner, with Battlements on the Pinacles
on the tops of 'em, and very high Roofs, according to the common Fashion of the
Country, yet they are generally handsome. The Streets, for the most part, are
large, straight, and well paved.

The Fortifications are indifferent; the Ramparts are adorned almost throughout
with double Alleys bordered with great Trees, which make very pleasant Walks;
the Citadel is strong, but somewhat neglected; it is a regular Pentagon.

It was built in the year 1567, and I Am told it cost Five hundred thousand
Ducats: the Duke of Alva's Statue in Brass was erected in the middle of the
Place of Arms; he was represented in complete Armor, but without a Headpiece,
his right Arm was extended toward the City, and his Hand open. Under his Feet
was a monstrous Figure with two Heads and six Arms; it had two Dishes hanging
at its Ears, and at its Neck a Wallet or Satchel, out of which issued two
Serpents. The six Hands held a Torch, a Leaf of Paper, a Purse, a torn Cloak, a
Club, and an Ax, and at the Feet of the Monster there was a Visor: On the Face
of the Pedestal that looked toward the City were these Letters: Ferdinando
Alvarez a Toledo, Albae Duci, Phil II. Hisp. Regis apud Belgas praefecto, quod
extincta seditione, Rebellibus pulsis, Religione procurata, Justitia culta,
Provinciis Pabem firmaverit. Regis Optimi Ministro fidelissimo positum.
F. A. A. T. A. D. P. S. H. R. A. B. P. Q. E. S. R. P. R. P. I. C. P. P. F. R.
O. M. F. P. This Statue was not long after broken by the People.

I find a pleasant Story in Chappuys, which I cannot forbear relating to you.
When the Spaniards made the Duke of Arschot Governor of this Citadel, the Duke
putting his Hands between the Person's Hands who was to receive his Oath,
pronounced these words; I swear by the Name of God, and of the Holy Mary, that
I will faithfully keep and preserve this Citadel, etc. After which the
following Answer was returned to him as part of the Ceremony: If you do so, God
assist you; if not, the Devil take you, Soul and Body: And the whole Assembly
answered Amen.

The Scheld is large and deep over against Antwerp, and two leagues on each
side of it; this was formerly the richest and most frequented Port in Europe. I
read not long ago in some Fragments of the Annals of this City, that the Trade
of it, in the year 1550, amounted to a hundred and thirty three millions of
Gold, without reckoning the Bank. In the same Memoirs Omnimodae Merces, Arts
priscaeque, novaeque.
Et quae sunt aliis singula cuncta mihi. Scal.

I found the following Story, which may serve for a Specimen of the ancient
Riches of Antwerp.

One John Daens, a Merchant, lent a million of Gold to Charles V, (I think)
toward the prosecution of the War of Hungary: the Emperor, at his return from
that Expedition, came to Antwerp, and was invited to Dinner by his Creditor; he
accepted the Invitation, and was splendidly entertained; and the Merchant,
after he had burnt a Fire of Cinnamon all the while, at last, to crown the
Treat, threw the Emperor's Obligation into the midst of it.

I need not tell you, that there have happened great Alterations since that
time. The Port of Antwerp is destitute of Ships; the Exchange is desolate and
unfrequented, and the City, though still beautiful, enjoys a sad Tranquillity,
yet there are many rich Families in it.

London and Antwerp were the two principal Cities of the German Hanse or
League. That great Society had a It Is called the Osterlings House.
large and fair public House in the last of those Cities, which is still to be
seen: the Bourse or Exchange is Ninety Foot long, and Seventy broad,
comprehending the wideness of the Portico's that surround it on the inside. It
was built in the year 1531, and took its Name from a House that stood formerly
in the same place, on which there was a Scutcheon charged with three Bourses in
French.
Purses, and from that time the public places appointed for the meeting of
Merchants have almost every where retained the Name of Bourse. The Town house
is also a very fine Structure.

The first time I saw the Churches of Antwerp I confess I was surpised with
their Magnificence, and especially I admired that which belonged to the
Jesuits, where there is nothing to be seen but Marble and rare Pictures; but
since that time I have seen a hundred Churches in Italy which surpass those of
this City. Nevertheless that Country cannot boast of such a Pyramid as the
Steeple of the Cathedral of Antwerp, which is almost as 420 foot high. There
are Three and thirty Bells in the Tower.
high as that of Strasburg, and more finely wrought: It Is true, the Italians
have Domes and Towers separated from the Body of the Church, but they are
perfect Strangers to such Steeples as that of this Cathedral.

Thirty paces from the same Church there is a Well, where we observed that the
Iron branches on which the Pully hangs are adorned with Foliages, and were told
that they were wrought by a famous Smith called Quintin Mathys. This
Anvil-beater became enamored of a Painter's Daughter, and had the good Fortune
to touch her Heart; he was handsome, witty, and ingenious, and besides was
Master of a considerable Fortune for a man of his Profession; but the Painter
would by no means be persuaded to give his Daughter to a Blacksmith. The old
man's Obstinacy did not dishearten Quintin; his Love animated him, and taught
him to overcome that difficulty: he exchanged his Hammer for a Pencil, and in a
little time equaled and even surpassed the best Painters in Antwerp; after
which he received the dear Reward of his Labors. This generous Lover died Anno
1529, and was buried at the Foot of the Cathedral, near the great Portal; the
following Verse is engraved on the Wall over his Tomb.

CONNVBIALIS AMOR DE MVLCIBRE FECIT APELLEM;
Love metamorphos'd Vulcan to Apelles.
Plantin's Printing House remains in some measure to this very day; it is now in
the possession of Moretus, who is also a very skilful Printer.

The Water of the Scheld being always brackish before Antwerp, and the
Fountains of the City not sufficient to serve the Brewhouses, they were forced
to be at the charge of bringing a new supply of Water by a Canal, which empties
its self into a great Cistern, out of which the Water is raised by Engines to a
large Basin, from whence it is distributed by forty Pipes to as many Brewhouses.
The Brewers are fixed to that number by reason of the great scarcity of Water,
which they have only at certain hours, and every one knows when to open the
Cock of his Pipe.

Some Authors relate, That Charles the Fifth passing through Paris, to show his
contempt of that City, said he would put it in his In French Began signifies a
Glove, and Ghent is also called Gant. In the year 1427 the Count of Nassaw
Baron de Diestein, the Marquess of Bergopzom, and the Baron of Wesemale, caused
the Circuit of several great Cities to be measured for a Wager: and they found
(as it appears by an authentic Record still extant) that the Circumference of
Lovain exceeds that of Ghent, by three Rods or sixty Feet. Voyage to Flanders.
Glove, meaning, That it might be contained in Ghent. The Jests of great
Princes are commonly received as Oracles; and this little Story, whether true
or false, has doubtless occasioned the ridiculous mistake of several Authors,
who speak of Ghent as of the greatest City in Europe. I know not whether it
might not be contained in the Suburb of St. Germans; but I Am sure it will
appear very inconsiderable if it be compared to Paris. It Is true, Ghent is a
City, but Paris is a little World.

After all, it must be acknowledged, that Ghent is a very pleasant place; it is
a fine City, neat, prettily built, in a good Air, and convenient situation:
whereas at Paris the Houses hide the City; here they are not so thick, but that
the Town may be easily viewed. The French King took it in six days,
notwithstanding the Inundations of its Sluices, Ann. 1678.

It receives great Advantages from the neighborhood of the Scheld and Lys;
there is a Bridge over the latter, on which there are two Statues of Brass
representing one Man ready to cut off another's Head. The same Figures are to
be seen in a large Picture in the Townhouse, with this Inscription written
below;

Ae Gandt le en Fandt fraepe sae Pere se taete desuu
maeis se heppe rompe si graece de Dieu, 1371.
I know not whether you can understand this Gaulish or rather old Walloon
Tongue without the help of an Interpreter. A Gand, says the Inscription,
l'Enfant frappe son Pere dessus la test, mais son epee romp, par la grace de
Dieu. To explain the meaning of it, they told us the following Story: A Father
and his Son being convicted of a certain Crime, received Sentence of Death, but
afterward a Pardon was offered to either of 'em that would be the other's
Executioner. This rigorous Mercy inspired both the unhappy Wretches with a
desire of dying, and they contended obstinately for that which they esteemed
the more advantageous part of so cruel a Choice; but at last the Father
prevailed, he had a greater Strength of Mind, and the length of his Life had
weakened the desire of it. After the Son had resolved to take away the Life of
him to whom he owed his own, and had already put himself in a posture to give
the fatal blow, the Sword either broke in the Air, or the Blade flew out of the
Handle; which Accident being interpreted as a particular Effect of Providence,
both the Malefactors were set at liberty.

The ancient Building, called the Princes Court, was heretofore the Palace of
the Counts of Flanders. We went thither to see the Chamber where Charles the
Fifth was The Prelates of Ghent presented him with a Bible as soon as he was
born, with these words written on it, Study this Book. Act. Her. de Chapter V.
born, which is so little a Room, that it is impossible there could ever be a
Bed in it; and yet there is an ancient Inscription which proves evidently, that
this is the place where that Prince came into the World. However, Ghent has no
reason to boast of giving birth to so great a Prince, In the Church of the
Nuns, called Beguines, there is a miraculous Crucifix, with an open Mouth. It
happened one day, during the time of the Carnaval, that all the Sisterhood went
abroad to take their Pleasure, leaving only one of their Companions at home,
who was perhaps as great a lover of the Sport as any of the rest, and unable to
bear so great an Affront, went to make her Complaint to the Crucifix, from
which she received the following Answer; Grieve not, my Daughter, to morrow
thou shall rejoice with me at my eternal Wedding. This Prophecy was entirely
accomplished; for the Beguin died the next day, and the Crucifix remained ever
afterward with its Mouth open.
for he used it so roughly afterward, that it had been better for that City he
had never been born. It Is observed that his birth happened on St. Matthias's
day, and that afterward on the same day he was proclaimed Emperor, and took
King Francis I. Prisoner.

The Cathedral is a vast Structure, dedicated to St. Bavon. Here I observed an
Epitaph on a certain Prelate, which (though plain and short) is perhaps more
expressive than the most studied Elogies.

Ecclesia Antistitem amisit,
Respublica Virum.
The Church has lost a Bishop,
And the Commonwealth a Man.
From Ghent we embarked on the Canal that leads to Bruges, which, without
controversy, BRUGES, formerly a Hans Town.
is a very large and fair City. It does not comprehend so large an extent of
Ground as Ghent, In this City a Traveller ought to visit the Townhouse, the
Water-house, Episcopal Palace, Cathedral, great Marketplace, the Colleges of
the four Nations of Flanders, the Church of the Jesuits, and several
magnificent Tombs in the Collegiate Church of Our Lady. In the Cathedral, at
the side of the Quire, they show the place where Charles the Good, Count of
Flanders, was assassinated by some Persons, whom he had compelled to open their
Magazines in a time of Famine. Voyage to Flanders.
but it is much better inhabited, and its Buildings are more uniform. Ships of
Five hundred Tun may come up to it by the great Canal, but Holland has drawn
the Trade from hence as well as from Antwerp.

The Order of the Golden Fleece was instituted at Bruges, by At first he
created only 25 Knights, three years after he added 6 more; Charles V.
augmented the number to 51; but Philip II, and III. created as many as they
pleased, without observing any certain number.
Philip the Good Duke of Burgundy, in the year Some say 1429.
430. I shall give you a brief account of three or four different Opinions I
have observed concerning the institution of that Order. Some think it was
occasioned by that Prince's He was thrice married, first, with Michelle of
France, Fifth Daughter of Charles VI; secondly, with Bonne of Artois, Sister of
the Count d'Eu; and thirdly, with Isabel of Portugal.
falling in love with a Maid of mean Parentage Others write, That the Girl was
red-haird, and that one day when the Duke went to visit her he found a Lock of
her Hair on her Toilette, which he gathered up very carefully, and preserved as
a precious Treasure. They add, That his Courtiers having taken the liberty to
break some Jests on this occasion, the fond Prince took a Resolution to
institute an Order of Knighthood by the Title of the Golden Fleece, in honor
to the Lock of red Hair. Davity says, That several Authors are of Opinion, that
this Order took its original from the Religious Society called the Thebean
Order.
, whose Gown was furred with Lamb-skin. Others relate, that esteeming the
extraordinary Plenty and Abundance of the year of his Marriage with Elizabeth
or Isabel of Portugal to be a presage of Future Happiness; and observing that
the initial Letters of the five Months of Harvest, July, August, September,
October, and November, make the word JASON, he instituted this Order with
allusion to the celebrated Fleece of Colchis. There are others, who pretend
that it was instituted upon occasion of a certain extraordinary Adventure that
happened to that Prince; which had some relation to the Story of Gideon's
Fleece. Judges 6. 37, etc.
And in the last place, some are of Opinion, that the great Increase of his
Revenue, by the importation of the English Wool, gave occasion to the
institution of this Order.

I observed at Brussels, either in St. Gudula's Church or the Townhouse, an
ancient piece of Tapestry adorned with the Arms of Burgundy, St. Andrew's Cross.
and with a representation of the Story of Gideon's Fleece, which probably may
have some relation to the Badge of this Order. I remember also that Oliver de
la March had the honor to serve Philip the Good, and during the space of
Fifty years, had several considerable Employments in the House of Burgundy.
la March relates, in his Memoirs, That at the magnificent Entertainment
called The Feast of Vows, which Philip the Good Febr. 17. 1453.
made in the City of Lisle, among several other Divertisements, Sports and
Comedies, with which the Solemnity was accompanied, the whole History of Jason,
and the Conquest of the Golden Fleece, was represented. And the same Author
makes frequent mention of the Mystery of the Fleece of Burgundy, both which
Observations laid together, seem to confirm the second Opinion; and after all,
who knows whether Duke Philip had not all the four abovementioned
Considerations in his view when he instituted this Order?

You know that the King of Spain, as Duke of Burgundy, is Sovereign of the
Order of the Golden Fleece.

Departing from Bruges, we embarked again on the Canal, and in three hours
arrived at the little City of Ostend. OSTEND
The Fortifications are prettily contrived, but the great Sluices by which it
receives Water from the Sea, and communicates the same to Bruges, is the most
remarkable thing about it.

It Is almost impossible to speak of Ostend without calling to mind the most
famous The Siege was begun by Archduke Albert, July 5. 1601, and Ambrose
Spinola entered the place Sept. 20. 1604.
Siege that the World perhaps ever saw. This little Fisher-town, meanly
fortified, sustained the shock of a potent Enemy for almost three years and
three months, during which time it received above Three hundred thousand
Cannon-shot, oftentimes under the covert of heaps of dead Bodies, with which
the besieged repaired the Breaches, lost above Seventy thousand One hundred and
twenty four.
Seventy thousand Men, and killed a Seventy two thousand and Nine hundred.
greater number of its Enemies; and after all, this little mass of Ruins,
overpowered by the numbers of the Besiegers, and unable to hold out longer
against so unequal a Force, extorted Articles of Capitulation from its Enemies.

There is a Canal between Ostend and Newport, but for the convenience of a
quicker passage, we chose rather to hire a Coach.

NEWPORT.
I have nothing to add concerning the little City of Newport, but that it puts
an end to our Peregrination, on this side of your British Seas.

By the good Providence of God, our little Voyage has been in all respects
happy, and the Pleasure that attended it was never interrupted by Sickness or
any Accident. And in particular I must own my self extremely obliged to our
common Friend M. S. Waring, whose good Company we enjoyed all the way. He is
Master of many excellent Qualifications, which charm all those that converse
with him.

To conclude, whatever Satisfaction may be found in Traveling, I can assure
you, that it is always a very sensible Pleasure to return home. I am,

SIR, Your etc.
Newport, Ostob. 3. 1688.
The End of the Second Volume.
INSTRUCTIONS TO A Traveller.
IT must be acknowledged, See Letter XXXIII.
that Traveling is attended with Pleasure and Profit, but it is no less certain
that these Advantages cannot be obtained without Pain. The design of these
Memoirs is, to instruct those who shall afterward undertake the Voyage
described in the preceding Letters, to improve the two first, and lessen the
other. I do not intend to discourse of Travels in general, but only to run over
the several Steps that we made in our Voyage, and to give those who shall
follow the same Road, or any part of it, such Instructions as I know to be most
useful for 'em.

The Rate of Places in the Stage-Coaches and Boats in Holland is fixed, so that
there is no occasion for contending about the Price, and therefore it would be
needless to give a particular account of the Rates, which are various,
according to the difference of Places and Distances.

The Carriage of Baggage must be paid apart when a Passenger has more than a
single Portmantle. It Is in vain to contend with the Dutch Boat-men, and you
must either agree on a price for the carriage of your Goods before you put 'em
in the Boat, or resolve to give 'em whatever they please to ask.

In some places, as at Roterdam, Delft, and the Hague, the Boats go off every
half-hour; in other parts they observe different times of setting out, but none
of 'em ever stay a moment after the Clock strikes the appointed time of their
departure. Those whose Affairs require greater haste, may gain a day by
traveling in the night; and they who embark in the Evening at the Hague,
arrive next Morning at Amsterdam.

At the usual places of changing the Boats, you always find Men with
Wheelbarrows to carry your Baggage; their Rates are so small that they deserve
not to be mentioned.

Our first design being to visit Germany in our return, and afterward to
repass through Holland, we resolved at the same time to see North Holland, but we
came another way, and had not time to put that design in execution. While one
is at Amsterdam, he ought by no means to neglect that little Voyage, it is but a
Walk of four days, and the Habits, extraordinary neatness, and other Customs of
the Inhabitants of that Province, are very singular.

In Germany you seldom meet with the convenience of regulated Passages; we
hired a Coach entirely for our selves from Vtrecht to Arnheim for About 1 l. 5
s. and 4 d.
twelve Francs and sixteen Sous. I will not undertake to reduce the Money to
our way of reckoning, the Traveller will find what the value of it is, when he
comes to the places where it is current.

Those who travel alone may take notice, that the Places in the same Coach are
of different prices; but, as I intimated before, all the Rates are fixed.

It cost us nothing for the carriage of our Trunks, because we were Masters of
the whole Coach, but otherwise we must have paid for 'em by weight.

We hired another Coach from Arnheim to Wesel for Eighteen Shillings.
nine Francs; the Rates vary according to the Season of the year.

From Wesel to Cologn we paid Nine Shillings.
four Francs and a half each; for thirty Livres we might have had a Coach,
which would have carried us straight from Arnheim to Cologn, but we were
desirous to see Wesel.

At Colen there are all sorts of Passages to go from thence to Mentz (for I
speak only of our Road) but all the Land-Carriages are extremely dear; for
since they have no constant times of setting out, the Passenger must also pay
for the Return, and besides, the Ways are hilly and uneasy: So that having no
urgent Affairs to hasten us, we resolved, for several Reasons, to go by Water.
In the great Boats, which are drawn by Horses, the common Rate is a crown a
piece, a little over or under; and if the Passengers please, they may land at
any Village by the way to dine or sup. But not to retard the passage, which
seems tedious enough otherwise to those who are not furnished with a good stock
of Patience, the best way is, to order the provisions for dinner to be brought
in the morning.

From Mentz it is but one easy day's passage on the Mein to Frankfort, by the
ordinary Boat, which is large and commodious, and sets out every day. The Rates
of the places are fixed, and the Traveller needs not desire a more convenient
passage.

We meet so often with different sorts of Money in Germany, that it is
impossible to avoid losing by 'em. The best way is to make sufficient provision
in Holland, of Gold Ducats, and Silver Money of the Emperor's Coin, which are
current every where, without any abatement, but something must be allowed for
the exchange of those pieces. At Amsterdam, for example, you must give two or
three pence more than the real value of a Ducat, and proportionably as much for
the Pistoles. But the Exchange of Money rises or falls, according to the
various Junctures of Trade and of the Times.

When Travelers meet together they may exchange the Money they have about 'em;
but we must not depend on such accidental Rencounters, which happen seldom.

The Spanish Pistols of full weight are the best Pieces that can be carried to
Italy.

The Bankers of Amsterdam directed us to the Neuville's their Correspondents at
Frankfort, who are very honest persons, and used us very kindly.

Travelers ought always to procure Letters of Recommendations for some Persons
of note in those Towns where they intend to stay any considerable time, not
only from their own Country, but also from the places where they stop on the
Road; for, if any Accident should happen, they will be glad to know where they
may find Assistance; and besides, the Persons to whom they are recommended may
be of use to show 'em the Rarities of the Country, to introduce 'em into
Acquaintance, and to give 'em necessary Instructions. The Recommendations of
Bankers are none of the least effectual.

Neither must a Traveller forget to take a Passport from the Prince or State
whose Subject he is: It Is true, these Pass-ports are not necessary, but they
may be useful, and we were asked for ours in some parts of Italy; besides, such
a Pass, on some occasions, procures Respect to a Stranger, and an Accident may
happen which may make a man repent his neglect of this piece of Caution.

It Is better to undergo the Loss that is a necessary consequence of Bills of
Exchange, than to be troubled with carrying about a Load of Money. And besides,
one ought not to take more Money along with him, than will be just sufficient
to defray his Charge from one place to another; for there are a hundred
Accidents which may make it very inconvenient for a Stranger to have his
Pockets full of superfluous Cash.

It Is a general Rule, -- Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator.
That a Traveller ought never to make a discovery of his Jewels or Money,
especially in the Inns; for almost all the Robberies and Murders that are
committed on Passengers are occasioned by their Imprudence in betraying
themselves.

At Francfort we bought some Boxes of Treacle from Dr. Peter's, and besides, we
had furnished our selves with some such Provisions at London. Health is so
necessary a Companion to a Traveller, that he cannot be too careful of its
preservation.

If we had resolved to go straight from Frankfort to Heidelberg, we might have
been accommodated, as we were informed by our Friends, with the choice of two
or three sorts of passage; but since we traveled only to see the Country, we
hired a Coach with six Horses, to carry us and our Baggage whithersoever we
pleased, for three Crowns a day, paying the same rate for the return: So that
if we had gone directly from Francfort, the charge of our Coach would have
amounted to six Crowns a day; but after we had spent four days in traversing
the Country, we left the Coach at Heydelberg, reckoning only two days for its
return to Francfort.

We were forced to make another bargain from Heydelberg to Nuremberg, which, in
that Season of the year, is six days Journey: We gave, as I remember, thirty
Crowns for the carriage of our Persons and Goods, and twenty Crowns for a whole
Coach from Nuremberg to Augspurg, on condition that we should take Ingolstat
and Newburg in our way. They who go by Dunavert make a whole day's Journey
less; but we were resolved to see Ingolstat, which is the strongest place in
Bavaria.

There are Stage Coaches that go from Augspurg to Venice, or at least to Mestre
near Venice, and the Rates of the Places are regulated, but they do not pass by
Munick, which we were desirous to see for several Reasons; and besides, the
Country is extremely rough for Coaches, they are very apt to overturn, and the
Passengers are often constrained to alight, by reason of the continual
ascending and descending among the Mountains.

And therefore we agreed to be carried on Horseback, and our Charges born from
Augspurg to Venice, by the way of Munick, Inspruck, Bolsana, Trent, Verona,
Vincenza, and Padua, at the rate of twenty Ducats of Gold a head. We made this
Bargain by the Advice of an interess'd person, but we were informed afterward
that we paid too dear by a fifth or sixth part. I thought fit to acquaint the
Reader with this passage, not that he may imitate our Example, but that he may
draw some Advantage even from our Blunders.

We were desirous to arrive at Venice before the Carnaval, which was not
necessary, for it is sufficient to see the three last weeks of it, especially
for those who intend not to spend more time in traveling than we determined to
do.

I advise those who may happen to be at Augspurg at the same season when we
were there, and design also to be at Venice during the Carnaval, to make a
particular Bargain for Munick; and from thence to go to Ratisbon, where they
may embark on the Danube for Vienna, and return to Venice by Saltzburg and
Palma nuova; and even they may make a little excursion from Vienna to Presburg,
that they may be able to say they have seen some part of Hungary, and after
all, come in time enough to Venice. They may afterward take occasion to see
Padua, Verona, and Vincenza.

Those who are of a tender Constitution will do well to provide good Furs at
Munick, before they engage in the Alps, if they are to pass 'em in the Winter;
for besides, that they will be in a manner overwhelmed with Snow; the Cold is
very piercing among those Mountains.

When one is at Inspruck, he ought by all means to visit the Cabinet of
Curiosities and other Rarities in the Castle of Amras, for which little Journey
he may hire a Coach of the Innkeepers. And that he may have time to satisfy
his Curiosity, he ought so to contrive his Journey, that he may have half a day
to spend in this place.

At Stertzlinghen, between Inspruck and Trent, it is convenient to leave the
direct Road which leads to Trent, by the Castle of Tirol, and to take that of
Brixen. It Is true, the first way is shorter, but it is dangerous by reason of
its Precipices: and for this Reason the Guide ought to have timely warning to
take the Road of Brixen.

There are some good Inns at Venice, such as the Louvre, the White Lion, and
the French Arms; but when one intends to spend some months in that City, the
best way is, to hire a furnished House. There are always some Apartments to be
let in the Procuraties, which, as it is the dearest, is also the finest part of
the Town. At the Louvre you are entertained for eight Livres a day, and the
White Lion and French Arms are somewhat cheaper, but you must always remember
to make your Bargain for every thing before you go into the House, to avoid
after-Debates.

For seven or eight Livres a day, you may hire one of the prettiest Gondola's
with two Rowers, whom you may put into Livery, and employ in what service you
please. The ordinary Gondola's cost fifteen pence an hour. Twenty pence make a
Livre, and a Spanish Pistol contains nine and twenty Livres.

I have already spoken of the Ridotti at Venice, which are Gaming-houses or
Academies of Basset, where the Noblemen cut, and Fools lose their Money.

Here we received the first Letters we had from England. A Traveller ought
always to acquaint his Correspondents where he intends to stay for some time,
that they may send their Letters thither, which for the greater Security may be
directed to some Banker. It Is true, a Man may make a shift to live without
News, but Bills of Exchange are absolutely necessary in a strange Country, and
great care must be taken to prevent their miscarrying; the surest way is, to
get a Letter of Credit, which is current every where.

Travelers are not stopped on the account of Customs or Imports, either in
Holland or Germany, and rarely in the State of Venice. The Toll-gatherers saw
us enter into the Laguna's without speaking one word to us, though we had a
considerable quantity of Baggage, but in other parts of Italy the Tolls are
very frequent and troublesome. Nevertheless you may usually buy your peace at
the rate of a few A Piece of Money about the value of 6 d.
Julio's; and we never met with any of those Officers so obstinate as to open
our Portmantles, save only at our arrival at Rome, at Pisa, as we came from
Leghorn, and at our departure from Naples and Bergamo.

It froze, without intermission all the while we staid at Venice; and,
generally speaking, we found the Winter very sharp all over Italy. Most People
are persuaded that there is hardly any Winter at all in this Country, and
therefore they usually choose that Season to travel thither: But I can produce
several Reasons against the Winter, and I know no more than one against the
Summer.

In Winter the Ways are uneasy and dangerous, especially in the Mountains, by
reason of the Snow and Ice. The Days are short; a Traveller comes late to his
Lodging, and is often forced to prevent the Sun in the Morning; besides, the
Country looks dismally, Nature is in a manner half dead, and neither Fruits nor
Flowers are any where to be seen.

The Summer corrects all those Inconveniences; it is hot, I confess, but that
trouble may be easily avoided, by reposing during the heat of the Day: and
besides, the coldness of the Winter does sufficiently counterballance the heat
of the Summer.

At Venice we hired a Boat to Padua for Four and twenty Livres; but we might
have taken places in the common Boat for two Livres a-piece.

At Padua we found by chance a Coach which had brought some Passengers from
Loretto, and stayed for Company to return thither. We hired the whole Coach for
Fourteen Spanish Pistols, on condition that we should also have the use of a
Saddle-horse, that we might stay three days at such places on the Road as we
should think fit to choose, that the Master of the Coach should pay for our
passage over Bridges and Rivers, etc. and carry us by the way of Ravenna.

The Charge of the passage over Rivers, etc. is not very considerable, but we
found it very convenient to ease our selves of the trouble of it.

It Is always worth the while to make enquiry whether there are any Coaches, or
what other sort of passage the Traveller intends to make use of, returning to
the place whither he designs to go, for by so doing he may save Money
considerably.

Some embark for Ancona at Rimini, and even at Venice, coasting along the Shore
of the Gulf. But when the passage by Land is easy, a curious and judicious
Traveller will never choose to go by Sea.

In many parts of Italy you may have Stage-Horses or Calashes, the Rates of
which are fixed. The greatest convenience of this way of traveling is, that
you may stop where you please, and change your Horses or Calash at every Stage,
without being obliged to pay for their return; and besides, you may take what
time you please to satisfy your Curiosity.

There is convenience for two Persons in a Calash, which I prefer before Horses
for several Reasons; in Summer you have the advantage of the Shade; they are
warmer in Winter, and more commodious in all respects; besides, the Passengers
may have their Portmantles tied behind, though they should amount to 200 weight
for each Calash; but it is convenient to look to 'em from time to time, or to
make a Servant follow the Calash on Horseback, to take care of the Baggage.

The tying and untying of the Portmantles at every Stage is a necessary piece
of trouble that attends this way of traveling; and therefore the best way for
those who have a long Journey to make, and intend not to stop on the Road, or
only to make a short stay, is, to agree with one Person for the whole Passage;
and they may easily calculate whether the Charge will amount to more than if
they should change their Horses or Calashes at every Stage.

Ferrara was the first place where they took our Pistols from us; they restored
'em at the Gate by which we went out, but we were forced to give 'em a little
Money.

When you come over against Catholica, between Rimini and Pesaro, it will not
be improper to leave the direct way to see the little Town and Republic of St.
Marin, which is ten or twelve miles further, on the right hand; for which
Reason, instead of agreeing with one man for the whole Passage between Padua
and Loretto, you may make your Bargain to be carried only to Rimini, where you
may take Horses for St. Marin, and return the same way back to Rimini, to
continue your Journey. But if you are not sure to find a new passage at Rimini
for Loretto, you may oblige the Person with whom you agree for your passage to
carry you by the way of St. Marin.

At Loretto, being eight Persons in company, we gave twelve Italian Pistols for
three Calashes and two Horses, on condition that we should arrive at Rome on
the sixth day. The Hurry of Loretto will not give a Traveller time to take
exact measures for the rest of his Journey, and therefore he must depend almost
wholly on his Guide, for the choice of the Way.

You ought not to forget, when you are at Terni, to visit the Cascade or
Waterfal del Marmore, which is but three miles distant from the Town, though
those who let Horses thither will tell you it is five miles, that they may cheat
you of a little Money. You must not give above two Julio's and a half, or three
at most, for each Horse, and you may satisfy the Man who brought you from
Loretto for the half-day you make him wait at Terni, if you did not agree to
the contrary at Loretto.

But, to avoid all this trouble, you may comprehend that little Journey in the
Bargain you make at Loretto; and, I advise you also to oblige your Guide to
carry you to Mount-Aeolus, near the little Town of Cesis, eight miles from
Terni. Here you may have the pleasure of viewing a very singular Rarity; for
the Holes and Crevices in this Mountain send forth perpetually, but especially
in Summer, certain cool Briezes, which the Inhabitants of Cesis bring in Pipes
to their Cellars and Houses, to cool their Wines and themselves also during the
great Heats See Kircher's Mundus Subterraneus.
; and besides, they have this Advantage, that they may open the Pipes more or
less, and let out what quantity of Coolness they please.

As you draw near to Narni, you may turn aside to the right hand, to see the
old Bridge mentioned in one of my Letters, it will not cost you above half an
hour to satisfy your Curiosity.

At our first arrival at Rome we lodged in an Inn, but after our return from
Naples we took a Palazzo, which in English is no more than a furnished House,
where we were very honorably accommodated for About 6 l. Sterling.
twenty Piasters by the month,

When a Stranger arrives at Rome, he is immediately pestered with a multitude
of Lackeys who come to offer their Service to him, but they are generally a
company of treacherous Rogues, who are by no means to be trusted.

There are two things which a Traveller ought principally to observe, with
respect to Servants, when he resolves to increase his Train. In the first
place, he ought to take such as are of the Country, and even of the place where
he resides at present, for they are acquainted with the Inhabitants and their
Customs, speak the Language, and are under an Obligation to perform their Duty
better than if they were Strangers. Secondly, he ought to receive 'em on the
Recommendation of a Friend who knows 'em particularly, and can assure him of
their Fidelity; and besides, he may carry some spare Coats along with him, that
he may put his whole Retinue in the same Livery.

The usual Wages for Footmen or Staffieri, as they are called at Rome, is two
and a half or three Julio's by the day; and Servants for the Kitchen may be
hired at the same rate.

We gave fourteen Pistols by the month for a handsome Coach with two good
Horses, though in another Season we might have had one for twelve, and even
sometimes for ten; but the greatest concourse of Strangers at Rome is in the
time of Lent, and at Easter, which enhances the price of many Conveniences.

They who are at Rome in Lent may easily obtain a permission to eat Flesh; and
even the Innkeepers on the Roads will accommodate you with it, but you must
not ask it too openly, lest you expose 'em to Censure. I have seen some
Passengers quickly satisfy the Scruples of their Landlords, by threatening to
go to another Lodging. But generally the lean days deserve that name with a
witness almost every where in Italy, and it is hardly possible for a Stranger to
accustom himself to those Severities.

A Traveller who intends not to stay above two or three months at Rome should
immediately after his arrival agree with a skilful Antiquary, and fix certain
times to visit with him the principal Rarities of that famous City; for though
several Authors have attempted to describe 'em, a curious and inquisitive
Person, who examines things upon the spot, and with his own Eyes, will always
be able to make some new Observations: and therefore, without consulting Books,
unless as Helps and Guides, he ought to take a particular view of every thing
that is remarkable, and set down all that he sees in his Journal; for it
happens not unfrequently, that a Traveller finds a very considerable difference
between his own Observations and the Descriptions of others, when he compares
'em together. And to make his Industry the more successful, he ought always to
carry a Note book about him, and every Evening to examine and transcribe the
Observations of the Day; nor will it be improper to use this method every where
else, as well as at Rome.

To ease my Memory, and that I might be able on all occasions to gratify my
Curiosity by an exact enquiry into what was most remarkable in every City and
Country through which we passed, I drew up the following Catalogue, which always
furnished me with a sufficient number of useful Questions.

Climate. Government. Forces. Arsenals. Garrisons. Fortifications. Castles.
Citadels. Largeness of Towns. Religion. Language. Coins. Trade. Manufactures.
Riches. Academies. Universities. Bishoprics. Antiquities. Monuments. Libraries.
Cabinets of Rarities. Learned Men. Skilful Artificers. Painting. Sculptures.
Architecture. Palaces. Houses of Pleasure. Confines. Prospects. Passes.
Entries. Bridges: Rivers. Woods. Hills. Towns and Villages. Customs. Fashions
of Clothes. Privileges. Adventures. Late Accidents. Natural or artificial
Rarities. Soil. Plants. Fruits. Animals, etc.
D. Pietro Rosini was our Antiquary at Rome; he is well acquainted with Medals,
and trades in 'em. I think we gave him three Pistols a month.

It Is convenient for a Traveller to view the Curiosities of Rome in the company
of other Strangers; for so his Pleasure is increased by the converse of his
Companions, and many Eyes see better than one.

No man ought to undertake a Voyage without making Provision of several sorts
of Measures, Geographical Charts, a Watch, Prospective-Glasses, a Mariner's
Compass, and Quadrant. And as far as he is able he ought to take the dimensions
of every thing; in order to which he may easily carry along with him a Cane
divided into several Measures. And besides, I took care to furnish my self with
a piece of Packthread well twined and waxed, fifty fathom long, and divided
into feet by Knots, by the help of which I could in a moment measure long
Distances, the height of Towers, bigness of Pillars, and what else I thought
fit to observe.

A Roman Palm, or Span and a half, make just thirteen Inches English measure;
the Roman Foot is shorter by six lines than that of England. Eight Roman Feet
make a Roman Can; and a Brass or Fathom of Milan makes 22 inches and a half,
English measure.
Brass or Fathom of Florence is equal to two Roman Feet.

A Traveller finds so much Pleasure in consulting the Maps of the Countries
through which he passes, that he can hardly forbear wishing he had complete Setts
of all that are extant; there are three things which ought to be observed on
this occasion by those who design to travel; first, they ought not to content
themselves with resolving to buy Maps in the Countries whither they intend to
go, but make sufficient provision of 'em before their departure, and even take
some of all Authors, for we inquired for 'em in vain in several great Cities;
and it happens not unfrequently that the least esteemed are upon trial found to
be the most exact. Secondly, their Maps ought to be pasted on Linen or Canvas,
and rolled up on Sticks. And in the last place, every judicious and curious
Traveller ought to note down all the Errors he perceives in 'em, and
communicate his Observations to those who make 'em; for, if every ingenious
Person would endeavor to promote so useful a Design, in a little time we
should have no reason to complain of the Uncorrectness of Maps.

The Prospective-Glasses ought to be of several sorts, and adapted both to
great and small Distances; they are useful for those who are desirous to take a
distinct view of Inscriptions, Pictures, Statues, Ornaments of Architecture,
etc.

To return to Rome; the Curious may furnish themselves with Prints of all its
Antiquities, and other remarkable things that are to be seen in and about the
City, of almost all which they may have complete Setts for a hundred Pistols.

Not only in that City, but every where else, it is convenient for a Traveller
to make a Collection of such Prints, which will be of use to refresh and
rectify his Ideas of the places he has seen; and they who are most curious may
carry a skilful Designer along with 'em.

I thought to have subjoined a Catalogue of about Three hundred of the finest
Pictures we saw at Rome, but I Am informed there is an entire Collection of all
those Pieces already communicated to the Public.

The Roman Calashes are very pretty, and fit for taking the Air in a level
Country, but not at all convenient for traveling; in the mean time, since
several persons are very fond of 'em, I advise those who design to make use of
'em for a Journey, to take care that they be bound more securely with Iron than
usually they are; to choose such as are covered with Waxed Cloth rather than
with Leather, which grows hard, cracks, and is too heavy; and to place the Body
of the Calash immediately upon the Shafts, instead of hanging it, for so it
will be less apt to overturn.

But the best way is, not to meddle with these Calashes, which occasion so much
trouble to those who use 'em; for they must buy Horses, and hire new Servants,
both which are subject to a thousand Accidents, and so many different Cares
spoil the pleasure of Traveling. And even sometimes the Grooms prick the
Horses Feet in shoeing 'em, when Gentlemen travel on their own Horses, to
oblige 'em either to buy others, or stay till their own are recovered.

After all, Money makes every thing easy, and there is no difficulty so great
that may not be easily surmounted by those whose Pockets are well lined with
Gold.

They who happen to be at Rome at the time of the arrival of the Quails, will
do well to leave the City for two or three days, and take a Journey toward
Ostia or Prattica on the Seacoast.

The Journey from Rome to Naples is usually performed thus: The Travelers hire
either Horses or Calashes, or both together, that they may have the advantage
of easing themselves by change. And the Person with whom they agree at Rome,
every Passenger paying Fifteen Piasters, obliges himself to give 'em eight
Meals in their Journey outward, and as many in their return, to stay five
whole days at Naples, to pay the Boat at Cajeta, to lend his Horses one day to
Vesuvius, and another to Puzzolo, both which are comprehended in the five to be
spent at Naples. Thus the whole Journey is performed in fifteen days, on the
last of which they return to Rome.

This way of Traveling is not altogether inconvenient for those who are
obliged to make haste, but they who are Masters of their own time ought to take
other measures; for a curious Person may find Employment enough at Naples for
twelve or fifteen days at least, and it is almost impossible in the narrow space
of one day to take a view of all the Antiquities and other Rarities that are to
be seen about Puzzolo,

And therefore they who have leisure to satisfy their Curiosity, may make use
of the Procaccio or ordinary Post from Rome to Naples, where they may stay as
long as they please, and return by the same way. I could not hear of any
Stage-Passages, or such as may be changed from time to time, in this part of
the Country.

They who choose the first method of performing this Journey are forced to
return by the same way they came, which cannot but be extremely unpleasant to
an inquisitive Traveller; but when one is at Naples, without any Obligation to
make use of a particular kind of Passage, he may in his return leave the direct
Road, and travel further within the Land on the right side of it, hiring Horses
from Town to Town. I know some Persons who took this way, but it is not
frequented, and therefore I only give this Advice to those who are willing to
purchase the Satisfaction of their Curiosity, and the Pleasure of Novelty, at
the expense of a little Trouble.

At Naples we lodged at the Golden Dove, where we paid ten Carlins each. The
Dove and Three Kings are the only good Inns in this City. Our Coach cost us no
more than twelve Carlins a day. At Rome you pay but seven Julio's in the best
Inns, and if you make a Bargain for a considerable time, they will content
themselves with six.

They trade much here in Silk Stockins, Vests, and other Worsted Clothes, which
are not comparable to those that are made at London. The Merchants of this
place over-rate their Commodities extremely.

I never heard that there was any Catalogue made of the chief Pictures that are
to be seen at Naples; and therefore, besides those mentioned in my Letters, I
shall name some others for the convenience of young Painters, who travel into
Italy. I speak only of such as are in Churches, Convents, or other places,
where a Traveller may be easily admitted to take a view of 'em.

The Virgin, by Raphael; in the Chapel of the Family of Dolce, at the Church of
St. Dominic major.

The Annunciation, by Michael Angelo; at St. Mary's of Health.

Another Annunciation, by Titian; in the Duke of Acerenza's Chapel at St.
Dominic major.

Queen Joan I, by Giotto; at the Incoronata.

The Refectory of Mount Olivet, by George Vasari.

The Nativity, and St. Agnes, by Pomarancio; at St. Philip de Neri's.

St. Thomas, at the Cathedral; and St. Michael, on the great Altar of S.
Angelica nido, by Mark of Siena.

Several Pieces, by Hannibal Carache; at St. Ann's of the Lombards.

St. Peter, by Caravagio; at St. Mary's of the Graces.

The Four Angels, in the Chapel of Treasure, at the Cathedral; and several
Pieces at St. Ann's of the Lombards, by Dominichini.

St. Francis, at St. Philip de Neri's; an Annunciation, and the Cardinal
Virtues, at the Church of the Holy Apostles; by Guido.

Several Pieces at St. Ann's of the Lombards, and the Roof of the Holy
Apostles; by Cavaliero Lanfranco.

St. Alexis, at St. Philip de Neri's; by Pietro da Cortona.

The Trinity, at the Church of the Trinity; St. Bennet and other Pieces, at St.
Severin's of the Benedictins; another St. Bennet, and St. Thomas Aquinas at
Mount-Olivet, and several Pictures at St. Ann's of the Lombards; by S. Feed.

The Virtues and Sciences, at St. Thomas Aquinas's, in the Cloister; by N.
Vaccaro.

The Pictures in fresco, at St. Severin's; by Zingaro.

The Magi, at Mount-Olivet; by Cottignuola:

The Assumption of the Virgin, at the Cathedral; by Andrew of Salerno.

The Roof of St. Paul's; by Cavalier Massimo.

St. John, in the middle of the fretting at the Church of St. John Carbonara;
by Rosso.

St. Michael, at St. Dominic major; and the Ascension at St. Ligerio's; by Beru
Lama.

St. John, and St. Luke, at St. Clara's; by Sylvestro Buono.

Christ's Marriage with St. Katherine of Sienna, at S. Pietro a Majella; by
Criscuolo.

A Picture of St. Lewis, at St. Lawrence's of the minor Friars of St. Francis;
by Simon Cremonese.

St. Jerome, at St. Philip de Neri's; by Gessi.

The Mosaic Work, at the Holy Apostles; by J. Bapt. Calandra.

The Adoration of the Magi, at St. Philip de Neri's; and several Pictures in
fresco, at St. Severin's of the Benedictins; by Bellissario.

The inside of the Dome of the Church of the Holy Apostles; by Cavalier
Benacschi.

Several Pieces in the Viceroy's Palace, and at St. Philip de Neri's; by
Jourdain a famous Painter, now living.

They who love Architecture and Sculpture may observe

The great Altar at the Annunciata; the Tabernacle and Altar at St. Mary's of
the Graces.

The magnificent Tombs of Andrew Bonifacia, and J. Battista Cicaro, at St.
Severin's of the Benedictins; the finest Organs in Naples are in this Church.

The great Altar and Tabernacle at the Barefoot Carmelites.

The Tomb of Ladislaus (though Gothic), the Chapel of the Marquesses of Vico, the
Statues of St. James and St. George the Martyr, and the Crucifix in the Chapel
of the Seripando's at St. John a Carbonara.

The Altars of St. Ignatius and St. Francis Xavier, at St. Mary's of
Constantinople.

The Statue of St. Sebastian, at S. Pietro a Majella; by John de Nola.

The Cardinal Filamarino's Chapel, that of the Annunciation, and the
Tabernacle, at the Church of the Holy Apostles.

The Baptismal Fonts, the Gate, and the Chapel of the Treasure, at the
Cathedral.

The great Altar, and the Chapel of J. Camill. Cacace, at St. Lawrence's:

The great Altar, and the Altar of St. Teresa's Chapel, at St: Mary's the
Mother of God.

The great Chapel of St. Mary's of the Carmelites.

The magnificent Chapel of St. James, at S. Maria nuova.

The Tomb of Don Pedro de Toledo, at St. James's of the Spaniards.

The Chapel of the Princes, of St. Agatha, and a Statue of the Virgin at St.
Paul's.

All these Pieces are extremely beautiful and magnificent; and a Traveller
ought also to visit the Treasuries and Vestries.

They who stay some time at Naples may also take a Journey to Salerno.

And since they will have occasion to make several Experiments at Grotta di
Cane, they ought to take exact notice of the space of time in which the Animal
dies; for the Origin of the Nerves being seized and stuffed by the Vapor, there
may happen a sort of Apoplexy, which may last longer than the spectators
commonly imagine, and produce only a seeming Death.

The common Opinion is, that the Water of the neighboring Lake is endowed with
a peculiar Virtue to reanimate the Dog, and one might easily cause some other
Water to be brought, to try whether it would not produce the same effect. And
besides, the Dog, or other Animal, might be laid on the Ground without the
Grotto, to see whether he would not recover without the help of Water. To try
all these Experiments, several Dogs must be brought thither from Naples.

Pliny cites an Author, who relates, That those Animals whose Genitals are cut
off, receive no Injury by being put into the Grotto. This might be easily
examined, and many other Experiments made by those who are upon the spot.

Going from Rome to Naples you are troubled with no Toll-gatherers, but in your
return you are perpetually plagued with 'em, during the first half-day's
Journey; for they imagine that all Travelers are laded with Silk-stockins, or
some other Commodities of Naples. It Is true, they searched none of our Company,
but in two or three several places they opened some of our Portmantles. The
best way to make this Journey pleasant, is to travel with a small Equipage.

The usual Road passes through new Capua, but you ought to agree with the Guide
to carry you to the old City, either in going or returning.

You may also make it a part of your Bargain, That if the Sea be so rough that
you cannot without danger pass the Gulf between Mola and Cajeta, you may be
furnished with Horses to take a compass about the Gulf, which you may do in a
little time. The Essence of Oranges made at Cajeta is said to be the best in
Italy, it is only to be had in the Convents.

At the Gate of Terracina it is usual to pass by the foot of the Mountain
toward the Sea, where the way is easy; but those who have a mind to see the
Town, may ascend straight to it.

Between Piperno and Terracina you may see the Abbey of Fossa-nuova, about two
or three hundred paces from the Road, at the Entry into the Wood of Piperno.
Those who are desirous to see the footsteps of the Mule mentioned in one of my
Letters, may quickly satisfy their Curiosity.

We agreed at Rome to be carried in Calashes, and to have all our Charges born,
during the space of eleven days, from Rome to Florence, by the way of Viterbo,
Sienna, Leghorn, Pisa, Lucca, and Pistoya, for six Italian Pistols a piece,
which was somewhat too dear a Rate, though, it is true, Calashes were very scarce
at Rome when we left it, and sometimes there is hardly one to be found,
especially when the Brothers of the Frock come abroad in whole Troops to
relieve their Garrisons. It Is six days Journey from Rome to Leghorn, from
thence to Florence two days and a half, and as much more we spent in several
places by the way.

They who design to stay somewhere in Italy, to learn the Language, ought to
make choice of Sienna for their place of residence; the Florentin Pronunciation
is accompanied with a harshness that both offends the Ear, and is troublesome to
the Throat; and at Rome they are confounded by the multitudes of Strangers,
with whom they are daily obliged to converse; but at Sienna you may find what
the Proverb requires, The Tuscan Language, and a Roman Mouth. Or you may apply
your self to a Master of the Languages in those Cities, where you intend to
stay some months.

At Florence they sell all sorts of excellent Perfumes, Essences, Balsams,
Pomades, etc. but the best are to be had of the Monks of St. Mark.

The Litters usually cost three Pistols and a half from Florence to Bologna,
and the Horses eighteen, twenty, or two and twenty Julio's, according to the
Season. The Way is too rough for Calashes, though it is not altogether impassable
by 'em.

A Traveller ought never to defer enquiring about a Passage till he is just
ready to depart, if he would not be forced to submit to the most unreasonable
Terms.

At Florence and Bologna you may have the use of a Gentleman's Coach for six
Julio's a day, and any Boy at the Inn will easily find one for you.

We crossed the whole Country of Lombardy in Calashes, which are changed at
every Stage. From Bergamo to Milan we made a particular bargain, but the
Inundation of the River Adda forced us to send back our Calashes. It Is probable
the Postilions knew well enough before they set out, that they could not pass
further, for this is one of their ordinary Tricks. They seem to be surpised
when the Waters stop 'em, and, when they can, make the Passengers pay the full
price that was agreed on for the whole Journey, under pretext that they cannot
be justly blamed for such an unforeseen Accident. It Is true, we might have
obliged our Calashes to take a compass and carry us to Milan, but then we our
selves must have had the deepest share in the trouble; and therefore we chose
rather to embark on the Canal at Canonica, and divide the loss with the
Postilions.

I know some persons, who having agreed for Calashes from Turin to Florence,
were obliged to take Horses at Bologna, by reason of the falling of the Snow on
the Appennins, and after much wrangling were forced to pay for the whole
Journey.

These Tricks ought to teach Travelers Circumspection in concluding of
Bargains, and among other things, to make an express Proviso that if any
unexpected Accident shall hinder the continuation of their Journey, they shall
not be obliged to pay, but in proportion to the distance of the place where
they shall happen to be stopped. And in the general, they ought to put all their
Agreements in Writing, that are of any importance.

Between Pavia and Milan you must turn a little out of the way, and spend an
hour in visiting the Monastery of the Chartreux Friars.

You must pass the Mountains between Novi and Genoa on Horseback; the Rates
vary according to the Seasons.

We gathered a great deal of Baggage during our Voyage, and the number of our
Trunks was increased by one half; but to rid our selves of that Encumbrance, we
embarked the greatest part of 'em at Genoa. They who buy a great number of
Curiosities will do well to follow our Example: they will find at all the
Seaports Consuls of their own Nations, who will help 'em to make a sure
Bargain with the Masters of Ships, and give 'em all manner of assistance.

At our return from Genoa to Novi we hired a Coach with four Horses for Turin,
to go by the way of Casal. At Turin we took Horses for Geneva, where we hired
others for Basil, and from thence took fresh Horses for Strasburg, agreeing to
pass by Hunninghen, Friburg, Brisack, and Schelestat. It Is to be observed that
a Traveller saves himself a great deal of trouble, by making it a part of his
Bargain, that his Charge shall be defrayed on the Road. 'Twould be needless to
mention what our passage through these places cost us, since the Rates vary
perpetually; the length or shortness of the Days, easiness or badness of the
Roads, and greater or less concourse of Travelers occasion these variations.

While you are at Geneva, you may hire Horses, to see the fall of the Rhone,
and at the same time take a view of the Fort l'Ecluse.

From Strasburg we embarked on the Rhine to Cologn, the charge of the passage
is inconsiderable. There are some large and well-cover'd Boats, which a
Traveller ought to choose rather than those little Wherries, that consist only
of four or five Boards nailed together. You may embark on the Rhine at Basil.

We hired a whole Coach from Cologn to Brussels, where we took another for
Ghent, and from thence continued our Journey to Ostend by several Canals; the
price of places in the Boats is fixed, and at Ostend we hired a Coach, that we
might arrive the sooner at Newport, though there is also a Canal between these
two Cities.

The Boat that passes between Brussels and Villebroeck is extremely commodious:
The Passengers may be accommodated with Meat and Drink; and in the best
Chamber, called the Roufle, there is a Chimney, and a little complete Set of
Furniture: You must pay somewhat extraordinary to be in this Chamber.

Besides, the things which I either described or mentioned in the account of
Antwerp, Travelers may visit the Abbey of St. Michael, and especially the
Refectory, and the Pictures in the Abbot's Apartment, the Churches of the
Carmelites, St. James, and the Dominicans, and the Magazines of Tapestry.

At Antwerp you may be well accommodated at Laboreur's; and in Brussels, at
Sieur Drouin's at the Sign of the Golden Fountain.

They who have not the convenience of a Yacht for their passage to England,
need not scruple to go by the Pacquet-boat, which, though not so honorable, is
both as safe and as good a Sailer as the other.

D. Antonio de Guevara Bishop of Mondonedo, and Preacher to Charles the Fifth,
relates, That the application of a Bag of Saffron to the Region of the Heart,
is an effectua l Remedy against the Sickness and Vomiting with which those that
are not I Am informed by some Persons that they have received great Benefit on
such occasions, by applying a Bag stuffed with gray Salt heaten small, to the
Stomach. And others assure me, That the best Remedy is, to keep always, night
and day, a piece of Earth under the Nose; for which purpose they provide a
sufficient quantity of Earth, and preserve it fresh in a Pot of Clay; and when
they have used a piece so long till it begins to grow dry, they put it in again
into the Pot, and take out some fresh Earth.
accustomed to the Sea are usually troubled. And he adds, That he tried the
Experiment with very good success, when he followed his Master to Afric, in his
Expedition against Tunis.

It Is almost impossible to give Directions concerning the Road that ought to be
taken by those who design to travel to Italy, since the choice of that depends
on the place where they intend to enter the Country, and the time they resolve
to spend in it. Only, in the general, they ought to consult the Map, and so to
take their Measures, that they may see the last days of the Carnaval at Venice,
the Holy Week at Rome, and the Octave of the Sacrament at Bologna; to avoid
being at Rome during the great Heats; to traverse the Country, to see as much
of it as they can; and to endeavor not to pass twice by the same way. If they
cannot be at Venice during the Carnaval, they ought at least to be there on
Ascension-day.

It may perhaps be convenient for two or three Strangers to travel in company
together; their Fellowship sometimes makes 'em pass their hours more
cheerfully, and employ the time they bestow in making Observations with better
Success and greater Pleasure, especially when they are all Men of Probity, and
of one Humor.

But these Societies are obnoxious to the same Inconveniences with which
Marriage is attended; for when their Humors do not agree, it had been better
for 'em they had never come together. Some are curious, desirous to see and
examine every thing with care, and never scruple to expose themselves to a
shower of Rain, or to find their Dinner cold at the Inn, if they can but make
some new Discovery or important Observation: whereas there are others who
travel like Posthorses, and neither mind Inscriptions nor Libraries, provided
they can find a good Bed at night, and good Victuals when they are hungry. And
therefore a prudent Person ought never to enter into a Society, till he has
first thoroughly studied the Humors of his intended Companions.

Besides, it is by no means convenient to travel in Companies in Italy; the Inns
are so miserable that oftentimes they can neither accommodate their Guests with
Meat nor Beds, when they are too numerous.

A Stranger ought always to be furnished with some Iron Machin, to shut his
Door on the inside, which may be easily contrived, and made of several sorts;
for it happens not unfrequently, that the Doors of the Lodging-rooms have
neither Lock nor Bolt; and it is commonly observed, that Opportunity makes a
Thief.

The Curiosity of a Traveller, especially of a young man, who goes to see the
World that he may learn to live in it, should not be confined barely to
Enquiries after inanimate Curiosities. They whose Quality can procure 'em
admittance in the Courts of Princes, ought never to pass by such places without
visiting 'em. They ought also to see good Company, to enquire after those
Persons that are famous for their Skill in Arts and Sciences, and to discourse
with 'em, for it is impossible to receive certain Information of any thing, but
from Persons of that Character, and their Converse is in all respects useful.

To prevent the Inconveniences of a bad Lodging, they who do not carry a
complete Bed about with 'em ought at least to make provision of Bed-cloaths and
Coverlets. I do not propose this piece of Caution to comply with the
over-niceness of some Persons, but to guard against the ill consequences of an
incommodious Bed, that may be very prejudicial to Health, which is so necessary
a Blessing, that if it were only for the preservation of that, a Traveller
ought to avoid all manner of Excess.

To conclude, if we call to mind that a Traveller is more obnoxious than other
Persons to Accidents that may disturb the Repose of his Life, this Reflection
ought to be a new and powerful Motive to engage him not to forget the principal
Duties of it.

The END.
THE TABLE.
ABgarus Page 44 Academy for Painting at Milan 216 Academies of Ingenious
Persons in Italy 239 Academy at Geneva 260 Adda, a River 207 Admiral Coligni
massacr'd, 30 Adrian 's Mausoleum 33 An extraordinary Adventure 299 Agats at
Friburg 271 Air sparkling in the night 184 Aix in Savoy 256 Aix la Chapelle 276
-- its Privileges 277 Alba 88 Albana ibid. Albergo, the great Hospital in Genoa
227 Albert Durer draws all his Figures with Whiskers 29 Aldobrandin Wedding 49
Aldroandus 's Cabinet 186 Alexander VI. fortifies Castle St. Angelo 33 -- his
Repartee concerning Pasquin 54 -- prostrate at his Master's Feet 180 Alexander
the Great, 119, 252 Alexandria 233 Alsatia burnt 273 Altar pierced by a Host 73
Amalasuntha strangled 148 Amber, what it is 211 A great Dish of one piece of
Amber ibid. Ambition 252 Anagram on the Republic of Geneva 262 Anastasius the
Bibliothecary, 97 Andes, Virgil 's Birthplace, 203 Ann, Pope John the
Twelfth's Mistress 102 Annius of Viterbo 145 Antipasto 240 Antique Pieces 171
Antiquities of the Cities of Italy 250 Antwerp 294 Apparition of three Saints
to a Boatman 13 Aqua felice 72 Aqua-pendente 148 Ara Coeli, a Church 123 Arch
of Titus, at Rome 125 Arch of Constantin ibid. Good Archers 265 Architecture of
Rome 94 Architecture; see Instructions to a Traveller. Christians nick-nam'd
Arenarii, 133 Ark of the Covenant 45 Armenians at Rome 115 Arms of Adam 281 --
of Bern and Geneva, 265 -- of Sienna 152 -- of Venice 3 Arno, a River 158
Arscot, its Duke; a pleasant Story 295 Arsenal of Bern 265 -- of Brussels 285
-- of Casal 234 -- of Castle St. Angelo 33 -- of Florence 181 -- of Geneva 257
-- of Lucca 162 -- of Strasburg 273 -- of the Vatican 33 Arve, a River 256
Ascanius 's Tomb 88 Asinelli, a Tower 190 Asparagus grows in the Fields near
Pavia 222 Balaam 's Ass 45 Astroites 157 St. Augustine 's Body brought from
Sardinia to Pavia 221 Augustus 123 The House of Austria cures Wens and
Stammerers 207
B
Balaam 's Ass 45 Balsams excellent 181 Banners in St. Mark 's Place 3 Baptism
of Infidels at Rome, 116 Baptistery at Florence 177 -- at Pisa 158 Palace
Barberin Palestrina, 92 -- at the four Fountains 93 St. Peter 's Bark 160 The
Sixteen Barks 63 Barnabots 8 Barth. Coglione 206 Barth. Zanicheli 192 Basil 269
Bastions double 234 Baths of Agrippa 64 Bayonets prohibited in the Cities of
Italy 246 Beauty of Rome 18, 19, etc. -- of the Country about Florence 169 Bed
enriched with Jewels 66 Hanging Beds 253 Jesuits Bell at Brussels 290 Sound of
the Bells of Jerusalem, 45 Extraordinary Bell at Mantua, 203 Great Bell of
Milan 215 Bellarmin 104 Gentilis and John Bellini 9 M. Bellori 52, 138
Belvedere 31, 59 Villa Benedetti 55 Bennet IX. made Pope at ten years of age 78
Bergamask, a good Country, 207 Bergamo 206 Bern 265 Bezoar 155 German Bible 32
Biedoblo, a City in Afric, turned to Stone 67 Bishops of Basil and Geneva 269
Two Bishops rise from the Dead, 278 A Blind Man a good Engraver, 93 Blondel 's
Treatise against Pope Joan refuted 107, etc. See Popes, Joan.
Boethius a Native of Pavia, 220 Bologna 184 Bolsena 148 Bombarding of Genoa,
227 Robert Bone 265 Works in Bone 195 An abominable Book 85 Golden Book at
Venice 7 Palace Borghese 21 Villa Borghese 64 Cavalier Borri 35 Bozzolo 200
Brabant 293 Brabantins 284 Brescia 203 The pretended Coyness of a young Bride
49 Bridge St. Angelo 71 Bridge Sixtus ibid. Brisack 271 Angelo Bronzini a
Painter, 180 A very rare Brooch 41 Bruges 301 Brussels 283 Bruxillus reckons
Two hundred and eighty thousand Gods at Rome 22 Bucephalus 119 Buffalo's 240
Burgundians defeated at the Battle of Morat 264 Butter scarce in Italy 241
C
Several Cabinets at Rome, 65 Cabinet of Aldroandus at Bologna 186 -- of M.
Bellori 138 -- of the Marquess de Cospi, 186 -- of M. Fesch and Erasmus 269 --
of Kircher 140 -- of the Duke of Mantua, 202 -- of M. Settala at Milan 210 --
of the Great Duke of Tuscany 172, 173 Calendrin Professor of Divinity at Geneva
261 Calepin, where buried 206 Sea Calf 282 Calvin 262 Campagna di Roma 249
Campo Santo, at Pisa 159 Canal Navilio 207 Candlestick of Amber 172 Cannon made
of the Nails of the Door of the Pantheon, 23 Cannon, when first brought into
the Field 206 Caper- shrub 248 Capirol 119 Cardinals their ancient Titles, 32
Carobe- Tree 248 Casal 233 Cascade of Tivoli 61 Castle St. Angelo 33 Castle of
Cremona 199 Castles very rare in the Country of I^aly 242 Castor and Pollux 39
Catacombs 127, etc. Cathedral of Florence 175 -- of Milan 212 -- of Pisa 158 --
of Sienna 149 Celibacy the cause of Disorders, 37 Ceremonies used in the
Baptism of the Jews 116 -- of washing the Feet of Pilgrims 117 -- of Rome 20,
28 -- troublesome at Florence 182 Certaldo, a Hill full of Shells, 153 Cestius
's Pyramid 49 Bored Chair for the Popes, 74, 102 Sleeping Chairs 249
Chalcondylas 102 Imperial Chamber 275 Chamber where Charles V. was born 300
Twelve thousand and Five hundred Chambers in the Vatican Palace 28 Four
thousand Chambers in the Palace Palestrina 92 Chambery 255 Palace of the
Chancery 91 Fine Chapels 87 Chapel of St. Lawrence in Florence 178 -- of the
Holy Handkerchief in Turin 236 -- of the Holy Sacrament of Miracles 290 Chapter
of Liege 279 Hetruscan Characters 172 Charles V. crowned at Aix and Bologna 187
-- splendidly entertained by John Daens a Merchant of Antwerp 296 -- was born,
proclaimed Emperor, and took K. Francis I. on St. Matthias 's Day, 300 Cheeses
at Parma weighing 500 pounds each 241 Villa Chigi 241 Palace Chigi 90 Church of
Annunciata at Genoa 230 -- of St. Anthony 88 -- of St. Constance 137 -- of S.
John de Lateran, 87 -- of St. Lawrence at Florence 178 -- of St. Mary major 87
-- of St. Peter at Rome 18, 24, 25 Cathedral of Sienna 149 See Cathedral.
Churchyard of Pisa 159 Cicero 120 L. Q. Cincinnatus 278 Ciphers of Christ's
Name, 134 A Circle of Gold round Bologna offered for the Ransom of King Hentius
190 Circuit of Rome 16 Citadel of Bergamo 206 -- of Brescia 204 -- of Casal 233
-- of Florence 181 -- of Mantua 201 -- of Milan 216 -- of Parma and Antwerp,
196, 294 -- of Sienna 152 -- of Turin 236 Clement IV. and his two Daughters 20
Clement VII. crowns Charles V. at Bologna 187 Coal 280 Barth. Coglion 206
Coligni massacr'd 30 Coliseum 125 The Gates Collatina and Collina 99 Roman
College 139 College of the Nobility at Parma 197 Collyridian Heretics 35 M.
Colomies 97 Family of Colonna 's very noble, 93 Palace Colonna 93 Columns in
the State of Venice 3 Fine Columns 23, 39 Column on which St. Paul was beheaded
73 -- on which the Cock crew when St. Peter denied Christ, 73 -- which was
cleft on the day of the Passion 73 -- called Milliarium 121 The Columns of
Trajan and Antonin 126 Columns of Porphyry 178 A wonderful Column 159 Commerce
of Geneva 232 Comparison of Frescati and Versailles, 59 Fine Convents 184 St.
Martin 's Cope 205 Cork- trees 247 Corpus-christi Day 217 Cotton 248 Council of
the Court 275 -- of Soissons 103 Courtesans of Rome 48 -- of Venice ibid. Cramp
cured with a Ring 206 Cremona 199 Cross of the penitent Thief, 45 Genealogy of
the Family of Crouy 281 Crucifix drawn by Mich. Angelo from a crucified Man, 21
-- which spoke to St. Bridget, 42 -- which spoke to St. Peter, ibid. -- which
spoke to St. Andrew des Ursins 181 -- which bowed its Head, 231 -- clothed like
a Switzer, 268 Crucifixion of St. Peter 73 Crystal of the Rock 219 Cuirasses
made for Women 229 Curtius 's Lake 125 Cybele 100 Cypress- tree two hundred
years old 247
D
Dactyli Judaei 157 J. Daens treated Charles V. 296 Dance of Death by Holben,
270 David descends from Heaven to play on his Harp at St. Katherine 's Wedding
151 Day, when begun by the Italians, 251 Deluge 154 Dendrites 157 Description
of the Chapel of St. Lawrence 178 -- of the Venus of Medicis 175 -- of certain
shining Flies, 193 Device of the Republic of Geneva 261 A Ship full of Devils
14 Devils perch on a Walnut-tree, 45 Diamond of the Great Duke of Tuscany 174 A
wrought Diamond found in a piece of Marble 62 Dianae Speculum 89 Dice of Pilate
's Soldiers 73 Disciples of Emaus painted with Chaplets. 30 Dish in which the
Paschal Lamb was eaten 231 Dish made of one Emerald 231 A large Dish of one
piece of Amber 211 A Diver drowned 63 Doctor Molinos 35 Doge of Venice 4 -- his
Revenue ibid. Doge of Genoa 4, 229 -- must be Fifty years old, ib. Dogesses or
Dogresses of Venice 5 Bolonia Dogs 186 Sea-Dog 282 Dogs draw Coaches at
Brussels, 286 Doliolo 52 Donation of Maud to the Popes 144 Pretended Donation
of Constantin the Great to the Popes, ibid. Doves of Peace 134 Duillius a Roman
Consul, the first who was honored with a Naval Triumph 120 Creation of the
Dukes of Parma 196
E
Eagles of Geneva 265 Earl of Ossory 173 The Earth swallows up a Soldier, 165
Easterlings their House 295 A rare Echo 219 Another Echo which repeats a
syllable forty times 219 Elogy of Rome by the Abbot of Vrsperg, in the margin
85 -- of Leonard de Vinci, 207 Enzelin 's Tomb 190 Epigrams on the Bored Chair,
85, 86 Style of Christian Epitaphs, 132 Epitaph of a Bishop 301 -- of a Horse
286 -- of Jo. de Fuc. 147 -- of Proculus 191 -- of Quintin Mathys 297 -- of
Raphael Urbin 23 -- of Richard II, King of England 164 Eridanus 234 Est, Est,
Est 147 Etymology of Alexandria, 233 -- of Alexis 168 -- of Beatrix 167 -- of
St. Cecilia 168 -- of St. Christina 167 -- of Cyprian 168 -- of Damian 167 --
of George ibid. -- of Gorgonian 168 -- of Jerome ibid. -- of St. Katherine 150
-- her History ibid. -- of Martin 167 -- of St. Maurice ibid. -- of Pavia 223
-- of Saturnian 168 -- of St. Siphorian 167 Exchange of Antwerp 296 -- why
called Bourse ibid.
F
Fans used by Men 192 Fardingales worn at Genoa, 229 Palace Farnese 90 The
Fathers 107 La Favorite, a House of Pleasure 202 Faustina deify'd 138 Faustina
in love with a Gladiator 66 Festival kept at Geneva in memory of the Scalado
258 Festival observed at Brussels, 288 Indian Fig- trees 248 Fistic- Nuts ibid.
Order of the Golden Fleece, 301 Flies shining in the Night, 193 Florence 169
Flowers 287 A rare Flower 65 Fort- Lewis 274 Fort of Urban VIII. 193 Fortune a
Goddess 138 Fortune Panthea ibid. Diverse Fossils 157 A Fountain tastes of Milk,
124 A pleasant Fountain 188 St. Francis 's Hood 180 St. Fredian changes the
course of a River 163 Frescati 59 Friburg in Brisgaw 271 Good Fruit at Genoa
241 Roman Funerals 51, 133 Fury of the Heathens against the Sepulchers of the
Christians 133
G
Gabel on Corn and Wine at Genoa 232 Gabrino Fondulio 200 Gallery of the Great
Duke of Tuscany 172 Galley- Slaves at Leghorn, 161 Game scarce in Italy 242
Castle Gandolfo 88 Gardens of Genoa 226 Garisenda, a Tower in Bologna 190
Garnet a Jesuit 139 Fine brazen Gates 177 Gates Collatina and Collina, 99
Genealogy in a straight Line from Adam 281 Geneva 257 Genoa 224 The several
Governments of Genoa ibid. Ghent 298 -- less than Lovain ibid. Gibelins 143,
166 The Gladiator in St. James 's Park at Whitehall 64 Glass Windows are rare
in Italy 226 A fine Looking-Glass 91 Large Globes 173 Gods of Rome, how many,
22 Gondola's at Venice 11 St. Gondulfus 278 Gonfalonier of Lucca 162 Government
of Lucca ibid. Granite a sort of Marble 95 Grasshoppers 146 Greeks at Rome 115
St. Gregory 's Dialogue with an Image 42 Grisler a Governor in Switzerland 265
Cool Grotto 's 53 Grotta di Cane 329 Guastalla 268 St. Gudula 's Church 290
Guelphs and Gibelins, 143, 166 Guttum, what it is 139 Gutschoven 281
H
Ridiculous Habits 269 Habit of young Noblemen at Venice 73 -- of the
Counselors of Basil, 269 Hail the scourge of Piedmont, 234 Great Hall 175
Hameranus 252 Holy Handkerchief in seven different places 237 Heats at Rome 249
Hentius 's Tomb 190 Henry IV. King of Denmark, 245 Hercules Farnese 91 History
of the Church of Ara Coeli 123 -- of a Cannon at Brussels, 284 -- of two
Columns of Porphyry 178 -- of another Column ibid. -- of a Crucifix at Genoa.
See Crucifix.
-- of two Diverse 63 -- of a Father and his Son, 399 -- of a Festival at
Brussels, 288 -- of a Gentleman's falling into a Ditch 127 -- of Hentius and
the People of Bologna 190 -- of a Hermit who hanged himself publicly, 140 --
of St. James Shakehorse, 46 -- of St. Katherine of Sienna 150 -- of the Ring
and Thumb of St. Mark 13 -- of the Foundation of the Church of St. Mary major
87 -- of the Foundation of the Church of St. Mary of the People 45 -- of a rich
Merchant at Antwerp 296 -- of a Nostredame or Image of our Lady 165 -- of
Quintin Mathys, 297 -- of the Emperor Sigismund and Pope John XXIII, 200 -- of
Sixtus V, and the Prince of Parma 34 -- of the Statues at Villa Pamphili 68 A
Hog half covered with Wool, 210 Holben, a famous Painter, 270 St. Francis 's
Hood 180 Horatii and Curiatii 88 Horns of Ammon 157 -- Fossil 212 -- of Moses
45 -- of the Rhinoceros 172 -- of Unicorns 211 Horses in the Capitol 119 -- of
Marble ibid. -- at Monte cavallo ibid. -- at Rome blessed at St. Anthony 's
Church, 88 Three famous Horses 285 Twelve thousand Crowns given for a Horse
ibid. A Horse 's Tail twenty foot long, 173 Great Hospital of Genoa, 227 -- of
Milan, 217 Hospital of the Trinity at Rome 141 Host, how carried at Venice, 142
Houille 280 Goodman Houilleux ibid. Hours, how reckoned in Italy, 251 House of
Sibylla Tiburtina, 62 Houses of the Easterlings, 296 -- at Rome 17, 90 Houses
of Pleasure of the Duke of Mantua 202 -- about Rome; see Tivoli and Frescati.
-- of the Duke of Savoy, 236 -- of the Great Duke of Tuscany, 181 Hunninghen
270 Double white Hyacinth a very rare Flower 65
I
Jacobins of Bern 266 St. James Shake horse 46 St. James devoutly adored at
Pistoya 166 Jargon of Bergamo 206 Jealousy of the Italians 246 The Jesuit
Garnet 139 Jews of Brussels 290 -- of Rome 116 -- marry before they are twenty
years old ibid. -- of Venice 6 Image of the Virgin chides St. Gregory 42 Other
speaking Images, ibid. Three Images weep and bleed, ib. Image of Christ, made
by Christ himself 44 -- of Christ, made by Angels 87 -- of Christ, begun by
Nicodemus, and finished by Angels 162 -- of the Virgin, about which Angels sing
Litanies, 88 -- of our Lady, which tossed the little Jesus from one Arm to
another, 165 See Crucifix.
Infant turned to Stone 66 Ingratitude 148 Inhabitants of Venice 2 Fine Inlay'd
Work 189, 206 Innocent XI. Pope 118 Inns meanly furnished 239 Inscription
against Women, 27 -- on the Pedestal of a Statue of Justice, 252 -- on the Gate
of the Manufactory of Bern, 266 -- at Viterbo 144 A curious Inscription 159
Forged Inscriptions 145 Institution of the Order of the Golden Fleece 301
Invention of Painting in Oil, 52 Inundations of the Tiber 71 Joan the She Pope
74 -- Mistress of Pope John XII. 101 John Annius of Viterbo, 145 -- of Bruges,
Inventer of Painting in Oil, 52 -- Daens 296 -- XII. made Pope before he was 18
years old, 78 St. John de Morienne 256 Floting Islands 63 Italians 239 -- their
Rhodomontades, 199 Jujube- trees 248 Treaty of St. Julian 258 Juliers 276
Palace Justiniani 90
K
St. Katherine of Sienna 150 -- of Vigri 188 Two Kings taken Prisoners, 223
Tomb of the Three Kings, 219 King's Evil. William III. rejects the superstitious
Custom of his Predecessors, with respect to this Disease, 206 Knives with
Twelve Blades, 183
L
Labarum 205 Lachrymatories 132 Ladies of Venice 12 Lagunes of Venice 4 Lake of
Bolsena 147 -- of Castel-Gandolfo 89 -- of Curtius 125 -- of Geneva 257, 258 --
of Mount Cenis 254 -- of Nemi 89 -- of Solfatara 63 -- of Vico or Cyminus, 143
Sepulchral Lamps 139 Language of Bergamo, 206 Lanthorn of Judas 45 St. John de
Lateran 86 St. Lawrence 's Chapel 178 Lausanne 264 Lazaret, an Hospital in
Milan, 217 Leda 39 Leghorn 160 Lentisk- trees, 248 Leo IV. 104 Leo X. 97
Leonard de Vinci, the most accomplished man of his Age, 207 Letter of St.
Chrysostom to Caesarius 180 Liberty of Venice, true Libertinism 5 Library of
the Palace Altieri, 91 -- Ambrosian 215 -- of the Palace Barberini, 92 -- of
Heidelberg 31 -- of St. Lawrence 179 -- of the Roman College, 139 -- of the
Vatican 31 -- of Duke of Vrbin ibid. Liege 279 Cassini 's Meridian Line 188
Lion escapes out of his Den without doing any hurt 181 Litanies of the Virgin
sung by Angels 88 The Pope's Litters 118 The Pope's Livery ibid. A live Lobster
found in a Rock, 62 Lombardy a plain Country, 184, 192 St. Longin 202 Lorier
187 Love, the cause of Disorders, 246 Fort Louis 275 Lovain 280 -- one of the
Laws of its College ibid. -- the Well of its Castle, ibid. -- number of its
Colleges, 281 Lubeccio, a dangerous Wind, 228 Lucciole, or shining Flies, 193
Lucca 161 Villa Ludovisia 59, 66 Several Families of Lucca retire to Geneva 165
Luther 32
M
Machine to drive away Flies, 192 M. Magliabecchi 180 Magna Matter 138 A Maid
General of an Army, 77 A Maid made Pope 74 Maid of Orleans 77 Poor Maids, how
married, 246 Maids put into Monasteries or married 20 Young Maids dance and
sing, 152 A Man with one Body, two Heads and four Hands 181 Manner of reckoning
the Hours in Italy 251 Mantua 200 Manuscripts written by Aldroandus 187
Manuscripts, 179, 216, 262, 269 Maple- trees 247 Marble and Minerals in Italy,
248 Marforio 55 St. Mark 's Thumb 13 Marriage of St. Katherine of Sienna with
Christ 150 Marriage of Palm Trees 247 Marmirol 202 Carlo Marotti a famous
Painter 92 Martana an Island 147 Martin V. 214 St. Mary major 87 St. Mary del
popolo 45 Massacre of Coligni 30 Massacre of Paris approved by the Pope ibid. A
Medal on that Massacre, 31 Masterpiece of Raphael 73 Mastreicht 278 Quintin
Mathys 297 Countess Maud Pope Gregory the seventh's Mistress, 26, 144 Mausoleum
of Adrian 33 -- of Cecilia 127 -- of Cestius 49 See Tombs. --
Merry May 153 Measure of Christ 73 Mechlin 292 Rare Medals 40 -- on Q.
Christian of Sweden 252 Winter Melons 241 Meridian Line by Cassini, 188 Mezeray
's Opinion of Pope Joan 85 S. Michael in Bosco a fine Convent, 184 Milan 209
Milanese, a fertile Country, 207 Four hundred Silk-Mills in Bologna 185 No
Wind-Mills in Italy, 251 Milliarium a Pillar 120 Miracles of St. Fredian 163
Modena 193 Dr. Molinos 35 Money of Bologna 185 -- of Genoa 232 -- of Judas 45
-- of Lucca 163 Monks love ease 183 Monks at the Virgin's Wedding 30 Mons
testaceus 52 Villa Montalte 67 Monte Cavallo 119 Monte Dracone 59 Monte
Fiascone 146 Monte Juovo 183 Monte nuovo, a Hill that grew up in one night 154
Montorio 73 S. Monulfus 278 Morat 264 Morges ibid. S. John de Morienne 256
Moses 's Rod 214 Essays to find the perpetual Motion 210 Mount-Cenis 254
Mountain of St. Julian, 167 -- of Radicofani 148 -- in Tuscany full of shells
153 -- of Viterbo 143 Mountains of Italy 248 -- of Rome 16 Mourners hired 133
Mourning for the Death of Caesar 159 White Mulberry- trees 248 Muscatello Wine
of Tuscany, 240 Effects of Music 245 Mushroomns bearing three half-body'd human
Bodies 157 Musket- barrel of Massive Gold 173 Myrtle- trees 248
N
Nail of the Crucifixion 214 Natura rerum parens 138 Nature does nothing in
vain, 156, 157 Christ's Navel- string 45 Navilio, a Canal 207 Newport 304
Noblemen of Genoa 229 -- of Italy live in the Cities, 242 -- of Lucca 165 -- of
Venice, 6, 7, 8, 13, 245 Nostredame, or the Image of our Lady at Bologna; see
Image Nuns of Venice 5 Nurseries 181
O
Ever-green Oaks 248 Obelisk of St. Peter 95 Obelisks of Rome 94, 95 Sweet
Odours 181 Oglio, a River 205 Oil used instead of Butter, 241 Sweet Oil found
in a piece of Marble 62 Olive- trees 248 Ombrella's 149 Onuphrius 97 Switzer
Orators 270 Order of the Precious Blood, 202 -- of the Golden Fleece 301
Oriflam of Constantin 204 -- of St. Denis 205 Maid of Orleans 77 Ornaments used
at the Emperor's Coronation 278 Osiris 92 Earl of Ossory 173 Ostend 303 Ancient
Medals of Otho 187
P
Antique Painting 49, 138 Painting resembling a Print, 216 Painting in Oil,
when invented, 52 Palace Altieri 91 -- Barberini at the four Fountains 93 --
Barberini Palestrina 92 -- at Bologna 186 -- Borghese 21 -- Caprara 186 -- of
the Chancery 91 -- Chigi 90 -- of Queen Christian of Sweden 39 -- Colonna 93 --
Farnese 90 -- Royal at Genoa 228 -- Justiniani 90 -- of the Duke of Mantua, 201
-- of Monte Cavallo 119 -- of the Duke of Parma, 196 -- of the Duke of Savoy,
236 -- of the Vatican 28 -- of Whitehall 202 Palaces of Rome 90 Palm- branches
247 Palm- Sunday ibid. Palm- trees ibid. Villa Pamphili 67 Panthea 138 Pantheon
21 -- of Athens 23 Parma 196 -- its Duchy a Fief of the Ecclesiastic State, 34
Paschal II. 45 Pasquin 54 Curious Pavement of the Cathedral of Sienna 149
Pavement of Florence 170 Pavia 220 St. Paul 's Splinter 45 Penitents of Rome
140 Perfumes 181 Persecution of the French Protestants 38 St. Peter 's Church
at Rome, 18, 24 Petrification 66 A Phantom 280 Phidias a Sculptor 119 Philip
the Good Duke of Burgundy institutes the Order of the Golden Fleece 301
Philipsburg 274 Pictures criticiz'd, 29, 30, 69, 176 Diverse Pictures, 9, 10,
11, 21, 28, 29, 30, 40, 60, 65, 66, 67, 73, 90, 93, 120, 136, 150, 151, 173,
197, 218, 269, 270 Eight thousand Original Pictures at the Palace Colonna 93
Piedmont 234 Pietro-mala, a City in Tuscany, where the Air shines in the Night
184 S. Pietro in carcere 124 Pilgrims at Rome 117 Pipes, their Use among the
Romans 51 Pisa 157 Pistoya 166 Pl^cenza 198 M. de Plessis Mornay 102 Po, a
River 199, 222 Poggi bonzi 152 Poggio Imperiale 181 Castor and Pollux 39
Martinus Polonus 98, 99 Pomegranat- trees 248 Pomaerium 199 Popes chosen young
78 Female Pope 74 Ancient Habits of Popes 29 Monstrous Popes no Rarities, 85
Verses on certain Popes, 85, 86 Pope Joan 74, 75, etc. 96, etc. 149 Port of
Antwerp 295 Portraiture of Christ made by himself 44 -- another begun by
Nicodemus, and finished by Angels, 162 -- of Cromwell 173 -- of General Monk
ibid. -- of the Earl of Ossory, ibid. -- of Paul V, 21 -- of the Queen of
Sweden, 38 Pouzzolane, asort of Sand, 133 Prattinola 181 Praxiteles a Sculptor
119 Luther 's Prayer 32 Italian Preachers 47 Christ's Prepuce 45 Pressentina,
an Island 147 Printing house of Plantin, 298 Privileges of Aix la Chapelle, 277
-- of the People of Bologna, 185 -- of the Province of Brabant 292 -- of the
Noblemen of Venice 13 Procession on Corpus-Christi-day 217, 229, 230 Pro
Christi, what it is 135 Proculus 191 Fine Prospects, 28, 59, 69, 198 Protectors
of Genoa 232 Protestants, where buried at Venice 14 -- persecuted in France 38
Proverbs 55, 56, etc. -- on Justice 177 -- concerning Milan, 219 Pyramid of
Cestius 49, 52
Q
Quails passing from Afric to Italy 242 Quintin Mathys 297
R
Radicofani 148 Raisins of Bologna 241 Ramparts of Antwerp 294 -- of Turin 236
Ranuccio Prince of Parma, 34 Raphael of Urbin 23, 28 -- his Masterpiece, 73
Rarities natural 173 See Cabinets of Curiosities.
Rates of the Apostolical Chamber, 84 Reggio 195 Regisole, a Statue 221 Curious
Relics, 41, 42, 45, 46, 73, 74, 180, 214, 219 Remora 212 Repartee of Alexander
VI, concerning Pasquin 54 -- of a Venetian Ambassador concerning the Donation
of St. Peter 's Patrimony, 144 Republic of Lucca 161 Contradictory Revelations
of St. Katherine of Sienna, and St. Bridget 151 Revenue of the Doge of Venice 4
-- of the Republic 6 Rhine, a River 269 Riches of Antwerp 295 Ring of St. Mark
13 A River miraculously changes its course 163 Robert Bone, an Archer, 265
Rocks softened 124 Rhodomontades 298 Rods of Moses and Aaron, 45, 176, 180, 214
Rome 16 -- its Antiquities, 64, 65, 66 Rostrum 228 Rotonda; see Pantheon Rupes
Tarpeia 124
S
Sacking of Mantua 202 Sanctum Sanctorum 87 Golden Sand 256 Sauciges of Bologna
185 Villa Savelli 67 Saxum mirae magnitudinis, 27 S. Scala 87 Scalado of Geneva
257 Scarperia, a Town 183 Scheld, a River 294, 295 Schelestat 272 Scorpions 243
Scotists 151 Rare Sculptures 39 See Instruct. to a Traveller.
Sea has lost ground at Leghorn, 160 Senate of Women 126 Sena 248 Sentences and
Proverbs, 55, 56, 57 Serein, or Evening Dew very dangerous about Rome 249
Sermons 47 Sermon of an amorous Monk 48 The brazen Serpent of the Wilderness to
be seen at Milan, 218 Fossil Shells 157 Shells on the Mountains of Tuscany 153
-- found in the Kidneys, 155 Ship full of Devils 14 Sibyls 124 Siege of Ostend
303 Sienna 149 Silk of Bologna 185 Sixtus IV. settled Whores at Rome 48 Sixtus
V. very severe 34 -- banishes and afterward recalls the Whores, 48 Skeleton
petrefy'd 66 Snow at Rome in August, 87 Soloturn 268 Songs of young Girls in
Tuscany 152 Spaniards in love with Statues, 26 Orlando Furioso 's Spear 221
Speculum Dianae 89 Spiders Spire 275 M. Spon 132 Sponges 248 Spurs of Reggio
195 Stammerers; see Austria. Star of the three Kings 45 Statue of Alexander
Farnese and his Son Rannuccio, 198 -- of the Duke of Alva, 294 -- of Boniface
VIII. 186 -- of Cosmo I. Great Duke of Tuscany 160, 171 -- of a Father and his
Son, 290 -- of God the Father, 176 -- of Grego^y XIII. 186 -- of Martin the
Fifth without a Beard 214 -- of a Peasant who discovered Catilin 's Conspiracy,
174 -- of Tullia, the only one of its kind in Rome 92 -- of Urban VIII, made by
a blind man 93 Ancient and very rare Statues, 65, 66, 67, 68 Fine Statues, 31,
39, 65, 66, 90, 91, 92, 93, 119, 120, 172, 174 Fine Statues made by Bernin, 65
One thousand eight hundred and sixty seven ancient Statues in the Palace
Justiniani at Rome 90 Steeple of Antwerp 297 The highest Steeple in Europe, 272
Style of Christian Epitaphs, 132 Stiletto's of Milan 246 Stone of Abraham 's
Sacrifice, 46 -- on which Christ was circumcised ibid. -- Dendrites 182 -- on
which the Soldiers cast Lots for Christ's Garments 73 -- Travertin 62 The
Devil's Stone 41 A very great Stone 27 Pumice Stones 248 Shining Stones of
Bologna, 192 Strasburg 272 Fine Street 198 Prodigious Strength 208 S^rigil,
what it is 139 Sturgeon 241 M. le Sueur 97 A vast Sum of Money given by a
private Person for the building and adorning the Front of the Cathedral Church
of Milan 213 A Picture of the last Supper, in which there is a Gammon of Bacon
instead of the Paschal Lamb 29 Susa 254 Christina Queen of Sweden, 38 Swelling
of the Throat; see Austria The wearing of Swords prohibited at Genoa and Lucca.
246
T
A fine Table 173 Tagliacozzo 185 Tail of Balaam 's Ass 45 -- of a Horse twenty
foot long, 173 Tarantula 's 244 Tarpeia rupes 124 Tears preserved 133 William
Tell a Switzer 77 Temple of Bacchus 136 Tesin, a River 222 Tetrapolis, or
Viterbo 145 Fine Theater 196 Thomists 151 Tiber 71 Tilmont 280 Tin scarce in
Italy 251 Tivoli 60 Tomb of Adrian the Emper. 33 -- of Ascanius 88 -- of
Aubigne 262 -- of St. Augustine 221 -- of Bacchus 137 -- of Cecilia 127 -- of
Cestius 49 -- of Charles the Great, 277 -- of Barth. Coglione, 206 -- of St.
Dominic 189 -- of Hentius or Enzelin, 190 -- of Jo. de Fuc. 147 -- of St. Luke
132 -- of Michael Angelo, 180 -- of St. Peter 27 -- of Raphael Urbin 23 -- of
Richard King of England 164 -- of a Duke of Rohan 262 Tombs of the Horatii and
Curatii 88 -- of the three Kings 219 -- of the Naso's 52 -- of the Great Dukes
of Tuscany 179 Ancient Tombs of the Christians 133 Tongue of Stammerers; see
Austria Tortoises 192 Town turned to Stone 67 Tower of Bristol 191 -- of
Cremona 199 -- of Florence 176 See Steeple.
Towers of Bologna 190 -- of Pisa 158 -- of Sienna 152 -- of Viterbo 143 The
Transfiguration the best and last Work of Raphael, 73 Treaty of St. Julian 258
Trees in Italy 247 Naval Triumph 120 Ancient Trophies ibid. Trouts 259 Trunk of
Belvedere 31 A dry Trunk of a Tree blossoms, 178 Tulips dear 65 Tullia, a rare
Statue 92 Tullianum, an ancient Prison, 124 Diverse Tuns 240 Turin 235 Turnep
exactly resembling a Hand 157 A fine Turquoise 174
V
Valentin, a House of Pleasure belonging to the Duke of Savoy 236 Vatican
Palace 28 Vaticanus ibid. Venus roughly handled, 39, 68 The famous Venus of
Medicis, 174 Verrua, a fortified Town in Piedmont 234 Versailles 59, 61 Verses
on the preservation of Health 258 -- on the Popes 85, 86 Fine Antique Vessels,
40, 139, 173, 174 Vessels of the Temple of Solomon 125 Ugolino, at Bologna 187
Ugonottorum Strages 31 Via Aemilia 143 Katherine de Vigri 188 Villa Benedetti
55 -- Borghese 64 -- Chigi 67 -- Ludovisia 66 -- Montalta or Savelli 67 --
Pamphili ibid. Virgil in Manuscript 32 -- born at Andes 203 Conception of the
Virgin 151 Viterbo 143 Unicorns 211 University of Bologna 185 -- of Lovain 281
-- of Parma 197 -- of Pavia 220 Volto Santo 162 Utrecht 279
W
Wardrobe of the Great Duke of Tuscany 175 Washing of the Feet of Pilgrims at
Rome 117 Water at Antwerp 298 -- of the Nile 222 -- of the Tesin very cold,
ibid. Aldobrandin Wedding 49 Wedding of St. Katherin of Sienna 150 -- of the
Virgin Mary, 30 An extraordinary Well 236 Whores settled at Rome by Popes 48
William III. See King's Evil. William Tell a Switzer, 77, 265 Italian Wine 240
Complement of Wine in Switzerland 270 She-Wolf of Romulus, 65, 120 Women of
Brussels 288 -- enslaved 37 -- enter but once a year into St. Peter 's Chapel,
27 -- invisible at Florence, 182 -- separated from Men at Church 247 Women and
Men ride in different Coaches 197 Apology for Women 78 A Woman with a Beard
like a Capuchin Friar 187 A Woman in love with a Gladiator 66 English Women
happy 37 Odd Habits of Women. See Habits. Senate of Women 126 Warlike Women 229
A Worm found in a Flint, 62 Writing awry 216 Sibyllin Writings 124
Z
Barth. Zanicheli 192 Fred. Zucchero a Painter, 176 Zuccone, the Work of
Donatelli 177
FINIS.

