A MODERATE, AND MOST PROPER REPLY TO A DECLARATION, PRINTED, AND PVBLISHED,
under His MAJESTY'S Name, December, 8.

Intended against an Ordinance of Parliament for Assessing.

But indeed animating and encourageing the Malignants, and Delinquents, in
their violent courses, for the maintenance of themselves, and their Malignant
Army.



LONDON, Printed, 1642.

A moderate and most proper Reply to a DECLARATION,
THE Pen that drops this Declaration, lately set forth under His Majesty's
Name, is a fellow to that tongue which cuts like a sharp Rasor, the Rasor is
sharp but it plainly appears that malignancy is the whetstone, and gives it
the edge; for so it cut, it cares not though it mangles truth and goodness;
and so it cut those whom it hates, it cares not though it cut also those whom
it professes to love. For the maine work of this Declaration is to condemn
that in War, which the favorits, if not the framers of this Declaration have
practiced in peace, yea to condemn that which in War the Parliament has done
for the preservation of the Kingdom, being far less then that which
themselves have done in this War for the ruin and destruction of it.

The great outcry of this Declaration seems to be for the property of the
Subject. But does not this cry come from the same shop, from whence heretofore
issued enforced Loanes, Knighting Money, benevolences, and Ship Money? And from
whence more lately issue plunderings, ransomes for not plundering, monthly
taxes of an high value and rate, So that this cry seems to be like that of the
Highway man, who having taken money from a passenger, to put away the
suspicion of it, raised an hue and cry against himself, For is it in earnest
to be thought, that the destroyers of property, are now suddenly become the
Patrons of property? or rather that by this assessement they are likely to be
put from their old trade and therefore are offended? For indeed, this which
they call taking away of property, is the means of preserving property for
ever. Besides, they have put upon the Parliament a necessity of assessements,
and that is their fault, and yet this fault of theirs they cast on the
Parliament. Again they know that the Houses have power to tax the whole
Kingdom; and the tax of the Commons of England arises only from the House of
Commons; Against this they object only the want of the Kings assent; which
assent being withheld by themselves; they again cast their own fault upon the
Parliament. The And the Earl of New Castle too.
King without the two Houses lays taxes and gives warrants for plundering, and
this with their advice and assistance, even to destroy the Parliament, but the
two Houses cannot have their leave to lay an assessement without the King for
their own preservation, and the preservation of the Kingdom. Yet is it well
known that there are sundry Laws which exclude the King from laying taxes
without consent of Parliament: but no Law that the Parliament, or two Houses
should not lay taxes, when the King not only deserteth them, but makes War
against them. In the Kings Infancy what assent of the King have the two Houses
for the laying of taxes? and it were to be wished that desertion of Parliament,
and War against the Parliament, did not give greater cause and necessity of
taxing without that assent, then the former. Briefly, the Parliament is
enforced to a War for it is own defense. This defense cannot be maintained
without money, and this is the anger that there is money gotten to maintain it.

For if Justice in the way of raising it, were their quarrel; the same Justice
would make them to quarrel with themselves; when they rob whole Towns, not of
the twentieth part, but of twenty parts of twenty. Where is this quarrel of
Justice when they lay monthly Takes in Oxfordshire, and other taxes in the
West? where was their Justice when they robbed in old Branford, as well their
friends, as their opposers? Had they the Kings consent or had they it not? I
think they will be ashamed to acknowledge either. Howsoever certainly they had
not the consent of the two Houses of Parliament, and so it was without Law, and
wholly without this Justice which they now exact of the Parliament. Shall we
attribute this to an excessive charity, that they love others above themselves,
and so would have others more just and honest then themselves? or rather do
they desire that other men may be just that they by injustice may destroy them?
They would not have men just, but naked and undefended that so by armed
injustice and violence they might subdue them into an everlasting bondage, and
misery.

But these men are still troubled with altering the property of Hull, and will
needs awake not a sleeping but a slain and dead objection. If they will be
ever speaking of it, they must ever hear, That he that takes away a sword from
one that would kill him, and takes it only that he may not kill him, takes
not away the property, but the mischief. He does not mean to profit himself
by the value of it, but to save himself from the cutting of it. And if nothing
else will convert the Penman of this Declaration, this perchance would serve
the turn, if he had no other means of livelihood and maintenance, but the
revenues and profits which the Parliament receives from Hull.

As for the Army of the Earl of Essex raised to destroy the King (for so the
Declaration will have it) it is such another truth, as if, when the Earl of
Essex his Soldiers fought at Branford to defend themselves and some of their
own friends and fellows formerly taken by the malignant Army were set in the
forefront, it were said, That the Earl of Essex his Soldiers did fight
against their own fellows to destroy them. These be the men that go about to
destroy the King, that by Armies of their own enforcing the Parliament to
raise an Army to defend it self, bring the King between two Armies and so
into the danger of that destruction, which themselves both cause and object.
They are the men that seek His destruction, that cause his presence there,
where destruction is; and cause his absence there where His safety is. But
certainly the Parliament wishes His absence from the Army, wherelies the
danger, and his presence in Parliament, where is His assured safety.

But here follows another wonder that those men who plunder without giving any
warning, should find fault with Sir Edward Bayntons warrant which, as
themselves say, gave warning to men, that they might escape plundering. Though
it is constantly affirmed that the word plundeting is not in the warrant.
But if he had plundered them without warning, they had nothing to object
against him but their own fault.

A Declaration succeeds in praise of property which being indeed so precious,
gives a strong exhortation to the Parliament to raise so much Money as may
safely defend it. In the Parliament lies the root of property, and to pull up
Parliaments, is to pull up property by the roots. Therefore to defend
property, the Parliament must be defended: and to defend the Parliament money
must be raised.

So to take part of men's goods to defend the Parliament is to defend property,
even in the root of it; if the branches be cropped to preserve the root, the
branches may again he supplied and renewed by the root, but if the root be
pulled up, which these men endeavor, the branches perish for ever. And this is
their grief, that this root of property is preserved. And can they take a
care of the branches of property who would pull up property by the root? which
being pulled up, not only the twentieth part (which is their complaint) but
the other nineteen are utterly lost. But neither does this Ordinance enjoyne
the taking of the twentieth part, that number being named, to set a bound to
the Tax, which the Assessors may not pass. They may take the fourtieth part
if they think fit; And it had been a deed of charity, if these men that find
fault with the taking of the twentieth, had left the twentieth at Branford, and
the places which they have ransackt and spoiled?

And now comes the Committee of examinations it self to be examined. The
Questions are, why so called? and how such power? Surely it should not seem
strange to any that knows Parliaments to call a Committee by the name of the
work of it, no more then to call a man that makes shoes, a Shoemaker. And
except there were a resolution to be angry at all that the Parliament does, is
it impossible to deny a power in the two Houses to imprison? And, not to
dispute the power of the House of Commons alone, or a Committee of that House
which those men unseasonably at this time do question) the power of imprisoning
is from the Ordinances of both Houses; and by the same the Committee is to name
the place and time. So the naming of the time and place, is not by the power of
a Committee, but of the Ordinance of Parliament. And it cannot be unknown, that
there is in Parliament a power not only of liberty and imprisonment, but of
life and death.

And if it must be called a slavery to be subject to this power, upon this
occasion: surely it is first, thus far a voluntary slavery; that they may
free their persons if they will by a voluntary contribution. Secondly, the end
of this imprisonment, thus termed slavery, is to fright them from a perpetual
slavery.

But that any Members of the House of Commons should be excluded from being
present at the Counsels of the Committee of eximinations, is an untruth so
notorious and corpulent, that it is to be wondered how the Scribe of this
Declaration, should have an ignorance or malice big enough to conceive and
bring it forth. Especially since so many malignants from which he might have
had better intelligence, have past through that Committee, who waiting at the
door, while Counsels were taking of their Causes, might well know and
observe, that the Members of the House, were not excluded from being present at
those Counsels. And yet upon this fained accusation, is grounded a tragical,
and doleful exclamation. As if all Parliaments were utterly destroyed, because
a Committee does exclude the members of the House of Commons, which indeed are
not excluded.

Neither does it follow as a necessary truth that because men are to be
imprisoned by the Committee, therefore they shall be separated from their Wives
and Children. For though these are to be removed from London and Westminster,
the Subburbs and Counties adjacent, yet the husbands being sent to prisons
remote from London and Westminster, the Suburbs and Counties adjacent, they may
all very well meet. And certainly it may well be thought that the Parliament
has at least as great cause to remove far the malignants and there Families,
(the disease of malignancy commonly in this case most affecting the Head, and
thence flowing into the body of the Family. But be it for ever reserved by
special privilege, to Arch prelaticall Tyrany, to banish men into remote
Islands, and by Parliament commands to tear their friends, Wives and children
from them.

And here again flows from this Writer, a huge tide of passion. But (as tides
use to turn) may not this tide thus return upon him? Is there now any liberty
left, but to those that would destroy the Parliament, and there with peace,
liberty, property, and Religion? Is not a violence offered to men's Consciences,
when they are terrifyed by Proclamations of Treason, extremities of War, for
keeping their Protestation whereby they have vowed to defend the privileges of
Parliament, and those that defend them? And is it any way contrary to the Oaths
of Supremacy, Allegiance; or the Protestation, to defend the Parliament against
those that would destroy it? or by force to bring Delinquents to Parliamentary
Justice, and to lead captive those, that lead His Majesty captive, and strive
to separate the Head from the body, to the ruin of both? How many persons of
Honor, Quality, and Reputation of the several Counties of England have been
turned out of their Offices, places, houses, goods, and lives? how many are now
in prison only for their faithfulness to the parliament and Kingdom? How
many substantial Citizens of London have been seduced to set hands to
petitions of dangerous consequence, and to withdraw their hands from assisting
the defense of Parliament and Kingdom? How See the last Declaration.
many papists, blasphemers, and men of dersperate fortunes, are met in the
Armies that fight against the Parliament, yea: how many papists in these times
of War, are authorized against Law by his Majesty's Commission to buy, and
take up Arms, when as the Protestants in diverse Counties have been totally
disarmed, and their Arms taken away, notwithstanding their property in them?
How many godly, pious and painful Divines, are now robbed, and plundered,
their books and writings spoiled and defaced, and themselves driven to London,
as to a City of refuge? And withal how many of those Ministers that preach
against the Parliament are found to be the same that were heretofore questioned
by the Parliament, for scandalous, vicious, and abominable lives? And (not to
put from London over hastily) is there not a cause to secure dangerous persons
in London, and that those of London should be forced to defend London, when as
near as London was to Branford, so near (in clear probabilities) was London
to the state of Brainford? For is it to be thought that the Cavaliers would
have changed their minds in the riding of eight miles; and that cruelty at
Branford would have turned into mercy in London? would they have spared the
substantial Citizens at London, who did not spare the very Beggars at
Branford? would they have asked the Rich men at London whether they were for
the King, who made no such question to the Beggars at Branford? Surely it is
most likely that as now London may be seen in Brainford, so then Brainford
would have been seen in London.

Neither is it unworthy of the Name of public Faith, that is given by those
that represent the public Body of the Kingdom. And whatsoever leave will be
given to the Word (public) it is enough for the security, if the Faith be
sound and sufficient for repayment. And (to speak only of the House of
Commons.) It is certain that house is trusted with the whole estate of the
Commons of England. And I hope the Commons of England will have enough to pay
the debts contracted for the defense of the Commons. But in the mean time what
Faith is given for the Taskes and monthly payments imposed on Oxfordshire and
the Western parts, under the Dominion of Sir Ralph Hopton? And even this
Declaration hereafter acknowledges that the King has parted from his Jewels
and Plate, (which it is pity should have been turned into the price of the
blood of his subjects) so that evil Counselors have reduced him to that
Lowness, that whenever he returns to a state, luster, of Majesty and Glory,
by a right (that is a Parliamentary) way, it must be by their faithfulness and
supply, whose Faith is now thus slighted and despised. And it is easily
believed that our Brethren of Scotland will not be displeased with the Word of
public Faith, and I wish it were as fit to be believed, that they have not
cause to be displeased with those that by a War raised against the Parliament,
endeavor to make the reality of that Word, less, if not wholly ineffectuall.

Neither is it for want of speaking but of hearing that these men hear nothing
of fundamental Laws. If has been said that it is most fundamental to a
state to preserve it self, And that the Lords and Commons in Parliament may
defend themselves, and their privileges against Delinquents, Malignants, and
their adherents, that seek to destroy them: That the Commons are entrusted
with the estates of the Commons; and the Lords, of the Lords, and both joining
togethether in disposing them, if the King withhold His assent, which should be
given for the preservation of the Kingdom, shall the Kingdom perish for want
of this assent? much less should it be turned into an objection against the
Lords and Commons as a fault of theirs, That the King will not assent. But if
this be neither spoken nor heard, are these men fit to demand fundamental
Laws for the Parliaments disposing of a twentieth part, who can allege
themselves no shadow of any Law for exacting two and twenty parts out of
twenty? For such a monster both of Arithm^tick and oppression have these men
lately engendered: Not to speak of breaking the fundamental Laws in taking
his goods, in whom the House of Commons is in some sort contracted and
represented, what fundamental Law have they for laying a Tax of four pound a
week on ninescore pounds yearly rent of the Speaker of the House of Commons?
What have these men to do to talk of fundamental Laws, that by a Lawless,
and senseless oppression, undermine and dig up estates even below their
foundations; and like Aegiptian Taskemasters will enforce the Brick to be made
beyond the straw?

And if extraordinary means of maintaining an undertaking prove it unlawful,
what an extremity of unlawfulness is there in their undertakings, who by these
super-extremities of exaction maintain their undertakings? As for Master Pi^s
speech which they call excellent, it would make them excellent too, if they
would follow it. For it is too manifest, that following the Laws of Lust,
Ambition, and the like vices have brought us to this present confusion. Neither
is it so strange that in a time of War against the Parliament dangerous
persons should be more safely secured from maintaning this War, nor that
Members of either House giving cause of suspicion by viewing Works of defense
or otherwise should be committed with the consent or approbation of either
house; not so strange by much, As that five Members of a house, should be
drawn forth from the house (to prison and death as it seems by the charge) by
force and violence. And for Hull, the present good use of New Castle, to admit
Arms and Soldiers for the maintenance of this unnatural War, speaks aloud
to justify Sir John Hothams keeping of Hull by order of Parliament; Neither is
Tonnage or Poundage imposed by Parliament; and is not Tonnage and Poundage paid
to the complainants at New Castle?

But the Parliament is the great Eyesore, and therefore when they could not
destroy it by pulling away five first (and how many fives after no man knows)
nor by an Army at Branford now it must be overthrown by paper-Bullets and by
untruetelling of Twenties. But certainly their Act of numbering fayles, as well
as their virtue of truth, and sincerity. For even in this month of December,
when the Lord Major was in the House of Commons at prayer (whereof a part, is a
part of Common Prayer, by which token he may be known not to be a Brownist,
nor a reviler of Common Prayer) it is certainly reported there were eight score
in the House; and not many less the same week when the house considered the
propositions for peace; And these men cannot but know that forty do make a
House of Commons; so that their own number acknowledges it to be more, then
an house of necessity requires. Yet there are also computed about an hundred
absent in the Army son defense of the Parliament; or in the defense of their
own Counties; in Ireland, or for some special occasions of their own. And
those that are present, and such others as are thus absent, complaining of no
fear it is a work of supererogatory charity, that these Enditers should make,
or feign a fearful complaint for them. True it is, that there are about three
score cast out of the House of Commons for fighting against the House, or some
other great offenses, neither needs any one to be afraid of coming to the
house, but those whom their own guilt makes affray'd of censure and
punishment. Neither are those that are present awed with an Army or Tumults,
but defended and secured by an Army and the goods of the City and Suburbs; and
it might pass for a special piece of craft if these men could make the
Parliament so foolishly credulous as to be afraid of their own security. It
were to be wished, That his Majesty, were as free from cause of fear from his
Army and Cavaliers, who are much wronged by reports, if they have not put
threats upon him, and upon his going from them to his Parliament.

And next to the Parliament, they are angry with the City of London, for being
a wall of defense to the Parliament. And whereas this paper is so often spotted
with the scandal of Anabaptists and Brownists for their power in the
Government or actions of that City, if they believe themselves, it were good
they did make others to believe them also, by naming some particular
Anabaptists and Brownists that exercise this power, as the Parliament has
named the papists which command in the Kings Army.

Neither has the Lord Major with a faction told the houses that that they will
have no Accommodation, or peace; but with the Sheriffs and Aldermen has
advanced and assisted a Petition to His Majesty for peace. True it is they
desire a sound and durable peace, accompanyd with Truth, and piety; neither can
they be much blamed, if they fear pretenses of peace that may cover such
designs of mischief and massacry as lately appeared at Branford.

But it seems the notes were taken in short hand which were sent to this
Writer concerning Sir Sidney Mountague, for if the story had been written in
words at length and the whole matter declared, it might have been known, That
Sir Sidney Mountague besides refusing the Oath (if it must be so called) of
Association, drew forth a Declaration, and vouched the authority of it, for
calling them Traitors that had taken the same. And let these men judge whether
it were any part of the virtue of patience that the house which had entered
entered that Association should endure the word Traitor to be cast upon the face
of it, or whether it were not a more commeudable virtue of curtesy, to dismiss
and separate a person of that opinion from the dangerous and infectious society
of Traitors.

And now follow some mistaken figures of rhetoric which should run on this
manner. These are the men that have sent to the states, to treat with them,
that they permit not Soldiers and Arms to come from their provinces, to make
and maintain War against the Parliament of England. These are the men that have
sent into Scotland, where Murrey is laboring to kindle a fire to consume this
Nation, to cast water upon that fire; and withal to entice our Brethren of
Scotland: now the papists are up in Arms to seek the peace of this Kingdom,
and the safety of Religion agreeable to the Act of pacification. And not only
for that Act, but for their own security it being an unquestionable Truth, That
if Ireland be the breakfast of the papists, and England their Dinner, Scotland
is likely to be their supper. In a word, these are they that have made a
preserving Ordinance, to save the Parliament, Religion, Laws and Liberty,
which were in danger to be devoured by illegal Commissions of Array, as
illegal Sheriffs, Armies of papists, and other ill-affected, persons.

But the words which follow, that an Army was first raised by the Parliament,
are so manifestly untrue that it is strange, how they could leave of the lest
remnant of Conscience to utter-them, and of loyalty to utter them under His
Majesty's Name. It is possible they may have heard of a Bible, and therein of
one David, that like the Parliament was accused of rebelling against the King,
and these were hunted like a Partridge; But that which I would say to them is
according to the speech of that David to Abner: ye are worthy to die because
ye have not kept the King neither his life nor honor. The life of the King
has been exposed to danger, by bringing him into the Battle; and his honor,
by making his Name a cover to notorious falsities. For were not the beginnings
of an Army raised in York? Did not Sir Francis Wortley draw his sword there
and cry, for the King, for the King?
and did not a papist there come forth and say let the sword, try it, before
the Parliament either made Votes, That the King seduced by evil Counsel
intended a War against the Parliament, which Votes were also before the
beginning of the Army of the Earl of Essex? And yet if the Parliament had
raised Forces, that may bear the name of an Army to bring Delinquents to
Justice, who can lay any blame upon the Parliament, or who can thence gather a
reason, why the King may justly raise an Army against the Parliament?

Yet is the raising of this Army, for defense of the Parliament, or of the
power and authority of it over delinquents, more then once in the last leaf
termed a Rebellion. To this, I will fetch an answer, out of Bodin. Bodin having
written much in favor of Bodin de Rep. lib. 3.
Kings though degenerated into Tyrants, and so much that he confesses he was
taxed for it, yet at last, lights on this story and thereupon gave his
sentence. The Earl of Flanders befieged his subjects in Gant, with an Army of
forty thousand men. The Army within the City was but five thousand. Upon this
disadvantage, they humbly sued for pardon. The Earl answered them, they must
come forth with halters about their necks, and then he would tell them his
mind. Hereupon, not having any assuraude of mercy, they issued forth, and
defeated his great Army, with a little one; and the Earl was forced for his own
safty, to hide himself under the Bed of a poor woman, who sent him forth in a
shape far below (his degree. But hereupon this Author inferres; Then did it
appear, That there is nothing morevaliant then a subject brought to despair,
nor any war more just, then that which is necessary. I only add, if the
Parliaments War be necessary, and a necessary War is just, certainly a just
War, cannot justly be called a Rebellion.

FINIS.

