THE COVENANTERS Looking-glass.

Discovering His duty and dignity with sundry Motives and Directions tending to
further our keeping Covenant with God.

ALSO An Epistle containing an exact Relation of all the most principal things
done in the Parliament of England since their first sitting to this present day.

WITH Diverse other material things very useful for all sorts both for the
present and future times.

By Thomas Mocket Mr of Arts and Preacher of the word of God.

ECCLES. 5.4. When thou vowest a Vow unto God, deferr^ not to pay it; for he
has no pleasure in fools.

DEUTERONOMY. 29.9. Keep therefore the words of this Covenant, and do them, that you
may prosper in all that ye do.

(...)

Greg Nazion Orat. 53. LONDON, Printed for C. Meredith at the sign of the
Crane in Paul's Churchyard. 1644.

TO THE HONORABLE THE HOUSE OF COMmons Assembled in the Parliament of England.
(...).
Honorable and Right worthy Patriots:
GIve me leave I beseech you; under your name to present to the World, the
humble and hearty acknowledgement we owe to Almighty God, the Kings Majesty,
the Right Honorable Peers, and you the Knights and Gentlemen, now most
seasonably assembled in Parliament, for the many great and worthy things that
have been done by your means for the public good. See the Remonstrance,
published Dec. 15. 1641.
Who have eased our backs of that illegal burden of Ship Money, Coat,
Conduct-money, and other military charges. Suppressed all Monopolies, Taken away
arbitrary government, the root of these evils. Much quelled evil Councillors,
and other malignant persons, by execution of justice on some, imprisoning
others, and causing others to fly, out of the consciousnesse of their own
guiltiness. Settled a trienniall Parliament in-stead of a trienniall
Visitation, and provided for the continuance of this, A wonder of mercy.
till all our greivances are heard and redressed, and all evils be removed,
which is of unspeakable consequence, because they secure a full operation of
the remedy, and afford a perpetual spring of remedies for the future. Put down
the High Commission Court, which in some respects (through the abuse of some,
and overruling of others, was made too like the Spanish Inquisition, which
suspended, silenced, and outed many of the most able and godly Ministers out of
their livings and freeholds, and so undid many a whole family; a Court, which
indeed at first was erected to suppress Papists and Popery, as the Spanish
Inquisition was to curb the blasphemous Jews; but was now, as that, turned
against pious Protestants; Have put down the Star Chamber; Taken away other
Courts, the forges of misery, oppression and violence; Dismounted the Canons
that were mounted to batter down Religion and the power of godliness together
with the late cursed Oath in them; Damned the Oath ex ossicio, by means whereof
they tortured many consciences with strange quaries and forcing unnatural
self-accusations. Freed Churchwardens from a dangerous Oath. Limited the
immoderate power of the Council Table. Punished and terrified some Ministers
and others that were of scandalous life, or Authors of Innovations in doctrine
and ceremonies. Reduced the Forests by good Laws to their right bounds.
Reformed the encroachments and oppressions of the Stanery Courts. The extortion
of the Clerk of the market. The compulsion of the Subject to receive the order
of Knighthood against his will, or paying sines for refusal. Recalled the
banished Exiles that had undergone the brunt, the chief let in the Prelates way
to Rome. Settled a happy peace betwixt us and our Neighbor Nation, which the
malignant Enemies of both, endeavored to imbroile in civil wars which are
grievous, yea which is worse, of Protestants against Protestants, one servant
against another, and one brother against another, till both were consumed.
Opened the Press for publishing the good and profitable labors of the godly;
And inhibited popish books and pamphlets tending to reconcile us and Rome, or
rather, as the truth is, to reduce us to Rome. Order for weekly lectures.
Order for banishing Romish Priests and Jesuits, the grand Incendiaries in
Church and state; And for securing the Papists, the professed enemies of King
and Kingdom, Church and state. Removed the Bishops from voting in Parliament,
and all Clergy men from temporal offices, which like a false byas in a boule,
wheeled them quite out of the way of preaching. Voted down Deans and Prebends,
which were (many of them) too like the drones which eat up the honey which the
painful Bees should live on. And since by several Acts of both Houses,
abolished the Hyerarchy root and branch; The sole seat of Antichrist as some
learned men do conceive. Ordered the suppression of Innovations in all Churches
and Chapels in and about the worship of God. The removeall and abolishing
superstitious pictures, images, crosses and other Relics and Monuments of
Idolatry and Superstition. The advancement of Gods holy word in all parts or
the Kingdom. Passed other Acts also for the removing and punishing scandalous,
corrupt and malignant Clergymen and blind guides; And sequestring their
Benefices for the maintenance of godly and painful Ministers, in which there
has been an happy progress made already, whereby you have refreshed the bowels
of many of us, and the souls of thousands of the people, blessed be God and
you for it! against Pluralities and Non-residency, For the due sanctification
of the Sabbath, cried down by the Popish and prelaticall party in their
preaching, printing, and practice. You have Given liberty to tender
consciences, burthned with unnecessary and scandalous Ceremonies, Opened a way
for godly Ministers to exercise their ministry, to which God and man has set
them apart, so that many thousands may hear the joyful sound again in their
ears, who were deprived of such blessed silver Trumpets, instead whereof they
had but Rams horns, (too good a comparison for many of them) which many times
sounded as terrible an alarm in their ears, as they sometimes did to them of
Jericho. You have procured from His Royal Majesty a Monthly Fast, published by
His Majesty's Proclamation, in which like the New Moons Fast or Feast of
Trumpets, the silver Trumpets of the word are sounded, and the sacrifice of
prayer and praise are offered up unto God. Your great care for the safety and
peace of the Kingdom, For the relief of now gasping Jreland, For supply for
our Armies, Ordinance for securing Malignants the Papists great friends, and
sequestring their estates that they may not be employed against, but for the
public good.

The oath for discovering of Papists, Pits were dug for the Righteous,
gallowses provided for Mordecai's, because they would not how to Hamaus, dens
of lions for Daniels, because they would not leave praying,; fiery furnaces for
the three children, because they would not worship the golden Image; dungeons
for Ieremy's, because they would preach the truth with boldness. Mr Call Feb.
23. in his Sermon.
a very necessary instrument; You have given a call to our dear brethren of
Scotland, who we hope through Gods blessing, will be a great means of reducing
public enemies to due obedience, or justice, and settling an happy peace with
truth in this and the other Kingdom. Called an Assembly of grave, learned and
godly Divines, in whose good (though slow yet safe) proceedings we much
rejoice. Your endeavors to suppress erroneous opinions tending to
libertanisme, which we humbly desire may be more vigorously prosecuted before
it be too late. The happy concurrence of the Right Noble Peers, with the truly
honorable House of Commons in their Honorable proceedings. Whose
faithfulness to God, their King and Country (when many rotten and treacherous
hearts have deserted the Public Cause, their trust, and consciences) makes you
so much more honorable in the eyes and hearts of all the godly and well
affected in all the 3 Kingdoms, I may say in all Europe, and them more
infamous to all ages. The happy and timely discovery of many grievous snares,
broken by your great vigilance and industry and the prevention of many most
desperate designs against this Kingdom, so that our Isacks are delivered and
the Rams are caught in the bush, and as the wise man says, Pro. 11, 8.
The Righteous is delivered out of the trouble, and the wicked comes in his
stead. And to name no more the renewing of our National Covenant, to which
add also, our late solemn league and Covenant, for which, we hope, the
present and future generations will have cause to bless God for you and our
Renowned Brethren of Scotland (so prudently made and commended to us by your
Honorable House) to bring back again all Israel to worship the Lord their God
in Jerusalem, who were too many of them making a Captain and turning back again
into mystical Egypt, which Covenant gave the rise to this ensuing plain,
unpollished discourse This was published formerly with the Epistle, and now at
the request of some, some what altered in the Epistle chiefly. Homo sum, errare
possum, ^ereticu^esse nolo.
(fitted and intended only for a country Auditory, where it is a commendation
to speak in the most plain and vulgar terms) which in all humility I present
unto you (worthy Patriots) not as Patrons, for if it be the truth of God, as I
trust it is, he is the Patron of it and will defend it: if any error be found
in it, I disclaim it, and think the work it self too slenderly performed, for
so judicious persons as you are known to be, but only, as his handful of water
to a great Artaxerxes.
Prince, the widows mite, a little goats hair, as a testimony of my humble
observance and thankful acknowledgement of the unwearied labors, continual
care and zealous endeavors of the Noble Peers and your selves (who still
continue faithful and cordial with this present Parliament) for the public
good, as also for the particular favor of diverse worthy Members of your House
toward my self.

And surely if you go on with all good speed to procure and add these things
to all the rest, which are humbly desired, viz. To provide for the comfortable
subsistence of those godly, painful orthodox Ministers, who lie under much
discouragement and distraction through a miserable incompetency. And Provide,
That Priests and Jesuits be quite banished the Land. And that Church Papists
(the most dangerous enemies and underminers of Church and state) may be
discovered by the late Oath in your ordinances for Sequestrations. And also all
other suspected persons, And that the Laws be duly executed upon Papists. That
Notorious offenders in Church and Commonwealth whatsoever they be, especially
wicked Counselors and desperate opposites to the Parliament, (the Achans that
hinder the endeavors of Joshua and I srael, the great Remora to the public
undertakings, and the great cloud that hides the face of God from us) be
speedily tried, censured and punished according to the quality of their
crimes; for what success can be expected so long as the Achans live? That
Idolatry and Superstition, especially the abominable Mass be totally rooted
out of this Kingdom, as you have in part done, blessed be God: Rome, Iezabel
mystical, Revel. 2.20. and 18.5.
For what peace so long as the whoredoms of Jozabell remain in this Land. That
evil Counselors, the raisers and fomenters of the great troubles and
distempers of the Kingdom, and of the absonce of His Royal Majesty from His
Parliament, etc. (which all good Subjects are greatly greived to see) to be
removed from His Royal Person with the first opportunity. That distressed
Ireland, whose condition is very much to be lamented, especially since the late
horrid Cessation, be speedily releived with an ample supply, where, as here,
the blood of many thousand sonles cry to Heaven for vengeance, and to you for
help against the mighty. That the peace of the Kingdom, that the power and
privileges of Parliament, the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subject be
firmly settled. That considerable places be fully secured by approved men, and
so trading quickened, to the relief of many thousands that now languish greatly
under want. That none may be put into the Ministry or admitted to places in
the Ministry, or in the Militia of the Kingdom, or any other places of trust,
but such as do willingly take the late solemn League and Covenant, though some
have made no conscience of violating that solemn obligation. That the blessed
work of Reformation, with all good spedd, go on and be perfected. That the
Sacrament by some good provision may be kept from being polluted by unworthy
persons, and all Ignorant persons be for their souls good compelled to learn
the grounds of the true Protestant Religion. And that henceforth one pattern
containing all the fundamentals of true Christian Faith and Obedience were
made, which would be of manifest and good use. That your grave wisdom with the
advice of the learned and godly Divines Assembled, would be pleased with all
convenient speed to provide, that the people might have a sure rule to walk by
in their worship of God, according to the word of God, that their minds may be
settled and consciences quieted to a cheerful obedience, which would be a great
inducement to many to join with us, who otherwise, I fear, will hardly ever
be persuaded, That the residue of dumb, scandalous and Malignant Clergy men may
be speedily and thoroughly proceeded against, and godly and learned orthodox men
placed in their rooms. And that your wisdom would think of some good way for
the admitting of godly and hopeful young men (who have prepared themselves and
are willing) into the Ministry. That the laws and Ordinances against
swearing, drinkennesse, whoredom and profanation of the Lords day, (crying
sins, with which the land is filled, defiled, and under which it mourns) be
duly and strictly put in execution, by appointing and inabling special
Officers thereunto. That you with the reverend Assembly of Divines would with
all speed hasten the work of Church Reformation in point of Government and
Discipline, as well as Doctrine and worship, That you would go on vigorously in
the prosecution of your late Solemn League and Covenant and the Ordinance of
both Kingdoms, published January 20 1643 and particularly for the thorough
suppression and rooting out of all Sects, Schisms and erroneous doctrines,
destructive to sound doctrine and the power of godliness, and tending to
libertinisme and disobedience to God and man. That our Armies may be quickened
to be more active and follow opportunities which may be of unspeakable
consequence: That reproachers and scorners of godliness and conscience by
nicknames may be questionable and severely punished by a law: That you would
be exceeding cautious of confiding in them about Treaties, who keep no Faith.
That Arminianisme and Socinianisme, the enemies to free grace, and Romes
Decoy-ducks to bring in Popery be timely and thoroughly suppressed. That
seandalous and Popish Magistrates that regard not the Execution of Justice, be
removed, and approved just men, fearing God and hating coveteousnesse and
unrighteousness, be placed in their rooms in all places. That Contemners of
your former good Orders be severely punished* Wakes and unnecessiry Alehouses
and Play Houses the very nurcerics of vice and randevouz for all profane
wretches, be suppressed. That the joint consent and happy concurrence of the
Noble Peers with your House, may be still continued. Especially that they and
you would use all possiole means and speed, that His Royal Majesty may have
a right understanding of your just desires and proceedings, and would with the
Prince be graciously pleased to return to His Parliament.

All which I mention not to show you what to do, impute not such folly to your
humble servant, but in all humility to spread before your wisdoms, what is by
many thousands heartily desired and humbly craved, according as in your pious
and deep wisdom, shall seem most agreeable to the rules of piety, true Christian
prudence and polity, which surely will complete the blessed work of Reformation
begun, make this a most slourishing Church and State, amiable to our God,
glorious to our friends, terrible to our enemies, and make you and your
Posterities renowned while this is a Nation.

And because your difficulties be very many and great, therefore hear a word
of encouragement from him who greatly honors you and your Assembly, and whose
duty it is ex efficio speciali, to teach, instruct, exhort, reprove, etc. The
cause you are about is eminently good and of great importance, God and all good
men are on your side, and though your adversaries be many, mighty and politic,
yet God, your Master whose work you are about, is stronger and wiser then they
all, and one Jacob can do more with God for you, then 400. Edowites can do
against you. And though our enemies should prevail yet ten times See my View
of the Solemn League, p 5. etc.
more yet cast not off your confidence in God, but remember that when we are
lowest, then are we nearest deliverance, and when our enemies are highest then
are they nearest destruction. And Honored Worthies you have found God going
along with you, so scattering your enemies, and furthering his work, even by
their wicked plots and oppositions, that you should now greatly dishonor God
and the cause, if you should suffer any thing to discourage you, or make you
fear the perfecting of the long and much desired work of Reformation in its
due time, only if Religion and the worship of God, and the discipline of Jesus
Christ be first settled, then other evils how great soever will vanish away,
till then it cannot certainly be expected.

It is true, it is not possible it should be done in a trice, the greatness
and exactness of the work, the great deal of rubbish in the house of God,
both wretched persons and things; and the great oppositions which great and
good works meet with, must of necessity make the work long. Wherefore, Noble
Senators, arm your selves with patience and resolution, always look as upon
the work with one eye, so at Gods glory and the public good and upon Gods
power, wisdom, goodness, promise, and faithfulness with the other, regard
not the person and face of any, but Justice, Gods glory and the Public good,
and doubt not of a desired issue in due time, which is the humble and hearty
desire of him who is resolved, to his utmost power, and to the last breath (God
inabling) by all means lawful to maintain and defend the true reformed
Protestant Religion, against all Popery and Popish Innovations, the Kings
Majesty's Person and Royal Posterity and Legal Authority, the power and
Privileges of Parliament, together with their persons in all their just and
good proceedings, the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subjects, etc. And
endeavor the Reformation of Religion, etc. according to our late solemn league
and Covenant against the enemies of God, the King and State, and shall till
death remain,

Your daily Orator at the Throne of Grace, THO. MOCKET.

THE National Covenant.
DEUTERONOMY. 29.9. Keep therefore the words of this Covenant, and do them, that ye
may prosper in all that ye do.


THese words of Moses from God, to the people of Israel, contain a further
reason of the exhortation delivered in the former Chapter, of performing
Obedience to Gods Commandments; which Reason or Argument is twofold; First,
From the consideration of Gods great and wonderful mercies and benefits
vouchsafed unto them, in their deliverance out of Egypt, ver. 2.3.4. In their
Journey in the Wilderness, v. 5, 6. and in the confines of the promised Land,
v. 7, 8. Secondly, from their Faith given, or promise of Obedience made unto
God, intimated in the word, Covenant, in this verse: Upon these two Grounds,
Gods goodness to them, and their promise to him, Moses does in this Chapter
press them to Obedience in these words*

Keep therefore the words of this Covenant, and do them,

The words of this Covenant, is the Articles and Conditions which the people
were, by virtue of this Covenant, bound to perform unto God. This Covenant,
that is, That Covenant which the people of Israel, by Gods appointment, made
with God in the Land of Moab, verse. 1. which is there said to be another
Covenant, beside, or differing from that which he made with them in Horeb, on
Mount Sinai, where the Covenant was given, Exodus 20. not in substance (for so
it is the same with that) but in respect of the persons with whom, even all
those of Israel who were then unborn or unfit to enter into Covenant with God,
v. 14, 15. And 2. In respect of the place, this being near the border of
Canaan, in the Country on the outside of Jordan. And thirdly, In respect of
the manner of revealing Christ, who is in this more clearly revealed then on
Mount Sinai.

The Propositions, or Points of Doctrine naturally arising from these words,
are two, viz.

That a Covenant, once made, must be faithfully observed. Or, Covenanters must
keep touch with God. 2. That this is the way to prosper: Or, Obedience is the
way to true Prosperity.
The former only is that which here I intend to insist upon, and shall include
the other in the motives to this point: In handling of which, the Rules of
Method do require that I do show you, before I come to Application,

1. What a Covenant is, and the kinds of it. 2. What it is to keep Covenant
with God. 3. How it must be observed. 4. The proof and grounds of this Duty.
For the first. A Covenant (to speak of it to the present purpose) is a solemn
promise, whereby a man does engage himself to God, to perform all that
Obedience unto God required in his Word, by strength from Jesus Christ.

1. I call it a promise, Because the party Covenanting, does promise unto God
Obedience.

2. I call it a solemn promise, Because it is ordinarily made with some outward
solemnity: Of this outward solemnity (which is for the greater ratification of
it) we find diverse forms in the sacred Scripture; Sometimes by Sacrifice, as a
Seal of the Covenant with God, so Psalm. 50.5. Sometimes with subscribing of
hands, as Isai. 44.5. Sometimes by sealing it also, as Nehem. 9.38. Sometimes
by an Oath, as in this Chapter, verse. 12. and 2 Chronicles. 15.12.15. Sometimes with
an Oath and a Curse, so Nehem. 10.29. All forms bind firmly, only some in a
greater degree, and lay a stronger tie upon the soul, then some others do, So
that to break either, must be dishonest and damnable.

3. It was added, whereby a man does engage himself to God, for it lays a
strong band and engagement on the soul, you have the phrase, Jere. 30.21. Who
is this that engaged his heart to approach unto me, says the Lord.

4. To perform unto God ( viz. in respect of sincere endeavor) all the
obedience which God in his Word requires of him; for otherwise, it is as good
as nothing, to bind our selves to obey God in somethings, and in othersome, to
take liberty to our selves, to transgress at our pleasure, It is universal
obedience that God requires, Deuteronomy. 5.33.

5. Lastly, It was added in the description, By strength from Christ, or in the
name of Christ, etc. All our ability is from him, and without him we can do
nothing, that is, truly good and acceptable unto God, John 15.5.

Now there is a double Covenant, Personal, and National, Personal, is that
which is presupposed and sealed in Baptism, and renewed in the Lords Supper. The
Articles whereof, are these two; 1. Faith in God through our Lord Jesus Christ;
And 2. Obedience to his Commandments (the sum of which, is contained in the
Decalogue, or ten Commandments) as a fruit of that our Faith in God. National
is, when a whole Nation, at least the generality, do thus engage themselves to
the Lord, and such is the Protestation lately taken. Thus much of the first
thing propounded, now of

The second, What it is to keep Covenant, and wherein it consists.

To keep Covenant with God, is to embrace and observe his Commandments, and
that must be done inwardly and outwardly, and so by the whole Man.

Inwardly, the Covenant is laid hold on, and observed.

1. In the mind, by knowing, and believing them.

First, By knowing the mind and will of God, and what he requires of us in his
Word, which is the Book of the Covenant, Exodus 24.7. containing the Articles or
Conditions of the Covenant on both sides, what we must expect from God, and
what we must perform unto him, which are propounded by Moses the Mediator, and
assented to by the people, Exodus 19. and a Copy of them fair Written delivered
to the people, Exodus 20.

Secondly, By Faith believing his Word, resting on his promises; For though
Faith (being an affiance or fiduciall resting on the promise of life) be an act
of the will and heart, as well as of the mind; yet I place it here, because it
has its original the assent, in the mind, understanding and giving assent to
the promise, as true and good.

2. In the memory it consists, by retaining in mind, what the Lord requires of
us, and what we must perform unto him; for we cannot keep our Covenant with
God, unless we both know, remember, and bear in mind, the Articles and
Conditions which we are to observe.

3. In our wills by embracing of his Covenant; that is, freely, willingly, and
heartily, making choice of God to be our God in Christ, our Father, and
Sovereign Lord; and embracing these Conditions, upon which he is pleased to
accept of us, to be his peculiar people; and which we engage our selves to
observe, and to our power, perform unto him, as most holy, just, and good, not
only good and right in themselves, but good to us also, and all those that in
conscience do observe them, Romans 7.12.

4. In our affections, we lay hold on the Covenant, and keep it, when we do not
only assent to the conditions of the Covenant, embrace them, and resolve to
observe them to our power, but do it out of love to the Commandment, joying and
rejoicing in this Covenant with the Prophet, Jer. 15.16. delighting in it,
fearing to break it, caring to observe it according to our promise and bounden
duty. Thus we must embrace and keep the Covenant in our inward man, viz. In the
mind, by knowing and believing it; in our memory, by retaining it, and
meditating on it; in our wills, by embracing the conditions of it, freely and
willingly, as just and good; and in our affections, by loving, joying,
delighting in it, etc.

Outwardly also, By obeying his Commandments by a hearty endeavor, in the
whole course of our lives to observe and do them, Nebem. 10.29. They clave to
their brethren, their Nobles (as if you should say, The Parliament Men) -- to
walk in Gods Law -- and to observe and do all the Commandments of the Lord, and
his Judgments and his Statutes. This is the second.

Thirdly, How we must keep Covenant with God; for the manner and extent of our
Obedience, viz. 1. Willingly and heartily, do every duty, every service we do
unto God from the heart, with a ready mind, as unto the Lord, as Josiah did,
who made a Covenant before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his
Commandments, and his Testimonies, and his Statutes, with all his heart, and
with all his soul, 2 Chronicles. 34 31. It is certain, That in every good action
there is tantum bonitatis, quantum voluntatis, so much goodness as there is
willingness and hearty affection; therefore it is, that in every service God
calls for the heart, Prove. 23.26. My son, give me thine heart, without which,
all our services are but hypocritical, and the most plentiful expressions of
Obedience little regarded by the Almighty: God is a spirit, and therefore looks
on the spirits of men, and will be worshipped in spirit and truth, Job. 4.24.

2. Universally, In all things, as well in one thing, as in another; we may not
observe some things, and omit others at our pleasure, for any worldly profits,
preferment, or other respect whatsoever. Deuteronomy. 5.32, 33. Ye shall observe to do
as the Lord your God has commanded you, You shall not turn aside, to the right
hand or to the left, Ye shall walk in all the ways which the Lord your God
has commanded you, that ye may live. etc.

3. Constantly, Always: To this we are exhorted, encouraged, commanded, Rev.
2.10. Be thou faithful to the death, and I will give thee a Crown of life.
Gal. 6.9. Be not weary of well-doing; to begin well, and afterward to fall off
again, is fearful; what is it else but to return with the dog to his vomit,
and with the Swine to the wallowing in the mire: better for such a man that he
had never known the way of righteousness, then after he has known it, to turn
from the holy Commandment delivered unto him. 2 Pet. 2.21, 22. Better it is
that thou should not vow (he there speaks of things Arbitrary, and not such
as are commanded and necessary) then that thou should vow, and not pay it.
This for the Manner. Now

Fourthly, come we to the Grounds and Reasons why we must, having once entered
into Covenant with God, be careful constantly to observe and keep it: And they
are these, and the like:

1. The Command of God, which is very clear and full in the Text; See also Yer.
11.6. Hear ye the words of this Covenant, and do them. Deuteronomy. 4.23 Says Moses
to Israel from God, Take heed to your selves, lest ye forget the Covenant of
the Lord your God, which he has made with you. Psalm. 50.15. Pay thy vows unto
the most high. Eccles. 5.4. When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay
it, for he has no pleasure in fools; pay that which thou have vowed. In these
two last places it is spoken chiefly, if not only, of vows made of things
voluntary and Arbitrary, that was in the power of him that voweth, before he
vowed, to vow or not vow them unto the Lord; yet being once vowed, the vow must
be kept: And if this bind in things Arbitrary, how much more in things
necessary, and otherwise commanded? Also full to this purpose is that, Deuteronomy,
4.6.40. and 5.1, 2.32, 33 and 6.1. and in very many other places.

Now we all ought to make conscience of the command of God, and carefully to
observe and do it, in respect of our relation unto him, and dependence upon
him, both essendo and operando, in our being, actions, and well being; which is
wholly on him: He gave us a Being, when we had none; continues that being, and
the comforts of it, we do enjoy; and redeemed us, when we were worse then
nothing, undone and lost for ever.

2. We should keep Covenant with God, because of that solemn Quia jam vovisti,
jam te ad strinxisti, a iud tibi facere non licet. Aug. in Ep. ad Arm^n.
bond and tie that lies upon our souls, whereby we have engaged our selves to
God, to be his, and only his for ever, to fear him and serve him for ever,
Numb. 30.2. If a man vow a vow unto the Lord, or swear an oath to bind his
soul with aboud, every oath, every vow binds the soul, lays a strong bond or
engagement on it. If it be but a man's Covenant, no man may disannull it, says
the Apostle, Gal. 3.15. viz. By reason of the strong bond or tie it lays on
the soul: How much greater, think you, is the tie and engagement which the
Covenant of God lays on the soul?

3. We must keep Covenant with God, that we may be like unto God, as we are
exhorted to be, Ephesians. 5.1. as in all other things, so in this we must strive
to imitate and follow God, to be like unto him: Now concerning God we read,
That he is faithful in keeping Covenant with us, Deuteronomy. 7.9 The Lord thy God is
the faithful God, that keeps Covenant and mercy with them that love him, and
keep his Commandments. Psalm, 111.5. He is ever mindful of his Covenant; as he
promises, Hos. 2.19, 20. I will betroth thee unto me for ever, etc. Therefore
since God is faithful in keeping Covenant with us, we must be faithful in
keeping Covenant with God, that we may be (as our duty is) like unto our
heavenly Father, and thereby may approve our selves to be the children of God.

4. For this end we enter into Covenant with God at Baptism, renew it at the
Lords Supper, and some other times, that we might keep his Statues, Judgments,
and Commandments. God requires this, and we use it chiefly, as a help to
further us in our Obedience to God: we are all naturally very backward, and apt
to take any occasion to neglect our duty of obedience to God, and therefore do
promise and bind our selves, thereby to help and further us in our duty, as we
use to bind men, to bring them into bond, who are apt to break promise: If we
be to deal with an unfaithful person that is like to play fast and loose, to
deny his promise, and fly from his word, we use to get him into bonds, and
then we think all is sure enough.

5. Breach of Covenant God accounts a great sin, and will severely punish it,
therefore we should keep Covenant with God.

1. He accounts breach of Covenant a great sin, though it be of covenant only
betwixt man and man, and reckons it among the great sins of the Gentiles,
That they were Covenant-breakers, Romans 1.31. Psalm. 55.20. 2 Timothy 3.3. what is
it then to break Covenant with God?

2. And as God accounts it a great sin, so he will severely punish it. So he
threatened, Genesis 17.14. The uncircumcised man child, whose flesh in his
forehead is not circumcised, that soul shall be cut off from his people: mark
the reason, He has broken my Covenant, says God. Levit. 26.15, 16, 17. Says
God, If ye shall despise my Statutes -- so that ye will not do all my
Commandments, but that ye break my Covenant, I will even appoint over you
terror, consumption, and the burning Ague -- And I will set my face against
you, and ye shall he slain by your enemies -- Ezekiel. 17.15, 16. says God of
Zedekiah, Shall he prosper? Shall he escape that does such things? Or shall he
break the Covenant, and be delivered? As I live, says the Lord God, Surely in
the place where the King dwells that made him king, whose Oath he despised,
and whose Covenant be beak, even with him, in the midst of Babylon shall he
die: A grievous curse is threatened against this sin. Jer. 11.2, 3. Hear ye the
words of this Covenant -- Thus says the Lord God of Israel, Cursed be the man
that obeys not the words of this Covenant; yea, many curses, Deuteronomy. 29.20,
21-25. The Lord will not spare him, but then the anger of the Lord, and his
jealousy shall smoke against that man; and all the curses that are written in
this book, shall lie upon him, and the Lord shall blot out his name from under
heaven; and the Lord shall separate him to evil, out of all the Tribes of
Israel, according to all the curses of the Covenant that are written in this
book of the Law -- Mark the grand reason of all this fierce anger of the Lord
against such, verse. 25. Because they have forsaken the Covenant of the Lord God
of their fathers.

For breaking of Covenant, God caused Achan and all his to be stoned and burnt
in the sire, Josh. 7.11.15. and all Israel suffere I with him; they could not
stand before their enemies, but were routed and smitten before th m. For this
very thing, Saul's breaking the Covenant made with the Gibionites, though long
before his time, God punished all Israel with three years famine; and in the
end, with the death of seven of Says sons, 2 Samuel 21. therefore also God rent
the Kingdom from Solomon, and gave ten Tribes to his servant Jeroboam, 1 King.
11 11.

All these things give weight to this duty, and the point in hand. Thus we have
seen it opened what a Covenant is, what it is to keep it, and how: Also the
point or duty clearly proved, That a Covenant once made may not be broken, but
must be carefully kept. Thus of a Covenant in general:

Now (with the good leave of the great Assembly) I will here take occasion to
speak something concerning our National Covenant, Vow, or Protestation in
particular: And here I will first set down the Protestation* prudently
commended to us by the Honorable House, in these words;

I A. B. Do in the presence of Almighty God, promise, vow, and protest, to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may, with my life, power, and estate,
the true reformed Protestant Religion expressed in the Doctrine of the Church
of England* against all Popery and popish Innovations within this Realm
contrary to the same Doctrine; And according to the duty of my Allegiance, His
Majesty's Royal Person, Honor, and Estate: As also the Power and Privileges
of Parliaments; the lawful Rights and Liberties of the Subjects, and every
person that makes this Protestation, in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful
pursuance of the same. And to my power, and as far as lawfully I may, I will
oppose, and by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to condign
punishment all such as shall either by force, practice, counsels, plots,
conspiracies, or otherwise, do any thing to the contrary, of any thing in this
present Protestation contained. And further that I shall in all just and
honorable ways endeavor to preserve the union and peace betwixt the three
Kingdoms of England, Scotland, and Ireland; And neither for hope fear, nor
other respect, shall relinquish this Promise, Vow and Protestation. Touching
this National Covenant or Protestation, we may here observe and consider,

1. What we here promise, and vow to maintain, and so what we here renounce.

2. What it is to maintain and defend the true Protestant Religion.

3. Why and for what ends, we entered into this Protestation.

4. How far this promise and Protestation does bind us.

First, What we here promise, vow and protest, viz. diverse things, which I
conceive are in number 7. And the

First, is to maintain and defend with our lives, power and estate. The true
Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the Church of
England, against all Popery and Popish Innovations, within this Realm,
contrary to the same Doctrine. I will not set down the principal Doctrines of
the true reformed Protestant Religion, and the Anti. See M Ley his book
entitled, A comparison betwixt the late Oath, etc.
Protestant or Popish Doctrines and Innovations, which we here protest against.

I will only set down some Arguments and Reasons, why we should with our
lives, power and estates, maintain and defend the true reformed Protestant
Religion in the general, and consequently, every particular branch and part of
it against all Popery and Popish Innovations, and every part and parcel of
Popery, and they are these:

1. Because God has commanded it, and every one ought to make conscience of
the commands of God, and to his uttermost power observe and keep them, JVDE v.
3. It was needful for me to write unto you, and exhort you, that ye should
earnestly contend for the faith, viz. the Doctrine of faith, which was once
delivered to the Saints: Not only contend, but contend earnestly, with all
vehemence and intention of spirit, with all our might. To this purpose also is
that of the Apostle to Timothy, 2 Timothy 1.13. Hold fast the form of sound words
which thou have heard of me, and 1 Cor. 16.13. Stand fast in the faith, that
is, both in the doctrine and grace of faith. And no less is pressed on us,
Levit. 18.4, 5. Deuteronomy. 4.40. and 5.32, 33. and 6.3, 17. and in very many other
places. Ye shall keep my statutes, my iudgemonts, my ordinances. and
commandments. And if we cannot without drawing guilt on our souls break the
lawful, just and good commands of superiors, how much lesss may we break the
righteous laws of God.

2. Our eternal salvation is built upon this. There is no other Religion, no
other way or means in the world by which we can be saved, Acts 4.12. 1 Cor.
15.^. By which also ye are saved if ye keep in memory (or hold fast) what I
preached unto you. If we deny, renounce, or forsake this, never look to go to
Heaven, never hope to see the face of God with joy.

3. Gods glory is greatly promoted and advanced hereby, as by the deny all of
the true faith or Religion, he is greatly dishonored, it confirms others in
their idolatrous, false or superstitious ways, and opens the mouths of the
adversaries and wicked men to speak evil of, and blaspheme the truth and good
ways of God.

4. The true reformed Protestant Religion is the badge of the true Christian,
and true servants of God, their Livery and Cognizance whereby they are
distinguished from all I dolaters, Pagans, Mahumetans, Papists and Jews that
still cleave to the Mosaicall Rights, long since abolished by Christ: Yea, by
the sincere embracing and profession hereof, the true Christians and servants
of God are distinguished from all hypocrites.

5. The Gospel (upon which the true reformed Protestant Religion, which we
profess, and is established as the public doctrine of this Church of England,
is undoubtedly built) was confirmed by many miracles from Heaven, and truly
divine. Look throughout the whole Book of God, and see how many divine
Ratifications there have been of the Gospel, and consequently of the true
Religion, which we do now publicly, through Gods great mercy, profess: It is
the same with that of the Apostles and people of God in those first primitive
times, and which our blessed Savior himself taught, professed and sealed with
his blood, and this should be a great inducement to us to embrace, maintain and
defend it to the death.

6. This has been recommended to us by the blood of all the Martyrs, of our
blessed Savior himself, of his Apostles and Disciples, they all suffered for
this, they loved not their lives unto the death, they willingly suffered the
loss of all for and in the defense of it, and sealed it with their blood,
stuck to it to the death, and so recommended it to us as a most precious
jewel and rich treasure, much better then life it self, and surely this
should much animate us to stick close to our Religion, the true Reformed
Protestant Religion to the death, seeing we have so many thousands, yea hundred
thousands that have dyed in the defense and cause of it.

7. This has hitherto and will ever preserve us. As it is our Religion for
which we are maligned, hated and plotted against by the Papists and other
Adrersaries of the truth; so it is that (or rather God, because of that) that
has hitherto preserved us in spite of all the Devils in Hell, and wicked men
on earth, and all their hellbred desperate plots and malignant designs against
it and us, that we have been and still are preserved, to the admiration even of
the enemies themselves. And this will ever preserve and protect us if we stick
close unto it, we have Gods word for it, Rev. 3.10. Because thou have kept the
word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which
shall come upon all the earth, to try them that dwell upon the earth. And if we
deny or forsake this, never look to prosper, the promises even of temporal
bleslings are made on this condition, that we stick close to it. See Deutr.
5.32, 33. and 6.17. and Chap. 28. Rev. 1.3.

So that if either we regard the command of God, or the glory of God, or our
own temporal or eternal good of soul or body, we must maintain the true
Reformed Protestant Religion against all Popery and Popish Innovations, we must
stick close to it, and maintain our Religion, unless we will lose soul,
body, our estates, and all, at least the true comfort of all.

And what do we protest against? is it not Popery and Antichristianisme, a
doctrine containing many positions blasphemous against God and Jesus Christ,
and destructive to all Christian Magistrates, Kingdoms and Commonwealths; a
Doctrine (to use the words of learned Master Bolton in his Sermon preached at
Paul's Cross) most false and accursed from Heaven, and is ever attended with
this inseparable curse, that it will plague the Kingdom that nourishes it,
and pay it home at length with a witness, except some right, round and
resolute course be taken in the mean time to root it out as in conscience,
policy, reason and Religion it ought to be, which if once effected, would cut
the thread of the Papists hopes for ever, making a party or faction here, cut
the throat of all plots against the Kings person, crush the Popes heart for any
probability or possibility of ever reestablishing, or erecting his accursed
tyranny in this Island again, and preventing such most bloody, barbarous, and
unheard of usage (or butchery rather) as there has been of late, and still is
in Ireland.

Secondly, We promise, vow and protest with our lives, power and estates, to
maintain and defend (as we are by our Allegiance bound) his Majesty's Royal
Person, Honor and Estate, Romans 13.1, 2. And there is great reason for it. Of
each severally.

1. His Royal Person; because as the Jews said of Josiah, he is the breath of
our nostrils, under whose shadow we shall be preserved alive, Lam 4.20. We are
all bound by the sixth Commandment to preserve, as our own person, so the
person of our Neighbor, though our inferior, much more his who is our
Sovereign, and the Lords anointed, who is worth ten thousand of us, as the
people said of King David, 2 Samuel 18.3. (...) the chief pillar of the
Commonwealth.

2. His Honor, dignity and Majesty, that it may have it is due respect, esteem
and reverence which belongs to it, 1 Pet. 2.17. Fear God, honor the King, and
that both inwardly reverencing him in the heart, Eccles. 10.20. and outwardly
in speech, gesture and action, as Nathan and Bathsheba did Solomon, 1 King.
1.23, 31. We ought by the sixth Commandment to maintain the good esteem and
dignity of our Neighbor by all good and lawful means, much more the Kings.

3. His Estate, i.e. his just and lawful revenue or maintenance. The Apostle
says, 1 Timothy 5.17. that they that rule well are worthy of double honor, i.e.
honor of maintenance as well as of esteem and reverence, much more he who is
custos utriusque tabulae, the Father of the Commonwealth, and Sovereign
Patron of the public good, whose care is for the whole Kingdom. So Romans
13.6, 7. For this cause pay you tribute also, for they are Gods Ministers,
attending continually upon this very thing, Render therefore to all their due,
tribute, etc.

Thirdly, We promise, vow and protest, with our lives, power and estates, to
maintain and defend the power and Privileges of Parliament. What these are we
may in part see in their own Declaration published Jan. 17th. and some others
of theirs published since.

And there is great reason why we should maintain them in all their just
Rights and Privileges.

1. Because these are the most happy Constitutions, and most effectual for the
public good that this or any Kingdom can have. In his 3d speech in Parl.
1641. Ian. 25. A Princely resolution. Earl of Strafford in his last speech on
the Scaffold.
And this his Royal Majesty himself has most Princely professed, That often
Parliaments are the fittest means to keep correspondency between his Majesty
and his people, and that He will always maintain their Privileges as his
own Prerogative, and their persons as the persons of his dearest children:
Yea, this was acknowledged and professed by the Earl of Strafford a little
before his death. I did always think the Parliaments of England were the
happiest Constitutions that any Kingdom or any Nation lived under, and under
God the means of making King and People happy. Parliaments are (as one says
truly) the glory, safety and sinews of our Nation, the privileges whereof, if
once impeached, farewell all that is glorious in free Subjects: These have been
secunda Tabula post naufragium, the only means to save a sinking state, the
refuge of the oppressed: The want and breach of which was a maine cause of all
our miseries of late years, and is now in a manner the only means of recovery.

2. In these our welfare, Laws and Liberties, and the comfortable enioyment of
all we have is involved, we stand or fall with them, if they be broken and
destroyed, we all extremely suffer and perish with them, if they be kept and
preserved we prosper and flourish; therefore great reason we should endeavor
what in us lies to defend and maintain the power and Privileges of
Parliament.

3. They are persons chosen and entrusted by our selves, to hear our cries,
remove our grievances, supply our wants, settle our Religion and peace against
the plots and doings of all public and private enemies of Church and State,
or our selves; they bear the burden for us, spend their time and strength,
employ their gifts and engage their estates, lives and all for us, and therefore
we are all deeply engaged to defend and maintain them, and all their just and
honorable actions, and stick unto them, to stand or fall with them: therefore
it is that very many thousands from most of the Counties in this Kingdom and
Principality of Wales, do in their Petitions offer Themselves, their Persons,
Lives and Estates, to defend and maintain, as the Kings Majesty, so his
Parliament in all their just proceedings for the public good.

Thus we see there is great Reason, why we should with our lives, power and
estates, by all lawful ways and means, maintain and defend the true Reformed
Protestant Religion, the Kings Majesty's royal Person, Honor and Estate, and
the Parliament.

Those three cannot be separated without utter ruin or extreme danger to all
three, The Declaration of Parliament, Jan. 17. 1641.
Therefore whosoever goes about to separate and divide these, the true
Protestant Religion, King and Parliament, or does give any council, or
endeavor to set or maintain division or dislike between the King and the
Parliament, is by both Houses of Parliament, declared a public enemy of the
State and peace of this Kingdom, and shall be enquired of, and proceeded
against accordingly.

The Rebels in Ireland did most shamefully and impudently pretend, and still
do in their Protestations and their Oath also, to defend and maintain the
King and his Privileges and Prerogative, and yet notwithstanding their deep
vows and solemn oaths they do clean contrary. Can they possibly be thought
to be and stand for the King, that do most barbarously destroy, abuse and
spoil his best Subjects, fire his Towns, take his Castles, Forts and Holds?
You may be assured that whatsoever the Papist and their adherents and abettours
here, do or may pretend, they have the same spirit and principles, and will do
as their brethren and confederates in Ireland have done, if, and so soon as
they have power and opportunity.

It is a legal principle, That the King is the head and the Parliament the
representative body of the Kingdom so that he that goes about to divide these,
does as he that cuts off the head from the body natural, or destroys the body
natural, and yet says he loves the head, seeks to advance and honor the
head.

I must therefore here say as our Savior in another case, These whom God has
joined together let no man put asunder. It was the policy and advice of a
Machivilian to subdue an enemy, Divide and regna, divide them and you may
easily overcome them and rule over them. A Faggot or bundle of sticks while
tied together, there is no breaking of them, but take them a sunder and then
you may easily break them all, one after another: So here while these 3.
concur together, we need not fear all the adversaries in the world, the
Pope, Spaniard, French, Papists, etc. but if these be divided by the cursed
plots of the enemies, look for nothing but ruin or extreme dangers of ruin.
And therefore it has been and is the cursed endeavor of our Adversaries to
divide betwixt these, between us and our Religion, and between the King and
the Parliament, and betwixt the Parliamentary houses themselves to oppose one
the other, and so betwixt the King and his faithful and most loyal people and
Subjects. But let it ever be our endeavor to join and keep these together,
and the blessing of him who is the God of peace and unity will rest upon us.

Magna Charta, Petition of Right, and the Statutes therein specified Also his
Royal Majesty both bin pleased diverse times in his Declaratio^s graciously to
promise all his good Subjects, that he will rule according to the established
laws of the Land, a most Princely profession.
Fourthly, we vow and protest to defend and maintain the lawful Rights and
Liberties of the Subjects: such are these, That no man may break open another
man's house, chamber door, study, trunkes, chests, imprison or arrest his
person, or ceaze on any of his goods, but by authority of Law, That no tallage
or aid shall be laid, had, or levied by the King or his Heirs in the Realm
without the good will and assent in Parliament: That no person shall be
compelled to make any Lones to the King against his will, That none shall be
charged by any charge or imposition, called a Benevolence, without consent in
Parliament, and such like.

And there is reason for it; for these are the glory of freeborn Subjects,
and that which does difference us from slaves and vassals; take away our
Liberties and bring in an Arbitrary power, that the Rulers will and pleasure
must stand for a Law, and then wherein do we differ from the veriest slaves in
the world; it therefore concerns us to defend and maintain our lawful Rights
and Liberties, even nature and common equity binds us to it. So that were there
no Protestation made and taken, yet we are bound as we are Christians by virtue
of our Baptism to defend and maintain the true Protestant Religion against
all Popery and Popish Innovations; as Subjects to maintain the King our dread
Sovereigns Person, Honor and Estate; as good Commonwealths men, the Power
and Privileges of Parliament, and the lawful Rights and Liberties of the
Subject.

Fifthly, (and mark it well) we are here bound by our solemn promise, etc.
with our lives, etc. to justify, Defend and maintain every person that makes
this Protestation in whatsoever he shall do in the lawful pursuance of the
same.

And there is great Reason for this also, that we should mutually defend each
other; for if any suffer in a common cause, as the defense and maintenance of
the true Religion, the Kings Majesty's Person, Honor and Estate, the Power and
Privileges of Parliament, etc. all suffer in him, and therefore all and every
one should stand for him, So did the Grecians and Barbarians, when they went
with Cyrus against the Persians. Suid.
as for themselves. The very Heathens would not be wanting to their Country,
but in a common cause were willing to do or suffer any thing, even the
greatest dangers; and Christianity should not make more slow, but forward to
all civil duties tending to the public good, upon better and higher grounds
then nature can afford, viz. out of conscience to Gods command, true Christian
love to our Brethren and Country, etc.

Sixthly, under the like engagement, we promise, vow and protest, To oppose and
hinder, and by all good ways and means endeavor to bring to condign
punishment all such as shall either by force, practices; councels, plots,
conspiracies or otherwise do the contrary of any thing in this present
Protestation contained. As for instance, if (which God forbid) we should see or
know any person that should rise up against the King or Parliament, wilfully
infringe their just and good orders and privileges, or endeavor to set or
maintain division or dis-affection between the King and Parliament, or
betwixt the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland and Ireland, be his pretense
(as Papists and Popish persons want not excuses and colorable pretenses) he is
declared a public enemy of the State and peace of the Kingdom, See the
Declar. of Parl. Ian. 17. 1641.
and we are by this Protestation bound by all lawful means to bring such a
person to condign punishment.

So again, do we see or hear any, seeking wittingly and wilfully to
disgrace, suppress or bring into contempt the true Reformed Protestant
Religion, or to vent and advance Popery, or Popish Innovations within this
Realm, to set up any wooden, stone or painted Image, Cross, or other
scandalous resemblances, we are by virtue of this Protestation bound by all
lawful means and ways, according to the rules of Christian wisdom and
prudence, to bring that person or persons to condign punishment for his
demerits.

And we have warrant for this in the word of God. Husha^ the Archite did
prevent the dangerous plot against David and discovered it to him, 2 Samuel 17.7,
8, 15. etc. Mordecai discovered treason against Ahasuerus, Hest c. 6. You the
very Pagans would do thus, endeavor to bring to deserved punishment those
that were enemies to their Idol gods, Religion, King, Country or
publick-wealth. And Gods word requires this of us, Pro. 24 21, 22. My son,
fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them that are given to
change, that is, to bring in any Doctrine, worship or discipline, or any thing
contrary to the true Religion or word of God, and the wholesome and good Laws
of the Land, especially such as are fundamental; for their calamity shall
rise-suddenly, and who knows the ruin of them both.

Yea in case of seducing from the true to false Religion, or worship of God (as
is well observed by a godly M. I. G.
Divine) it is clear that we must bring any to punishment, how near or dear
so ever unto us. See Deuteronomy. 13.6, 7* 8, 9, 10. If thy Brother the son of thy
mother, or thy son, or thy daughter, or the wife of thy bosom entise thee,
saying let us go and serve other gods. Thou shall not consent unto them, nor
hearken unto them, neither shall thy eye pity them. Our love to God and the
true Religion, ought to overruled our affections to our friends and natural
Parents in the flesh, much more our affections toward others, which our
Savior confirms, Mat. 10.37. He that loves Father or Mother more then me, is
not worthy of me, and he that loves Son or Daughter more then me (...) not
worthy of me.

And in case of the public weal, if any person be an enemy to it, and will
not be reclaimed, our affection to our Country, and the Commonwealth must
overruled natural and private affection even to such as are near and dear
unto us: and Cicero an Heathen determines this among other cases, Cicero de
Ossicijs l 3.
That if a man's own Father would betray his Country, and do any thing that
tends to the apparent ruin of the Commonwealth, he must not keep silence,
but prefer the safety of his Country before a Father, and endeavor to hinder
him, or complain of him. This is just and reasonable, for a public good of
such concernement ought to be preferred before a private.

Seventhly, we also promise -- In all just and honorable ways to endeavor to
preserve the Union and Peace between the three Kingdoms of England, Scotland
and Ireland. And there is great reason for it, because they being now (as it
were) one, the division of them or disturbing their peace, is the way to ruin
all, especially in these evil times, when all our forces united together will
be little enough and too little without Gods more then ordinary assistance, to
preserve our peace, yea to keep them from sinking and ruin by the common
enemy to our Religion, to our King and Kingdom.

And this is the first thing I here promised to speak off, viz what we do
here promise, vow and protest. Now for

The second, What it is to maintain and defend the true Protestant Religion,
or Doctrine, and oppose the contrary, viz. in our hearts to believe, embrace,
love, profess and walk according to the Rules of the true Reformed Protestant
Religion, to justify and defend the same, as occasion requires and calls on
us, and to disavow the Popish Doctrine and Innovations which are contrary
hereunto and set our selves against it and them, or any that shall endeavor to
attempt any thing contrary to the true Protestant Religion, the Person, Honor
and Estate of the King, the power and Privileges of Parliament, etc.

Thirdly, The grounds and reasons of making and entering into this Protestation
or National Covenant, are included in the preamble to the Protestation, to
which I refer you for fuller satisfaction, only thus much here in a few
words, I conceive it may be of use.

1. To bind all true Protestants more firmly to God, his truth, ways and
worship, and to prevent the growth of Popery and Popish Innovations, and in
time to root out both, as in conscience, reason, Religion and policy we should,
And this is a very special means to effect it; for this binds us not only to
embrace, maintain and defend the true Religion, but also to reject Popery, yea
to oppose it, and all such as seek to advance or uphold it.

2. To discover all Popish persons, and such as stand disaffected to the true
Religion, and the peace and welfare of the King and Kingdom, Church or State,
that they may be dealt with according as to justice does appertain.

3. Thereby also the better to disappoint all the Adversaries plots and
designs against true Religion, the King, Kingdom, Church and State. And

4. To continue and increase the honor, peace and welfare of the same, to all
which purposes this bond may be of special use, and the most effectual means
to accomplish such blessed ends. Now,

Fourthly, How far and how firmly this bond or Covenant binds us?

1. How far, in respect of the ways and means to be used, and that is only to
lawful ways, to do all these things as far as lawfully I may, and by all
good ways and means, that is, by such ways and means as are warrantable by
the Law of God, and the wholesome and good Laws and Statutes of this Realm. As
for instance, when we see any Popery or Popish Ceremonies and Innovations in
the Church which we have protested against, we may not in a violent and
tumultuous way without any lawful call and warrant set our selves against them
and remove them, but by our prayers to Almighty God, and petitions to his
Majesty, the honorable Assembly, or others in Authority, who are by Law
enabled to remove the evils that we are bound to oppose, and rectify things
amiss; Beside, God needs no tumultuous carriages, and unwarrantable ways and
means to effect his work of Reformation.

2. But how firmly does this bind us?

Answ. It binds us to keep it to the uttermost of our [Power, Estate and Lives]
even to the death, so as no law of man, or power of any worldly Prince or
Potentate whatsoever can absolve us from it. And we promise and protest in the
close, that neither hope, fear, or any worldly respect, neither favor nor
frown of men, neither promises nor threats, neither hope of gain, profit,
pleasures or preferment, or fear of any worldly loss, trouble or the like
(for all these as I humbly conceive are included) shall make us relinguish this
promise, vow and Pratestation.

And this solemn engagement is made in express terms in the presence of
Almighty God, and so implicitly calling the Almighty God of Heaven and Earth,
who hears what we protest, and does see our intentions and purpose, and will
narrowly observe our future actions, how we keep our solemn promise with his
Majesty, to reward or take vengeance on us if we do not really, and for the
future carefully endeavor by all lawful means and ways to perform our
promise, vow and Protestation.

And which yet further adds weight to this engagement, it is made in the
presence of the Congregation (yea and I may say of the Angels also) who are
witnesses, Ps. 91.11, 12. Heb. 1.14.
and will testify against us one day if we willingly and wittingly break this
our Covenant.

And this also, our own hands or mark (which is equivalent) is subscribed and
stands on record as a witness to God and men against that man that shall
wittingly and willingly break his Protestation, so solemnly made, yea, and
this Church, and these Walls and Pewes will one day rise up to condemn that man.

Hear what God himself says, of ordinary vows and promises, which are of a
far inferior nature to this, Deuteronomy. 23.21, 23. When thou shall vow a vow unto
the Lord thy God, thou shall not slack to pay it, for the Lord thy God will
surely require it of thee, and it would be sin in thee; That which is gone
out of thy lips thou shall keep and perform, according as thou have vowed unto
the Lord thy God, which thou have promised with thy mouth: As for instance, if
the Jew under the Law vowed unto God to offer a lamb, or bullock, or sheep or
goat, etc. So now if any should vow or promise to God, That if such a
business succeed well, if such a ship in which he has a venture return home
well and safe; if such a field of corn prosper and come well in, or the like,
he will give so much to the poor members of Christ, or the like in way of
thankfulness to God for his goodness toward him. Or if God do indeed
deliver him out of such a trouble, sickness, misery or affliction, or the
like, he will give so much to such a pious use, etc. Keep a private day of
solemn thanksgiving to God, or the like, he may neither omit nor delay to do:
according to his promise, says Moses from God, Thou shall not slack to pay
(or perform) it, The Lord thy God will require it of thee. So again, Numb.
30.1, 2. This is the thing which the Lord has commanded, If a man vow a vow
unto the Lord, or swear an Oath to bind his soul with a bond he shall not
break his word, he shall do according to all that proceeds out of his
mouth. And if promises and vows touching things voluntary, and of a far less
and inferior nature, made only by a man's self alone, do so strongly bind,
that God may Just e exigitur ad solvendum qui non cogitur al vovendum. Bern. in
Ep.
justly, and will require it of him, and punish him accordingly for breach of
promise, in case he perform not; how much more does such a solemn vow and
Protestation as this is, made to God, in a thing of this nature (which Religion
and reason binds us to observe, though there were no Protestation made nor ever
thought of) how much more (I say) does this bind us, and will God punish the
wilful contemners or breakers of it?

Wherefore brethren, you who have taken this Protestation or National
Covenant, and have therein implicitly called God to witness, and be your Judge
to take vengeance on you, if you perform not your vow and Covenant to God, be
sure the hand of God will follow you, if (which I hope I shall never see and
hear of you) end eavour not to perform your Protestation and Covenant
according to promise, but wilfully break it, and much more if also any should
wittingly and willingly endeavor to hinder others that endeavor to keep their
Covenant, and do wilfully distuibe them in their duty of maintaining the true
Reformed Protestant Religion, or opposing and removing in a legal way any part
of Popery or Popish Innovations protested against, suppose Images, and
scandalous Popish Pictures, Crucisixes, and the like.

And let such a man be sure, that if he perform not his part, but wilfully
break it, oppose and hinder others, yet God will perform his part, God will
bring the curse upon him which he has implicitly wished in his Protestation in
the presence of Almighty God, as he did bring on the Jews the curse which they
wished to themselves, Mat. 27.25. And we know it has layne heavily upon that
Nation above sixteen hundred years. When Zedekiah had broken his Covenant
with the King of Babylon, see what the Lord says of him, Ezekiel. 17.15, 16.
Shall he prosper? or shall he escape that does such things? or shall be break
the Covenant and be delivered? As I live, says the Lord God, surely mine Oath
which he has despised, and my Covenant which he has broken, even it will
recompense upon his own head, v. 19. We have solemnly covenanted and
promised, vowed and protested to God the King of Heaven, to maintain the true
Religion, oppose all Popery and Popish Innovations; to the King on earth, to
maintain his Royal Person, Honor and Estate; to the Parliament, to maintain
and defend their power and Privileges, etc. And we may be sure, that man shall
not escape, that wilfully breaks his Covenant; but the hand of God will find
him out, either here to his conversion, repentance and salvation, or hereafter
to his condemnation.

Wherefore brethren I beseech you all (and I hope and persuade my self you
will) consider what you have promised in the presence of Almighty God, and do
your best and heartiest endeavor to keep your Protestation: Oh let not any
person draw guilt on his own soul by a wilful breach or careless neglect of
his Protestation, I could therefore wish that evey good Subject would have and
set up a Copy of the Protestation in his own house, to mind himself so often
as be goes in and out of his solemn vow and Covenant made to maintain and
defend with his life; power and estate, the tine Reformed Protestant Religion
against all Popery and Popish Innovations, the Kings Majesty's person, the
power and Privileges of Parliament, etc.

Yea all of you have in Baptism solemnly engaged your selves to God to
believe in him, love him, fear him, serve and obey him in all his righteous
commands, to defend his blessed truth, and the professors of it, and
consequently to oppose what in you lies by all lawful means, all Popery, and
Popish Rites and Ceremonies, and whatsoever is contrary to his blessed word and
will; Thus every mothers child of us stands engaged to God, and be sure thou
can not wilfully break Covenant with God, and escape unpunished.

But let us come to speak more particularly by way of Application, to bring
all home to our selves, to work as on the head by information, so on the heart
and affections by application, that the whole man may be put upon the
conscionable practice of the duty, which is the end of preaching.

And seeing a Covenant once made may not be broken, but carefully kept and
performed, this may serve to reprove, to humble and to exhort.

First, for Reprehension, and that of two sorts, wherein blaming others, I
desire to chide and be humbled my self.

1. Such as seemingly make or enter into Covenant with God, but do really
break it. So do all, that having been baptized, do not live answerably.
Circumcision is called a Covenant, Genesis 17. because it does necessarily
presuppose and seal the Covenant. Now Baptime is in the room thereof, yet how
many break it? yea how few do indeed keep that Covenant, or that do in good
earnest endeavor to keep it? Many, very many of them have also renewed that
Covenant at the Lords Supper, re-engaged their souls again to God, and yet
go on still in the ways of sin and Satan: In the Covenant we all engage our
selves to leave all sin, believe all divine truths revealed to us, and live
holily in obedience to all his righteous and good Commandments; yet where
almost shall we find a man or woman truly endeavoring to keep Covenant with
God.

The word Sacrament signified of old the Soldiers Oath, betwixt the Captain
and the common soldier, which now is by long use applied only to this
Ordinance of God, and so we give God the hand in the Lords Supper: It is a
Covenant with God, wherein we do all (as it were) swear, promise all
faithful service to him, to be wholly at his command, and not to serve sin
and Satan any longer: The very act of receiving or being baptized imports no
less, and binds us to the duty, and so does the Lords Supper: Yet where almost
is the man or woman that makes conscience of keeping his Covenant with God?
Does not almost every one run on still in his own ways, serve himself and
his lusts, sin and Satan, as if he had never entered into Covenant with God,
or made any promise of obedience, and so add unfaithfulness in breaking his
Covenant with God? Yea, observe it, and we shall see many so far from keeping
Covenant with God, that they grow worse afterward then they were before they
came to the Sacrament: so how many are there who lying on their sick bed, or
in some great trouble or fear, promise and seriously vow, that if God will
raise them up again, remove such or such an evil, they will become new men,
etc. and yet afterward are as bad, yet worse then before? And may we not also
say, There be many who having taken the Protestation or National Covenant, yet
are careless in keeping it; yea willingly break it, by causing and fomenting
division and dislike betwixt the King and his Parliament, and good Subjects, by
opposing and hindering the removal of scandalous Images and Pictures (some of
which are most abominably evil and greatly abused by many, in whose hearts
they stick faster then in the glasse-windowes or walls (though we hoped
otherwise till experience proves it to be true) also by bowing toward (if not
to) the pretended Altar, or East, etc. I say no more, but let every man's
conscience be his own Judge.

In civil contracts with men, men will be ashamed that have any sparks of
ingenuity and common honesty in them, if they break their word and solemn
promise with men, and should we not much more for breaking Covenant with God?

If we had never received the Sacrament, neither the one nor the other, and so
never entered into Covenant with God; yet it were sin to us (and sin is
damnable) to disobey God, seeing we are all bound to yield obedience to God, by
virtue of our Creation, preservation and sustentation, to be his and only his,
to serve him, and him only for ever; but after Covenant with his Highness to
sin against him, disobey his righteous and good commands (for so they all
are) rebel against his Authority, is much more grievous, especially when
withal we do serve sin and Satan, Gods and our own enemy. It was a great
aggravation of Judas sin fore-prophesied, Psalm 55. That he put forth his
hand against such as were at peace with him, and broke his Covenant, ver. 20.
So it is a great aggravation of sin for a man that is in Covenant with God to
break his Covenant, and lift up the hand against God, with whom he has entered
into terms and conclusions of peace, to disobey God with whom he has entered
into Covenant to obey and observe him in all things.

To all such I may say as the Prophet Malachy to the Priests that brake their
Covenant with God, Mal. 2.10. Why do ye deal treacherously every man by
profaning the Covenant of God? And add as he does there, ver. 12. The Lord
will cut off the man that does this. And as Jerem. 2.19. Thine own wickedness
shall correct thee, and thine own backesliding shall reprove thee: Know
therefore, and see that it is an evil thing and bitter that thou have forsaken
the Lord thy God, and that my fear is not in thee, says the Lord.

2. Others there are that do really enter into Covenant with God, but
seemingly break it, either out of ignorance, infirmity, want of watchfulness,
etc. So do all the godly, all that truly fear God, more or less; though they
often fail in their obedience, yet it is not wilfully, out of love and liking
of sin, but out of ignorance, weakness, want of care, etc. but do never so
sin, as wholly and wilfully upon meditation to break their Covenant with
God, 1 John 3.9. He that is borne of God sins not, that is, whosoever is
regenerate and truly godly, he does not wittingly and willingly sin, he does
not love sin, and live and lie in sin, in the breach of Covenant as others
do; the ground is, because his seed abides in him, i.e. because grace is
immutable, and ever working holy desires, purposes and endeavors to obey God
and keep his Commandments, the Articles and conditions of the Covenant. The
Covenant with Adam was broken and all forfeit and lost, because mutable; but
the Covenant of grace has for ground the immutable promise of God, that it
shall never cease, Jer. 32.39, 40. Heb. 13.5. and Christ who ever lives. If
Adam had stood till now then that Covenant had not been broken, and all lost as
it was; but Adam sinning, brake his Covenant, and lost all. But now Christ ever
lives; therefore all that are in the Covenant of grace, all that are in Christ
shall ever live, John 14.19. Because I live ye shall live also. There are ever
living desires, purposes and endeavors to keep Covenant with God, in respect
of which unfeigned constant desires, etc. the godly ever keep their Covenant
with God, so as they never break it wholly or wilfully with full swing of
affection, with delight as others do, much less live, lie and dye in sin as
the wicked do.

But secondly, because all unregenerate men wittingly and willingly break
their Covenant with God made in Baptism, and renewed in the Lords Supper, and
now in the late Protestation or National Covenant, and the godly do fail
much in their duty, and do often in part break their Covenant out of
ignorance, want of watchfulness or the like, either by omitting some duty
commanded, or doing something forbidden, and in the manner of our obedience;
therefore we have all cause to be humbled. Let me therefore call upon you all
and upon my self to be kindly humbled for the breaches we have so often made
in our Covenant. Oh! that we should break promise with God, Absq, necessitate,
remissio voti, non dispensation, sed prae varicatio est. Bern.
prevaricate with his Majesty, how should this grieve our souls? truly nothing
will break a good heart more then this, to look back and see how
unfaithfully, and how foulely we have dealt with so good and gracious a God,
and broken Covenant with him who is and has always been so good and faithful
to us and all his.

And the rather should we be humbled, if we look upon the effects and
consequents of sin, either in respect of God or of our selves.

1. In respect of God. God is angry and grieved, God is angry with all men's
sins, but grieved especially with the sins of his own people that are in
Covenant with him. It is with God as with an husband or dear friend: if al
lothers speak evil of him, slight him, or disobey him, he can more easily
bear it; but if the wife or some other friend that has entered into a near
league of friendship with him should speak evil of him, slight him -- Oh!
this cuts him to the heart, this grieves him sore, Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14. It was
not an enemy that reproached, then I could have borne it; but it was thou, a
man, mine equal, my guide, and mine acquaintance, etc. Indignities and evil
carriage from a near hand is most grievous, not to be borne: so here, breach of
promise and unfaithful dealing from such as are in Covenant with God, is most
grievous unto him. We have a notable expression full to this purpose, Ezekiel.
6.9. says God, I am broken with their whorish heart (mark with whose) which
has departed from me, breach of Covenant in his own people is that (which to
use the Prophets figurative expression here) breaks the heart of God; other
men's sins grieve him, but the sins of his own people break his heart. Oh!
when it comes to this, that God may say of us as there David of Absalom, as
some say, or of Saul, as others think, in the type, and Christ of Judas in the
Anti-tipe: It was not an enemy, a drunkard, a common swearer, an adulterer or
any other open wicked man; but thou a Professor, one that has entered into
Covenant with me, etc. then fear what God says of disobedient revolting
Israel, Psalm. 95.10, 11. Forty years long was I grieved with this generation,
etc. to whom (or as the Apostle has it, Heb. 3.11. so, i. e. therefore) I swear
in my wrath they should not enter into my rest.

2. It is lamentable also, if we consider the effect of it in respect of our
selves, that no tie will hold us. Had we seen that Bedlam man mentioned in the
Gospel, breaking all his chains, certainly we should have pitied him; it is
much more lamentable to see men, that no bands, no ties will hold them to God,
but they break all, break their purposes, break their promises, break their
solemn Protestation and Covenant made with God, their Covenants sealed at
Baptism, and renewed at the Lords Supper, and now in another kind, in our
National Covenant; therefore how should this humble us, and make us blush, and
be ashamed and confounded for our unfaithful dealings with God?

Be we therefore exhorted all of us, as to look back and be humbled for our
failings and breach of Covenant for the time past, so to look forward, and for
the future to give all diligence to keep Covenant with God, both our National
and Personal Covenant. And here something first by way of motive, and then of
direction.

First, beside what has been already said, me thinks those considerations
should be of force to quicken us to this duty by way of Argument.

the consideration of the Party to whom our Covenant is made, and that is God,
where consider these 5. things.

1. His absolute Sovereignty over us. It is independent, universal, He is the
most High God, possessor of Heaven and Earth, Genesis 14.19, 22. Me thinks this
most absolute sovereign power over us to command, reward or punish us, should
move us to a careful performance of this duty, of keeping Covenant with him.

2. He is omniscient, and knows certainly what we have done, and how we
engaged our selves; yea (add this also) all our secret vows and promises we
have made unto him, in the night, on our sickbed, in time of trouble, etc.
Heb. 4.13. All things are naked and open unto the eyes of him (of God) with
whom we have to do; therefore we should carefully keep Covenant with God.

3. God remembers our Covenant, yea and all our vows and promises, though made
long ago, and how often they have been renewed. Men many times, after a little
space, forget what bonds and Covenants have been made unto them, so does not
God, Psalm. 111.5. He is ever mindful of his Covenant. which although it be
spoken specially of keeping promise with his people; yet it is also true, that
he is ever mindful of what we should perform unto him, and looks for it at
our hands as men look for their Rents at the days of payment; obedience is
Gods rent-penny.

4. God will make us remember our Covenant, either here by threatenings,
terrors and troubles, or hereafter by torments. All crosses, losses,
afflictions and troubles are to put us in mind of our Covenant with God. Men
will call for their debts. All Covenants and promises are due debts to God,
therefore he will call for them; Therefore it was, that when Jacob forgate or
neglected his vow at Bethel, God put him in mind of it: And of notwithstanding
all threatenings, afflictions, troubles, men will not remember to pay their
debts, perform their Covenant unto God here, he will make such feel his
torments hereafter. God is most just and unpartiall, that will not suffer
breach of Covenant, if unrepented to go unpunished.

5. Our promise and Covenant is made unto God, who is faithful as well as
just, and will keep Covenant with his, Deuteronomy. 7.9. Know that the Lord thy God he
is God, the faithful God, which keeps Covenant, and mercy with them that
love him and keep his Commandments, Psalm 111.5. He is ever mindful of his
Covenant. And if God keep Covenant with us, it is most reasonable that we
should keep Covenant with him.

Secondly, consider the quality of our Covenant with some other circumstances
not mentioned before, all which add weight to this duty, and should quicken us
to obedience.

As 1. Our Covenants and promises are due debts to God. Now every honest man
will be careful to pay his debts, to perform his Covenants and promises,
Psalm. 37.21. The wicked borrows and pays not again, that is, makes no
conscience of keeping his promises; such a day I will repay it (says he) but
perfourmeth not: But it is a sure note of a godly man to keep touch with God,
as it is a note of a sincere upright heart upon consideration to be willing to
enter into Covenant with God, to be bound to him: so it is a note of an honest
and good heart to be mindful of his Covenant, and careful to perform with
God.

2. A Covenant is one of the deepest bonds that can be to tie us to God in
obedience. Gods omnipotency is tied by an Oath and promises, so that he cannot
in respect of his Oath do that which otherwise he might easily do being
omnipotent, and surely it does as deeply and strongly bind us to God, to obey
him, as it binds him to keep promise with man. It is one of the firmest and
strongest ties that can lie upon us; and therefore we should be most careful
to perform our Covenant.

3. Think also on the witnesses. Our Covenant was made with God in the
presence of Angels and men, the whole Congregation then present, and our own
consciences. All men know that we have been baptized, and many have seen us at
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, where again we renewed our Covenant and
promise of obedience to God. Now all these, Angels, Men, that Table, yonder
Font will rise up in judgment against us one day, if we do not keep Covenant
with God.

4. It is a solemn Covenant, it was not made rashly, unadvisedly, upon sudden
flash and heat of affection; but deliberately, upon meditation, after warning
given, and you bidden seriously to consider of it, and the danger more
especially of breaking our personal Covenant showed. Rash vows and promises,
if lawful and in our power, do bind, much more such as are deliberate;
therefore Joshuah 9.19. the Covenant which Israel had made with the Gibeonites,
though gotten by fraud; yet Joshuah and the Princes durst not break it, v.
19.20. All the Princes said unto the Congregation (whose fingers itched to be
doing with the Gibeonites) we have sworn unto them by the Lord God of Israel,
now therefore we may not touch them, but this we will do unto them, we will
let them live, lest wrath be upon us, because of the Oath which we have sworn
unto them.

5. The frequency of renewing our Covenant should make us more careful of
keeping promise with God. Our Covenant has been renewed again and again, so
often as we have been at the Lords Table, and received the Sacrament, been at
public or private Fasts and days of humiliation (for in all those we do if
not expressly, yet implicitly and interpretatively renew our Covenant with God)
but if we had never but once in all our life time, at Baptism only engaged our
selves to God in Covenant; yet were we firmly bound to obedience, much more
being so often renewed. It is a grievous thing to think that a man should
promise, and promise again and again, and still break all.

6. The equity of the duty should make us more mindful of keeping Covenant
with God. Is it not a most reasonable thing that God should be believed, loved,
feared, served, obeyed? Is it not a most reasonable thing that sin should be
left, abhorred, detested? Are not all his Commandments most just, righteous
and good, so as no Laws of men in all the world are comparable unto them,
Deuteronomy. 4.8. What Nation is there so great that has Statutes and Judgments so
righteous as all this Law which I set before you this day? See Romans 7.12. That
(even that Commandment that hit him full on the sore, wounded him at the
heart, stroke at his bosom lusts, and discovered him to be but a dead man; yet
even that) Commandment is holy, just and good; and therefore we should be
unjust, unhonest, unreasonable, if we should refuse to obey or willingly break
it. Again, God has made a Covenant with us, we expect he should perform with
us, every one would have God faithful to him, and keep Covenant with him, and
is it not then a most equal thing that we should also keep Covenant with God?

So is it not a most equal, just and reasonable thing that we should maintain
and defend the true Protestant Religion, the Kings Person, Honor and Estate,
the Power and Privileges of Parliament, etc. Let me report it to every man's
conscience, whether all the things protested be not just and reasonable?

I may add this also, the riches of Gods mercy in giving leave and making way
for us to come before him again and renew our Covenant with his Highness, and
his readiness to renew his Covenant with us again, with the whole Nation
after all our revoltings and backsliding, and personally with our selves in the
Sacrament, setting to his Seal. For former miscarriages God might have
discarded us and cast us off for ever, and never have been entreated of us any
more; but seeing the Lord is pleased to continue our lives, and give us another
call, to approach before him, offering to renew and seal his Covenant with us,
if so be that now we will come in unto him, be cordial, and deal sincerely
and faithfully with his Majesty for the future, how should this move us to be
ever mindful to perform Covenant with him who is so good and gracious to us
as he is?

Thirdly, look on the examples of others that have gone before us, both godly
and godless men.

1. Godly men. We read of David swearing and truly endeavoring to keep
Covenant with God, Psalm. 119.106. I have sworn and will perform it, that I
will keep thy righteous indgements. So the Church and people of God, even in
the midst of great troubles and afflictions, Psalm. 44.17, 18, 19. All this is
come upon us, yet have we not forgotten thee, neither have we dealt falsely in
thy Covenant. Our heart is not turned back, neither have our steps declined
from thy way, though thou have sore broken us in the place of Dragons, and
covered us with the shadow of death.

2. As godly, so godless men have been careful to keep Covenants and promises
at least with men: Pharaoh a Pagan King bids Joseph go and perform his Oath
which his father made him to swear, though it was a long and chargeable
journey, Genesis 50.6. And Herod, incestuous Herod that made no conscience of
incest and murder; yet makes scruple of his Oath, he would not break his
promise, Mat. 14.9. The King was sorry, never belesse for his Oaths sake. --
You may observe it, that many mere natural men wholly destitute of the life
of grace or any good conscience, will notwithstanding be very punctual in
observing their Covenants and promises, though to their own damage and hurt,
and should not this greatly shame men that have a name for Religion, and would
be thought to be some body among the faithful, to be found unfaithful with
God or men? What I shall mere natural, worldly, unbeleeving men, in their
kind go beyond the children and people of God? be more mindful of their
promises and Covenants then the godly, then Professors are of their promises to
God? Yea, shall the very Pagans outstrip us Christians in their dealings with
men? Oh'l let us blush and be ashamed, and repent and amend, least the men of
this world, yea the Pagans rise up in judgment against us one day and condemn
us.

Fourthly, think of the great good that hereby will redound To God. To Men.


1. To God. It makes much for his glory: It gives him the glory of his
excellency that he is worthy of it; of his power, wisdom, goodness and
faithfulness, that he can, is able, ready and will keep Covenant with us; but
Apostasy, revolting, breach of Covenant, and falling off again to former evil
ways and courses is most derogatory to Gods glory, and dishonorable to his
Majesty, such a man does in effect Diabolum Demino pr^ponit, comparationem enim
^idetur egisse ut dicatur prenunciasse eu^ esse meliorem cujus rursus esse
maluerit. Fert c. 5. de ^aenit.
prefer the Devil before God; for he seems to have compared and weighed
them together, and trying both, at length pronounces him to be the better,
whom he chooses again to serve.

2. To men, and the good is either National, or Personal.


National, to keep Covenant with God tends much to the good of the whole Land
and Nation. There are great designs now on foot for the good of the Church and
State: The Adversaries are many, mighty, extreme malicious, and exceeding
busy, have most desperate and damnable designs against both, also the
Especially in July and August, 1641. when this was preached.
hand of God, the plague and The small Pox, etc to this day in many places
sweeping away very many.
other devouring diseases are rife in the great City, and in diverse parts of
this Kingdom. Now the conscionable performance of our Covenant with God, and
particularly of our National Covenant, will be the most probable means under
Heaven to maintain the true Protestant Religion, to suppress and in time root
out Popery, disappoint the enemies of this Church and State, further the great
and long desired work of Reformation, and conduce much to the honor, peace,
safety, welfare and prosperity both of King and Kingdom, of Church and State,
and the salvation of souls.

Again, we have prayed and do pray for the public health, safety, peace and
prosperity, and who is now likely to prevail with God but they that truly
endeavor to keep Covenant with him? Hos. 7.14. They have not cried unto me with
their heart, when they howled upon their beds; They came before God in their
troubles, cried mightily unto him, fasted, prayed, yet all this God esteemed
but as the howling of a dog. What was the reason? verse 13. They have fled from
me, they have transgressed against me. A Father cares not for the howling of a
dog so long as the child cries not; he regards more the tears and cries of
one child, then the howling of 20. dogs; wicked men in the Scripture phrase
are dogs, swine, traitors, Rebels to the Majesty of Heaven and Earth, and
therefore are not regarded by him; but the prayers of them that are faithful
in his Covenant may do much good, Prove. 15.8. The sacrifice (which is also
accompanied with prayer, and so both the sacrifice and prayers) of the wicked
is abomination to the Lord, but the prayer (the single prayer) of the upright
is his delight, their prayers may do much good for a Nation, both to remove
and prevent evils and procure good. What is a Parliament, an Army, a posture of
defense without this, though they be all of great use? It Is notable to this
purpose which we have Job 42.7, 8. faith God to Eliphaz, My wrath is kindled
against thee and against thy two friends -- but* go to my servant Job, -- and
my servant Job shall pray for you, for him will I accept. It is the prayers of
faithful Covenanters that do prevail with God for themselves and others.

2. Personal, the good that will redound to our selves is great and manifold.

1. It will be for our credit. All the Country cries out against him that has
no care of his Covenant or promise, Sancti quidem and honesti pro positi
ditatio, magna ruina est. retr. Chris.
that makes no conscience of his word, such a man was hateful to the very
Pagans; but they commended him that was careful to keep touch; what a blot
then and descredit is it not to keep Covenant with God? to promise and promise
again and again, but perform nothing, Deuteronomy. 4.5, 6. says Moses to Israel, I
have taught you Statutes and Judgments as the Lord my God has commanded me,
Keep therefore and do them; for this is your wisdom and your understanding
in the sight of the Nations, which shall hear all those Statutes, and say,
Surely this great Nation is a wise and an understanding people. What were these
Statutes but the Articles and conditions of the Covenant which we must observe?
So Isay 56.4, 5. Thus says the Lord to the Eunuchs that keep my Sabbath, and
take hold of my Covenant: Even unto them will I give in mine house, and within
my walls a place and a name better then of sons and of daughters, I will give
them an everlasting name that shall not be cut off.

2. It will make for our peace and comfort. Conscience tells us we should keep
Covenant with God, that ties and moves to duty: Now if we endeavor to do it
truly, sincerely, universally and constantly, conscience cannot but justify,
speak peace, and so affourd comfort, Psalm. 119* 165. Great peace have they
that keep thy Law, and nothing shall offend them, Gal. 6.16. As many as walk
according to this rule peace be on them, and mercy. If we willingly break
Covenant, conscience (though it may for a time lie quiet and secure, being
lulled asleep, etc. yet it) will cry out, and then no peace, no comfort to the
wicked, says God, Isa. 57.21.

3. It will be for our safety. While we are with God and for God, God will be
for us, and if God be with us who can be against us? Romans 8.31. God will be his
protection who keeps Covenant with him. Masters that have but a spark of
goodness in them, will protect and maintain their servants in all their
lawful undertakings for them. Why? because they are their servants in covenant
with them: so God will protect all his servants in all their doings, according
to his will, and at his command, because they are in covenant with him. He that
has the Kings protection is kept safe from many arrest: so he that keeps
covenant with God has his protection, and thereby is kept safe from wicked
men, sin, Satan, death and Hell, that none of them can truly hurt him, but
rather their rage and endeavor shall turn to Gods praise and his childrens
good.

4. If we keep Covenant with God, then God will bless and prosper us. We see
it in this very Text, Keep therefore, -- that ye may prosper in all that ye
do. So Deuteronomy. 7.12, 13. Wherefore it shall come to pass, if ye hearken to
these judgments, and keep and do them, that the Lord shall keep unto thee the
Covenant, and the mercy which he swear unto thy fathers, and he will love thee,
bless thee, and multiply thee, he will also bless the fruit of thy womb, and
the fruit of thy land, thy corn and thy wine and thine oil, the increase of
thy Kine, and the flocks of thy Sheep -- and thou shall be blessed above all
people. So Levit. 26.3. to 13. and Deutr. 28.1. to 15. view them over, there
are great things promised, outward blessings to them that keep Covenant with
God. Excellent also is that place, Deuteronomy. 4.40. Thou shall keep his Statutes and
his Commandments (says Moses) That it may go well with thee, and with thy
children after thee, etc. Psalm. 103.17, 18. The mercy of the Lord is from
everlasting to everlasting (from everlasting predestination to everlasting
glorification) but upon whom? upon them that sear him, to them that keep his
Covenant, and to those that remember his Commandments to do them. Brethren,
here are great things promised, and we all desire to have them, to live and
prosper, and be ever blessed, why, here is the way to keep Covenant with God,
me thinks all this should much inflame the worldly man's affections to enter
into, and keep Covenant with God, seeing such things are promised to them that
do so.

5. If we keep Covenant with God, then God will keep Covenant with us: if we
faulter with God, and break Covenant with him, then will he break Covenant
with us, and most justly may he do so, Deuteronomy. 7.12. It shall come to pass, if
ye will hearken to these statutes and judgments (the Articles of the Covenant
on our part to God) and keep and do them: That then the Lord thy God shall
keep unto thee the Covenant, and the mercy which he swear unto thy fathers,
Deuteronomy. 8.18. Thou shall remember the Lord thy God (what is it to remember God,
but to think of our Covenant of obedience to him, and do it? and mark what
follows) That he may establish his Covenant which he swear unto thy fathers.
So psalm. 25 10. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth, i.e. all the
passages of his providence are out of love, for good, and shall certainly be
made good, be performed; but to whom? to such as keep his Covenant and his
Testimonies. Brethren, would you have God to keep Covenant with you? then see
that you keep Covenant with him.

6. Know that whosoever does keep Covenant with God, them will God own for his
peculiar ones, Exodus 19.5, 6. Now therefore if you will obey my voice indeed,
and keep my Covenant, then shall ye be a peculiar people to me above all
people. Beloved, this is a great matter that God here promises, That if we will
indeed keep Covenant with him, then we shall be his peculiar ones, as much
beloved, as highly esteemed of God, as a most choice treasure is of men, that
God, the great God of Heaven and Earth should so love, esteem and account of a
man, a poor, weak, mortal, sinful man, this is wonderful; yet this you see
he promises to all that keep Covenant with him.

7. And for the future God promises great matters, and will certainly make them
all good to all those that keep Covenant with him; they shall have Heaven, life
eternal, immediate communion with and a full fruition of himself, who is the
only alsufficient, independent good. We have his own word for it, Lev. 26.11,
12. and he cannot deny himself; Therefore a faithful man, that keeps Covenant
with God, is a happy man, a rich man indeed; not so much in re, as in spe, in a
present possession, as in future reversion, and sure promises; God himself,
Christ, Heaven, glory, life eternal, all is his: If a man have a bond of a
hundred or a thousand pounds from sure men, we say and that truly, he is so
rich: so a faithful godly man is as rich as the promises, Heaven and eternal
life, yea God and Christ, and all is his; and therefore he cannot but be most
happy, who does now in part, and shall fully enjoy him who is all in all. If a
man had all the creatures, all the glory, pleasure and comforts of them all;
yet that all were nothing in comparison of God, all without him could not
content the mind of man, but God himself will fully satisfy it, which
results from all the former.

8. It will also be a point of wisdom to keep Covenant with God, Deuteronomy. 4.5,
6. Behold I have taught you Statutes and Judgments (the Articles of the
Covenant betwixt God and us) keep therefore and do them, for this is your
Wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the Nations, etc. (...), says a
* Father. Greg. Nazian. Orat. 53.
Let a promise made by a vow or Covenant be perfected by performance; for it is
the part of fools to fail. Oh! my brethren, how should the consideration of
this so great and manifold good inflame our hearts to this duty. That is the
4th. motive, the benefit.

Fifthly, on the other side, think of the great evils that will follow upon
the wilful breach of Covenant with God. God is greatly dishonored, Religion,
the peace, safety and welfare of the Land is extremely endangered, according
to the greatness and generallity of this sin; for if one sinner destroys
much good, what will a multitude, a million do? beside the privation of all
that personal good forementioned, and the positive displeasure and evils
which God insticts on Covenant-breakers, which oftentimes lights heavy on men
in this world, in their name, estates, bodies, consciences. See Lev. 26.15.
etc. and Deuteronomy. 28.15. to 68. there are 54. verses together of dreadful plagues
that God denounces against Covenant-breakers, one of which well set on by the
hand of the Almighty is enough to break the heart of the stoutest sinner,
Jerem. 11.2, 3. says God, Hear ye the words of this Covenant: Thus says the
Lord, cursed be the man that obeys not the words of this Covenans.

Neither does breach of Covenant with God always bring evil upon a man's self
only, but upon others also many times, take one instance, 2 Samuel 21. because
Saul brake the Covenant which Joshuah and Israel made with the Giboonites at
their first coming into Canaan; therefore God brought on all Israel a famine
in the days of David for three years together. There are diverse things
remarkable here, as 1. This Covenant was made not with Israel, Gods own
people, but with the Gibeonites, who were otherwise designed to destruction
with the rest of the Canaanites. 2. It was not made in Saul's own person, but
by his Predecessor; and that 3. above three hundred and eighty years before
Saul came to the Kingdom. 4. It was with a good intention in Saul, and out of
his zeal for the children of Israel and Judah, v. 2. Yet God plagued all
Israel and Judah with a famine for that breach of Covenant, no less then 3.
years, year after year. The inference from hence is easy, that every one
may see what a grievous thing it is to break Covenant with God. Consider all
these things, weigh and ponder them well and seriously, and the Lord work them
on your hearts, and make them effectual to quicken you and me to this duty.

2. Directions to further us in the duty.
Now if there be any soul (that having entered into Covenant with God lately,
and all that have formerly done it in Baptism) who unfainedly desires and
resolves to keep Covenant with God, let him hearken to these directions
following, which may through the blessing of God not a little further him in
the performance of this duty.

1. Resolve upon it that it is a duty, and it must be done, Covenants must be
kept, and that you will set about it, and are resolved to do it; Resolution
will carry a man on far, and help much as in all worldly undertakings, so in
spiritual, and where a man is not resolved to go on, every little matter will
take him off. That is the first.

2. Red the heart of all it is base lusts, especially of it is bosom lusts,
labor to empty the soul of them. Our lusts are like unto Sampsons locks, all
the while Sampsons locks were on, no bonds would hold him; but when they were
cut off he could easily be bound: so here while our strong lusts remain in our
hearts, no bonds, no promises or Covenants will hold us in obedience to God.
You may see this in the Jews, Jerem. 42. 1, 2, 3. They came to the Prophet,
desired him to ask counsel of God for them, what he will have them to do,
and they promise very solemnly to do it, ver. 5. and 6. They said to Jeremy,
The Lord be a true and faithful witness between us, if we do not according
to all things for the which the Lord thy God shall send thee to us, whether it
be good, or whether it be evil, we will obey the voice of the Lord our God, to
whom we fend thee, and they add a strong reason also why they will do so,
that it may be well with us when we obey the voice of the Lord our God. Yet
there was a bosom lust in their hearts, and therefore when the Prophet from
the Lord told them what they should do that it might be well with them, they
fall off, all their former solemn protestation would not hold, chap. 43.2, 3.
Therefore labor to rid the heart of all base lusts, that like a false by as in
a bowl will draw aside from Gods Commandments.

3. Know where the power both to be rid of bosom lusts that hinder, and to
keep Covenant with God is, and seek it there where it is to be had, and that
is in Jesus Christ, all our strength is in him, there is no power in our
selves, not so much as to think a good thought of our selves as of our selves,
2 Cor. 3. 5. God is the strength of his people, Psalm. 28.8. and 37.39. and he
will give strength unto them, Psalm. 29.11. and 68.35. All the grace we have is
from Christ by his Spirit, and all the obedience we do is by virtue of his
grace in us, inabling us: As at first, all the strength we should have had, had
Adam and we stood in him, was to be derived from him the first Adam: so now all
the strength a Christian has to do God any service is from Jesus Christ the
second Adam, by virtue of a new Covenant made with us in him. It is not enough
to bind a man's self in a bond of a hundred or a thousand pounds, the bond
will not pay the debt, or enable the obliged to do it, there must be a stock
of money, a power and way to raise it, or it will never be done: so here, now
all our strength is in Christ; and therefore as Joseph's brethren in their want,
went to Joseph the Lord of Egypt, so we must go to Jesus the Lord of the
Church.

This is his Office, he is the Prophet and King of his Church; a Prophet to
teach us, and a King to rule in our hearts by his Spirit, to subdue sin and
mable to holiness; therefore he has received gifts to give unto men, Psalm.
68.18. and Ephesians. 4.8. Therefore if disordered lusts stir in the soul go to
Christ the King; as when there are disordered persons in a Kingdom, we go to
the Magistrate to punish and curb them, so go to Christ for power against
them, and for power to do duty, to keep Covenant.

And as you look to Christ's Office with an eye of faith, so press him with
his promise, he has promised to subdue our enemies, sin and Satan, and to
enable his to do valiantly, and his promise is confirmed by an oath, Heb.
6.17, 18. and 7.20. therefore fear not to speed.

4. Exercise the abilities you have received already, and they will increase
and grow greater, as we use to say, use legs and have legs, use strength and
have strength: so use that little ability you have from him, and God will give
more. To him that has shall be given, Mat. 25.29. Do as well as you can,
aquinas.
actus intendit habitum si nervose fit, the act increases the habit and
faculty of doing, if the power we have be put out in acting. I say therefore to
you as David to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 22.16. Arise and be doing, and the Lord will
be with you.

5. Get strong reasons for God against sin, Satan etc. for the true Religion
against Popery and Popish Innovations, etc. for unless the judgment be
clearly convinced, the heart will never come fully off, and much less go on
evenly and constantly in the duty; and therefore get strong reasons why God
must be believed, loved, feared, obeyed above all: so why sin must be left
and abhorred, why this Religion must be embraced, professed, practiced,
justified, defended, and not Papistry, or any other Religion, and so for all
other things protested.

6. Renew your graces, as faith, repentance, and love often

1. Faith, for ever the soul finds it true by experience, that as faith
increases or declineth, so does obedience.

2. Renew Repentance, or sorrow for sin and former failings, often: To sin
once is too often, but to repent, sorrow for it many times is little enough;
The oftener we renew our repentance and sorrow for our sailings and breaches of
Covenant, the greater will be our sorrow, and the more our care to keep
Covenant, and fear to offend for the future.

3. Renew also your love to God and Jesus Christ: The more love to God and
goodness, the more strength and readiness in the soul to obey God.

7. Set up a spiritual watch in the soul over thine own heart, Jer. 17.9.
and 42.3, 4, 6, 7. with 43.2, 3.
especially against the lusts to which thou art most prone, that the deceitful
heart and lusts draw it not aside out of the way of Gods Commandments. Every
man has a deceitful and dissembling heart, that is ever ready to dissemble
with God and deceive it self: If any man has a better thought of himself, he
is so much the worse for that thought; and therefore have an eye to the
Covenant, and look to thine own heart also, that it deceive thee not, and
cause thee to behave thy self falsely in thy Covenant.

8. Keep under a powerful Ministry and be frequent in the use of all Gods
Ordinances and religious duties. It is the means God has appointed to keep men
in the good way of obedience to Gods Commandments. In 2 Chronicles. 15. we read
that every thing was out of order, and there was no regard of the Law of God or
man, and the reason is, ver. 3. because Israel was without a teaching Priest
(dumb S John's, it may be, they had enough) but there was no teaching
ministry, to instruct, direct and exhort them to duty, and as Gods instrument
to convey grace by his Ordinances, to enable them to obey God; for the teaching
Minister is an instrument, by whose labors in the word, God is pleased to
work grace in the hearts of his people, whereby they are enabled to duty.

The Ministry of the Word, reading the Scriptures, prayer, etc. are the food
of the soul. Now he that will labor or be able to work must eat: so he that
will have strength to do duties acceptably and keep Covenant with God, must be
frequent in the use of Gods Ordinances: The soul must feed on this bread of
life; and therefore brethren that you may be enabled to do the Lords work,
and keep touch with God, live under a powerful Ministry, and be constant and
conscionable in the use of it and all other means of grace. Let me exhort you
as the Angel did Elias, Up and eat, so do you feed with savor and delight
upon the Word, Sacraments, etc.

9. Minds your selves often of the Covenant, think serionsly with your selves
what you have done, and how deeply you have engaged your selves to God, and
work it on your hearts, that it may take a deep impression on your spirits,
that it may never be forgotten; for if it be forgotten (though never so
solemnly made) it will be broken; Therefore brethren mind your selves of your
duty, and often remember one another, Heb 3.13.
exhort one another. This will be of good use also: Men keep in mind their
Rent-dayes, days of payment, and will sometimes put others in mind also,
least they miss and forfeit; and so should we do, least we loose the benefit
of our Covenant.

Lastly, pray often and earnestly, and get others to pray for you also, and
pray one for another. So did David for himself, Psalm. 86.11. Teach me thy way,
O Lord, I will walk in thy truth; unite my heart to fear thy Name. And Psalm
119.36. Incline my heart unto thy Testimonies. So verse 80. and 143. Also for
others, 1 Chronicles. 29. when he saw a great willingness in the peoples spirits,
he prays, verse 18. O Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and of Israel our Fathers,
keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy
people, and prepare their hearts unto thee. So pray I also for you, even for
every one that has some good resolutions, and is in his heart purposed to keep
Covenant with God. The Lord keep this for ever in the imagination of the
thoughts of your hearts, and prepare your hearts to him. This God has
promised, Jer. 32.39, 40. Ezekiel. 36.27. there is great ground for prayer. Now we
know that faithful prayer will avail much if it be fervent, James 5.16. the
promise is made to it, and it is the work of Gods own Spirit and God cannot
but hear the request of his own Spirit put up according to his will. I end
all with that of King David to Solomon, 1 Chronicles. 22.16. Arise, and be doing,
and the Lord will be with you. And that of the Apostle, Be not weary of
well-doing; for in due time ye shall reap, if ye faint not. Amen.

FINIS.

