THE EMBASSAYS TO THE EMPERORS OF JAPAN

Cum. prerelegien



Remarkable Addresses BY WAY OF EMBASSY FROM THE East India Company OF THE
UNITED PROVINCES, TO THE EMPEROR of JAPAN.

CONTAINING A DESCRIPTION OF THEIR SEVERAL Territories, Cities, Temples, and
Fortresses; THEIR Religions, Laws, and Customs; THEIR Prodigious Wealth, and
Gorgeous Habits; THE Nature of their Soil, Plants, Beasts, Hills, Rivers, and
Fountains: WITH The Character of the Ancient and Modern JAPANNERS.

Collected out of their several Writings and Journals BY ARNOLDVS MONTANVS,

Englished, and Adorned with a Hundred several Sculptures, By JOHN OGILBY Esquire
His Majesty's Cosmographer, Geographick Printer, and Master of the Revels in
the Kingdom of IRELAND.

LONDON, Printed by the Author, and are to be had at his House in White Friars,
M.DC.LXXI.

De LAND REYSE van OSACCA tot IEDO.

(...) Groote Steeden. (...) Kleyne Steeden. (...) Casteelen. (...) Dorpen.
(...) Vlecken. (...) Heerlyckheeden. (...) Toorene en tempels (...) De Cyffers
syn de (...) L^^^t^ van de Br^^^.


De WATER REYSE van NANGASACQUI tot OSACCA.



map of Osaka and Edo De LAND R^YSE van OSACCA tot IEDO.


A MEMORABLE EMBASSY TO THE EMPEROR OF JAPAN
The Earth and Sea constitute a round Globe.
FRom the round Shadow which darkens or eclipseth the Moon, the different Rising
and Setting of the Celestial Luminaries, and the various Elevation of the
Zenith, or Vertical Point, infallibly demonstrates, That the Earth and Sea
making one Body, presents exactly the Figure of a Globe: Which though the
Surface of this mighty Ball be rough and gibbous, many parts thereof swollen into
Rocks and high Mountains, others sunk into depressed Valleys, yet make an even
and smooth Circumference: for the highest Tops and lowest Descents are nothing
in comparison to the Magnitude of this vast Body, but seem less than Warts on
the Hand, or small Furrows in a Plough'd Field.

Incircling this our Terrestrial Orb at an unmeasurable distance, sparkle the
innumerable Lights, in the immense expansions of the Firmament.

The Description of Heaven and Earth.
About the Earth, the Air spreading it self into three Regions, dispenses from
the middle, all sorts of Meteors, with their several Effects upon us. The
lowest Story variety of Birds and flying Fowls make their Receptacle; the Sea
and Rivers, Fish inhabit: but the Earth and Sea, and all Creatures there
residing, the Creator left solely to the gubernation of Man, under whose
Command they remain, so inverting the Authority of Power, placed the
Microcosmus over the Macrocosme, the little World to Rule the great.

The distribution of the People upon the Earth.
But since the Fall of Adam, his Generations persisting, more and more
increasing their enormous sins, and louder-crying offenses, brought Gods just
Judgment upon them, who therefore destroyed the Old World by an Inundation or
general Deluge, only preserving eight Persons, who descending from the Ark,
the Waters being ceased, a new World began; in which by degrees their numerous
Progeny so multiplied, that they were forced to Plant fresh Colonies, still
more and more remote from the Foot of the Mountain where they first settled.
But nothing more helped to the well and equal re-peopling of the desolated
Universe, than the confusion of Tongues, which happened in the Worlds Infancy
at Babel, where all the Children of that Generation resolving to settle, not
minding farther Discoveries, pitched upon the fertile Plains of Shinar; Here
must be (say they) the Center of our growing and intended Empire; this our
begun, this our stupendous Work, whose aspiring Tower looks down already upon
the Clouds, and hereafter threatens to scale the Skies, shall be the mighty,
and all-commanding Head of our Imperial City, which extended over these Plains,
we will inhabit, and with our Lives and Fortunes guard and maintain. But they
in their vain Design and presumptuous Project, were suddenly baffled by Divine
Providence, who in stead of settling, scattered them over the face of the Earth:
for when they were at the busiest, and in the height of their expectation,
laboring to finish this mavelous Structure, thus the Almighty disappointed
their whole endeavors, all Tasks were suddenly thrown aside, each mistaking,
not understanding one another; in which confusion their only comfort was, to
meet with any that spoke with them the same Language: These using one Tongue,
gathering in a Body, stuck together, and in several Companies fled to strange
and unpeopl'd Regions; where Planting they flourished, and suddenly grew up to
be several great Kingdoms. Since called Europe, Asia, and Africa, the then
only known Country.
So this their total rout, and flying to all the Angles of the Universe, proved
for the better, each by this means being sooner supplied; so extending by
degrees their fresh Colonies to the utmost and Maritime Coast.

Yet however, one Party after this dissolution remaining still upon the Spot,
which though they utterly slighted their begun Tower, leaving it to ruin and
decay, yet went on cheerfully with their chief City; where Nimrod first taking
the Title and supreme Authority upon him, sat in his new erected Throne, first
Monarch of the Assyrian Empire. Besides him, many absolute Princes were thus in
process of time established in their several Dominions, and the whole World
seemed to be once more totally replenished.

When the restless Nature of Man, either unsatisfi'd with what he has
achieved, or spurred on by ambition, or urgent necessity, to enlarge their
Bounds for their supernumerary Swarms, gave the beginning to the Iron, or
turbulent Age, War and Hostility raging every where, in which those prevailing,
grew high and mighty, those conquered, low and humble, continual vicissitudes
and fluctuations of People, Kingdoms subverted in Republics, and
Commonwealths, weary of such Government, turned again into Monarchies. The
weakest Party, put to all extremities, and worst of exigencies by the pursuing
Enemy, were enforced, all Land denied them, venturing for refuge into the wide
Ocean, were soon swallowed up; some driven they knew not whither, lighted on
uninhabited Countries, there beginning new Plantations, and perhaps, by such
Fugitives the new World never heard of by antiquity, became of old to be
peopled, and by that means grown since to such vast Empires, as our late
Voyagers have discovered.

Here it will not seem amiss to give you an account, according as all Writers
have it, how this our Old World was peopled, viz. Asia and Africa, and who were
the Fathers, or chief Captains, giving Denominations to the People, and settling
them in their several Plantations, beginning with Holy Scripture.

The Offspring of Japhet.
Noah and his three Sons, Japhet being the eldest, his Offspring spread
themselves over Asia and Europe. Moses recounts these to be the Sons of Japhet,
Gomer, Magog, Madai, Javan, Tubal, Meshech, and Tiras: Gomer, as they say,
first settled his Colony along the Caspian Sea, where Strabo and Pliny place
the Cemerians; the Sons of Gomer being Ashkenaz, Riphat, and Tagorma, Planted
other Colonies, Ashkenaz laying the Foundation of the Kingdom of Media, which
others contradict, supposing that he settled in the lesser Asia; others, the
Country of Hessen, or Saxony, but out of what Records we know not; and
Eusebius, where ere he has it, calls Ashkenaz the Father, or first Prince of
the Goths, whilst the Modern Jews make him the Planter of the Teutonick
Nations, or High Dutch, and the transplanted Seed of Riphat into more Northern
Regions, gave Denomination to the Riphean Mountains beyond Scythia, which
afterward took in Paphlagonia. From his third Son Togarma, sprang the
Togarmians, who sat down on the North-side of Canaan, beyond Cappadocia: but it
appears by the Chalde Paraphrase, that Togarma peopled Germany; and the Jews
affirm, that the Turcomany, or Turks, are also sprung from the Togarmians,
whereupon still the Turkish Emperor is by them called Togar. But Magog, Japhets
second Son inhabited Coelesyria, Mada, and the Territory of Media. Javan, the
third, was Father to the Ionians, who in process of time, growing great with
other conjoined Nations, called themselves Greeks, their Country Grecia. From
these the Latins drew their original: whereupon at first, a great part of
Italy was called Greece; and still several Names of Italian Cities do
undeniably show the Extract of the Latins from the Greeks, which the ancient
Writers affirm, by making Javan to be the Bifronted Janus, signifying Father
both to the old Greeks, and new Latins, descended from him. The Sons of Javan
were four, Elisha, who Planted in the Islands of the Mediterranean Sea;
Tarshish, from whom Tarsus in Cilicia bears the Name; and Kittim, a Place in
Cyprus, where between the two utmost Points Thronus and Dades, in the Entrance
formerly stood the City Kittim; and still the Point Dades bears the Name of
Cape Chiti. Dedanim, Javans youngest Son, possessed that part of Eperia, where
the City Dodona was renowned famous for the Oracle of Jupiter Dodoneus,
presaging by tinckling Brass Instruments, or Cymbals, and also from the
oraculous Oak it self, which (as they say) spoke from its hollow womb, giving
Responses. From Japhets fifth Son sprang the Tubaleans, afterward called
Syrians. Others, according to Josephus, set themselves down in Spain, (so
believed) because the ancient City Setubal in that Kingdom retains Tubals Name.
Meshechs Progeny steered their Coast toward Arabia. The Ancients differ in no
thing more, than settling the Habitations of Tiras, Japhets youngest Son:
Josephus affirms him to be Father of the Thracians, in whose Country Pliny and
Mela delineate the River Atira: Others transplant him to the European Sarmatia,
according to Ptolomy, sprinkled with the Stream called Tyras, and at present
Nester: Some make Tiras the Builder of Tire in Phoenycia; again, some of the
Duringians and others, of Thurium, a very ancient City in the entrance of
Tarentine.

The Progeny of Sh^m.
Thus far Japhets Successors: next Sems, that is to say, Elam, Ashur, Arphaxad,
Lud, and Aram, did overspread Armenia, Persia, India, and the farther Eastern
part of Asia: But especially Elam is acknowledged to be the Father of the
Elamites, from whence the Persians proceeded, extinguishing by their firm
establishment of their sole Dominion, the first Name of Elamites. Ashur Founded
within the built City Nineveh, the Assyrian Power: formerly the Heathen
Histories bring these down from Ninus. Concerning Arphaxad, Moses says thus:
Genes. 10.
And Arphaxad begat Salah; and Salah begat Eber. And unto Eber were born two
sons: the name of one was Peleg, for in his days was the earth divided; and his
brothers name was Joktan. And Joktan begat Almodad, and Sheleph, and
Hazarmaveth, and Jerah, and Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah, and Obal, and
Abimael, and Sheba, and Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobah: all these were the sons
of Joktan. And their dwelling was from Mesha, as thou go unto Shephar, a
mount of the east. These are the sons of Shem, after their families, after
their tongues, in their lands, after their nations. Benedictus Arias Montanus
ascribes particularly these Distributions to every one of the Children of
Joktan, that is to say, to Almodad, the People of Themeotes, according to
Ptolomy and Mela, transplanted into the Asiatick Sarmatia; to Sheleph, the
Selebians; to Hazarmaveth, the Sarmatians; to Jarka, the Arachosians; to
Hadora, the Hircanians; to Uzal, the Oxiaenian Bactrians; to Dikla, the
Scythians, within the Mountains of Imaus; to Obal, the Obolites, between the
top of Caucasus and Paropanisus; to Abimael, the Imaenses, where the renowned
Imaus has very high Precipices; to Sheba, the famous Saces: yet others think
it more advisable to bring the Sabeans to Sheba, bordering on the Persians;
Ophir, called The Territory of Ophir, whether Solomon every third year set
forth a Fleet to fetch Gold from thence. Yet after all the Distributions and
Sprinklings of Mankind over the surface of the Earth, much of it confirmed by
many Authors, and also by sacred Writ, our Modern Geographers, and late
Travelers, hardly make out scarce two Parts of three of the Terrestrial Globe
to be yet inhabited, all the Antartick, and most of the Artick Regions, an
unfrequented Desolation, and Africa and Asia full of unpenetrated Deserts, and
inaccessible Mountains, and many Isles: Of which several were discovered by the
Ancients, and since by our Moderns, not thought worthy the labor of
Cultivation, amongst which our Japan lay a long time Fallow, till by a
necessitous Calamity a few miserable Exiles, being (as they say) banished from
their Country, were enforced to Plant there; which from such poor beginnings,
and unwilling undertakers, has insensibly by degrees in few Ages, shot up from
nothing, to be a most Potent and formidable Empire.

But before we proceed any farther in this our intended Design, concerning a
Description and Relation of Japan, (of which the Hollanders are most able to
give the best account) it seems not amiss, raising our selves a little from our
Seat, to look round about, and by an easy Prospect take a brief and general
Survey, not only of the new Art of Navigation, but also of those famous
Navigators, that boldly first adventured to unloose (though thought unpossible
before) the Virgin Zone of this our Terraqueous Globe; so not only finding
undiscovered Parts of the East, but also a new Western Indies, abounding in
Gold and Silver, as the other in Silk and Spices; besides, giving us a farther
account of a third Continent (though yet unknown) equivalent to either of the
former.

The Compass by whom found.
The Loadstone, or Magnet, whose several Virtues, and wonderful Operations,
being well known through many Ages; yet that it was a Terrella, or little
Earth, having Poles respecting the North or Southern Points of the Firmament,
having imaginary Meridians and Parallels, being the greatest wonder, and of
most use, was not found until Flavius Melvius a Neopolitan discovered it,
about two hundred years since, to the great benefit of Mankind, and perfection
in Navigation; before which without Compass or Chart, the poor Seaman, when
stressed with Weather, the Sun and Stars, his only Pilot, Night and Day
muffl'd in Clouds, he crept along the Shore, which was the constant practice,
or emboldned by the signs of fair Weather, ventured farther into the Offin;
their condition was most miserable, not knowing where they were, which way to
Steer, or from what part of Heaven the Wind then blew: As in Virgil Aene. lib.
3.

After our Ships so far had left the Coast
Till all the World, but Sky and Sea was lost,
A sable Cloud with Night and Tempest rose,
And the Ocean rough with horrid darkness grows;
Enraged Winds make raging Waves more fierce,
And through vast Floods us every way disperse;
Whilst Fleeting Tempests muffle up the Day,
All Heaven becomes to Gloomy Night a prey,
Perpetual lightning breaks from broken Clouds.
Drove from our course, we wander through Dark Floods,
Nor Palinurus knows, in such a Sky,
Day from the Night, or whither he should Ply.
Three Sun-less Days, as many nights we were
Wandering through dismal Fogs, without a Star;
But the fourth Dawn, we rising Land behold,
And far off Hills, which misty Clouds infold,
Sails struck, we row, our lusty Seamen sweep
The azure Pavement of the briny Deep.
Postquam altum tenuere rates, nec jam amplius ullae
Apparent terrae, coelum undique, and undique Pontus:
Tum mihi caeruleus supra caput adstitit imber,
Noctem, hiememque ferens, and inhorruit unda tenebris,
Continuo venti volvunt mare, magnaque surgunt
Aequora: dispersi jactamur gurgite vasto.
Involvere diem nimbi, and nox humida coelum
Abstulit: ingeminant abruptis nubibus ignes.
Excutimur cursu, and caecis erramus in undis.
Ipse diem, noctemque negat discernere coelo,
Nec meminisse viae media Palinurus in unda.
Treis adeo incertos caeca caligine Soles
Erramus pelago: totidem sine sidere noctes.
Quarto terra die primum se attollere tandem
Visa, aperire procul monteis, ac volvere fumum.
Vela cadunt; remis insurgimus: haud mora, nautae
Adnixi torquent spumas, and caerula verrunt.
So that now, by the help of the Needle, our Modern Navigators often run safely
that in ten days, which Aeneas, Ulisses, and other Ancients Navigators, still
fearing Shipwreck, made a ten years pudder of.

And lately, by the help of this great additional, the Compass, they were able
to say, By your leave, taking a long farewell of Atlas, and the Herculian
Pillars, fixed, and looked upon as eternal boundaries of the West and South,
both to Empire and Navigation, and boldly ventured to Plow the unmeasurable
bosom of vast and unknown Seas; so with a steady Course night and day, dark or
light, fair or foul, with an unwearied patience, slighting all dangers, raising
new Stars, and setting the old, till they happily finished their long Voyages;
some of them compassing the World, Girdling the Universe, making the utmost
East and West join hands together.

Thus they have, in a manner, accurately Surveigh'd the New World, America,
inspecting it from Coast to Coast, from the East to the Western Ocean; and
Magellanica, the last or unknown World, though they have not so penetrated as
the former, yet by Sailing the skirts of its extended Border, they Calculated,
by the largeness thereof, to be no less than another third part; so baffling
the opinion of the Ancients with a finis, that were so stupid to sit down
contented with the only knowledge of a third part of the whole world.

How Columbus came to the knowledge of a new World.
The first Neptunian Hero, or great Sea-Captain, who had the prime honor of
discovering the West Indies, was Christopher Columbus, a Genoese; who having
Married in Portugal, settled in the Maderas: He being ingenious, and naturally
much addicted to Novelty, still hearkening after new Projects, as well to
satisfy his own Inclination, as to improve his Fortune, by chance in his
Travels fell acquainted with Marcus Paulus, a Florentine, not only a
Physician, but a great Naturalist and Student in Philosophy; who finding his
humor, highly treated his curious and inquisitive disposition, with then
supposed imaginary Stories, first discovering to him Antipodes, and making out
by rational demonstrations, that the great Celestial Luminaries, where not idle
nor hudwink'd up in their absence from us, and our privation of light; nor as
the ancient Poets tell us, that Phoebus when setting, descended into Thetis
Lap; so all night, quenching his Horses fiery Fetlocks, swimming under water,
till drawing near the East, he with reflected Beams colored the Golden
Port-holes of the Dawn. But that these great and Resplendant Lights sprinkled,
and cheered with fecundating Rays, in alternate Day, so blessing other places,
that were no less than inhabitable Worlds with happy fertility, making evident,
that the Earth was not round and flat like a Trencher, as other old Writers
affirmed, but Orbicular and hung Self-poysed, surrounded not only with Air,
but the vast expansions of the Sky.

But whilst he ruminated and revolved such Notions in his Working Fancy, so it
happened, that a Vessel Bound for Africa, was driven quite from her intended
Course by extremity of Weather, and many days tossed up and down in the wide
Ocean, far out of sight from any Land; and at last having spent all their
Provision, in a most miserable condition put in to the Haven of Madera, where
the Captain and his whole Crew being utterly Famished with long Fasting, and
past all recovery by Refreshment, soon after died. But the Master, whom
Columbus had taken to his House, in the time of his Sickness, related unto him
wonderful Stories, how he had been driven on strange and altogether unknown
Coasts, being by his Calculation Westward, and so far off, that he supposed
never any European had seen; and withal, bequeathed to him after his Death his
Journal Papers, of that his so much unfortunate Voyage: who soon after Dying,
Columbus with great earnestness perusing the Writings, found what confirmed
him, as if he had been there in Person, and also gave him great Instructions of
directing his Course to New Countries not yet discovered.

After this, he rested not long, till he put in Action what might promote his
Business, that by the help of a better Purse than his own, he might Purchase
Wealth and Honor by this his new and great Design.

Proffers his Service to the King of Portugal, and the King of England.
First he addressed himself to the King of Portugal, whose Maritime Country
being opposite to his intended Discoveries, made him (as he supposed) fittest
for the Undertaking; who altogether declining it, he sent his Brother
Bartholomew Columbus into England, there to make his Address, and Negotiate
with King Henry the Seventh, concerning these Discoveries; who famous for his
great Abilities and Prudence, he supposed the only Prince in Christendom to
employ him in so great an Enterprise; but such was his Misfortune, that he was
taken by Pirates, and kept by them (wanting Ransom) a long time close Prisoner;
so that he came too late to the Court of England: For during his Captivity, his
Brother Christopher Columbus made Application to Ferdinand and Izabel, Kings of
Castile and Aragon, who then in very low condition, turmoyl'd in a great War,
against the Granada Moors, did not hearken to his Proposals.

Thus Columbus and his Cause lay seven years quite neglected; but when these
Princes, had by their several happy Victories subdued their Enemies, he then in
the beginning of the Peace, and first halcyon after so long a Storm, renewed
his Business, and moved the Court of Spain once more: The King and Queen then,
though low, and their Treasure exhausted with the late Wars, yet began to
listen to him, and at last were so much persuaded, that they took up seventeen
thousand Ducats upon Interest, with which they Rigged and Furnished him out
three handsome Vessels.

With which Columbus well satisfied, set Sail September. 1. Anno 1492. Columbus
set Sail 1492.
first directing his Course to the Canary-Isles; from thence stood full West
with a Trading Wind into the great Ocean, where he soon after, met with no
ordinary Storms or Huricanes, Winds blowing from all the Points of the Compass,
which sadly ruffled and shattered his Vessels: next falling (which Block proved
to him worse than Aesop's Stork) into continual Calms; for there his Men
growing sick and weary with lying so long at Sea, Mutiny'd, and despairing ever
to see Land, nothing would satisfy them but a speedy return to save their
Lives whilst their Provisions lasted: He thus put to it, was enforced to
promise them, that if they discry'd not Land in three days, he would perform
their desire.

So it happened, that at the appointed time they saw Westward near the Horizon,
sprinkling Clouds, by which sign he overjoyed, bidding them be of good comfort,
and told them they should soon see Land, which accordingly they did; and soon
after came to Anchor on the Coast of Florida, where Landing, Discovers Florida.
taking some short refreshment, helped by the Natives, he took a survey of the
neighboring Country, and the adjacent Isles; and whilst he bartered Trifles
for Gold, and other rich Commodities, he took possession of the Country, by
raising of a Fort in his Royal Masters name; in which, leaving forty eight
Spaniards, Commanded by Diego Arana, Returns home.
he departed thence Fraighted with great Riches, and ten of the Indians.

Soon after arriving in Spain, he was received with great joy, giving a good
account to their Majesty's of their success, with which they were so well
pleased, that they furnished him out again; then he discovered the great Isles
Hispaniola, Discovers Hispaniola and Cuba, and also Nombea De Dios, and Panama.
and Cuba, and the bottom of the great Bay of Mexico.

Thus Christopher Columbus finished fourteen years in several Expeditions,
discovering the West Indies.

Americus Vesputius, set forth by the King of Portugal, to make a farther
Discovery of the West Indies.
Mean while, the fame of these his grand enterprises stirred up, invited many
other Sea-Captains to raise their Reputation, and better their Fortune in like
manner; amongst which, Americus Vesputius a Florentine, was employed by Emanuel
King of Portugal, who making larger Inspections along the Continent, got the
denomination of those vast Territories, the West Indies, now called America,
though Christopher Columbus was the first Discoverer.

Henry the Fourth, Son to the King of Portugal, discovers new Countries.
But before we go on any farther with the business of Spain, we shall give you a
brief account of the Portuguese; who mean while, or rather before took up the
Art of Navigation, and became Seamen, following their new Discoveries to the
South and Oriental parts of the World: Their first Undertaker being the young
Prince Henry Duke of Visco, second Son to Henry the first, King of Portugal,
the eldest being Heir Apparent, and well provided by Patrimony and due Right of
Succession to the Crown of Portugal after his Fathers decease, the younger
Brother being of a high and magnanimous Spirit, was ambitious; if so, it might
be, the enjoying of his Native Land, Birthright had denied him, to raise his
Fortunes at Sea, which who knew, but might prove equivolent to his Brothers
Kingdom; and also encouraged to Study the Art of Navigation, by several Learned
Persons, who assured him by clear and many demonstrations, that there was much
Land that might prove of great concern, altogether yet unknown, and especially
in the South beyond Maretania, which could not be penetrated by Land, by reason
of the vast and unpassable Deserts and excessive heat; but finding those Coasts
by Navigation, they might make a deeper inspection of the whole African
Continent.

His first Voyage was beyond Mount Atlas.
Resolved upon this, he put in action what with mature judgment he had
designed; and getting all things ready, furnishing some Ships for that purpose,
set Sail in the Year 1410, and Steering on, was the first that sunk Mount Atlas
lofty Crown under the Horizon, being till that time the Terminary, or Ne plus
ultra, of all Southern Navigation, discovering beyond the Mount threescore
Leagues off the Coast of Africa, and so returned, but with mean success.

But not altogether daunted, ten years after having replenished his stock,
designed for such Adventures, he fitted out another Fleet, under the Command of
Johannes Gonsalvez, a good and expert Seaman, who first ventured to loose
sight of Land, and Sail into the Main Ocean, where he, though encountering many
Storms, prodigious Tempests, cross Tides, and unbridled Currents, yet bore up
courageously, and fighting his way through all Weathers, and other
Encumbrances, reaching four hundred and twenty Leagues beyond Atlas; where
weary and overpowered, at last by such grand Opposers, viz. Winds and Tides,
contented himself with the honor of so great a Discovery, returned.

These names they gave them at the first Discovery.
Thus this Prince in forty Years, Discovering the Maderas, the Isle Porto
Sancto, Cape de Verd, and the Coast of Guinee; and having the honor of opening
the Bosom of the Southern Sea, and making the Portuguese Navigators, being of a
great age, he died in 1463.

Alphonso the fifth discovers the African Coast.
After his Decease, the whole business of Navigation fell, and the Sea lay
Fallow, unploughed by the Portuguese twenty years, when Alphonso the fifth,
King of Portugal, taking hold of so well begun, and long neglected a business,
the second time revived the Art of Navigation (though much against the present
humor of the People) strenuously went on: First Sailing beyond Cape de Verd,
finding the Island of St. Catherine, and settled a constant Trade, which came
to a good account with the Negro's in Guinee.

He dying, John the second succeeding him, went on with the Work, and set out
Jaques Canus, Discovers Congo.
a good Sea-Captain, who first discovered Congo, and Sailing up a River,
penetrated much of the Inland thereabouts.

When stirred up much by the rumor of Christopher Columbus's Expedition,
employed by the King of Castile, the fame being spread over all Christendom,
ambitious to match what Spain could do in the West with his Southern
Expedition, being so well prepared already by their former Voyages, with great
Cost and Care, A Voyage of Bartholomew Diazio.
he set forth Bartholomew Diazio, who Coasting Africa, reached at last the
great Southern Point, which indeed was the Work, if he had understood it, and
made right use thereof; but there being disanimated by mutinous Mariners, and
stress of Weather, giving a bad Epithet to the great Point, calling it Cabo
Buyig, or Cabo Boyie, because there he was stopped, and soon after forced to
return yet his wiser Master understanding it better, Cape of Good Hope, why so
called.
named it Cabo de Bona Esperanca, that is, The Cape of Good Hope.

A strange Voyage of a Franciscan Monk.
But whilst Diazio Rid before the great Southern Cape, a Franciscan Monk, called
Anthonio, his intimate Friend, incited by a strange curiosity, Landed there,
and ventured alone to seek his Fortune in so vast and unknown a World. I tell
this Story, though not so pertinent, because of the wonder, that one Man should
be so hardy, to venture his single Person, to travel through Countries so full
of Heat, Drought, and Deserts, and Peopled with such as he could neither
understand, nor they him; but thus he went, not only through all Africa, but a
great part of Asia, reaching to Jerusalem, there paying his Devotion, he
returned to Lisbon, giving the King an account of his miraculous adventures.
Upon this the King bethought himself of a less chargeable way than Rigging a
Fleet, which could only discover the Coast; to which end he employed Pedro de
Cavillano, and Alphonso Payva, both skilful in the Arabic, A wonderful Journey
of two Portuguese.
as private Pilgrims, to make Inspections of those Countries, which were yet to
them unknown. They first came to Naples, then touched at Rhodes, after visited
Egypt, and saw Grand Cair, from thence to Jerusalem; here paying due Tears to
the holy Sepulcher, they parted, traveling several Ways, Payva for Ethiopia,
where he died; and Cavillano to Ormus, so to Calicut in India. Here he received
Messages from the King his Master, not to return till he was able to give him a
good account of Africa: Thus commanded he ventured into Ethiopia, where the
King of that Country became his great admirer, much taken with his Person and
Parts, inviting him to dwell in his own Court, and offering him, if he would
Marry, a Lady of great Fortune, and Noble Extract.

From the Emperors Palace he made means to send a Letter to the King of
Portugal, in which he informed him at large both of the Asiatick and African
Countries; and amongst the rest, described the City of Calicut, and gave a
Character of the Inhabitants, who, he said, were of a swarthy, and of an
Olevaster Complexion, scarce knowing ought of humanity or civil address,
unaffable, irreligious, and ignorant of all Moral Virtue: they are proud of
going naked from the Middle upwards, only above their Elbows they wear Armlets
of Pearl, and a Simiter in a Belt hangs thwart their Shoulders; and about their
Middle they wear Skirts, or long Bases of Purple-Silk, richly embroidered with
Gold.

Here the Female Sex are allowed Polygamy, one Woman may Marry as many Husbands
as she pleases, and those which enjoy the greatest number, are esteemed there
the most Noble, so there is no priority to their Children by Birth, none
knowing well their own Father, but either they are all Coheirs, or else her
Sisters Children Inherit. That the Natives of Ethiopia were all Blacks, and a
kind of Christians, but mixed with an allay of Judaism and Mahumetan; and how
the Emperor maintained a great standing-Army, to defend his Dignity and
Territories, which were very vast.

Emanuel King of Portugal is earnest to make farther Discoveries of Africa and
India.
Soon after this Information, King John died in the Year 1495. Emanuel
succeeding him, and willing to go on with the Work of Discoveries, advised with
his Peerage, what was best to be done in so high a Concern: His Council
consisting more of private than public Spirits, who aim at Grandeurs, and the
general good, first looking upon the difficulty, danger, and great Charge, then
considering as to the Honor and Profit, they had gotten enough by the
Discoveries in Africa already, and it were mere madness to take upon them more
than they were able to perform: for sending fresh Ships and new Colonies to
Plant remoter Countries, would weaken the Kingdom, and disable their Navy,
neither would these newfound Lands turn to any other account, more than to
maintain those that settled there: these and the like they alleged. The
publick-spirited Party, which were, and are commonly the fewest in all great
Consultations, convinced them in all their Arguments, saying, That they had no
cause to complain of the Honor and Profit which the Nation had already gotten
in their first Discoveries, but that it should rather encourage them to
proceed. The King's Treasure being better supplied, and the whole Nation much
employed, and more enriched by this their foreign Trade, and should they
neglect what they had so happily begun and undertaken, they would not only
lose their Expense and Pains, but the whole Affair would in time by degrees
moulder away to nothing. And if we should wave such honorable Enterprises as
these, who would attempt (discouraged by our example) any Business that had the
least face of difficulty or danger?

Thus the business being highly debated, the King hearkened only to those of
his Council who advised according to his judgment and inclination, and with all
diligence speedily set forth four Ships, well appointed with Soldiers, Seamen,
and all other Necessaries, making Vasco de Gama their Admiral, adding his
Brother Paulo, and Nicolao Celio for his assistance; who set Sail on the tenth
of June, Anno 1497, followed with great sorrow, cries and tears of the
Adventurers Wives, Children, and their nearest Relations, being possessed with
a prejudice, that the Voyage was so long and dangerous, that they should never
see them again.

Having weighed Anchor, first they directed their Course to the Fortunate
Isles, from thence to the Hesperides, and having cleared Cape de Verd, they
steered more Easterly till he lost all sight of Land, and lay engaged in the
wide and open Sea three Months together, when in ten Degrees of Southern
Latitude Land appeared, toward which he made with all possible speed, and soon
anchored in the Mouth of a pleasant River, where Landing he found some of the
Natives, whose Hair was short and curled, and they of a swarthy Complexion,
were naked, who never knowing what belonged to Commerce, nor having seen any
Strangers before, they made but small Traffic with them, only trucking
Spikes, and several sorts of Nails for Cattle and Fruit. Gama called this Place
St. Hellens Bay, and the River falling in it, St. James River.

Being thus refreshed, such was then their Courage, that weighing, they
resolved never to touch again, till they were clear beyond Cabo Bona Esperanca;
but here they were so vexed and pusl'd with almost never quiet Weather, that
they not only despaired of performing their Expedition, Are in great danger.
but also of their Preservation; the common voice and complaint of the Seamen
was, That they run themselves like blind and mad Men to their utter ruin: This
despairing fancy of theirs was more and more fermented by the continuation of
still vexing Storms, The Seamen would return.
especially having lost all hopes of return to see their Native Country, Wives
and Children any more. But Gama on the other side labored to appease and
encourage them, saying, That truly noble Souls slight all dangers, and that
whatsoever they had once undertaken they would never let go, nor be baffled or
deluded with any fear, in what face soever it appeared: but now the worst was
past, the hardship in a manner over, and after a long Race they were now ready
to seize the Quarry, so purchasing not only immortal Fame for the wondrous
Achievement, but also Riches, which would both supply their present necessity,
and make them and theirs for ever. But they were deaf to all persuasions; and
stubbornness, mixed with a general consternation, had so blocked up their Ears,
that they in stead of inclining to the advice and encouragements of their
Admiral, seeing he would not hear of any return, Conspire his Death.
they conspired his death, concluding that it were better for one Man to suffer
than so many: This Combination of theirs his Brother Paulo discovered, and
several of the Crew and Masters were brought in question, and secured, whilst
Vasco taking the charge of the Helm himself, and trusting none, Steered, though
still charged and affronted with stirring Weather, till at last he SEFALE

doubled the great Southern Cape, not stopping till he ran fifty Leagues
beyond, where he found a Bay, which he called St. Blasius; Discovers n^^v
Countries.
in the middle of which lay an Isle, where Landing they met with some of the
Inhabitants, not unlike those where he had touched lately before, only they
covered their Privacies with a Shell fitted for that purpose.

From hence, having refreshed themselves, they Sailed on, but making little
way, being ruffl'd often with foul Weather, hollow Seas, and a contrary
Current, still running Westward: yet at last they reached the Confines of
Zanguebar; which he so called from the Name of that Saint, and soon after cast
Anchor before Sofala, the chief City of that Country; They come to Sofala.
where he found the Inhabitants more civilized: who thought themselves very gay
in Copper Hoops, or Rings, which they wore as Bracelets and Armlets, and proud
of Daggers with Cotton Hilts, using a Language altogether unknown: but one of
the Townsmen spoke Arabic, by whom they understood, that a white People in
Vessels like theirs, had traffick'd with them formerly.

Vasco de Gama had ten Convicts, or condemned Persons in his Fleet, sent by the
King, who saved their lives, to be put ashore where the Admiral thought fit,
there to wander and seek their Fortunes, and if they lived, to make
Observations of the Country, and learn the Language, which hereafter might,
come to some account: two of these he turned ashore, leaving them there for
that purpose: Mean while, staying a Month at Sofala, a great Sickness happened
in the Fleet, from the alteration of Diet, which before was scarce and salt,
now fresh and plentiful, of which many died.

To Mosambique.
The next start he made was to Mosambique, a rich City, famous for Trade and
Commerce, situated in a small Isle under fifteen Degrees of Southern Latitude.

Here the Merchants and Citizens went all in Satin, embroidered with Gold, and
wear great Turbants of fine Linen, Simiters hanging across their Shoulders,
and in their left Hand a Buckler, who being thus Habited, came in small Boats
aboard the Admiral, who civilly and kindly treated them; where Discoursing,
they told him, That their King was called Abraham, and was the sole Monarch of
Mosambique, but under him his Xeque, or Lieutenant, Governed the City, That he
was called Zocacia. Gama soon after, conversing and being amongst them, got so
much in theirs and the Deputies favor, that he obtained two Pilots, who
undertook to carry his Fleet safe to the East Indies; which kindness of theirs
arose from a mistake, supposing them to be Western Saracens: but afterward
understanding that they were Christians, all this sweetning and good will
turned to rancor and hatred, the Pilots first repenting, abhorring to do any
thing for Unbelievers, leapt overboard, and so swimming to Shore, deserted the
whole business. The Portuguese being troubled at this high affront, conceiving
their relinquishing of them was influenced from the Town it self, brought all
their Guns to bear upon them, Fires at the City.
which discharging, they hurt and slew several of the Inhabitants, insomuch
that Zacocia was forced to call a Council; who there resolved to send him
another Pilot, which had also private instruction, in stead of carrying them to
their designed Port, to betray and deliver them up to the King of Quiloa,
making them believe that they were Abyssine Christians, who would kindly
receive, and furnish them with all sorts of Provisions. This treachery they
willingly undertook, out of malice and detestation they bore to Christianity.
Thence weighing Anchor, Gama hasted with a fair Gale to the Port of Quiloa,
suspecting nothing, to his utter ruin, which was there decreed, as before
mentioned, when Providence, being now ready to enter the Mouth of the Harbor,
sent a terrible Storm, but indeed a friendly one, which in spite of all his
endeavors, Tacking to get in, drove him at last back into the Offin, and so
much to the Leeward, that by his treacherous Pilots advice, and they willing to
save their lives, steered his Coast to Mombaza, a City, or rather a Fortress,
being built on a Rock impregnable, almost Moated round about by the Sea. Here
Gama having no sooner dropped his Anchors, but the Inhabitants, delighting in
Novelty, came flocking in great Companies aboard, who entertained them with all
civility, whilst the Pilots, not forgetting their treacherous Design, inveigl'd
the Inhabitants, having the advantage of the Tongue, first telling them that
they were Christians, and that they would do God and their Country good
Service, besides their own private benefit, being able to overpower them, to
seize their Ships, and sacrifice those unbelieving Dogs. Thus concluding, they
informed one another, going from Ship to Ship, as if upon curiosity and
pleasure, resolving to put in action what they had thus concluded, when the
Decks were more filled with the Inhabitants.

This matter was the easier to perform, because one of his Ships he had burnt
already, being not able to Man her, losing so many in their last great
Sickness. But Gama not liking his Anchorage, being too much within, and too
near some Rocks, if he by stress of Weather should chance to drive, suddenly,
upon better consideration, gave order to weigh, and to Anchor, as he supposed,
in a fitter place to Ride in, and to moore his Vessels.

A Plot against Gama discovered, and by what means.
Now the Saracen Pilots, seeing an unexpected hurry amongst the Sailers, busy
to and again about their Tackle, bending to Sea-wards, thought their Plot
discovered, and that they were carrying them clear away, leapt suddenly
overboard, muttering they were betrayed, the rest of the Natives, taking the
Alarm, as soon followed them, Diving under Water like a Flock of Sea-Fowl, not
appearing till they were out of Musket Shot, rejoicing they had so escaped.
But this Rout was not so sudden, nor were they all so ready in making of their
escape, but that he took thirteen Prisoners, and also carried away with him two
of their Vessels that lay near him; Gama takes two Vessels.
amongst which he found an expert and honest Pilot, who first truly informed
him, that the City Melinde was not far distant from thence, being almost under
the Equinox, and that their King was an affable Prince, receiving all Strangers
with great civility. The Admiral Gama being thus encouraged, and believing the
Pilots report, followed his directions, Steering straight on for Melinde, where
they found (though a Saracen) his Relation to be true.

The Melindian King having withdrawn himself, being old, from all public
Address and Business, sent a handsome Present, as a token of Amity and true
Friendship, by the young Prince his Son; and soon after provided him an
excellent Pilot, who conducted his Fleet in twenty days safely to Calicut in
the East Indies.

Description of Calicut.
The City Calicut lies on the Coast of Malabar, and though it boasts no Haven,
or any safe Harbor, and yearly much troubled, especially in the latter end of
May, with foul Weather, and overgrown Seas, raging with sudden and often
violent Heuricanes, yet by its great Commerce and Trade, is a famous, rich, and
well peopled Seat. It happened that the Portuguese arrived there in the midst
of this their turbulent Winter, getting within two Leagues of the City; and
soon after, there being a short intermission of Rain and Tempest, the
Inhabitants being able, came aboard in nimble Skiffs for that purpose, and
Gama, hoisting out his Pinnace, went ashore with some chosen Men, carrying
another of the forementioned condemned Persons along with him; who being turned
loose to seek his Fortune, and distinctly habited from the rest, the People
flocked about him, amongst which happened to be two Merchants of Tunis, one of
them, whom they called Monzaido, being well experienced in the Spanish Tongue,
and hospitable, took him to his own House, and afterward proffered all service
and kindness to the Admiral Gama, himself discovering the Condition of the
Country, and Inclinations of the Inhabitants. Whereupon Gama sent this
Merchant, with two others joined in Commission, as Envoys to their Emperor, or
Zamarin, who besought from Gama, that he would permit them safe Landing, that
so he might present him Letters from his Master, the Great King of Portugal,
which contained Matters of great consequence for the general good, especially
desiring an everlasting League of Amity and Peace.

How Gama was entertained.
The Zamarin, or Emperor, at that time resided in Pandarana, a small City two
Leagues from Calicut; where Gama's Ambassadors had Audience, and their Request
without any scruple or dilatory demurs presently granted them, taking it a
great kindness and honor, that he had made his Address on such an amicable
purpose. The Emperor also out of mere kindness advised them to come to Anchors
under Pandarana, there being a safer Harbor to protect them against the sudden
violence of the Weather, and that also there he might the better, being so near
in Person, establish the Overtures of the King his Master. And presently after
he lent his prime Pleasure-Boat, called Catuales, from Pandarana, to fetch Gama
in fitting State to his Royal Palace. But Gama, Gama goes to the Emperor, but
not without being very circum^p ct.
who by late woeful experience was grown cautelous, considering the worst of
what might happen, chose twelve of his stoutest Seamen to attend him as a
Guard, and some of his own Boats to wait ashore for his return, and left the
charge of his Ship to his Brother, with Instructions, that if any mischance
should befall him, which might detain him there, or otherwise, that he should
speedily hoise Sail, and carry the whole Relation to his Master the King of
Portugal.

At that time these Indians had neither Horses, nor other Cattle to carry Men
or Burdens, so that Gama was conveyed to the Palace in a Sedan. In the Way he
was met by some of the Emperors Attendance, all Clothed in fine Linen, who,
employed for that purpose, marched orderly before him to the Palace, and then
conducting him by the Hand through several Anti-Chambers and Rooms of State,
The description of the Zamarin's Palace at Calicut
at every Door and Entry standing ten of the Emperors Guard. He entered at last
the Presence, which was very large and stately, the Floor covered with a rich
and costly Stuff, interwoven with Silk and Gold, the Walls hung with more rich
and curious Tapestry; round about upon ascending Steps, on several Thrones, all
Princes, his Privy Council sat. The Emperor, or Zamarin himself, clad in white
Cotton, embroidered all over with Golden Roses, tied up with handsome Knots,
rich with invaluable Oriental Pearl, lay supinely at his ease, leaning upon his
Elbow, on a most glorious Couch, wearing a Hat, which rather resembled a
Turbant of Massy Gold, decked with inestimable Jewels, sparkling like Stars; a
great part of his Arms and Legs were neatly Hoop'd about with weighty Golden
Rings, which being Buckl'd sat close; his Toes and Fingers Were covered with
Jemald-Rings, and Armlets, set with Diamonds: Near him stood an Officer with a
flat Plate covered with Betel, an Herb which the Indian Princes continually
chew, whose Virtue keeps always a sweet Breath, and better than drinking allays
Thirst, correcting Crudities, freeing the Stomach from all Qualms, and the Head
from melancholy, disaffecting Vapors. The Zamarin being of a black and swarthy
Complexion, his Body, tall and burley, his Limbs large and brawny, (for his
Arms and Legs were naked) showed enough in Countenance and Person, the Majesty
of a King.

Gama's Discourse to the Zamarin.
Gama being commanded to sit, by an Interpreter declared first the occasion of
his Address to his Imperial Majesty, that he was sent from his Royal Master the
King of Portugal, in his behalf with Salutations, and to kiss his Hand, who
endeavored, being a great Prince himself, to make amicable Leagues, and
everlasting Friendship, with all other Foreign Monarchs wheresoever, and in the
first place with him, hearing of his Majesty's many singular Virtues,
Magnificence and Fame, spread to the utmost Confines of the Universe, he also
commanded a Fleet to be Rigged and set forth under his Conduct, who now having
spent much time, passing through many dangers, an unmeasurable Way, tossed with
all Winds on a turbulent Sea, at last being happily Landed at this long desired
Port, and having received the extraordinary honor and favor of this his public
Hearing and Address, he in the King of Portugal's Name, humbly proposes what he
so much desires, that is, not only an establishment of a well-grounded Peace,
and friendly Correspondency betwixt the Princes, but also that his and your
People might drive a constant Trade and Commerce, which might equivolently
redound to the good and profit of both Nations.

Thus saying, with a submiss and comely Posture he delivered his Letters,
written in Arabic and Portuguese, with several Presents, which though not
costly, yet their Novelty was such, that the Emperor was strangely taken with
several of them, growing to that kindness thereupon, that he proffered him all
Friendship, The Zamarin shows Friendship to Gama.
promising him of his own accord whatever he desired: and then being more
inquisitive, entertained himself by enquiring of his King, what manner of
Person, and the like, then of his Country, what, and where it was, and how far
distant, desiring to know of his strange Adventures in his so long a Voyage
thither: To all these he gave him a brief and handsome account; which no less
pleasing, the Emperor caressed him with a sumptuous Banquet after their manner;
both Parties being extremely satisfied, Gama departed.

The fame of this Negotiation was next day all the News through the City, all
sorts of People for the most part well approving of what they heard, only the
Saracen Merchants, who were many, and there residing, drove a great and
profitable Trade from thence to other Parts; they hearing of this were
strangely surprised, being much troubled, lest the Portuguese should break in
upon them, and carry a great part or all of this their rich Traffic into their
own Channel; nay, this would not only be destructive to their Estates, but
also to their Religion, which is very catching, by this means introduced, might
prove fatal to many of their Souls.

The Saracen Merchants incense the Zamarin against Gama.
These upon a double score, love of Profit, and hate of Christianity (to which
they bore an inveterate malice) the next morning the primest of them gathered
together, and went to the Palace with a ready Speech prepared, to draw an odium
upon the Portuguese; who having ready admittance, their business by their looks
and behavior appearing to be serious, and of no small concern, they humbly
showed to the Zamarin, how that these Strangers, who had in a manner surprised
his Majesty, having no other information of what they were, or their Condition,
but from themselves, were indeed not so, and that they had told him nothing but
Lies, for they were able to make out, that they were a Crew of Roving Pirates
and Robbers, and declared by their actions common Enemies to all humane
Society; and that their King, if they had one, was a petty Prince, far off in
the West, who not able to enlarge his narrow Territories upon the adjacent
Country, sent these Hectoring Desperado's through all Seas, to make Booty of
what they could either get by Wheedling, downright Cheating, or the Sword: And
if his Imperial Majesty be so pleased to grant them a free Trade and Commerce,
that then they would, being so enforced, leave Calicut, this their settled
Staple, and seek Trade elsewhere, which sure would not redound so much to his
Majesty's benefit, who had so long brought in their Customs and Duties, a
certain and great Revenue to the Crown, which they by no possible means, if
they deserted the Place, could in many years make the like, or any considerable
Return. Thus the business was agitated, and the Emperor informed by both
Parties.

The Malabars contrive to make away the Partuguese.
When the Malabars, being by Nature fickle and treacherous, not only persuaded
by the Saracens how dangerous such alterations would be, but also influenced
and encouraged from the wavering Court, conspired, laying a Plot how to dispose
of the Portuguese otherwise, by their utter destruction: which was not so
clearly carried, but that Monzaido, the Tunis Merchant, and a real Friend to
the Strangers Interest, scenting the bottom of their Design, informed Gama of
the whole Intrigue; who being very sensible of the danger, made his escape
sudden and privately from the City, that he might the better save himself and
his Fleet from undoubted Ruin; so setting Sail, he left the treacherous Harbor
for his security, where Cruising at Sea, Their Plot is spovl'd, and Gama falls
upon the Malabars.
he met with an Indian Vessel, standing in for Pandarana, a safer Port than
that of Calicut, where the Emperor had formerly advised Gama to, by whom he
sent Letters to the Zamarin; wherein he gave an account, that he was enforced
for his safety to leave his Harbor, and trust the Sea, a Plot being laid, to
take away, not only his Life, but to seize his Ships, and make Prize of all he
had; and that some had so poisoned his Majesty's Ear concerning them, gracious
to him before, with lying and scandalous Tales, and other false Aspersions,
that he would not venture any further Commerce, nor have to do with such a
fickle and not to be trusted People; therefore desiring, That such Goods as he
had there left ashore, might speedily be sent aboard, and he would not trouble
his Majesty nor them any further.

But the Zamarin excusing himself, laid the fault on his corrupt Officers and
Attendants, who were already tried, and condemned to suffer, condign Punishment.

But whatever his Excuses were, there was no Restitution, and the Goods lay
still as Confiscated for the Emperors Use; at which Gama being justly incensed,
resolved by Reprisal to make up his Loss: And soon after he seized on a Malabar
Vessel, by chance standing into Calicut, in which were six Persons of Prime
Quality amongst them: Thus the Emperor being enforced to release those
Prisoners of so much esteem, delivered up all those Goods which Gama laid claim
to, sending with them also an Answer to the King of Portugal's Letter.

In the mean time Monzaido the Tunis Merchant (his Kindness toward the
Portuguese being discovered) made his Escape from the City (where he feared no
less than Death, and Confiscation of all he had) for his Safety, to the Fleet;
whom Gama receiving with all Civility, carried him after to Lisbon, where he (a
Convert) received Baptism, and lived there, being turned a Christian,
Honorably, and in good State and Condition, many Years.

But the Zamarin looking upon this as a high Affront, to be force'd thus to his
dishonor to exchange Goods for Prisoners, and to be brought to Capitulations,
only three Ships opposing his Mighty and Absolute Power; would not thus sit
down, nor take it so; although his own Navy, by which, nay, with a small part,
he might have vindicated his Cause, which were there then, by reason of the
Annual Tempests hall'd ashore, and could by no means possible be suddenly
Launched; yet with wonderful dexterity he Manned out sixty Boats, with stout
and expert Soldiers, who were so Ordered and Commanded, that they were able to
destroy and Swallow them all.

He flying, and they pursuing, and just ready to lay him aboard, twenty to
every Ship; so it pleased Providence, to befriend him with a sudden Storm,
which parted the Fray; they being routed, and forced, not without danger,
ingloriously to return; and Gama coming clearly off, loosing the sight of
Calicut, Steered his Course directly home, Gama returns home to Portugal.
and in something more than two Years completing his Voyage, Anno 1499. he
Anchored in the Haven of Lisbon, where he was received with great joy; being
the first (to his Eternal Fame and Honor) that with an undaunted Courage,
passing so many imminent Dangers, found a Way by Water to the so much desired
East Indies.

After Gama's Return, of whom the King had received sufficient Information
concerning the Profit and Advantage which might be made by the East India
Expeditions, did so much encourage him, that he fitted out thirteen Ships,
Manned with 1500 Mariners, and 500 Soldiers, under the Command of Pedro Alvaro
Caprales, who had strict Order, That he should endeavor by all means to make a
League of Amity and Friendship with the Emperor of Calicut; and to request the
Liberty of Raising a Fort there, to the end they might there settle their
Staple of Merchandise: Which if the Emperor should refuse, nor would be drawn
to by any Persuasions, then to endeavor to force him to it by Arms.

Thus having received his Instruction and Commission, he departed with his
Fleet out of the Haven of Lisbon, and Steered the same Course to St. James
Island, as Gama had done before. Then he Sailed more Westerly, and fell at last
on an unknown Coast, which he called Holy-Cross-Land, since Brafile; where
Landing, and finding it a fruitful and rich Soil, he cast up a Fort, and sent
Gaspar Lemius back to Portugal, to inform King Emanuel of his New Discovery.
And leaving the Charge of the New Work which he made there; to some choice Men
that he took put of the Fleet, with all Necessaries to maintain it, he
departed, directing his Course toward Calicut.

But in the way he rancountred with such Storms, that he lost four of his
Vessels; and glad he came off with no greater damage, Steered directly for
Calicut, where soon after he arrived.

Where the Zamarin dealing also treacherously with him, they fell at variance;
but Caprales played his Game so well, that he forced the Zamarin to pay him
double the damage of what his Losses came to: So returning with mean Success,
he arrived in the Haven of Lisbon, Anno 1501.

The same year Emanuel plying his Business, set forth three other Ships, under
Johannes Novius; who meeting with Caprales, now in his way homeward, telling
him of the fickle and treacherous behavior of the Zamarin of Calicut, quite
discouraged, supposing such his Labor would prove in vain, returned with him:
So that that Expedition signified nothing.

Notwithstanding all these Rubs and Discouragements, his being still more and
more out of Purse, and all his Endeavors turning to no account, but only
feeding as it were vain Hopes; yet not one jot discountenanced, he went on
strenuously, and set out the year following a second time Vasques de Gama, with
ten Ships, conceiving by his well-experienc'd Conduct, he might be more
fortunate, and might at last set a better face upon the whole Affair; yet he
returned with little better Success than the former had done: But howsoever,
the King went on, and would not be daunted, setting forth Vincent Soderio, next
Stephano Gama, then Alphonso and Francisco Albuquerque, and after Gundissalo
Coelio, with several Fleets; all which returned but small Audits, in lieu of
his vast Expenses.

But at last, considering the whole weight of this high Concern lay only upon
his Shoulders, and some few of the Nobility; his Merchants and Private Traders,
and the whole Body of the People, not at all concerned: Neither seeming
willing, then, or at any time, to be engaged, either in their Purse, or
otherwise; he bethought himself (observing the Nation to be naturally
Superstitious, and much inclined to hearken to Prophecies, and such Follies of
knowing Future Events) of a way, a subtle Artifice, to catch the whole People,
or at least the Richer sort, with a new Device, or Royal Trepan, which was thus
effected.

Hermicus Cajadus, a Learned and Famous Poet of that Time, being not only witty
in his Art, but ingenuous, and trusty to carry on a close Design, King Emanuel
privately employed: They contriving together, what the King dictated, the Poet
set down, and soon after at his leisure put it in Verse, and with as cleanly
Conveyance, got the whole Matter engraven in ancient Characters, upon three
Stones; which done, he buried them on the Seashore, near Cape Rocha Decintra,
which were there to lie till Emanuel gave the Word. The day being appointed for
the Discovery, Hermicus, the better to carry on the Kings Business, invited
several Friends, Persons of Quality, his Neighbors, who dwelt thereabouts, to a
Treatment at his Countrey-Farm; where when they were merry, amidst their
changed Dishes and turned up Bowls, one that he entrusted, brought him strange
News, which was, That where he had been digging for Stones to finish his
Worships new Wall, they had found three Stones, with Inscriptions upon them, A
strange Discovery.
which neither he, nor any there present knew one Letter of; and sure must be
of some wonderful Signification. At this they all started up from the Table,
left their Feasting, and running immediately to the Place, gazed upon the
Marbles, all admiring the strange Characters, but none understanding a Tittle
thereof; reckoning by the worn and almost defaced Letters, That the Stones must
have lain there many Ages. Soon the fame of this was spread through all Parts
thereabouts, which came at last with great wonder to the Kings Ear; but he
showed himself more amazed and strangelier concerned than the Relater; and very
earnest suddenly to see and know what they might signify, straight commanded
the Marbles to be brought to Court. The King then viewing them with greater
astonishment, with much ado a good while after got them to be Read and Copied
out, finding them to be a Prophecy of Sybilla, to this effect.

Sybilla vaticinium Occiduis decretum:
Volventur Saxa Literis, and ordine rectis.
Cum videas, Occidens, Orientis opes,
Ganges, Indus, Tagus, erit mirabile visu;
Merces commutabit suas uterque sibi,
Soli aeterno ac Lunae Decretum.
Sybil foretells Joy to the Western Shore,
When Stones are found, with Letters graven over.
O West, when thou the Eastern Wealth shall see,
Indies and Tagus shall Admirers be;
That all Parts opened, Traffic entertain,
Wherever Suns rise and set, Moons wax and wane.
And ordered them to belaid up in his Treasury, as Holy Relics, signifying by
their Preservation, as the Palladium to Troy, the Safety, Good, and Utility of
the Nation; clearly demonstrating, That the Portuguese, being the most Western
People, should be them, that by their Conquests at last should Command over the
remote East Indies.

The Cheat thereof.
This strange Discovery not only spread through Portugal, but was more than
Table-talk through all Christendom; and the Inscriptions every where Copied,
and Translated into their several Languages, and many Learned Commentators
glossing, and giving the same Opinion thereupon, That the Portuguese were only
destined for that Business.

Thus by deceiving of his People, they were undeceived, and brought to a right
understanding of the Benefit that would accrue both to him and the whole
Kingdom, by a vigorous Prosecution of the Grand Design, so lately and well
begun by Vasco; in pursuit of which, they might without question make
themselves Masters of the vast, and yet unknown Territories of the Oriental
World.

Thus, and by this Superstitious Means, the Work went forward on all Hands,
every one striving to be foremost, and to join their Stocks together, to carry
on the Design; By which enabled, the Portuguese first conquered Goa, and there
settling their Staple, from thence penetrating every way, they got several
Footings, making themselves by Conquest Masters of many considerable Places,
Conquering whole Kingdoms, bringing from thence a World of Treasure, and also
drove the first Trade in our Japan.

Now leaving the Portuguese, with their Voyages and Discoveries in the
East Indies; it seems not amiss, nor altogether impertinent, to peruse the
remaining Navigators, that sought Adventures Westward in America. Next to
Americus, of whom we have formerly spoke, was Vasco Nunno Bolboa, a stout and
expert Captain, who adding to Columbus his Discoveries, Anno 1513. first found
the Straits of the Bay of Mexico, between Nombre de Dios and Panama; and
(passing the Isthmus) the great Southern-Sea, verging both the East and
West Indies.

Hernando Cortis takes Mexico.
Next Hernando Cortis, not only a Voyager, but a Conqueror, with a great Fleet
and considerable Army Landed at Mexico; who with a few Spaniards, and the help
of the Claxcallans, Natives, and inveterate Enemies to the Mexicans, Conquered
that vast Empire, Peopled with Millions of Men, for the King of Spain, Anno
1520. and entering the great City Mexico, took their Emperor Montezuma Prisoner
in his Palace: But the exceeding Glory of this Action, and Honor of this mighty
Conquest, he but a short while enjoyed; for in the height of his Hopes and
Bravery, looking out of a Window, about to appease some of his then mutinying
Spaniards, a Stone hit him by chance, of which Wound, though not mortal, he
soon after died.

Francisco Pisaro conquers Peru.
Five Years after, Francisco Pisaro, another Voyager and Conqueror, seized a
second Empire, being the large Territory of Peru, in the Name of Charles the
Fifth. But of this he was not so soon Master, spending six Years in finishing
so great a Work: yet at last he took Prisoner their King Atabalixa, who, though
he used him not very civilly, brought him the greatest mass of Treasure that
ever was heard of in one Booty since the Creation; for all the Utensils of the
Court, from the Scullery and the Kitchen-Boards, to the Royal Table, were all
of massy Gold; insomuch that the meanest Private Soldier shared no less than
nine thousand Ducats, besides whatever was embezell'd away.

Gets an invaluable Treasure.
Here Pisaro's Part was such an infinite Sum, that Arithmetic would scarce find
Figures for it; the Revenues of which, improved by Good-husbandry at Use, might
have made him the richest Person in the Universe; and if he so pleased, he
might have easily set himself up a new Emperor, had he not been defrauded of
the most part of his new acquired and vast Riches, by Almagro, one whom he most
trusted, and his chief Companion and Confident.

Spaniards kill one another at Peru.
This close Conveyance and grand Cheat of his was not kept so private, but
Pisaro had intelligence of the whole Fraud; and from thence the Difference grew
so high betwixt these former Friends, that Love turning to Hatred, they as
Enemies stood upon their Guard. In this Contrast, and tumultuous gathering of
Parties, Ferdinand Brother to Francis Pisaro laid a Plot, suddenly surprising
Almagro, who being not able to make his Defense, was slain: But Diego,
Almagro's Son by an Indian Woman, being hot upon Revenge, like a bold
Assassinate stood not to make close Contrivances, but at high Noon entered the
House of Francis Pisaro, and amidst his Friends dispatched him: And soon after
Gonsalves, Pisaro's Brother, slew Diego; who then Commanding All, deserted the
Emperor Charles the Fifth his Master, and assumed the Government upon himself;
which he not long enjoyed: For the just Authority of the Emperor being carried
on with great Discretion by Peter Gasca, suddenly overthrew his ill-grounded
Government, real Right prevailing over imaginary and usurped Regality; such
Grandeurs belonging only to Princes: Thus the Usurper being defeated, the
Emperor was repossess'd.

Whilst Castile and Portugal were thus busi'd, following their Fortunes, and
several new gotten Interests, one in the East, and the other in the
West Indies; enlarging their several Territories, till they at last began to
Clash and Interfere; and also the Portuguese then looking with an ill eye on
the Golden Fleeces, rich and mighty profit that Spain brought from the West;
the Spaniard on the other side, as much grugding and repining at their new and
great Trade of Spices, which the Portuguese fetched from the East, furnishing
in a plentiful manner all Christendom, which turned to no less account, as they
supposed, than their Gold, when also a great discontent and no small difference
arose, not easy to be reconciled.

The Portugal laid his claim to all new Discoveries, being the first that broke
the Ice, and opened the way for such adventures; and withal, challenged what
ever was found, not only in the East, but also in the West Indies, by his
Commission and Patent granted him by Pope Eugenius the Fourth, and Signed by
his whole Consistory.

But Spain on the other side produced other Letters, Signed by Pope Alexander
he Sixth; in which his Holiness expressly Conferred upon his Majesty, in
consideration of the Promulgation of the Gospel, that might be by his means
spread into many unknown Countries, all that lay Westward beyond Cape de Verd,
being on the main Land of Africa, the Meridian of the Isles Hesperides; so all
on the other side, to the South and East, he Decreed for Portugal, and indeed
not improperly, because so lay their business, and both being possessed of the
same Division before.

Thus the Controversy being settled by the Court at Rome, that Castile might
not meddle any further in Eastern; nor Portugal, with Western Discoveries,
which both parties agreeing to, observed the Orders.

Ferdinand Magellanus Sails about the World.
Till Ferdinand Magellanus, one that had served a long time under Alfonso
Albuquerque, in the East-Indian Expeditions; for which being not rewarded
according to his Expectation, and as he thought he deserved, bearing a private
grudge, on this account against King Emanuel, making his Address, proffered his
Service to Charles the Fifth; How it happened.
telling the Emperor, that if he were pleased to Employ him, he would
undertake, without the least breach of his Holiness Commission, by a Western
Course, to find the Molucco Islands, and so make him absolute Master of the
Spicy, as well as the Golden-World.

He considering the great profit of such a Trade, and also by that means to
lessen the Portuguese Commerce, by taking from them such a yearly Revenue,
accepted of the proffer; and in the Year Fifteen hundred and nineteen, set him
forth with five stout Vessels, all well appointed for a long and new
Expedition; leaving Sivill, he first directed his course toward Brasiel, from
thence Coasting on, till he reached 53 degrees Southern Latitude; here he
discovered those Straits, which from his name are called Magellan: In the Mouth
of these, one of his Ships Foundered striking on a Rock, another of his Vessels
weary, and horribly disgusting the Voyage, Weighing Anchor, stole from thence
by night, and ran away directly back to Sivill.

But Magellanus, passing with many difficulties these unknown Straits, opened
at last the great Southern Ocean; where also suffering much by foul weather, he
came to the Island Subus, where he, and several of his prime Officers going a
Shore, where invited by the Natives farther into the Country to a Treatment;
who having gotten them at such an advantage, suddenly, expected Feasts,
Magellane murdered.
turned to bloody Banquets, and there amidst their Merriment, by the Salvages,
they were all barbarously Murdered.

Those few that escaped the Massacre, not able to Man three Ships, were
necessitated to burn one of them, being the worst; so they prosecuted their
intended Voyage to the Molucco Islands; here Anchoring before Tedor, they took
in their Lading of Spice, which they so long had sought for. And from thence
Steering homewards, one of them receiving so great a Leak, could not possibly
be saved by all their endeavors, but that she sunk downright with her whole
Freight, and so rich a Burden; Of five Ships, only one returns home.
so that of five Sail that went cheerfully forth, returned (that being so
crasie) scarce one; which after three years, and so long expectation, entered
the Haven of Sivill, with a poor Lading of tainted and dammag'd Spices: But
however, the name of the Ship and Master that first of all Sailing a Western
Course, Girdled the World, deserves to be Registered; the Master John Sebastian
Lano a Biscaner, the Ship called, The Victory.

But now returning to our intended Japan, concerning whose Plantation from a
few Exiles, we have formerly hinted, we will now enlarge.

Who first peopled Japan.
The Peopling of Japan, and first Plantation thereof was from China; as by their
own Relations about Seven hundred Years since, proceeding first from a Grand
Conspiracy and Rebellion.

The time unknown.
A great Minister of State, Allied and Interessed in a prime Family, though he
enjoyed as much as his Prince, having the whole Government and Disposure of all
things at his pleasure; whilst the Emperor followed Ease and Luxury, thought
himself unhappy and dissatisfied, A strange accident; by which Japan was
peopled.
unless he became absolute Master: This Ambition of his, was for their own
Promotions fermented by all his Relations and Kindred, which were very many; So
that at last they contrived a Subtle and Execrable Plot, yet very difficult to
carry on; not only the Death and Murder of the Emperor himself, but of all
such of his Privy Council, and others in great Authority, that adhered not to
him, or had on several occasions discovered their aversness against his too
much present Power and growing Popularity. This their damned Contrivance,
though close and clandestinely carried, and not many entrusted with the bottom
of their Design; yet how, I know not, taking Air, a part of their horrid
business came to light. Thus being disabled to Work any longer privately in
their Mine under ground, whereby at one blow, and in one night they might
finish the whole Business, they were forced to set a fair Face on their foul
Intention, by public Vindication, and wresting the sense of their Black Cause
into a better Construction; so first letting loose their Band-Dogs, Fears and
Jealousies, recriminating and complaining against evil Counselors, that
therefore they were forced to stand upon their Guard; and as they called it,
take up defensive Arms; mean while, the Imperialists being not idle for their
safety, aray'd themselves against this their new-raised Militia; So Privy
Conspiracy became a Grand Rebellion, and the whole Empire engaged in a long
Civil War, many great Battles fought with various success; at last the event
falling on the right side, the Emperor, by the Victory made more absolute than
ever; being stirred up with just indignation, resolved to make them Exemplars by
their sufferings, to all that dare leap at the Throats of their Sovereign
Princes: First, Setting forth a severe Proclamation, prescribing all, who
either were Abettors, or had been actually in Arms, where ever Detected; so
that the whole Empire became a Shambles, blushing with Blood and Slaughter, by
putting in Execution this his severe Decree. When a more moderate Party of his
Majesty's Council, having also of their Relations amongst them that were in
imminent danger, ready to suffer under the Persecution, humbly besought the
Emperor that he would mitigate his Just Sentence with Mercy, and sparing their
Lives, only to Banish the Rebels his Dominions, and suffer them to spend the
remainder of their miserable Lives in the Desolate Isles against Corco;
Japanners banished from China.
which he granting, they were transported thither; and as we said before, from
a few poor and Male-contented Exiles, began a small Plantation, which in
process of time, growing up, is now become a famous and formidable Empire,
standing in competition with that of China, and since called Japan.

Inveterate malice of the Japanners against the Chinesies, and their different
customs, from whence it proceeds.
Whether this Story be true, or not, we are not able to assert, but that they
were a Chinesy Colony, may appear by much of their Speech and Character yet
remaining amongst them; and that this Tradition either true or false, causes an
irreconcilable Difference, with inveterate Malice against the Chinese, as a
people that have unjustly thrown them out of their Native Country, taking from
them their Rights, Lands, and Possessions. Thus this ancient Feud continuing to
this day, they on all occasions fall on their Coast, entering with Fire and
Sword, and all manner of Hostility; and also they so much abhor and loath the
Chinesy Customs and Fashions, that rather than they would resemble them in
their behavior, they have taught themselves such proposterous actions, that
they are not only unlike them, but all the world beside.

Customs of the Japanners.
First, As the Chinese and several Nations uncover their Heads, or bowing in
their Salutation, conjoyn right Hands or embrace, they stand Starched like a
Statue, stiff without any Motion; and in stead of uncovering their Heads, they
in a cross manner, put off their Shoes; and as they and we commonly rise up in
Respect to any Person, entering the, Room, they just contrary, in stead of
standing, sit down; and as the Chinesy and other Nations, when they walk abroad
put on an upper Garment, a Cloak, Coat, or Mantel, they Disrobe themselves and
March in Querpo, putting on their loose Vestments when they come in; and
whereas we esteem bright colored Hair, and white Teeth, they look upon Tresses
as black as Jet, and Ebbony Teeth, (both which they artificially make so) as
most Ornamental, and the chief marks of Beauty; and what all Nations agree in,
making the right Hand the Superior, and place of most honor, either walking or
sitting, that Pre-eminence they give to the left: and to be clad in black,
amongst them signifies Triumphs and Joy, which every where else are the Habits
of Mourning and Sorrow, only White amongst them being the Dress of Loss and
Disaster: And so amongst their Women, who when they walk abroad, order their
Handmaids and Daughters to go before them, whereas ours follow their
Mistresses; and as other Women, when with Child, expatiate their bodies by
unlacing, to give more liberty to their growing Issue, they on the otherside,
contract, imprisoning the Infant in a narrower Circle, Strangely different in
their nature from all other people.
by pinching and girding closer their swelling Waste, supposing else they
should Miscarry with what they go withal; and when not impregnated, they give
their bodies all scope and liberty; when ours, as much straiter, and bind
themselves up to recover, if possible, their former shape and slenderness.

They after Delivery, in stead of Swathling and wrapping up the Child in warm
Clothes, throw it into cold Water to harden; and in stead of comforting the
Mother with some Cordial Broth, they keep them fasting, not suffering them, a
good while after their Delivery, to receive any considerable nourishment.

Their manner of Diet is also opposite to ours; whereas we delight in Friends
and Strangers at our private Tables, or at least admit Relations and Concerns
to sit with us, never willing to eat alone; they on the contrary have each
their peculiar Boards, where they Dine and Sup by themselves in a churlish
manner, and served but meanly, are satisfied with a slender pittance.

A Drink in Japan called Chaa, held in great esteem by them.
Their Drink is a Concoction made of Rice, which in strength and relish
resembling Wine, they use as if such, often taking men plentiful Doses, that
they become inebriated therewith; but for their mornings Draughts, and closing
up of their Stomachs after Meals, they only following the Chinesy manner,
drink Chaa, which comforts, and is a great suppressor of Fumes, that rising
from the Stomach after great Meals disturb the Head.

It is not known how big Japan is, Linsch^t.
The Empire or Island of Japan, if it be an Isle, is not only one, but many;
which evidently appears by those parts that border on the Sea, where the Coast
discontinued with many In-lets, stands like a broken Wall, and the several
falls of fresh Water Brooks and Rivulets, descending from the upper Grounds,
with their mixed interweavings, both from Sea and Land, make a numerous crowd of
petty Isles: from which watery redundancy, arise Cloudy exhalations, that cause
variety of stirring weather; as sudden Winds, cold Rain, Hail, Frost and Snow;
yet these mixed changes so attemper the Air, that though under a hot Climate,
they suffer not by extremity of heat in their Summer Solstice.

This Country extends it self from 157 degrees to 170 Longitude, and in
North Latitude, from 30 to 38, which makes 810 in length, and 408 English Miles
in breadth.

Its Eastern borders only open to the great Ocean; the South lies toward the
South Sea, where great and many Isles lie scattered, and make now a new
Archipellago. The West side, the Sea intervening lies opposite to the Empire of
China: The North-West, but at vast distance respects Tartary: The North
bordering on Pedso, only separated by an Inlet of the Sea, which runs not up
above thirty English Miles, where both Lands continuing, stop the course of the
Flood, and make one Continent, which Francis Cairon Ambassador to the Emperor
of Japan, that traveling from the Territory of Quanto, where the Imperial City
Jedo lies North-East, seven and twenty days journey to the Prominent Point of
the Kingdom of Sunguar, here Sailing over a Bay or Gulf of the Sea, they came
to the Country of Jesso, desolate and Mountainous, but full of precious and
costly Furrs. The Japanners have often times ventured very far in. Jesso, but
could never discover the end. The Emperor himself has so much endeavored the
knowledge of it, that he sent Persons a purpose to inspect and make discoveries
how far his Territory extended, and supplied them with what, not only might
serve their Necessities, but whatsoever might accelerate and make more easy so
difficult an Expedition.

Teco borders on Japan.
Yet after long searching and far traveling through rough and untracted Wilds,
sometimes climbing steep Ascents, often engaged in amazing Precipices, they found
their labor in vain, and no end, only seeing some few Salvages hairy all over
with slovenly Beards.

The extent thereof could never be found out by the Inhabitants.
These beastial People, rather than humane, could neither give any account of
the Country Jesso, nor of their own wherein they dwelt; so it evidently
appears, that Jesso and Japan are one Continent, but how far Jesso extends
Northerly; and whether both may make one Isle, none has yet informed us.

Who first Sailed to Japan is uncertain.
Who of our European Voyagers (a new way being found by doubling the great
Southern Cape to the East Indies) first discovered this Land is uncertain.

Some relate, That a Portuguese Ship by stress of Weather, not intending any
such Course, was accidently driven upon the Coast of Japan, Anno 1539, but
neither tell us the Ships Name, Captain, Master, or any other Particulars; so
we wave this account as but a story, and not sufficiently Authentic, to have
the honor of the first Discovery.

Jo. Petrus Maffeus, and Jacobus Thuanus, Anthonius, Guluamus. Most set down,
that it was in Anno 1542.
But this seems more credible which Joannes Petrus Maffeus, and Jacobus Thuaamus
attest in the Writings of Anthonius Guluamus, how Antonius Mota, Francisco
Zeimot, and Antonio Pexot, in their Voyage Sailing from Dodra to China, were
forced from their intended design, and driven with an unwearied Tempest on the
Confines of Japan; the time being more memorable, because that in that Year
1542 the King of Portugal sent Alphonso Soso, empowered by his Commission, with
like authority, as if himself were there present, his first Lieutenant or
Viceroy, to Reign at Goa. But soon after (of which also we have no certain
account) the Portuguese by several Casualties and Adventures, got good footing,
and drove a great Trade there, amongst which, this in the first place being of
most remark.

By what means the Portuguese got footing in Japan.
A Youth, a Stripling of Japan, being terrified with the hard usage of a cruel
Master, expecting upon some occasion a severe punishment, fled; taking
Sanctuary in a Monastery of the Bonsi, amongst them the prime Religious Order;
where whilst he skulk'd and kept himself in private, to escape his terrible
Lord, it happened, that a Portuguese Vessel, Commanded by one Alvarius Vazius,
touched in that Harbor; who coming a Shore, and curious to see Novelties,
viewing this Religious Structure, where whilst he was gazing about, and feeding
his fancy, now with this, now with that, the Youth presented himself in a sad
Petitioning Posture, signifying to him by signs, that he would be pleased to
save him a- board his new arrived Vessel from some threatening danger; he taking
compassion of him, found out a means to conveigh the Youth from thence, thither
that night, where, supposing the Boy not altogether safe, nor himself neither,
put him aboard a Merchant that lay close by him, who was to Weigh Anchor that
night; who accordingly set Sail, and carried him to Malacca, whether he was
bound with his Freight: The young Japanner in his passage, observing their
manners of Worship, and hearing them Chant and Sing at their daily Service, or
else moved by Divine Inspiration, earnestly desired to become a Christian, as
they were; whereupon the Master of the Ship made his desires known to the
Fathers, then Residing at Malacca, that he might receive Baptism; but they
modestly refused, saying, That the honor of it belonged to the Bishop, Johannes
Albuquerken, then Resident at Goa; whereupon he was transported thither, and
there with much Ceremony, after Divine Service, he received in sight of the
whole Congregation, Baptism, and changing his Japan Name Auger, was Christened
Paul of the Holy Belief.

Paul now well instructed in the Portugal Tongue, informed Franciscus Xaverius,
Cosmo Turrensis, and Johannes Fernandes Jesuits (Fathers that had ventured
their Lives in promulgation of the Gospel, and to make Proselites in those
parts) of the whole estate of his Country; whereupon, being encouraged, they
Embarked themselves first for Malacca, and from thence intending their course
upon the like service for Japan.

Ariving at Malacca, they met with a Chinesy Vessel, with whom they agreed to
Transport them to Japan; all which proceedings, Cluverius informed in a Letter
to some of their Society at Conimbrica, The Contents of Xaverius his Letter,
concerning his Voyage to Japan.
and also that they were encouraged by the information of some Portuguese
Merchants in Malacca, that Traded to Japan, How that the Seed of Christianity
had been already Sowed there by some of their own Society, and that in a
miraculous and wonderful manner, which in brief they related thus:

Some Fathers, Portuguese, by chance arriving there, but how he knew not, a
Japan Prince feigning Civility to them amongst other Entertainments, provided
them stately and well-furnish'd Lodgings, where when at night expecting to take
their repose; the Scene suddenly changing, they were entertained with dreadful
Apparitions and prodigious Spectrums, horrible Dins and Noise of rattling
Chains, Stools, and Cushions flying about their Ears; their Clothes rent and
torn off from their Bodies, and themselves fearing in like manner to be pulled
to pieces; which when all their Exorcismes and Prayers not prevailing, they
bethought themselves of their last refuge, which was Signing themselves with
the Figure of the Holy Cross, and scoring them on the Walls and Posts. which so
doing, on a sudden all was hushed, and those terrible Representations vanished,
and all that night after, they, without the least disturbance, rested well till
the next Morning; which, when divulged about the Town, and that they night by
night heard nor saw no more of those Diabolical Phantomes, the whole people
were almost persuaded to Christianity; in token of which, and also to keep away
the like evil Spirits from their abodes, you might have seen all the Walls and
Posts of their Houses every where marked with Crosses: Thus they reported.

Xaverius Voyage to Japan.
But to return again to Xaverius, and to conduct him in his Voyage to China: The
forementioned China Ship, stood to and again betwixt the Islands, so lingering
and loosing time, the Master being never willing to Steer that Course, and
besides being very superstitious in his own persuasion, he had his God, a
Wooden Idol erected on his Stern, to whom, A Ship-Idol of a Chences.
when ever he consulted concerning the course of his Voyage, or what else he
desired to be resolved, he humbly Addressed himself with Presents, Perfuming
the Image with Aloes, and Frankincense, and lighting many Tapers; Presenting
him with several, Dishes, as Birds, and other light Meats for Digestion, which
though it would not eat, yet he took signs and tokens from the Statues looks,
though immovable, which wire to him Responces of his good, bad, better, or
worse success. This, as in other things that are left to chance, happened
sometimes right, sometimes wrong; but by this stirred up, and still following
the seeming counsels of his Wooden God, and his own inclination bending him
homeward: he persuaded Xaverius and the rest of the Fathers so much, that they
being weary with lying so long at Sea, consented, and so unanimously agreed, to
refresh themselves at China, hoping from thence the better to complete their
intended Voyage: So the Master upon their resolution, Steered directly for
Canton, but the Wind proving more favorable for Chincher, a Haven further up in
the Country, and where he dwelt; they condescending, he Steered directly
thither, all intending to Winter there; So Sailing on till they came near
Couchin, where they were informed, that the Pirates had taken the Harbor, and
the Wind hindering to go back to Canton, he had no other course left, but was
necessitated to Harbor that Winter in Japan, whither standing with a fair Gale,
they soon arrived at Congaxima, the very place where young Paul was born, had
dwelt, Xaverius lands in Japan.
and fled from his cruel Master two years before: Here Xaverius, and the rest
of the Fathers Landed, the 15 of August 1549. where they were kindly received
by the Young-mans Parents and Relations; and he himself, though he had deserted
the Heathenish Idolatry of his Native Country, yet they looked upon him with
great respect, because as they accounted he had been now a great Traveller, A
Japauner turned Roman Catholic, relates what he has seen in India.
and able to render an account of wondrous Novelties, which he had made
observation of in Foraign Countries; every one coming and busy about him,
making several enquiries; insomuch, that the whole Town was full of the news;
and at last it came to the ear of the King of Saxuma, who being informed of it
as a business of no little concern, the young Traveller was commanded to
attend, where the Prince himself inquisitive, examined him where he had been,
and what he had seen, who presently recounted to him with a good confidence,
That he had been in India, where the Portuguese, a Potent and Warlike Nation,
come from a strange Country, and the utmost Parts of the Western World, had by
their Conquest, subduing several Nations, settled their own people in the heart
of India, in great and rich Plantations, and were the most formidable, and the
only Terror of the rest of the Oriental Coasts; and that the Countries about
Malacca and God, where they had also settled, either by permission or the Sword,
were rich and populous places, whose several Products, by the means of the
Portuguese, were become rich Merchandise to the whole Eastern World: Then he
demanded of him what persons those were that Landed with him, whereupon he
quick and pertinently answered, That they were also Portuguese, but of a Holy
and Religious Order, who by their Examples of Meekness, Zeal, and Sincerity,
sometimes backed by wonderful Miracles, Conquered Men's Souls, bringing them to
their Belief faster, than their Layety subdued their Bodies and Countries by
force of Arms.

Whereupon the Fathers were presented to him, who gave at first a fair and
indifferent hearing to the Disputation betwixt them and the Bonzy, and others
of their Orders: But concerning the Issue thereof, and the Miracles, as they
say, wrought by Xaverius, in maintaining the Truth of the Gospel, and there
being seconded by many more of their Fraternity; and also the cruel
Persecutions which both they and their Proselites went under, are at large
described in the Jesuits Letters sent from time to time from Japan, and
Printed by the Order of their College at Lions, Loven, Delingen, and Colen; of
which more at large hereafter.

But besides those Voyages which the Fathers Xaverius, Cosmus, Turrenfis, and
others made to Japan at several times, is also famous the Voyage of Captain
Francis Pais, in the Ship de Sancta Cruiz, from the Haven of Macau, in the Year
1588. who gives this account.

A Voyage to Nangesaque, by Francoi^ Pais.
We Sailed through the Straights of Lanton, in six Fathom Water, and Sandy
Ground, but the middle of it much deeper; on the Larboard side of the Entrance,
though straight, opened a Bay, near which the Wind being contrary, blew almost
a Storm, yet the strength of the Current so prevailed, that we made way clearly
through.

At day break, We discovered the Island Branco, well known at a great distance
by its steep and chalky Cliffs; after that we descried the Flat Coast of
Loemon, known by its two Promontories on the North-East and South-West end:
Then we Steered our Coast North-East, where happened several great Calms and
terrible Thunder and Lightning.

A considerable time we kept in sight of China, about five or six Leagues from
the Shore, after that we had Sailed close by the Islands of The two Sisters,
Formosa, and also by The three Kings; there appeared, as commonly does in those
parts, before a Storm, the dreadful signs of an ensuing Tempest, Signs of bad
weather. About the Cape of Good Hope, appears commonly a small black Cloud
before a Tempest.
which was here a Rain-Bowe only of two colors, hoop'd in with two more, the
outmost the largest; the Master being thus warned, furled his Sails, lowered
his Yards, and dropped all his Anchors, and so in a manner moored his Vessel, by
which time it blew so hard from the North-East, bringing along a high and rough
Sea, which oftentimes raked over us from Prow to Stern, that all our
Ground-Tackle, though very good, seemed not strong enough to keep her from
Driving: Thus we lay plying the Pump, Shipping often so much Water, as was
ready to beat down the Decks, so that we every Minute expected death; and that
which was worse, the Wind shifting eight Points toward the North-West,
furrowed fresh Billows athwart, which beat over our Broadside. Thus having
suffered four and twenty hours the utmost of the Perils, when utterly
despairing, not able to hold out any longer, it pleased God, that the Weather
broke up, and the Storm ceasing, after a short refreshment we joyfully weighed
Anchor, and proceeded on in our Voyage.

And now being got about an hundred Leagues from the Island of Meaxuma, we saw
with admiration a great number of py'd Fowls, black and white, by the
Portuguese called Allcatrasses, which preyed there on Fish. Before this Island
lies an obscure Cliff, and the Isle presenting it self in four Cantels, or
Divisions, being cut through in the manner of a Cross: On the South-West end of
it are two round Hills; the other Islands are known by several Rocks,
resembling Organ-Pipes; Here Sailing two Leagues along this Coast, to the
height of one and thirty degrees; from thence Steering our Course to Cabexuma,
which is surrounded by many Rocks, we discovered the Mountain of Amacusa, and
the utmost Point of the Island Cavallos, known by the tall Pines that Crown the
High-Land. At some distance off from the shore lies a Ridge of Rocks, which as
a Bar breaking the violence of the Waves agitated with Wind, make within a
smooth and safe Harbor. Then we found the Bay of Nangesaque, by joining our
Landmarks together, being a Tree, and the Roof of the great Church, where we
Anchoring, Hoysed out our long Boat, and so Landed in Japan.

This is our second Discoverer of any note, giving the most exact account of
the nearest and best way to Japan.

But two years before the return of Pais from his forementioned Voyage, John
Hugh Luschot setting Sail from the Haven of Maccaw, intending his Voyage for
Japan: He relates thus;

Linschot's Voyage to Japan.
The 19 of June we Weighed Anchor from before the Island des Outcas, lying on
the West side of the Entrance toward Maccaw, leaving the great Isle of Thieves
to Lee-ward, which has another longer Island full of Woods to the Northward of
it; and the like shape presents the Isle Tonquiau, being naturally fortified
with ten Cliffs like Bulwarks, but on the North-East side opens a convenient
and safe Harbor: We waved Lamon, standing off to Sea at a great distance,
because many Pirates lay lurking up and down, sheltered under those Coasts,
their design especially to seize Portuguese Vessels; therefore we Steered
directly toward the Chabaquon-Head, a High-Land, appearing a far off from the
Coast of China; afterward we Sailed the length of the Red Stone, Varella, a
Rock so called, and well known by its color, which appears above Water, and
may be seen beyond Port Chinogoa; Soon after we Stemmed the Isle Lequeo
Puqueno, whose steep Coasts are about sixteen Leagues in length, under twenty
five degrees North-Latitude, where we Sailed against a Current of troubled
white Shells, but after 15 Leagues we found ease: Then rose the Seven Sisters,
Isles so called, from their so much resembling one another; the first appears
with a sharp Spire or rising Point in the middle; and at the foot on the West
Angle, a Rock opens like a Column or Pillar; on the North-East, marked with a
black Cliff. The Seven Sisters out of sight, we raised the long Isle Ycoo, full
of black or sable Trees; from whence we lay North-East, Sailing betwixt that
and Tanaxuma through a Channel, clear from all danger of Rocks and Shelves; At
the Mouth of which, appears a Mountain like Vesuvius, or that of Aetna, which
vomits upwards hideous Smoke and dreadful Flames, mixed with Stones; the
Ruptur'd Bowels of the Mountain, which ejected with no little Fragor, sometimes
fills the adjacent Shores, Sea and Land, with terrible Affrights, and wonderful
Consternations.

But Tenaxuma, an Isle eight Leagues long, has on the West a good Harbor,
fortified naturally with Rocks; the Low-Land full of rising Hillocks, covered
here and there with black Pines: Eight Leagues Northerly, beyond this appears
the Coast of the mighty Empire of Japan, but in the midway, Steering to
Jebuxy, we lay a good while becalmed; yet nevertheless, the eleventh day after
we set Sail from Macow, we arrived in Japan.

But besides all these Voyagers, and the many Discoveries and Plantations of
the Portuguese and Spaniards in either Indies, at last the Hollanders being
thrust into an exegency of dangerous consequence, and forced by an overcoming
necessity, also became Navigators, and undertook (to save themselves from utter
ruin) that Work, by a business which happened thus;

At first, and in the infancy of their Trade, They only contented themselves
with making short Flights, and trafficking to their neighboring Confines, as
France, England, Denmark, Norway, and other Places in the Northern Ocean; with
which naturally delighted, and tasting the sweetness of Profit, they ventured
farther to Spain and Portugal, then growing more bold, entered the Straights,
seeking through the Midland Sea, at Legorn, Genoua, and Messina, what by their
several Trades might be more beneficial. Here whilst the Portuguese and
Spaniards made such wonderful Discoveries, they fixed and well satisfied, sat
down and went no farther.

The first reasons why the Hollanders undertook the Voyage to the East Indies,
and afterward to Japan.
But after the War was proclaimed by Spain against the United Provinces, King
Philip issuing out strict Commands, that all Goods that heretofore were
Exported from; his Harbors, or Imported from the Hollanders, whether the Growth
of either Country, or otherwise, should not only be confiscated and made
seizure of, but great Mulcts, and other Punishments inflicted upon all them
that durst, or were so hardy, as to infringe in the least these his special
Edicts, supposing by this means sooner to reduce them to his obedience, which
happened quite contrary: for by this time, prosecuting Magellanus's Discovery,
Spain had engrossed in a manner the whole East India Trade, so that his Ports
and Harbors were the Staples of Christendom, for all manner of Drugs, Spices,
and all other Oriental Growths: Thus the Hollanders being suddenly blocked up,
and cut off from so beneficial Traffic which they made with Spain, sending
those Commodities which they fetched from thence through most Parts of Europe,
that much astonished, looking upon themselves as utterly undone, they began to
consider, if any way were possible to be found to deliver them from their
imminent destruction; at last, after several Consultations, they bethought
thought themselves of a means; for having furrowed up much of the Northern Sea,
knowing as far as Greenland, they believed it not difficult to find a new and
shorter Way beyond Russia and Tartarie, through the Straights of Anian to
Japan, and from thence to the East Indies, which by surveying the Terrestrial
Globe, could not be above a fourth part of that so long Voyage by the great
Southern Cape; which if effected, they cast up, that with a quarter of the
Charge they might bring the Indian Products to their Doors, and be able to
furnish at so much lower Rates those accustomed Places which they formerly had
supplied.

The first Ships of the Netherlanders endeavor to find out a Passage to the
East Indies behind the North, but in vain.
In order to which, Anno 1549, they Rigged out four Ships, who Sailed on
according to design, till they encountered with huge Floats, and swimming
Castles of Ice; and though they were much troubled, encumbered, and in great
danger, yet against all this opposition, they reached the height of Nova
Zembla; but there being no longer able to oppose, the Ice increasing, covering
almost all the whole Sea, they were forced to return; so this their first
Expedition proved fruitless: Yet not disanimated with their first bad success,
they prepared that Winter, and toward the latter end of the next Spring, when
those Seas might be penetrated, seven Ships more, who after sixteen Weeks,
being stopped by the same impediments, returned with the like account into the
Maes. Yet though a little troubled with their unfruitful endeavors, they sat
not down so, but ventured out two Ships more; but this third Voyage proved more
unfortunate than either of the former, for they lost one of them, being frozen
up, and the Company Wintering there, were forced to break up their Vessel to
build a Cabin with it on the Shore, where they several Months suffered by
bitter extremities, and a Sunless Sky: the other being much crased and
Weather-beaten, was forced to return. Thus where they expected Mare Liberum, or
open Sea, they found Mare Clausum, the great Northern Bays, by which they hoped
a Passage, all blockt up with Ice.

Cornelius Houtman the chief promoter of the East India Expeditions.
The usual Way, lately found by the Portuguese, though long and difficult, lay
open; upon which, after small consultation, they pitched, and lighting on an
expert Sea-Captain, Cornelius Houtman, who had been formerly there, and lately
for that purpose redeemed by them from the Turks, they furnished out with four
Ships, who having in two years and four Months made little more than a saving
Voyage, anchored in the Texel.

Notwithstanding all these disasters, and small account of great endeavors,
they set forth another Fleet to Trade the same way; and not only them, but,
the business working of it self, several other Merchants began to venture out
Ships, freighted on their own accounts: Those and the first joining their
Stocks together, set out eight Ships under the Command of Jacob van Nek, and
growing impatient, two Months before their return they sent out three more,
under the Conduct of Stephen vander Hagen.

Several Merchants in Amsterdam fit out Ships for the East Indies, as also in
Zealand and Rotterdam.
In the mean time this example was every where followed, and this new Trade,
like a new Fashion, was imitated through all the United Provinces, and none
scarce looked upon, if they were not Venturers to the East Indies, for by this
time they found great profit by it. Yet by the multiplicity of Merchants
Trading there, a great inconveniency had like to have happened, to the ruin of
the whole business; for every one employing his own Stock, and for their
quicker dispatch endeavoring to out-buy one another, raised the Markets, and
soon discovered what value the Europeans set upon the Indian Goods: which
growing mischief to avoid, the States consulted, and ordered, that all
Adventurers to those Parts, should be conjoined and made one Society, and
called them The East-lndia Company.

The Netherland States to prevent the growing mischief, make an East India
Company
This being published, and also every one invited that could join their Stocks
with those that had already put in, and giving great encouragements, they
raised in short time a Bank of sixty six Tun of Gold: A Tun of Cold 1000 l.
Ste^ling
and those that ventured 5000 l. had the honor to be called A Prime Partner,
and so were chosen in order Treasurers for the whole Company, giving annual
Accounts to all the rest: which collected Treasures are kept in their
respective Places, till the Fleets are ready to set Sail; but the Head of all
where they are to adjust their Accounts, and pay in their gathered Sums, were
Amsterdam and Middleburgh, which is observed to this day.

Increasing of the East India Company.
Since which Establishment, this Company has not only made prodigious
improvements of their Stock, but also brought by their Conquests vast
Territories under the Command of the United Provinces; for the Natives, weary
of the insupportable behavior of the Spaniards and Portuguese, freely offered
themselves in Leagues of Amity, to be under their Protection; and others that
were more stubborn, and would persist under the Spanish Command, were subdued
by force of Arms: which soon growing so considerable, it was thought fit to
settle a new Government there in the most convenient Place.

Staple at Batavia.
Great Java, culled out as fittest for that purpose, they built their City in,
and called Batavia; which they fortified so well, that they baffled the Emperor
of Java, lying before it with two hundred thousand Men.

Here the States Governor keeps a Princely Court, and has his Privy Council,
who by an arbitrary Power determines all business of Peace or War; and such his
Limits of Dominion by their several Conquests are, that they extend from Japan
to Bassora in the Red Sea, being at least six thousand English Miles.

Thus we have settled the Batavian Plantation, and given a brief account of
those Voyagers which happened in such an Age, and one juncture of time, which
laying the Ocean open, found a way for Traffic to all the Angles of the World.

Embassies sent from Batavia to Japan.
But before we go on farther upon our Japan Discourse, and how the Hollanders
first settled their Staple in that Country, sending triennial Embassies from
Batavia their chief Residence, with great Presents, it will not be unfit to
relate one Embassy, which was the only one that ever we heard of, addressed
from thence to any Prince or Potentate whatsoever; for they taking so much
State upon them, though they receive all with great Pomp and Civility, never
make any return.

The Jesuits did this to make themselvesd famous by Converting the Japanners.
Histor. Jesuit. Hosp p. 139.
Alexander Valignanus a Jesuit, a Person, besides his Theology, eminent both
for Moral Virtues, Mathematical Sciences, and all other Learning, zealous to
promulgate the Gospel, and the Faith of Jesus Christ, and altogether to
eclipse, if possible, the high estimation the Japanners had of their blind
Priests, horrid Rites, and dire Superstition; to which purpose Mencio Ito,
Nephew to the King of Fiunga, and Michael Cinga, nearly related to the Kings of
Orima and Omura, his Pupils in the European Learning, he not only persuaded
them, but brought in their Royal Unckles, that it would be worth their time to
travel into Europe, where being eyewitnesses, and by certain experience to be
able to give an account of the glory of the Church of Christ, and the
magnificent splendour thereof: So it was, that as he designed, it happened, and
the young Princes with Julianus Nacaura, The Embassy from Japan to Spain and
Rome.
and Martinas Fura their Counselors, and two Gentleman-Ushers, and their two
Fathers the Jesuits, set Sail in the beginning of the year St. HELENA.

from Nangesaque, and after many dangers Landed at Miaco, and having stayed
there nine Months for a Ship, they a second time Embarked for Malacca, Come
to Malacca.
where they lost one of their Ships, and were themselves pillaged by the
Mahumetans, and glad they escaped with their Lives; then reaching Manapur, from
thence they travel by Land to Couchin: In this populous City they spent a year,
To Couchin.
and after hoisted Sail for Goa; To Goa.
where they were magnificently entertained by the Portuguese Viceroy,
Franciscus Mascaregnus. From thence Embarquing in a Portugal Ship, the first
Place worth mentioning was St. Hellens, To St. Hellens.
where they Landed.

Description of the Isle.
This Island, so called by its first Discoverers the Portuguese, from the Saint
on whose Day it was found, being the 21 of May, lies in the Main Ocean, 16
Degrees and 15 Minutes Southern Latitude, about 510 Leagues from the Cape of
Good Hope, 350 from Angola, and 510 from Brasile, being the nearest Continent
to this Isle, is about seven Leagues in Circumference, appearing high above the
Water, defended every where from the violence of the Sea, by steep Rocks like a
Wall, with Bulwarks, and is naturally Hilly, but cut quite through with many
Valleys; amongst which are two exceeding pleasant, as the Church Valley, so
called from a small Chapel built there; on the Northside of which is an easy
and delightful Ascent to the High-lands: toward the South is the Vale of
Orange, so called from the great plenty of that Fruit, which besides Lemons,
Pomegranates, and the like, grow there in great abundance, that they may Lade
six or seven Vessels with them yearly. On the West Side of the Chapel is good
Anchorage, but they must lie near the Shore to keep them from Driving; for from
betwixt the declivings of that Rocky Coast, the Wind comes often down with
great violence, and sudden gusts.

The Air.
The Air of this Island is very temperate and wholesome, insomuch that the Sick
which are brought out of the Ships on Shore there, soon recover their health.
The Valleys are not more than moderately hot, the Mountains temperately cold,
being continually fanned with cooling Breezes, and the Air is refrigerated
frigerated with five or six Showers in a day, the Sun shining as often betwixt;
and though the Soil be naturally dry and barren, yet it is replenished with
many Springs of sweet and wholesome Water, especially the Church Valley, through
which, descending from the High-lands, glide several pleasant Streams down to
the Sea, for the great accommodation of those that Anchor there, and put in
forfresh, Water; yet besides this, they have two other, from whence they supply
their wants.

This Isle, destitute of Inhabitants, may ascribe its plenty of wild Gattel to
a Portuguese Merchant, who in the Year 1512 coming to Anchor here, and
observing the pleasant Situation, and the solitariness thereof, which then
agreed well with his disposition, being something inclined to Melancholy, and
having been formerly much crossed in his Fortunes, wearied with business, and
the cunning practices of those he dealt withal, settled himself in this
solitary Place, putting ashore those Sheep, Swine, and Poultrey he had aboard,
which increased in a short time to a Miracle, insomuch that they supplied
whomsoever touched there, with plenty of fresh Provision, and especially after
King John of Portugal issued out strict Commands, prohibiting all his Subjects
from settling there.

This Soil, though naturally (as we said before) very dry and thirsty, is much
fertiliz'd, being moistened by many Springs and showry Weather, so that it bears
variety of Fruits, especially Pease and Beans, of which great store are found
growing every where, which when ripe, falling, sow themselves, making such
plenty.

Here are also whole Groves of Orange, Lemon, Pomegranate, and Figtrees, which
are always laden with ripe, green Fruits, and Blossoms; and great Shades of
Ebony and Rose-trees: the Wood is not easy to be wrought, because of its
knottiness. The Valleys are like Kitchin-Gardens, full of Parsly-Beds,
Porcelin, Sorrel, and several other Herbs good for the Pot, and also for many
Distempers, especially the Griping of the Guts, a Disease very incident to such
as frequent these Parts.

The Woods and Hills abound with all manner of Beasts, as Goats, Deer, some as
big as Stags, and also wild Swine of several colors, but very difficult to be
taken. When the Portuguese first discovered this Country, they found not any
kind of Beast or Fruit-bearing Trees, all which they transported, Stocking and
Planting of them there, which since have so spread themselves, that both the
Hills and Dales are satiated with them, without any art of Husbandry.

Here are also Partridges, Pigeons, Peacocks, and Pheasants, which cannot be
taken either by Snares or Nets, but only by Shooting. No Beasts or Birds of
Prey, Serpents, Toads, or Frogs, have here their receptacle; but ugly Spiders
and Flies, some green like Grasshoppers.

The Cliffs on the South Side of this Island entertain thousands of gray and
black Sea-Pies, or Mews; also speckled and white Fowls, some with long, and
some with short Necks, which lay their Eggs (being of a good relish) in the
Rocks. These kind of Fowls the Netherlanders 1608 in a Voyage to the
East Indies, called them by Irony, Mad-Pies, being so tame and gentle, that
they took them with their Hands, or knocked them down with their Sticks.

Here the Seawater which beats against the Rocks, remaining in a frothy foam
upon them, whitened with the Sun, becomes pure Salt, and Saltpeter.

Here are also Mountains which produce Bolus, and a fat gray Earth called Terra
Lemnia, such as comes from Lemnos.

In the South-east part of this Island is a Mountain, whose Earth being of a
brightish brown, Dies a good Red; and also one in the East, which yields a pure
mixed color, being brown above, and white below.

The Sea near this Island abounds in Fish, but must be taken with Hooks, and
not with Lines or Nets, because of the foulness of the Ground; Carps, but of
another color than those of Europe; Eels, about the thickness of a Man's Arm,
and of a good taste; Crabs, Lobsters, of better r^llish than those in England;
and also very good Mussles, which stick so fast to the Rocks, that they must
cut them off.

This Isle, though thus flourishing, lies still uninhabited, for they say that
the King of Portugal would permit none of his People to settle there, or
appropriate to themselves, but to be left free and open, to relieve those that
Sail that way.

Here they Landed, and after they had refreshed themselves, they showed the
young Princes the Sport of Hunting the wild Boar, with which they were much
delighted.

The Japan Ambassadors arrive at Lisbon.
From thence at last, helped with fair, and detarded with foul Weather, they
Landed at Lisbon, where they were received magnificently by the Cardinal Albert
Austria, Governor and Duke of Bragance. From thence they proceeded through
Guadalupe, Talavera, and Toledo, to Madrid, They come to Madrid and Majorca.
where Philip King of Spain entertained them with much splendour and kindness,
and showed them his Court, the Escuerial, and also his Treasury, then full, his
Plate-Fleet being newly arrived. Three Months they diverted themselves in
Castile, after Sailing to Alicant, and visiting the Isles Majorca and Minorca:
There entering the Haven of Pisa, they found Peter, sent from his Brother
Francis Duke of Florence to meet, To Florence.
and conduct them to his Palace, where they received no less welcome, and
splendid Entertainments, than formerly at the Spanish Court.

To Rome.
Next they progress'd on directly toward Rome, the Pope sending Franciscus
Gambara to his Confines, to attend and invite them to his Palace. In the
Evening they were met first, and received with all civility by the Master of
the Jesuits College, who Lodged and Entertained them in a decent manner. Their
Entrance into Rome very sumptuous.
The next day they made their public Entry, and were to be presented to Pope
Gregory the third, which was performed with all the imaginary Grandeur that
could be possible: First marched his Holiness's Lifeguard, Riding all alike
suited in rich and costly Habits; next the Infantry, his Guard of Switzers;
then the Attendants of the Cardinals all Clincant in Gold, and in Carnation
Silks; then the Cavalcade, all the Princes and Nobility in or about the City,
Riding in Order, with all the splendour that might be, with Trumpets and
Kettle-Drums beating and sounding before them; then the Japan Princes well
Mounted, and richly Clothed after their Country manner, being an under
Garment, Vest and Tunick, curiously embroidered with Birds and Flowers, wide
and short Sleeves, about their Necks a Scarf, two Scymiters hanging on one
side, the Hilts and Scabberds Studded and Imbossed with Pearls and Diamonds; at
last the Magistrates and Gentry of the City made up the Rear; thus attended
they marched to the Palace, and entering the Presence where his Holiness sat,
surrounded with Cardinals and Bishops, all in Pontificalibus, according to
their Degree, with their Myters on, Crosiers in their Hands, Copes and
Surplices, which exceeded, as Jacobus Augustus Thuanus affirms, Thuanus Hist.
Lib 81.
all the pompous Shows that ever were seen there before. Thus attended, they
addressed themselves, and according to the manner, though Princes, in an humble
posture kissed with joyfulness his Holiness's Feet; then the Royal Letters of
the three Kings, which were Translated into Latin, were opened and publicly
Read, the first Indorsement thus:

Remarkable Superscriptions of the Japan Kings Letters Written to the Pope.
To the most zealous Order, and chief Vicar, supplying Christ's Place on Earth,
the prime and holy Father, prostrated at his Feet, humbly presents These,
subscribing thus: Trimus King of Bungo throws himself with all humility under
the most blessed Feet of your Holiness. After the same manner were the other
two directed.

An Application made by Father Jaspe Gonsalvus to the Pope in behalf of the
Japan ^mbassadors.
After the Letters were Read, Jasper Gonsalvus, a Portuguese Jesuit, in the
behalf of the young Japan Princes, explained in ample manner the meaning of the
Address, or Embassy, and at large Commentated upon the Epistles, then made a
large Elogium upon the Kings, setting forth their Piety and Zeal to Religion:
This done he turned toward the Pope, speaking also in his high commendation
and praise, whatever in such an Audience was fit to be said.

The Popes Answer by Anthony Buradapulius.
After this was done, Anthony Burapadulius made in the Pope's behalf this
Answer, which in brief was thus:

That the Kings had done exceeding prudently and religiously, and were highly
to be commended for thus sending their nearest Relations in an Embassy so
expensive, long, and dangerous, to visit his Holiness at Rome, Gods Vicegerent,
and true Successor of Peter the Apostle, the Head of the Catholic Church, and
Keeper of the Keys of Heaven, by which means he hopes the whole Nation may be
absolutely reduced to the Christian Faith, without which none can be saved; and
happy would it be for them, changing for Salvation their abominable and
heathenish Superstition, to offer in the Temple of Christ, rather than in their
Dayro, or Pantheon, not of Gods, but Devils; and that they ought to give the
Almighty thanks for the holy Xaverius, who by his Doctrine and pious
Persuasions, brought them first to hearken to everlasting bliss and happiness,
and true welfare of their Souls; which saving Faith has already of late
powerfully operated on many Nations, both in the West and East Indies, who had
time out of mind been led in Ignorance, and blinded with the abomination of
Idolatry, now following Christ's Banner, are professed Enemies to the Doctrine
of Devils.

Much to this purpose he spoke, intimating also, That his Holiness gave them
thanks, and took it as a great kindness, that they had made to him thus their
Address by such a magnificent Embassy; and so all rising they were dismissed.
The Japanners are nobly entertained in Rome.
And some few days after the Pope admitted them to his own Privacy and
Apartments, where they were some hours in familiar Communication with his
Holiness, enquiring of them concerning the Greatness, Wealth, Manners, and
Customs of their Country, and the like. But whilst they stayed some Months in
Rome, and were frequently and magnificently entertained by the Cardinals,
Officers, and Persons of Quality in the City, and were visited by the Spanish
and French Ambassadors, Thuanus.
spending their time in daily Caresses, and variety of noble Entertainments,
Pope Gregory the thirteenth, being taken after Dinner with an Appoplectick
Distemper, departed so suddenly, that they could not administer the Sacrament
to him, in the 83 year of his Age; on whose Monument this Inscription is now to
be seen.

Inscriptions on the Tomb of Pope Gregory the thirteenth.
Gregory the thirteenth, deserving all love and honor from his Successors, and
all Persons of what degree soever, first for his adorning the City of Rome with
Churches, and other public Edifices, for his great Charity to the Poor, for
many public Schools through the Universe, for the promulgation of the Faith of
Jesus, his Fatherly love to all Nations, especially for the kind Reception of
the Japan Ambassadors, sent from the remotest part of the World; and last of
all, for his exact Correction of the Calendar, or Annual Accounts.

Pope Sextus the fifth gives them many rich Presents.
Sextus the sixth succeeding him, showed also great kindness and bounty to
those Royal Japanners, settling a yearly Revenue of four thousand Crowns,
toward the Christian Churches in Japan; two thousand for the building of
public Schools for the breeding up of their Youth in the true Belief; and also
made a rich Present to the Kings their Unckles, of Swords and Crucifixes,
embossed with Silver, Gold, Precious Stones, and other costly Curiosities.

They depart from Rome, and return to Japan,
So on the thirteenth of June in the Year 1585, having received these several
Bounties, and Benedictions from his Holiness, they departed; and traveling
through Italy and other Lands, much tossed and turmoil'd by Sea, spending five
years abroad, they Landed at Nangesaque in Japan, and from thence went directly
to the Emperors Court at Meaco.

These, as we said before, were the only Addressers employed in an Embassy
from thence into Europe, or any other part of the World.

Since which time the Hollanders have Traded to Japan to their great benefit,
especially since the Portuguese, upon the account of the Jesuits Conspiracy,
were prohibited to Traffic any longer in that Country, which in brief was
thus:

The Jesuits are banished from Japan because of a Plot.
THe Jesuits having laid a Plot to deliver up the whole Empire of Japan to the
King of Portugal, and having well digested the same, sent him inviting Letters,
promising, that if he would send them eight stout Vessels well Manned, they no
sooner mould be arrived, but that several Kings, and many thousands of the
People their Converts, should be all at once ready to Declare for him, which
would so much overpower the Emperors remaining Party, that if he then proved
stubborn, and would not yield, they should be able to force him to his
subjection: But this being discovered, The Portuguese age banished from Japan.
the Portuguese were presently banished and excluded for ever from Japan in the
Year 1641, the Jesuits and principal Confederates being all put to death,
suffering condign punishment.

So the Trade lay in a manner open to the Hollanders, which they being almost
solely employed in, made so great an advantage thereof, that they were able
every three years to send Gratulatory Embassies, with several rich Presents to
the Emperor.

The Hollanders Staple at Firando.
The first Staple they settled in that Country, was upon Firando, a small Isle,
which on the East Side Coasts with Bongo, by some called Cikoko; on the North,
with Taquixima; on the South faceth Goto, both also washed by the Sea; the West
respecting the Main Ocean.

The Haven of Firando, better accommodateth Japan Vessels than the Hollanders,
which being of greater Burden, draw more Water, especially the Mouth of the
Haven being narrow, and their Ships large, is very dangerous; but within they
lie safe, being Land-lock'd round about, which breaks off all force of Winds
and Waves whatsoever; and though it blow to the height of a Heuricane, yet
they Ride still in smooth Water.

Description of the same.
This Port they have also fortified with a double Breast-work. In stead of a
Palace, the Governor keeps his Residence in a mean Shed built of Planks
clenched together. This Haven till of late was but little frequented; but since
the Hollanders East India Company settled their Staple here, many Merchants
from the adjacent Isles and other Places, come thither to Traffic with the
Netherlanders, which brings much Profit to the Governor yearly, and also a De
Logie op FIRANDO.

great Ground-Rent from the Hollanders; themselves having built at least forty
Houses.

The Storehouse of the East India Company there.
The Storehouse which was first ordered there for the Company, consisted of
four Low Rooms, and five Upper Chambers, for the Reception of their Goods;
besides Kitchen, Larder, and other Offices; lying close by the Haven, with a
Key, and Stairs to the Water; but being built of Wood, which in short time grew
dry and rotten, it could not preserve their Merchandise either from Fire, foul
Weather, or Thieves: Therefore in Anno 1641. they began to build one more
large, of Stone; which the Emperor not rellishing, supposing they might convert
it into a Fort of Defiance, The Netherlanders remove from Firando to Nangesaque.
commanded them to desist, and at the same time removed them to Nangesaque.

A strange Idol.
Near Firando, at an Inlet of the Sea, stands an Idol, being nothing but a
Chest of Wood, about three Foot high, standing like an Altar; whether many
Women, when they suppose that they have Conceived, go in Pilgrimage, and
offering on their Knees Rice, and other Presents, with many Prayers imploring,
That what they go withal may be a Boy, saying, O give us a Boy, and we will
bear him, though a big one.

But before the Hollanders left Firando, they sent their Merchandise in small
Vessels to Nangesaque, where they had then a Factory, and there found in the
Year 1694. a Hollander called Melchior Sandwoord, who Sailing with the Fleet
from Mabu, through the Straights of Magellan, losing his Company, had suffered
Shipwreck on that Coast thirty Years before. Thus the Hollanders being removed
from Firando, keep their Staple ever since at Nangesaque.

Netherland Ambassadors sent from Nangesaque to Jedo.
THe Ambassadors that were dispatched from Batavia to the Emperor of Japan, June
28. Anno 1641. received peremptory Orders, to Land only at their ple
Nangesaque, and to go from thence to the Imperial Court at Jedo. The Chief in
Commission for this Employment, was his Excellency the Lord Bloccovius, who had
joined to him as an Assistant Andreas Frisius a great Merchant. All things in
readiness, and rich Presents prepared, they put to Sea, their Fleet consisting
of three Ships and one Ketch: The Governor himself, and several others,
conducted them aboard, and weighing Anchor from them, falling to Leeward, lay
that night before Batavia.

Description of Batavia.
This City of old called Calappa, since Jacatra, and now Batavia, has its last
Denomination from the Batavians, which were a People driven out of their own
Country, before the Birth of our Savior, by their Neighbors the Hessens; The
Batavians from whence extracted What Tract or Land they formerly inhabited.
then known by the Name of Catti, settled in the Lower Countries, as Germany
between the two Horns, or the Arms of the Rhine, which now happens to be the
United Netherlands: So that in Commemoration, and to keep up the Honor and
Antiquity of their ancient Name, and first Original, they call this their New
City, and Head of their East-Indian Government, Batavia.

Description of Jacatra.
When first Cornelius Matcleif Anchored at this place, Anno 1607. it was called
Jacatra, being a mean Village; the Houses being all built after the Javan
manner, from the Foundation, of Straw; the Town having no other Fence-work, but
Ranges of Wooden Pales, like our Parks. Power of the King of Jacatra.
The Royal Palace it self was a great Huddle of Deformity, consisting of many
Rooms one within another; the whole Materials that built it, being nothing but
complicated Reeds, Bulrushes, Pleated Sedges, of which Work and Contrivance
they were then proud. But the King about that time had a Design to Fortify
this his pitiful Metropolis with a Stone-wall. His Royal Navy consisted of four
Galleys, in which, beneath his single Bank of Oars, sat his Soldiers, or
Lifeguard, which attended his Commands upon the Decks. This Prince, who drove
there the only Trade in Pepper, (though by his Subjects restrained not to
dispose of more than 300 Bags Yearly) a Commodity of which the Hollanders knew
very well the Advantage, struck a League of Amity with them, annexing Articles
of Traffic, to which they both agreed; which the King, being of an inconstant
and covetous Nature, observed so little, that he raised both the Prizes and
Customs whenever he pleased: So that the Hollanders conceiving themselves
neither certain in their Trade, nor safe in their Persons, raised a Fort there,
for their better Security of Commerce and Defense.

English and Netherlanders fall at variance before Jacatra.
HEre also at the same time the English drove an equal Trade, not inferior to
the Hollanders; who clashing in their Commerce, striving to ingross the
Commodities one from the other, there arose an irreconcilable Difference
between them, not to be decided but by the Sword, and Force of Arms; whereupon
soon after they engaged all their Forces that were there present, resolving to
venture all their Stakes both by Sea and Land.

Strength of the Netherlanders on Java.
The Hollanders had erected there two Store, or Block-houses; one whereof they
called Nassau, Fortifying the South Side of the Harbor; and the other, being
last built, was named Fort Maurice. On the North-side, along the Shore, they
had raised a Platform, with Palisadoes to plant their Cannon on; but the
Breast-work not being finished, they lay open to the Enemy: Also another
Eastwards, near the City, on which were planted two Great Guns, and three
Sakers. The Point of the River that lay North by Fort Maurice, was raised two
Foot high, and made defensive with Trenches. On this Point also were planted
two Great Guns, and five Sakers. The North-West Point toward the Sea was of
the same height as the Palisado'd Platform, having a Breast-work of Wood, and a
Shelter against Rain, with seven Sakers planted upon it. The other side on the
West had yet no Outworks, which the Gallery of Fort Nassau supplied, from
whence the Soldiers might play with their Muskets: And in these Places they
disposed of their whole Forces at Land.

Strength of the English and Javanners against the Netherlanders.
On the other side, Jacatra had by this time a strong Wall, built of red Stone,
and a high Tower planted with Ordnance; which declaring for the English, put it
self in a Posture of Defense. The English had only their Storehouse, and a
Breast-work at the Point of the Harbor, made up of coyl'd Cables, strengthened
with Pyles, and Earth well ramm'd together, to stop the Netherlanders from
entering into the Mouth of the Harbor. In this Posture, and all being prepared,
The Netherlanders fall upon the English.
the English first gave Fire; which was presently answered by the Hollanders,
and so followed, that suddenly they fired the English Storehouse, and became
Masters of the Entry, or Point of the River; the Fort from Jacatra in the mean
time playing upon the Hollanders, which were (as they say) but two hundred and
forty Men, whereof eighty were Blacks.

English Fleet before Jacatra.
Whilst they were thus busy on the Shore, the English Fleet, consisting of
eleven Sail, came up before Jacatra; and the Governor, to perform the Admirals
part, Valor of Coen.
went aboard; they having seven Ships lying there, which were ready Laden, and
not altogether fit for such Service yet making a Virtue of Necessity, they drew
out; but the Wind being contrary, which kept them to the Leeward, were forced
to ply yet more to the Windward; so making not much way. When they were within
Cannon-shot, the English unfurled their Red Flag of Defiance, commanding them
by Sound of Trumpet to Strike, or else they would force them: So on the first
of February 1619. both Fleets drawing up one to another, about twelve a clock
at Noon, engaged, and were in hot Dispute till late in the Evening, both Sides
behaving themselves with great Skill, Courage, and Resolution; till being
parted by the Night, they lost sight one of another; the Dutch retreating to
Amboyna; and the English, triumphing with their Victory, Sailed back to
Jacatra, where they were reinforced with seven Ships more which had not
Engaged. So the Hollanders, in a low Condition, were blocked up both by Sea and
Land: And also to make their Case more desparate, the Javanners had gotten a
thousand Men for their Assistance from Bantam; The Netherlanders besieged in
their Fort before Jacatra.
whose Numbers being thus increased, they closely besieged the Hollanders in
all their four Fortifications at once. Peter Vander Brook the Governor, Coen
being gone to Amboyna with their shattered Fleet, had the absolute Command; who
set up new Flags of Defiance on each Bulwark, and plied the City so smartly
with his Cannon, that it struck such a terror in the Inhabitants, and Wydruk
Rama the King of Jacatra, that he showed himself willing to accept of Peace; A
Peace with the King of Jacatra,
which after a short Cessation was agreed upon, and the Hollanders Articled to
pay him for his Losses, Eight thousand Ryals. But shamefully broken.
The Business seeming thus to be decided, the King desired, that there might be
a friendly Interview, and to see and speak with their Governor Vander Brook at
his own Court: But the Hollanders distrusting some Plot veiled under this his
kind Proffer, were much troubled, having found him before both fickle and
treacherous; The Commander Vandenbrook found treacherous
yet at last he ventured, and went according as was desired, with a slender
Train, to his, Palace; where he was no sooner come, but they seized upon him,
and used him most barbarously, threatening him with the most exquisite Tortures,
and Death at last, if he would not surrender up the Fort; to which end, they
immediately haled him, with a Halter about his Neck, under his own Guns,
advising him, if he would save his life, to bid them do as the King had
instructed him; but he, on the contrary, commanded the Besieged to maintain
their Fort by all possible means, and never to map of Batavia (Jakarta) Ware
affbeeldinge Wegens het Casteel end Stadt BATAVIA gelegen oit groot Eylant
JAVA Anno 1669. Aneract Portratura of the Castle and City BATAVIA Lying on the
great Ilan JAVA Anno 1669.
trust to such a false and perfidious Nation-whereupon the Javanners in the
same manner haled him back to the Court.

The English demand the Netherlanders Fort.
Captain Thomas Dale the English Admiral, shot Arrows into the Hollanders Works,
with Letters, expressing, That he himself was no way accessory to the Blood
which already had been spilt on both sides; and also advising them not to
deliver up their Fort to the Javanners; which being of dangerous consequence to
either Party, they should do well to assist them with their Additional Defense,
and so save both Stakes, in surrendering to them; which if they would not, he
should do his best Endeavors to save their Lives and Goods from so merciless
an, Enemy, by forcing them to it; to which purpose, he had already planted
sixteen Pieces of Ordnance against Fort Maurice, and would suddenly fetch up
more from the Fleet. The next day he sent them a second Letter, in the same
manner promising them to save their Goods as well as Lives, and give them two
Months time to dispose of themselves; and those that thought fit to receive
Pay, he would List with his own, and use them with the like Respect and
Kindness, as if they were all one Nation: Which if they refused, or used delay,
he was prepared immediately to fire his Guns, and at once with a general
Assault to Storm them on every side.

Scarcity in the Fort.
They had not within the Fort, Ammunition sufficient for one day in hot Service;
and the English having a great help by their Auxiliaries the Javanners, and
also a Victorious Fleet ready at Sea: The Dutch being continually upon Duty,
were weary, weakened, and disheartened, and also a Breach being made in their
Works, which could not possibly be made up ere they were Stormed; and as he
threatened, there was no hopes of Coens Return in four Months at least. Upon
these Considerations, forced by an inevitable Necessity, they thought it best
not to refuse the English Proffer: Articles on which the Fort was to be
delivered to the English.
So they agreed to deliver them the Fort, the Guns, and what more belonged to
the Defense thereof; and to the King of Jacatra, all the Merchandise, Money,
and Jewels. But the English were to furnish out the Hollanders with a Vessel of
two Guns, fifty Muskets, one Barrel of Powder, and six Months Provision, that
so they might convey themselves to Cormandel. In earnest whereof, Admiral Dale
received the Governor Coens Houshold-Plate; the Fort, and all things
beforementioned, were to be delivered up, so soon as the Ship was ready to
receive them.

BUt just when they were upon Surrendering up the Fort, and going from thence
aboard the prepared Vessel, according to the Articles, a wonderful Accident
happened, which gave quite another face to the whole Businefs. A Merchant, one
Cornelius Houtebraken, having admittance to Vanderbrook their Prisoner, whom
they had so treacherously seized upon, A strange Acciden^.
persuaded Cornelius to go to the Panagran, or King of Bantam, to entreat him
to use what means he could to get him into his Custody, and make him his
Prisoner; which if he did, he would nobly requite at their Admiral Coens
Return. This Account the Merchant giving him, and he considering that there
might be an Advantage, in having such a Pledge as the second Man of the
Hollanders in his own Hands, bethought himself of a way to put in Execution his
Design, which was thus: Whilst Rama, the English, and the Hollanders were
agreed, and Articles of Surrender ready to be performed, he sent Damagon, a
Prime Favorite of his, with 2000-Men, to Rama's Court Jacatra; where venturing,
Damagon sets upon the King of Jacatra.
and securing the Passages sages with his own Soldiers, went and presented the
Panagran's Letter to Rama; which whilst he was perusing, he pulled out a
Steeletto, and seizing on him, setting the Point to the Kings Breast, said,
Either resign thy kingdom to my Master the King of Bantam, or die. Rama being
astonished, and thus suddenly surpised, willinger to lose his Right and
Possession, than his Life, yielded; and at the same instant, having no more
warning, took his Wife and eldest Son; and so leaving his Palace, and what else
belonged to him, went like a willing Exile into strange Countries, where after
he was driven to that Necessity, that he turned Fisherman, going in a poor
Canoo to Sea, to maintain his Wife and Family.

Bantamers besiege the Netherlanders Fort.
The English seeing so great and sudden an Alteration, and the Work carried on
so strangely; the Bantamers to and about the Hollanders Fort, and Vander Brook
rescued, and carried from thence to Bantam, they plainly and evidently
perceived, to their no great comfort, That the Hollanders would break their
Faith, and Articles concluded and agreed upon, and their Golden Dream of such
Acquirements, by their Agreement, would come to nothing. Nor were they deceived
in their Judgment; for the Hollanders in the Hurly-burly, and sudden Alteration
of Government, thought they had a fit opportunity to Fish while the Waters were
troubled; and so taking new Counsel and Courage, Fortified themselves afresh,
and repaired their Breaches; and withal, high in their Hopes, ostentatiously
set over the Gates of the Fort in Capitals the forementioned BATAVIA, Vander
Brook calls it Batavia.
which Name after they gave their City. To back this their haughty Proceedings,
done as if in defiance to the English, Coen also, little expected, arrived with
seventeen Sail the 25 of March, gathered up from the Molucco Islands, and lay
before their New Batavia. The next day he set some few Men ashore, Coon takes
Jacatra, and ruins it.
which broke into Jacatra, pulling down the Wooden Walls, and Straw Houses:
Then adding fresh Supplies, they marched from thence to Bantam, and there
demanded of the Panagran, his Prisoner, the Governor Vander Brook, with seventy
others taken out of the Ship the Black Lion. The Panagran, Du^c Prisoners
delivered from Bantum.
though unwilling, yet being threatened by them, delivered most of the Men that
Evenning, and the next Morning the rest, with their Vice Admiral Vander Brook.

But the English seeing Coen thus arrived with such Recruits, and all things
falling out cross to their Concern; not able to strive with these unexpected
Misfortunes, with all speed getting their Guns that lay on the Shore aboard,
they hoysed Sail, directing their Course to the Straights of Sunda.

Peace proclaimed between the English and Netherlanders.
When soon after, on the ninth of June, Peace was Proclaimed there by Order from
the States of the United Provinces, between the English and the Netherlanders;
in which settled Quiet, whilst they employed themselves in a constant and
undisturbed Trade, they not only improved their private Estates, but also this
their new Plantation, raising what was an inconsiderable Storehouse, at first
to a slight and undefensive Platform, then to a petty Fort, and next to a
Castle with Redoubts; which in few years after, they so flourishing there,
became a strong and almost impregnable City, now famous through the Eastern
World, and well known every where by the Name Batavia.

BUt this their growing Metropolis, the Emperor of Java looked upon with an ill
eye, and could not well digest such their Proceedings, to build such
Fortifications upon his Ground, scarce asking his leave; and jealous of future
Events, what a Goad it might be in his Side hereafter, that had already
Eclipsed his Authority in his own Ports, by losing his Custom and Traffic;
which they had engrossed, by a new and peculiar way of their Trading with
Japan, China, Samutra, Succadanen, Siammos and other Countries; so his
displeasure and jealousy breaking out at last into open Hostility, he began a
War, and to vindicate his Cause against those that so had injuriously intruded
upon him; and Anno 1629 drew up against the New City an Army, consisting of
150000 Men, and vested round within Pistol Shot of the Walls, which he plied
with such continual Stormings, that he kept the Besieged with fresh Alarms, in
such hot service, that they had neither time to eat, drink, nor sleep, or any
minute of refreshment; but they so roughly entertained him, what with playing
their great Guns, throwing Grenades and Fireballs from their Outwork and
Platforms, that it cost him daily an incredible number of men, so that at last,
their Soldiers filling their Trenches and Outworks with their Bodies, the
Besieged suffered more under the assaulting stench, and noisome smells of the
Dead, than by the charge of their, living Enemy; to ease them of which, they
were forced themselves to dig Pits, and tumble them in at such times, when they
had any respite, or the least breathing while granted by the Retreat of their
Foes.

Strange storming of a Fort near Batavia.
AMongst many memorable Passages that happened in this Siege, that of the most
remark, chanced to be at Fort Magdalen, the utmost Redoubt of the City, being
defended only by sixteen men, who made such stout resistance, placing their
Guns with that dexterity, that making Lanes through the Enemy, they lay on
heaps one upon another, that they almost floated in their Goar. At last, Powder
and Shot failing, and having no time granted, nor any possibility to spare any
one of their men to fetch more Ammunition, the Storm being so terrible; these,
so great were their Resolutions, that they until'd the Roofs, and dug up
Stones, and whatever else they could find, throwing at the Enemy, and so kept
them off a great while. This also at last failing, and that they must be
swallowed up by the fresh assaults of the Javanners, they bethought themselves
of defensive Weapons, such as never were heard of before, nor, as may be
supposed, never used in the world, throwing upon them Close-stool-pans, Jakes,
and what the Common-shore did afford; which Merdurinous Arms, so Painting, and
perfuming their naked bodies, was more terrible to them, than Powder and Ball,
flying not only from the enemy, but even from themselves, such was the
loathsome stench; but more especially, when fresh men sallied out of the City,
they betook themselves to their heels in a general rout, crying in their
Language, Oseitang Orang Hollanda de Bakalay Sammatay, that is, You Holland
Devils fight with T --

The Javans break up their Siege from Batavia.
The Javanners courage began to fail, almost quite despairing of ought that
could be gotten by the Leager; so Firing their Camp in three places toward
Evening, the first of October 1629, they marched off, and the Hollanders fearing
Treachery, kept close within their Works; Private slaughter amongst themselves.
but in the morning sent forth a Party of Foot, and Horse to explore the Enemy,
and bring an account where they were, and in what condition and posture. These
perceived at last, that the Enemy quite deserting the Siege, were dispersed,
and fled, leaving eight hundred slaughtered bodies, many of them desolated, the
rest run through; which wondrous news bringing back, every one decsanted upon;
but in a few days after, they were informed of the cause, which was thus;

PULO TYMON



The Reasons.
THe Emperor in the former Siege, which was the year before, had Invested
Batavia with, as he supposed, an innumerable Army, which having ill success,
thousands of his Men were killed, baffled, and beaten off by a few sturdy
Hollanders, returned with a great loss, and disparagement.

The Prince of Mandura, an Isle in an Inlet of the Sea, two Miles Northward
from Java, having a Quarrel against the Emperors General, who had the sole
Conduct of the former War; and being now returned with shame and disgrace, cast
out words against him to this purpose: That he had behaved himself indeed well,
and Very handsomely, having such a numerous Army to come off so basely, with so
much loss and dishonor, which had he the like, he would give the Emperor
another manner of account, or never return alive. This the Emperor taking
notice of, thought fit to employ such a brisk Undertaker; and raising a second
Army, joined him in Commission with his first General, who was a soft man, yet
well beloved of the Soldiers, who when they were thus forced to Retreat, as
they had been before, and leave their Siege, Rallying up their scattered Forces
in the forementioned Plain, some distance from the City: This Prince coming
near the former General, as he and the rest of the Captains were consulting how
to dispose of their shattered Forces, the old General said thus boldly to him;
But whatsoever becomes of us, thou shall be sure to keep the promise which thou
made so bravely to the Emperor, never to return alive from Batavia; and as he
spoke, ran him through the body; and the rest of the Captains and Officers
about him, fell upon his Lifeguard and Followers, leaving eight hundred
massacred upon the Spot.

Since this beating of so powerful an Enemy, and such a numerous Army, that in
probability the Hollanders would scarce have been a Breakfast for, being by
Divine Providence thus totally dispatched, they have since enjoyed such a
serene Tranquillity, that now Batavia is become the greatest and flourishing
City of all the European Plantations in the East: From hence, his Excellency
Lord Blockhoff, Anno 1649, on the 28 of June, as we said before, began his
Voyage, being employed Ambassador to the Emperor of Japan; Steering first
through the Straights, which washes the Head-Land of Samutra, called Sunapara,
and the Isle of Banca; and in eight days ran the length of Paulo Tymon, having
that Coast on his Starboard.

Description of Pubo Timon.
THe Isle makes out a most delightful Prospect, rising from the Shore like a
copped Hill, the ascent interwove with winding Valleys, full of fresh
Fountains, vested with several sorts of shady and Fruit-bearing Trees: The
North-East Point of this, has a small adjacent Isle; the Straits betwixt which
makes a pleasant Passage, and a safe and convenient Landing-place on Tymon.

Description of the Heth Betel.
Here grows wild, and to be gathered every where, the so much esteemed Herb
Betell, on the virtue of which, the Indians believe their whole Regiment of
Health depends, so that scarce one is to be found that has it not in his mouth
chawing night and day; which to take off the bitterness, they commonly commix
with Arera and Chalk; the better sort compounded with Calphur de Buaneo, Aloes,
and Musk, Which they say has these Operations; first, That it makes the Breath
Sweet, keeps White, Fastens, and Consolidates the Teeth; it Corroborates the
Stomach, making good Digestion, and chearing the Spirits, adding Strength and
Vivacity to the whole Body. They take him to be a very ill-bred and uncivil
fellow, that offers to presume, come before, and speak with the Governor, e're
he has perfumed his Breath with it. This Plant has most Efficacy, and grows
best under a temperate Climate. The Leaves are not unlike that of an Orange,
but sharper, runs up, embracing Poles, like our Hops: Some choose the ripe and
golden colored Leaves as the best; others, those that are quite withered: In
the first chawing it renders a reddish Juice like blood, which they spit out,
but what comes after they swallow. If the Leaves be kept close, and not much
handled, they will keep their virtue a great while; with which the Javanners
load whole Fleets of their small Vessels, transporting it from thence home, to
their no little profit; near the Shore it is cheap, but up in the Country
being scarcer, is much dearer.

Description of Polu Cecir de Terr.
FRom hence they went on in their intended Voyage, and on the twelfth day
raised Pulo Candor, a small Isle; next Pulo Cecir de Terr, so distinguished
from Pulo Cecir de Mere, lying Easterly to the Offin; but Cecir de Terr verg'd
with a white Sand, lies before the main Continent of Cambodia, The power of the
Cambodian King.
and is much frequented by the Japanners, Portuguese, and Couchicinessers, and
Malayers.

The King of this Country Cambodia, has his Residence in a Palace, Fenced in
stead of Stone, with Wooden Pales, Guarded with sixteen Elephants, who
faithfully make good their appointed Stations, all Fortified with twenty four
Guns, made prize from several Villages belonging to Goa, and many other places,
that formerly suffered Shipwreck on his Coast. They are Painted blue, and stand
Mounted on black Carriages.

His Counselors.
His Counselors, when ever they meet upon serious Affairs of State, or to
decide private Controversies, repair to the Council Table, each of them with
Golden Bags, in which are three Gold Boxes esteemed precious, being full of
Cardimum, and other rich Essences, and a pair of Siezors to make ready Pynang.
They sit before the King, making a Semicircle; behind them are placed the
Tonimmes, or Common Council, with the like Silver Bags; their Priests shaven
like our Friars, sit foremost, facing the King.

How the Ambassadors are received.
The public place of meeting, where the King sits Enthroned in full State and
Glory, is built like an Arch, but signifies his Court and Temple, covered and
adorned with Gilt and Carved Work; their Floors all Matted, where stand three
great Idols, and three little ones. The Ambassadors that make their Addresses,
coming for Audience, are placed amongst the Okina's; five and twenty being sent
from the King to receive their Embassy, and make Report to his Majesty; the
Ambassadors, by an Interpreter, deliver their Message to the Chabander, he to
one of the Okinars; the Okina with his hands lifted above his head, to the King.

Japanners in Cam^odia.
The Japanners which were eight Families, driven from their Abode (for what
reason we know not) settled in this Country, and held in much esteem by the
King, because they assisted him in a Grand Rebellion against his Son, who
Conspired to depose and destroy his Father, and settle himself in his Throne.

Strange Rock.
Leaving Cambodia, they crossed over to Chiampa, and four days after they passed
by St. John de Fix, being a steep Mountain, whose Spiry top resembles a man,
large as the Colossus. Hereon, the night following, being the 15 of August, the
Ambassador himself, Lord Blockhoff, departed this Life, being Inbalm'd, his
Bowels enclosed in an Urn or small Chest, was with all Solemnity and Honor, as
if a Funeral, discharging their Guns, and the like, thrown overboard. From
thence, with their single Ambassador, Andreas Frisius, though sad, they went
on; and passing by Pulo Cambier, and Catao, they raised in view the Island
Aynam, and soon after Macao, where they were cumber'd with abundance of
Fishermen, which seemed to cover the whole Sea.

Description of Macao.
The City Macao, or Mavaw, stands situated on a small Isle, or Isthmus, being
joined with a neck of Land to the main Continent of China, lying in twenty
degrees North-Latitude. The middle of this narrow piece of Land, a great Arch
seems to bestride, stopping all passage with shut-up Gates, to go through which
all Portugueses are prohibited; and whatever Merchandise and other Commodities,
carried in and out pay Toll and Customs to the Emperor of China; but the
Mandariens granted the Portuguese to Plant Henpeoao, and suffered them in
Myacaco to Erect their City, which they built with strong Walls, and Fortified
with three Forts, raised on three Hills, being the outmost Angles of the Town.
The first and chiefest St. Paulo, stands fortified with thirty Brass Guns, each
carrying Balls of 36 pounds weight, and is the Court and Residence of the
Governor. The second called Nostra Signiora Dellapenna de Francia; And the
third, Nostra Signiora de Guyle, are the Priory of the Cleusenars: These, so
soon as they descry any Ships in the Offin, Steering thither from Japan,
Manillas, or any other Coast, they give notice by Ringing their Bells.

This City has also four Redoubts, or strong Bulwarks on the Land side, and
three Fronting the Sea: The first of these called St. Jago de la Barra, is so
great, that it seems a City it self; where two Platforms, with well Mounted
Guns make the place impregnable; under whose command the Channel lying, all
Vessels must pass, entering the Harbor; Over whose Captain or Commander, being
Commissioned by the King himself, the Governor has no Authority. The second
Bulwark, Nostra Signiora del bon Pelta Guardes, the South-West side of the
Town, close without the Gates, stands a Powder-Mill, from whence a Wall running
in manner of a Cressant, Invirons a Bay or standing Pool, replenished with a
Water to the Bulwark Francisco: Between the two Bulwarks, or Redoubts are many
stately Edifices, near which stand their Landmarks. The third Bulwark,
Francisco, has at its Foot a Platform, on which is always ready Mounted a
Culvering that carries a Bullet of 48 pound weight, which when Discharged at
random height, reaches to the Point of the Island Cavean.

From this runs a Wall toward the Land to St. John's Bulwark, near the Gate
Lazaro; and from thence up Hill, to the Jesuits College, adorned with large
and handsome Buildings. Within the City, the Jesuits, Dominicans, Franciscans,
Augustines, and Cleusenars have their several Cloisters; to which the three
first add no small Splendour. The Bishop of this place, is under Diocese and
Jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Goa.

The Trade of Macaw.
This City Macaw drives a great Trade with Tonkyn, Quinam, Champa, Cambodia,
Macasser, Solos, Timos, Marillas, and formerly also Japan; to which place none
dare set Sail without Commission from their Council: Their Traffic none of the
meanest, being Gold, Silver, White Silks, Cloth of Tishew, Rubies, Pearls,
Musk, Quicksilver, Spiljauter, Porcelin, China-Roots, and Rubarb; the City
within also abounding with all manner of Artificers.

A great Storm, which drove the Fleet from Japan.
After the Fleet lost sight of Macaw, on the fourth of September there happened
a terrible Storm, and violent Rain, mixed with dreadful Thunder and Lightning:
which foul Weather was sadly guessed at by a strange Sight, Sirius, or the
Dog Star, the greatest and brightest of all the fixed Stars, whose Body appeard
darting out fiery Beams, resembling Claws like a Scorpion. Three days they
suffered under this vehement Tempest, and driving still more to the Leeward,
they were forced to drop Anchor; which coming home, and the Storm rather
increasing, they were not able to weigh again, but for present safety cut their
Cables, and carrying only a fore Course they lost nine Leagues more of what
they had formerly gained; then attempting to put out their main Course, that
they might not lose any longer so much of their Way, Peter Davenson, a stout
Seaman, and good Commander, handling the Tackle, was carried overboard, Sail
and all: Upon this a Council being presently called, to consult of what was
best to be done in this exigency, all their Lives lying at stake, they resolved
to lie upon a close Hale, and bear what Sail they could, if possible so to
double the Point of Piscadores, from thence to bring her to their intended
Course, if Wind and Weather permitted, which by that time might prove more
favorable; but that Night it blew so hard, that they could scarce carry their
Sprit-Sail; yet in the Morning growing calmer, they put out their Mizne to keep
them from Driving to the Southwards, finding themselves in 22 Degrees
Northern-Latitude: but when they hoped the violence of the Tempest had been
spent, at Noon it began afresh, blowing from the East with greater violence
than ever, in which they lost their Sprit-Sail, when despairing, and quite out
of hope of any possibility of preservation, the Wind all the forepart of the
Night continuing the same fury, then believing themselves at Deathsdoor, and
ready to be swallowed up, it pleased Divine Providence in mercy to assuage the
great violence of the Tempest, and the Wind changing, they lay more Eastward,
haling close aboard their main Tackle, so got within a League of the Coast of
China; under which being high Land, and sheltered by the Spoon-Mountain, which
broke off the fury of the Weather, they had smoother Water, and at last, being
delivered from so great a danger, came safe to Anchor at Formosa.

Description of the Island Formosa.
THe Formosan Isle, formerly called by the China's, Paccande, extends it self
in length from the South to the North, and in breadth East and West, being an
hundred and thirty Leagues in Circuit: the Prospect shows you much rising
Ground, and a Hilly Country, which abounds with Deer, great store of wild
Goats, Hairs, Coneys, Swine, Tigers, and the Luvasey, whose Flesh has a
delightful and excellent relish. The Woods also have no want of Pheasants and
Pigeons. The Ground being fruitful, produces store of Sugar, Ginger, Cinnamon,
Coco-Nuts, and several other Necessaries fit for humane sustenance; besides,
full of populous Villages. They are Governed by several Lords, not depending
nor acknowledging any Superior, so that each Town being a Republic, they still
have Wars and are at difference one with another, Town against Town, Village
against Village, insomuch that Peace never set foot in that Isle.

Of their many Villages, the prime and of chiefest note, are Sinkan, Mandauw,
Soulang, Backeloang, Taffacan, Tifulucan, Teopan, and Tefurang; the last in a
Valley near the High-lands, where Fort Selandia stands, formerly called Tyovan.

The Inhabitants of Tefurang are very salvage.
The Inhabitants of this Village are rude and salvage, robust, and almost of a
Gigantick size, Their Customs.
not black like the Caffers, and count it no immodesty to go stark naked. Their
Women, well built for stowage, short, and inclining to grossness, wearing
Apparel; yet twice a day they strip themselves, and are not ashamed to bathe
and wash in public.

These, though a barbarous People, are kind to the Netherlanders, heartily
entertaining them with their own, though mean, yet wholesome Fare.

Inhabitants of Soulang.
Soulang breeds a needy, spiteful, inhospitable, and a bloody People.
Notwithstanding the fruitfulness of the Soil they commonly live in want, being
extreme lazy, tilling no more than they suppose will supply their necessity;
which often falling short, they are so hardly put to it, that when they
perceive Provision growing scant, they live sparingly many days, or else they
might be utterly famished; for in such exigencies they never help one another:
nay, they are so supinely slothful, that the Women do all the business of the
Field, Plough, Sow, and Reap, having neither Horses, nor any other Cattle to
help them; the Drudgery being the more, because they make it Gardners work, for
only with Shoes they dig and turn the Glebe; and where their Corn grows
thickest, especially Rice, they pluck it out with their Hands, and set it where
they find the Blades come up thinner; and in Harvest knowing neither Scythe nor
Sickle, which tries their patience, cropping it with a Tool like a
Pruning-Knife Stalk by Stalk, a Span below the Ear; which without Threshing
they store up in their Houses, How they order their Rice.
hanging it in the Evening in small Bundles over the Fire; and early in the
Morning the Women rise and Pound so much as will serve them that day for their
lazy Lord and Family. Besides Rice and other Grain, they sow Carrots, Set
Water-Melons, Pinang, Quach, Taraum, and Pting.

This Isle is not stored with such Wines as other Places in India have, which
their Trees produce; but they have another sort of Liquor, that inebriates no
less than the Indian, or Juice of the Spanish Grape; which they prepare in this
manner: They take a quantity of Rice, which they put in a Vessel made for that
purpose, and boil it; then turning it out, they knead it into little Balls, or
Pellets; when they are well chewed they put it into another Pot, there letting
it stand till grown sour; to this they pour a good quantity of Spring Water,
which being so put together, works a Month or two, for so long it will
ferment; which done, it becomes a clear, pleasant, wholesome, and strong Liquor:
the longer they keep it, the better it grows, Strange Liquor in Formosa.
for it will hold good thirty years. The top of this Liquor is thin and clear,
the bottom, or sedement thick like our Pap: the thin makes their Drink with
which they often Fuddle; the thick makes their Cawdle to recover, which they
eat with Spoons after their Recovery. This they carry with them to the Field,
and take a Dose thereof when they think fit: and thus yearly they spend most
part of their Rice.

The Women Fish and Till.
The Women when their Cultivation, or Land-work is done, then they betake
themselves to the Sea, and Launch out their Boats, which they call Champans,
and fall to Fishing, where they catch great store of Crabs, Oysters, and
Gurnets, which they Salt without Gutting, and therefore, though Pickled, keep
not long, but are apt to putrify and breed Worms; yet they like it never the
worse, but look upon their Dish as the greater Dainty, the rancker the Hogoe.

Their Youths, though strong and of able Bodies, spend their time in idleness
and sloth; and when forty years old, then they settle themselves to Laziness,
as if it were a Trade or Handicraft, spending twenty years in a methodical
doing of nothing, in a small Hut or Hovel, dandling their Children, or
Dalliance with their Wives, seldom or never stirring out of their own Limits,
or Patch of Ground, unless invited either to a private or public Feast, or
Hunting-Matches, in which Pleasure they take some pains, using several, Several
woys of Hunting.
and indeed ingenious ways to catch the Game, sometimes practicing deceit,
laying Snares and Traps of complicated Rushes and Reeds so artificially, that
they look fresh, as if growing and ungather'd, setting them in the Haunts of
wild Boars, Lays of Deers, and the like, and so catch them, wondering who made
their new Lodges and Beds so soft, and lay Meshes in other inviting places,
which if they take not willingly, nor observe such allurements, they drive them
in, Where they also make them their Prey; and they trepan them into Pits,
dug and spread over with a light Swarth, or Turf of Grass, supported with
brittle Twigs laid athwart the Holes: here to make them sure from getting out,
they place a Snare, which suddenly arrests them, taking them Prisoners by the
Neck or Legs, and then they with a shout fall upon the so taken Quarry.

Strange manner of Hunting in Fira^d^.
Besides this, they use Hostility and open Arms, whole Villages march out
together, nay, two or three Townships, joining their Forces, taking the Field;
where drawn out in a single File, they stretch a Ring, which extends four or
five English Miles in compass, every one brandishing in each Hand a Javelin,
some carrying three or four: thus all prepared, with a rally of Hounds they
rouse the Prey, then contracting their wide Circumference by degrees into a
narrower and narrower Circuit, closing up at last Man to Man, Shoulder; this
done, if any one of their thrown Spears hit and fallen in the Body of the Game,
they never lose him, for their Lances being short, not above six Foot long,
and Pointed with Iron, having three retorted Hooks, stick so fast, that though
flying to shelter amongst the Bushes and Shrubs, will not, when impeded by
intangling Branches, drop out, and also having tied at the But-end of the Staff
a long String with a Bell, so that if by chance the Beast thus imparked break
the Pail, yet they never lose him, for they follow not only by the scent, but
by the sound, both which seldom fail.

They use also Arrows, especially when they Hunt wild Deer. The remainder of
the slain Venison, Venison how eaten.
when they have Feasted themselves, they barter for Clothing and Raiment with
the China's, seasoning with Salt the Humbles, to keep for their own private
Store; but if by chance they kill a pregnant Do, they unlace her, and Feasting
upon the Slinck, eat up Skin and all.

The Formosan Men's Exercises, and their manner of Fighting.
To this their Manly Divertisements, and Exercises of Saiha, pleasing Labor, as
pursuing their Game, they have also rougher work, and serious engagements,
which, when successful, brings no less delight to such a barbarous People, that
is, a Civil War, ancient Feuds, or fresh Animosities, still upon new occasions
fermenting, so that Town against Town, and Village against Village all the
Country over, are in open Hostility, either public Slaughter, or private
Murder being their Sports, which thus they carry on: First one Town begins,
sending the other a bold Defiance; this is followed by twenty or thirty in a
Party, which Row in their Boats, or Champans, to their Enemies Village, near
which they lie as if in Ambuscade till Night, then growing dark, they Landing,
march up and down and explore the Fields, culling out private Huts, and such
like Houses, where the Graver sort, the Married People, as we said before, at
their ease and pleasure dwell: Those that be thus supinely careless they
suddenly surprise, and off goes their Heads, Hands, and Feet; sometimes more
cruelly they slice out their whole Bodies, each one carrying a Collup in
triumph home, as an evidence that he had no small share in that bloody
Slaughter, but, as they suppose, honorable Action: But finding no small Game,
or such single Adventures, then they attempt secretly the next Village, where
silently breaking into a House or two, they spare none, but salvagely kill Men,
Women, and Children, carrying their Heads, Hands, and Feet home, as Trophies of
their Victory: But sometimes falling short of their Design, and glad to escape
to save themselves; and often, the whole Town so suddenly taking the alarm,
they with as little mercy are all cut off: at other times in their flight so
few appearing, that the Enemies in hopes of revenge, are trepanned to their
Boats, where in greater and unexpected numbers they Fight so valiantly, that
they put them to the Rout; yet these, though seeming Furioso's, receiving the
least Wound, basely retreat and quit the Battle.

Their Defensive Arms are Shields, so large, Their Arm^:
that they cover their whole Bodies; their Offensive, Darts and Faulchions.

It often happens, that two or three Villages join against one or more
associated Towns: these have no Commission-Officer, or Commander, but whosoever
shows most Men, they make their General, and has the prime Authority to Rule
over the others according to their numbers. Neither are their Warlike
Stratagems common, for when they intend to Attaque some Village by a sudden
surprisal, for they have no Works to storm, opposite to the way that they
appear upon, and ready to enter the Village; on the other side they lie in
ambush, which when they charge in, giving a smart alarm, the People struck with
a sudden fear, in a confused manner betake themselves to their Heels, and
flying from, fall just into the Mouth of the same Enemy, who suddenly starting
up, are not sparing, but oftentimes make a general slaughter, whilst the others
ransack and pillage the Houses. Sometimes in the Night they break into a House
or two, which leaving, their business being done, two of the Party stick fast
in their likeliest way to return, so to stop the Pursuer, sharp-pointed Reeds,
about half a Yard long, they making their Retreat by another improbable way.
Each Conqueror that shares for his own part a Head; carries it through his
Village upon a Spear, insulting and singing in praise and glory of his god, to
whom he solely ascribes his Victory; thus proudly vaporing, they are joyfully
received every where, and entertained with the best Liquor the Town affords.

Formosans have great Churches.
Every sixteen Houses have their own Chapel, to which they carry this their
bloody Spoil, which afterward he boyls till the Flesh comes from the Bone,
then drying it in the Sun, they pour strong Liquor (a Custom which they never
omit) upon the bare Scalp: fourteen days they keep Holy, Feasting and
Sacrificing to their gods, Keep great Feasts when they are Conquerors.
who gave them so great and glorious a Victory.

Of these Heads, who e're enjoys one, looks upon it as his greatest Treasure,
prizing them beyond Gold or Silver, or the most precious Jewel, and when any
sudden accident of Fire, or the like happen, this they take most care of, how
to carry it with them, or leave in safety.

Have no supreme Governor.
THis Isle, as we said before, has no King, nor supreme Governor, but every
petty Village is a small Republic, Ruling it self under twelve Magistrates,
chosen every second year; Strange Counselors.
whose chief Qualification is to be fifty years old: these when going out, in
honor and commemoration that they were once prime Rulers, have all their Hair
picked off from their Temples, and each side of their Heads with Tweasers;
which baldness is the well known Badge of their former Authority. Their
Authoity.
But these Governors Power has but small Limits, for in every Exigence all the
Villages meet in the Temple there, having no Representatives, every Man speaks
to the purpose according to his abilities, or as he is biassed; which done, the
Twelve take into their consideration, and from the general result of their
various opinions, give their special Verdicts, which the People as they like or
dislike, ratify or refuse. But they have absolute Power to seize the Clothes
of whomsoever wears Apparel in that three Months, when by their Laws they are
commanded to go naked, and Pray to their Idols for Rain, being about that time
always a dry Season. This also in part they inflict upon the Women that go too
gorgeously in that Quarter. This their Court of twelve Aldermen suffer great
hardship or Penance, not being allowed by their Laws to taste any strong Drink,
as Pietang, use Sugar, or eat any Fat of their Meat, till such time as their
Rice is half ripe, believing that only preserves the sprouting Blade from the
harrase of wild Beasts, as Deers, Swine, and such like.

The Punishment of Criminals.
Their chief Practice, and special Virtues, are Theft, Murder, and Adultery, at
which they are very dextrous, either by Stratagems, or downright violence, and
he that reckons up the most of such dire Actions, appears amongst them the
bravest Fellow.

Show great respect one to another, and chiefly the Youth to the ancient People
These People, though they have no superiority amongst them, neither by the
honor of Birth, nor their own acquired Riches: yet the Seniors keep the Juniors
at a greater distance than we in Europe; the old Men exacting a greater Respect
from the younger by far, over whom they exercise absolute Authority, and
Arbitrary Power, without any limitation, Youth being no better than a Slave to
Age; for wheresoever a young Man sees one more aged than himself (though at a
great distance) starts suddenly out of the way, as if a Prince were coming with
all his Train; and if he chance to call and beckon to him, then sending him of
an Errand, he dare not refuse, though to the farthest part of the Isle; neither
dare they once offer to come near, or intrude into any Room where Parents are
together; so that to be young, is to be a Slave, and when old, a Prince, having
no honor of superiority but by their years.

Strange Marriage.
THe Males must not Marry before their one and twentieth Year, nor wear long
Hair till the seventeenth. Their ceremonious Rites of Matrimony are only
consummated thus: The Suitor, who by the advice of his Parents or his own
Affection, has cast his Eye upon a Mistress, begins his Courtship or
Gallanting with a Present, which his Mother, or a near Relation, carries to her
House, there presenting in her Servants Name, with all Complements, and
manifestations of his Affection. These Gifts are commonly eight Skirts or
Petticoats, as many Wastcoats, or Upper-Bodice, four hundred Armlets of pleited
Rush, a dozen Rings for their Fingers, either Copper, or white polished
Hartshorn, and so many Laces of red Dogs Hair, five Linen Girdles, twelve
Dogs hair Coverlets, thirty Chinesie Pieces of Cloth, a great Box full of
Dogs-hair, with which they make a Border, or Love-shade, to beautify their
Forehead and Temples, which they call Ayam Maniang, and five pair of Hart-skin
Stockings. These Presents are sent only by the Wealthiest; and those that are
less able according to their abilities. If what they thus present is received,
the business is concluded, and Marriage presently confirmed by the Nuptial Bed.

The Formosan Men live (...) with their Women.
Notwithstanding the concluding Ceremony, the Husband and Wife dwell not
together, but live apart by themselves; but in the Night he is allowed in a
clandestine way to steal to his Enjoyments; whether making his approaches, he
is neither allowed Fire nor Candle, but with all silence and secrecy steals
into the Bed; neither there must he speak to his Bride, but if he want any
thing, that he signifies by Coughing; upon which, guessing what it may be, his
Wife administers, and her Houshold-business being done, she comes to Bed; a
hard Lodging, where indeed they have no Bed, neither Pillow nor Bolster, but a
Buck-skin spread upon the Floor; yet others have a Bedstead spread with Rushes.
These hardships, as they suppose, makes them fitter for the encounters of
Venus, and more stirs up Loves fervor than warm dalliance in softer
accommodations: Neither may he linger there, but ere the Dawn visibly appear,
thence he must, that so his departing with an appetite, he may be the more
earnest for a second fruition: But all this while neither of them are a burden
to one another, but each provide themselves, and follow their own affairs; and
if they meet by chance in the Day, they pass by like Strangers, the Husband not
daring to speak to his Wife without her License. May not speak to them in the
day-^ime.
The Charge of bringing up of the Children is left to her Care, till they are
above one and twenty years of age, then their Father receives and keeps, or
disposes of them as he thinks fitting.

BUt the Formosan Women have a barbarous Custom (void of all Motherly
affection, and humane reason,) for whoever proves with Child before 37 years of
age, when the Fruit of her Womb waxes ripe and fit for Delivery, they cruelly
and in unspeakable manner destroy: for in stead of a Midwife that should assist
them in their Labor, or Childbed-throws, they employ a cruel Dame, who laying
them in a fit posture on their best and softest Bed, Horrible Murder of their
Infants.
crushes and kneads the tender Infant in the Womb, till it become like a lump
of Dough, which departs from them with more extreme torture, than if they were
naturally delivered.

Georgius Canidius, a Minister of the Gospel, residing in Formosa Anno 1627
relates, that he knew a Formosan Woman, who was delivered of 16 Children in
that horrible manner, her first abortion being in her seventeenth Year; and he
being inquisitive to know why she thus made away what would have been her own
dear Issue, and to be esteemed most of all worldly joys by her, received this
answer from her, That her shamefacedness and modesty forbad her to be a Mother
before she was of age of discretion, being accounted amongst them 37 Year.

In what Year the Formosan Men begin to keep House with their Wives.
The Husband (as we said before) in the 40 Year of his age, forsakes his
solitary abode, and lives with his Wife, spending the remainder of their days
together in small Huts or Hovels in the Field: but upon the least jangling or
falling out, they part; so that sometime they change their old for new Wives
once a Month. If he can clearly convict her, showing just reason for this
separation, he recovers her Dowery, seizing those Gifts which he presented
before Marriage; but failing either in his Arguments or Proofs, the divorced
Wife preserves her own Estate. Some Marry two Wives, but they are looked upon
as committing Fornication or Adultery; but of late, Custom, and the common
practice, makes the offense not altogether so heinous.

THeir Youth and Batchellors have their peculiar Residence; for in every
Village, as we said before, 16 Houses have their Chapel, U^marry'd People have
their Dwelling, apart.
in which they have distinct Lodgings, as in a College, where they keep their
Batchellors Place, though Married, till such time as they go to live with their
Wives.

The Formosan Houses are artificial.
The Formosan Houses are the handsomest, and exactest built of any after the
Indian manner; for in stead of digging deep, they raise a Foundation six Foot
high of firm Clay; the Walls of the Fabric are raised only with Reeds and
Rushes, artificially strengthened with interweavings, having four Doors opening
to the four Winds; but the prime Buildings have eight: Their Houshol-sluff.
The Ornament without, and Furniture within, are Stags Crested Heads, and wild
Boars, Chinesie Raiments, and Deer-skins; and also Assagays, or Javelins,
Shields, Swords, Bows and Arrows, Cattle, Axes, Cans, Pitchers, and Troughs,
Vessels of Barks of Trees, and Earthen Ware. But they pride most in the Bones,
Sculls, and hairy Scalps of Enemies Conquered by their own Hands.

They use no private, Feasts.
but public Feasts, to which every sixteen House-Parish repair, being kept in
their little Temple, or Chapel, where after their Devotion to their gods, they
spend the rest of their time in Feasting, Singing, Dancing, and all manner of
Idolatry; and he that appears there in a Dogs-hair Coat, is the bravest Fellow.

Strange ordering of their Dead.
THe manner of disposing of their Dead, and Funeral Obsequies, are thus: When
any dies, the Corpse being Laid out, after 24 hours they elevate it upon a
convenient Scaffold, or Stage, four Foot high, Matted with Reeds and Rushes,
near which they make a Fire, that so the Corpse may by degrees dry: to which
Place the Friends of the Deceased daily flock together, and that they may keep
up sorrow the better, bring along with them store of Mans-flesh, and several
strong intoxicating Liquors. But before the sick Person departs, being just
ready to give up the Ghost, thus they begin their inebriating grief: One beats
on a Drum made of a hollow Tree, which gives notice of a Person deceased; at
which Summons the Women come from all Parts near, bringing Pots and Vessels of
strong Drink with them, and making themselves, Strange Dancing.
and the Relations of the Deceased, Drunk. They Dance all Night before the Door
after this manner: They take a Trough like a Chest, but longer and broader, and
turning the bottom upwards, the Women get up, and two by two, Back to Back,
move their Legs and Arms in a Dancing time and measure; which pace, or taboring
tread, sends a kind of a murmuring, or doleful sound from the hollow Tree; when
these mounted Couples are weary, they come down, and others supply the Place:
thus the Maudlin-Drunkards Dance nine days together, whilst the Body lies
parching by the Fire, sending forth a very noysom stench: then having bathed
the Corpse* nine days over, they wrap it up close in a Mat, and lay it higher
than before, so covering it with a fitted Canopy from all light, there lying
three year, till such time as nothing remains but a Skeleton, all else being
consumed to Dust; then they Interr him in his own House, with all the Ceremony
of Feasts, as if lately departed.

How strangely they order their Sick.
THe ordering of their Sick is no less unnatural and preposterous, for they use
them worse than if the Devil were their Doctor; for in stead of Potion or Pill,
and the like, they use but one Medicine for all Diseases, and that is a dry
Halter, especially in the Village Teopan, for as soon as any Person falls sick,
and begins to complain, lying down, and not able to walk about and follow his
business, they presently prepare a tough Cord in stead of Cordial, so putting
the Noose about his Neck, they hoist him up to the top of the House with a
Pulley kept for that purpose, then let him suddenly fall with a Jolt, which
commonly proves immediate Cure by killing of them; yet some mend upon this
choking Medicine, either by the strength of Nature, or their spirits irritated
by the fright.

The Religion of the Formosans.
THe Formosans neither Write nor Read, using no Books, Letters, nor Characters:
but yet that Law and Religion which they have amongst them, they observe
without alteration, delivering it by Tradition from Generation to Generation:
for certain young Men are appointed to be instructed from the elder; and
faithful Memories are their only Registers and Records. First they believe the
Universe, Heaven and Earth, to have been without beginning, and shall be
without end; next the immortality of the Soul; for which reason they build a
little Place, in which they put a Tub of Water with a Dish in it, before the
Door of the Deceased, supposing the Spirit thereof comes daily thither to bathe
or cleanse. The next Article of their Faith is, that there are several
Punishments after this life, according to the equality of their Crimes, and
Rewards of eternal happiness for those that have, when living, merited by doing
well: therefore they dig broad and deep Trenches, filling them with Mud and
Slime; over, which they make a floating Bridge of bundled up Rushes, which
leads to the most delightfullest and luxurious Vales in the Country: over
these, as they affirm, the Souls of the Deceased must pass, which the Wicked
endeavoring to cross, the unstable Truss, or rolling Bridge, tumbles them over
into their Stygian Lake: but the Just and Godly walking in safety over, enjoy
there all pleasure in an everlasting Elysium.

What they account sins.
Those sins which they account most heinous, are but frivolous toys, built upon
Superstition and slight Observation, as not to go naked (as we said before, at
their set and appointed times; to wear Clothes or any thing of Silk; Women to
bear Children before their 37th Year; to fetch and eat Oysters not in due
season; and to venture to undertake any business, though of little or no
consequence, before they have observed good Auguries from the Notes or Language
of the Birds: All these are Capital, and as they hold forth, unpardonable
Offenses; but Murder, Theft, Lying, and Forswearing, these have their
Qualifications, for some may commit them, and some may not, without any
scruple; but in general they are looked upon no more than peccadillo's, and
venial Offenses.

When they take an Oath, they ratify it by breaking a Straw. To be a public
and common Drunkard, and to be an Adulterer and debaucher of young Women, if
carried privately, is no harm.

Though they believe the immortality of the Soul, yet they utterly deny the
resurrection of the Body.

Their chiefest Idols.
Amongst their several gods which they worship, the chiefest are Tumagisanhach,
who Governs and Inhabits the South, his Celestial Spouse; Taxankpada Agodales,
commands the East, where when it happens to Thunder, they believe that she
exercises her Tongue, the Females best Arms, scolding so loud at her Husband in
the South, because he neglects his Office, not fending Rain when the Earth
needs; who being netled with his Wives bitter and sharp expression, not
enduring to hear her any longer, opens his Mouth, sending, and dispersing with
his Breath abundance of Water.

Another Deity which they worship out of fear, because Tamagisanhach, as they
say, creates Men with comely Visage, and well proportioned Bodies; this being
an angry and ill natured Power, delighting in mischief, makes it his whole
business to, spoil and misshape what Tamagisanhach has made fair and handsome,
disfiguring their Faces with Pox and Blasting, bunching their Backs, withering
and crooking their Limbs, and the like, then deriding at their lameness and
deformity: so this Sariafing they hold in great veneration, that he would be
pleased to spare them, and do them no harm.

Their gods of War.
When they take up Arms, and proclaim Hostility, they offer Sacrifices to
Talafula and Tapaliape, their two gods of War.

Women perform Divine Services.
THeir Priests, or rather Priestesses, which they call Inibs, are Women, the
whole Function of Divine Service, or Worship, belonging to them; for they not
only Pray to their gods, and Preach, but also Sacrifice: their chiefest
Offerings are Stags and Boars-heads, presented in a Charger upon boiled Rice,
Pynang, and other strong Drinks, as a Condiment: this performed, two of the
Female Order stand up before the Congregation, and make a Sermon; in which they
set forth the praise and honor of their gods, going on with that vehemence of
expressions, and loud declamations, that at last their Hair stands upright,
Strange actions.
and their Eyes rolling, seem ready to start out of their Heads; then near the
conclusion of these their dire Exhortations, they fall down in a Trance, and
oftentimes lie so for a whole hour, whilst the People gathering near them, tear
their Throats, and cleave the Air with hideous shreeks and cries: when coming
to themselves in a cold and faint Sweat, their Limbs trembling, their Teeth
chattering, strangely discomposed, they tell the People, that in their Trance
the gods appeared to them, unfolding mysterious things for their good, not yet
to be expressed; besides two others of these Women mount the Battlements of the
Temple, and standing at the gable ends, they make fresh, loud, and long
Supplications to their gods: At last they strip themselves, and thus denuded,
crying more earnestly to their gods, and first shaking, then taboring, or
clapping with their Hands, raging as in a phanatick distraction. All the Women,
following their impudent example, throw off with their Weeds all shame at once,
Drunkeness a Virtue
and so Tope and Deboush, till they disgorge this their too plentiful excess.

Besides this their public Worship in the Temple, they Offer in the open
Streets, and exercise private and domestic Devotions, performing Family Duties
daily in their own Houses, to which those that please may repair, and join with
them in this their Idol-Service.

The Office of the Inibs.
With these Inibs also they consult concerning fair or foul Weather, when they
have any business abroad, also of future Events, which they seem to foretell,
and if bad, advise how to prevent, or at least to mitigate: They also profess
Exorcism, and to drive away evil Spirits, to charm and confine the Devil, and
all such deceitful Tempters; which they perform in a Rant, with loud hectoring
acclamations, drawing a Japan Faulchion, with which they Fence, Strike, and
Thrust, flourishing it in the Air, making them believe, that thus they Fight
the Fiend, and slice Satan out in Sippets, forcing him, thus being mangled and
cut almost into Atoms, to dive for his better safety into the Sea.

Formosan become Christians.
Yet these so salvage People, and blind with an overgrown ignorance, have
lately (since the Hollanders East India Company settled here, and built a Fort
for their Defense and convenience of Trade,) without any great difficulty
embraced the Doctrine of the Christian Faith, Why they are easier Converted
than other Indians.
which was the easier introduced, the Inhabitants being their own Governors,
and under no supreme Authority, who exercising a tyrannical Power, would, as
other Persecutors, force them back from Gods true, to their false Idol-Worship,
as at that time most part of India was, being either under Heathen or Mahumetan
Governors, who with great fury obstructed the Gospel, which else might have
flourished through the Oriental World: Besides, the Formosans kept no Books,
wherein the bounds of Religion were fixed, and a settled maintained Doctrine,
which still caused great variance and hot Disputes amongst themselves; the
whole Conduct of their Divine Laws being left to a few frantic and ignorant
Women, who know nothing but by Tradition. This made it the more easy to reduce
them from their Paganism and Idolatry; and finding little in their frenzied
Inibs, that might persuade them to persist in their former Superstitions, many
of them, with small difficulty, became good Christians.

Trade of the Netherlanders in Formosa.
THEre the Netherlanders drive a great Trade with the Chinese Junks, which come
from the River Chincheo, and the City Aymoy. The Merchandises which they deal
for and Barter, are Transported from thence to Japan, India, and Holland. When
the Vessels make a slow Return from Aymoy, lapsing the usual time when they
should freight themselves with their Goods for Japan, or Batavia, then the
Hollanders Sail thither; where for ten Tails, every Tail being a French Crown,
they buy a Picol of Silk, weighing a hundred and twenty pound.

Why Formosa is of such great concern.
THis Island is of great Consequence to the Hollanders, because by this means
they obstruct the Spanish Trade both with China and Japan; which Inconvenience
the Castilian well observing, to prevent, Anno 1626. going ashore on the North
Point of Formosa, cast up a Fort with all speed, The Castilians set upon the
Netherlanders in Formosa.
calling it Kelang. Yet though thus settled, they rested not, but Rigged a great
Fleet, hoping to drive the Hollanders from Tyovan: But foul Weather frustrated
their Design. After that, the Portuguese undertook the like in Macaw; but had
the same ill Success. This was also no small Obstacle to the Japanners, who
drove a very profitable Trade in Formosa, before the Hollanders built their
Fort Zelandia there; for after being much obstructed by this means, and though
they complained at home, could set no Redress; Japanners complain of the
Netherlanders.
So whilst the Business was agitated on all sides, the Hollanders losing no
time, but making advantage of the Opportunity, took Kelang, and made themselves
Masters of the whole Isle.

The Chinese War is the occasion of the loss of Formosa.
BUt whilst they thus settled themselves there, the State of China was turned
topsie-turvey; and that long and well settled Government, fixed and confirmed
with all the Ligatures of Strength and Cementing Policy, was utterly subverted,
and quite overthrown, by a horrid and grand Rebellion. This Combustion first
brake out in the Province or Kingdom of Suchuen; and though but small at first,
yet afterward the whole Empire was involved in the like Flames, and Public
Calamity; which thus happened:

This Country has a Tract of barren and inaccessible Mountains, which
formerly were sculking Receptacles for a few guilty Persons that had committed
Theft and Murder, and other such heinous Offenses; Robbers in China.
after it became the Asylum or Sanctuary for all sorts of petty Criminals, such
as Cheaters and Bankrupts, who supposed the open Air better than a close
Prison; then Hectoring Debouchers made there their Summer-Progress; next, all
sorts of Vagabonds, fearing the Whip, flocked thither; and at last, those that
were pinched with Poverty, and not enamored with Labor, betook themselves also
to this kind of idle Life: So growing numerous, they began to draw down in
Bodies, Attaquing whole Villages, and carrying away the Booty to their Dens and
obscure Recesses in the Mountains. Thus fleshed and encouraged, deserting the
Hills, and their former Aboads, they pitch their Camps in open Plains, and
spoiling wherever they came, soon overrun that whole Province, and left
nothing to Conquer but the Metropolis Chinghi; not questioning (such was their
audacious Resolution) to make themselves Masters of that Rich and Populous
City: Which they had done, and without any great difficulty, but that a Woman,
a Virago, inspired with more than a Masculine Spirit, by her Courage, Care, and
Conduct, so baffled them in all their Endeavors, giving them Repulse upon
Repulse, that at last, with Loss and Dishonor, they were forced to quit their
Enterprise, which had wholly dissipated their whole Army; when two Commanders
of the Imperial Forces, then drawing thither from Queichew, utterly to quell
this horrid Insurrection, fell at variance betwixt themselves; and the
Difference grew so high, that one of them to be revenged of the other, quitted
his Loyalty, and carried over his whole Brigade to the despairing Rebels; who
thus reinforced, joining together, set on the Emperors remaining Party; in
which Battle, satisfying his Revenge, he not only slew the General his
Antagonist, but they beat the Viceroy of Tutang, and routed his whole Army:
But yet soon after, he bestirring himself, recruited so his Forces, that though
he could not utterly dissipate them, he brought them to Conditions, and to pay
him double the Damage of what ever they had gained in that Predatory War.

But the Rebels, when thus languishing, having nothing left but the Mountains
which first fostered them, retreated thither; when about that time, all things
in a manner settled, several of the Northern Provinces of China were infested
with the destroying Plague of Locusts, which covering the whole Country,
devoured what ever was fit for Humane Sustenance, bringing an extreme Famine:
Great Famine.
which the Rich were able to bear out; but the Poor were so driven to the worst
of Exigencies, Starving, that they every where, stirred up by the Example of
those of Suchuen, It makes Robbers.
fell to pilfering and stealing; and gathering at last into Parties, to Robbery
and Murder; setting, in like manner, upon whole Towns and Villages: And soon
after, they formed eight several Armies, selecting those they thought most
likely, and fittest for Valor and Conduct, to be their Commanders; who growing
skilful, (practicing daily Martial Discipline) suddenly brought these great
Bodies in good Order and Array.

With these marching, as they had well-design'd, several ways, they made
themselves Masters of whole Kingdoms and Provinces, none being able to
withstand such an universal Inundation of Arms: And thus making the whole
Riches of the several Countries which they entered, their Spoil, they gathered
up an inexpressible Mass of Treasure; by which enabled, as they then thought,
to wage War with the whole World, having in their hopes already devoured the
vast Empire of China; all which perhaps might have been done, had they
unanimously joined to carry on the Work together; The Robbers in China fall at
variance amongst themselves.
when their eight Generals, every one of them stirred up by Ambition, began to
contrive how he might be Lord and Master of all, and either destroy, or make
the rest his Inferiors. Upon these Terms they all stood, clashing one at
another in their Consultations and Councils; and at last, the Difference
increasing, they divided into Factions, and began a Civil War amongst
themselves, which was carried on with so much eagerness and bloodshed, that
eight Generals were reduced to two only, Lycunghus, and Changienchunghus.

And these also not easily suffering any Equal, but both ambitious to be
absolute and sole Commanders, not only of what the remaining Corrival enjoyed,
but also of those Forces which had lost their Leaders in their late
Dissentions, clandestinely plotted each others Destruction; which failing, they
came to a better understanding of their present Condition, from the sad Example
of their six slain Competitors: So coming to Articles of Agreement, That
Licunghus should march into, and have for his part the Spoil of the two next
Southern Provinces, Xensi, and Honan; and the other General, Changihen-chungus,
was contented to Plunder the two Northern Territories, Suchuen, and Huquang;
whereupon both seeming well satisfied, dividing their Armies, they parted;
Licungzus for Xensi, all which Territory he soon Pillaged and Conquered; and
making his way by force of Arms, broke into the pleasant Country of Honan,
where lying down before Caifung, meeting a rougher Entertainment than he
expected, their Cannon always thundering from the Walls, though he made furious
Assaults, yet he was twice repulsed, with the Loss of many Men: So finding that
Storming would prove in vain, he resolved by Starving to force them to a
Surrender; to which purpose, he blocked up all the Avenues with a close
Leaguer, which brought the Besieged to that extreme Necessity and Want, that
their Miseries might have been compared with the Calamities of any City
suffering in that kind: Yet still with an undaunted Courage they held out,
expecting to be relieved by Zung-chinus the Emperor himself, who accordingly
came with his Army near Caifung. This City stands in a Valley, on the
South Side of the River Huang, about three Miles distant; whose Waters using to
swell very high, after great Rains falling in the Mountains, they kept off from
damaging the City, with a Wall, built where the Banks were lowest. This
Water-fence the Emperor broke down, designing to destroy the Enemy in his Camp,
lying near the City; in which he failed not: for such was the violence of the
sudden Inundation, that Licungzus being surpised, with the loss of many Men,
was forced to raise his Siege.

Destruction of the City Caifung.
But this comfortable Relief, and the Joy of their Delivery from so powerful an
Enemy, was but of a short continuance, a greater Misery soon overtaking them,
and indeed their utter Destruction; for the Waters that were friendly at first,
swelling to such a height, became their deadly Enemies, scaling their Walls,
beating down stately Temples and Houses, and at last (in a general Deluge)
swallowing the whole City; where perished no less than 300000 Souls.

The Robber Licungzus is Conqueror.
But the Rebel Licungzus upon this Accident rallying up his scattered Forces the
had escaped the Flood, Marched on, carrying all before him wheresoever he went,
bringing at last the Emperor to that straight of Necessity, that utterly
despairing, he hanged himself in his own Palace at Peking. The Emperor had
three Sons; the Eldest escaped, yet was never heard of; but the other two the
Insulting Conqueror Beheaded.

Now being Absolute, and Reigning as Emperor in Zung-chinus stead, looking
about, saw nothing that could hinder him to settle the Empire upon himself and
his Posterity, but Usanguejus, who with a Standing Army guarded the Walls and
Borders, keeping out the Incursive Tartar, whereupon he sent, commanding him to
take the Oath of Allegiance. But he, either scorning to be under a Rebels
Subjection, or conceiving that it would be more for his Safety and Advantage to
trust a Foreign Prince, that would undoubtedly hearken to such Proposals; and
he also having the Opportunity, by guarding the Passages, moved the whole
Business to the Emperor of Tartary; Vsanguejus fetches in the Tartars against
Licungzus.
who gladly watching all Occasions, accepted of it, and suddenly Marched in
with Eighty thousand Men, to try his Fortune against Licungzus, who surpised
with the News of this sudden Expedition of the Tartars, and not able to form so
great an Army as might withstand him, the Enemy being near at hand, he removed
his Court farther into the Country, to Sigan, making that his Imperial City;
and with him conveyed from thence the vast Treasure which former Emperors had
been gathering Two hundred and eighty Years. Vast Treasures of the Chinese
Emperor.
Eight days were spent in carrying away the Wealth through the four Gates of
the City, upon Cammels, Horses, and other Beasts of Burden, which from Sun to
Sun went laden with Silver and Gold, and all manner of costly Gems, and Jewels
of invaluable Worth: But in the way, this Prize of prodigious Estimation the
Tartar seized on. Thus gaining both Wealth and Reputation, he soon became
Master of Peking, Tartars become Masters of China. Lycunghus is slain.
and presently after defeated Lycunghus, with his whole Army, insomuch that he
was never heard of more. Then he Rewarded Usanguejus, who in the great
Distraction of the Nation (both Parties setting up several of the Ancient
Blood Royal, deposing and killing one another) stuck to the Tartar, proving so
faithful to his Trust, that he made him King of Xensi; and soon after, his Son
Xunchi, being a Child, was chosen Emperor.

Pyracy at Sen by Iquon.
BUt whilst China was thus shattered and harras'd by Land, arose a great Pyrate
at Sea, called Chinchilung (by Strangers and Foreign Traffickers known by the
Name of Iquon) who served first under the Portuguese at Macaw, and afterward
the Hollanders in Formosa: Now setting up for himself, got a Crew of loose,
Iquon's strange Rise.
debauched Chinese, which daily increasing, with their Forces grew not only
Considerable, but so Great, that he made himself Admiral of the Sea, engrossing
the whole Indian Trade to himself; holding Correspondence, and driving Commerce
with the Spaniards at the Philippines; with the Hollanders, in Formosa and
Batavia; and with the Portuguese, at Macaw and Japan. Through his Hands also
was all the Chinese Merchandise Transported abroad, and Foreign Commodities
Imported thither; by which he got such a Mass of Treasure, (Commanding at least
Three thousand Vessels) which raised his Ambition so high, that he thought of
no less than to be Sole Commander at Land, as well as at Sea. But the Tartar,
not a little troubled at such his Greatness and Power, nor being able to
redress himself at Sea, having no Fleet of his own; since Strength would not
prevail, used Policy, promising him, if he would come in, and be as a Friend,
to make him King of two Kingdoms, viz. Fokien, and Quantung. Thus allured by
the Golden Bait of a Crown, little suspecting that under such fair Proffers lay
worse Designs, he accepted the Overture, and brought his Fleet into the Haven,
before the City Focheu; where going to Treat further concerning the Emperors
Gracious Offer, the King of Fokien poisoned him at a Banquet; His death.
which his Son and Brothers hearing, suddenly made their escape to Sea,
revenging their Brothers Death on all whoever happened in their way; and whilst
their Fury was thus high, they fell upon Formosa.

Coxenga, formerly a Clothier of Putman, afterward Governor of Tyoan, had now
the Command of the Fleet; and having a private grudge at the Hollanders,
because they would not assist him against the Tartars, went with six hundred
Junks, whereof some carried forty Guns, well Manned, and provided with all
Necessaries, Coxenga lands in Formosa
from China to Formosa, where he Landed several thousands of his Men, who made
so great a Havoc and Slaughter amongst the Inhabitants, His Cruelty there.
that neither sparing Young nor Old, they put them all to the Sword. The Women
they stripped stark naked, driving them through their Army, and Ravishing them.
Such as they thought not handsome, they more disfigured; putting out their Eyes,
cutting off their Noses, and driving them in that lamentable condition to the
Fort Zelandia. Others they hewed in pieces; to which miserable end came also
three Dutch Ministers, Anthonius Hambrock, Arnoldus Vinsenus, and Peter Mus.
These and the like Cruelties they used, and others such as were never heard of
by any. The first Assault they made, was upon the Fort Kelang; which being too
weak to resist against so powerful an Enemy, the Besieged were forced to a
Surrender. The Chinese being encouraged by this their good Success, marched
next to Zelandia, which was Fortified with three double Walls, standing upon an
Isthmus between Formosa and the Island Baxambaya.

Close by, and under the Command of the Fort, the Netherlanders had settled
their Residences. This Plot the Chinese long before had in Design; The
Chinese had a Design along time against Formosa.
which to effect the better, they brought their Junks into the Haven or Tyoan,
a place of Free-Trade for the Chinese, many of them residing there, who
against their coming, had furnished themselves privately with store of Arms,
and covered their Houses with Cow-hides, and had all things in such a
readiness, that upon a Moments warning, they cast up Breast-works against the
Fort Zelandia; whereupon Hans Jurricaen, a Sergeant at Arms, and some of the
Besieged, went to Coxengo, to understand and take a view of the Enemies Forces.
Before the Fort stood a Bulwark, just behind the place of Execution, against
which the Chinese cast up a Platform, which did much hurt to the Fort
Zelandia; and also took the Bulwark before the Castle, in which a hundred
Chinese were blown up into the Air: for the Hollanders, upon their departure
from the same, left lighted Matches in their Store-Chamber, where the Powder
lay, which took Fire just at that instant when the Chinese entered. But this
Loss of theirs, cost the Hollanders dear: For though soon after there arrived
five Ships from Batavia, to the Relief of Zelandia, against the Chinese; yet
they had such ill success in their first Attempt, that going ashore on
Baxombaya, to Storm a Fort which the Chinese had newly cast up, they were so
roughly entertained, that they were forced to Retreat, Hollanders are beaten by
the Chinese.
with the Loss of Three hundred and eighty Men.

Upon this their so great Defeat, Coxengo sent in a Dutch Minister, one of his
Prisoners, to Frederick Cojet, who Commanded Zelandia, advising him with all
speed to deliver up the Town and Castle; which if he refused, and obstinately
stood out, he would without Mercy put all his Prisoners immediately to the
Sword: But the Governor would not so deliver up All, and such a Charge as he
was entrusted with; and so slighting his Threats, sent his Refusal: Upon which,
Coxengo finished the bloody Massacre which he had begun, putting all the
Remainder of the Prisoners to the Sword. Yet Cojet (though much troubled at the
loss of so many of his Contrymen) stoutly defended the Fort against all
their Forces; till his Men wearied with continual Duty, being daily Stormed and
Assaulted on all sides, tired and out of heart, he not being able to hold out
longer, Surrendered. Cojet delivers up Zelandia to the Chinese.
The Articles were these: That the Besieged might in safety go aboard their
Ships: That whatever Prisoners were taken since the Massacre on both sides,
should be exchanged; and the Fort Zelandia, with all the Treasure, Ammunition,
and whatever else belonged to it, to be delivered. Where Coxenga found ten Tun
of Gold, forty Pieces of Ordnance, and other things of great Value. So
accordingly they went aboard their five Ships, and Sailed back, having
sustained all these great Losses, to Batavia; where Cojet was called in
question concerning his delivering up of the Fort Zelandia, the State there
being much troubled with the Damage that might follow, by the loss of such a
considerable Place, The Japan Trade was molested thereby.
from whence their Trade to Japan might be utterly obstructed by the Chinese
Junks. Mean while the Tartar, the new Emperor of China, sent Ambassadors to the
Hollanders at Batavia, offering to assist them, and help to revenge their
Cause, by driving the Chinese Pirates out of Formosa.

The Netherland-Fleet proceed on in their Voyage to Japan.
IN the Interim, the Ambassadors for Japan, being upon their intended Voyage,
came at last to the Island St. Clara, before the Southern Point of Cikako,
which is a Rocky and High Land; from whence Steering North and by West, they
were incounter'd the second Night with a great Storm; which overcoming, though
with great difficulty, they descried on the seventeenth of September, the
Fore-land of Nangesaque; of which nevertheless being doubtful, they yet
continued on their Course, and about Noon, Weathering the Point, they got to
the Northward. The Land lying low, and they Strangers to the Coast, they were
much troubled; and the Pilots seeing more Islands opening near the Mouth of the
Bay of Nangesaque, growing more diffident, stood again to the Offin, where they
discovered two Japan-Vessels, Steering Southward; and making toward them, they
were forced (being overpowered by the Gale, then growing fresher and fresher)
to leave their Design of Intelligence: But soon after they descried another
Japan-Vessel, to which drawing near, and Hailing, not understanding one
another, they lost that Labor also.

When early on the eighteenth day, the Point of Nangesaque appeared
North-North-East, about five Leagues and a half distant; and the Island Goto,
North-North-West: By which Position of the Course, they knew they were in the
right Channel, which would lead them safely to the Harbor; and by Night they
reached the Point or Promontory of Nomoo, which extends it self South-West
along to the Bay of Arima. Thus they wrought themselves up within four Leagues
of Nomoo, lying North and by East, in thirty Degrees Northern-Latitude, from
thence plying Easterly only with their Fore-Sail. The next Morning they
entered, Come into the Bay of Nangesaque.
with all their Sails a-trip, running up merrily to the Northern Shore, into
the Bosom of the Bay of Nangesaque, behind the Summit of whose opposite Coast
rises a Rock resembling a Steeple; beyond which, seven Leagues to the
Southward, stands Nangesaque; passing which, Sailing on to their Harbor, they
incounter'd many Isles, and some Rocks; which all opening, seemed courteously
to entertain and give them a Passage: So by Noon they Rode before Nangesaque,
having six Fathom and a half Water, and a Clayie Ground; where they found six
more of their Friends, Dutch Vessels.

Frisius his Entry into Nangesaque.
AT this time Derick Sneck was Consul there for their East India Company; where
also was Philip Shillemans, Governor of Tonking, who as soon as the Fleet
arrived, went aboard, to wait upon, and conduct with all Ceremony of State
Andreus Frisius, being appointed by the Council at Batavia, to succeed in the
Place of the deceased Ambassador Bloccovius. With the like Formality and
Honorable Respect, the Embalmed Corpse of Bloccovius was brought ashore and
interred, to the Wonder and Admiration of the Natives.



Derick Sneck Sails to Batavia.
THe first of October, Derick Sneck went from Nangesaque to Batavia, whose
Place Antonius Brekhurst supplied, who was also added as Colleague to Andreus
Frisius, in his Address as Ambassador to Quaeme, then Emperor of Japan,
(Residing in his great City of Jedo) concerning the Free-Trade and Commerce
between the Hollanders and his Subjects. According to the great Consequence of
this Embassy, an answerable Train and Equipage was prepared; but being not well
settled, since their coming from Firando to Nangesaque, their Storehouses were
as yet out of order; so that there was a confusion in the carrying on of their
Procedure: And though Nangesaque is a more Rich and Populous City, and more
resorted to than Firando, yet that Island had better Conveniences, and fitter
for the Hollander to Trade upon.

Description of the Castle Firando.
THis Country produces nothing worthy, nor any thing to show, but the Castle
in which Firandano, Brother to the Lord of the Island, inhabits. The Castle
stands amidst a pleasant Mead, to which they pass over a Bridge of blue Slate,
which leads unto the Base Court, guarded on each side with a File of
Musketeers. The Gate is covered with a double Penthouse, one a good distance
beneath the other: The opposite Jaumes are adorned with the Emperors Arms, and
those of their Noble Family. The Castle standing upon a Hill, shows it self in
Prospect at a great distance, because its Tower or Spire being seven Stories,
tapering in a Pyramidical Form, appears afar off. Upon each side of the Castle
open eight Doors, by which, on Steps cut out of the hard Rock, climbing the
steep Ascent, they enter through several Doors to the Palace. Below are four
Arbours of Pleasure, or Banquetting-houses, standing on square Pillars, built
round with Galleries, and a Cupiloe on the top. This is all that Firando boasts.

But they were much troubled, whilst they were preparing to go upon this
Embassy, being informed, that never any had Audience from his Imperial Majesty,
if they did not open their way with rich and costly Presents beforehand.

It seems not here amiss to say something concerning the Description of the
Country, Customs, and Character of the People; from a good Author, Johannes
Petrus Maffeus.

THe Country, Jon Peter, Maffeus, Historiar, lib. 12. Description of Japan.
commonly called Japan, says he, is not one, but three Islands, whose Skirts or
Margents are sprinkled round with many lesser.

The greatest and wealthiest stands divided into three and fifty Provinces, or
petty Kingdoms, the chief City called Meaco, gives its denomination to that
Isle.

The second Island called Ximus, divides it self into nine Principalities,
whose most eminent Cities are Vosuquim, and Funaium.

The third Division or Isle is Xicocum, Division.
and has only four Vicegerents, and famous for the City Tosa; so that the
three Isles of Japan number 66 Kingdoms, all subordinate under one Emperor.

The whole Country extends in length almost 200 Leagues; Bigness.
the breadth not answerable to the length, for the broadest part not being
above thirty Leagues, and the smallest but ten; its circumference is not yet
well known: and lying in a manner North and South, extends it self from thirty
two, to eight and thirty degrees of Northern Latitude: Borders.
The East looks toward Nova Hispania, but at 150 Leagues distance: The North
Buts upon Seythia or Tartary, and other unknown Countries: The West views
China, but far off, for from Liampo, a City standing on the most Eastern Point
of China to Goto, being the most Western Island of Japan, where first the Ships
arrive, makes sixty Leagues, and from Amaccen, on the most Western Harbor of
the East Side of China, to the forementioned Isle, is 290 Leagues. The South
lies bordered with the wide washing Ocean, at great distance, unknown
Territories, whence, they say, a strange People were drove by foul weather on
the Coast of Japan, which settling there, never returned.

The Soil.
THis Climate, for the most part, is Snowy and cold, and the Soil not very
fruitful; Rice, which is their general Food, and grows most plentiful there;
they Reap in September their Harvest, for other sorts of Grain in many places
is in May, which they Bake not to make Bread of as in Europe, but eat it soft,
being boiled to a Pap, or Gruel: They have several warm Springs or Baths, which
cure (as they say) many Distempers.

Strange Mountains in Japan.
THe Country appears more Hilly than Plain, amongst which are two wonderful
Mountains, one of which Vomiting; continual Flames, with terrible smoke and
fragors, a horrid Figure; fancied by some to resemble the Devil, appears
standing amidst a Circle of Fire, on the very top. The other called Figenoiama,
reaches (as some report) several Miles, Perpendicular above the Clouds, and
middle Region of the Air.

THis Country abounds in Mines, Mines.
from whence the Inhabitants gather their greatest Riches; whose special care
invites foreign Merchants to Trade and Barter with them.

Trees. A wonderful Tree in Japan.
THeir Trees or Plants which they set, either for use or pleasure, resemble
ours, unless their Palms, which are of a tender and strange quality, contrary
to all Plants whatsoever, for they endure no manner of moisture, for if the
least wet touch the Roots, they fade and wither immediately, being destructive
to them as Poison; which to save and cure, they dig up, and dry the taken up
Roots in the Sun, then set it in a new Hole filled with dry Sand, where being
so Transplanted, it soon recovers, and reflourisheth in full verdure; those
Boughs or Branches that are cut or torn off with Winds, or any other accident,
they Nail on, which grows to the Body as well as if Graffed, or Inoculated.

Cedars in Japan very great.
Several places abound with Cedar, some of them so tall and large, that the
Carpenters use their Limbs or Branches for main Timber, in their stateliest
Buildings, and Shipwrights make Masts of them.

Japanners live on Venison.
THe Japanners neither breed nor keep Sheep, Swine, Geese, nor Poultry, nor eat
scarce any other flesh but Venison; the Deserts are full of wild Cattle, and
untamed Steeds, of a good race: The Woods are full of Wolves, Bores, Stags and
Conies.

Beasts, and Fishes there.
Amongst their several sorts of Fowl, they want not Pheasants, Ducks, wild
Pigeons, Turtle-Doves, Quails, and Partridges. Here they have also abundance of
Fish, amongst which the Eells, and what they call Voom, they most esteem:
Butter they know not, nor the use of Sweet Oil, but what they spend is pressed
out of Whales, which are often driven ashore upon their Coast. The meaner sort
of People use neither Tallow nor Wax, but carry up and down to light them
Branches of Pine Trees, in stead of Candles and Torches.

Their shape and strength.
THey are something tall of Stature, and well Set, and easily endure Watching
and other hardships, signs of a strong Constitution. From twelve to sixty years
of Age, they are liable to Musters, Impresses, and Martial Affairs. They suffer
their Beards to grow something long, Difference in Hair.
and use several fashions in Shaving their Heads: Youths keep only their
Foreheads bare, the Rusticks and common sort employ the Razor but on half their
Heads; the Nobles leave only a Tuft or Lock of Hair near the Nape of their
Necks, which if any touch, they look upon as a high affront, and a great
dishonor.

The Japanners are a strong People.
They much exercise their patience in all manner of sufferings, and are so
inured by Custom, that Hunger, Cold, Heat, and Thirst, Watching and Travel are
their Play-Fellows; for as soon as born, though the weather happen to be
extreme cold and pinching, they carry out the Infants, and wash them in the
Running Streams, where whilst they are cleansing, they let them paddle in the
Water to save themselves from sinking: So soon as Weaned, their first Lesson is
the Art of Hunting, kept from their Mothers, and all Female Relations; their
Schools of Learning, wherein they commence in Hardiness, are wild and
unfrequented places, believing, that nothing makes them more tender and
effeminate, than to be near Women.

Their manner of sleeping and eating.
THe Floors of their Houses are Matted all over very curiously; and that they
may tread the softer, stuffed like a Quilt, which indeed, are rather their
Couches or Beds, where laying themselves down, under their head in stead of a
Down-Pillow a Log or Stone, whereon they well and quietly Repose.

These Mattings are their Tables also, on which, sitting cross Legged, they
take their Repast: Are very politic.
Yet in their Diet, they are no less curious or dainty than the Chinese, and
like them use two Sticks, one in each hand, with which they take up their
Hash'd Service, needing neither Knives nor Forks, which they handle so
dexterously; and these Tools are so fitted for their purpose, that they never
let any thing fall, nor foul their Fingers; entering their Dining Room, for the
more cleanliness they pull off their Shoes. The meaner sort, especially those
that live poorly, near the Coast, fare hard, eating only Rice, Fish, and
Sallets; but the Inlanders Feast daily, and feed plentifully like the Chinese.

Rich Feasts.
In stead of Table-Clothes and Napkins, their Dishes are served up on little
Boards or Tablets, being either Pine or Cedar, curiously Painted after their
manner with various colors: Their prepared Dishes are heaped up with variety
of Meat, like our Bisks or Olapotreeds, tricked up with Leaf-Gold, the edges
stuck about with Cyprus Branches: But when they Treat Noblemen, they gild the
Bills, Feet and Legs all over with Gold: They entertain their Friends and
Strangers Cheerfully, with hearty Welcome.

During their time of Eating and Drinking, they have several Customs which they
perform with strange and Mimick Gestures, the whole Nation every where
punctually observing the like: The Blood of the Grape is altogether unknown to
them, but in stead thereof, they make their Wine of Rice; but above all, they
are most delighted with Water heated, mixed with the Powder of Chia.

Their Drink is made after a peculiar manner.
In nothing they are more curious and diligent than in making this Compound,
which the Grandees themselves pride to prepare, when they entertain their
Friends; for which purpose, to make this their special Liquor, they have
peculiar places in their Houses, where in a kind of Furnace over a gentle Fire,
it stands infusing, from whence when they are visited by Strangers, lifting up
the lid, they take it up in Dishes, and present it hot, trowling the Cup about
one to another.

The Japan Treasures, wherein they consul.
Their several Vessels which they use in this Preparation, are a kind of
Limbeck, or Furnace, Tunnel, Stone, Cruses, Spoons, and Pots, in which they
keep both the Herb and Powder of Chia.

Their last Complement which they are most proud of, is to show them their
Wealth, boasting their accumulated Treasure: But their forementioned Drink the
Japanners esteem and value, more than we our Precious Stones, and Inestimable
Jewels.

They also set a strange Rate upon Sword-Hilts, especially when made by some
peculiar Masters.

Their Houses and Cloisters.
Most of them dwell in Houses of clinch'd Wood, covered with slit Plankings,
because of the frequent Earthquakes which happen there, so with falling, they
suffer not much harm, and are soon repaired; some dwell in Edifices built of
Stone, no less Costly than Artificial. Their Temples also are most Magnificent,
with stately Cloisters, and Enclosures where their men and women are aparted.

The Japanners Tongue is very strange.
THe Japanners have one Tongue or Language in common, yet it is so various in
Pronounciation, that it seems to be of several and distinct Dialects, for they
use no Adjectives to their Substantives, as we do, but by variety of words,
they understand the matter to be good, bad, or indifferent, or what ever else;
nay, more than this, they have several Tones, or Accents in their Speech, which
are sharper or flatter like our Musical Notes, by which they distinguish their
meaning: But their Princes speak by themselves in a Commanding manner, or in an
Imperative Dialect; the Common People in a lower Style; in brief, the Men and
Women use not one Mode of Speaking. Moreover, Their manner of Writing is far
different from their Vulgar Colloque, and they use one Character in their
Writing, and another in their Printing, which are so different, that they
nothing resemble: Their Books are also numerous, which are either Divine,
Moral, or Heroic: Besides, As also their Character.
they have one Letter or Character, which signifies a Word, nay, sometimes
whole Sentence, not unlike the Chinese, or the Egyptian Hieroglyphics, from
whence the Japan Tongue is most difficult to be learned or understood.

Their Arms.
THey much delight in War: Their Arms, besides Guns, Bows, and Arrows, are
Faulchions and Daggers, which they begin to wear, and exercise at twelve years
of Age; their Faulchions or Scimiters are so well wrought, and excellently
tempered, that they will cut our European Blades asunder, like Flags or Rushes,
the edge neither rebated nor notch'd.

They have also Javelins Tipped with Gold or Silver, and their Pikes, which are
longer, but lighter than ours, they know how to handle very dexterously.

They often change their Apparel.
They change their Clothes and Habits with their Years; when they are past their
Puberty, and accounted of full Age, they wear a Coat or Tunick of various
Colors, reaching to their Ankles, with which they go loose within doors; but
going abroad, they tie it like long Breeches about their Legs, and gird about
their middle, over which they wear a short Sleev'd Vest, by the Japanners
called Quimon. This manner of Habit, in Summer they wear very fine, and in the
Winter a courser, stuffed very curiously, or Quilted.

Their Shoes are without Heels, in manner like Slippers, with a Horn-Ring
fastened betwixt the great and second Toe. They carry Fans, Imbroider'd with
Gold, with which they defend their Faces from the Sun, and cool when hot.
Persons of Quality walk in State under an Umbrello or Canopy, but the Common
sort of People go Bare-headed Winter and Summer, slighting Heat, Cold, Wind,
and Weather.

To be clad in Black or Scarlet, amongst them signifies Triumphs and Joy, but
their Mourning for loss of Friends, and other Disasters, is White.

The Customs of the Japanners are opposite to the Europeans.
IT is scarce to be believed, with what (as one would imagine) studied
Opposition they differ from us, both in their Clothing and Diet; and as for the
Femelick Sense, or that of Smelling, whatsoever is most sweet, fragrant, and
oderiferous to us of Europe, seems to them as abominable as the stench of
Carrion, or what ever else is odious; And that which we account delicate,
dainty, or well-season'd Dish, that they spit out, and their stomachs rise at:
In like manner, what they highly commend, and seems to have a most delicious
gust, that we as much abhor: We in heat of Summer affect cool and pure Spring
Water, which they drink hot, liking what is muddy, better than what is clear,
and what ever Vocal or Musical Instruments, Singing or Playing, well Composed
Airs, that are most Ravishing and Grateful to us, grace their Ears so much,
that they will stop them with their Fingers, they seeming to them so harsh and
dissonant. White, which through all the known world is counted the best Color
of Teeth, and though theirs being naturally Ivory, they disdain so much, that
they make them artificially Ebbony, and the blacker, the prouder they are of
such a Beauty: And having the Spirit of Contradiction so much, that as we
Mounting on the left side, they get up on the right side of a Horse; and as we
vail our Hats when Saluting, they uncover their Feet, putting off their Shoes;
As we rise, showing our respect to Friends, or Persons of Quality, Saluting
with Congees and the like Postures of Reverence, they sit down and take State
upon them, so receiving the Addresses; and as we set a high Rate and great
Value upon Pearls, Jems, and other Precious Stones, they look upon them as
Whitings-Eyes, and Pebbles, admiring and giving Rates for old Iron and Earthen
Ware; and as we have our Physic well prepared, the acerbity or other ill
tastes taken off with Correctives, they take them simple in their own likeness,
able to kill our Horses; and in stead of nourishing up their Sick with light
Meats, fit for digestion, they stuff them up with course Feeding, not sparing
to give them any sorts of Fish, either fresh or salt; and whatever the Patients
Distemper be, they neither let Blood, not know the saving use of Phlebotomy.
They are so grounded in these their contrary Customs and Manners, and so
strongly opiniated in, that if any ask why they do so, they will not only
answer, but dispute very stiffly in maintaining their Cause.

The first quality of the Japanners are the Tori.
BUt though they differ thus in their common Customs, and other Opinions,
relating man to man, and equality of Persons, yet when they come into the solid
Work of Government and Authority, they build by the same rule and policy,
raising by degrees as we do. The first being the Foundation or Basis of this
Structure, they call Tone, which general Appellative denominates several Orders
and places, in which they execute Justice, differing as much as our Barons,
Earls, Marquesses, Dukes, and Kings, all being subordinate, and ending in a
sole Monarch, the Emperor. These rule not by the Power of Riches, but by the
Number of Men, for when they are chosen Governor, they give all their Lands to
this their new Militia, reserving only a small acknowledgement in Rent of
being their Landlord, laying no other Taxes or Duties upon them, but to attend
at Court at Festivals, and other seasons of the Year, and in War, to assist him
at their own Cost and Charges.

The Power of the Japan Kings, wherein it consists.
So it happens, that though he be poor and boast no Treasury, yet he is
honorably attended in Peace at his Royal Palace; and in time of War, lends into
the Field a strong and numerous Army. But what is most to be admired, these
Kings, though but Viceroy's, after once Elected, not wanting the suffrages of
the People, Rule so Absolutely, that neither the Extremities of Fortune, nor
the Fear of Death, or ought whatsoever, will make them lay down their Title, or
forsake the Power with which God, and their good Fortune, had entrusted them
with.

Resign up their Dominions when grown old.
But when grown old, he retires to a private Lodge, or House of Pleasure, beset
with Orchards, and Gardens of delight; where whilst he Solaces himself, and
takes comfort in Privacy, fit for his age, he orders his Son, or next Heir to
take the Helm of Government, breeding him up to make him fit for that purpose
from his Childhood.

The Bonz^es, Japan Priests, what they are.
Next to the Royal Authority, comes the Sacerdotal Order, or the Priesthood,
Ruling all Ecclesiastical Affairs, Ordering their wicked Rights and abominable
Superstition. These are Shaven, both their Heads and Chins, and live single,
using all the Formality and Gravity, both in their Speech, Looks, and Gesture,
of those that are truly Religious: Under which appearance of Sanctity, they
commit all the Outrages of Lust, Avarice, and Revenge, but the blinded People,
believing that they are Miracles of Piety, spare no cost to Maintain these
Saint-seeming-Devils. These, amongst their other Functions, take special care
in ordering of Obits, and Noble-mens Funerals, not only as Churchmen, but in
the manner of Heralds, setting them forth with all Order and Ceremony, and
going before the Hearse, Singing new Elegies in honor of the Deceased.

These are of several Orders and Societies, but they are all generally called
Bonzi, most of them being of Noble Extract, and younger Brothers of Honorable
Families, forced by Necessity, take Orders upon them.

In Japan are also several Schools and Colleges for the Education of Youth, on
which are settled great Revenues for the Maintenance thereof.

These Religious Persons were formerly in highest Repute amongst them, but
since the Preaching of the Gospel, by which Doctrine their Vizards have been
taken off, discovering them in their own horrible likeness, they have not only
lost much of their ancient Reputation, but are rather abhorred and hated by the
People, their once so much admirer.

The Citizens are of the third degree amongst the Japanners.
The third degree and honor are the Gentry, the Burgers, or Magistrates of Cities.

Tradesmen the fourth.
The next are Tradesmen and Artificers, which are exquisite in their manner of
Work. In the principal Towns are kept many Heralds-Offices, and Printing-Houses.

Husbandmen the last.
The lowest degree are Husbandmen, and those that follow Country affairs; these
by reason of their Poverty are subservient to the Rich, which indeed are very
numerous.

These People have several Virtues: First, they are generally good natured, of
a kind and affable Disposition, of quick Apprehension, have ready Memory, and
nimble Fancy, exceeding not only many of their own Eastern People, but our
Western, in solid Judgment, and aptness of Learning, insomuch that the Rusticks
and their course-bred Children, appear rather like Gentlemen in their courteous
and civil behavior, and other deportments, than to be a Race of churlish
Clowns. They are quick of Apdr^^^^ion.
They much sooner get the mastery of the Latin Tongue and any other curious
Arts, either Mechannick or Speculative, than our Europeans. To be poor is
accounted no dishonor, And Patient.
nor are they much differenced from others, by contempt, or taking notice of.
They keep their House always clean neat; which done, they dress themselves
accordingly, then walk abroad and make Visits. They abhor all manner of
railing, or using loud and contumelious Language, Theft, vain Swearing, and
such like Debaucheries. They fare covetous of good Fame, and fair Reputation,
Covetous of Honor.
and therefore also bear a Respect beyond belief to their Superiors, and all
those under whose Authority they are. Will su^^er no Reproach.
They are impatient in Points of their Honor or Honesty called in question, not
enduring what tends to their affront or disparagement; and a false Accusation
seems as bad to them as if condemned for a Criminal: therefore the meanest of
them have a care to show a Respect to one another at their meeting, never
speaking ill, or calumniously in their absence. The Nobles spend most of their
discourse in praising and extolling each other, Are very faithful.
commemorating still their many worthy Acts, and several Virtues: Nay, the
meanest Handicraft, or Day-laborer, if any be minded to Hire or Emyloy them in
such Drudgery, if they speak not civilly, and with respect to them, they will
in a Huff refuse their proffers, and scorn their business. They behave
themselves the most wary, and with greatest care, to avoid all Dissentions and
Quarrels, or the least Dispute; and if they have any ancient Grudge, they never
express it by their Tongue, Hide their Anger.
but by their Looks, showing only a sad, or discontented Countenance; and
rather than controvert their Cause, whether right or wrong, They never go to
Law.
and put to Arbitration, they will sooner lose it. They think it becomes not
the Grandeur of any Person of Honor to speak much, or be talkative. Upon these
accounts it happens, that there is neither Rangling, nor any Quarrels amongst
the Common People passing through the Streets, nor the least Dissension betwixt
Man and Wife, Parents and Children, Master and Servants; thus ordering their
Affairs with all quiet and silence: and if any small Breach chance to happen,
Friends make it up, and immediately reconcile: And when they punish any
Malefactors (which happens seldom) they forbear all opprobrious and
foul-mouthed Language. They never Scold.
They have neither Courts of Judicatory, or any other Laws, as we in Europe:
They lay up their private Revenges to spend in War against their public
Enemies. When they meet by chance together, Never complain of inconveniences.
or sitting at their private or public Entertainments, none ever complains of
his misfortune or trouble, either at home or abroad, nor of his Crosses or
Losses in any Concern whatsoever; and have a wonderful faculty, to vail with a
glad and cheerful Countenance their pinching griefs, and heart-eating sorrows:
Thus they never molest or vex one another with unnecessary and untimely
Complaints, to the disturbance of the whole Company: Nay, if their Friends
enquire of them what is the matter? they put it off with a well-feign'd Smile,
or give a slender account of the business, as not worth the mentioning: But if
(which seldom happens) any be falsely accused, or scandalously reproached,
whatever they suffer inwardly, they bear it with a settled and unchanged
Countenance, Why they are so patient.
as not concerned in the least tittle thereof. We may judge these Qualications
of their springs from a greater prudence, and better temperature of spirits,
considering the inconstancy and vicissitudes of humane Affairs; for sure oftener
than in any other Country, alternate Fortune setting up, and casting down,
raising Beggars to the Throne, and tumbling Kings from thence to the lowest
step of poverty, plays her Jokes, now flattering, as soon frowning, by which,
being so versed and practiced in, they always remember in their greatest
height, the lowest condition, and stand prepared with an untroubled
willingness, ready to receive any alteration, as if looked for long before: But
these you would believe not to be acquired Virtues by age and experience, but
rather natural, which appears by their Children; for they show by their Looks
and Conversation, that they have a magnanimous Soul.

But these their good Qualifications they show not always, for they stand taxed
with as many Vices, insomuch that all which we have said before, may be thought
rather to be a counterfeit and well acted Part as in a Play, than otherwise.

Japan Religion is abominable.
THeir Religion, or abominable Idolatry and Superstition, by several
persuasions inclines them, not only excellently well to dissemble and cover
their ill nature under the Cloak of Zeal, but also helped by the inspiration of
evil Spirits, their gods we may suppose they take delight in cruelty,
bloodshed, and the like; of which their Preachers and Doctors are the Bonzies.

Bonzies Doctrine.
These, though differing amongst themselves, yet all agree concerning the
Immortality of the Soul. Some hold forth in public to Congregations; others of
the superior Dignity inculcate their Divine Doctrine, and are as Chaplains in
Noble-mens Houses, and the Families of Princes; but these Grandees to whom they
belong, they little or seldom trouble with punishments for Offenders in the
World to come; but public Ministers that openly Preach to the common People,
always belabor the Pulpit with terrors of tortures, and eternal damnation in
Hell.

Amida and Xaca are two Japan gods.
Besides these two Orders, there are others, who always make their Theme the
praises of Amida and Xaca: These are their Saviors, on whom they build their
Faith, and are to them as Law and Gospel, whom they must always implore, not
only in calamity and trouble, but also in their times of Joy and greatest
Felicity, That they would graciously be pleased by their merits to wash away
their sins and offenses, that so their Souls may come to everlasting Bliss:
these and their other supreme gods they call Frotoques. As also the Frotoques.
They have also their inferior, or lesser rank, which they follow only for
worldly benefits, Praying for Health, Wealth, Children, and all transitory
blessings: these they style Camis. And Camis.


How they make Men gods.
Though their gods are numerous, yet still they add, and make more of their
Princes: for when any King, famous and much honored for his great Exploits and
valiant Achievements, deceases, they also, in the midst of their Funeral
Solemnities, Instal, and Register in the Lift of their Deities, paying them
ever after Divine Worship, as the ancient Greek and Romans did so several of
their eminent Hero's, they having gods much resembling these, such as Mars,
Bacchus, Venus, Mercury, and others, making them first Examples, Wickedness of
the Japanners.
after call upon them as Protectors in their heinous Debaucheries, as Lust,
Drunkenness, and the like.

Amongst other seeming Virtues, one especial ability they have, their Looks and
Gestures still denote them to be the only practisers of Piety and pure Zeal,
when their Bosoms swell with projects of all manner of mischief: and where they
bear the greatest, and most inveterate malice, resolving to be severely
revenged, there they Smile and Fawn, and in their Speech, Face, and Gesture,
express nothing but their dear respects, love, and honor that they bear them:
This is so common amongst them, that whosoever deals plain and honestly, speaks
as he thinks, and performs what he promises, becomes a mocking-stock, and their
only May Game.

They murder one another on small occasions.
Revenge is so sweet to them, that the first occasion of having any advantage in
the very Streets, where stealing close behind the Person, drawing their
Scymiter, if the first Stroke fail, the second dispatches him; which done the
Asassinate wipes his Sword, and Sheathing it, walks away unconcerned, as if a
Jest, or nothing done. Nay sometimes, having no Quarrel, in a mere Frollick,
they will try whether the Edges of their Blades be so tender, as to be bated,
or turn upon one another Heads.

Their cruelty on those which they Conquer.
But those Towns or Villages have a sad destiny, which are taken in War by force
of Arms, for they grant no Quarter, no respect of Age, Sex, or Degree, but are
all promiscuously, and without mercy put to the Sword, and so left weltring in
one mothers Gore. And in like manner, any Party, or Army, when they are
defeated in the open Field, of those not one escapes, either they are killed
upon the Spot valiantly Fighting, or if they fly, are barbarously murdered by
the Country People; all one to them, Friend or Foe, for whomsoever they find
straggling, they without mercy dispatch, upon no other account but to strip
them, and enjoy what they have: Filching and Stealing (as we said before) that
they all abhor; but Robbery and Bloodshed they glory in: therefore all the
whole Country groans under the Murders committed in Robberies by their
Highway-men; and the Sea as much molested with Pirates.

Women with Child murder their Infanis.
THeir Women also are as strangely merciless to their own Issues, murdering
without any Motherly compassion their tender Infants, either before their
Birth, or if failing, soon after; to which purpose the Bonzies, their good
Confessors, teach them a Drink to cause Abortion, which if by strength of
Nature overcoming, as soon as born, they, worse than brutish Tigers, tread upon
the Infants Neck, and so dispatch it; which they commonly do, either hating the
trouble of Nursing them up, and giving Education, or else counseled by ill
advising Poverty, as not being able to maintain them.

Poor and Needy Perish in Japan.
FOr Persons that are Sick, Lame, and Infirm, or Travelers, they have no
public Hospital, or other private Reception; but they are forced to take up
their Lodgings under the cold Canopy of Heaven, fled from, and deserted of all
Men; so that either they must recover of themselves, or else die there in a
miserable manner, and when dead, thrown upon the Dunghill as Offal or Carrion.

FOr all Crimes or Offenses whatsoever, Punishments.
they use but three Punishments, viz. Drubbing on the Soles of their Feet,
Banishment, or Death, their Heads being cut off by a Scymiter, which they see
not. But in some Places the Robbers being accounted the greatest Offenders,
they carry and show them about in Wagons, which done, they Crucify them and
leave them nailed to their Crosses in the Highways near the City.

Strarge Punishment for the Robels in Japan.
When Persons are suspected for Treason, or Plotting Rebellion, the King sends a
Party, which surrounds the House so close, that none can escape, then makes
them only two Proffers, either to kill themselves, or yield to Mercy; which if
they accept, they are stigmatizi'd with hot Irons, so to be distinguished and
known to have been Quondam-Traitors wheresoever they go; but if they choose
rather to be Self-Executioners, They cut up their own Bellies.
they rip up their own Bellies: some of them with strange courage in a horrible
manner open athwart, so that when their Bowels hang out, to be the sooner
dispatched, they lay down their Heads, to be cut off by one of their Servants,
whom they suppose has most kindness for them: the rest of the Abetters, or
Conspirators, scorning to outlive their Captain, divide amongst themselves,
making two Parties, bravely fighting, kill one another.

The like they will do in many other Exigencies, and especially in private
Quarrels, that concern their good Name and Reputation: Nay, their Children
themselves, when taking Pet against their Parents, or any such like unkindness,
will desperately rip up their own Bowels. The Children rip up their own Bowels


They have no Laws.
THey have no Rules or Observations in driving their Trade, or making Bargains,
but all is left fast or loose to the will and pleasure of those that Deal,
taking no Cognizance of Promise, or any Signing of Contracts, or Articles of
Agreement. And in Cities the ancient Burgers have no more Privilege than the
new-come Foreigners. Their Tradesmen and Artificers not being imbodied in
Societies, or Companies; no Guilds nor other Courts to Plead in, nor Tried
before a Judge and Jury. No Sergeants or Actions to lay hold on Debtors; but
all Controversies are decided by force of Arms, and Judged by the arbitrary
Power of their King, from whom there is no Appeal.

These Monarchs have absolute Power over their Nobles, commanding and sending,
without any farther Trial, when they please for their Heads. The Nobles thus
domineer over the Gentry, the Gentry over the Citizens, all of them exercising
the like Authority over their own Families.

THeir Kings, though they keep not in Pay Strangers, nor any hired Soldiers,
Ambassadors of the Japan Kings.
only depending upon the favor and good-liking of their Subjects, yet they
expect to receive from them the same Honor and Obedience, as if they had all
the Country in Custodiam, and their whole Militia, Strangers. Either sitting
in the Throne, or walking, they are still surrounded with a constant Guard,
which keep off all Petitioners; and if any with great difficulty are permitted
to make their humble Address, the King never answers them but with a Frown or a
Nod, or else by Writing.

Are oftentimes removed.
But for all this Greatness, if the People take a spleen, and rise against them,
they are often left destitute, and not able to raise any Assistance. But
sometimes Subjects are divided, one Party Royalists, standing for the King; the
other Commons, in Defensive Arms for the People, which often join Issue in
Battle, and according to the success thereof, either he is deposed, or sits
better settled in his Throne: But when the People get the better, and proceed to
a new Election, then there oftentimes happen such Clashings amongst them, in
nominating Competitors, that thence also grows a second War; and now and then
after all this pudder, to close up the Breaches, and reconcile all Interest
with the Crown and Scepter, for the most part Force carrying all, and deciding
by the Sword, they are forced to take and receive their former King again:
Still the sternest and severest Princes sit fastest in the Throne, and Reign
longest. But yet their Registers show very few that many years have enjoyed the
Crown, and as few succeeding out of one Family.

Japan was first Governed by a Dayro, or sole Monarch.
It is most certain that Japan in former times was Governed by a Dynastie of
successive Princes; the last of which called Vo, or Dairo, Reigning long in
Peace, and being observed to be of a mild and quiet Disposition, gave occasion
to two of his Peers, or Ministers of State, they being of a rough and turbulent
Nature, to conspire, being indulgent to their own ambition, so to share and
assume the Imperial Government to themselves; these from their eminent Places
were called Cubi: so watching, upon the first occasion, Cubi the chiefest Peers.
and fit opportunity, they put this their Design in execution, raising a great
Rebellion, and in a moment turned the Hinges, and dislocated the Ligaments of
Government, by which a happy and long Peace had been maintained, into Uprores,
Tumults, and all the hatterings and harrases of Civil War; the success whereof
falling on the wrong side, the Emperor only losing so much of his former
Authority: but soon after these Brethren in evil, usurped the absolute Command,
Clashing amongst themselves, neither admitting of an Equal, in a second Civil
War, one being destroyed, the other Governed all.

The Privileges of the Dairo.
Yet the Dairo retains to this day the Power to be the Fountain of Honor, all
Titles and Degrees of Places and Dignity being derived from him, from whom, all
being his Substitutes, he receives Annual Tribute; a great part of which he
expends in the Magnificence and Splendour of his Palace-Royal and Attendants.

Who is the chief of the Japanners.
He that stands foremost, at this time being the most eminent and powerful of
the Japan Princes, is Texiba, the Great King of Meaco, and the Territories
belonging thereto, commonly known by the Name Tasa, all which he keeps under
his Obedience by force of Arms.

This Crown belonged to King Nubananga, which Taxiba, with some of his
Confederates, wrested from him, and in the hard pluck destroyed him, his Wife,
and whole Posterity. Thus much says Johannes Petrus Maffeus of our Japan.

Relation of Cosmus Turrensis concerning Japan.
HEre we will also annex the Contents of Father Cosmus Turrensis, a Latin
Letter, Dated from Firando Anno 1557, concerning the Customs and Character of
the Inhabitants.

The Japanners (says he) are so capaciously apprehensive, and so tractable,
not only easily yielding to Reason, but Matters of Faith, that when they come
to us, are very inquisitive and earnest to be resolved in some hard Questions
of Religion, when we had first presented them the original and immortality of
the Soul, they were soon brought to an understanding and belief thereof: And
when we set forth to them, That none could be saved, nor Salvation granted by
any, but the Father of all things, and Omnipotent Maker of Heaven and Earth; by
which Arguments they were so suddenly convinced, and their former Reasons,
which led them on in their blind Superstition, so totally routed, that without
any farther scruple, or asking time to consider, they abominated their old
Idolatry, and were converted to good Christians; which after received, they
never waver'd not staggered from, most of them so resolved, that they become
Champions for Jesus Christ, and were ready to lay down their Lives in
maintaining the Truth of the Gospel. Neither are they obtuse, or ignorant in
putting their Questions, but will smartly examine, and answer Logically, as if
they were, Casuists, concerning deep Mysteries in Divinity; insomuch, that
since Xaverius Landed here, which is now five Months, he has been daily
visited by the Bonzi and the Laiety, Conferring from Morning till Midnight,
asking and disputing several Questions concerning our Belief: First, What God
is? What his Power? Where he dwells? Why not visible? How it is possible that
the Soul has a beginning, as we affirm, and no end? Furthermore, says he, as
the Japanners account themselves most apprehensive, and also full of Fancy, so
they believe they are in their serious Affairs not inferior to any Nation of
the World: upon which account they are so elevated in their own opinion, that
meeting any Stranger, they give him only a scornful glance, and with their
Hand a go^by, as if too mean for their Conversation. They very well distinguish
good and evil, which apperas by the Bonzi, who committing all sorts of
debauchery in private, yet are so conscious of it, that these Hypocrites,
Wolves in Sheeps Clothing, seem to be the only Saints. Thus far Cosmus
Turrensis.

Now leaving Digression, we will go on with our Embassy we mentioned before,
that Andreas Frisius, by an Order of the Batavian Council, if ought should
happen amiss to Bloccovius, that he should supply his Place. But the chief of
the Netherlander resident at Nangesaque found it convenient, upon debate map of
Nagasaki De Logie voor NANGASACKI op t Eylandt Schisma The Lodge before
NANGAQUE on the Island Schisma
of several weighty Reasons, to join with Frisius in the Embassy of Anthonius
van Bronkhorst, Deputy Governor in Derick Snoecks absence. To which purpose all
Accommodations were preparing in the Storehouses of the East India Company at
Nangesaque.

Description of the East India Companies Storehouse at Nangesaque.
IT will not be amiss in short to describe the chief Staple and Residence of
the Netherlanders in Japan near Nangesaque. The Portaguese, when first they
were allowed to setle there, raised this Fort, or Building, out of the Water:
but after being driven out of Japan, and the Netherlanders commanded to remove
from Firando, they were allowed to supply the empty and deserted Lodge of the
Portuguese.

This Lodge, for by that Name it is known through all Japan, lies on a small
Island, divided by a River of forty Foot wide from Nangesaque, which they
cross, going over a Drawbridge; which by reason of Floods that happen, is an
hundred and fifty Steps long.

This Island, or Fortress, is defended each way round from the Water, with a
strong wooden Pail: Within, in a convenient Place the Governor has a stately
and well-furnish'd Residence. Near the Gate of the Drawbridge stands their
Sale-house, or Office, where they Vend their several Commodities. On the other
side stands a pleasant Garden, beautified with all sorts of Flowers. Two
Streets cross-ways lead through the whole Work; on each side of which are
convenient Storehouses, fitted for receiving and Packing their Merchandise.
Near an Inlet of the Sea is the second Gate, where there is a handsome pair of
Stairs to carry down, or Land their Bales of Goods. The middle of the Lodge
shows a plain and open Court, built round with Houses, whither the Merchants
resort, bringing thither to Sell and Barter these following, viz. White raw
Silk, Pansjens, Peelinx, Gielems, Chions, Gasen, Sumongus, Flanels, Merchandise
Vended at Nangesaque.
colored Brokaeden, Sattins, China Fabitas, Damasks, Chiowerens, Hempen-Cloth,
Sit-Clothes, Sowing-Silk, Silk- Pee, Namrack, Japan-Wood, black Sugar,
Cambodia-Nuts, Caiman-skins, red Leather, Aloes, Capox, Wax, white Sugar Candy,
Steel, Cotton, Sublemact, Cassia, Lignum, Spanish-Green, Porcelin-colour,
Camphire, Calemback, Musk, Chinesie-Wares, Deer-skins, Cow-Hides, Paper,
Pepper, Elephants-Teeth, and Ager-Wood; all these are brought by the Chinesies
to Nangesaque: Other Nations bring more variety.

Concerning that Factory of the Netherlander Trade at Nangesaque, the Emperor
sent these his Royal Mandates, Indorsed to the Governors of the City.

Orders Written by the Japan Emperor concerning the Trade of Nangesaque.
KNow you People, that you shall not suffer any of our Japan Vessels to Freight
themselves to any other Foreign Country; or if any such Offenders stealing
away be taken by you, kill them, only reserve the Commander, with the Ship and
Goods, till our farther Order: And after this our Edict, whosoever of our
Subjects return from abroad, punish them with Death. Make strict enquiry after
all Priests that are spreaders of the Christian Faith: whosoever apprehends one
of these Seducers, shall have an hundred Boats of Silver; and he that informs
where he is, shall also be rewarded. If any Ships of ours coming in shall not
obey these Orders, call to your help some of our Garrison at Omera. No
Merchandise shall be engrossed to any one, but sold to many. None of our
Nobles, or Soldiers, shall deal with any Strangers, but shall buy it at the
second hand from the Japan Merchants. The Cargo, or Bill of Lading, shall be
showed to our Officers before they break Bulk, or nuke Sale of any Parcel
thereof. The Market Price shall be settled upon all sorts of raw Silk, and then
Proclaimed in five Cities, before the Vendition thereof: this being performed,
all other Merchandise are free to be sold at their pleasure. All Merchants, for
whatsoever they Contract, shall tender Payment within twenty days. All Foreign
Ships may depart by the twentieth day of the ninth Month. Those Ships which
come in too late, shall lie fifty days ere they Land any Goods. All Merchants
whatsoever shall repair from our five Imperial Cities to Nangesaque, on the
fifth day of the seventh Month, if not, they are excluded their shares of the
Silk-Market: and whatsoever Silk is carried to Firando, shall be sold at the
same Rate as at Nangesaque. No Goods, as we said before, shall be brought to
Market before the Price of Silk be asserted.

This Edict was received Anno 1665, and Dated thus:

In the twelfth Year of Quane, Emperor of Japan, to our Officers at Nangesaque,
Sengok, Gammatane, Camy, and Sackibibare Andano Camy.

This was Signed by five of his Privy-Counsellors, Congao Camy, Bongona Camy,
Inhano Camy, Sannickino Camy, and Oyemo Camy. But now let us go on with our
Embassy.

The Netherland Ambassadors go from Nangesaque to the Japan Emperor.
THe 25th of October 1649, their Excellencies Andreas Frisius, and Anthonius
van Bronkhorst, set forth after Noon, attended with a Train of twenty
Netherlanders, three Bonzies, three Interpreters, and thirty three Japanners,
who being equally divided into three Vessels, took their leave of Nangesaque.

This City, by the French and Portuguese called Nangesaqui, by the Italians,
Nangasachi, stands on the Island Bungo, otherwise Cikoko.

Without the Bay, about six Leagues from Nangesaque, in their Way to Jedo, lies
a Fisher-Town called Duvos. Description of the Japan Fishers.
Those that Fish here, and also in most Places of Japan, wear Boots but to the
middle of their Leg, like Buskins; and have Wicker-Baskets in their Boats,
whick keeps their taken Fish alive. They have several manners of Fishing, and
use a kind of Casting-Net, with a long Line of Twigs at the same. Their manner
of Fishing.
They have also another way of Fishing, and chiefly for Pilchards and Sitang, a
Fish which always lies near the Ground; at the bottom of which Nets they lay
their Baits. But before we proceed any farther from Nangesaque, let us take a
short view of the Situation thereof.

Description of Nangesaque.
THis City stands in thirty Degrees Northern-Latitude, near a convenient
Harbor, fitter for the Reception of Merchant-Vessels, than any other Port or
Haven in Japan: It is both great and populous, but without Walls or
Fortifications, as most Cities in Japan are.

Their Towns and Churches.
The Steeples and Turrets, which appear very high above the ordinary Houses,
give the Town a stately and delightful Prospect, especially toward the Sea,
where they have an open view of the Streets, where are many magnificent
Buildings.

The City is divided with several Streams, and joined together with as many
Wooden Bridges.

Every Street is parted by a Gate.
The Streets are unpav'd, and therefore in rainy Weather very foul and cloggy;
every Street has a great Gate, which is shut every Night, and guarded with a
Watch, so that growing late, there is neither Theft, Murder, nor any other
Outrages committed.

The Houses of Nangesaque, how built.
Their Houses are commonly uniform, but the Materials which they Build withal,
differ according to the ability of the Builder. They use commonly Wood: but the
poorer sort raise their meaner Habitations with Walls of Rice-Straw, Loam'd
over with Clay, which closes so well, that it easily keeps out Rain and Wind;
yet the richer sort Plaster their Partitions, raising the Foundation four Foot
high from the Ground, with Planks covered over with thick Mats curiously sewed
together. They are but slight built, apiece, Why they build them not high.
and for the most part as broad as high; which to prevent the ruin by
Earthquakes, that are frequent in that Country, they raise them no higher.
Their Roofs are almost flat, but something sloaping; jetting out beyond the
Wall four Foot, like a Pent-house; under which is an Entry, or Passage, that
leads to their Gardens, which are adorned with artificial Rocks, Gardens.
and still flourishing Trees; which in a pleasant Prospect they view from their
Dining-Rooms. The forementioned Cantilivers defend those that walk the Streets
both from the Sun and Rain, like our Pent-houses; these and the whole Roofs are
of Planks clinch'd one over another, which carries off the Rain easily. On
these stand Troughs and Tubs, fitted to receive the Water, to be ready against
accidental Fires. They dwell all in the first, or lower Story, for the second
and uppermost is so low, as scarce fit to lay their Lumber in.

The Towns and Cities are very subject to Fire.
Their greatest and smallest Villages being being thus built all of Wood, suffer
much, and sometimes unvaluable Losses by Fire; therefore the richer sort, and
those that are able, build apart Stone Warehouses, where they lay up those
Goods and Commodities they most prize. Whatever Houses are burnt down, they
immediately build up again in the same manner of Wood, which the Forests
plentifully supply. They seldom use Stone, because if over-thrown by
Earthquake, they become a great heap of Rubbish, which they would not be
troubled to remove.

The Noble-mens Buildings are very stately.
The Gentry, or better sort, have large and fairer Houses; where the Husband and
Wife have their several Apartments, in which they live asunder when they
please; and also Rooms for his Employment, and for Address and Entertainment.
Their Dining-Rooms are set forth with Cupboards of Plate, Cups and Dishes, that
they show glorious like a Goldsmith's Shop, and Gilded, giving a more various
pleasure to the Eye, than our choicest European Pictures. But the Walls of
these Halls and Parlors, The Japan Structures, after what manner.
in stead of Hangings, are covered with Paper Painted with Imagery, the Sheets
being so curiously glew'd, that no Man can discern where they are conjoined.
Strange Shutters.
Some of these Halls have artificial Shutters, which opening, show little
Closets, and small Retirements; but these Doors, or Places to be opened, are so
neatly Wrought, that none can perceive but it is a firm and perfect Wall: but
over the half-Pace, or uppermost part of the Hall, stands a large Picture, done
to the Life, under which a Pot always supplied with sweet smelling Flowers,
gathered fresh from their own Gardens. The chief Housholdstuff of the Japanners.
Along the Walls to sit upon, in stead of Chairs and Stools, they have Chests
curiously Varnished after their Indian manner, and Dishes which they esteem
precious, standing upon them, to drink their beloved Chia in: Besides all this,
they hang up upon their Walls their Scymiters, and other Arms, which they use
in Battle. This is the best and richest Furniture which they have belonging to
the Grandees, and Persons of most Quality: the poorer sort garnish their meaner
Habitations, Japan Houses, how in the outside.
each according to their degree and ability. But the Frontice-pieces of their
Houses are but plain and ordinary, yet they are uniform, and in a direct Line;
their Streets being but narrow and short, of which they reckon up eighty eight;
How many Streets there are in Nangesaque.
reckoning as many Gates, being Locked up every Night, and at each a strong
Guard with Lights attending; where none may pass, None go through the Gates in
the Night.
unless he bring a Signed Warrant from the Governor, without which neither
Doctor to his Patient, nor a Widwife to a Woman in Labor, though upon Life and
Death, are admitted to go through: Nay more, if any of these Streets happen to
be on Fire, In the time of Fire one Street may not help another.
they must not expect any help from others, but save themselves by their own
care and diligence, for neither cries nor tears, nor loud complaints of those
ready to be destroyed and consumed to Ashes, prevailed not in the least, nor
move their Neighbors nor Governors to open and bring them assistance in this
miserable condition, so that often it happens, that the whole Ward, Men, Women,
and Children, are burnt together in one Funeral Pyle. This sad Fate had like to
have happened to some Hollanders, lodging in one of these Streets, twenty
Houses all burning at once, and many People destroyed in the Flames before
their Eyes; who when they saw no hopes that the Gates would be opened, and they
must suddenly with the rest endure the fiery trial, brake by force through a
backside, having a Wooden Fence, so escaping that dreadful Conflagration. It
often chances, that though their Locks and Keys keep out neighborly assistance,
yet they keep not in the Fire, but that breaks through, and many times destroys
not the next Ward only, but the whole City, leaving it prostrate smoking in
its own Ruins; which suddenly, as we said before, they re-build in the same
manner, the adjacent Forest being ready to furnish them with several sorts of
Wood and Timber, and the like Materials for that purpose.

Gardens about Nangesaque.
This City also lies surrounded with large and pleasant Gardens, so delightful,
that the Eye seems never enough satisfied with viewing; where all manner of
Fruit are much improved, growing very prosperously, especially the Chinesie
Apple transplanted thither, and all sorts of Pears, where they have Walks
shaded with Cedar, Their Cedars.
whose lofty Crowns seem to salute the Sky; the single Bodies of which make
Columns for their Temples, and Main Masts for their Ships of the greatest
Burden, or Sovereigns of the Sea.

Temples in Nangesaque.
Their Temples also are of Wood, built commonly forty Foot square, with Spires
and Steeples, curiously Carved and Gilt; of which they have many, and though no
larger, yet pleasant and sumptuous with Imagery work: on each corner of the
Roof stands a Dragon erected, and within the Temple several Figures bigger than
the Life, with terrible aspects, resembling Giants: to these, when entering the
Temple, the Japanners use short Prayers, then put into an Offering-bason, being
small Pieces of Copper-Coyn, by them called Casius.

The Inhabitants of Nangesaque, their Shape and Apparel.
The Inhabitants are whiter than other Indians, but sallow to those of Europe;
have strong and well-compacted Bodies, and are healthy of Constitution; their
Noses are flat and Camosi'd; their Eyes little, especially the Women's. Both
Sexes are almost Habited alike, wearing long Garments, but shorter than the
Chinesies; the corners of which Coats they take up before with their Hands,
carrying the right Lappet under their left Arms, and the left under the right,
which thus they fasten with a Girdle; their Tunick thus tied up, the left
corner affords them a Pocket in their Bosom, which keeps their Notes and
Letters: on the left-side hangs down from their Girdle a long two-handed
Scymiter.

Sumptuous Apparel of the Japan Ladies.
Their prime Ladies, and high-going Dames, wear stately gorgeous Dresses, their
Hair is curiously sleeck'd, and neatly turned up; and their Gowns are much
fuller, and more flowing in thick and looser Folds than meaner Women, the Stuff
not only rich and costly, but Embroidered all over with Gold, with a large
Silken Scarf about their Necks, which meets athwart over their Bosoms: a
Needle-wrought Girdle, rich with Silver and Gold, does compass and keep in
their well-shap'd Bodies: on their left Hand a great Fan, with a long Handle,
Painted with several Birds and Flowers, richly Gilt and Varnished: under their
upper Garment, or Gown, which (as we said before) is so richly Embroidered,
they have seven or eight Silk Petticoats, every one a degree longer than the
other, the longest trailing after them upon the Ground: But all these Clothes
upon them are neither burthenous, nor troublesome, though this be their daily
Dress, yet they seldom come abroad, nor appear public in their Houses; but in
the Evenings, if fair Weather, they take the Air a little with their Husbands;
by Day, in close Sedans, or else by Water in a Tilted Barge.

But ere we convey the Ambassadors further through Japan, it seems not amiss to
take a short Survey, the better to give you a Description of this Large and
Potent Empire.

A short and brief Description of Japan.
THis Spacious and Wealthy Isle, by the Natives called Nippon, and formerly by
the Spaniards, Argantana; and in the Year of Christ Twelve hundred (according
to that Famous Author Paulus Venetus) Chryse, and Zipangry, has on the
East Side California, Its bordering Countries.
and New-Granada; but at a vast distance, an Ocean of a thousand Leagues
spreading betwixt. Westward, but far off, it looks upon the Isle of Corca, and
Great China: Hugh Linschot reckons the nearest Promontories or Head-lands,
stretching from China to Japan, to be eighty Leagues distance. The North
opposes the Land of Jesso, and the Straights of Anian; and beyond all, the
Coast of America. The South verges on the Philippines, Mindanao, Gilolo, and
the Molucco Isles.

And Latitude.
It extends from thirty to forty Degrees Northern-Latitude; so that the longest
day is fourteen Hours fifteen Minutes, and the shortest nine Hours forty five
Minutes. Their highest Sun appears 15 Degrees at Noon short of the Zenith. The
Air differs not much from the Temperature of the Islands Sardinia, Rhodes,
Cyprus, Candia, and Sicilia, and like that of the main Land of Portugal and
Spain, and as moderate as Arabia, Syria, Persia, and China.

Division of the same.
JApan is divided into five Provinces, Jamaystero, Jetsengo, Jetsesen, Quanto,
and Ochio; besides the Isles Saykok, and Chiccock. Maffeus calls Saykok, Ximum,
making that seven Provinces; but Francis Cairon, being an Eyewitness, deserves
more to be credited: He affirms, That several Kings Govern there, and also in
Chiccock, one King, and three Viceroys. That part of this Country that is
called corruptly Japan, boasts two Metropolitans, Miaco, and Jedo. Maffeus also
tells us, That this has fifty three Kingdoms; amongst which he names Miaco and
Amangutium, saying, Miaco consists of twenty three, and Amangutium of thirty
Kingdoms; but of late all these petty Kingdoms are fallen into the Lap of one
Sole Monarch or Emperor, who keeps his Magnificent Court at Jedo.

But Japan also, besides Saykok and Chiccock, lies surrounded with several
lesser Isles, as Hiu, Tacaxuma, Iquicuchi, Canga, Firando, Meacxima, Oeno,
Cocyque, Beroe, Oqui, Murgan, Avans, Mettogamma, Meho, Mianisinu, Sando, being
full of Silver Mines; Vulcans Isle.
and Vulcania, often ejecting hideous Flames to the Sky, lying to the West,
beyond the Straights of Diemon, which washes the Isles Chiccock and Tacaxuma.

The Territory of Ochio.
OChio, the North-East Territory of Japan, borders on the vast Wilds of Jesso:
For the Inlet or Bay which divides them, runs not up above forty Leagues, there
ending, stopped by the Mountains of Ochio.

Description of the great Country Jesso.
THe Extent of Jesso, being Mountainous, and abounding with costly Furs, is yet
unknown, although the Emperors of Japan were much concerned, taking great pains
about the Discovery thereof, to that purpose employing several Persons at his
own Cost and Charges, who made search over Rocks and Mountains, and almost
inaccessible Places, explored vast and wild Countries, very far; but found no
end, though they diligently inquired of the People, who being Salvages, could
give them no Account further than where they dwelt. So after long Toil and
Trouble, they were forced to return without any Effect of their Design, as we
said before.

The Jesuit Lodowick Frojus, in his Letter of the eight and twentieth of
February, 1565. to the Indian Fathers, writes thus concerning the Inhabitants
of Jesso: Against the Northermost Part of Japan, about three hundred Leagues
from Meaco, is a very large Country, full of Salvage People, The Inhabitants
of Jesso are horrible People.
which are Clothed in Skins of Wild Beasts, Hairy all over their Bodies, having
exceeding great Beards, and long Whiskers or Mustachioes, which they turn up
with Sticks made for that purpose when they drink. They covet, and are very
desirous of Wine; also Valiant in War, and therefore much feared by the
Japanners. If by chance they receive any Hurts in an Encounter, their only
Application is Salt Water, with which they bathe and wash the Wound, so drying
it up. On their Bosoms they wear Looking-Glasses, which serve them as Shields
or Breast-plates. Their Swords they tie about their Heads, in such a manner,
that the Hilt thereof hangs on their Shoulders. They only Worship the Moon.
Aquita, a great City, stands in the Territory of Genuaen, bordering Jesso:
Hither the Natives come in great Numbers to Trade; and also the Aquitans Travel
to them, but not in such Multitudes, because they are oftentimes cut off, and
murdered by the Inhabitants.

Error of the Geographers concerning Japan.
THe Maps of the World, our Terrestrial Globe, have till of late placed nothing
beyond Aquita but the Ocean; though long since confuted by Hugh Linschot,
proving upon the testimony of the Jesuit Frojus, who deserves to be more
credited (as having resided a long time in Japan) than some of our Geographers,
who set down by hearsay the Largeness and Extent of Japan, without any Proofs
or Testimony; whereas it is made manifest, That Japan extends it self much
further than commonly drawn: Moreover, Francis Cairon, Ambassador to the
Emperor of Japan at Jedo, witnesses, That the Largeness of this Country is not
known to the Inhabitants themselves.

Mistake of Maffeus and Cluverius.
Therefore Maffeus is much mistaken, when he sets down the length of Japan to be
two hundred Leagues, and its greatest breadth but thirty. And Cluverius in his
Geography reckons the length to be an hundred and fifty Leagues, and the
breadth seventy.

Hazarts ignorance concerning the Description of Japan.
But none more errs in this, than the Jesuit Cornelius Hazart, in his History of
the Island of Japan; which that we may the better answer, hear his own Words.
Japonien, or (as others call it) Japan, by the Inhabitants, Nippon, is a
Territory lying in the farthest Point of the East, being the outmost Borders of
Asia; (which to prove, he quotes Isaiah, cap. 18. ver. 2.) For although to the
West, to the Frontiers of China, Vide Isaiah.
is no more than fifty Leagues, (says he) and to the City Amacoa, two hundred
ninety seven; and on the South having so vast an Ocean, no known Country being
beyond, Japan may certainly be called The Worlds End: And standing divided into
so many small Islands, that a Geographer of our times calls it also A World of
Isles; the chiefest of which are, Niphon, Ximus, and Xicocus, consisting of
sixty six several Kingdoms. The Isle of Niphon reckons fifty three, boasting
also many stately Cities, of which the Metropolis is Meaco. The Island Ximus
has nine, and several handsome Towns, amongst which, Usuquin, Funai, and
Cangoxima. The Isle Xicocus accounts no more than four Kingdoms: Which being
taken together, Japonien is as big as all Italy.

Though this his Style be ridiculous, yet his Ignorance, and so strangely false
Description, is so much more, that he ought rather to be pitied and laughed
at, as one distracted, than to be answered; but that we are bound in Conscience
to undeceive his believing Readers. Hazart's false Description Japan
contradicted.
First, he plants Japan on the West side of China. This is such a blind, nay
such a stupid Mistake, that the like was never heard of: For, was there ever
any Writer or Geographer, that settled Japan West from China? All agreeing,
neither can it be otherwise, being an Isle, but East from China; that Empire
being not only the utmost Borders of Asia Eastward, but of Europe also; being
one continued Main Continent, Westward to Gads Pillars, and the Atlantic
Ocean. Next, admit it were, as he affirms, That Japan lay West from China; yet
out of what Chinese Haven did ever any Vessel reach any Port in Japan,
measuring but sixty Leagues? Whereas it is notoriously known, That the Distance
betwixt these Empires is much greater: And who can show me in any Map or
Journal of his Travels, a City called Amiaco, lying at such a distance from
Japan, as he gives, without any proof or testimony? Next (which is very
strange) he says, That Japan looks on no Country Southward, but the Main
Ocean; or else, Lands so far off, that they are utterly unknown. What then will
become of all these Countries; as, Tanaxima, Lequeio Granda, Formosa, de
Philippines, Mindore, Mindanao, Borneo, Celebes, Molucco, and other Realms;
besides many other Countries which are cut off by the Ocean, and lie far and
near distant from thence, and daily frequented and Navigated by Strangers,
insomuch that all Geographers mention the same? Which belongs more especially
to you, who have published instead of grave Experience, your no want of
Ignorance, and utter Deficiency in that Science: For what can be more absurd,
than this your Description of the Principal Islands, Niphon, Ximus, and
Xicocus, dividing of them into sixty six Kingdoms, and settling them all so
handsomely, with a perfect Mistake, on the wrong side; not consulting Francisco
Cairon, who being himself upon the Spot, took an exact Survey of Japan, which
your Church History makes truly manifest in several Pages.

Japan is much bigger the Italy.
Lastly, Of all Comparisons, this seems the most odious, That Japan, with all it
circumjacent Isles, is no larger than Italy: For the same Cairon (whom
concerning other Matters you have for the most part copied out, and tricked up
this your Japan-History with) tells us in the beginning of his Description
thereof, That beyond Quanto, a Territory lying up high in Japan, (from whence
the Emperor raises his chiefest Revenue, and keeps his Court in Jedo) it is
twenty seven days Journey before you come to the Province of Sunguar, lying in
the most Northerly part of Japan. At this rate, how can Italy be compared to
Japan? Sure Father Hazart you neither know the one, nor the other: For let any
one take the Extent of Italy, The Largeness of Italy.
which they reckon from the Alps, and the City Aosta, passing through Rome and
Capua, to Rhegio, and the Promontory de Army, he shall never make more than two
hundred twenty five Leagues: And though the breadth along the Alpine Mountains
reaches a hundred and forty Leagues, yet taken generally, it proves much less;
for betwixt Ancona and the Tyber gives the rate of the common breadth, which is
no more than thirty four Leagues. How apt then seems this Comparison, when
several Writers, Eyewitnesses, tell you, That Miaco, lying almost in the middle
of Japan, is three hundred Leagues distant from Jesso, bordering the said Isle.

NOw to what concerns the Extract or Original of the Japanners, the general
Opinion thereof we have already related, which was, That they (not unlike the
Batavians, who by a Civil War were drove from Hessen, to the Island between the
Rhine and Wael) Rebelling against their Emperor in China, were Banished to the
desolate Isles of Japan: The Extract of the Japanners from China. Some are of
opinion, that the Tartars have interment themselves with the Chinese. From
whence this opinion proceeds.
But Father Martinius contradicts this Opinion in his Chinese Atlas, saying,
That the Japanners are not only Extracted from the Chinese, but also from the
Tartars; because they still retain some of both their Customs: For they follow
the Chinese Religion, as also the same Apparel which at this day is worn in the
Chinese Territory called Honan. It is no wonder that this Territory could
produce People enough to Plant Japan; for it contains above eight great Cities,
and at least a hundred Populous Villages. Moreover, the Chinese Book of their
Annual Accounts, reckons, that this Province can bring five Millions seven
thousand two hundred and seventy Men into the Field. But although the Japanners
do so much resemble the Chinese in several of their Customs, yet they also
imitate the Tartars in many of their Fashions; for they not only shave their
Heads after their manner, leaving but little Hair; but they use also the
Letters D and R, which the Chinese Speech does not acknowledge.

Martinius opinion concerning the Extract of the Japanners.
Martinius moreover relates, That the Chinese Memorials make mention of Xio an
Emperor, who was deluded by a peculiar Person, telling him, That Japan produced
an Herb, which if the Emperor could get, would make him Immortal; for which he,
to be assured thereof, sent several thither, which never returning, by degrees
Planted our Japan.

A Catalogue of the great Persons and inestimable Revenues of Japan.
LAstly, Concerning the Revenues that belong to this vast Empire, it does
manifestly appear by the Signed Account of the In-comes of the Japan Princes
and Kings, taken by Francis Cairon.

The Revenues are reckoned, according to the Japan manner, by Cockiens, of
which every one makes a French Crown. The nearest to the Emperor, which had the
greatest Revenue in the time of Francis Cairon's Residence there, was the King
of Canga, Getchiu, and Natta, called Cangona Tsiunangou, living in the Castle
of Langa: Every Tun of Gold is 10000 l.
His Yearly Revenue came seldom to less than a hundred and twenty Tun of Gold.

Surnango Daynongon, King of the Territory of Surnga, Toto, and Micauwa,
inhabiting the Fort Faytsiu; and Onwarino Daynaugou, King of the Countries of
Owary and Mino, Resident in the Fortress Mangay, have each seventy thousand
Pounds per Annum.

Sendayno Thiunangon, King of Massanine and Ochio, dwelling in the invincible
Castle Senday, has Yearly above sixty four Tun of Gold. 640000 l.


Satsumanon Thiunangon, King of Satsuma, Ossina, Fiungo, and Luchio, in the
Fortress of Cangasima, treasures Yearly sixty thousand Pound Sterling.

Kinocouny Dayanangon, King of the Countries of Kino and Iche, commanding the
Strong Hold of Wake Jamma, has Five hundred and fifty thousand Pound Sterling
Yearly. Near upon the like Sums have the Kings of Catto Fingonocamy of Fingo in
the Fortress Koumamotte, and Matsendeyro Jemnosco of Sunkicen in the Castle
Foucasa, and Matsendeyro Inocamy of Jetchesen, keeping the Fortress of Oecde.

These petty Kings Catto Cibo of Osio, Commanding the Fort Ais; and Assaino
Taysima of Bingo in the Borough of Oky, have each forty thousand Pound
Sterling Yearly.

The Kings Matsendeyro Nangato of Sova, living in the Castle of Fangy; and
Mittons Thiunango of Fitayts, in the Fort Mit; and Nabissima Sinano of Fisien,
commanding the Castle Logioys; and Matsendeyro Sindairo of Inabafoky, in the
Fortress Tackaham, receive Annually Three hundred and ten thousand Pound
Sterling.

Near upon the like Revenue has Todo Ishumi King of Ingu Iche, his Royal Fort
or Palace being called Sou; and Matsendeyro Lonuey of Bisen, commanding the
Castle Ossajamma; and Inno Caimon of Totomy, inhabiting the Strong-Hold
Sawajamma; and Tosso Cauwa Jetchin King of Boyses, in his Royal Seat Cokera;
and Ojesungu Dainsio, King of the great Territory of Jatsengo, Governing and
Residing in the Fortress Gunysauwa; and Matseddeyro Denico; and also the Lady
Jetsengo, Queen of Formando, and there Residing.

Revenues of the Japan Dukes.
Next, The Secondary Princes, or Dukes, as we may style them, are Mansendeyro
Auwa, Commander of the Country Auwa, dwelling in Incts; and Matsendeyro
Jutchigonocamy Duke of Conge, the Seat of his Government being Tacato; and
Matsendeyro Tsiusio, Prince or Duke of Joo, Residing in his well-fortified
Citadel Mats Jamma: Each of these supplies his Exchequer with Fifty three Tun
of Gold Yearly.

Arjama Grimba Duke of Tsickingo, Commanding the Castle Courme, falls short of
their Revenues ten Tun of Gold.

Revenues of the Japan Earls.
Their Third Degree of Princes, which we may call Earls, are to be distinguished
by their Name thus: Morino Imasack Earl of Imasacka, his principal Fort being
Tsiamma; next Tory Inganocam Governor of Sewano, dwelling in Jammangatta; then
Matsendeyro Tosa Prince of Tosnacory, Residing in his Strong-Hold Tocosiamma;
and Satake Okiou Governor of Wano, keeping his Court in the Fortress Akita; as
also Matsendeyro Simosaucamy Lord of Simosa, dwelling in the Castle Tattebays,
have each of them Yearly twenty Tun of Gold. But these two Lords (such as we
may term Barons) Foriwo Jamaissiro, and Ikouno Jokonocamy, one Governing Inomo,
and the other Sanike, are well pleased with each sharing yearly Eighteen
thousand pound Sterling.

But these, though of lesser Dignity, as Fonda Kaynokamy of Faryma, and Sackay
Counay, Ruling in the great Territory Wano, receive each of them Annually
Fifteen Tun of Gold.

Their Knights Revenues.
Those which at our Rates we may look upon as no more than Knights, are
Tarasauwa Simedo commanding Fisen, Kiongock Wakasa Ruler of Wakasa, Forii Tango
in the Country Jetchesen, Menfio Fiongo in Bingo, and Sackosbarra Eskibou
Governor of Kooske, receive every one yearly Twelve Tun of Gold.

Mansendeyro Tawayts Commander of the Imperial Fort Quana; and Oeckendeyro
Imasacka Ruler of Simotske, inhabiting in the Fort Oetsnomico; and Sanada Ins
Governor of Sinano, residing in the Castle Koske; and Taytfibanna Finda in the
Country Sickingo, dwelling in the Strong-Hold Imangouwa, being all Knights:
Every one of these boasts no less Means than Ten thousand Pound a Year.

And also the Knights Ongasaura Ouckon of Firima, Indatiu Vontomiu of Gio and
Nambou, Sinano of the great Territory Ochio, and Niwa Groseymon likewise of
Ochio, receive a thousand Pound less than the former.

Abeno Bitchiou, Governor of the Imperial Castle Watsuky in the mighty Country
Mousayes, has for his Yearly Revenue Eighty thousand Pound Sterling.

The Knights Kiongock Oenieme of Tanga, dwelling in the Fort Tanabe; and Makino
Surnga in the far-spreading Country Jethingo; Nackangauwa Nisien in Bongo,
Matsendeyro Camba in Sinano, Nayto Samma in Fitayts: These have yearly Seventy
thousand Pound.

Revenues of their Lords.
The Lords Jockenda Bitchiou, Comander of the Imperial Fort Matsjamma, in the
Territory Bitchiou; and Matsara Fisennocamy Lord of Fisen, residing in the
Castle of Firando, where formerly the East India Company held their Factory,
before they were forced to remove to Nangesaque: These receive Annually six
Tuns of Gold apiece. The like Sums have the Lords Seugook Fiwo in Sinano, Catta
Sewado in the Country Gyo, Tosauwa Okiou in the Province Dewano, Matsendeyro
Iwamy in Farima, Teskouwa Tonnomon in Bongo, Tsungaer Jetchiu in Ochio; and
Ongasauwara Sinano in Firama.

The Lords Itho Chiutry of Fongo, commanding the Castle Orasy; and Fourta Fiwo
of the Country Iwamy, ruling the Fort Daysiro; Wakisacka Arbays of Sinano,
residing in the Fortress Ino; Touky Nangato in Johe; Toba Arima Seymonoske of
Nuko, Outa Fiwo of Jamatta, Matsendeyro Dewado of Jetsesen, Inaba Minbou of
Bongo, Croda Caynocamy of Chinano, Matsendeyro Sovodonno of Isumy, Tonda Sammon
of Socinnocammu, Stotfianangu Kemmets of Ichie, Fonda Ichenocamy of Micauwa,
Matsendeyro Jamayssiro of Tamba, Mori Caynocamy of Inga Johe, Tonda Notanocamio
of Farima, Ahito Sionoske of Fitaits, Assano Oenime of Chione, Neyto Cinocamy
of Chione, Catto's Kibodo of Ochio, Sama Daysiennocaniu also of Ochio, and
Commander of the Castle Sama; Fonda Jamatta of Taysima, Ouckob Cangato of Mino,
and Neyto Boysen of Dewano: All these Lords have for their yearly Revenue five
Tun of Gold apiece.

The Habit of the Japan Lords.
THe Habits of these Lords are very Rich: They wear short Coats, with wide
Sleeves, curiously stitched with Silver and Gold. Under their upper Garment
they wear a Silk Wastcoat, tied close about them with a Girdle, in which they
put their Scymiters. Their Breeches are so exceeding wide and long, that they
tread upon them as they go; for they hang down over their Heels. Upon the
bottom of their Wastcoats, a little above the Waste-band of their Breeches,
they have Portrayed their Coat of Arms.

Revenues of their meaner Lords.
Moreover, these following Lords, Inawa Aways of Tamba, Camy Dyrik of Iwamy,
Cattayngiri Ismou of Jamatta, Chonda Findanocamy of Jetsesen, have yearly forty
thousand Pound Sterling a Man: And Itacoura Sovodonne, Governor for the Emperor
of the mighty City Meaco, receives above the forementioned Forty thousand
Pound, four Tun of Gold yearly, from the Countries of Jamaisico.

The like Revenue the Lords Matsendeyro Bongo, of the Country Iwamy; Fondo
Nayky of Firima; Matsendeyro Tango of the great Country Ochio; Canna Mauris
Isoumo of Finda; and Ciongok Chiury of Tango, receive annually.

The following Lords, as Outta Giwe of Mino, Matsendeyro Ouckon of Farima,
Minsonoja Ichenocawy of Kooske, Immasacka Kaynocamy of Bitchiou, Matsendeyro
Jammatto of Jetsesen, Inno Fiwo of Costie, Matsendeyro Tonnomon of Mikauwa,
Akisuckis Nangako of Nicko, Savo Inaba of Sinano, Foyssimo Fongo likewise of
Sinano, Sunganoma Ouribe of Totowy, Simaes Oemanoska of Nicko, Kinostay Jemon
of Bongo, Sono Kussima Governor of the Island Siussima, Koyndo Fimano of Tonga,
Fonda Fimosa Commander of the Imperial Fort Nissiwo in the Country Micauwa,
Gorik Sersnocamy also of Mikauwa, Chinsio Suraga of Fitayts, Secuma Fisen of
Sinano, Todo Toiusima of Mino, Fonda Isumy of Fitayts, Tongauwa Tosa of
Bitchiou, and Mansendeyro Tosa of Jetsesen: All these receive yearly three Tun
of God apiece.

Revenues of other Lords.
Lastly the Lords, Sugifarra Foky of Fitayts Kinostay Counay of Bitchiou
Matsendeyro Koysero of Farima Inasacka Tsonnocamy Matsendeyro Kenmots of Tamba
Masteysacke of Ochio Omoura Minbou of Fisen Matsendeyro Isumi of Mino
Matsendeyro Chinocamy of Tsounocoumy Minsus Faito of Micauwa Nyto Tatewaky of
Chiono Ongasawary Wakasa of Simosa Fichicatta Cammon of Chiono Iwaky Sirrosy
likewise of Chiono Rikongo Fiongo of Dewano Takanacca Oenieme of Boungo Mourii
Ichenocamii and Boungo Wakebe Sackion of Totomy And Isifoys Insnocamy
Commanding Oungoury, Kourosie, Farima, Oscca, Cammejomme, Sanbonmats, Daymats,
Iwamoura, Faynctory, Coria, Iwayffowo, Sekyada, Mawaffa, Jedowra, Jurii,
Founay, Ounaus, Oumiso, Cosiois,
Receive each of them Twenty thousand Pound Sterling of Yearly Revenue.

Revenues of their lowest Degree of Lords.
Their Lowest Degree of Lords, of which some fill their Treasuries with the
Revenues of the small Circumjacent Isles, are Sangoro Saffioye, and Fory
Minnasacka; each of them having Twenty thousand Pound Sterling yearly.

Qua Jamma Sammon, Fossacauwa Gemba, Fackina Deysen, Matsendeyra Deysen,
Gottawais Lord of the Island Goto near Firando, Cattayngiry Iwamy, Cassima
Jetsingo, Coubery Tomoty, Tackandy Mondo, and Miake Jetsingo, have each One Tun
and a half of Gold per Annum.

But Odaura Bisen, Tojamma Giwo, Fira Oucka Giuemon, Oseki Jemon, Fayssien
Gouwas Kibon, Outano Tango, Fieno Ouribe, Auby Ceynocamy, Otana Mousoys, Majuda
Jammatta, Taytsibanna Sackon, Cackebe Sayngoro, Mynangauwa Chinamovani, Jaydsio
Dewanocamy, Coungay Inaba, Oictana Caweyts, Niwas Kibon, Fory Arbays, Fosio
Mimasacka, Sayngo Wacksacka, Touda Inaba, Miangy Sinsen, Sannanda Nyki, Iton
Tangou, Ikenday Jetseses, and Touda Nayki.



Emperors Officers Pay.
As for the Emperors Chief Officers, their Revenues are as follows. His
Councellor of State, Dayno Idonno, Fifteen Tun of Gold a Year.

Sackay Ontadonno Nangay Sinadonne, Ten Tuns of Gold. Sackay Sinadonno, the
like Sum. Sackay Sannickodonno, One Tun of Gold less. Audo Ouckiondono, Six Tun
of Gold. Inote Cawatsdo, Five. Inabe Tangedonne, Four. Sackan Auwado, and
Sackay Jammassirodonno, each have Thirty thousand pound Sterling. Nayta Ingado,
Sintsia Winbondonno, Misson Ockiedonno, Matsendeyro Jemondonno, Jamanguyts
Tayssimodonno, and Matsendeyro Juedonno, receive from the Emperors Treasury Two
Tun of Gold a piece Yearly. But Ale Boungodonne, Auwe Jamma Ouckerodonne,
Ciongok Sinsendonno, Itacoura Nysiendo, Narsy Jucdonno, and Akimonta
Maysimaddonno, have each of them Fifteen thousand pound Sterling Yearly.
Lastly, Forita Cangadonne, Miura Simaddonne, Maynda Gonoskedonno, Mesiono
Jamatta, Fory Itsuocamy, Miury Oemenoskedonno, and Fondo Sanjadanno, have every
one, One Tun of Gold per annum.
The Emperors expenses in housekeeping and guard.
THe Emperors Housekeeping consisting of several Boards for all his Officers,
and his Seraglio of Ladies, amounts to 1400000lib Sterling, Annual Pension. His
Lifeguard also cost him ten Tun of Gold more; So that the Pensions for his
Lords and several Officers, and the whole maintenance of his Court and Militia,
reckons up 28000345 Tun of Gold yearly.

Apparel of the Soldiers.
As for the Soldiers which the Emperor keeps in Service, most of them are
Noblemen, and wear small Helmets, but exceeding great Breeches; sometimes they
are Armed with short, at other times with long Firelocks or Muskets, not
unlike ours, only the Cock strikes not from them but toward them. Instead of
Powder-Horns, or Cartrage Boxes, they use small square Baskets, made very
artificially of Flags or Rushes. In their Girdles they stick one short and one
long Scimiter.

The Netherland Ambassadors go by water from Nangesaque to Osacca.
BUt to return again to our Ambassadors, Andreus Frisius, and Anthonius
Brookhorst, which Sailed from Nangesaque, the 25 of September. 1649. with three
great Barks Laden with rich Presents for the Japan Emperor; twenty
Netherlander, three Bongies, as guides to direct them in their Journey from
Osacca to Jedo, three Interpreters, and thirty four Japanners, besides the
beforementioned Ambassadors.

In short time, they got beyond Foveunda, Zotta, and Nanatjamma, and Sailed
Northwardly between Firando, Omodackey, and Oysinocuby, Towns situate on
Bungo; then they reached the Islands Auwo, Fimissima, and Ginkai, and left
Nangago, on the left side of the Coast of Bungo.

Then they brought the Island Aymissima under their Lee, and descried the City
Assia, The City Asia.
twelve Miles North-East from Aymissima.

This City stands on a white Sandy shore, and is seen a great distance off at
Sea, by reason of its high Mountains, which seem to touch the Clouds.

After this they discovered the famous Town Icaminangano-misacco, and the City
Cocero, lying in an Inlet of the Sea.

The City Cocero
Cocero at its first view is very delightful to behold, having two Suburbs, one
above the City, and another below toward the Sea.

Here they directed their Course Easterly into the Straits, which in the North
washes Japan, and on the South Chiekok, and Tousa. On the left side of Japan
stands the City Simonisicci, The City Simonysicci.
within which is a small Fort, and opposite to that a strong Castle, built on a
high Hill, near which is the Haven Isacka, to which belongs two Villages
containing forty houses a piece.

Within the forementioned Straits they met with many Islands, Islands.
several of their names unknown, yet at the hither end lies Mettogamma, and
next Mocko, The City Camenosacci.
Mianosimi, and Camero; betwixt which, the City Cammenosacci stands on the more
of Japan.

In a long Tract from East to West, they saw near the Coast of Japan, the
Islands Icowe, Szuwa, Caroto, Cominagari, and Jocosmi, all improved with
Villages.

Opposite to Caroto, are seen in the middle of this Channel, between Japan and
Tonsa, several high Mountains, whose tops are crowned with various Trees; here
they stood due East, and had on their Larboard in the Japan Coast, the Towns
Tantonomis, Mewarri, Bignatum, and Binga; On their Starboard, the Inhabited
Isle Syrais: So Sailing on between Simeia and Samnic, Ousimate and Wota, Icsima
and Muro, they met with so strong a Current, that their Rowers had great labor
to bring them through.

The City Muro.
MUro, a Town situate on Japan, has a very fine Haven; five Miles beyond
which rises Firmensi, The City Firmensi.
a stately City, Fortified with a strong Castle; near which the Sea is often
times very rough, which they left on their Larboard, and also Ahos, Takasima,
and Swoja, and came to Fiongo. But when they met with Calms and wanted Wind,
their Men with a Line hall'd their Barks along the shore.



Netherland Ambassadors come to Ojacc^.
Sailing from hence, they kept along the Coast of Amanasacci, and came on the
thirteenth of January, after nineteen days travel to Osacca, and getting up the
River, they came to Anchor before Anissima, the Suburb of Osacca. Soon after,
three Pleasure-Boats came thither, for to carry the Ambassadors with their
Goods and Retinue.

Fayfena, a Japan Pleasure-Boat.
THe Japanners build a kind of Pleasure-Boats or Barges, by them called Fayfena,
which commonly have forty Oars, built before like an Elephants Head, and in the
Starn a fine Looking-Glass, Cabin and Helm, after the Portuguese manner: Some
of these Fayfena's have above thirty Rowers in them, which Row with such speed,
and make so fresh way, that it is to be admired; for commonly they make a
Voyage from Osacca to Nangesaque in twelve days time, lying two hundred and
twenty Leagues distant from one another.

Art exact description of the situation of the Cities between Nangesaque and
Osacca.
FRom Nangesaque, to Fouconda, is two Leagues; from Fouconda to Zitta, eight;
thence to Nanatzjamma, three; from thence to Omodakey, two; then to Oysinocubi,
five; so to Firando, eight; from Firando to Auwo, six; then to Jobeco, seven;
thence to Fimissima, seven; from Fimissima to Ginha, seven; so to Amissima,
seven; thence to Jammangan-misacci, fourteen; from hence to Simonisicci, seven;
thence to Motogama, seven; so to Mocko, eleven; from Mocko to Mianosimi, eight;
from hence to Cammenosacci, ten; then to Camro, seven; so to Jowe, three; from
Jowe to Szuwa, two; thence to Caroto, three; from Caroto to Cammagari, five;
from hence to Tantonomi, ten; so to Jourissiro, five; thence to Bignatum, five;
from hence to Syzais, three; from Syzais to Fubi, ten; then to Oussimato,
seven; so farther to Wota, four; from Wota to Muro, six; then to Akas,
thirteen; so to Fiungo, five; and from Fiungo to the River of Osacca, is
thirteen Leagues.

Frisius and Brookhorst are fetch d into Osacca.
UPon the first Rumors of the Ambassadors, Frisius and Brookhorst's arrival at
Osacca, both Men and Women, thronged in great multitudes to meet these
strangers; but the greatest crowd was on the Bridge, on which they flocked,
that from thence they might satisfy their Curiosity in viewing the
Netherlanders; several of these Bridges were scarce sufficient to bear the
burden of such great multitudes, and often cracking so exceedingly, that they
not only threatened great danger to those which stood on them, but also those
that Rowed under them.

The Inhabitants had almost forgot that ever they had seen a people which dwelt
in another part of the world, and come above three thousand Miles in a stately
Embassy to their Emperor, which made the chief Citizens and Burgesses of Osacco
themselves to venture their lives on the forementioned Wooden Bridges to see
these strangers.

Jacob Spex, and Peter Sea^^, on when they came to Osacca.
ANno 1611. The Ambassador Jacob Spex and Peter Segerszoon passed through
Osacco with Presents to the Emperor Goyssio Samma, who at that time kept his
Court in the City Soringou, to the end, they might obtain liberty for to Trade
there.

Their journey from Firando thither.
These Ambassadors went on the 16 of June, Anno 1611. from Firando with one
Bark; So Sailing by the Island Aymissima, and the City Assia, and Rowed along
the Banks of Cocero, and in the Evening dropped Anchor in sight of the City
Ximontchequi; but the Wind rising and blowing in great gusts, forced them to
Weigh, and Row back to the Haven Isacky: Where arriving, the Wind soon after
ceased, and they the second time Weighed, and Steered their Course to
Ximontchequi; toward the Evening they came to Myands: So leaving Cadmenexequi
on the Larboard, about midnight, they drew near Szuwa, under which Isle they
came to an Anchor: From Szuwa they proceeded forward, having the Stream with
them; but the Wind being against them, they got but sixty Miles in three days
time, which was not without great pains and toil of the Rowers; who at last
being quite tired out, the Lord Spex was forced to put in for Vosimado, where
he hired four Japan Vessels, which, by turns were to ease the wearied Rowers:
But they had the Wind still Easterly, and blowing often very fresh, so that
with great difficulty they at last reached the Haven Muro, where the Sea went
so high, that two of their Vessels sunk before the Harbor; but the Weather
growing calmer, they betook themselves again to their Oars, to Row through the
hollow Waves; but the Tide setting them so hard, they were forced to come to an
Anchor at Firmensi; From hence Weighing, they passed Tackessima to Fiungo, and
from thence to Osacca; a great part of their way, the Seamen were forced to
hale their Bark along the shore, which put them to great pains.

On the sixth of August, the Ambassador Spex came to the River of Osacca, and
Anchored before the City Aussima, where he hired several small Vessels, to
carry him to Fussiny, because his Vessel drew too much Water for to carry him
over the Shoals. In the afternoon he went through Osacca, and toward Evening
Rowed up the Stream, which in many places was so shallow, that they were forced
to put forward their Vessels with great trouble.

Fidery Samma loses his Crown.
At that time there resided in Osacca a Person of Royal Extract, called Fidery
Samma, a young Prince eighteen years old, who was strangly bereaved of the
Diadem of that Kingdom, and by reason of his great Revenue, and the general
view of Osaka The City OSACCO De Stt OSACCO
affection of Nobles and Commons, stood also fair for the whole Empire; but
having lost all, he retired thither as a private person.

The journey of Francis Caron, and Henrick Hagenaer from Firandona to Osacca.
SInce that time, besides several others, Francis Caron, and Henrick Hagenaer
went Anno 1634. the 13 of October in an Embassy to the Emperor of Japan, who
Sailing from Firando, harbored that night in the Bay of Tascha; the next day
Sailing on till the Evening, they were forced by a violent shower of Rain to
Anchor against the Village Jobokki; next morning proceeding in their Voyage,
they passed the City Fagatta, and the Island Anesma, and at last came to an
Anchor at Chimano Suky, where they were presented with some fresh Provisions,
by the Agent of the East India Company residing there.

After a short refreshment, the Ambassador Caron Weighing Anchor, with a fresh
Gale from the North West, about Midnight entered the Straits of Camonosiky,
whose Banks on both sides are continued Streets, being full of Houses: here
they were forced to produce their Pasports, which done, they left this place,
and after some time met with such a hollow Sea between several scattered Isles,
that they were necessitated to get into a small Harbor of a Fish Town. But the
Weather growing calmer, they Rowed to Cammangasie, and from thence to Memarry,
a handsome City, crowned with many Spires. The City Mewarry.
On the utmost Point to the Sea-ward stands a very fair Temple, whose Steeple
being seen at a great distance at Sea, serves for a Beacon or Light-House.

Here they left the City Bignatum on their Larboard, and ran East North East by
the City Oussimato, and came in the Evening to Muro, where the Bonjoyes of
Nangesaque commanded the Netherlanders Interpreter to inform them, who those
were that were traveling to the Emperor.

Out of this Harbor, Ambassador Caron set Sail with a Train, besides his own,
of above a hundred Japanners, and soon after reached the City Akas, where they
encountered with a loud Storm out of the North East, furrowing up a very hollow
Sea.

The City Akas.
AKas, a well fortified City, stands fortified at one side with a Castle of
Defense, surrounded with Stone Walls, raised out of the Water; from hence they
set forward, and passed by Fiungo, and after Noon they spied the City Osacca
and Saccaio; about Sunset they got over the Flats, and entered the Bay of
Osacca; where going a shore, they were received by, and lodged in the house of
Grabbidons, President there for the East India Company.

These were the two only Embassies that passed through Osacca before the
Ambassadors Frisius and Brookhurst, who after their arrival ashore in the
afternoon, were conducted to a fair Lodging, Frisius and Brookhurst bodyed in a
Noble man's house in Osacca.
with all conveniences in a stately House, in which the Commanders and
Governors of Nangesaque in their traveling backward and forward to their
Emperor, use to take up their Lodgings. The Fabric it self was formerly the
Habitation of a Japan Priest, but since altered into a house of Entertainment
for Ambassadors and Envoys.

The description of the mighty City Osacca.
AS to what concerns Osacca, it is an Imperial City, and the Metropolis of the
Territory of Quioo. Near the mouth of the River, an obstructing Rock divides
the Channel, making it troublesome and dangerous for those that pass the River,
runs up Northerly, branching through the middle of Osacca, and also through
Meaco, making many Sands and Shoals, and at last loses it self in a spreading
Lake beyond that City.



On the utmost Point or Promontory of the River stands the King's Custom-House,
where all Ships must touch that pass by the same, there paying such Customs as
belongs to their Cargo with which they are Freighted: this House raised each
Story with a several Roof, shows very stately, and is to be seen far into the
Sea.

Mountains near Osacca.
On each side appear two rising Hills, which hinder the Prospect of the East and
West side of the City; only some of the high Spires appear above.

The Water-Castle of Osacca.
Opposite to the Custom-house stands the Kings Block-house, surrounded with a
strong Wall raised out of the River, ready and fully replenished for all
Occasions with well-mounted Cannon. The Emperor Xogunsama began to build this
Fort; but his Son Toxogunsama, succeeding him in his Imperial Throne, Anno
1629. finished and Garrisoned it in the space of three Years.

Storehouses against Fire.
Behind the same are built ten Storehouses, opposite to the Sea, with a broad
Street, and a Stone Cause-way. These Warehouses are exceeding large, and built
all of Stone, that they may not suffer Damage by Fire.

Imperial Turrets.
There are also several Towers, in which the Emperor keeps his Treasure,
collected from the Isles Chiccock, Saycock, and Tonsa.

Besides these forementioned Buildings, Watergate.
is also seen the Watergate, through which the Custom'd Goods go in and out,
having a great and broad pair of Stairs, which descend to the Sea, and a Guard
of five hundred Soldiers constantly attending the same.

Somewhat further is the Emperors Ship-yard, which is of a great Circumference,
having many Docks in the same, wherein continually all manner of Vessels are a
building, whose Hulls they make generally very broad. The other part of the
City stands behind the Hills; but is divided from them by a Rivulet. The
Governors House.
A little way up the River from the Sea, is the Governors House, curiously
built, and within full of costly Rooms, and rises aloft, in manner of a
Steeple, with four Roofs.

The Temple of Devils.
Between this Edifice and the Block-house appears the lofty Roof of the Temple
of Infernals, within which the Japanners worship a horrible Image: Their Idols
very horrible.
His Head represents that of a Wild Boar, with two great Tusks sticking out of
his Jaws; and adorned with a stately Crown, full of Diamonds, and other
Precious Stones. Over his Breast hangs a Scarf, which is parted in the middle:
and that which makes it the more terrible to behold, are four outspread Arms,
of which one of the left stands upwards, holding a Ring on the longest Finger;
the other hanging downwards, holds a Flower not unlike a Lilly. The uppermost
Right Hand gripes fast a small Dragons Head, spitting Fire; the lowermost, a
Golden Scepter: trampling with his Feet upon the Belly and Thigh of another
Devil, which lies along under him: He having his Head all hairy, and a pair of
Ox Horns graffed thereon, with an Iron Chain about his Neck, a Girdle with
great Buttons about his Middle, a long Tail between his Legs, and broad
Garters about his Knees; the Right Arm stretched out, and the left bended in to
his Side, is as dreadful a Spectacle as the other. These horrid Shapes they
nominate Joosie Tiedebak; How they call them.
and God they call, contrarily, Joosie Goesar. The Japanners honor and worship
these resemblances of Devils with all manner of Offerings, to the end they
might not receive any hurt from them.

The Image of their Devil Vitziputzli.
The same Opinion have the Western Indians of their Devil Vitziliputzli, whom
they Worship and Reverence with great Zeal. This Vitziliputzli sits on a Silver
Footstool, which stands upon a Bier, whose four ends have as many Props, with
Serpents or Adders Heads fixed on them. The Forehead of this Idol is painted
blue, with two Streaks of the same Color athwart his Nose, running to each
Ear. His Head like a long-Bill'd Bird, is impalled with stately Plume of
Feathers, the tip of the Bill of massy Gold. In his Left Hand he holds a white
round Box, and five white Plumes, pleited cross-ways over one another; in the
middle a Branch, which signifies Victory. On his Side hang four Arrows, which
(according to the Opinion of the Mexicans) were sent him from Heaven: His Right
Hand rests on a Staff, in manner of a Serpent, painted with blue Streaks: Upon
his Bosom appears the Face of a Man, with glaring Eyes, a high Nose, and a wide
Mouth, opening before or near the Orifice of his Stomach. Thus stood he, for
the most part veiled with a Curtain; his Body almost covered with Chains of
Pearls, Diamonds, and other Precious Stones, which hung round with various
colored Plumes, like Labels.

The Devil Tezcatlipuca.
They no less fear their Demon Tezcatlipuca, made of black Jet, and clothed in
a rich Habit: In his mouth he holds a Silver Spike, about a Finger long, in
which sometimes stick Green, other times Red Plumes of Feathers; which
distinguished Colors they wear as Favors at their several Festivals. Between
both his Ears hang many Gems of great Value; and about his Neck an Emrauld,
that covers most part of his Breast; also wearing Golden Armlets: On his Navil
a costly Topaz; his Left Hand bearing a Fan of Gold, being a Plate so curiously
pollish'd, that it well performed the Office of a Mirror or Looking-glass, by
the Mexicans called Itlachcaia, wherein they believe Tezcatlipuca sees all the
Transactions of the World, by which he Judges, Determines, and Punishes or
Prefers every one according to their well or ill doing: Therefore he stands
ready with four Darts, to distribute upon those which commit the highest
Offenses.

The Tempell of the Idol Canon TEMPEL VAN DEN AFGODT KANON.


The Watch-house in Osacca is very stately.
BUt return again to the Description of the Imperial City Osacca: Behind the
Diabollical Temple, spreading it self along the Shore, stands a Watchtower, a
more than Royal Building, raised extraordinary high, in the great Street which
leads to the City Saccai.

At some distance from this, next you may behold a large and stately Temple, in
which is a wonderful Idol, being fifty Foot high: Its Head all of Silver,
presented by the King of Bom, whose Country abounds with Mines of that Metal.

Imperial Banqueting House.
On the Left Hand, at the lower end of the City, opens from behind the Hill, a
fair Prospect of the Imperial Tower, crowned with an almost unmeasurable Spire;
beyond which, about a League Southward from Osacca, may be seen another Tower,
called Lords-Castle, where the Noblemen use to meet, both for their Serious
Occasions and Divertisements.

The Temple of the Idol Canon.
But in the Center or middle of the City stands the much celebrated Temple of
the Idol Canon, whom the Japanners believe has the absolute Power over all
sorts of Fish and Fowl that haunt the Water, he being as their Neptune, or
Sea-commanding God: A few Steps from which stands the Porters Lodge, with a
broad-brimm'd Roof, whose Edges shoot far out before the Walls: Near this lies
a Path leading to the Out-wall, which now lies for the most part in its own
Ruins; yet this Wall has one very fair Gate, resembling a Triumphal Arch,
through which they walk to a pleasant Plain, full of shady Trees: but this
Pleasure is divided from them by a second Quadrangular Wall, Plastered with
white Loam, every Quarter a pleasant Green belonging to it.

Strange Porch before Canons Temple.
But the Temple-Porch belonging to the first Wall, that incloses the Court, is
built Orbicular, with six Angles, making a kind of Cupiloe on the top. To this
sad Place many wretched People resort, who, weary of their Lives, either
suffering under Poverty, or Chronical Infirmities, or distracted with blind
Zeal, in Fits of their Religious Melancholy, Japanners drown themselves.
here expecting to be freed from all their Sorrows, and to enter into present
Happiness, by drowning themselves in this their Soul-saving Pool of their
Water-God: But first they warily consult Canon himself in the Portal, seeking
his Advice; from which, as their fond Fancies dictate, they either return full
of Hopes, or desperately throw themselves headlong in, and for a quicker
dispatch, greedily swallow the Water.

As did also the ancient Germans, to the Honor of the Goddess Hertha.
This kind of dreadful Sedecede, or destroying themselves, is not unlike the
ancient Worship of the Teutonick Goddess Hertha, which Tacitus relates thus:
That in an Isle lying not far out at Sea, a Priest waited in a Grove
consecrated to the Goddess Hertha, in which stood a close Chariot, which was
profaned if touched by any but this her Attendant: His Function was to know at
what time the Goddess set forth upon her Holy Voyage, to visit the Seats of Joy
and Everlasting Happiness; to which purpose, he made ready the Chariot, and
Harnessed the Buffles to draw her; which he attended with great Zeal and
Religious Diligence: And what Countries soever she passed through, all War
turned suddenly to Peace. Nor finished she her Progress, till the Priest had
fully informed her, of the several Impieties raging and reigning everywhere;
which done, she driving into a Lake, as weary of this World, suddenly vanished,
never appearing more; and all the Retinue that belonged to her, following the
Chariot, in like manner drowned themselves: From whence arose that kind of mad
Zeal and frantic Desire, of thus making themselves away by Water, that so they
might meet with the Pleasures of the other World.

In what place the Goddess Hertha was chiefly worshipped.
Philippus Cluverius, in his History of Germany, affirms, That the Island
beforementioned by Tacitus, is no other but Rugau; where yet to this day, near
the Promontory Stubbenkamar, stands a Thicket called De Stubenitz, and in the
same a Lake of Black Water, so deep, that it is supposed to be bottomless;
which though it abounds with Fish, yet is not frequented by Fishers; this
proceeding out of a Reverential awe or fear of this thought to be Sacred Water:
Yet some less scrupulous in Points of that nature, undertook lately to leave a
Boat in the forementioned Pool, designing to Fish there the next day; and
coming in the Morning, their Boat was gone, which after long search they found
fixed in an Oaken Tree: Whereupon one of the Fishermen cried aloud, saying,
What! were all the Devils joined together, to cast my Boat in yonder Tree?
Strange Relation.
Upon which he heard a terrible Voice replying, All the Devils were not
employed, but only two, I and my Brother Claes. But not only this Pool
belonging to the Nymph Hertha, were they Diabollically persuaded to make
themselves away in; but many other Places in Germany, where upon the like
account Self-murder was committed, by throwing themselves headlong into the
Water, raging to follow the same Goddess to the forementioned Seats of Bliss.

A farther Description of Canons Temple.
BUt to return again to the Temple of Canon: The same rises aloft with three
peculiar Stories, whose Roofs are six-square, jetting out a great way over the
Walls. Every Partition has three double Windows; only between the second and
lowest Story stands a Gallery, supported on twenty eight great Pillars. The
Walls painted with all manner of Fishes, adorn much the outside of the Temple.

Description of the Idol Canon.
Within stands the Idol Canon, who, according to the Relation of the Bonzi, or
Japan Priests, lived two thousand Years ago, and created the Sun and Moon. The
Image appears from the middle upwards as if rising out of the Jaws of a Fish:
On his Forehead sticks a Flower: From each Elbow-joynt come two Arms; one
erected, with a Ring on the Middle-finger; the other pendent, holding a Flower
between his Fingers. That Right Hand which he holds aloft is clinch'd; the
lowermost holds a Scepter: About his Arms, Neck, and Middle hang Strings of
Pearl: From his Shoulders hang two Scarfs: Before him stands the Figure of a
Youth, appearing from the middle upward out of a great Shell; who with Arms
erected, prays to Canon; having a Scarf tied about his Middle, of which the
ends hang over: On the right side stands an Altar, on which are placed four
Images, in a supplicating posture; out of their Hands, folded together, springs
Water, which runs into four round Holes made for their Feet. The Mythologie of
these, and the Figure in the Shell, the Bonzies refused to declare.

The Chief Buildings in Osacca.
ON the right side of Canon's Temple stands the Admirals House; and somewhat
near this City, a stately Cloister of the Bonzies, rising with two high Roofs
or Stories, a great distance one from the other. Next this is the Habitation of
the General, known by its double Roofs, and Gable Ends; hard by which stands
the Temple with two hundred Images: And no less stately is the Palace belonging
to the Lord-Treasurer of Japan.

In the same Street stands a Watchtower, which is seen by Land six Leagues
from the City; and at Sea, seven. The Church in which the Images of the old
Bonzies are kept as Holy Relics, is also very curious to behold; part of it
may be seen at some distance at Sea, and the other part conceals it self behind
the Hills.

How it is within.
Moreover Osacca, like most of the other Cities in Japan, has neither Walls nor
Bulwarks; but is divided in the middle by a Current, on both sides of which are
stately Buildings, made of Clay; the outsides covered with Boards, to keep the
Water from soaking through; within full of large Chambers. In the time of the
Emperor Xogunsama, Anno 1614. seven Ships with Convicts went from the Haven of
Osacca to Nangesaque, because they would not desist from the Roman Catholic
Religion: At that time also the Jesuits Church in Osacca was pulled down by
Sangamido, who was empowered by the Emperor to persecute the Romanists; which
was performed with all manner of Cruelty, all imaginable Tortures being used on
them.

Osacca is oftentimes ruined in the Japan Civil-Wars.
But above all, Osacca suffered much by the Civil Wars which the Japanners
maintained one against another, each striving to obtain the Imperial Crown;
insomuch that the City and Castle fell now into the hands of one, and then of
the other.

After the Death of the Emperor Taycosama, Anno 1601. Japan was exceedingly
turmoyl'd in a Civil War; nine Princes joining against Dayfusama, of whom the
Chief Commander was Morindono King of nine Provinces, out of which he raised
Forty thousand Men, many Great Persons amongst them; and had also the Treasure
of the deceased Taycosama, and all Necessaries for War: In the interim, some of
these Provincials set upon Dayfusama, who entertained them so roughly, that
Eighty thousand Men were either slain by the Sword, ripp'd open their own
Bowels, or were taken Prisoners, few of them escaping by Flight.

Conquest of Dayfusama.
Hereupon Dayfusama carried his Victorious Army with all speed to Osacca, where
Morindono was so much astonished at his gotten Victory, that he left the
Invincible Castle Osacca, which was provided with double Stores, and strong
enough to endure the greatest Siege that could be, Osacca is taken.
to Dayfusama; before whose Approach, he with some of his Nobles forsook the
Castle, and went to his stately Palace beyond Osacca, resolving to submit
himself freely to the Mercy of the Conqueror.

But the King of Sassuma showed much more Courage: for he, with Six hundred
Soldiers, valiantly fought his way through the Conquering Army of Dayfusama,
and marching on undiscompos'd toward Osacca, got thither some Hours before
Dayfusama, where he furnished himself with such Vessels as he found, with which
he Sailed to his own Kingdom Sassuma, distant above two hundred Leagues from
Osacca, to the end that he might there Fortify himself against Dayfusama.

A horrible Earthquake in Osacca.
BEsides this their suffering by War, this City before endured a far greater
Misery, almost to an utter Desolation, by a sudden Earthquake, happening Anno
1585, the fourth of August, about Midnight; which was so terrible, that they
expected nothing less than present Destruction. The first shudder or shake was
so vehement, that in less than half an hours space, many hundreds were buried
in the Rubbish of their own fallen Houses. The fairest Buildings first failed,
coming to ground with horrible cracks; amongst which, that stately Palace, the
fairest and largest that ever the Sun shined upon, which Taycosama built, with
ample Galleries, and such spacious Courts, that therein they say he was able to
Exercise a hundred and fifty thousand Men. This stupendous piece of Architect
he built on purpose to show his Power and Magnificence to Ambassadors, that
were ready with an Embassy from the Emperor of China.

The Xetherland Ambassadors travel from Osacca.
OUr Ambassadors Frisius and Brookhurst, after they had taken a full Survey of
the City Osacca, departed from thence the twentieth of January, Anno 1649.
Early in the Morning their Goods were sent before, the Carriage required eighty
two Horses: And the whole Train consisted of forty four Netherlanders and
Bongois on Horseback, a hundred Bearers, appointed only to carry and look to
the Presents, the Silver Vessel, great Looking-glass, and many other Rarities.
The Ambassadors went in several Sedans, being attended in all by three hundred
Men, and a hundred twenty eight Horses.

Their Journey to Menco.
With this Train the Ambassadors came about Noon to the great Village
Firaskatta, where they Dined; and about four a clock they traveled through
Jonda, which is a small City, curiously built, Fortified with a strong Castle,
and surrounded with Walls. The Governor of this Place came to meet the
Ambassadors, who having a considerable Train, was carried in a Sedan, and
followed by some of his Guards. All the way which they passed was on a high
Bank, verg'd with Rice-Fields so far as could be discerned. At that time it was
every where Frozen very hard on the top of this Bank; and in going down the
same, they Traveled through several Villages, and the Way it self was planted
on both sides with Trees.

Description of the Japan Cedars.
Amongst these the Cedars raised their lofty tops above all the others, to an
exceeding height. Theophrastus relates, That the Syrians and Phenicians used
Cedars for the Building of their Ships: The same Custom is at this day in
Japan, and no marvel, because the Cedar has a Gummy Moisture, which preserves
it from rotting; which Secret the Japanners not knowing, oftentimes look upon
the Sudor or Sweating of their Cedar Images as a great Wonder: But this is
occasioned by the moist Air, and a South Wind, which generally draws an Oil out
of that Wood. Moreover this Tree grows higher and thicker, according to the
several Places it is Planted in. On the Mountains of Syria they grow so
large-wasted, that four Men are scarce able to fathom one of them; but these
have spiny and slender Bodies, considering their wondrous Height, whose lofty
Crowns seem to mingle with the Clouds. Japan also produces Cedars, no ways
inferior to those: The Leaves thereof are soft and downy, but prickly at the
sharp ends. There is also a small kind of Resemblance between the Cedar and the
Juniper-Tree; but the Leaf of the last is longer and smaller, and grows nothing
near so high; and the Wood thereof, being cut asunder and used, is soon subject
to rot: And also the Cedars are of a more fragrant smell, and bear a kind of
Cod not unlike the Myrtle, which being opened, has four white Corns or Grains,
like Rice, enclosed in them; which when ripe, are of a deep yellow Color;
whereas the Juniper-berry is black, bitterish, and unpleasant to the Palate.

Gum of Cedars, of what Virtue and Use.
The Gum which the Cedar produces, preserves the dead Corpse from decaying; and
the Berries have three several tastes: for the innermost of them is of a sharp
relish, the outermost Shell sweet, and the Pulp it self between sweet and
sour. These Trees either have continually Fruits or Blossoms on them: So that
whilst one Tree bears Blossoms or Green-fruit, the other Ripen. This Fruit
being hot in Operation, helps all Coughs proceeding from cold Defluxions, the
Cramp, opens obstructed Uritories; and the Oil thereof, if the Body be
anointed therewith, defends it from the biting of Venomous Creatures.
Furthermore, the Cedar always flourishes, being constantly green; whose
stately Branches run up in an exact Line, like the Trees themselves; but if the
Branches grow too heavy for them, the Body of the Tree commonly bends, growing
crooked under the Burden: The Cod which incloses the Berries, when it begins
to ripen, opens it self, and in time of Rain or Mists, drops off, leaving a
round Stalk at the Boughs: This Stalk decays not till two Years after the
dropping off of the Cod, which of it self requires a whole Year before it
becomes ripe, and this happens chiefly in Winter.

The Ambassadors come to Meaco.
Along this Bank, shaded with Trees, verging the River, the Netherland
Ambassadors going through a Town called Iondo, came to Meaco, where they were
Received and Lodged in the House of a Wealthy Merchant.

THis Imperial City Meaco lies in the Province of Mino, eighteen Leagues beyond
Osacca. Along this River (which takes its Original from a great Lake three
Hours Walk beyond Meaco, discharging its Waters through Osacca into the Sea)
stands the Imperial Blood-Grove; The Imperial Blood Grove near Meaco, why so
called.
which Denomination it received from the Japan Emperor Nobunanga, who was
murdered there June 22. Anno 1582.

The Emperor Nobunanga would be worshipped as a God.
THis Nobunanga in the time of his Reign had erected a new City, and called it
Anzuquiama, on a pleasant Hill, raising within it a stately Temple; which to
make the more famous, he caused to be brought thither the most Adored and
Venerable Idols in all Japan. Next to this Temple he Founded a Sumptuous
Chapel, where on a polished Marble he had his Imperial Arms Engraven, and his
own Statue delineated to the Life; which so soon as finished, he published his
Royal Edicts, with strict Commands, That after Proclamation, and the appointed
Time, none should dare presume thenceforth to worship any other God, than that
his Image in the Temple, within the City Anzuquiama, because he was Created by
Heaven and Earth.

Soon after he set forth second Orders, with the like strictness, That on such
a day, being our last of February, all Persons, of what Degree soever, should
keep holy that Day, being his Imperial Majesty's Birthday; requiring them also
to repair to the Chapel at Anzuquiama, and there to worship the new god
Xantai: To which he also added Promises, and Threatenings; viz. Those that did
according to his Commands, adoring this his own new-erected Statue, should, if
they were Poor, grow Rich; and if Wealthy, their Estates should be augmented or
improved, with the enjoyment of a long Life, in great felicity: And those that
neglected this Duty, were to expect the contrary.

A great resort of People to Meaco.
This being Proclaimed through all the Empire, the great City Meaco was much too
little for so vast a Concourse of People, that in throngs flocked daily
thither: So that several Leagues were taken up round about the City, for the
Entertainment of these mighty Multitudes; the Town being first crammed up, and
many forced to ly aboard their Ships.

A new Idol Xantai.
On the Day of Celebration, the young Prince, Nobunanga's Son, first began the
Ceremony, prostrating himself in a devout manner before the new Image Xantai:
After, in order, the Kings, Princes, and Nobles, and other Eminent Persons, in
their respective Degrees.

At which time appeared, to their great amazement, a wonderful Prodigy, a
Blazing Comet; and also at Noonday Fire falling from Heaven; seeming to
signify sudden and sad Misfortunes, all threatening and impending over the Head
of Nobunanga. A Temple and Idol at Dubo.
About a Mile from Meaco, in the Village Dubo, Nobunanga also built a fair
Temple, in which he set up an Image, intended for his own, and to the Life
resembling himself. The Idol sits Cross-legg'd in the middle of a Pedestal,
raised with broad Margins, curiously Engraven, his Hands lying upon his Belly:
About his Neck hangs flying a loose Scarf: Chains of precious Gems and Jewels
adorn his Breast and Bosom; and a tripple Chain of Pearl about his Neck, Waste,
and Belly. But the greatest Ornament was the Illustrious Crown which impalled
his Head, which thus Nobunanga made himself Master on.

Nobunango makes himself Emperor of Japan.
Anno 1564, the Emperor Cubo Governed Japan, who kept his Court at Meaco: when
Twelve thousand Traitors conspiring against the Emperor, entered into a Solemn
League and Covenant, and at the first appearance surprised Meaco, firing the
Palace in four Places. The Japan Emperor Cubo is murdered.
Cubo being taken thus unprepared, not able to put himself in fit posture of
Defense, yet made a bold Sally, adventuring with his Sword drawn, followed
only with Two hundred Men, to make his view of Miako (Kyoto) MIAKO
way through; but there being overpowered, receiving several Wounds, he was
slain, and the rest all cut in pieces. So the Regicides broke into the Palace;
where finding the Emperors Mother and Daughter, they made up their bloody
Breakfast by such Female Murders: but the Empress her self, concealed in a
Cloister of the Bonzi, being discovered, in cold Blood, acting Rebellion to the
height, as a Criminal, they beheaded.

Thus they destroyed the whole Royal Family, only preserving Cubo his younger
Brother, because he had taken the Order of Priesthood; and that they might not
suspect him hereafter, they tied him with a Sacerdotal Vow, and obliged him by
the like Religious Promises; but he by this means making his Escape, he
secretly conveyed himself to Vatadomo, Governor of Loca, who received him very
courteously, and persuaded to his assistance Nubunanga, King of Boari; who
joining together, brought an Army of sixty thousand Men into the Field against
the Emperors Murderers, who finding themselves not able to resist, they freely
resigned (some of the prime Abettors being punished) he in stead of putting in
the next of Blood, made himself absolute Master of the City and Castle of
Meaco, re-edifying the burnt Palace, Meaco taken; and the burut Palace rebuilt.
which for the sudden perfecting he neither spared Cost nor Labor, employing
fifteen thousand Men daily at Work; and going up and down with a drawn
Scymiter, that none might be idle or lose any time, where he cut off a
Carpenter's Head, for lifting up the Vail of a Woman, by chance then passing by.

At last Nubunanga went on so victoriously, that in short time he conquered and
brought under his subjection thirty several Kingdoms; also making himself
Master of Cubo, setting the Imperial Crown upon his Head, as a Trophy of his
Victories: and afterward put the same upon his new Idol in Dubo, which
represented him to the life, that so he might, whilst living be worshipped as a
god: to which end he wanted not store of Sycophant Courtiers, and other City
Flatterers, that held him up in this his vanity, making him believe, That
nothing could be more just and honorable for a Person that had performed such
wondrous Acts, and made so many Conquests by his Prudence, sole Conduct, and
Valor.

But others resented hainously this his vain Imagination, and proud Design; not
but that several Princes they had themselves deifi'd for their worthy Actions
after they were deceased, but that his ambition should aspire so high, to be
both God and Man at once, and whilst he was yet living, and subject to all
mortal frailties, he should blasphemiously presume to take place among the
gods, and receive Offerings and Sacrifice, only fit for Immortals, and the
ever blessed; unless (said they) we should make him a god for his Cruelty, his
Promise-breaking and Perjury: for whatsoever Countries were surrendered to him,
trusting in the Honor of a Prince, his Oaths and Clemency, he put without mercy
to the Sword, as if he had taken them by Storm, and entered by violence. But
more than any, King Aquechi, being a bold and high-spirited Prince, chafed and
stormed, and would not sit down tamely, and talk only of this his profane
arrogance, though he had obliged him with many great favors and bounty, making
him King of Tango, and General over his whole Army; yet in such a Point as
this, the honor of Religion, and the true Worship of their ever just gods, at
the stake: therefore converting the Emperors whole Forces against him, he
marched up to Meaco the two and twentieth of June, Anno 1582. The Prince
Aquechi flays Nubunanga.
Nubunanga being thus suddenly surprised and beleaguered with his own Forces,
had no way to attempt his Escape, but being followed close by the Enemy, he
was, after some resistance, slain in the Wood near the River of Meaco, which
from thence received the denomination of The Imperial Blood-Grove.

Revenues of the Temple at Dubo.
The Temple which he erected in the Village Dubo, has a Revenue of two hundred
thousand Tail of Silver yearly, every Japan Tail reckoned to be five Shillings
Sterling. But now we will return again to Meaco.

Description of the City Meaco.
ON the side of this Imperial City is the great Mountain Duboyamma, which runs
to Iondo; at whose Foot stands the Village Dubo, adorned with the stately
Temple, erected there by Nobunanga, whose lofty Roof is seen in some Places
above the shading Trees. The Idol Xaca at Dubo.
Within stands the great Idol Xaca, taken for the chiefest in Japan; for which
cause the Temple is constantly Locked up, except at one time in the year; when
it is opened with great Ceremony, and entered first by that Order of Priesthood,
called Foquexus.

Several Opinions of the Japanners concerning their Religion.
THe Japanners differ so much in their Opinions in matters of Religion, that
they may be divided into three principal Sects, which branch into many.

The Sect Xenxus.
The first called Xenxus, acknowledge the Life to come, a Reward for the Good,
and Punishment for all Evil doers. The Bonzi are of this Opinion, and chiefly
show great Reverence to their Idol Chamis: The Idol Chamis.
for whose honor they have Founded several Temples, and use his Name upon all
serious Matters, or when they take the Oath of Allegiance to their Emperor: To
him they bring several Offerings, praying him either to remove those troubles
which are upon them, or else to grant them a victorious and happy success in
all their Enterprises.

Pythagorea^ Doctrine embraced in Japan.
The second Persuasion allow also of the immortality of the Soul; but according
to Pythagoras, That the Soul should be transmigrated, according to their
merits, either to worthier or baser Creatures, himself giving out, that he had
once been Aethalides, Son of Mercury, who granted him a Boon to ask one favor
whatsoever he desired, excepting Immortality: whereupon he requested, That he
might know and remember whatever happened to him after his death, and not be
forced to drink Lethe, the River of Oblivion: so after Aethalides his Decease,
he was transmigrated into Euphorbus a Trojan Hero, slain by Menelaus, next
Hermotius then Pyrrbus a Fisherman of Delier, and lastly the forementioned
Pythagoras the Philosopher, who broached this so much followed Doctrine.

The Idol Omyto.
This Sect which they style Xenxus, worship the Deity Omyto, commonly called
Amida. The Fables which the Japanners relate of this Idol are beyond all
apprehensions, and above our Faith to believe. It will be enough to relate, how
they ascribe Salvation and everlasting happiness to this their god Amida, The
Ido Amida.
always invoking him with these words, Namu Amida Buth, that is, Save us,
Blessed Amida, save us; which often repeated Prayers they number upon Beads, as
the Roman Catholics do their Devotions, the Image holding a String of Beads
like theirs.

The Secth Foqueux worship the Idol Xaca.
The third of the Grand Sectaries being Foqueux, pay their Devotions to the Idol
Xaca, to whom they use commonly thus to Pray, Namu, Mio, Foreo, Qui, Quio,
which whosoever speaks best and pronounces best, seems to them so doing, to be
a good Omen of their future happiness; notwithstanding there is no Japanner,
extracted from India, that well understands these words.

These Worshippers of the Idol Xaca are Cambadagies and Cacubo's, both esteemed
very zealous and religious amongst the Japanners.

Mord des Keisers Kubo. Vermoorde vande Keyser CUBUS. The Murdering of the
Emperor CUBUS


Cambadagi teaches Idolatry.
Cambadagi taught them first to offer Sacrifices to the Devil, and use
Necromantick Arts; the other, Divination and Witchcraft, like the Chinese
Priests. Most of these live in Hills and desolate Places, remote from all
humane Society.

In the Village Dubo, on the Skirts of the Mountain Dubojamma, a Mile from
Meaco, stands a Temple, the Residence of the great Idol Xaca.

The River which near Osacca discharges it self in the Ocean, runs through the
City.

The chief Building of Meaco.
This City is surrounded by Suburbs, and has a Bridge, with two Towers on each
side of the River; near the Gate, through which runs the Way. that leads to
Oets and Jesi, are very strong Watch-houses, both for Horse and Foot, where
constantly they keep a strict Guard. Somewhat farther stands the high Tower,
from whose top the Emperor may behold the great Lake near Jesi, and the
pleasant Hill Pauromama.

Temple of the Bo^zi.
Next to this is another Tower, which is the Emperors Armory. On the right side
of this Structure appears the magnificent Temple, dedicated to the six Orders
of Bonzi, where the chief of this Priesthood called Xaximofins dwell, and have
their Residence.

The Palace of the Gayro.
But in the Center, or middle of the City, stands, what out-shines all, the
glorious Palace of the Dayro, whom they so much reverence, esteeming his Royal
Person to be so sacred, that his Feet are not suffered to touch the Earth, nor
the Sun to shine on any part of his Body; nor will they allow him to breathe
the common or open Air; neither must the Hair of his Beard and Head be Clipped or
Shaved, nor his Nails Pared: his Table is always plentifully supplied, and
every Course dressed and served up in new Dishes.

The Emperor's Court.
On the right hand is the Emperors Court, built more obscurely under the jetting
side of a Mountain, and therefore scarce seen by those which travel from Osacca
to Meaco, only some of the Pinacles appear above the Hills.

Great Costs and Charges did Nobunango bestow in the re-building of this Palace
after the burning of the same by the Rebels.

Near this is the Imperial Garden, full of Trees and odoriferous Flowers, which
are so curiously Planted, that the Eye which beholds them seems never satisfied
with so pleasant an Object.

Palaces of the Japan Kings.
On both sides of this Garden are the Courts in which the Kings that commonly
attend the Emperor, have their Residence, every one striving to exceed the
other in Building; so that end of the City seems all one Palace, being adorned
with so many sumptuous Edifices.

The left side of the Dayro's Palace is shaded by an exceeding high Turret,
Banquetting-Turrets.
covered with a Golden Plate; below the Court, toward the River, are twelve
more large and stately Houses, which make one Seraglio, The Seraglio.
in which the Dayro keeps his Concubines.

Besides all other Buildings, the House of the chief Bonsjosen, called
Eglanmith, that is, The light of understanding, makes a most glorious show.

Somewhat lower you may see the Wall built by the Emperor Dayfusama; when he
extended Meaco four Leagues in circumference.

No less costly is the great square Temple, with three Roofs raised very high,
which incloseth the gilded Idol Dai Buth: to whose Worship the Japanners repair
and flock from all Parts both far and near.

The Governors Court of Xoquansie appears also very glorious. The Emperors
Custom-house stands near the Gate which leads to Iondo, through which the
Hollanders coming from Osacca made their entrance into this City, where all
Strangers produce their Letters and Pasports, not till then being permitted to
go any farther.

On the left side of the Custom-house a beautiful Temple shows it self, three
stately Spires rising from the uppermost Roof, which contains as many gods, or
Idols, as there are days in the year. Daily in order they take down an Image,
which with great Ceremony they carry to the Chamber of the Eglamnith, where,
after staying all Night, the Priests next Morning waiting upon it, carry it
with great solemnity to the Temple, affixing it in its former Place.

The Emperors prime Herald, or King at Arms, called Honroccou Racclaybono,
resides in another fair Court with three Roofs.

Next this a Watch-house, under whose Roof two thousand Men constantly keep
Courts of Guard, always ready under Duty.

At the farthermost part of the City stands the Emperors Stables and
Storehouses, wherein are kept all the Furniture and Arms belonging to Horse and
Man; within whose utmost Bounds they may exercise forty thousand Horsemen.

The Citizens themselves dwell also in little Palaces, with such variety of
Rooms, Lodgings and Apartments, as they think fit, which when they please they
divide into many more, with Partitions curiously Gilt and Varnished after the
Indian manner, which they set up and remove with small trouble, so altering
their whole House upon all occasions for their convenience.

Meaco flourishes beyond all the Cities in Japan, because all others suffer
much and often by Civil Wars, when this being the Seat of the Dayro, after he
was degraded of his Imperial Authority, they bearing so much respect and
reverence to his Person, that they never looked that way, nor drew their Armies
near that Place, not so much as once to disturb him.

Father progress of the Netherland Ambassadors. Oets.
ONe Night the Hollanders stayed in this City, and toward Noon on the one and
twentieth of January, traveled to the great Village called Oets. The way which
directed thither was between high Mountains, on both sides built with Houses,
one side appearing a stately Fort, raised on the Promontory of a River. In Oets
the Ambassadors stayed some hours to refresh themselves; then going forward,
they went through Jesi, a Walled City, Jesi.
to which leads an even. Path, each side beset with pleasant Trees; at the end
of which Lane stands a Village, washed by the Water; on whose Promontory the
Castle Oets is built.

The Water in this Place makes two Inlets, or Greeks, over the one a small
Wooden Bridge, and over the other a Bridge of two hundred and thirty Steps long.

Japan Beggars
THis Road is much pestered with Beggars, as most Ways of Japan are, which
commonly have a great many Children with them. These poor People carry a Dish
in their Hands, in which they receive and gather Alms. The Women carry a
Budget, or Bag, and a Callibash, which hangs before them, and under that their
Purse. Oftentimes whole Generations of them banished by the Emperor from the
Cities, Range all over the Country with their Wives and Children. The ancient
People and Infants they carry in square Baskets, which they make fast to the
Horns of two Oxen, one going before, and another behind, the rest lead the way,
and follow, Singing Songs and Sonnets of the valiant Acts of the ancient Japan
Hero's, and so passing by several Houses, of which the Inhabitants, in reward
for their Singing, bountifully bestow Alms upon them.

THe Netherlanders departing from Jesi, came toward the Evening over a steep
and scraggy Mountain into the Village Cusatz.

Here grow the best sort of Canes.
This Place produces the best sort of Japan Canes or Sticks: The young Sprigs,
filled with sweet Juice, are tough and full of Joints, each distinguished at
equal distance by a round Knot, being small at bottom, and thick on the top.
These Canes they use in stead of Ropes to tie with; The use and description of
them.
and also make Cables of them for their greatest Ships, which last longer than
those of Hemp. They also make all manner of Baskets and Hampers of these Canes,
which are much stronger than the Europeans that are Pleited of Twigs: and two
Pieces of the said Cane being rubbed hard together, serve in stead of a Flint
and Steel for to strike Fire with.

Fruit-bearing Canes.
There is a sort of these Canes which bears a sharp Fruit, the Shell of a
Chestnut color, thorny, and full of streaks, which grow athwart one another,
and is about the bigness of a small Apple, or Crab; on each Bough from the top
to the bottom, in stead of Leaves, are small knotted Branches, which being very
tough, are Pleited together like a Rope: The longest of these bears the Fruit
which hangs just at the end thereof in a Cluster of six or seven Cods together,
each containing a hard Kernel; out of which they press Oil, of a peculiar
Virtue for the curing of Wounds, and therefore much used by the Slaves to heal
those cruel Blows, which oftentimes they receive from their Masters with those
Canes till the Blood runs down their Backs. Moreover, there are another sort
which grow about Cusatz, shooting up from the Roots of small Trees, which
spread themselves Pleited together a great way.

BEfore daylight the Ambassadors proceeded forward in their Journey, and ere
the Sun appeared, Itzibe.
they were got to the Village Itzibe. About two Leagues beyond Itzibe they
Ferry'd over the River Jocatangauwa; and about ten a Clock they came to
Minacutz.

Here a strong Castle stands for the securing of the Road which leads to Meaco.

To Minabutz guides an even Way, on both sides Planted with shading Trees, and
bordered with Rice-Fields as far as they could discern.

Japan above all other Countries abounds in Rice, Japan Rice.
and produces much better than any other Place in India; whose Coasts it not
only supplies, but also all Europe in a plentiful manner: they Mow it in
September, the whitest sort bearing the higest Price: that which is brown,
growing in Begu and Sian, is of a far less value.

In Japan, as also in all India, are no Mills to Grind any manner of Corn;
wherefore they Bake no Bread after our European manner. Their Rice serves them
in stead of Bread, but is boiled in Water, and brought to their Tables like Pap
or Pudding. The Rice which is not kneaded but in Lumps, is very unwholsom, and
occasions the griping in the Bowels, and weak Eyes. They also Roast their Rice
after that it is boiled, making it in Cakes.

Father Xaverius relates, that traveling through Japan, he sustained himself a
long time by those Cakes of Rice, which the Japanners called Arela, carrying
some of them with him in his Sleeves.

The Rice when growing has a fatty thick Leaf, not unlike those of Housleek,
but broader, shooting up half a Yard from the Ground, with a Purple-colour'd
Flower, and a double Root.

Plinius affirms, that the Indians made Oil of Rice: but at present, not only
in Japan, but in all India, they make a very strong Liquor of it.

The Mountain Coetsecajamma.
THe Hollanders leaving Minacutz, encountered with that high Mountain called
Coetsecajamma, where they found much trouble in carrying over their Goods and
Package; yet at last getting through Zintzsamma and Sacca, they came to
Sicconoziro, where they rested all Night.

An hour before daylight the next Morning, the Moon shining, the Ways and
Rivers also Frozen very hard, they proceeded forward in their Journey, where
afar off they espied a costly Edifice, Castle Cammiammi.
being the Castle Cammiammi, rising aloft with very high Turrets. The Walls
built of Freestone, fortified the Castle in such a manner, that it seemed able
to endure a hard Siege. Beyond this Fortress appears a large Village. About two
Leagues farther they entered the Town Isacutz; PLACE="marg"Isacutz.
and whilst they were there at Dinner, some Rusticks came and offered them
Provisions to sell, being Clothed as the ordinary Citizens, or Burgers,
Description of the Japan Rusticks.
Riding through the Country on Buffles, having a Hook in his Nose, which being
made fast to a Chain, and coming about his Ears, and between his Horns, serves
them for a Bridle.

The Women wear Clogs under their Feet, which have a Knob that sticks between
their great and second Toe, to keep them close to their Feet: they wear a kind
of short Boots, or Buskins, which they fasten with Strings athwart one another.



FRom Isacutz the Ambassadors traveled through Zono, Ojebakitz, Owaka, Isacutz.
Jokeitz, and Tonuda, to Quana: The City Quana.
In the closing of the Evening they entered the City, which above all Places in
Japan is most artificially built, and surrounded with strong Walls, on one side
fortified with a large Castle all of hewn Stone, whose Turrets are seen at a
great distance.

The City Piongo ruined by Wars and Earthquakes.
ABout half way between Meaco and Quano, stands more Northerly into the
Country, the famous City Piongo, which in the War that Nobanunga maintained
after the Emperor Cubus's death, was quite ruined: For when Cavadonis Vocata,
Brother of the deceased Cubus, who was the only Person that was left alive of
that Imperial Family, escaping from his Enemies, and flying to Vantandonus for
Aid, which he obtained, was not only nobly treated by him in his Castle, but
also endeavored by persuasions to stir up his neighboring Kings to take revenge
on the Emperor's Murderers; amongst whom Nobanunga, King of Voari, willingly
embraced this opportunity, to the end, as he pretended, to help Vocata to the
Crown of his deceased Brother Cubus; but contrary, in a Civil War, he embroiled
the whole Country: for when Nobanunga had quelled the Rebels, and made Peace
with their chief Commanders, Mioxidoni, and Diondoni, he never so much as
thought of establishing Vocata in the Throne, but turned his victorious Army
against other Japan Kings; of which he brought thirty under his subjection, as
is said before: and by these Conquests made himself Master of the whole Empire.
Amongst which fluctuating Commotions and Turmoils of an intestine War, Piongo
bore no small share; for being taken by force, it had not quite worn out the
marks of Nobanunga's cruelties: and soon after, in the Year 1596. was totally
ruined by a terrible Earthquake, that more than half the City, with Houses,
Temples, and People, were swallowed up in the Earth, and the remaining part
thereof turned so topsie-turvie, that it represented nothing but a heap of
Ruins and Rubbish, and miserable marks of Divine severity.

Terrible Earthquakes in Trugillo
THese Earthquakes in Japan are very common, as also in America; and amongst
other Places, Trugillo, a City in Peru, Anno 1619. the fourth of February, was
exceedingly shaken by the like Trepidation: a little before Noon the Ground
began to move, and in few Minutes ran the space of an hundred and sixty
Leagues, continuing very fiercely for fifteen Days; all which time a dreadful
Comet hung over their Heads, which added, if possible, more terror to the
Inhabitants, expecting their utter destruction, and the end of the World.

Two being struck with a consternation, became dumb.
Besides those great numbers that were destroyed, and had scarce room to lie
buried under the ruined Buildings, it is worthy our observation, how Peter
Flores a Councellor, Johannes Pontinus de Leon, Secretary to the Peruan Bishop,
both Spaniards, were struck with such a wonderful consternation, that they
became dumb, and never spoke after.

A strange accident.
Amongst others also happened another strange Accident, which may serve as a fit
pattern of Divine Justice: A public Notary coming over thither, and being
busied about drawing some Articles of Agreement, by which a poor Man suffered
much injury and great damage, he having false Witnesses ready to Sign the same,
one there present discovered the Cheat, who falling out with the false
Witnesses, was by them drove out of the House, and he no sooner being got in
the Street, but the House tumbled down, killing him and his false Witnesses.

Great Earthquakes in Canada.
No less terrible was another late Earthquake in Canada. The first of February,
Anno 1663. there arose a great noise and rumbling like Thunder in the Air;
whereupon soon after the Bells fell a Jangling as if they had Rung of
themselves, the Walls rent asunder, great pieces of Timber and Stones fell on
the Ground, the Roofs of Houses and the Trees struck and fought one against
another.

Near the Village called The Three Rivers, two great Mountains with Woods were
turned with the bottoms upwards, Rocks and Mountains thrown into the River, so
making several Channels in the same, and the Waters made new Inroads into the
Country.

In other Places Hills were swallowed up, whole Woods removed, and by Pauwels
Village a Mountain was washed off by the Floods, and became an Island, and is
still to be seen in the River.

But no Country in the World suffers so many Calamities, and more almost total
Ruins, than this our Japan.

FRom Quano the Ambassadors took Shipping: for between Quano and Mia the Ocean
makes a great Bay, so that none can travel by Land but with great Charges, loss
of Time, and through bad Ways: for which cause they hired sixteen Japan
Vessels, in which they Shipped their Goods, Horses and Men; so hoising Sail,
and having a small Gale of Wind, it was Midnight before they reached Mia, the
Bay being about seven Leagues over.

Description of the City Mia.
THis City is very curiously built, and adorned with many Temples, and
fortified toward the Sea with a strong Castle. Here the Hollanders stayed a
whole Night.

Sacci Bonzi, Japan Priests.
In this place, as generally through all Japan, they met with the Sacci Bonzi,
being Japan Priests, which perform their Duties in the Temples, and serve as
Chaplains in Noble-mens Houses, as we said; their Hats made of fine Straw, with
broad round Brims, the Crown like our Scull-caps, fitting just the Mold of
their Heads: their Coats, which are very wide, hanging down to their Heels, of
several colors, and are Selvidg'd with white: their Girdles, which are broad,
and stuffed full of Cotton, serve them in stead of Pockets for their Books and
Memorials; which they use chiefly in their public Devotions: their Shoes, like
Slippers, having a Heel raised with three pieces of Leather: In the right Hand
they carry a thick Cord, rolled up like a Spindle; in the left, a Copper Basin,
Engraven with Images, representing the Japan Idols: on which Basins they strike
with great force with the knotted Rope. But this custom of theirs they use but
seldom, unless they make Offerings and Sacrifices in the open Streets: for at
other times, when they perform their Services in the Church, they hang the same
at the Door, or Entrance of the Temple.

Narromi, Siriomi, and the stately City Occosacci.
THe Ambassadors parted from Mia the twenty fourth of January in the
forementioned Year 1646. traveling through the great Village Narromi, and
Siriomi, to the stately City Occosacci, full of curious Buildings, and
fortified with a strong Castle, which defends it from the sudden Onset of the
Enemy.

To this City leads a Bridge of an hundred eighty eight Paces long, over which
the Hollanders carried their Goods. Here they Dined, and in the Afternoon
marched on through Fintzara to Accasacci. The Road thither is exceeding
pleasant, in some places of it divided by several Rivulets; others with easy
Ascents, and delightful Valleys, but each shaded with Trees.

In Accasacci they rested all Night, and on the five and twentieth of January
traveled through the great Village Goo; and passing over a very long Bridge of
Timber, they came to the City Josinda, having a most delightful Situation; The
City Josinda.
the Hills round about covered with a pleasant Shade, and the Ways Planted with
Trees in such order, that their tops meet together, making the whole Road one
artificial Arbor, defending Travelers, not only from the Heat of the Sun, but
the Rain also.

The Retinue of the Lord of Bungien very strange.
About ten a Clock they reached the Village Ftagawa, where they met with some of
the Lord of Bungien's Soldiers, who, according to the Relation of the
Interpreter, came with a Commission from the Japan Emperor, residing at Jedo,
to take possession of the Castle and Places belonging to Osacca. The first
Train was followed by the Lord himself, who was carried in a Sedan; after him
followed his Ammunition and Household stuff, guarded both by Foot and Horse,
which Rid on stately and well-train'd Steeds, Armed with Bows and Arrows,
Lances, two Scymiters, one short, the other long, with a Dagger, and Helmets
on their Heads, and Wax-leather Boots: The Foot as well as the Horse marched
very orderly, and in good Martial Discipline, not making the least noise, nor
any one Voice heard, notwithstanding they were half an hour passing by in great
Companies.

About eleven a Clock the Netherlanders descending a Hill, entered the Village
Siraski, Siraski.
bordering the Sea, being washed by the same on the right side, and the left
verg'd by a high Mountain covered with Trees.

Leaving Siraski they reached to Arei, Arei.
where the Sea makes a Bay of a League and a half broad, but is very shallow,
which put them to much trouble in carrying over their Goods, because the
Vessels oftentimes ran aground.

On the opposite side of this Bay lies on a Promontory, Meisacca.
the Village Meisacca.

From hence Riding on in their Journey they went through several Villages,
along a Road on both sides shaded with Trees, which brought them in the close
of the Evening to Fannama. Fannama.


The City Mitzke.
Before daylight leaving this Village, they crossed the River Terui, and
visited Mitzke, a City curiously built, and fortified with a fair Castle. From
hence they reached Teucarai; where Dining, they went on through Kakingaw to
Nisaca: near which is the Mountain Conay, a League and a half long. The Way
that goes over this Mountain is pleasant, being Planted on both sides with
Trees.



The Palace of the Bousi. on a high Mountain.
From the top of this Hill they saw a steep Ascent, which on the left side as
they went had a sumptuous Edifice, raised and adorned with many Turrets and
double Roofs, which appeared Spiring above the shading Trees.

The Japan Interpreters related, That it was one of their chiefest Universities
or Schools in Japan, and the Residence for their most Learned Priests which
seldom or never come abroad, Bonsi seldom come abroad.
being continually busied with instructing and teaching their Youth there;
every year on a Set-time repair thither from all parts of the Country diverse
other Priests, for to dispute with those that reside there about Religion and
Philosophical matters; which Disputation is very strange, for often one of the
Assembly or Priests is wanting on a sudden, One a year lost.
whom they say, (if you will believe them) they never hear more of.

Horrid self-murder committed in Japan, to the honor of their Idols.
The Japan Interpreters being demanded how it happens, replied, That the Devil
carried them away: Yet others think, that they sacrificed themselves to the
honor of the Idols Amida or Xaca, who they look upon as favorers of Sedecedes
or self-slaughter, upon which account many make themselves away commonly after
this manner.

A few days after they are possessed with this Frantic Zeal, mad to see their
gods, and be where they reside, they go up and down craving Alms, and what they
get they put in their wide sleeves, desiring the people to let them know their
Commands, and what Commendations they should carry from them to their Deities,
on whom speedily they were resolved to attend; which frenzy the people look
upon as true Devotion, and a Religious undertaking. This done, they take with
them new whetted Sythes, which they say, must clear the rough and untrodden
ways, leading to Everlasting Happiness: Then they enter a Boat, which they
prepare for that purpose, tying great stones about their Necks, Arms, Middle,
and Legs, and thus they either leap over, or sink downright, by pulling out a
Plug, with the Boat under them; if he leap over, his friends that follow to see
the horrid spectacle, presently throw Fire into his Boat, not allowing it to be
fit for any Profane or common use after.

Great honor shown to them that drown themselves for their gods.
FAther Lodowick Frojus relates, That in his way to Miaco, coming to the Island
Heu, in the Village Fore, where six Men and two Women had thus drowned
themselves, to whom the people had Built and Dedicated a Chapel, near the
Shore, in memory of their so great Merits, and Devout destroying of themselves:
The Walls of the Chapel within were hung round with Clift Sticks, wherein were
Verses stuck, with Elogiums, highly extolling the Religious Magnanimity of
these miserable Desparadoes, which thus ventured by water to visit their God
Amida.

This place by Travelers and others is daily frequented, there entering to pay
their Devotions to these Water-Saints, and tells us also, That passing another
time that way with his Brother Lodowick Almeida, meeting with some ancient
Women that came out from their Worship, each having a Garland of Roses in their
hand, which they seemed to tell over, muttering Prayers, as we our Beads, fell
foul, and railing bitterly at them, as profane, irreligious Fellows (though
they might perceive by their Habits they were Strangers) that durst presume to
pass by, and not entering, pay there their due Devotions.

How they carry themselves before their drowning.
Also Gasper Villela, in his Letter from Saccai, dated Anno 1562. relates, that
he saw several of these wilful Murders, which he thus sets down:

The Japanners (says he) when they are heated with a frantic Zeal, raging to
be delivered from this vale of misery, and be suddenly transplanted to Eternal
Happiness, which they believe to be in the bottom of the Sea, or else in some
Subterranean world, where those gods reside, that dispense eternal rewards and
everlasting happiness, for transitory merits in this mortal life: First they
get up upon a Bench or Form, the better to be heard, where they Preach and
Inculcate against the short and uncertain Pleasures of this World, and how the
best of Earthly joys are mingled and embittered always with grief and sorrow,
and that so short and uncertain a Life to be taken away oftentimes on a sudden,
without any warning, were better to make a resignation of, than to be snatched
away at pleasure of those that gave it; This being the Theme or Argument which
they always insist upon, there they and others keep commiserating people, being
in a manner as frantic as they, bestowing great Alms upon them, and have
always an audience thronging about them. The last day, for to close up all,
they make their Rehearsal of all the Sermons, being a Repetition of what they
formerly delivered; which done, they drink off a chearing Bowl of lusty Liquor;
then dressing themselves up in their best Habits, stuffing their wide Sleeves
with Stones, and hanging weights of Iron about their Necks, they enter the
Boat, in which they lay a sharp Scythe, for to Mow off, as we said before, the
Thorns and Briars which grow in the way to Bliss.

I saw (says Villela, in his forementioned Letter) one that had seven
Associates, which did all throw themselves into the Sea, with like joy, as at
the Celebration of a Marriage, that I stood astonished with admiration.

Jamam-Buxen converse with evil Spirits
Moreover, the Japanners are much inclined to Sorcery and Witchcraft, the
chiefest pretenders to that Art, they call Jamam-buxen, that is, Soldiers, or
Knights of the Round Valley, which they believe have familiarity with Evil
Spirits.

These Sectaries, to purchase fame of Zeal and Piety, watch, never letting
their Eyelids close in two, nay, sometimes three days and nights together,
taking small sustenance, whilst they seem to do wonders, that is, removing in
a dexterous manner, by such their Diabolical Arts, Bodies from their Graves,
none knowing how, Strange actions.
or when they were carried thence. Nay, more by confederacy, they will seem to
raise the dead, and having some who lie stiff before them, like bodies laid
out, that at a certain word in their Imprecations start up alive, and when
these by their Disciplining, Fasting, and Watching three Months together, have
thus Massarated themselves, they invite some of their intimatest Friends with
them, so going aboard their Vessel, fitted for that purpose, sink and drown
themselves all joyfully and lovingly together. Drown themselves.


Why the Japanners ear no manner of death.
But nothing more their Religion prompts them to, than a sleighting scorn of all
the Terrors and Pangs of Death, looking upon those that shrink at such fears,
as Vulgar and Ignoble Persons, not fit to be conversed withal, because they all
believe, that Death is the certain way to Happiness; which Opinion has been
anciently received in Japan, and very old in many other places, especially
amongst the Gauls, Britains, and Germans, and several other Nations, That the
Souls of those that feared not Death, whether offering themselves for the
public good, or the honor of their gods, should immediately so dying, be
translated into Paradise.

Strange self-murder of the Goths, Herod^s. lib. 4.
HErodotus says, That the Goths, held for the valliantest amongst the
Thracians, believe themselves immortal, and that they never die, but leaving
this world, they go to their God Zamolxis, upon which account, every fifth year
by Lot they choose an Ambassador, whom they send to this their God-amighty in
such manner as follows; First, Having well instructed him in his Message, and
made fit for so honorable an Embassy, then they lift him up by the Arms and
Legs, placing under him three Arrows, with the barbs upwards, which done, they
let him drop upon the Points, by which, if he be so well transpierc'd that he
dies suddenly, then they believe that they have made a good choice, but if so
it happen that the sharps missing the Vitals, he die a lingering death, they
judge him to be a vicious liver, and not fit for the undertaking; so presently
go to a second Choice, giving him the like Instructions.

The Grave Philosopher Seneca also hints thus concerning the Immortality of the
Soul, When the time comes that separates the Soul and Body, leaving the
Material Substance on the Earth, the Spirit reascends to God the Donor. Then
also he makes the Soul thus a Speaker; Now free from Earth, I dwell in the Air,
or Etherial Sky. This his Description of Dying and leaving this Mortal Life,
signifies his Opinion of a better and Immortal Residence. We must remove, (says
he) for death which we fear, destroys us not, but gives us another and a
happier Life, which hereafter, we shall assuredly know, and rejoice at our so
blessed a change.

This Doctrine of a second Life, though wanting the pure light of the Gospel,
most of the ancient Heathens believed, of which our Western and Eastern World
have given notable Testimonies.

Strabo tells us, That one Mandanis a Brachman, Strabo lib. 15 Geograph.
being presented to Alexander the Great, and he Courting him with fair
Promises, and rich Presents to be as his Companion and Councellor, looked upon
him, though he had Conquered the whole World, as a contemptible Fellow, he
being fully satisfied from their own Principles of future Hopes, Disputes of
the old Brachmans concerning the ^^^e, and after death.
for his Just and Meritorious Life, to receive the great Rewards of Everlasting
Beatitude, said, O Alexander, I despise your Gifts, neither need I any, The
saying of Mandanis.
to receive them from one that is poorer than he that is in the greatest want;
being hungry, and still unsatisfi'd with all the Plunder and Spoil which thou
have got. Neither fear I your threats, since I by dying, already worn out by
Age, shall remove to a far better and happier life than thou can expect in
the World which thou have here unjustly gotten, or in the World to come.

Cicero de D^vinat p^^o. Calamus the Indian burns himself.
Cicero also tells of the Indian Calamus, Who making a fire under a Gilded Bed,
covering himself over with Straw, kindled the same, and so by degrees felt the
extremest of all tortures, burning to death; a brave and noble departure (as he
says) out of this World; the day of whose death, Alexander the Great appointed
to be kept holy, and not long after he followed him.

Next he tells us of Hercules, who with conjesting Trees, which he had himself
torn up by the roots, erected his own Funeral Pyre, where laying himself down,
and there consumed to Ashes the greatest of Hero's, they after his magnanimous
departure, reckoned him among the number of Gods.

FUrthermore, as to what was said before by the Japan Interpreter concerning
the vanishing of one of the Bonzi, which annually meet in the Castle on the
Mountain Conay, The Bouzies are often carried away none know whether.
the like happens (as they say) in several other meetings, in which some of
them vanish from thence, or are snatched away, how and by what means we know
not.

Villela relates in his forementioned Letter, That this Romance, or Hocus-Pocus
of conveying bodies, is generally believed to be real amongst the Japanners,
but always looked upon as a bad Omen: And in his time, he says, there dwelt one
of the Bonzi in the City Sacci, who being very rich, lived as vicious a life,
and being seventy years old, lying on his deathbed, could not endure to hear
of death; but one day, at high noon, he was taken away on a sudden in the
presence of all his friends, and was never heard of after.

The Netherland Ambassadors leaving the Palace of the Bonzi, Village Cancia.
they Rode toward the Village Cancia, where they rested that night; in the
morning, the Ways being frozen very hard, they went on in their Journey, and in
a short time they reached the swift Current Oyengauwa, River Oyengauwa.
which they crossed very easily, because it had not Rained there in a long time,
for in wet seasons, the Floods are so high, and the Current so strong, that
none can pass it but with great trouble.

There the Emperors Faulkoners met the Ambassadors.
Stepping on the opposite shore, they spied three of their Emperors Faulkoners
after their Game, the Ambassadors Sedans, in honor to the Emperor, were set
down on the ground, the Horsemen alighted, and the whole Train stood still,
till the Faulkoners were past by them: Then traveling through the Villages
Simanda, Torisjeda, and Ocambe, over several steep Ascents and Declivings, they
entered Mirice.

Surunga, a great City, but ruinous and uninhabited.
SOmewhat farther, they came to Surunga, a great City, but desolate, because
since the death of the Emperor Toxogunsama, who was Crowned Anno 1629. the
Inhabitants deserted it, resorting to other places for Trade.

The Emperor taking some distastes against his Brother, forced him to rip up
his own Belly; which cruel Execution they commit in the following manner:

The manner of the Japanners ripping up their own bellies.
THe Criminals sit according to the Eastern manner, in an open place before a
Temple, being bare from the middle upwards; behind him stands one with a
Cordial, if he should faint, and six Priests that give him Spiritual Comfort,
and take care of his Funeral; before him sits one with the Knife that must
perform the cruel Office; on each side at equal distance, stand twelve of his
best Friends and nearest Relations; on both sides are great multitudes of
Spectators.

This cruel Execution is oftentimes inflicted upon many without any cause; for
they judge those liable to the same punishment that have any Relation to the
Criminal.

Francis Cairon tells us of a passage that happened about Jedo, during his
residence there. A Noble Man commanding a Lordship of the Emperor, forced his
Tenants to pay him more Rent than the Emperor had ordered; by which means he
enriched himself: But the people not being able to bear the burden any longer,
they joined together and went to the Council, complaining of the Lord of their
Manor, which they strictly examining he was found Guilty, and Condemned with
all his Family to be their own Executioners, ripping open their own Bellies. He
had a Brother a Servant to the King of Fingo, two hundred forty seven Leagues
distant to the Westward from Jedo: an Uncle in Satsuma, twenty Miles farther: a
Son by King Conocoumy: a second Son, who dwelt Eastward from Jedo, one hundred
and ten Leagues, serving the King of Massama: his third Son, in the Imperial
Castle Inquano: his youngest Son being Married to a wealthy Merchants Daughter
in Osacca. Two of his Brothers being of the Emperors Lifeguard. All these were
forced in one day and hour, for their Brother or Fathers forementioned offense,
in a miserable manner, to rip up their own Bowels.

The manner of cutting their bellies.
Which Executioners work is performed thus: First, they cast up how many hours
it may be ere the Messenger of Death brings the sad news to their remotest
Relations; which being the utmost time, appointed no Reprieve beyond, both the
nearest and farthest on one day, and just at noon, obeying the strict sentence,
they become their own cruel destroyers.

But one of them, a Merchant in Osacco, prevented self-slaughter, being struck
with so great a terror, that he died immediately after the tidings; and his
only Daughter, who would have made her self away, though not Condemned, had
she not been carefully looked after, starving her self, died on the eleventh
day: But how the Women escaped in these destroyings of Families, he is silent
in.

CAsper Villela in his Letter from Firando, dated the 13 of October 1557. says
thus concerning this manner of punishment: Those that are to be ripped open have
two choices left them, either to cut their bellies, or fight to death.
When the King Condemns any to this Execution, he sends a Messenger to him, who
acquaints him with the day on which he must die, the Condemned Person never
flinches nor seeks to make an escape, but humbly requests that the King would
be so pleased, that he himself might perform his Majesty's Command, which if
granted, he takes for the greatest honor which at that time he is capable of.
At the appointed hour, he attires himself in his best Raiment, and so rips up
his own Bowels; but if the King order his Death by the common Execution, then
he puts himself in a posture of defense, guarding his House with his Children,
Friends, and Servants; the King's Officers coming at the expected hour with a
strong Party, begin the Assault and Battle, with discharging of Arrows; then
drawing nearer, they come to pushing of Pikes, and chosing up with their
Swords, entering, (the Kings Party being always too strong) cruelly massacres
him and his whole Family: and the rest of his Relations that were not there,
nor engaged, are all stigmatized with a hot Iron.

This severe Law neither exempts the highest nor the lowest, but Lords and
Peasants, Citizens and Soldiers, suffer thus without mercy all alike. This
false Witnesses have, or any that are taken in a Lie before a Magistrate,
inflicted upon them, insomuch that most Punishments amongst the Japanners are
sanguinary. The Kings that are convicted of speaking Treason against the
Emperor, are only banished to Faitsinchina.

Description of the Faitsinchina.
THis Faitsinchina is a small Isle, about a League in circumference, lying
Easterly from Jedo to the Offin, fourteen Leagues; whose Cliffy Borders are so
steep, and the Sea fathomless, that they want Cable to Anchor there; so that no
Vessel can come near the Shore safe, but after this manner: When the Weather is
calm, and the Water smooth, they venture in small Vessels, who drawing near the
Rocks, some of the boldest and activ'st of them tying Cords about their Middle,
leap from their Vessel, lighting among the Cliffs, not without great danger,
and climbing to the top where they have Crains, or the like Engines planted for
that purpose; with which they hoist up their Vessels some Fathoms above the
Water, A strange contrivance to preserve Ships.
so that they impend in the Air, where they seem as at safe Anchor, being free
from the beatings of Waves and Weather, which else would immediately bilge them
upon the unhospitable Shore, where many were lost ere this Invention was found.

This spot of Ground is for the most part barren, little of the Isle fit for
Cultrature, boasting only a few Mulberry-Trees.

Banishment of Japan Kings.
Here the greatest Persons suffer under Exile, where without all hope of any
return, or ever to be redeemed, they live in a miserable condition; for in
every angle of the Isle stands a strong Tower, where Soldiers keep Watch and
Ward; which Monthly, if Wind and Weather serve, are relieved; nor are they
longer to remain, lest by their continuance they may grow acquainted with the
Royal Prisoners, and be inveigl'd by Bribes, or otherwise to help, or at least
connive at their escape.

These, though Kings, have no Princely Fare, only a little Rice, Roots of
Trees, wild Herbs, and some other unsavory Food, which they cook themselves:
and that which adds more to their misery, is bad Drink, and unwholsom Water.
Their Houses are only poor Huts, too slight Defenses to keep out Wind and
Weather: And also they are set hard Tasks, to Spin and Weave so many Pieces of
Silk yearly, the Growth of the Place, their own Silkworms furnishing them with
Materials.

The Emperor's Court was formerly in Surunga.
But our Ambassadors stayed not long in Surunga, where formerly the Japan
Emperors used to keep their Court, and afterward the Emperor's Brother; but
since Toxogansama's Brother ripped up his own Bowels, they removed the Court from
thence: which was the chief occasion of the deserting and desolation of this
City; for most of the Inhabitants went from thence to settle in other Places.

The City is much ruined.
On one side of the City stands a large Castle, whose Ruins manifest
sufficiently its former greatness and splendour.

The Metherland Ambassadors enter Jesare, and find there an ancient Man, who
told them that Spex had formerly been there.
LEaving Surunga, they traveled to the Village Jesare, where they Lodged all
Night.

Here they found an old Man, who told them that the Ambassador Jacob Spex,
thirty years before their arrival, Lodged in his House, passing through that
Village in his Journey to Jedo, after he had presented the Emperor Goysssio
Samma with several things, and treated with him about permitting the Hollanders
to Trade in Japan.

Spex's Journey from Meaco to Surungo and Jedo.
Ambassador Spex entering Meaco the tenth of August Anno 1611. received ten of
the Emperor's Horses, and a Present from the Governor Itakara Froymondonne;
thence Riding on seven Leagues farther, he rested one Night in Cusatz; the next
Day Dining in Sutsifama Sutsifamme: in the Evening he arrived at Sesquinoso,
traveling from thence the next Morning to Jokeitz; and Ferrying over the Bay
which washes Mia, about Sunset (having that day suffered much by the extreme
heat of the Sun, insomuch, that one of his Train died thereof by the way) they
entered Naromi, where he ordered him to be interred: Then Riding through
Occosacca to Josinda, they posted to Futsigeda and Merico, and toward Evening
came to Surunga.

Makes his arrival known in Surunga.
The arrival of the Netherlands Ambassadors, Spex and Peter Segerszoon, was
immediately made known to the chief of his Imperial Majesty's Council, being
Cosequidonne, and Ikoto Siosabrandonne, with entreaties that they might be
permitted, so soon as possible, to the Presence and Audience of the Emperor.
The Ambassadors received in answer, That they were heartily welcome from so far
a Country, and troublesome a Way, through which they had traveled thither; and
without all peradventure their arrival would be very acceptable to the Emperor:
to which end they would prepare all things in readiness against the next
Morning for their Audience. Which Cosequidonne performed, bringing the
Netherlanders the next Day to the Imperial Palace, but could not be admitted,
the Emperor being busied, receiving and looking over some grand Accounts of his
Viceroys, so that they were forced to stay and wait his leisure.

What happened to the Portuguese Ambassador before the Emperor.
Where whilst they tarried, they nnderstood something of the business of the
Spanish Ambassador, who had been newly dispatched from thence before their
coming, who had first addressed himself in Person, and afterward in Writing to
his Majesty's chief Councellor Cosequidonne; and when he was presented to the
Emperor, humbly he laid his Presents down before him on his Throne near his
Footstool, being ten Pieces of Cloth of Gold Tissue, a Golden Bowl, and a
Watch, which the Emperor received; but the Ambassador (his Majesty not replying
a word in answer to his Addresses) was commanded to withdraw: notwithstanding
he entered the Court with a stately Train, he himself richly Habited, wearing a
Gold Chain about his Neck. His business to the Emperor was to excuse the death
of the Japanners, three years before condemned to die at Maccau; also to make a
Complaint of a great Spanish Carvil burnt at Nangesaque; by which some lost
above ten hundred thousand Ducats, laying the whole blame upon the Emperors
Officers there. The Emperor's Answer.
Soon after the Great Minister of State, Cosequidonne, answered him, That the
Seamen, and chiefly the Captain and his Officers, refused to take any
Cognizance, or give them any answer in point of satisfaction concerning the
inhumane Murder of his Imperial Majesty's Subjects in Maccau, which plainly
evidenced, that where they were able, they minded neither Right nor Justice,
but did then, and would hereafter when they could, carry all other Transactions
before them by force and violence; and that the Captains surly and stubborn
answers, so opposite to the Laws of all Nations, showing such a slight respect
to his Imperial Majesty's Demands, without granting the least redress, forced
his Majesty to take satisfaction by retaliation; therefore where the Sword of
Justice would not reach, he made up his Audits by Fire, burning their Ship.

Errors committed by the Castilian Ambassador before the Emperor.
Many Errors did the Spaniard commit in this his Embassy: first in visiting the
young Prince at Jedo before the Emperor; then entering the City Surunga, with
forty Musketeers, and flourishing the Spanish Colors, firing his Muskets,
sounding Trumpets, and beating of Drums at the end of every Street: The like
folly he committed in his Speech to the Emperor, making these four
Propositions: First, That the Castilians should have free liberty, according to
their manner, in any or all of his Majesty's Ports and Harbors. Secondly, To
Trade in all Maritim Parts of his Empire. Thirdly, That the Emperor should
absolutely prohibit the Hollanders from trafficking in any of his Dominions; to
which purpose his Royal Master, the King of Spain, would be ready with a strong
Fleet to join in his Assistance, utterly to drive them from his Imperial
Territories. Lastly, That the Castilians should not by any of his Subjects be
obstructed in their Trade, but to have egress and regress to what Towns and
Markets soever, to sell their own, and buy the Country Commodities. These were
the Proposals he delivered first by word of Mouth, and afterward in Writing,
waiting five days in Surunga ere he delivered this his Message to the Emperor;
and before he went away, the Gifts which he had presented to the Minister of
State Cosequidonne, were returne'd.

Spex and Segerszoon are appointed to come before the Emperor.
But whilst the Ambassadors, Spex and Segerszoon, attended some hours in the
Court; Cosequidonne sent them word, That the Emperor could not give them
Audience that day, he being busy about other Dispatches, but to morrow he
would use his utmost endeavor to bring them to a Hearing; so the following part
of the day the Ambassadors spent in addressing themselves to the High Treasurer
Ohoto Sionsabradonne, a Person looked very much upon, for his great Prudence,
Presents given by Spex to the Emperors Privy Council.
Affability, and his endearing Conversation; whom they presented with whole
Pieces of Scarlet, fine Damask-Linnen, and several other Stuffs, with many
curious Flasks, a Carbyne and a Powder-horn, which he accepted, showing great
civility and kindness, proffering them his assistance in what ere he could; and
the rather, because he had lately heard (as he said,) that a Peace was
concluded betwixt the King of Spain and the United Provinces for twelve years;
for before, the Hollanders in time of War, looked more after Spanish Prizes,
then full freighting of their Vessels with such Merchandise as was proper for
their Country, which now he hoped they would do. Moreover they visited also
the chief Minister of State, Cosequidonne, to whom they presented Gifts no way
inferior to the forementioned, but he modestly refusing told them, That they
must needs have had great trouble in bringing them so long and tedious a Voyage.

Spex deals underhand with Cosequidone.
Enquiring of them the Concern of their business to the Emperor, they replied
first, That his Imperial Majesty would be graciously pleased to excuse the
staying away of their Ships so long from Japan, and also an Answer upon the
Emperor's Letter. The Reasons which they alleged thereto seemed of so great
consequence to Cosequidonne, that he undertook to deliver them himself to the
Emperor, saying, He doubted not but that his Majesty would be very well
satisfied with them: the Ambassadors answering. That thev did not in the least
question it. Cosequidonne also inquired of them what business else they came
about; which they declaring, said, To entreat his Imperial Majesty, that he
would be pleased to grant the two Letters Patents, whereby the Netherland Ships
hereafter might be under the protection of the Emperor, and grant them liberty
to drive a free Trade in all his Majesty's Ports; and that they might unlade
their Goods at Firando without Waiters or Overseers; and to show their
Commodities to the Merchants, always preserving such Rarities as the Emperor
should fancy for Royal use: all which Cosequidonne, approved of, not doubting
but that the Emperor would grant their Desires: At last, discoursing with them
about some Affairs of the United Netherlands, he took his leave of the
Ambassadors, promising them, that after Noon he would bring them to the
Emperor's Presence. So having conducted them into the Street, one William
Adams, President, and residing in Surunga for the Netherland East India
Company, being with him, was called back to take the Presents, Cosequidonne
refuses the Ambassadors Presents.
and return them with thanks to the Ambassadors, saying, That it was not his
custom to receive any Gifts from Strangers. Having also refused the Presents
made to him by the Spanish and Portuguese Ambassadors, nay all that ever were
proffered to him by any Foreign Merchants. Moreover saying, The Ambassadors,
Spex and Segerszoon need not doubt of his good will, for it would be neither
more or less whether he kept the Presents, or returned them again, only it was
not his custom. Whereupon William Adams replied, That it was no Present, but an
ancient use amongst the Netherlanders, to requite such grand favors as he had
been pleased to show them, and therefore humbly desired him to accept of them.
Then inviting them again into his House he receive'd them, saying, He had done
more than ever he had heretofore, it being a thing quite contrary to his Nature.

Here Spex and Segerszoon appear with their Presents before the Emperor.
In the Afternoon, according to Cosequidonne's promise, they were admitted to
the Emperor's Presence: where, upon a Table, they laid their Gifts, being
several Pieces of Scarlet and Crimson-colour'd Cloth, black Flannel,
Crimson-colour'd Kersies, Watered Camlets, Satin wrought with Gold, fine
Damask Linen, Nurenburg Carpets, curious Flasks, several Pounds of Lead, a
French Fewsie eight Foot long, two hundred Pieces of Steel, two Carbynes, and
as many Powder-horns, and five Elephants Teeth.

His Discourse with them.
After they had made their Obeisance before the Emperor, his Imperial Majesty
bidding them welcome, asked how many of their Contrymen, being Soldiers, were
in the Molucco Istands? If the Netherlanders Traded to Borneo? If the best
Camphire was to be had there, and how it was got? Where the choicest Aula and
Calamba were to be found? If any sweet-scented Wood grew in Holland? What sort
yielded the best Price?

How they were entertained after the Emperor had discoursed with them.
To which Demands the Emperor by means of an Interpreter had respective Answers
made him; where upon the Ambassadors withdrawing from the Presence, being led
out by Cosequidonne, and Sionsabrondonne, who wished them joy of that unusual
Honor and Friendliness which the Emperor had shown them; the like he never did
to the greatest of the Japan Kings, though they oftentimes bring Presents to
him, to the value of thirty thousand Ducats: and also the Spanish and
Portuguese Ambassadors were dismissed without hearing the Emperor utter one
word. William Adams being called back, he saw the Emperor busy in viewing the
Presents, saying, I see these Hollanders are Masters both of Arts and Arms.

The whole Negotiation of their Embassy they got translated into the Japan
Tongue, leaving the Schedule in the custody of their Patron Cosequidonne, to
the end they might be the sooner dispatched at their return from Jedo, whether
they were advised to go and visit the young Prince, the Emperor's eldest Son,
which the Spanish Ambassadors (as we said before) had done.

Depart for Jedo.
On the eighteenth of August, Anno 1611, they set forward; to which purpose
Cosequidonne procured them the Emperor's Pass, with ten Horses, and a Mandatory
Letter, to will and require all his good Subjeds to help them with all
Necessaries, and ever else they had need of in their Journey; and also Letters
to his Son, then waiting upon the Prince at Jedo: But in their first days
Journey there happened such a Tempest of Thunder, Lightning, and Rain, that
they were necessitated to fall short, and, take up their Lodgings in Jesare;
being the same Village, and the same House, where the Ambassadors Frisius and
Brookhurst, Anno 1649, the twenty seventh of December, were entertained in. The
next morning setting forward, whilst the Wind blew hard and cold, they went
through the Village Okis, and a little Grove, and also through Jui, passing
over several Streams. The Way from Jui lies along the Shore of a Bay, A strange
Rock.
near a Mountain; where in one Place going over a steep Rock, the Tract was not
above two Foot broad, having an amazing Precipice on one side, and Towry Cliffs
on the other; the Sea always roaring, with thundering Billows breaking against
it; the Ways beyond also difficult and troublesome, full of Salt Pits, Japan
Salt Pits.
the more dangerous, being dug after their Country manner, where the
Japanners make their greatest store.

Description of the miserable condition of the Lazers in Japan.
On both sides of the Ways in some Places, behind the Towns and Villages, appear
scattered Huts, raised up with Pleited Rushes, and Roof'd with clinch'd Planks;
in which are confined poor Lepers, which live in a miserable condition, their
whole Utensils, or Household Stuff, being a Bag, or a Basket; yet some have a
Bolster, or little Pillow, which is to them a Bed: Before their Door, in stead
of a Bell, hangs an old Basin, which they beat upon when Travelers pass by, so
craving their Charity and Alms, which falling short, they many times suffer the
extremity of Hunger, not being permitted to approach near any Town, Village, or
any Place frequented by People, upon pain of Death, because their Leprosy is
no less catching than incurable: thus being banished from all society but
themselves, they linger out their wretched and contemptible Lives.

It seems that this Disease reigns more in the Eastern Countries than in the
Northern.

Herodotus tells us, that the Persians suffer not any Communication with those
that are struck with Leprosy, accounting that this infliction falls upon them
for some horrid Sin, and foul Impiety; but more especially for some heinous
Offense committed against the Majesty of the Sun.

From Jui they passed through the Village Cambaro, to the swift Streams of
Fusikaw.

Mountain Fusinojamma.
Here they saw Mount Fusinojamma, where the Horses were unsadled, and their
Goods put into small Vessels: a considerable time they spent thus in crossing
the River, so that it was Noon before they reached the Village Jussiwarra:
where whilst they were at Dinner they were told by the Inhabitants, That the
Hill Fusinojamma, which they saw in their Way, rising so high into a Spire,
might be discerned thirty Leagues off, its lofty Crown always covered with
Snow; Janambuxi, a sort of Japan Priests.
and how that some Mountain-Priests, which they call Janambuxi, once a year
travel thither, spending eight hours in climbing to the top, and often three
thousand in a Company; where tarrying sixty Days, they masserated themselves
with Fasting, and all manner of Hardships: And whilst they thus afflict
themselves in their damned Devotion, the Devil, as they say, appears to them in
a horrible manner. After this terrible Apparition of their god and Master, in
four hours they joyfully descend the Hill, supposing they have performed an act
of wondrous merit; and soon after they are advanced to the Order of the
Janambuxi, which they signify by white Knots hanging about their Necks, Their
Habit.
and a little black Cap only covering the Crown of their Heads, their Hair
beneath being Curled. Thus distinguished, they range over all the Empire,
carrying in their Hands a Copper Basin, which they Tinckle, to intimate their
coming. Thus in all Places they Offer their Service, which is to Conjure for
stolen Goods, which thus they perform:

How they find out stolen Goods.
They take a Boy that is is but a Stripling, and set him on the bare Ground
cross-Legg'd; then they call upon their Master, their black god, the Devil,
with distracted mutterings, thundering loud Charms, and horrible Imprecations,
That he would be graciously pleased to enter and possess the Child, that from
thence, as from an Oracle, they might, have a Response to their Question:
Whereupon soon after, as they relate, the Youth suddenly begins to froth and
foam at the Mouth, rolling and gogling his Eyes, skrewing his Neck and Body
into hideous Postures, like Convulsion-fits; then by these signs knowing the
Boy to be possessed, he asks where the Goods missing are? Whether lost or
stolen? Which way they went? and, Where to be found? Whereupon the Boy answers
directly, giving them an account what became of them, and how they shall be
recovered.

The Priests called Janambuxi are sent for to the Sick.
Besides these Janambuxi, there are another sort of Mountain-Priests, which
haunt and frequent solitary Villages and Towns; whose Office is to visit the
Sick, when they are sent for, by whose Bed-sides they sit Night and Day,
muttering strange Words and Incantations, which none there understands; and the
harder, because all Expressions belonging to Religion, have a distinct Dialect
by it self, and in Writing, a more difficult Character than any other. Hendrick
Hagenaer a Hollander, says, That he has himself seen several of these
Jammaboos, wearing a long Cord, with white Bobs like Buttons, about their
Necks; rolling their Eyes, and distorting their Faces, in a wonderful manner.

A Strange Accident that happened to a Jammaboos.
During the said Hagenaer's Residence there, it happened that a Sick Person sent
for one of these Jammaboos, who according to their manner, spent a considerable
time in muttering or reading to himself; and whilst he was thus earnest in his
Devotion, he, and those that were there present, seeing no Mouth open, This is
a common trick of those that can speak in their Bellies.
nor any Lips stir, heard a Voice, saying, Why do you molest me? I brought not
this Sickness upon the Diseased: I am but a Minister, that am sent from your
Enemy with this Distemper: First appease and satisfy him, and I have done, and
shall trouble him no more.

The strange Language used in the Japan Religion, from whence extracted.
That which is said concerning the Jammaboos using a peculiar Dialect in Matters
of Religion, to the end they may not be understood by the Common sort of
People, it is certainly believed, That they have borrowed the same from the
ancient Celtian Druydes, who brought this Practice first from the Goths, a
People inhabiting Ascania (being Swedland, Norway, and Schoonen) who long
before, under their Commander Taunasis, to mend their colder Quarters, broke
into Egypt, where they slew the King of that Country Vesofis, after that
running over a great part of Asia, and fought several Battles with the Persian
Monarchs Xerxes, Cyrus, and Darius, not fearing to engage Alexander the Great;
so making their way by the Sword to India and China. Thus these Druydes, their
Northern Priests, grew familiar with the Indian Brachmans, and they with the
Japan Bonzies, Laertius vit a Phil.
Studying each others Doctrine. Diogenes Laertius relates, That the Indian
Gymnosophists and Druydes always taught in obscure and mysterious Dialects,
admonishing their People in the first place to honor the Gods, to do nothing
that is base and wicked, and to contemn their Life, being called to Service of
their King and Country.

Pomp Mel. In Geogr.
Pomponius Mela says, That the Druydes instruct and teach their Disciples their
whole Doctrines in private, divulging only to the Common People the
Immortality of the Soul; which Science they are bound by an Oath to keep
secret. Seldinius tells in what Words they Swear, which are these: I charge you
by the Circle of the Sacred Sun, the unconstant Motions of the Moon, and by the
Power and Influence of all other Celestial Luminaries, That you never make
known to the Vulgar what I shall inform you withal; nor ever forget your
Master, nor the Benefits you have received from him: And in so doing, the Gods
will not only defend you, but grant also whatever you shall desire. But those
that break this Sacred Oath, the Gods will cast them out of their Possession,
and in stead of Blessings, will overwhelm them with all sorts of Miseries and
Misfortunes, and an unhappy end. Xaverius affirms this, saying, That a Brachman
Youth and he being alone together, told him, That his Master, before he would
instruct them in his Doctrine, made them take the forementioned Oath, binding
them never to discover those things which he should teach them.

Moreover, concerning the Druydes manner of Instructing their Youth, Caesar
relates thus: Cas Bell. Gall 7.
They learn them (says he) diverse Verses, which they keep in memory, some
spending twenty Years in the right understanding and expression thereof;
judging it not lawful to write them down, but thus to be preserved by
Tradition. He says also, That they use a Greek Character.

The Druydes, Brachmans, and Benzi, generally agree.
And whereas the Jammaboos use a peculiar Dialect in Matters of Religion, far
different from their common Language; the like Custom had the Druydes in former
times: For besides their Teutonick, which was the general Tongue of all those
Northern Nations, speaking about Divine and Philosophical Matters, they used
the Runian Tongue, Runian Tongue, what kind.
strangely different from their Vulgar Language.

Description of the Harbore-Bonzi.
THe Japanners that belong to the Groves, or Forest-Priests, also range all
over the Country in great Companies. These Itinerary Ministers they call
Harbore-Bonzi, which ran after the Netherland-Ambassadors, craving Alms: But
for the most part they reside in Woods, and dark Recesses under Ground, by
which they are so overgrown, and look so strangely shabby with Clotted and
Elf-lock'd Hair hanging down over their Shoulders, matted and unkemb'd Beards,
that Strangers are often afrighted at the sight. Their Caps, being round, are
made of pleited Rushes; on the top they wear a Tuft of a Black Horses Tailor
Mane; about their Middle, a Girdle stuffed with Cotton: Their upper Coat also
of Cotton, with short Sleeves: The under Garment, or Vest, of Deer-skins; a Bag
hanging by ten Strings at their Girdle: In their Left Hand they carry a large
Staff, lopped from the Setang, a Tree bearing Fruit like our Medlars: Their
Shoes they fasten by tying them round about their Ancles with Leather-Thongs;
the Soles have four Nails driven in them, with such broad Heads, that when many
walk together, they make a noise like a Troop of Horse. At the thirtieth Year
of their Age, they begin to Study Necromancy.

Gengues, or Soothsayers.
THe Ambassadors also met with another sort of Juggling Wizards or
Fortune Tellers, called Gengues, who pretend to discover Thieves and Stolen
Goods. These People dwell in small Huts on the tops of Hills. They are scarce
to be distinguished from one another by their Faces, being so much
Weather-beaten, never hiding them from the heat of the Sun, Cold, Hall, Rain,
or Wind; but going continually bare. Marriage is permitted amongst them,
provided they take one of their own Sect, and Family of the Gengues.

Furthermore, What is written concerning these Conjurers, by Father Lodowick
Frojus, in his Letter from Meaco, dated February 26. Anno 1565. I shall here
recite; but leave the Reader to his choice of believing or rejecting it. The
Gengues (says he) have a Horn growing upon their Heads; A strange Relation of
the Gengues, by Father Frojus.
whom their Master the Devil oftentimes commands to climb to the top of a steep
Mountain, where they are to expect him at the appointed time: Thither they
flock in great Numbers; and coming to the Place, the Evil Spirit, according to
his Promise, appears to them about Noon, but most commonly toward the Evening,
passing oftentimes backward and forward through the whole Assembly of the
Gengues; who soon after, inspired with mad desire to follow this their wicked
Seducer wherever he goes (though through Fire and Brimstone) where he
vanishes they throw themselves after, which is always at the steep Precipices
of the Mountain; thus desperately destroying themselves, falling down Headlong:
Which thus happened to be discovered.

An Old Man being thus Possessed, and mad to follow the Devil, his Son used all
means to dissuade him; yet he would not hearken, but thither he went, his Son
going with him; then both scaling the top of the Mountain, the Spirit appeared
to them, Habited Richly, like some Great Person, whom the Father Worshipped,
falling on his Knees in a most submissive and humble manner; but the Son,
drawing his Bow, shot at the Spectrum, which suddenly vanishing, turned into a
wounded Fox; which running away, he traced by the drops of Blood discoloring
the Grass, where on the edge of the Precipice Reynard vanished; but he looking
down after him, saw abundance of Bones, and Skeletons of Dead-men, which there
broke their Necks, so conquering Hell by violence, running headlong to the
Devil.

Japan Soothsayings and Conjurings, whence proceeded.
But the forementioned Charms and Conjurations, Fortune-telling, and other
Diabolical Arts, used by the Japan Janambuxi, Jammaboos, Harbore-Bonzi, and
Gengues, have their Original from Asia: The Japanners have learned these
Necromantick Arts and cunning Delusions from their Ancestors, which brought
them from the Places of their first Original. Above two thousand Years ago, the
Black-Art was used through all the Eastern World, being performed after diverse
ways and manners. Who knows not, That in Asia they use, for the performing of
the forementioned purposes, Water, Drinking, and Looking-glasses, Oil, Rings,
Fire, Children, and Birds?

What was more common to those that would know Future Events, or regain Lost or
Stolen Goods, than to run to the Conjurers or Fortune Tellers; which Office the
Priest generally performed? Conjuring with a Basin.
Sometimes they used a Basin full of Water, in which they threw several Pieces
of Gold and Silver, and also Precious Stones, marked with peculiar Letters:
Then standing over this Basin, muttering their Charms and Incantations, calling
upon an Infernal Spirit, at last asking what they desired to know; and
according to his Demands, a Voice, as it were from under the Water, made
Responses to his several Questions.

With a Cruse.
At other times these Jugglers also use a Cruse, filling it with clear Water,
and placing lighted Wax-Candles round about: Then calling upon Satan, they
inquired of him concerning those things of which they desired to be satisfied:
Then standing still, a Child or great-bellied Woman went to the charmed Cruse,
so taking a view of the Shadow which the Water presented, by which Appearance
the Spirit answered their Desires.

With Glasses.
Looking-glasses also served them as Instruments to the performing of their
Diabolical Arts, Glasses a known Cheat.
wherein, after they had ended their Charms, they saw such Shadows, by which
they were answered to their several Demands. The Emperor Didius Julianus used
the like Glasses, Julian the Apostate.
seeing several things in them that happened to him afterward.

With Fountains.
The Greek Writer Pausanius tells us of a Fountain before the Temple of the
Goddess Ceres, in which Fountain by a small Cord they used to let down a
Looking-glass, wherein if those that were Sick did look, and saw a Dead Corpse,
there was no hopes of their Recovery; but if a live Person, they were certain
to live and recover.

With Oil and Red-lead.
When they are desirous to know Future Events, then they take Oil, with some
Red-lead, mixing them both together: Then they take a stripling Youth, painting
his Nails therewith, and holding them in the Sun, which makes such Shadows,
that by them they know what they desire.

Wit a Gold Ring.
They also take a Gold-Ring, and shaking it in the Water, judge by its Motion
what they desire to be informed of.

With Stones.
Sometimes throwing three Stones in standing Water, by the manner and position
of the Circles, they answer the Question propounded.

With Water.
Varro a Learned Roman, tells of a Youth skilled in Magic, that in a Response
of a great Question, read fifty Verses out of the Water, foretelling (but in
ambiguous sense) the various Successes of the long War betwixt the Romans and
Mithridates King of Pontus.

With Wheaten-Cakes.
Near the Lacedemonian City Epidamnus, was a Pool sacred to Juno; to which, to
be resolved of doubtful Matters, they used to resort, where they threw in
Wheaten Cakes, made for that purpose; which if they sunk, were a good Omen; but
if they floated up and down, they looked thereon as a Sign of ill success.

With a Pot.
It was also very common to put a Roll upon their Heads, on which a Pot of
Water; then muttering certain Words, if the Water boiled over, that signified
good; but if it stirred not, bad luck.

But discovering of Thieves, finding Lost or Stolen Goods, and the like, which
the Japan-Priests, the Janambuxi and Gengues pretend so much to, was common two
thousand Years ago through all Asia. Amonst many other of their Experiments,
this was most used by the Ancients: With an Ax.
They strike an Ax into a round Post, so deep that it sticks; then amidst their
Mutterings, they name the several Persons who are most suspected: but at the
first mention of the guilty Person, the Ax trembles, or leaps out of the Post.

With a Sieve.
Our Foolery of the Sieve and Shears is also much approved amongst them, for a
most certain Discovery of a Theft: And as we use for a Charm St. Peter and St.
Paul, they repeat these non-sensical Words, Douwima, Touwima, Entimemaus.

With an Asses Head.
They also do Wonders, as they believe, with an Asses Head broyl'd upon the
Coals: And the like Vanity, concerning Predictions, they observe with a Cock,
With a Cock.
which thus they perform: In a smooth Floor they lay so many single Letters,
cut in Paper, that make up their Response with the Negative and Affirmative,
laying on every one of these a Barley-corn, and scattering a few others
promiscuously betwixt them; then they bring a Cock fresh and fasting, who falls
to work, picking up the Corns as his Choice directs him; which done, they
gather up the Letters from whence the Corn has been taken, and of those, by
setting and spelling of them several ways, they make a Judgment.

With Mandrakes.
What did they not ascribe to the Mandrake-root, by throwing it into the Fire;
and Meal-cakes? Vid Virgil, and Hemes.
What Observations made not the Augurists out of the Flight and various Voices
of Birds? Others, of Howling of Wolves, With Birds.
and Barking of Dogs, Swarming of Bees, Voices in the Air, Numbers, Lots, and
Dreams? Of Spirits, and imaginary Spectrums? Of their certainty of Future
Fortunes, by Physiognomy and Palmistry? The appearing of Blazing Comets, and
their Astrological Predictions, by the various Configurations of the Celestial
Bodies.

Who first found out Soothsaying and Conjuring.
The Greeks having all their Learning from the East, say, That Zoroaster was the
first of the Magi that studied and brought to light Magical Conclusions,
whether Natural or Diabolical: For such and so abstruse were some of their
Practices, that not being able to make out the Reason, most Ages have supposed,
That many of them have been performed by Demons and Cacademons, Evil Spirits;
which after was brought by Osthanes (who followed Xerxes wonderful Army) into
Europe: Which Juggling Art Democritus describes at large, finding the Original
Practices in Phenicia, Apollonica, Captidenes, and Dardanus: So that Antiquity
concludes, That the Assyrians, Chaldeans, and Persians, and other Eastern
Countries (under which we may reckon China and Tartary) were the first
Soothsayers and Magicians: So that we need not wonder, that Japan at this day
(continuing still under Idolatry) nurses great store of Sorcerers and Wizards,
who without dispute came thither from China, the Place of their first Original.

Netherland Ambassadors proceed in their Journey.
BUt the Netherland Ambassadors, Frisius and Brookhurst, having refreshed
themselves with a good Dinner, and delighted in hearing the strange Relation of
the Japan-Priests called Janambuxi, who ascended the top of Fusinojamma, they
left the Village Jussiwarra, and rode along a Sandy-way through Farri. The
Common Road being very dusty, they crossed over to a Meadow washed by the Sea,
which directed them to a great Village called Nomatz. Thence going on, they
came to Missima, lying at the Foot of Mount Faccone. The Way that led thither
was exceeding pleasant, both sides being shaded with Trees. Missima burnt.
In this City, which was destroyed by Fire but eight Months before, and since
rebuilt in that time, the Ambassadors lodged one Night.

Ambassadors hire fresh Horses.
The next Morning they hired diverse Horses to carry the Netherlanders and their
Retinue over the Mountain Faccone: for their other Horses were much tired, and
these fresh ones better used to Travel the craggy Paths of Faccone, being kept
for that purpose. Thus fitted, about seven a clock they ascended the Mountain;
and passing through several Villages, not without great trouble and danger, The
Village Faccone, of what kind.
about Noon they entered Faccone, situate near a Navigable River, on a
Mountain, and surrounded by many others: The River destitute of Fish, is
seventy and eighty Fathom deep, and in some Places ninety and a hundred.

The Gate of Faccone, why so strong Guarded.
After Dinner, they rode through a Gate at the end of the Village, which was
Fortified by a Castle, where all Persons were stopped that were carried in
Sedans, or rid on Horseback, except the Japan-Nobility: And on each side the
Gate stands a Watch-house, with four Rooms being square and open; the Walls
hung with Arms, being Muskets, Pikes, and Scymiters. The Soldiers fit on the
Ground cross-legg'd. Description of the Japan Sentme's.
They use a Game or Play among them, not unlike our Draughts, which requires
great Leisure and Study: In this Exercise they spend much time in their
forementioned Watch-houses; or else they smoke Tobacco, exercise their Pikes,
Fence with their Swords, or shoot at a Mark. At one end of the Watch-house
hangs a great Lanthorn, with fine Painted Linen, in stead of Glass or Horn: at
the other end a Flag, with the Emperors Arms, and those of the Governor of the
Castle. At each end stands a Sentinel, one being Armed with a Musket, and the
other with a Pike.



Strange manner of Notes to be bought for the Deceased.
MOreover, along the River, on whose Banks stands the Village Faccone, are also
three Temples of the Japan-Priests, to which they repair from all parts of the
Country, where for a small piece of Money, about the value of Threepence,
they buy a Ticket, which they stick upon the Stones that lie near the River; by
which means, as they imagine, the Souls of their deceased Friends have free
egress and regress to drink of the Water of the said River.

THey also spend two days in August in Remembrance of Departed Souls, which
thus they perform: Toward the Evening they light many Torches, being curiously
painted; How the Japanners visit the Souls of the Deceased with Dishes of Meat,
and other things.
with which walking round about the Town or Village (some out of Zeal, and some
as Spectators) when grown dark they proceed out of the City, where, as they
fancy, and verily believe, they meet with the Departed Souls: Here, though they
see nothing, they generally cry aloud, saying, Ah, welcome, welcome: Where have
you been this long time? Where have you been? Sit down and refresh your selves;
you must needs be weary and tired with such a Journey. Which said, they prepare
a light Treatment of Rice, Fruits, and other Provisions; and the meaner sort of
People bring warm Water, after they have been there an Hour, as if they had
waited on them at their Collation; then making Excuses for their mean Fare,
they invite the Deceased Souls to their Houses, saying, We will go before, and
prepare your Lodgings, and provide better Cheer against your coming. Then two
days being past, they all go out of the City with Torches, that so they may
light the Souls of the Dead, to the end they should not stumble by the way; and
after they have thus conducted them out, every one returns home, throwing
Stones against, and chiefly on the tops of their Houses, to the end that none
of the Souls may hide themselves; for if they stay longer than two days, they
take it as an ill Omen. Moreover, they seem also to be very careful of them,
fearing that if they should stay behind, and go alone, they would easily lose
their way to Paradise, or be destroyed by Tempestuous Weather.

Distance of the Japan-Paradise.
BEsides this their vain Folly of Entertaining the Dead, they reckon Paradise
exactly to be Eleven hundred thousand Leagues (neither more or less) distant
from them; which long Journey, the Souls, that are Aerial Bodies, finish in
three Years time: Wherefore they set two days apart, bringing them Provisions,
and entertaining them in their Houses, that so they may be refreshed, and the
better able to proceed on in their Journey. Cleansing the Graves.
At the same time also they make clean all the Graves, in which Office the
Bonzis's assist them, but are well paid for their Labor. None, though never so
poor, but will endeavor to get so much Money, as to pay their Priest for the
cleansing of the Graves of his Deceased Friends and Relations.

A dangerous way for the Netherland-Ambassadors.
THe Ambassadors Frisius and Brookhurst, parting from the Village Faccone, soon
after encountered with a steep and craggy Mountain, where getting to the top,
they ran exceeding great hazard in descending the same, the Path not being
above two Foot broad, and full of Stones, having a steep Hill rising on one
side, and a Precepice on the other, that a weak-brain'd Person was not able to
look down, without danger of being taken with a Dizziness; for one of the
Ambassadors Train looking upon the Descent, was taken suddenly with a Vertigo,
and so dropped over the Pummel of his Saddle, that he fell from his Horse,
where he had miserably perished, but that holding fast by the Reyns, his Horse
dragged him up, where he soon after recovered; They enter the City Oudauro.
and in the Evening they reached Oudauro, a stately City, one side thereof
being adorned with a sumptuous Palace, surrounded with Stone Walls, having also
many Spires, which are seen at a great distance. The Japanners residing here
relate, An Earthquake in Oudauro.
That a few Years before a terrible Earthquake had shaken the Country
exceedingly all thereabouts; besides what damage the People sustained by the
loss of their Houses, Steeples, and Churches; also swallowing up a strong
Castle; the Ground gaping very terribly, so devouring the Fort, and the Hill
whereon it was raised, which stood in the same place where the new Castle is
now built.

It is no wonder in Japan, for whole Cities or Countries to be swallowed up; or
turned topsie-turvey, A Japan City swallowed up.
and shuffled into Ruins and Rubbish. At the Foot of the Mountain Faccone stood
formerly a famous City, which in few Hours, both Men, Beasts, and Buildings,
was swallowed up together in one destruction; in place whereof, only a great
and almost fathomless Lake appeared, by which the Netherland-Ambassadors passed.

The Opinion of the Japanners concerning Earthquakes.
Concerning the Reason of these Earthquakes, or from whence they proceed, the
Japanners themselves are of several Opinions. Most of them hold and affirm,
That a great Sea Monster or Leviathan beats the Shore with his Tail, every blow
of which shakes the Neighboring Countries.

The Ancient Greek and Latin Philosophers differ also much concerning the
Reason of Earthquakes, which are the most terrible of all Humane Afflictions.
Concerning which, hear Plato and Seneca, in their own Words; the first in his
Athenian Antiquities: Plato in Timeo.
A terrible Earthquake happened, which a Day and a Night moved the Ground toward
a Brook, which is now called the Mediterranean- Sea, in which were all your
Ancestors swallowed up, Sonec Not. Quest.
and also a whole Isle, then called Atlantis. Seneca says, You see whole
Countries removed out of their Places; Main Continents divided into scattered
Isles: So the Sea also parted Calpe from Abile, Barbary from Spain, and
likewise Sicily from Italy: As we hold England from France, Ireland ^^om Wales.
In our time several whole Countries and Fields have been so shuffled, that the
Boundaries and Situations were never found again. This happens (says he) by
Winds enclosed in the Bowels of the Earth, which penned up like a Cholick,
striving for vent, rumbling up and down, in getting passage, it not only
shakes but tears up the Superficies. They say of old, That Ossa and Olympus
were but one Mountain; but since divided, as now they stand, by an Earthquake.
Moreover Pliny tells us, Plin. Lib. 1. cap. 91, 92.
That the steep Mountain Cybotus, with the City Curite, and also the famous
Cities Supylum and Tantalis in Magnesia, Galanis and Gamales in Phenicia, the
Mountain Phegium in the Moors Country, the Cities Pyrha and Antissa in the
Lake Meotis, Elice and Bura in the Corinthian Bay, were all drowned and
swallowed in like manner. Pausanius relates, That Elice and Bura sunk thirty
seven Years before the Birth of Alexander the Great.

The Reasons of Earthquakes are adjug'd to be several.
Also of the Cause of Earthquakes, the Variety and several Manners of its Aguish
Fits, Writers differ much. Democritus tells us, That abundance of Rain soaking
through the Crannies and Porous parts of the Earth, swelling its Belly like a
Dropsy, rises and recoyls toward the Superficies, to disembogue it self; but
wanting vent, beats, seeking a Passage against the upper Ground, which causes
that Trepidation.

Thales held, That the Earth being a floating Ball, danced upon the then more
troubled Waters, the cause of its Shaking. But the more Modern Opinion, which
seems most likely, is, That these Shakings of the Earth arise from a
Sulphurous and Nitrous Matter, which either by Fermentation, or some other
Accident, taking Fire in the Bowels of the Earth, blows up like the springing
of a Mine; which sudden Bounce in like manner shakes all Parts about it, and
opens the way, that in a Train it explodes other like Combustible Matter: And
after, as many times it happens, it makes Breaches, whence Flashes of Fire
breaking forth, tear the Surface of the Earth.

The right opinion of Aristotle concerning Earthquakes.
The most Learned agree, That these Tremblings rather arise from imprisoned
Winds in the vast Caverns of the Earth, whose former Passages being stopped by
accidental falls of Earth, and Internal Ruins, seek a Vent elsewhere: Or
whether it be that the Winds descending nearer the Center, finding no way back;
or whether the thirsty Earth, being in Nature dry, sucks up abundance of
Moisture, which either by Subterranean Heat, or the piercing Warmth of the
Sunbeams, are rarefied into more stirring Vapors, which wanting room for its
Activity, breaks through the very Adamantine Dungeons of the Earth; which
violent Ruptures shake the Superficies, being also torn and rent in like manner.

Thus holds Aristotle also, demonstrating the same with several Philosophical
Arguments, saying, and proving by Experience, That the greatest Earthquakes
happen always in serene and calm Weather, which falls out in September and
March, when commonly the Air is most turbulent; these Meteors seeming to have
left the middle Region of the Air, and got into the middle Bowels of the Earth.
Which he makes more apparent, saying, That the Earthquakes never cease, till
the Winds break forth through the erupted Earth again: And that those Countries
that have most Excrescencies, being more Mountainous, and nearest the Sea, are
oftener troubled with this dire and sad Infliction; whereas the Champaign and
Inland Countries scarce ever hear of a Terrene Trepidation.

The differences of Earthquakes.
Some Philosophers reckon up three sorts of Earthquakes; others seven. The first
is, That the Earth tosseth like a Boat upon the Sea, which subverting, quite
overthrows so many fair Buildings. The second seems like a Knocking, or great
strokes under the Ground, which makes the Superficies recoyl and fall, enclosed
Vapors then seeking a Passage. The third, a Ripping and Renting of the Earth
into yawning Graves, in which are swallowed up and buried oftentimes whole
Cities. But he that Dedicated his Description of the World to Alexander the
Great, reckons four more: The first is a double Trembling, that meets and
dashes Terrene Billows one against another: The second, a Breaking of the
Ground in all parts: The third, only a Rumbling under Ground: The fourth,
shuffling the Earth in a wonderful manner, which turns all things topsie-turvey.

How long they continue.
Concerning the continuance of Earthquakes, sad experience has taught us, that
some will last forty days together, without little or any intermission,
according to the easiness or difficulty of the vents which keeps in longer or
shorter the shut up Commotions.

The signs before the Earthquakes.
There are also several signs that are forerunners of these miserable effects;
for growing near (as we said before) the Air is generally very calm, because
those Vapors that commonly disturb the Air, are confined in the close Bowels of
the Earth; and if any Cloud appear, it seems like a thin stroke or white Line
athwart the Sky, which happens commonly after Sunset, and in fair Weather.

But the Sea is troubled, swelling very much without any apparent cause of
molestation; and the Water that had been fresh in standing Lakes, grows Salt
and Brackish.

Pliny H st. 19.
Pliny relates, That Pheraecides a Grecian Philosopher, after he had taken such
Water out of a Pit, foretold the Lacedaemonians of the Destruction of their
City, then threatened by an approaching Earthquake; Another sign is, that the
Reptilia, or all creeping Animals that live under ground, forsake their dark
Recesses, and frighted, seek up and down for other abodes; The Sun, no Clouds
appearing, grows dark, and shines pale and dim.

The events that follow on an Earthquake.
The Earthquakes themselves amaze the beholders in such manner, that they often
bereave men of their Senses; for who would not be astonished, and for ever
after stupifi'd into folly or frenzy, Stange inconveniences in Japan,
occasioned by Earthquakes.
to see Houses, Towns, Cities, nay whole Kingdoms turned into one Sepulcher?
great and new Islands, thrown up in an instant in the Sea? Mountains removed,
and seeming routed to run several ways; the sollid and firm Continent, turned
into a crew of segregated Isles, and other Lands, the Sea quitting them, are
joined to the main Land? Fire, and Streams of burning Sulphur are vomited out
of the Earth, and burning Coals, Ashes, and heaps of Rubbish spread over Sea
and Land, for the space of many Miles; common Roads turned into Rivers; then
the sickness and mortality that happens after, falling on-those that escape,
from the dire infection of noisome Parbreaks belched from the Earth; of which
dreadful Calamities, no Nation suffer more than the Japanners.

ANd that we may have a better sense of the miserable condition of those that
suffer in this worst of extremities, take a brief account from Eyewitnesses of
two that happened nearer our own doors; The first happened about 160 years ago
at Bononien; Horrible Earthquakes at Bononien.
the second in Ragusa, near Illiria. Philippus Bernaldus, a learned Person,
lived Anno 1505. in Bononien, where on the last of October, about eleven a
Clock at night, a horrible noise awakened him, and all the City; soon after,
Chimneys and Walls tumbled to the ground, yet in few hours, it beginning to
cease, they were a little comforted; but three days after about the same hour
in the night, it broke forth with such violence, that the Inhabitants expected
nothing but their utter ruin, hideously roaring, and thundering underneath,
and rouling like a troubled Sea above the Earth; great and small Buildings
falling with dreadful cracks into a heap of Ruins; darkness increasing, made
the terror the greater. Half of Prince Bontivoly's Palace fell with such force,
tumbling down, added so to the Earthquake, that it shook the whole City. The
Walls of St. Jaques, St. Peter, and St. Francis Churches were rent from the top
to the bottom, the Steeples and Pinnacles, and other Towers coming all down
headlong at one blow, not one Chimney in the whole City or Suburbs left
standing, yet by degrees, after the great violence abated, every night, some
sudden trepidations gave them new alarms of fresh terror; therefore the
Inhabitants forsaking their own houses, lived in Tents in the Corn Fields, at
least a month after; most of whom fell into Burning-Feavers, of which many
died.

After the second Earthquake, began a third, which also beginning in the night,
lasted forty days, doing great mischief, after the unvaluable damage they had
suffered before.

Moreover, Boroaldus relates, That his friend Falcus Argelatus was struck with
such a Consternation, that loosing his Senses, in a desperate manner cut his
own throat, who not performing speedily the work, he frantickly ran up a pair
of Stairs, and threw himself headlong out of a Window, and broke his own neck,
whereof he died.

An Earthquake at Ragousa:
Not long since, Ragousa was in like manner terribly shaken by an Earthquake.
This Trepidation began on the sixth of April 1667. in the morning between eight
and nine of the Clock, it being a clear and Sun-shiny day. In the twinkling of
an eye, the whole City was shaken, the Legier George Crook, being sent by the
States of the United Netherlands to take his Residence at Constantinople, had
also a house at Ragousa, which tumbling down, killed him, his Wife, Minister,
Child, and two Servant-Maids. Jacob Van Dam, who was President for the
Netherlanders at Smirna, was in the same house, but in a lower Room. He with
six others got under a Stone pair of Stairs; he was no sooner out of his
Lodging, scarce half Clothed, but it tumbled down, with three Stories more,
darkness struck them with fresh terror; after which, when growing clear, Van
Dam came forth from his shelter, and went to Crook's House, where calling as
loud as he could, and hearkening if possible he could to hear any body answer
him, he concluded that they lay all swallowed under the Rubbish and Ruins.
Neither durst he tarry long there, seeing the Walls totter, fearing he might
suffer under the like Calamity, never standing still, till he got quite out of
the City; all the way terrified with imminent danger, Stones and pieces of
Timber still falling in a terrible manner, both before and behind him, the
ground trembling under him, and gaping in several places about him, that
hundreds of swallowing Gulfs appeared in the Streets. Thus he, with six more of
his Company, with much trouble and terror escaped out of Rogousa, losing one by
sudden death in the way; but when they had cleared themselves of the Town, the
Country proved no less difficult and dangerous, great heaps of torn up Rocks
and Rubbish, filling the Paths, so that they being put to a stand, could find
no way to get farther, whilst looking behind them, they saw the City in several
parts of fire, and three Storehouses of Powder (a dreadful thing) when e're
they caught, would utterly destroy the miserable remainder of those yet alive.

Thus for a night and a day this misery lasted, without any intermission,
whilst the people that escaped lay in the Fields, without either eating or
drinking; and few of these that thus escaped, but were either hurt or struck
with sickness, and had not a Venetian Ship that lay in the Harbor afforded them
Bread, they had perished with hunger; which Vessel also ran as dangerous a
Risk, for the water forsaking the Haven, left them three times on the bare
Sand, and that often times failing, hideously gaping, was ready to swallow them
up; then the Sea returning with such violence, that it was a wonder but they
had been bilged upon the Shore, besides many others suffered that lay there,
living in a most sad condition, under beams lighting across amongst the Piles,
that were hurt and maimed, languishing, starved to death, no possible help to
remove the great heaps of Timber and get them out.

Van Dam at last got aboard of a Ship, where the terror was a little mitigated,
a Magazine of Powder being very near, expecting every minute the blowing up;
when two days after, on the eight of April, three hundred Turks and Moor-lacks
on Horses and Mules, descending from the Mountains, after some small
resistance, entered the City, there making havoc and bloody slaughter where
e're they went; so clearing the way with a great booty gathered up amongst the
Ruins, returned.

On the sixth day, the Earthquake beginning to abate a little, Van Dam went
toward the City, to look after his Goods, and several Presents which the
Ambassador Crook had in custody for the Grand Seignior.

The City was yet in a miserable condition, the Earthquake still continued,
though not so furiously as before, the Fire also not quenched, and the Streets
full of Thieves and Robbers; the Ways and Paths covered with dead bodies, of
which some were Burned, others lying in their own Blood, which occasioned a
horrible stench: Yet Van Dam found at last some Laborers, whom he employed to
dig out his Goods from under the Rubbish, promising them one half for getting
the other. Two days they spent in prosecution of the design, but nothing
appearing, they were quite disanimated, and gave over; of six thousand
Housekeepers, remained scarce six hundred alive, sixteen thousand being Burnt
and lost by the Subterranean Fires breaking forth.

A farther journey in Japan.
BUt now to return to our business, the Netherland Ambassadors stayed a night
in Odauro; and after they had viewed the place, where the old Castle was sunk,
and a new one raised upon the Walls of the former, they went on in their
Journey, being the thirtieth of October, crossing several Rivers, and through
many Villages to Hedo, and from thence to Osa; next they Ferry'd over the
Rivers Barueuw, and Sanamicauwa; over which being got, they went through
Firaski, Banio, Tamra, and Fovissauwa, all fair Villages.

Description of the Temple Toranga.
THis way they met with nothing worthy their observation, but a large Temple,
dedicated to one of their gods called Toranga: On the four corners of the Roof
lay four large Oxen, Carved to the life, curiously Gilded. The Roof on each
side jutting out above six Foot beyond the Walls; the Temple it self built
Quadrangular, in each Square stood four Figures, painted according to the
manner of their Ancient Hero's, whose several Achievements are by their poor
People sung up and down in the Streets; above which are Windows of pleited
Rushes, the upper part fastened to the Roof, and the lower to the Pictures; a
white Plastered Wall being between the Temple, is surrounded with a
Stone-Wall, like a Breast-Work, Plastered; in the inside, near the Front,
joins the House of one of the Bonzi, whose Cupulo appears in Prospect like the
Steeple of a Temple.

Tempel int Koninekryck Vaccata Temple in the Kingdom VACCATA


Description of the Idol Toranga.
Within stands the Idol Toranga, who had formerly been a great Hunter in
Corca, and commonly dwelt in the Metropolis Pingjang; some Centuries before the
Chinesy King Hiaovus, subdued and brought under his subjection half the Island
Corca, which had never before tasted the cruelty of the Tartars, nor heard of
the Spoils of Sandaracha, with which the Japanners and Chinese furnish their
Houses: Otherwise Toranga, the Japanners Mars would have released Corca from
those troubles with which they were molested a long time. Toranga finding not
work enough in Corca, went over to Japan; at which time there was a grand Rebel
that molested many of the Kings, putting all to the Fire and Sword where ever
he went; which Toranga understanding, immediately takes up Arms, sending for
aid from Corca, then called Leaotung.

Every Territory supplied him with men, and chiefly the Province of Kinks, in
which the City Pingjang is situate, produced many stout Soldiers, which they
sent over to Japan. The other seven Territories being Hoanchai, Kiangyen,
Civenlo, Kingxan, Changoing, Caociubi, and Pingan, raised also many Forces for
Toranga; at last he Mustering all his Forces together in Jamam, brought it to a
Field-Battel, where he got the day, slew the Rebel, and also eight Kings that
were joined with him; alluding to which, How Tonga became a god.
their Idol Toranga stands fighting with a Humane Figure, having nine Arms, in
each hand a several Weapon, viz. a Sword, Club, Stilletto, Scimeter, Battel-Ax,
Bow and Arrow, setting his right foot on the middle of a Copper-Dragon
spitting fire, his left on the Tail; betwixt these two Images, in contest
appears more backwards upon a Wall, where his Arms stands Engraven, a White
Steer, and under several Japan Characters, beneath a white Stag, with a Man's
Head Crowned; Both which the Cereans Worship and Adore with great Veneration;
all these Images stood on a stately Altar, curiously Carved, underneath were
several square Seats. This Toranga is taken for one of the first Emperors of
Japan, who by his victorious Arms, had brought all those several Kingdoms under
his own subjection, and for his Heroic actions, in process of time, the
Japanners have Registered him amongst their gods.

Idol Basanwow.
IN like manner, Basanwow was also Worshipped formerly as a god, by the
Germans: Trithemius relates, That Basanwow, youngest Son of Diocles King of
the Sicambrians, following his Father in the Wars, made many glorious
Conquests, subduing the People of Friar and Meats, and slew the powerful Lord
Thaboryn, so making himself Master of his Country; and in the Sixteenth year
of his Reign, he was so arrogantly ambitious, that he designed and affected to
be honored as a God; to which purpose he Summoned a Parliament, amongst whom
taking place in his Imperial Throne, richly Habited in all his Parliament
Robes; he on a sudden, as was neatly contrived, was drawn up, and the Roof like
a changed Scene closing again, so he in all his glory vanished, none ever
knowing after what became of him, so they all voted him (nemo contra dicente)
ascended into Heaven, and so from that time forward, he was ranked amongst the
Tutonick Deities, and honored as a god.

BUt the Ambassadors leaving this Temple of Toranga, proceeded in their Journey
from Fovissawa through Toska and Fundage, to Cammagawa, where they rested a
night; the next morning being very cold, they Rid along the Sea shore; about
Noon they met with a Noble Lady, being the Emperors Niece, Great state of the
Emperors Niece.
who was traveling to Meaco, there to Marry with a near Relation of the Dayro:
Her attendance were very rich in Apparel, several Persons of Honor riding on
stately Horses, with Gold Embroidered Saddles, their Bridles beset with Pearls
and Diamonds; her other Servants ran a Foot before in very Costly Liveries; her
Guard also were armed with Bows and Arrows, and some with Pikes and Muskets.

Description of the Japan Wagg^^^s.
Besides the Men, she had also many Ladies of Honor that attended her, sitting
in Chariots drawn by Oxen and Horses, which were led by some of their Servants,
with Reins made of Gilded Chains; the Chariot having two Wheels, near which
were steps like a Ladder to enter the Chariot, which as ours has four, theirs
have eight Angles, every corner above adorned with a Dragon Couchant; the
outside of the Coach curiously Painted and Gilt in several Panes, with a Frame
neatly Carved, are Pannel'd with several Pictures. This sumptuous Train was
above three hours before they all past by the Hollanders, who stood still to
see them.

The Ambassadors Frisius and Brockhurst reckoned up by Leagues from place to
place.
Then Riding on through the Village Cawasacca, and the City Sinagawa, on the
last of October, they entered the Imperial City Jedo; having undergone a long
and tedious Journey, since their departure from Osacca, for from Osacca to
Firaskatta, is five Leagues; from thence to Jonday, three; so to Fissima,
three; then to Meaco, three; from thence to Oets, three; from Oets to Cusatz,
three and a half; so to Itzibe, three; then to Minacutz, three and a half;
thence to Zintzamma, three; so to Sacca, two; from Sacca to Sicconosory, two;
then to Cammiammi, one and a half; thence to Isacutz, two and a half; from
hence to Jokeitz, also two and a half; so to Quano, three. Then the Ambassadors
crossed a Bay seven Leagues broad, to Mire; from thence to Narroma, a Mile and
a half; then to Siriomi, two Mile and a half; so to Ocosacci, three; then to
Fintzawa, one and a half; from hence to Accosacci, two; then to Goi, half a
League; from Goi to Josenda, two and a half; so to Ftagawa, one and a half;
from thence to Suriski, one and a half; so to Arei, one; then to Meisacca, over
a Bay, one and a half; from hence to Fannama, three; so to Foucorais, one and a
half; then to Cacingaaw, two; from thence to Nisaca, one and a half; from
Nisaca, to Cancia, is the like distance; so to Simanda, one; then to Fovisjeda,
two; from hence to Ocambe, one and a half; then to Mirico, two; from Mirico to
Surunga, one; so to Jesare, two and a half; then to Okis, one; thence to Jui,
two; from hence to Cambaro, one; so to Jussiwarra, two and a half; then to
Farry, two; from thence to Nomatz, one and a half; so to Missima, one and a
half more; then to Facanne, four; from thence to Odaura, is also four; from
Odaura to Oiso, is the like distance; from hence to Fraski, two; so to
Fovissaunea, three; then to Toska, two; from Toska to Fundaga, one and a half;
thence to Cammagawa, three; so to Cawasacca, two; from hence to Sinagawa,
three; from Sinagawa to Jedo, is also three Leagues; so that their whole
Journey from Nangesaque to Jedo, was Three hundred forty five Leagues; five and
twenty Leagues reckoned to a degree. But Nangesaque and Osacca, How far
Nangesaque lies from Jedo.
are Two hundred and twenty, and Osacca and Jedo, One hundred thirty five
Leagues distant one from another.

Frisius and Brookhurst come to Jedo.
No sooner were the Ambassadors entered Jedo, and entertained in the house where
the Agents for the Netherland East India Company have their Residence: but they
sent to the Chief Governor Sickingodonne, and the Masters of the Ceremonies
Sabroiseimondonne, to inform them of their Arrival. The Street through which
they Rid, when they entered the City, before they came to the Inn, was at least
four Leagues long, both sides closely Built with Houses, and parted or divided
with Fifty three Gates, which are locked up every night, for at every Hundred
and eighty Paces distance stands a Gate.

Description of the Imperial City Jedo.
THis City stands in Thirty five Degrees, and Thirty eight Minutes Northern
Latitude, near a Bay of the South Sea; Before it are several Banks and Shelves,
so that none but small Vessels can come near; and though the Water be very
shallow in this place, yet it produces great store of Flounders, Gurnets,
Plaice, Roaches, Eels, and excellent Oysters, but cannot be bought but at great
Rates: As also, all other Provisions are dear, the City being very large, and
exceeding populous.

After what manner the houses are built in Jedo.
Most of the Houses are built of Clay, the outsides covered with Boards, serving
as a defense against Rain; besides the innumerable small Buildings: the great
Houses of the Nobility adorn the City very much; every one of these large
Edifices have several stately Entrances, amongst which one exceeds all the
other in Beauty and Art, which is never open except for the Emperor: For when a
Nobleman builds a House, Strange gates at Jedo.
he makes one Gate or Arch, which is covered over with Planks, it being
artificially Carved with Imagery, all Gilt and Varnished after the Indian
manner, and are also kept so close covered, that none may or can look upon
them, but in one Month of the Year, which is when the Emperor is pleased to
Dine in the new Edifice, then they open their ample Gates, through which none
but the Emperor passes, and after that they shut them up again, because none
should be so much honored as to Tread in the same place where the Emperor had
been before, for he never but once makes a Visit.

Streets in Jedo.
This City also stands in the Territory of Quanto, and like most Cities in
Japan, without Walls. The Streets are generally of a good length, every one
being sixty Ikins long, which is One hundred and fifty Paces; at the end of
which stands a Gate that is Locked and Guarded every night; at every end of the
Street is a Gate, which is a Ward within it self, having two Head-boroughs or
Constables, that look to keep all things in good Order in these their
Precincts, and deliver up an account Weekly of all Accidents in the same to the
Chief Warden of the City. This dividing Street from Street, is not only
observed in the Cities of Japan, but also in all their Towns and Villages.

view of Iedo (Edo) IEDO


Inhabitants are free from Custom.
ALl the Inhabitants here are free from paying of Taxes, only giving a certain
Sum of Money to their Landlords, for the Ground-Rent of their Houses; most of
which are built of Wood, and therefore Jedo and all other places are very
subject to Fire, oftentimes whole Cities so being consumed, yet they still
Re-build them of the same Materials: Every Street has also a large
Storehouse, built of Stone, which in the Fire time, they preserve all their
Richest and most considerable Goods; they all dwell in the lower-most Rooms of
their Houses, the upper being scarce big enough to hold their Lumber.

The Mountain Tacajama.
As you come from Sea to Jedo, the Mountain Tacajama stands on the left side of
the City, rising with its shady top toward the Clouds, from which also
descends a River, running along under a Wooden Bridge by several Houses into
the Sea. On this Rock stands also the chiefest of the Emperors Towers, at whose
Foot is a fair Temple, Dedicated to the Emperor; Emperors Temple.
for which reason none upon pain of death dare presume to enter the same, but
only his Imperial Majesty, his nearest Relations, and the chief of the Bonzies.

Village Tonquarba.
THe Village Tonquarba lies in a pleasant Grove, on the right side of the
Mountain; somewhat more Easterly, the City Algirham is shaded and surrounded by
many tall Cedars, a Castle belonging to it, only appearing above the Trees;
about half way between Tacajama and Tonquarba, flows the River Toncaw through
Jedo, into the South Sea: The River Toncaw.
Without the City is a large Stone Bridge, with nine Arches crossing the
forementioned River. Near this Bridge stands the Palace of Toerodono, Chief
Ranger of Quanto.

Palaces and Churches in Jedo.
Near the City is another Stone Bridge which crosses the River, that on one side
washes the Village Tonkoujamma; opposite against which stands the Castle of a
Nobleman rising aloft, with four Galleries like a large Turret; Somewhat more
Westerly stands another stately Building, of one of the Emperors Chief
Officers; on the top of whose Frontispiece stands a Square Turret.

At the upper end of the City, close by the River Toncaw, appears an exceeding
large Watchtower, being Four-hundred fifty eight Foot and a half high, Guarded
with twelve hundred Soldiers.

On the East side of this the Emperors Magazine, a large Structure; in the
West, ranged in order, stand several. Temples of their Idol Fotoques, one
consecrated to Camis, and another to their Evil Natured god, which we call the
Devil: In the middle of the City rises a most delightful Banqueting House, in
which the Emperor Chiongon Toxogunsama used to Recreate himself.

The Emperors Garden.
Moreover, those that view the West part of Jedo, will first see the Palace of
the King of Bungo, to which is joined his Imperial Majesty's Garden, which is
so exceeding pleasant and delightful, that those famous Orchards of Semiramis
being reckoned amongst the Seven Wonders of the World, are much inferior to it;
Nature and Art striving to out-vye one another.

Next to this, stands the Palaces of the Lords of Chiecow and Firando, His
Imperial Majesty's Counselors, Bungono, Nognicono, Vonemo, Ingando, Cambano,
Rimo, Cuno, and Texinucano: The Camies also Resides in a very sumptuous
Building.

Somewhat farther is another fair House, in which Utrandono, the Emperors
Groom-Porter dwells; Southward from thence is the Temple of Xaca; close by
which stands the Custom-house; near this are several large Buildings for the
Emperors Generalissimo; somewhat farther, a Walled Plain, where two thousand
Horse may be drawn up and Mustred.

The Temple of Xantay, to what end, and by whom built.
Amongst other Temples, is also very Beautiful, that which is consecrated to the
Idol Xantay, having three Roofs one above another: The Emperor Nobunanga, after
he had brought thirty Kingdoms under his Subjection, and by that Victory
obtained the Imperial Crown, spared no Cost in the building thereof, that by
that means his Name might be ever after kept in memory: He would also have been
honored as a God, and with more Zeal than any other of the Japan Deities; but
being murdered by the Prince Aqueche, Anno 1582. with his Death the Ceremony
of his Service, a Divine Worship was utterly ceased, and his Temple consecrated
to Xantay.

Temples full of Images.
Not far from thence you pass by the Court of the Chief Governor of the South
part of the City Jedo, which being built long in Front, has in the middle a
Portall with a square Tower: Farther into the City are two Temples of the
Ickoisen, almost touching one another, both full of little Images: Next to
these are two more, that belong to the Priests, which they call Bulgru; within
these are no manner of Statues found, except one representing the shape of a
horrible Monster.

This City has also several other fair Buildings, in that part which is beyond
the Mountain Tocajamma, for there is a strong Garrison wherein are Quartered
Three thousand five hundred Soldiers: On one side of which is the Palace of
the Mayor, or Chief Governor of that part of the City, to whom all the Inferior
Officers are to render an account weekly, of what has happened in that time in
their several Wards.

The Watchtower which is seen at a great distance, both by Sea and Land, and
the Garrison, with the Chief Governors Court, make most ways a Triangular
Prospect; somewhat farther stands a Temple Dedicated to all sorts of Beasts,
with a very high double Roof. On the North side of which appears a large Court,
in which four of the prime Bonzies live together, having also three Temples
built in a Row.

The Temple of Camis, and Fotoques.
AT last appears the Temple Consecrated to the Idol Camis, and Fotoques; which
Names are not peculiar for one, or two, but general; for the Japanners call all
their gods, to whom they Pray for future Bliss in the world to come, Fotoques;
and those from whom they expect Transitory Happiness, as Health, Wealth, and a
fair Race of Children, that should enjoy what they are possessed withal after
their Deaths, they call Camis.

The Emperors Seraglio.
In the List of Superior Deities, many of their Princes and Emperors, for their
great Achievements, when living, have been Registered by their Subjects, and
after departure Worshipped as their gods, as the Ancient Greeks and Romans
heretofore.

But on the other side of the Imperial Garden, stands the Seraglio, for his
Women, being in thirty large Divisions, which the Japanners call the Chandran;
nearer the Sea are more Palaces belonging to the Kings, Quicougeu, and Date,
and beyond those the King of Saxuma, has his Court much resembling Quicougeu
his Palace, only the last has a large Porch, built Arch-wise high, like a
Steeple.

TEMPEL met Duysend BEELDEN.


BUt that which Crowns the City, and appears above all the rest, is the
Empresses Magnificent Palace, which they call Miday, rising aloft with three
Galleries, or Stories according to their manner, one surmounting the other.

The King of Figens Court makes also a stately show: But on one side of the
Empresses Palace are Houses, being large built, all of Stone, wherein lies the
Inexhaustable Emperial Treasures, and heap'd-up Mountains of Gold, and Silver,
not to be valued within the compass of Arithmetic; the Riches of St. Mark, and
the Golden Mines of Potosi, with the whole Revenues of all the European Kings
cast up together, would scarce Balance the unimaginable Audits, and vast
Accounts thereof.

Phaiglerodano Cammangon, the Empresses Brother, being the King of Jamaystero,
dwells here also in a sumptuous Palace, near which are three Courts, belonging
to his Unckles, the first being the King's of One way, the second of Mito, the
third of Cinocuni, all three Brothers to the Emperor Xogunsama, surnamed
Conbosama; These three Palaces stand very near one another, the largest and
fairest, is that in which Cinocuni Resides, having two Roofs one above another.
Xogunsama, Son to the Emperor Daifusama succeeded his Father in his Throne,
Anno 1616.

Other Palaces in Jedo.
Near this place also stands a fair Building, belonging to two Brothers of the
King Amanguci. Somewhat farther is the Court of the King of Tacata; and next
that the Residences of the Kings of Zanuaquq, Fanga, and Omura. About the
middle of the City are five Palaces more, in which reside the Princes Amacusa:
Beyond these, the King of Arima has a large Court: The Temples of the two
Emperors are also very beautiful; on the North end is a Light-house of Five
hundred ninety four Foot high: A Light-house for ships to steer into the Harbor.
Some distance from hence is a fair Cloister for Widows; And near this, the
Palace, in which the Chief Governor of the East part of the City resides; Six
Streets farther, a Temple Dedicated to the Idol, with four Heads.

But that which exceeds all the Buildings at this end of the City, is a stately
Cloister, whose height, largeness, and magnificence deserves no small wonder;
in this College, the second, and third Son of the Emperor have their
Education, bred up to several Arts and Eastern Learning: Toward the East end
of Jedo appear two fair Temples, both Dedicated to their god Amida. The Temples
of Amida.
But distinguished, by calling the one only Amida, and the other, The Golden
Amida; At the farthest end of the City, opposite to the Village Tonquerba, is
the Court of the Emperors Chief Custom, and Collector in the East part of Jedo.

Description of the costly City Amida.
THe Temple of The Golden Amida is no small Ornament to this City, the Idol
which is terrible to behold, stated on an Altar; in the middle of the Isle the
Altar is Plated all over with Silver, on which stand two Golden Cups, one
before, and another behind the Idol, who sits himself Mounted on a Horse with
seven Heads, every Head signifying an hundred thousand of Years, his own like
that of a Dog with long ears, in his hands a Golden Hoop, holding the middle in
his Mouth betwixt his Teeth; but nothing can be more costly than the Skirts of
his Coat, from the middle downward, Studded and Embossed with Pearls, Diamonds,
and other Precious Stones: At the bottom of the Altar are many Japan Characters
Engraven, which are the Hieroglyphics or Mysteriouss Signification of the
several Attributes of this their Idol to be esteemed one of the chiefest of all
their Deities, therefore they account it a Blessing, when they have occasion
but to name him.

The Empress worships Amida.
FAther Lodowick Frojus relates in his Letter from Canga, an Island in Japan,
dated Anno 1565. That the Emperor Cuba his Royal Consort, had built a Chapel
in her own Palace, Dedicating it to Amida, in which she daily attended with a
great Train of Ladies, there paying her Devotions to his Statue representing a
comely Youth, Crowned with Gold, that Reflected Rays, like Sunbeams; for when
the Emperor Cubus was slain by the Rebels Diandono and Mioxindono, and the
Empress making her escape took Sanctuary in a Monastery near Miaco, where being
discovered, the Privilege of the place not protecting, they sent an
Executioner to take away her life; she preparing to obey the hard Sentence,
called for Pen, Ink, and Paper, and Wrighting to her two Daughters which were
also Imprisoned in the next House; Informing them, That she was to be unjustly
Murdered, but she rejoiced, and would be glad to Embrace Death, because she
doubted not, but that Amida had found this means to bring her to a better
Habitation, and the sooner to enjoy that Paradise, where her Dear Husband, so
lately Murdered remains; expecting by her company the full accomplishment of
both their Happiness. Then Sealing the Letter, she thanked the Bonzi for his
kind entertaining of her in their College, and drawing near to Amida's Altar,
where kneeling, she lifted up her Hands, and called twice on the god for to
forgive her her Sins: Then the Bonzi laid his Hand upon her Head, as a Token,
that she had Absolution from all her Offenses; then going from thence into a
private Room, she lifted up her hands again to Heaven, and cried, Amida, Amida,
which said, Was beheaded.
she was Beheaded.

Images of Amida, are diverse.
Furthermore, it is to be observed, that there are several Images Representing
this god; for whereas he sometimes is made (as we said before) with a Dogs
Head, riding on a Seven-Headed Horse, another resembling a Naked Youth, with
Holes in his Ears, sitting on a large Rose, Carved of Wood, and in a strange
Shape, with a Fantastic Cap on his Head, slit before, with two large Buttons
on the top, with a comely and youthful Countenance; in his Ears hang two Rings,
one within another, about his Neck a Scarf, his Breast covered with an Oval
Plate curiously Engraven, over his Shoulders and Back hangs a Coat of Feathers
neatly Wrought, and joined together, in his Hands a String of Beads, his Breast
and Belly exceeding large, sitting on a great Cushion, before him stands
several Japan Letters, Engraven on a square Stone.

They also place oftentimes near their god Amida, another Idol with thre^
Heads, which are covered with one flat Cap, or Bonnet, joined close together,
their Chins Hairy, about the Neck a Pastboard Band, on each side four Arms and
Hands, the Breast and Waste girded with five Strings of Pearl; the Belly
appears like the Body of the Sun, darting Rays, with several Characters in the
middle; the Walls are all hung with rich and costly Japan Habits, and before
them many burning Lamps.

A very stately Temple with a thousand Images near Meaco.
But besides these two Temples of Amida in Jedo, there is a most famous Chapel
about a League from Meaco, being of more antiquity, erected by some of their
ancient Emperors, and since by the Modern enlarged and beautified, being four
hundred and twenty Foot long, having two great Porches, with Portcullises in
the middle: where entering you may first see a large Seat, on which sits an
Image, bigger than the Life resembling a Giant, with Holes in his Ears,
Bald-headed, and shaven after the manner of the Indian Brachmans; over this
huge Figure hang several Cups, on both sides diverse shapes of Armed Soldiers,
Morisco Dancers, Exotic Wizards, and other dreadful Figures, with antic
Gestures: Their Wind and Thunder also are personated in terrible Figures. Then
they enter the Chapel, ascending on seven Steps, having five hundred Idols on
each side fixed to the Wall, all representing Canon the Son of Amida, with
amiable Looks, each having thirty Arms, two of which are of ordinary size, but
all the other very small, and in every Hand two Arrows, on their Breasts are
engraven seven little Faces, on their Heads Golden Crowns, with Strings of
Diamonds. Moreover, not only the Chains, Bells, and other things belonging to
these Images, but also the Statues themselves are all Massy Gold, wrought by
the Goldsmith, insomuch that the beholders Eyes dazzle at the glory and splendour
of Canon's Chapel. To which most People from all Parts of Japan repair to
perform their Devotions, and the rather, because there are many more Temples
near it, to which they also resort upon the same account.

Description of an University in Japan.
ABout two Miles from the aforementioned Chapel is a famous University, built
at the Foot of a Hill, and divided into several Halls, Colleges, Cloisters,
surrounded by a pleasant Stream: near which are many Chapels; in some of which
they worship a horrible Image, representing, as we suppose, the Devil.

On the top of the Hill appears three great Temples built of Wood, on exceeding
large and thick Pillars; the Ground Paved with polished Marble.

Of the Idol Xaca.
In one of these stands a very large Image of their god Xaca, having many lesser
Statues placed on both sides of him; at his back hangs a Piece of Parchment, to
which are joined two thousand broad Seals, near which stands forty
Representations of two-year-old Children; on each side of the Temple are two
foul and horrible Monsters Armed with great Clubs. All these Images and Seals
are richly Gilt.

In the second Temple, or rather a Theater, for there they keep all their
Commencements, promoting of Students, according to their several Merits, to
Places and Dignities, which they perform thus: The Proficient and the Master of
this Ceremony are placed in the middle of the Stage, with Penons and Flags
hanging over their Heads, where the Graduate in a formal manner beseeches a
Prime Doctor to put him in Orders, and prefer him according to his Deserts;
which done he takes Place as he is advanced.

The Temple for the Porcupine.
This Edifice is dedicated to the Porcupine, amongst them the Emblem of
Learning; but they erect no Altar nor Image for him, as for other gods, but
only hang the dead Animal up in the Roof of the Hall, that when the Students
implore this Deity to fill them with Arts and Sciences, they may lift with
their Eyes, their Hearts also to Heaven.

The third exceeds the other two in height and beauty.

Palaces for Scholars.
Here are other several Halls, adorned with large Image, which make up their
University; where Scholars Study and have their Residence: in each of them are
fair Libraries, Japan Library.
stuffed with innumerable Catalogues of Books, where with a Skrew, or turning of
a Wheel, what Book soever they desire to see, presents it self.

Many Churches in Japan.
THe Number, Magnificence, and wonderful Riches of dedicated Places and Temples
for Divine Worship, are beyond admiration, and almost incredible. The greatest
have dwelling in them, to perform the Rites and Ceremonies, twenty Priests; the
second Rate, fifteen; others, ten; and the least, two.

Make bad use of them.
But these Structures, built for religious intentions, and commonly in the most
luxurious and pleasantest Situation of the whole Isle, are made by their
dissolute and gormandizing Priests, the Academies of all Debaucheries, and
especially the Schools of Gluttony, Drunkenness, and Lust; who in their
Frollicks in open view of all their Idols, in a gallanting humor, will not
spare to prostitute their wanton Mistresses; and for their more convenience,
lay them at the Feet of their gods, and make them Bolsters for their Adulteries.

Hendrick Hagenaer relates, that he saw six Temples near Osacca, at whose Doors
stood large Images of Wood, holding Boxes in their Hands, into which the
Japanners throw Pieces of Copper, by them called Caxa.

A strange Chapel.
There is also a Chapel, through the middle whereof runs a Stream, into which
the poor Women throw several Written Papers.

Description of the stately Cobucui.
THe manner of building these Japan Temples is very stately. Lodowick Almeida,
an Eyewitness, gives a large description of one, called Cobucui, in the City
Nareau. This Temple (says he) has Portico's, behind each a large open Court,
surrounded with fair Galleries, supported with Columns; at the first entrance
are broad Stone Stairs, with half Paces; on the uppermost stand two great
Images, very artificial, each having Keys in their Hands, intimating that they
are Porters of the Temple; behind the third Portal appears the Temple it self,
to which they ascend upon Marble Steps: whose two-Leav'd Doors seems to be
guarded by two mighty Lions, Carved to the Life; in the middle Isle, toward
the upper end are three Images, bigger than the Life, each ten Foot and a half
high, representing the god Xaca, and his Children standing on both sides of
them; the Floor is all covered with square Marble; Exceeding great Pillars in
the Temple of Xaca.
but especially seventy Pillars of Cedar, neatly Carved, of an incredible
height, which so adorn the Temple, that they strangely amaze the beholders:
The Accounts of the building this Edifice say, that each of these Pillars cost
5000 Ducats: The Walls Painted with various Images, and several Plants and
Flowers, also much illustrate this House for their Divine Worship; the Roof is
covered with Tyles made of Clay, And also strange Tyles.
not tempered or mixed with Sand, but beaten very thin, each being two Inches
thick, and have upon a Ground of black Paper several Shapes in antic postures,
which are so curious, that they exceed one another in art and beauty: An
exceeding Roof.
The vaulted Roof being Arch-wise, may last five hundred years without the lest
Repair; and notwithstanding it is very heavy and large, yet it jets nine Foot
over beyond the Walls without Supporters, insomuch that our European Builders
would think it impossible, that so great a weight could hang over in that
nature without falling.

The Dining Room wherein the Bonzi eat is very costly.
On one side of the Temple stands the College of the Bonzi, which is as
glorious to behold, and as strong, being an hundred and twenty Foot long, and
thirty six Foot broad; And also the Places where they sleep.
their Lodging-Rooms about the same are reckoned to be an hundred and eighty;
besides many stately Halls, whereof one stands on twenty four Cedar Columns, in
which is the Library of the Bonzi, full of the choicest Japan Books. Here are
also several fair Stoves in deep Vaults, and provided with all Necessaries.
Their Kitchins are very curiously furnished, their Kettles made of the best
Copper, are two Foot and a half deep, three in circumference, and two Inches in
thickness; before these runs a Rivulet of fresh Water. In the Nights they hang
up twenty four Lanterns with lighted Candles in their Chambers.

Before this College, or Court of the Bonzi, is a Pool that abounds with all
sorts of Fish; of which if any one should adventure to steal, he is without
mercy put to death.

This Temple Cobucui, has been built above seven hundred years: The like
Temple is also in Jedo, in which the Idol Xaca, of an exceeding huge stature;
may be seen.

This Image was erected formerly by the Widow of the Emperor Taykosame, who
caused it to be made hollow, pouring it full of melted Copper, and the outside
to be Gilt very costly.

Description of the Idol Xaca.
THe Head of this their god Xaca has the likeness, or Face of a middleaged
Man, with a thin Beard, the Hair of his Head cropped above his Ears, his Cap
folded like a Scarf, about his Neck are Chains of Gold, interlaid with
Diamonds, about his Middle a Scarf woven of Gold and Silver, his Hands he holds
forth, but a little asunder in a praying posture, about his Wrists are Strings
with long Tassels, and sits cross-Legg'd, on a great Golden Plate, before and
behind him are two large Vessels, in which they put their Offerings; the Golden
Plate whereon he sits, covers a square Altar, on whose Brim hangs twelve Pots
by Gold Chains, in which both Night and Day they burn Incense, which are still
supplied with odoriferous Gums; the Altar being square, stands on a broad Foot,
cut with several Japan Characters.

What Xaca was formerly.
But this their god Xaca, whom they worshipped when living, was a great
Proficient in the Pythagorean Doctrine, which of old was most general, and a
Religion most spread through all the World, and much followed by the Greeks and
Latins; from whence the Grecian Fables of Transformation took their rise, who
(according to Plato) generally believed, Plato 17.10. de Legibus.
that Orpheus after his death became a Swan; Thamyras, a Nightingale; Ajax, a
Lion; Agamemnon turned to a Crane. Ambros. Lib. De Bono Mors. Cio.
Ambrose relates they also believed, That the Souls of their Learned changed
into Bees or Nightingales, because that whilst living, they had pleased the
Peoples Ears with their sweet and eloquent Language; but the Souls of the
malicoius turn into Serpents; Thieves and Robbers, into Wolves; Cozeners and
Cheaters after their Death become Foxes; every one changes into such
Creatures, as best analogizeth with their several Virtues and Vices.

Plato and Pythagoras, according to Herodotus, first taught the Egyptians this
Doctrine. Zamolxis spread the same amongst the Northern Goths; for which they
worship him as a god. The Druides spread it all over Gaul and Germany: and the
West- Indians, I know not how, are much of that belief: And Josephus tells us,
Joseph. L. 18. Ant. G. 11.
that the Pharisees amongst the Jews were much biassed with this Persuasion.
Julian fondly imagined, That the Soul of Alexander the Great informed and gave
life to his Body, and therefore slighted all dangers.

This their god Xaca, says Father Kircher, the Indians called Rama; the
Tunkmensers, Chiaga; by the Chinese, Xen Kian. The Chinese derive him from
India, in the Province of Tien Turk Gnoe. Moreover, the Japanners have this
Tradition concerning Xaca, The Dream of Xaaca's Mother.
That his Mother dreamed, that she saw a white Elephant issuing out of her
Mouth, and went into her left Side.

Why the white Elephants are of so great esteem in India.
From hence proceeds that great esteem which the Indians, and chiefly those in
China, Lai, Tunchim, Siam, and Pegu, have of white Elephants, for they are kept
and attended on like Kings, and feed on all variety of high Fare, and in Golden
Dishes. The Nobility visit them in humble and submissive postures. No other
Quarrel than a white Elephant caused a great War, Anno 1576, between the King
of Siam and Pegu, in which the Siams were so defeated, that they not only lost
their white Elephant, but were utterly subdued, and brought under by the King
of Pegu: But this Yoke the succeeding Princes did soon shake off, and were
Masters of two white Elephants, which in short time after dying, caused great
lamentation to the King and People of Siam, judging them to be sent from
Heaven, as an evidence and earnest of future blessings.

Xaca Murdered his Mother.
But the first piece of divine service which this their god Xaca in his humanity
performed, was offering his Mother, which he himself killed, lifting up his
right Hand toward Heaven, and his left pointing to the Ground, said with a
loud voice, Behold, neither Heaven nor Earth affords a greater and more holier
Saint than I! This done, he withdrew to a dark Recess under a Mountain, where
he spent his time in Study, Writing many Books, and (as the Chinese say)
Instructed eighty thousand Disciples; but out of this number he selected first
five thousand five hundred, and out of them drew one hundred, and at last he
reduced that hundred to ten, which he made great Masters of this so much
followed Science: And then dying, he left them a great Legacy, He dies.
being all those Books that he had Written in the Cave: and that there should
be no dispute hereafter concerning the Contents of these Written Volumns, he
Sealed them, and Indorst with this positive Superscription, Thus I Xaca have
Written the Truth.

His Opinion concerting the transmigration of the Soul.
Amongst others of the Pythagorean Assertions, he maintains, That the Soul is
transmutated eighty thousand times into several Bodies and Shapes, and that
under six vile transformations they committed all sorts of wickedness and
impiety, and at last turned into a white Elephant, by the Indians called Lothan
hoe Laenses, then they attained to the City of rest, and everlasting happiness:
but before they come thither they Fly with Birds, Graze with Oxen, Crow with
Cocks, Swim with Fishes, Creep with Serpents, and grow with Trees.

Hermias a Learned Christian.
Of this their Opinion the Learned Hermias says thus: When I view my Body I am
afraid thereof, for I know not by what Name to call it, whether a Man, a Dog, a
Wolf, Stier, Bird, or Serpent, for they say that I exchange into all these
several Shapes; which live either on the Earth, or in the Air, and in the
Water; neither wild, tame, dumb, prudent, or foolish; I fly in the Air, I
creep on the Earth, I run, I sit, and sometimes I am enclosed a Prisoner in the
Bark, of a Tree.

The Japanners and the Chinese, which are of Xaca's Religion, believe that the
Soul changes into Trees or Plants.

A strange Story of a Tree that spoke.
Philip Marimus, in his Japan Voyage relates, That in Cochinchina, Anno 1632, a
Tree of an hundred and twenty Foot high, and a proportionable thickness, was by
a Storm blown down to the Ground, which a hundred Men could not move; whereupon
being conjured, as they say, by one of their Exorcists, to know the reason why
it could not be stirred, it answered, I am a Chinse Pince; my Soul having been
transmigrated into several Bodies a hundred Years, at last is settled in this
Tree, from which as an Oracle I am to tell you of Couchin China, that a woeful
War is ready to fall upon you, under whose pressure you shall suffer extremely.

This Story, whether fabulous, or an Illusion of the Devil, is believed both
through all China and Japan, insomuch that ever since they put Dishes of Rice
to the Roots of great Trees, that the Souls dwelling within may not languish by
long fasting: and therefore they feed Animals and living Creatures also, that
they may not suffer by Hunger.

Within Camsana (if we may credit Bollandus) stands a Cloister of the Bonzi, Of
a Clovster in Camsana Bolland. Vit. Sanctor. A. ^. L. ^an. 15. C. 4.
near which is a Hill shaded with pleasant Trees, thither one of the Priests
carry daily at a set time two great Baskets, full of all manner of Food, when
drawing near the Hill he Rings his Bell, at the found of which is summoned all
sorts of Creatures, that in an incredible number come flocking from their
several Shelters and Recesses, to which he throws his Alms, and so scatters,
that they are generally satisfied; which done, in the same manner he Rings them
back again, and they fairly retreat to their respective Receptacles.

These Animals they believe are animated with the Souls of formerly famous
Persons, which reside in several Creatures, analogizing in their different
kinds and natures with the humor and disposition of those Hero's when alive.

From whom the Japanners have the Opinion of Transmigration.
It is without contradiction, that this Learning of Transmigration took original
in Egypt: And from them Plato and Pythagoras received that Doctrine, which they
Preached into Greece, the Seminary then of Philosophy; which at last spread
through several Angles of the World: The Goths had it in the North, the
Germans and Gauls in the West, and at the same time the Chinese and Japanners
in the East, who received it from the Indian Brachmans.

The Brachmans also affirm, amongst a world of strange Fancies, that some Men
for their Crimes, after Death become aerial Spirits, fantastic Shapes,
unsubstantial Bodies, wandering up and down so long, till they have suffered
enough to expiate their Offenses.

These Spirits are not permitted to Eat the least Blade of Corn, Herb, Grass,
nor any thing whatsoever, but only what they receive by Alms; to which purpose
they throw Meat to Daws and Pies nine days together after their Friends
departed Souls, that so the wandering of their deceased Relations may pick up
something with them.

These Spirits sometimes also appear in humane Shapes, but are not to be
feared, because they are harmless.

The Brachmans believe there is a Hell.
Moreover, the Brachmans also acknowledge a Hell, by them called Jamma Locon,
from whence the Souls, after great punishments, are released, and appear again
in the World in several Shapes.

But besides their Jamma Locon, they make mention of a deep, dark, and dismal
Pit, by them called Antam Tappes, which (as they say) is full of Thorns,
Vultures, and Ravens, with Iron Beaks and Claws; Mastiff-Dogs, Stinging-Wasps,
and Hornets, which heavily afflict and torture the Wicked condemned to that
Dungeon, in a most horrid and petulant manner, without any cessation; and that
which is worse, their punishment (as they say) never ends.

And also a Life after this.
They also hold two Conditions of such as are Saved, entering into happiness,
some of them travel to an inferior Heaven, called Surgam, where no sins are
committed; nor death suffered to enter; yet the Dewetas (for so they call those
that after death are believed to go to Surgam,) when their time of residence
there is expired, travel from thence, Soul and Body again conjoined; but what
becomes of the Body in their return, the Brachmans have not well made out,
only they affirm, That some come back to the World, and are regenerated and
born again, and those Feast on all manner of Delicacies, and enjoy fair Women,
but without Issue. But this they have not well anvill'd out neither; for some,
they say, never remove from Surgam, but bear Children there, which they number
amongst; the Stars; this they hinted from the ancient Astronomers, that often
(as we do sometimes) discover new Stars in the Firmament.

Their Opinion of Heaven.
But those which worship and obey Wistnou, keeping themselves from all Offenses,
are transported to Weicontam, where God sits on a most glorious Throne: But
they say there are two Weicontams, calling one Lela Weicontam, which is a most
pleasant and delightful Heaven; but the first only called Weicontam: From
thence none return again to this World. Great Disputations one the Brachmans
maintain about their Second Heaven, Lela Weicontam: Some affirm, That the Souls
remove from thence to another Elysium: Others maintain the contrary.

The Sect Foqueux worship Xaca.
Moreover, concerning Xaca, it is well known, That all the Japan Bonzies worship
him; but chiefly those they call Foqueux: For as they are of another Sect, so
among themselves they are of other Opinions. This Sect is so called from a Book
written by Xaca, which treats of attaining to Salvation by saying these Words,
Namu, Mio, Foren, Qui, Quio; though no Japanners understand the true meaning
thereof, being Indian Words.

The manner how the women ourn themselves.
THe Funerals in India, if Married People, and the Husband die first, are
commonly double; for the Women burn themselves with their Husbands, because
they will not live after their deceased Lords; so perfecting the Celebrations
of the Funerals: Which they willingly expose themselves to, in Honor of their
God, whom they call Rama; which they perform thus.

When the Wife promises her departing Husband that she will die with him, then
she must lose no time; but the same day, where her Husband lies burning in the
Funeral Pyre, she must leap in, and be consumed with him. This dreadful
Ceremony is strictly observed by the Brachmans and Wiensjaes: But the Setteraes
and Soudraes go farther; for there the Women also burn themselves, though their
Husbands die in other Countries, although it be many Years after their Deaths,
yet as soon as they receive the sad News, they shrink not from the Fiery Trial
of their Affections, but by burning dispatch themselves. Some of the Men also
are as mad, who in the Worship of their Xaca, dig a large Pit without the City,
in which making a great Fire, they desparately leap thereinto, where they are
in short time consumed to Ashes; whilst the Woman sits on a Stool, dressed up,
and richly clad, before the Door of their House; and if she be extracted from
the Settera, or Soudra, she has in one Hand a Limmon, and in the other a
Looking-glass, calling continually on the Name of their God, Naraina, or Rama,
which is Xaca; sometimes chewing Betel, amongst which they mix an intoxicating
Herb, that bereaves her of her Senses; so taking away all manner of fear of
what she is to suffer.

But if she belongs to the Brachmans, or Wiensjaes, then they hold red Flowers
in their Hands, first dedicated to the Idol, whose Picture they hang about
their Necks: Then after she has taken her Farewell of her Friends, she either
goes out of the City, or is carried in a Sedan, her Countenance being
cheerful, looking merrily, which she denotes by several Gesticulations of her
Hands and Body, crying aloud to the Sound of Trumpets and Drums, Rema, Rama,
Saltae; Rama, Rama, Saltae; that is, God Rama, Rama, make me happy. And thus
being led through the chief Streets of the City by some of her nearest Friends,
and at last approaching near the Place of Execution, where her Husband was
burnt, she withdraws to a neighboring Pool; where after having washed her self,
she puts on a yellow Garment, and gives her richest Apparel and precious Jewels
to her chiefest Relations, and to the Brachman-Priest, which makes her
Funeral-Sermon, before the Fire, to whom she also makes great Presents: The Pit
wherein she is to leap, is like an Oven full of glowing Coals, being hung round
about with green Mats, to the end she might not be affrighted at such a horrid
Face of Death. At one end thereof lies a Mount, or Heap of Earth, thrown out of
a small Hill, on which she takes her last Farewell of her Friends; All which, to
perpetrate this dreadful Self-murder, encourage her to be her own Destroyer;
whilst she having thrown her beloved Pestle and Mortar, and other Housholdstuff
which she used daily, into the Fire, they put a Jar of Oil upon her Head,
letting some fall upon her Body. The Mats being removed, the Virago leaps in;
and after her, her nearest Relations standing round about, contribute to the
Flames, each throwing in a Faggot, the sooner to dispatch their wretched
Kinswoman.

Difference in burning women.
Thus the Widows end their Lives, that are of the Settrean, Weinjaen, or
Soudraen Families: But the Brachman Women suffer a more cruel Death; for they
are laid close by their Husbands, on the Funeral-Pyre; then the People build a
Pile of Wood over them, placing about their Heads Oil, Rozin, and Turpentine:
This done, the Women standing in order round about, make doleful Ullula's,
mixed with loud Shrieks and Lamentations; during which Clamor, the
Brachman-Priest lights the Pile, which kindling by degrees, brings a lingering
and terrible Death.

Women buried alive.
Besides this way of ridding themselves of the old Females, they have another
way of destroying themselves, which they perform thus: They take the Relict,
and lead her as it were in Triumph, amongst the Sound of Pipes, Drums, and
Trumpets, to a Pit dug square like a Cellar, where stands the Body of her
departed Husband; to which descending on Earthen Steps, setting her self down
on a Bank, she takes the dead Body in her Arms, then perfuming the Corpse with
Frankincense and Myrrh; which done, the Mourners begin to throw the Mold into
the Pit, which she rakes greedily toward her with her Hands, and so having
covered her self at last with Earth to the Chin; then hanging a Cloth before
the Entry of the Pit, they give her Poison in a little Dish, and then on a
sudden break her Neck backwards.

Die of Hunger for the Honor of Xaca.
Thus also the Japanners, both Men and Women, make away themselves, frantic
with mad Zeal, in Honor to their God Xaca: For those that are his greatest
Admirers, upon no other account than honoring him, dig their own Graves,
covering the tops, leaving only a small breathing-hole; wherein they famish
themselves to death. These kind of Self-murderers, or Sedecedes, happen
frequently in and about Jedo, and in several other Places of Japan.

BUt to return again to our Ambassadors Frisius and Brookhurst, who had
informed the Lords Sickingodonne and Sabrosaymondonne of their Arrival on the
last of November, and staid till the twenty ninth of the following Month in the
House of the Chief President for the East. India Company, before they could be
permitted to offer those Presents which they had brought to his Imperial
Majesty: Netherlanders are commanded to come to Court.
They had order to prepare themselves against the next Morning, to appear
before the Emperor: Whereupon the Japanners went to a Troo (for so they call a
Bath) that they might cleanse themselves; for none must presume to approach
before the Emperor otherwise.

But when the Netherlanders had got all things in a readiness against the
appointed time, ^e disappointed.
they were countermanded, because the Emperor was indisposed; therefore they
could not as then be admitted to Audience: And the Emperor continuing ill for
two Months, they were forced to dispense with the time, and bear it patiently.
On the sixth of April they received Orders, that the next Morning they should
bring their Presents before the Council, and the young Prince; for his Imperial
Majesty was not fully recovered of his Sickness. So about nine of the Clock the
next Morning, the Ambassadors were carried in a large Sedan to the Palace,
their Attendants following them on Foot. The s Kysers hof te JEDO. das Schlos
zu Jedo. The Emperors Court at JEDO.
Streets through which they passed were exceedingly crowded with People; and
coming to the Palace, they went up four Steps, Come to Court.
which brought them into a large and spacious Hall, half the Floor neatly
rubbed, the other covered with fine Mats, in which some Lords kept a Guard.
Through this Hall the Ambasadors and their Retinue were led into several fair
Chambers, How they were received.
divided from one another by Partitions; where waiting an hour and a half,
first the Lord Frisius, and then Brookhurst, were admitted the Presence of four
of his Imperial Majesty's Privy Council, who by Commission were to represent
the Emperor, as if in Person. Before these the Ambassadors laid down their
Presents; and soon after, before the young Prince the Emperors Son: Which being
delivered, and after some small Discourse, Depart from the Court.
they had leave to repair to their Lodgings: Only a Merchant, one Cornelius
May, and a Dutch Goldsmith, staid behind, to inform a Japanner how they should
order the Materials that belonged to the Silver Ship, which was one of the
Presents, when they would make it ready to Sail. Two Hours they spent in this
Instruction; which done, they also went to their Lodgings.

Description of the Imperial Palace at Jedo.
THe Residence or Palace of the Emperor deserves no small Admiration: Round
about the outermost Wall are large Rails, several Foot from the Moat that
surrounds the Palace; betwixt which, is a broad Path, always thronged with
People, and thousands of Coaches and Sedans, continually going and coming. The
Walls are built of Freeze-stone, very high and thick, with Battlements on the
tops: The outermost Wall is surrounded with a broad and dry Trench, and over
the same a Bridge, with several Arches: The Gate made strong with thick driven
Iron Nails, is built apiece, two Stories high; each Square or Story having
a peculiar Roof, jetting several Foot over the Walls; on each side of the upper
Square hang two long Flags or Pennons, with the Emperors Arms: The Gate is
continually Guarded by a strong Watch. Round about the inside of the Out-wall
are an innumerable company of little Hovels, for the Soldiers: These Huts are
built exactly in a Line, and border a second Moat, which is not without several
Creeks, because the second Wall juts out in many Places, being a Bulwark, with
many Towers, in all which are strong Guards kept, as on the Out-wall. In the
second Gate is also a great Watch kept, to which joins a third Trench, Has
three Moats and Walls.
over which leads a fair Stone Bridge, at the end whereof a third Gate opens,
between another Stone Wall, very sumptuously built.

Strange Wall of the Palace.
This is not a plain straight Wall, but rather a Bulwark; with Redoubts and
Outworks, and several Flankers, Towers, and Watch-houses; yet uniform,
answering one another: So that it rather seems a Fortification, than a Wall.
When you are past the third Gate, you enter into a spacious Quadrangle, where
before you, but as far as you can discern, appears the Emperors
Banqueting House, with stately Turrets, surrounded with Trees and strong
Walls: On the Left Hand it is indented; but on the Right, smooth and even,
running along a Hill, on which the Emperor's Temple stands. Nearer the third
Gate are several lesser Courts: The first being square, has many fair Lodgings
about the same, supported on twenty eight Cedar Columns, being open underneath
like Piazza's; over which Rooms a Roof shoots out sloaping, and has a second
Story on the top, Walled round about, over whose four Corners jets another
Roof. Next this Court, is a second, in which seveval Lodgings, resting on four
Columns, which face the Entry: Behind these is another new stately Building,
enclosed within a Wall.

The Emperors Garden.
THese Outward or Base-Courts are more delighful, by the Pospect of the
Emperors Garden, which wants not any thing that Nature, Art, and Cost can
afford, the Walks Arbour'd with Trees, the Beds of Flowers curiously divided
one from the other, borders on the side of a Hill, whose top is crowned with a
Temple, in which the Emperor pays his daily Devotion.

The Palaces of the Emperors nearest Relations.
But on the left hand of the forementioned third Gate, are many beautiful
Houess; the lowermost Roof of which, adorned on all Corners with great Golden
Balls, has on it several Rooms and Balconies, from whence they have a large
Prospect of the forementioned open Court, and the three double Bulwarks.
Between this first Palace, and the third Inner-wall, are daily drawn up the
Emperor's Guard, being three thousand Men, which keep constant Watch there.
Next to this first Palace joins a second, which exceeds the other in length,
but is nothing near so high; the Roof also adorned with Golden Balls. Between
these two Palaces stands a sumptuous Fabric, like a Tower: All which Places
are the Residences of the Emperor's nearest Relations.

Description of the Emperors Lodgings.
Behind these, appears the most magnificent and stately Residence of the
Emperor, adorned with three exceeding high Turrets, each being square, rising
aloft with nine Stories: Above every Story the Roof jets over so much, that it
seems to lessen the Rooms; the middle Turret being the biggest, on whose top
glister two large Dolphins, covered with a Golden Plate, lifting their Tails up
to the Sky: Opposite against which, stands a spacious Hall, on gilded Columns;
the Cieling curiously carved, and gilded; the Roof also shines like Gold. In
this Place his Imperial Majesty always sits, when he gives Audience to Foreign
Ambassadors, or any of his Substitute Kings or Princes. On one side of this
Hall, the Women belonging to the Court have their several Lodgings.

AFter the Lords Frisius and Brookhurst had had their Audience on the seventh
of April, before four of the Chief Counselors, and repaired back to their
Lodgings, Fresius and Brookhurst come to Court a second time.
they were on the next day, by Orders from Sukingodonne, and Sobrosaymondonne,
fetched again to Court in two Sedans, their Retinue following them on
Horseback; and entering the Palace, they staid a while in the forementioned
Halls. Frisius was first admitted to come before the Council, and soon after
Brookhurst, where at that time they treated on nothing; only the Council
presented the Netherland-Ambassadors with several Silk Habits, which the
Emperor had given them in return; and then were Licensed to depart to
Nangesaque.

They visit the council with Presents.
But before they left Jedo, they visited (according to an ancient Custom)
several of Majesty's Privy Council, propining them all with Rich Presents: So
on the sixteenth of April all things were made ready for their Departure. But
had they not staid so long for Admittance to the Emperors Presence, they
intended to have visited the famous Sepulcher of his Majesty's Father, which
stands four days Journey beyond Jedo, Stately Tomb of the Emperors.
on a pleasant Hill, the Foot of which is surrounded by a Wall, having a large
square Portal in the middle, with strong Gates, on each side of which stand two
fair Chapels, built against the Wall, each a Story high; the Edges of the
upper, decked with Golden Balls: On the left side is a broad Passage, Paved
with Free-Stones, Railed in on both sides, which leads to a Pair of Stairs four
Steps high, where they ascend to the second Gate, which is adorned with Gilded
Balls: Here the Hill is again surrounded with second Walls, which on the left
hand is bordered by a long Temple, and the right side shaded by pleasant Trees.
About a Stones cast from the Trees, appears a Chapel; and passing along a
crooked Path, a third Gate, flanked with two Stone Walls, leads to the Entrance
behind the Hill, where the Imperial Tomb stands Erected, which indeed is a most
glorious and Magnificent Piece: Four Towers rise up toward the Sky, joined
together by several stately Buildings which are between them: Within the
highest Tower lies the Imperial Corpse Interred, before which four hundred and
fifty Lamps burn both Night and Day.

The Emperor visits his Fathers Tomb every year.
HIther the Japan Emperor comes, with a great Train of Nobles, to make
Offerings to his Deceased Father, which he first Consecrates with a long
Prayer, in the Chapel before the first Gate, of which, the Front of the lowest
Story rests on four square Pillars, half way plastered in the Walls, which
between the Walls is curiously painted: The Doors double; on both sides of
which, and in the middle, stand six Zuilen, two and two together. On the Edges
of the broad-brimm'd Roof hang gilded Images: The lowermost Story has a Second
Building, divided into five Rooms.

Copper Candlestick.
Within this Chapel hangs a Copper Branch or Candlestick, which the East India
Company presented by Francis Cairon, to the Emperor of Japan, the third of May,
Anno 1636. This Candlestick has thirty Branches, weighing seven hundred ninety
six Pounds: And besides this, Cairon presented also to the Emperor two great
Persian Alcatives, one Piece of Black Velvet, twelve Fowling-Guns, and fourteen
Pieces of all sorts of Cloth. The Privy-Councellors Samuchedonne, Oiendonne,
Actwadonne, Cangadonne, Taikimondonne, Jusdonne, Chimadonne, Bongodonne,
Triussima, Bitchioudonne, Okradonne, Neysiendonne, and Deysiendonne, got every
one of them peculiar Presents: besides the Inferior Officers at the Emperors
Court.

MOreover, The Japanners are exceeding ambitious of perpetuating their Name,
sparing no Cost in their Sepulchers. The Funeral-Rites of their Nobles are thus
Celebrated. Strange kind of Funerals used in Japan.
An Hour before the Corpse is carried out of the House, the nearest Relations of
the Deceased walk before toward the Funeral-Pyre, being all clad in white
Silk, which is generally their Mourning Habit: Then the Women follow, both
Married and Unmarried, covering their Faces with a Vail of several Colors. Men
of great Estates are commonly carried in Herses of Cedar, curiously Carved.

The Bonzi's Ceremony with the Dead.
At a considerable distance follows one of the chiefest Bonzi, the Minister that
performs the Funeral-Rites, in a great Coach, which shines, being all Silk and
Gold: Thirty Bonzies more run about the Coach; they wear broad-brimm'd Hats;
over a fine Linen Surplice, a Black Cloak, covered with a gray upper Garment,
each carrying a long Torch lighted, made of Pine-Branches, which (they say)
lights the Defunct, that he may not mistake or miss the Way. These thirty are
followed by two hundred more, who call aloud upon that God or Idol which he
most Worshipped, when alive. They also beat on great Copper Basins, and carry
two large Baskets, full of Artificial Paper-Roses, of diverse Colors, which
they tie at the end of a long Stick, shaking them as they go in such a manner,
that the Roses fly out of the Baskets; that being a sign, as they say, That the
Soul of the Deceased is already gone to the Place of Everlasting Happiness.
After these, follow eight Youths, young Bonzies, in two Rows; who trail after
them long Canes, with Flags, each Inscribed with the Name of his Idol: They
also carry eight Lanthorns, with lighted Candles, which in stead of Horn are
covered with fine Cotton: Near these Lanthorn-carriers walk two Youths, in gray
Clothes, which carry also Pine-Torches, which they light when they come out of
the City, and with these kindle the Fire that must consume the dead Body.

The remaining Ceremony.
Next before the Corpse walk a great number of People, all in gray Clothes, their
Heads covered with little three-corner'd Caps of black shining Leather, on
which they pin small Papers, written with the Name of his Idol: And that it may
be more conspicuous, a Man follows, which carries in a Frame, in large
Characters, the Name of that God he had so much adored.

The Corpse it self.
Then follows the Corpse it self, which is carried by four Men, on a Bier,
covered with a Bed very richly adorned, on which sits the dead Body, with his
Head bent forward, and his Hands folded together being clothed all in white;
over which hangs a Paper Coat, being a Book concerning the Mysterious Devotions
belonging to his Deity, and full of Prayers, That he would be pleased in mercy
to save him.

After the Corpse, follow the Sons of the Deceased, in comely Habits, the
youngest Son carrying also a Torch of Pine, to kindle the Funeral-Pyre. Last of
all, comes a second Rabble of Common People, suited with black Caps, as the
former.

How the dead are burnt in Japan.
When coming near the Pyle, they stand in a Ring, and soon after make a hideous
Noise, the Bonzies striking with great force on their Copper Basins and
Kettles, and all the People calling aloud on the Name of his Idol, which
continues a whole Hour; during which they prepare the Pit, being square, and
Railed about, and hung with Mats: Toward the four Points of Heaven are four
Entrances, being the East, West, North, and South. The Pit is covered over with
Canvas, and on each side of it stands a Table, with all manner of Fruits, near
the Table, Pots smoking with Perfumes and Frankincense; no sooner they approach
near the Enclosed place, but they throw a long Rope over the Corpse, on which
every one lays their hands, and call on the name of their Idol, several times
together, then they walk three times about the enclosed place.

At last they set the Bier with the Bed, and Corpse on the Funeral-pyre, to
which, the Bonzi who Conducted the whole Train, steps forth and Mutters several
Words, which none of those that are present can understand, and takes a burning
Torch which he Waves three times over the Head of the Dead Body, signifying by
those Circles, that the Soul of the Deceased had never beginning, nor shall
ever have an end; when done, he throws away the Torch, which two of the nearest
Relations to the Deceased, whereof one stands at the East end of the Bier, and
the other at the West, as a Ceremony, reaching it over the Corpse to one another
thrice together; then they throw it on the Pyle, whilst others pour on Sweet
Oil; then setting Fire, which kindles so suddenly, and grows to that height,
that the Body is consumed in a moment.

Strange Custom when the body is burnt.
In the Interim, his Sons and kindred walk toward the two Tables, where setting
Fire to the Pots, with Perfumes, they fall on their Knees, and Worship the
Deceased, then, as they believe, to be in Heaven; This finished, their Bonzies
are rewarded according to their several Services, and the Chief Orderer of the
Funeral receives at least twenty Ducats, and the other Officers lesser Sums.

After the departure of the Friends and Bonzies to their several Houses, then
the Common People, and those which were Habited in Gray, make merry about the
Fire, with such Food, as stands on the Tables. On the next day, the Children
and Friends of the Deceased repair again to the Funeral Fire, where they gather
the Ashes, Teeth, and Bones in a Gilded Pot or Urn, which they carry home, and
covering it over with a Cloth, set it in one of the chief Rooms of the House.

Make repetition Sermon, after what manner.
Thither all the Bonzies come, to make a Repetition of the Funeral Sermon; On
the seventh day they begin their Visit, and set the Urn with the Relics on the
Ground; others set down a square Stone, on which is Engraven the Name of the
Idol: After this, the Sons go daily to their Father's Grave, on which they
strew Roses, and place hot Liquor, and set several Dishes of Meat about it, so
that their Father's Soul may be refreshed.

Bon, a dead Fast.
But besides these Funerals, which commonly cost those that are able at least
three thousand Ducats, and the ordinary Citizens generally two, or three
hundred: They keep on one day yearly a general Feast through the whole City,
which they call Bon, dedicated to all the souls of their deceased friends, on
which day each hangs a Lanthorn and Candle at his Door, and all visit the
Graves of their several Relations, great multitudes carrying out of the City
Chargers full of Variety of Cates, with which they Treat (as they believe)
their departed Spirits, then inviting them home to their Houses; of which we
have already spoke at large.

Description of a mourning Japanner.
MOreover, it is worthy our Observation, how the Japanners behave themselves
after the Burying of the Inurn'd Relics; they mourn two year very strictly,
abstaining all that while from all manner of Pleasures and Delights: Their
Habits expressing great signs of Sorrow, wearing Caps on their Heads, flat on
the top, square before like a Cap, and spreading broad behind, hanging down
like a Vail to their Hams; their Coats exceeding wide, which they fold athwart
their Breasts, and hold their Hands in a sad Posture within their Sleeves; this
Coat may neither be Laced nor Embroidered, but is only tied about with a broad
Girdle; below their Coat, their Breeches appear, hanging over their Feet like a
Sack; all their Clothes are made of brown Linen, without being ever Bleach'd.

The corpse of poor people misused.
The Funerals of the Poor People are no way to be compared to those of the Rich,
for not one Bonzi follows their Dead, they having no Money for to satisfy them
for their Labor, without which they will not budge one Foot, so that they only
take care for to provide Food for the Departed Souls; and the more, because
most of them, either public or private, are against the Immortality of the
Soul; therefore the Dead Bodies of the Poor (of which there are very great
numbers in Japan) they throw in the night time, in some private place or other,
or else upon the nearest Dunghill.

Departure of the Netherland Ambassadors from Jedo.
BUt to return again to our Ambassadors, upon their departure from Jedo, where
having found no opportunity nor time to visit the Emperors Tomb in Niko, whose
Luster was made the greater, by the Branched Candlestick given by the
East India Company, to the Japan Emperor, as being Cast of Copper, and brought
from Holland, such a long and tedious Voyage.

The Lords, Frisius and Brookhurst taking their leave, from Jedo proceeded on
in their Journey to Nangesaque, on the 16 of April, Anno 1650. and having
passed Sinagawa, Rokna, Cawasacca, Cammagawa, Fundaga, and Moska, they espied
the famous Temple of Apes; the whole world shows not the like, if you look upon
the strangeness of the Building, and the manner of the celebrated Rites, it is
notoriously known, that Egypt was full of the like Superstition, and mad
Worship, holding for their gods, which they held in great Adoration, all sorts
of Beasts and Monsters: All Writers commonly affirm, That their chief gods were
Apis, and Osiris, the one, a living black Ox, with a white Head, broad Back,
and shaggy Hair, which was to live no longer than the set time limited by the
Egyptian Laws; then a general Fast Day was ordered to be kept very strictly, on
which the Ox called Serapis, Strange dealing with the Ox Apis.
was Drowned in a Consecrated Lake; on whose death, as being their god Apis,
all Egypt Mourned, both Old and Young Lamenting, with striking on their
Breasts, tearing the Hair off their Heads; but when they found another of the
same Color, and shape, the whole Country rejoiced thereat, setting him in the
same place; they generally Feasted, but this their dumb god could not answer as
the Delphick Oracle, nor the Dodan Oak, nor Jupiter Ammon, but by eating Fodder
out of their hands, that was a good Omen to the Inquirer that proffered it, but
if he refused, that they looked upon as ill Fortune; for which cause, when he
refused the Food which Caesar Germanicus proffered him, he after despaired,
expecting his utter Ruin.

Osiris, what manner of Ox.
But their Osiris was a Gray Ox, with a Dogs head, holding in one Foot a
Scepter, Emblematically expressing his Omnipotent Power and Godly Authority.

The Ancient Egyptian Kings, used to offer Men and Women on the Grave of
Osiris; yet this cruel Sacrifice in process of time was changed, Offering only
a red Ox, by reason it suited best with Typhon's Color, which they say, slew
Osiris.

Of this also hear what Pliny says, In Egypt an Ox is worshipped for a god,
Plin. lib. 8. Cab.
which they call Apis, who gives Responses of good or bad Fortune, by taking or
refusing the Food which the Injured presents with his own Hands; who taking a
dislike to that which Germanicus proffered, refusing, would not eat, who soon
after unfortunately died: This Apis is continually kept private, but when he
appears publicly, he is accompanied with a great number of Children, singing
Elodiums to his praise, which he seems to understand and accept of.

Strabo says thus, In Heliopolis stands a Dedicated Temple to the Sun, and Ox
Mnevis, Strabo Geog. lib. 17.
which is fed in an enclosed corner, and by the People Worshipped; as at
Memphis is their Ox Apis.

Herodotus tells us, That the Egyptians Worshipped a Cat, Herodot. in Euterp.
which if she died in their Houses, they Salted and Buried her in a stately
manner, carrying her to Bubastis, to be Interred there in the Holy City: The
like Cicero, Diodorus, Siculus, Plutarch, and Juvenal testify.

As to what Clemens Romanus, or rather an unknown Writer by his Name, Clem.
Romans l. 5. Retognit.
Writes concerning the forementioned Worship, deserves peculiar Observation:
Some Egyptians, says he, have learnt, That an Ox, called Apis, must be
Worshipped and Adored; others, a Goat, others Cats, some an Egyptian Bird,
called Iphis, which feeds on Serpents; others held of a Fish, called Ajun, and
many other such Ridiculous Creatures, that I am ashamed to name, for a God.

Clemens Alexandrinus relates, That the Saitae and Thebans Worshipped a Sheep,
Clem. Alex. Adm. ad Gent.
and the Lycopolitans, a Wolf; that those of Leopolis honored a Lion, as being
the King of all four footed Beasts; for which reason also the Persians Picture
their god Mithra, which presents the Sun, with a Lions Head.

Plutarch tells us the reason why a Lion is Dedicated to the Sun, Plut. lib. 4.
Symp. 4, 5.
viz. Because Lions, amongst all Beasts with Claws, bears only one young one;
and that they are very watchful, and sleep little, and their eyes shining,
being open when they sleep: And at last, because the Leontines when the Sun
passes through the Sign of Leo, find all their Fountains and Pits full of Water.

Strabo writes of the Mendesiers, Stran. Go. l. 17. Aelian de Animal. l. 10.
c. 23.
That they promoted a Goat and Buck to Religious Honor.

Aelianus relates, How the Coptists eat their tame Goats, but to their wild
ones they showed great Adoration, because they were a delight to the goddess
Isis.

Other Egyptians reckon their Goats amongst the number of their gods, because
that according to Diodorus Siculus, it has Genitals like a man; for which
reason the Greeks and Latins honored their Priapus.

Herodotus relates, Herodot. In Euterp.
That the Mendesiers showed much sorrow upon the death of a great Goat-heard,
in relation to his Employment, they holding Goats in great Veneration.

The Egyptians and Greeks also Picture their Idol Pan with a Goats Face and
Feet, notwithstanding they believed, that he was like the other gods.

Women make themselves common with Goats.
The same Herodotus relates also, That the Mendesier Women make themselves
common with Goats, that so they might obliege them, and be big, and bear
Children, by their Sacred Seed.

Strabo witnesses, That the Athribites held a small Creature brought forth, by
a Mouse, Rat, and Weasel, for their god.

Plutarch tells us the reason why these miserable People Worship such a vile
Beast as their Creator; Because it is Born in a new Moon, and his Liver decays
at the decrease thereof.

Strange things done by the Indian Mfee.
The Indian Rat is Dedicated to Latona, and Ilithya, or Lucina, which maintains
a continual War with the Viper and Crocodile, with both which Egypt is much
troubled, and therefore the Rats are accounted worthy of Religious honor,
because they destroy both. But not all the Egyptians Worship the Indian Mice,
for some Adore the Crocodile, and despise the Mice, because they break the
Crocodiles Eggs, and also kill them; for when the Crocodiles lie beaking with
open mouth in the Sun, the Mouse leaps in, and there gnaws their Bowels
asunder, and makes his way out through their Bellies.

These Worshippers of so opposite a Religion, one Adoring the Rat, the other
the Crocodile, are not only at variance among themselves, which often grows to
War, but they prosecute and destroy the Creatures where ever they find them;
the Crocodilians destroy all the Rats and Ingnumons where ever they find them;
and those that put their trust in Rats, destroy without mercy all Crocodiles.

Besides Strabo, Juvenal. sat. 15.
Cicero, Diodorus Siculus, Juvenal, Plutarch, and Aelianus, witness, How the
Egyptian Ombits worshipped the Crocodiles with as great Zeal, as the Greeks and
Latins did their gods; but the Apolletick Egyptians cursed their Crocodile,
because Tiphon transformed into a Crocodile, slew Osiris; and also because the
Daughter of Psammymitus King of Egypt, was likewise devoured by a Crocodile.

Moreover he relates, Strab. Geog. lib. 17.
How that the Psyli, a People in Cyreen, and the Egyptian Tentyrietes have a
private Charm against Serpents, and the other against Crocodiles, which they
can both order according to their pleasure. Crocodile by whom taken, without
prejudice.
The Tentyrietes dive without any fear, to the bottom of deep Lakes and Rivers
after the Crocodiles, and kill them with great ease; to which end, when they
were to show this amongst their public Shows in Rome, they leapt into the
Water, and fetched them up to the open view of the whole Concourse.

The same Strabo relates also of Arsino, formerly called the Crocodile City,
That the Priests there feed those Beasts with Cakes, Flesh, and Wine, which was
brought as an Offering by strangers, and laid near a Consecrated Lake.

Maximus Tyrius dissert. 31. Miracle of a Crocodile.
MAximus Tyrius relates, That an Egyptian Woman feeding and breeding up a young
Crocodile, was accounted holy by the Egyptians, because she Nursed a Deity, and
therefore both she and the Crocodile were daily Worshipped by many of the
Egyptians. This Woman also had a Son, about the same Age as the Crocodile; a
long time the Youth and the Serpent agreed playing together, but at last
growing old, and fierce with hunger, he preyed upon the Boy, and eat him up;
the Mother being much amazed at this sad accident, yet she esteemed her Son
happy, because the Crocodile which she held for a god, had devoured him.

By this ignorance of the Heathens, appears plainly Gods Wrath and Divine
Judgments, men Adoring in the presence of a Never-dying and Omnipotent God,
that which is not only Mortal and Frail, but much Inferior to themselves: But
who can give us a better account, and the reason of Worshipping of Beasts, than
the never-failing Schoolmaster of the Heathens? I will here set down the whole
words written in the first Epistle to the Romans; Romans 1. v. 19, 20, 21, 22,
23, 24, 25.
Because that which may be known of God, is manifest in them, for God has
showed it unto them. For the invisible things of him from the Creation of the
World are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
Eternal Power and Godhead, so that they are without excuse. Because that when
they knew God, they glorified him not as God, neither were thankful, but became
vain in their imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened. Professing
themselves to be wise, they became Fools: and changed the glory of the
uncorruptible God, into an Image made like to corruptible man, and to birds,
and four-footed Beasts, and creeping things. Wherefore God also gave them up to
unleanness, through the lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own bodies
between themselves: Who changed the truth of God into a lie, and worshipped and
served the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever. Amen.

There is scarce one living Creature either on the Earth, Sea, or Air, which
the Heathens do not worship.

Strabo says thus of the Egyptians, Strab. Geogr. lib. 17.
There are some Beasts which they serve jointly, three of them inhabiting the
Earth, as an Ox, a Dog, and a Cat; Of flying Fowls, the Hawk, and the Bird
Ibis; Of Fishes, those called Lepidotus, and Oxyrinchus; Besides these, there
are also other Creatures which they serve; For the Saiten and Thebans, adore a
Sheep; the Latopolitans, the Fish Latus, which swims in the River Nyle; the
Lycopolitans, a Wolf; the Hermopolitans, the Baboon, whose head is like that of
a Dog; the Babylonians, living near Memphis, an Ape; these Apes are like
Satyrs, half their bodies like Dogs, the other half resembles a Bear, they are
bred in the Moors Country. The Thebans Worship a Crane; the Leontines, a Lion;
the Mandesiers, a Ram; others Worship other Deities, about which they maintain
great and hot Disputations.

Out of these Testimonies of the Greek and Latin Writers, of which some lived
before, after, or about the time of our Saviors Birth; and the undisputable
Testimonies written by the Apostle St. Paul; we may easily Conjecture, that not
only the Idolatrous Worshipping of Beasts is very Ancient, but chiefly with
ugly and deformed Baboons, and Monkies, nay there is scarce one Beast which the
Heathens worshipped more than the Ape.

Not far from Toska through this Village, the Netherland Ambassadors, Frisius,
and Brookhurst traveled. In their return to Nangesaque, on the 18 of Aug.
1650. stands The Temple of Apes, famous through all Japan, the Structure is no
less Artificial than Costly.

Description of the Temple of Apes in Japan.
IN the middle Isle stands a high Wooden Altar, the undermost part about half
a man's height is square with two Ledges; on the top of this stands a second
Square; but a third part less than the undermost, whose top being broad, with
handsome Mouldings, which jet out of each corner; every side of the Altar
curiously Carved, and a great Copper Basin lies on the lower Square of the
Altar; near which stands a Bonzi, which strikes on the same with great force,
to the end, that by that noise, the Congregation may be stirred up to a greater
Zeal in their Devotion, who prostrate themselves, lying on their Knees, Elbows,
and Foreheads on the ground; on both sides of the Temple, the Walls of which
are full of Neeches, in which sit several living Apes, to which the Japanners
make their Oraisons; above the Neeches jet out like Evens, but are square, and
stand straight; on the top of which, many Apes Carved in several Postures, some
lying all along, others sitting, and standing upright, are placed: Against the
Walls, also several square Pedestals curiously Graven, against which the
nethermost seem to be Apes, the rest between each of these Pedestals, are
several larger Neeches, in which are other Carved Apes; but next to the Bonzi
which Plays on the Basin, stand several Inferior Ministers, that help him to
perform this his Divine Service: At the farther end of the Temples sit on a
broad Ledge, not far from the Roof above all the other, several Figures of
Monkies, before which are daily placed great Dishes full of variety of Meat.

It deserves no small wonder, that these Temples of Apes were not only before
the Birth of our Savior, for the Hermopolitans, and Babylonians (according to
the testimony of Strabo) Worshipped Baboons and Monkies, above eighteen hundred
years since.

The Religion of Apes very ancient, and spread over Asia.
ANd how far this shameful Worshipping of Apes is spread over Asia, may hereby
appear; for it is not only usual in Japan and China, but also in the Territory
of the Malabaers, and the Wild Country, between Macaw and Pegu, and the Island
Cylore, where they set up Apes for their gods.

The famous Italian Balbus, relates in his Voyage from Macaw and Pegu, How that
amongst the Indian Idols, which they call Pagods, he found that they generally
Worshipped Apes, and also living Baboons, which they Chained in their
Varralloes, for so the Indians call the Isles of their Temples.

Who discovered Ceylon.
It is worth observing what the Learned Vossius, has taken out of Linschot: The
Island Ceylon, which the Portuguese Writer, Johannis Barruis affirms, with
several pregnant Reasons, to be the ancient Taprobana, discovered by Francois
Almeida his Son, who was to pillage the Saracen Merchants, which Trade along
the Maldivian Islands, from the Molluco's to Arabia, but missing of them, set
upon Ceylon: after which the Portuguese General Soarius obtained leave of the
King of the Western part of Ceylon, that he might raise a Fort there near the
Seaside; but whilst they were busy in building the same, the King being
inveigl'd by the Saracen Merchants, that they would be a great hindrance to
them in their Cinamon-Trade, he set upon them with some thousands of Men, Wars
between the Ceylonians and the Portuguese.
which proved at first a sharp Assault, because the Portuguese never in the
least suspected to be so treacherously surpised. But the General Soarius soon
after putting his Men in order, they made such a valiant Resistance, that they
forced the King to pay for his falsehood toward them, an hundred and twenty
thousand Pound of Cinnamon, twelve Diamond Rings, and six Elephants yearly.

For a defense against the Islanders, the Fort Colombo was well fortified; yet
it was not so strongly built, but that it decayed and fell to the Ground, which
made Lupus Brittus to be sent thither with several Workmen to repair the Fort;
where arriving, and being busy to prepare Mortar, Stones, and other
Necessaries for the re-building, the Saracens again spurring up the Ceylonians
against the Portuguese, they a second time Sallied out upon them; but first the
City Colomba refused to sell the Portuguese Provisions, after that they slew
all those that they found straggling from the Fort. The Portuguese being thus
troubled Sallied out of their Castle, and fell into the City Colomba, upon
which the Citizens deserted the same, leaving their Wives and Children in
possession, so that Brittus without the least resistance became Master of the
City, but strictly forbad all his Men from committing any outrages, only he
caused the Women and Children to be tied to the Threshold at their Doors; which
he did partly to, manifest, that he intended no cruelty to the Ceylonians, and
partly, that if possible, by that his kind dealing with them, he might gain
their Affections. This Conquest had almost proved the utter ruinie of the
Portuguese; for those that fled from Colomba fetched all the Forces that they
could possibly get together, and being spurred on by their Affections toward
their Wives and Children, set, like hungry Lions, upon the City: Thus the
Portuguese seeing utter ruin threaten them, they saw no other way to release
themselves but by firing the City, which the Townsmen perceiving, left to
Storm, and endeavored all of them to quench the Fire, and to unbind their Wives
and Children; during which time most of the Portuguese got into their Castle,
which else would have been taken by the Natives.

But this business rested not so, for the Ceylonians soon gathered twenty
thousand Men together, and besieging them in their Fort, raised Works about the
Fort, with six hundred Iron Mortar-pieces fixed on them, in the daytime
throwing Darts, which wounded two hundred Paces distance, Remarkable Arms of
the Ceylonians.
and in the nightime Granado's, which burnt their Huts. The Besieged, though
few in number, yet wanted all manner of Necessaries, without which they were
not able to subsist a Day, and being driven to the worst of Exigencies, they
made a Virtue of Necessity, and Sallied out with three hundred and fifty Men,
which Fought so valiantly, that with small resistance they beat their Enemies
from their Works: But the Enemy was not so baffled, but drew up one Company for
a Field-Battel, having two hundred and fifty Elephants in the Front, with
Wooden Towers, Planted with Cannon on their Backs, their Noses, or Snouts,
Armed with sharp Scythes, which whisking to and fro, they could Mow down all
those which came near them; behind these followed the Cingalessers, being the
Foot well Armed, the right and left Flank Winged each with an hundred and fifty
Horse: At first sight the Portuguese were struck with a general consternation,
and even ready to quit the Field, when one of the Enemies Elephants being
wounded, retreated disorderly, routing those that were next him, so opening a
Breach, at which the Portuguese falling in like a Torrent, suddenly dissipated
their whole Army, and making great slaughters, became Master of the Fieldl; and
at last the Portuguese, recruited with fresh Supplies, took the City Ceylon,
destroying all with the Sword and Fire, Anno 1654.

Pico de Adam.
ON this Island is one of the highest Mountains in India, called Pico de Adam,
or Adams Hill; for the Congaleans affirm, that Adam was Created there, the
print of whose footsteps hewn in Stone, as they say, are to be seen yet.

On the top of this Mountain stands a magnificent Temple, held then to be full
of Treasure and other Rarities of an inestimable value, the hope of which Booty
drew the lucrative Portuguese thither, but found nothing according to the
report, or their expectation, only a Golden Cabinet, inchased with Precious
Stones and Diamonds, in which lay enclosed an Apes Tooth.

An Apes Tooth valued at seventy thousand Ducats
In what esteem or adoration the Ceylondians had this Relick, may appear by the
trouble, charges, and proffers, which, they made for the redemption thereof;
for they in solemn manner sent Ambassadors of special Quality, who made Address
to the Portuguese, tendering seventy thousand Ducats to be re-possess'd of the
same.

The Portuguese would fain have been nibling, and at sharing of so vast a Sum
for so pitiful a trifle: But Gaster the Bishop utterly withstood it, affirming,
that nothing could be more impious or contradictory to the true Believers of
the Christian Faith, than to uphold by any means, directly or indirectly, any
thing whatsoever belonged to the maintenance of false Worship and Superstition
of the Heathen, and therefore ordered the Tooth to be burnt, and the Ashes to
be thrown into the Sea.

But besides the Congaleans, Strabo Geog. 1.17.
the Hemopolitans also (according to Strabo) worship an Ape.

IT deserves no small admiration, that the Japanners, and other Heathens stoop
to such vile Creatures, and worship them as their God, being themselves Men,
and Aspirers to greater excellencies: Yet we may find, that the Ancients, upon
seeming good Reasons, held several Beasts, and despicable Creatures in such
great adoration, having by long practice made observation, by their Looks and
Postures foretelling future Presages, and present Discoveries, which have
oftener hit than otherwise.

Cicero affirming this, Cicero 1.2. de Not. Deor.
says thus: The Egyptians are falsely aspersed concerning the worshipping of
Creatures, for they adore none but upon good accounts, and some benefit or
other which they receive from them: as in the first place the Bird Ibis, a
great destroyer of Venomous Serpents. I could also say something on the nature
of the Indian Mice, Crocodiles, and Cats, but that I am not willing to enlarge
this Discourse, yet I will conclude, that the Heathens worship their Beasts for
benefits which they receive from them.

Lucan also tells us, That the Egyptians had found out more than the
Moretanians had done heretofore; for they divided the Heavens with the Stars
into twelve Houses, in which Signs are several Constellations, looked upon by
their Learning, or help of Imagination, to personate, as fixed there, several
sorts of Creatures, as Gods, Hero's, Men, Monsters, and several sorts of
Fishes. And therefore the Egyptians have diverse Worships, for their Soothsayers
used not only the Planets, which are as their gods, but make their Responses
from the Configuration of the several Signs, which are inferior Creatures.
First, Lucianus de Astrol.
they worship a Ram which they have from Aries: they touch no Fish which
resembles the Sign Pisces; neither will they kill a Goat, because of Capricorn;
and the Bull, for the sake of Taurus, they hold in the like estimation. The
Apes requiring a peculiar Worship, the Inhabitants Consecrated a peculiar
Prayer.

Lucan says, That the Lybians worshipped the famous Jupiter Ammon, in the
manner of a Ram, as being one of the twelve Celestial Signs, to whom the
Heathens came from all Parts to know future Events.

Moreover, he says some of these Worshippers of Beasts did not adore them as
gods, but because they were Consecrated to their Deities, and for their good
Deeds shown either to the gods or men; and therefore at Delphis, according to
Aelianus, a Wolf was religiously honored, because he gave direction of the
sacred stolen Gold, buried in the Mountain Parnassus.

The Ambraciots worshipped a Lyonness, after the Tyrant Phayllus was devoured
by one big with Young.

Aristotle tells us, That the Citizens of Troas worshipped the Mice, Arist.
Rhetor. L. 2.
because they gnawed their Enemies Bow-strings when they were at War with them.

Moreover, some of the Heathens, and also the Japanners believed, That the
Souls of Men by death were transmigrated into Beasts, and therefore they
worship not the Beast it self, but the Souls of Men which resided in them.

Apollonius Tyancus persuaded the Alexandrians, Philostr. in Vit. Apollon.
That a tame Lion which he had was the Egyptian King Amasis; for which reason
the Priests made Offerings to this supposed Amasis, adorning the Beast with
Golden Armlets, and Collars, and in that manner sent him to the farthermost
Parts in Egypt, Singing before him religious Hymns and Praises of their god. In
Leontopolis they erected a stately Temple, because Apollonius said, That it was
not fitting that the powerful King Amasis, whose Soul was transmigrated into a
Lion, should go a begging from Door to Door for his Food.

But chiefly the Apes seem to afford the best Residences for humane Souls,
because they resemble a Man both in outward Shape, and within, Humane Bodies.
as Aristotle affirms: wherefore Physicians, when they want humane Bodies,
often Anatomize an Ape.

Galen calls an Ape an imperfect resemblance of a Man, Arist. L. 2. Hist. Anim.
Coel. Resp. L. 3. C. 10.
as Coelius Rodignius relates of him.

What more resembles Humane Shape,
Than the vile ridiculous Ape?
Tulp's Description of an Ape.
THe Lord Nicholas Tulp tells us of a Baboon sent from Angola to Frederick
Prince of Orange, which was called by the Indians, Ourang Outang, was as tall
as a Child of three years old, and as big as one of six, neither Fat nor Lean,
but well in case, with strong Thighs, Bald before, and overgrown behind with
black Hair, his Face also hairy, resembling a Toothless old Woman, the Ears
like those of a Man, on his Belly an indented Navel, the Hands and Feet perfect
with Fingers and Toes, so that his foremost Parts were altogether Man, who
often walked upright, and would carry a handsome Burden: when it Drank it lifted
up the Lid of the Pot with one Hand, and held the Ear with the other, and when
having Drunk, orderly wiped its Lips: when he went to sleep he commonly laid
his Head higher than his Body, neatly covering himself like a young Maiden in
her Bed.

Moreover, the forementioned Tulp relates, That the King of Sambaces, told
Samuel Blomert, that the Baboons in the Island Borneo dare encounter with Armed
Men, and will set upon Women; and if by their kindness and courtship they
cannot vitiate, they will force them. Therefore by reason of the great
resemblance of Apes and Men, the Japanners are of opinion, and chiefly those
that believe the Pythagorean Doctrine concerning Transmigration, That the Souls
of deceased Kings and Emperors reside in Apes.

The Bonzies called Neugori, how they live.
THe Netherland Ambassadors left the Temple of Apes near Toska, and came on the
eleventh day after their departure from Jedo, on the seven and twentieth of
April to Meaco, the chiefest City for Trade in Japan: wherein are erected
several Cloisters of the Bonzi, in which the Penitentiaries are Locked up, that
will take their leave of this World: yet account it no sin to commit all manner
of Vices without the least regret; in which wickedness those exceed, which have
promoted Cacubaw to be a god.

The Sect called Neugori are divided into three Degrees or Sections, for some
of them Pray continually, others study and exercise themselves in Martial
Discipline, and the rest make daily a set number of Arrows. And because they
acknowledge no Superior, nor chief Commander, they carry on business in great
disorder: The oldest give their Votes first, which if any one oppose, the
business falls, so that all jangle and disagree: which Consultation the Bonzies
break up till the Evening; and when grown dark, they decide their business with
the Sword, and often kill one another, though their Religion strictly forbids
them to hurt a Mouse, or kill the smallest Fly.

The Netherland Ambassadors take a survey of Meaco.
FUrthermore, as to what concerns Meaco, it is much adorned by the Palaces of
the Emperor Cubus Taikosama, and also that of the Payro.

In this City the Ambassadors stayed till the thirtieth of April, and being
invited on a Day by the Master of the House where they lay, and one of the
Bongois, to view some of the chiefest Buildings in the City, they were carried
with several other Merchants in Sedans, often standing still to admire the
costliness and magnificence of their several Temples and Towers; after which
being scarce satisfied with viewing the beauty of the various Edifices, they
were carried to a Musick-Lecture, where the Master of their Lodgings had
provided a handsome Collation for them; which done, they in the dusk of the
Evening returned to their House.

Description of the Emperor Cubo's Palace.
But amongst those famous Buildings which they viewed, none seemed so rich and
stately as the Palace of the Emperor Cubo.

Lodowick Frojus, an eyewitness, relates, That he had not seen the like
Fabric, neither in Europe, nor all India.

The Gardens which encompass it are surrounded with Cedar, Cypress, Pyne, and
Orange Trees, besides many others, whose Names are to us unknown; which are all
Planted in such a decent order, that they represent many fair Arbors; the
Lilies, Roses, and other Flowers which deck the Garden Beds, also amaze the
beholders, not only for their sweet Smells, and various Colors, but also
their strange manner of Setting them.

The Governor of Meaco's Palace.
The Governor's Palace of Meaco merits also observation; behind whose
Privy-Lodgings is a mavelous Garden, which is not only artificially adorned
with Imagery, Trees and Plants, but a River in the middle, cut through Rocks,
and runs up above nine thousand Paces. This River, or Lake is shaded on both
sides with all manner of delightful Trees; the middle every where sprinkled
with Isles; which are all conjoined with Stone-Bridges.

The Cloisters of the Bonzi in a Grove.
Not far from the City appears a pleasant Grove, which shadeth fifty large and
spacious Cloisters of the Bonzi, where most of the Royal Youth have their
Education, sent thither to ease their Parents of the charge of bringing them
up; yet all pay great Admittances, which are to be disbursed in the enlarging
and beautifying of their Colleges, each striving to outvie one another in
greatness, luster, and convenience. Lodowick Frojus viewing one of them says
thus:

I went, being led by some that had newly embraced the Christian Faith, through
a Door curiously varnished, into a Cloister of the Bonzi: behind the fore Gate
was an open Court, Paved with black square Stone, and surrounded with a large
Gallery, the Walls underneath being also Varnished, shine very curiously; next
to this Court lay a stately Garden, where neither Art nor Cost had been spared,
several rising Grounds, or Mounts being made in the same of polished Marble,
neatly joined together: the tops of these Hillocks crowned with Trees, were all
made passable to one another with Stone-Bridges: the Ground underneath being a
course and glittering Sand, mixed with small black Shells, betwixt which were
Planted all sorts of Flowers, which grow in such a manner, that not one day in
the year but some of them flourished in their full beauty; so that there seems
to be a continual Spring there, and a perpetual Paradise.

The King of Devils Temple.
Within this Wood also stands a Temple dedicated to the Prince of Devils; his
Image very terrible to behold, grasping a Scepter in his right Hand, two other
horrible Representations standing on each side, that on the left holding a
Book, wherein is registered (as they say) all the Transactions of Mankind, the
other seems to Read what the former has Written. The Walls every where are
Painted with various and exquisite tortures and torments of Hell, which (as
they believe) are inflicted for the manifold sins and offenses committed by all
sorts of People, of what degree soever.

There is scarce a Temple in Japan which has greater resort than this, the
People bringing great Sums of Money thither to buy Pardons, and purchase
Indulgences, to quit Scores, and clear them from the Punishments that they may
be condemned to for their sins after this mortal Life.

Yet above all the Buildings in Meaco, the Dayro's Palace is the most
magnificent, and of greatest splendour, excelling most of those Fabrics that in
ancient times were accounted famous. The fore-Gate of the Dayro; Court.
The Portico through which the Dayro goes forth and enters, makes a stately
Frontispiece, before which an Arched Portal, whose Roof jetting beyond the
Walls, has on each Corner a Golden Ball, adding more luster; near which on
each side a large Gallery, and in each of them four ample Apartments with
Vaulted Cielings, each Room having nine Windows on every side, serve for Courts
of Guard, fitted for a Garrison of Soldiers: on the outermost Wall, between the
upper and lower Story, are curious Imagery, Varnished after the Indian manner,
and next the Roof of the Gallery hangs out a Flag, or Ensign, with the Dayro's
Arms.

Description of the Bulwarks.
To this joins the Wall which surrounds the whole Court, being full of Bulwarks
and Battlements, has also many fair Watch-houses, built in the inside: But
within the forementioned first Gate is a large and spacious Court, Paved with
Freestone, which when the Dayro is carried through, is always thronged with a
concourse of People; he sits in a large Sedan, The Dayro's Sedan.
carried by fourteen Men very richly Clothed; the Sedan of a long square, rises
sloaping from each Corner, and ends in the middle in a small Golden Pyramid;
the four sides are Window'd with a thin Silk, through which he may see
whomsoever he please, yet cannot be seen by any: This Sedan rests on long
Poles, which the Bearers carry on their Shoulders; before him Rides his
Lifeguard, on each side of him thousands of Japanners prostrate their Faces,
that so in his passing by they may worship him.

His sumptuous Train.
Behind the Dayro's Sedan follows a Coach drawn by two Horses, whose Heads are
adorned with stately Plumes, Caparison'd with Furniture, Embroidered with
Pearls and Diamonds, and led by two of his Servants by their Reins; between the
Horses and the Coach go two Men, one carrying a large Fan, with which to cool,
he continually agitates the Air; the other carrying a great Umbrello.

This Coach (in which the Dayro's Royal Consort sits) is followed by above
twenty Chariots, each having two wheels, and are drawn by as many Horses, which
are led by the Reins of their Bridles: In these the Dayro's Concubines are
carried: they can see all Passengers through their fine silken Windows, making
every angle of the Chariot transparent like the Dayro's; on each side attends
in great Trains their Maids and Ladies of Honor, which are also accompanied by
diverse of the Dayro's Attendants, all Clothed in rich Apparel, which make a
glorious and delightful show.

Moreover, on each side of the forementioned open Court stand several Palaces,
built after diverse fashions, but all of them so rich and beautiful, that Art
seems to have played so well her part on them, that they required no less than
an Emperor's Revenue for the erecting of them.

H^s Kitchins.
Behind are the Kitchins of the Dayro, from whence the several Dishes with
variety of Meats, which are daily above a hundred, are carried between the
Seraglio and the Garden, to the Dayro; they are very large, having several
Officers belonging thereto, whose Table-expences amount yearly to many Tun of
Gold.

The Dayro's Court in Miaco. das Sehlos des dairo ze Miaco. Hof van den DAYRO
le MIAKO


A pleasant Garden.
Behind these also is an exceeding pleasant Garden; enclosed with high Walls;
which have in some Places large Towers full of spacious Rooms; and that which
makes it the more delightful to behold, is a round Palace, which in the middle
of the Garden rises aloft with high Turrets, the Trees all very artificially
Planted in rank and file, the Flowers and other Plants stand divided in several
Beds; and many other Curiosities in this Place are sufficient testimonies, that
Nature, Cost, and Art, have joined all their Forces together to exceed that
famous Temple in Thessalie, and the Gardens of Adonis, at large described by
ancient Poets.

Description of the Dayro's Court.
In the midst of all these sumptuous Edifices and delightful Gardens, stands
most intimate, the Palace where the Dayro has his Residence; which rising
aloft with several Roofs toward the Sky, is environed by a stony Wall, adorned
with many Images; whose Entrance ascends on fifteen broad Copper Steps, guarded
at the bottom on each side with two Watch-houses built uniform, being square,
have a large Door, several wide Windows, and the Walls very neatly Painted, the
Roof jetting over at the four Angles of the Wall, and tapering aloft, is
covered with gilded Boards, the Ridge alfo adorned with golden Balls.

The Garden thereof.
Next these Watch-houses lies his private Garden, enclosed with a peculiar Wall,
at whose corners are Banquetting-houses, built with eight Angles; the Roof of
which rising Canopy-wise, ends in a sharp Pinnacle. The delightfulness of this
Garden can scarce be expressed.

Very costly fore Cate.
Concerning the Palace it self, on the top of the forementioned Copper Steps
appears the Portico, supported on each side with eight stately Columns, covered
with golden Plates, curiously Engraven; the middle Roof jets out a little over
the other; this also adorned with Imagery. The Arch is exceeding costly, being
richly gilded on each Corner, the Floor covered with polished Marble, which
shines like Glass. Behind this Porch appears a high and spacious Court, which
being so exactly Paved, and the Stones so closely laid; that it amazes the
beholder.

Description of the Front of the Palace.
Next this joins the Palace it self, whose Gable-end jets out beyond all the
other Buildings; the Gate thereof being very broad, has on each side great
square Pillars, Carved with several Images: the Walls which join to the Gate
are Engraved with all manner of Fruitage, and covered with a gilded Roof, whose
Edges are adorned with Golden Balls, and especially at each Corner with two
Dragons Couchant. Above the first Roof is a second Story, which rests on
sixteen Columns; on whose Floor are five spacious Halls, each of which has
five double Windows in the Front, the uppermost part of them sheltered under
the Roof which jets over them, on the Corners of which also lie Couching
Dragons, all Gilded. Over this a third Story, having in the middle a broad and
high Window, and on each side two more, distinguished from the middlemost,
being made round on the top; the Roof of this Story ends in a square Turret,
which is also covered with another Roof, the Edges of which jetting over, and
curiously Wrought, ends on the top sharp like a turned Spire.

Roofs Tyl'd with Gold.
But on the right and left side before the Front, are the costly shining Roofs,
built before the Palace on ten great Pillars, covered with Golden Plates: the
Tylings of this Roof are Plates of massy Gold, joining to the undermost
Windows of the second Story, so surrounding the whole Palace.

The Dayro's Halls.
Behind these Golden Tops are the lower Halls in which the Dayro resides; the
magnificent splendour of which is too glorious to describe, the Windows are
covered with the finest of Silks, the Walls Varnished after the Indian manner,
the Floor Paved with Marble, over which are Mats spread, no less curious than
costly.

Over those Halls on the second Story are several Rooms built after the same
manner, whose Roofs not jetting out so far as that which comes over the Front,
the Windows are seen very plain. On the right and left side of it the lowermost
Roof is adorned with many Golden Balls. The upper Stories being several Foot
narrower than the other, are covered with a flat Roof, under which are many
large and convenient Apartments.

In what manner the Japan Emperor comes every sixth year to visit the Dayro.
THe Japan Emperor comes every sixth Year a hundred and sixteen Leagues to Meaco
to Visit and Complement the Dayro: which Progress is published every where by
his Gests through all the adjacent Countries, that the Ways may be mended, and
all other preparations may be ready against the coming of their great Master
and his magnificent Train, where are twenty eight Places appointed and prepared
for his Reception, whereof twenty are Strongholds; where for the better safety
the Emperor takes up his Lodgings.

Conraedt Cramer being dispatched from the Netherland East India Company to the
Japan Emperor, was present in Meaco upon his Imperial Majesty's coming thither,
Anno 1626; whose splendid Train and Reception he describes thus.

ALthough the Emperor had been busied before in preparing all things in
readiness for his great Progress to Complement the Dayro at Meaco, yet he
permitted the Netherland Ambassadors to his Presence, granting them public
Audience; whereas on the contrary, those of Siam and the Portugal Agents were
denied, and could not obtain that liberty and favor. Whereupon his Excellency
Lord Cramer, after having made his several Addresses to the Emperor and his
chief Council, had License to depart, and would have returned back to Firando,
had not the Lord of that Island, and Cacusymondonne, a Courtier of the
Emperors, entreated him to stay and see the splendid and magnificent Train, and
Ceremonies of State used at the Emperors coming to the Dayro.

The Ambassador Cramer went in the Evening with his whole Retinue to a House
near the Imperial Palace, where he had hired a Place to stand in, by which the
Emperor and Dayro were to pass the next day, being on the five and twentieth of
October, where whilst he stayed with his Servants treating about Price, the
People began to flock in such great Multitudes, and the Crowd still more and
more increasing to get Places, that the Ambassador finding it impossible to get
home to his Lodgings, was necessitated to stay there all Night: Early in the
Morning the Streets swarmed with an incredible number of People, which between
the Emperor's and the Dayro's Court were all strow'd with white Sand, and
Railed in on both sides, all along Guarded with Soldiers of his Imperial
Majesty's and the Dayro's, Japan Guards, how Armed.
Clothed in white Vestments, with Head-pieces Varnished with black Wax; and
Armed each with two Scymiters and a Pike, by them called Nanganet. These Guards
were up and down still busied in clearing the Way for Coaches and Horses,
through the People, which two days before came flocking from all Corners of
Japan in great numbers, there getting on Scaffolds, and staying all Night under
the cold Canopy of Heaven, to see the Emperor pass by the next Day, when all
the Windows and Roofs were covered and thronged with Spectators.

Great Ceremony obser^'d when the Emperor and Dayro meet.
By break of day the Train began to march. The first that passed, were several
Servants or the Emperor's and Dayro's, with many Palanquino's, or Porters, who
carried Gifts, that were to be Presents, in square Waxed Chests, covered with
the Dayro's Arms in Gold, unto the Emperor's Court, a strong Guard attending
them. After these, followed forty six Sedans, of white Wood, about a Fathom
high, in-laid with Plates of Copper, and curiously painted, in which the Ladies
of Honor belonging to the Dayro's Wives were carried each by four Men. No
sooner were these passed by, but there followed twenty one Sedans more, covered
with black Wax, and gilded, which were also carried by four, on their
Shoulders: These Ladies of Honor, being richly Habited, sat in great State.
After them came twenty seven large Sedans, which were carried by a hundred and
eight Men: Their Servants that followed were alike clothed in White Liveries,
and of the same number. In these Sedans, fair to the Eye, having gilded Doors
and Windows, were some of the Dayro's Nobles, belonging to his Court; but
before every one of these, a tall lusty young Man went, holding by a long Pike
an Umbrello of white Silk, embroidered with Gold.

The Dayro's Nobles, how habited.
Next these, came a Cavalcade of twenty four of the Nobility on Horseback,
wearing on their Heads a small black waxed Cap, with a black Plume; and Coats
with wide Sleeves; and their Breeches made of the best Satin, were long and
narrow, of several Colors, richly embroidered with Gold and Silver: By their
Sides hung gilded Scymiters, Bows, and Arrows, girt to their Waste with
Needle-workt Scarfs, whose Tassel'd Fringes hung over on each side of the
Horse; their Boots drawn on straight, being black, were gilt with golden Bars;
bravely mounted on gallant Horses, proud of their little Heads, short Ears, and
gaunt, yet Well-truss'd Bodies: Stately Horses.
Insomuch that the meanest there, seemed to excel the most generous and
bravest Steed that ever Europe boasted or bred: Their Saddles were all waxed or
gilded; the Seats embroidered with Silver and Gold, or else richly spread over
with Tigers Skins; their Mayns, like ours, were curiously pleited with Silk,
Silver, and Gold Ribbons: Their Caparisons. that covered their Breasts and
Buttocks, were a kind of Network of Crimson Silk, full of Tufts, and dangling
with the Motion of the Wind; on their Foreheads a golden Horn, resembling our
painted Unicorns: Their Shoes, to take away the noise of trampling, were of
interwoven Silk, instead of Iron: Each Steed led by two Grooms: Two great
Umbrellos, made of fine Linen, covered over with red Cloth, with a Silk Fringe
round about it, being carried before, served to cover each Horse; which was
farther attended by eight Pages, or Servants, all in white Liveries, and Armed
according to their manner with two Cutlesses; being thus attended, they Rode on
from the Dayro's to the Emperors Palace, without any disturbance in good order.

Unvaluable rich Coaches.
After these followed three rich Coaches, each drawn by two black Bulls,
covered. with red Silken Nets, and led by four Footmen in white Liveries; these
Coaches were each four Fathom high, two long, and one broad, being adorned with
Waxen Figures, and Enammell'd with Gold; on each side being three Windows, and
two before, which were hung with rich Curtains; the Entry behind opened like
the Gate of a Princes Palace, steps ascending with Turrets on each side, the
Windows beneath shaded with black Wax, the Rounds of the Wheels Gilded, the
Spokes neatly Turned, and Inlaid also with Gold and Mother of Pearl; which
moving, call glancing Beams like a Looking-Glass reflecting the Sun, a novel
and most glorious sight.

These Coaches, or rather Towers, each of them carrying in State the Dayro's
Principal Wives, Each Tail valued at an Englith Crown.
are valued at seventy thousand Tail apiece. The Train of Pages all clothed in
White which attended these Ladies was numerous, each of them carrying a Gilded
Footstool, and a pair of Wax Slippers.

But besides their Attendance of Pages, these three (as we may call them)
Empresses, and also a Train of Ladies which followed them in twenty three
Sedans, made of white Wood, and Plated with Copper, each having an Umbrello,
two Pages, and four stout men to carry them.

Dayro's Courtiers.
THese being passed by, appeared a second Cavalcade, sixty eight of the Dayro's
prime Gentlemen, bravely Mounted, and completely Armed, their Horses seeming in
beauty to outvie the former; these Marching by two, and two, were attended by
a great Train of Servants, Slaves, Pages, and a Guard of Pikes.

Presents.
Then followed the Presents, being carried in great State by several Lords of
the Country; The first were two Gilded Scymeters, the Pommel, Handle, Hilts,
and Chase all Massic Gold; a curious Fire-Lock, much esteemed with them; a
Sun-Dial, imbellish'd with Gold and Pearl, there a great rarity; two stately
Golden Candlesticks; two large Pillars of Ebony; three square Pollish'd Tables
of the same Wood, the corners Tipped with Gold; three Desks; two mighty Chargers
of Massy Gold, attended with a pair of Wax Slippers.

Coaches of the old and young Dayro.
The second Cavalcade being passed, there followed two more Coaches of like
bigness, but exceeding the former in Riches, having the Emperors Arms on the
top, Cast and flourished round, in a Plate of Massy1 Gold.

In the first sat Sadosienminamo Tonofindelanda the Emperor himself; and in the
other, the Heir Apparent, or young Emperor Oeudesienminamo Tonoynemijtsamma;
fourscore Lords marched two and two on foot before these pair of Coaches, all
gallant men, Armed with Scymiters and half Pikes, which are the Emperors
Gentlemen-Pentioners, or Lifeguard, which the Japanners call Sambreys: But
just before the Emperors Coach marched eight men, who with Ebony Staves, and
Steel Battoons, like our Whifflers, clearing the way: Two beautiful Horses
richly Trapp'd were also led before, the Coaches, about which a Guard of eight
Archers, Armed with Pikes, Bows, and Arrows.

The Emperors retinue.
Next in good Order march their Imperial Majesty's Brothers, then all the
Princes and Nobles of Japan followed on Horseback, to the number of an hundred
sixty four, Clothed and Armed like the former, but much richer, according to
their several Births and Qualities: The chiefest and most Eminentest of these
Grandees, and those that next followed the Emperors, were Owarny, Cammysamma,
Quijne Deymangon Samma, Massamenemoet, Nocammy Samma, and Myttotchonango Samma,
all the old Emperor's Brethren: Then came Matsendeyro Thuyquesnocammi Samma,
the great Lord of Langa; Matsendeyro Mutsnocammy Samma Lord of Satsuma;
Matsendeyro Jondonne; Matsendeyro Symoutsquedonno; Matsendeyro
Quonnenochwuchoo; and at last came Turagano Deynangono Cammy Samma, being the
young Emperors eldest Son: These ten Lords Rode immediately behind their
Imperial Majesty's Coaches, each by himself, attended by a numerous Train of
Gentlemen, Pages, and Guards of Pikes, etc.

t Ziedende water van SINGOCK das sicdende wasser zingock. The boiling water of
SINGOCK


The rest of the Lords followed two in a Rank, the primest of them taking the
left hand, which in this Country is the upper and chief Place; Ouwaydonne, and
Wouta-donne, the first the Emperors chief Councellor, and the last his Sons,
were their appointed Leaders, which were attended by four hundred in white
Liveries.

Sumptuous Train of the Dayro's.
Then came six new fair Coaches, though not above half so big as the former, and
only drawn by one Ox, but proportionably beautiful; In these sat some of the
Dayro's Inferior Concubines, who were again followed by a Cavalcade of sixty
eight Gentlemen on horseback, attended with many Servants and Slaves.

There was yet another Coach, wherein the Dayro's Chief Secretary Rode,
accompanied with thirty seven Gentlemen on horseback; then followed the
Norimans or Sedans, in which were carried several of the Dayro's Grandees,
whereof fifteen were of Ebbony Inlay'd with Ivory; thirteen more shining with
black Wax and Gold; and eighteen all glistering like Mirrors, with a deep
Varnish, of black Wax; these were followed by six and forty great Gilded
Caroches, which with their attendance followed the Sedans: No sooner was this
Train passed by, but there came fifty four disguised like Mascurades, being the
Dayro's Musicians, Playing on several Instruments, as Pipes, Tabors, Cimbals,
Bells, and some strung Instruments, unknown to us.

Description of the Emperors Sedan.
AFter these Merry Boys, followed the Dayro himself, sitting in a great square
Edifice, surrounded with drawing Doors or Windows on each corner; on the top
stood a Gilded Ball, and a Cock of Massy Gold thereon with wings displayed:
This Moving-house being nine foot high, was very beautifully adorned on all
sides with Carved Imagery, each Angle plated with pure Gold, and the Roof of it
imitating the Heavens, with Sun, Moon, and Stars. Fifty of the Emperors Nobles
Clothed in long white Robes, and Waxen Head-pieces carried this Ambulatory
Palace, supported on long Poles. Forty Gentlemen Accouter'd like the Ancient
Greeks or Romans, Armed with European Head-Pieces, and Pikes Gilded at the
ends, carrying in one hand a Shield, stuck full of Arrows, had each of them an
Umbrelo carried over them, and went before, being the Dayro's Lifeguard: These
were again followed by thirteen great Waxen Chests, carried by the Pallaquin
Porters:. And lastly, The whole Procession was closed with four hundred Persons
all in white Vestments, Marching six in a Rank in very good Order.

Great tumult in Mecae. after the Dayro was past.
BEfore the Dayro's Train were all past by, the Evening came on, and
innumerable company of People of all sorts; the Scaffold and Houses which had
been filled with Spectators, had disgorg'd their burdens into the Streets, so
that the multitude was so immensly great, that many disorders happened, and
several were crowded to death; many were so squeezed, that they burst asunder,
others falling, were sure never to rile, being immediately trampled under Feet;
horrible was the general cry of the common People: The Horsemen making their
way by force through the Foot, which tumbled down one over.another, in great
number on both sides; so lying prostrate, for the Horses to tread over, the
Streets flowed with blood: Amongst this miserable Crowd were also many Thieves
and Robbers, which with drawn Scymiters made their way through, cutting of
Purses, Stealing, Murdering, and Robbing as they wen't, immediately killing
without mercy all those that offered the least resistance, so that in many
places several fell down dead, and over these tumbled others; and the following
multitudes still pressing forward, oftentimes made a Mountain of Men heaped one
upon another, whereof those that were uppermost were happy, for those which
were underneath were sure never to rise; the noise all night was so great, as
if the City had been in an uprore, and the insolences grew to that height,
that many persons of Quality, who could not get out of the throng, or near
retiring to their Houses, were set upon, and many of them spoiled and Murdered;
among others, the Lord of Firando's Secretary saw his Servant Robbed, and a
rich Cabinet of his taken from him before his Face, whilst he had much ado to
defend himself from the violence of these Assaulters.

The Ambassadors escape strangely.
THe Ambassador, Conrade Cramer, stood and saw from his Scaffold many of these
Cruelties and Outrages committed; and seeing himself in no safety to stay there
all night, but that he and all his Retinue would be sure to perish before next
morning, he also ventured amongst the Crowd; the press being so great, that he
was born up by the People most of his way, being but seldom able to put a Foot
to the Ground; yet at length, so it pleased Providence, that he and all his
Followers got without any considerable loss into their Lodgings.

How the Dayro is treated by both their Majesty's.
THe Dayro and his Wives lay there three days and three nights in the Emperors
Palace, where they were served by their Majesty's, their Brothers, and the
greatest Princes of the Court. Those which were placed by the Emperors, as
Stewards to prepare the several Dishes for the Dayro, was the Lord Chief
Justice of the Country and City Miaco; and also the Lords Ivocomasamma,
Coberytothomysammay Nacamoramokumonsamma, Mannosabroyemonsamma; every Meal
consisting of one hundred and forty Services; and for to attend the Dayro's
three Principal Wives, were placed Ouwandonie, Head Councellor of the old
Emperors; and also the Lords of the Council, Farimadonne, Queniemondonne,
Sioyserondonne, and Chirotadonne.

This Feasting being done, the young Emperor gave the Dayro these following
Presents; being three thousand Boats of Silver, each of them four Tails and
three Marses; two rich Tables, covered with Golden Plates; two hundred Japan
Gowns; three hundred Pieces of wrought Satin; twelve thousand Pound of raw
Silk; one great piece of Calombac; five great Silver Pots full of Musk; and ten
beautiful Horses, with all their Furniture; but those which the old Emperor
gave him were much less: Thus ended the glory of that Triumphal Procession.

Sumptuous Palace of the Emperor Taicosama.
MEaco, by the Japanners called Cabucoma, is divided into upper and lower
Meaco's, the lower spreading toward the Fort Tutzumi, is so costly built, that
one Range seeming one House, is at least three Miles in length.

The Dayro has his Residence in the upper Meaco, where is also seen the most
Splendant and Magnificent Palace, Erected by the Emperor Taycosama, Anno 1586.
hung round about with a thousand Mats, edged with fine Damask wrought with
Gold. The Walls of some of the Rooms all over are Plate^ with Gold; the
greatest part of the Palace is built of curious Wood, and costly Marble; before
the Palace appears a spacious Court, wherein stands an Imperial Theater, where
Comedies and Tragedies are Acted.



Japauners expert in acting Plays.
At which the Japanners are very exquisite, having no want (as they say) of good
Poets, whose Theme being either Divine or Moral, they boast sufficient, and
well Written Plots; their Commick punish (like ours) Vice, prefering Virtue;
their Tragic, setting forth the great, though unfortunate Acts of former
Saints, and ancient Hero's. They also adorn their Stages with Scenes, shifted
according to their various and changed Arguments, and betwixt every Act appears
a full Chorus of Musicians, Singing and Playing like the Ancient Greeks and
Romans, on several Instruments; but no place elsewhere in Japan exhibits the
like Shows or Presentations of the business concerning the Stage, than in this
Theater.

Description of the Japan Races.
BEfore this Palace of Taycosama, they have a piece of Ground taken in for a
Course, or Race, being a Match betwixt a Man and a Horse; about the Walls stand
thousands of Spectators, on a more eminent Seat, Railed in, sit cross Legged by
themselves, several Drummers; on the tops of the Rails hang ready fitted to
their hands great Copper Kettles and Basins; some also lying on the ground, on
which they Beat and Taber with such force, that the hideous din and shrilness
of the noise, often deafs the unwilling hearers: At the end of this Lane stand
two strong Posts, having a great Rope made fast from one to the other; behind
this, at a small distance, stands a square Pillar, on which a Flag or Ensign
waves, fast on a Staff; one man's Office is to embrace this Post with his left
hand, and with his right points on the Breast of another, who has on his
Breast hanging about his Neck a square Board, Painted with a Griffin; he also
lays his right hand on the top of the Post, and his left on his Scymiter; next
to him stands a third, side-ways, which holds a long knotted Whip in his right
hand, which gives the Signal to the Racers; behind these three stand others
with black Head-Pieces, adorned also with a Sable Plume, which are the Judges
of the Course:The Prize which they run for is commonly two pair of Waxed Boots,
made fast to Wooden Clogs, Plated with Silver; he that runs has a thin Silk
Habits, Laced close about the middle, their Slceves reaching down to their
Elbows, their Breeches being wide, are tied up about the middle of their Thighs
like Trunk-Hose; on their Legs they wear Buskins of Silk; when they are ready,
the Drummers beat, and the signal being given, they start, the Race being
betwixt a Man and a Horse, they thus perform; The Man holds the Horse, by a
single Rein drawn out, with which he must not straiten, nor hold in the Horse,
who runs at his full speed, and the men by him, when drawing near the Goal, the
forementioned Posts and Cord, the Horse and he must leap over at once together;
which done, with equal dexterity, he gains the proposed Reward or Prize, which
if he fail, making a feeble or no performance, he not only loses the glory
of the Victory, but also all manner of Court-Preferment.

BUt as to what concerns the Dayro, he is the only, true, and lawful Heir of
Japan, and was formerly held in such Veneration by the Japanners, that they
honored him as a god; and by this his great respect, he kept the Empire a long
time in Peace and Quietness, till Anno 1550. During the Dayro's Government,
Japan never tasted the inconveniences of a Civil War, which after his removal
from the Throne, Civil Wars were terrible in Japan, the reasons thereof.
brake out in that nature, that scarce any Country in the World was ever a
greater Stage or Bloodshed: The salvage cruelties which they used against one
another, in that grand Commotion are unexpressable; the Conquerors turned their
new-gotten Provinces top-si-turvey, killing, not sparing Infants in the Cradle,
destroying and burning both Towns and Villages, of which some to this day lie
buried in their own Rubbish, by which they sufficiently testify the
Destructions which were made by their Civil Wars, in which Japan was turmoil'd
above fifty years.

The occasion and beginning was thus; The Dayro, who is accounted so holy, that
the Sun must not shine upon him, nor his Feet touch the Earth, nor his Hair or
Nails ever suffered to be cut; (which Custom has been in use from many Ages to
this day) had a hundred and eighteen years ago two Sons, of which the second,
according to an ancient Law, supplied the place of Captain General, to be ready
on all occasions to quell all manner of Insurrections, either by substitute
Kings or Subjects. The eldest expected after his Fathers Decease, to possess
the Throne, during whose life he held no Command. Their Mother, out of her
affections to both, prevailed so far with the Dayro, that the General-ship
should be so divided betwixt both the Brothers, that they might Command their
Forces Alternately, each his Trienial. But the youngest, when the time came
that he should Resign his Commission to his eldest Brother, refused, and
privately chose several Princes of Japan for to assist him if need should
require; by which means he Fortified himself so strongly, that he cared for no
Forces whatsoever, no, not his Father himself, who immediately chose another
General, granting him Commission, not only to subdue, but kill his Rebellious
Son.

Soon after, several of his Substitute Kings raising all their Forces, brought
a mighty Army together in the Field, with which they went on so successfully,
that in short time, they utterly defeated and destroyed the Rebel, and all his
Forces.

Insurrection against the Dayro.
This was the first Rebellion and Insurrection that was made against the Dayro;
but by the death of his Son, the War was no way finished: For the conquering
General, taking that opportunity, as having all the Forces under his Command,
after the Decease of the Dayro, made himself Emperor of Japan.

Against him the young Dayro arose, notwithstanding the new Emperor allowed him
all his former Revenues, and showed him the same Respect as had formerly been
shown to his Father. At last the Dayro marched toward the new Emperor, whom by
means of a chosen General (by the Japanners called Cubo) he defeated and slew.

This Conquering General, not regarding the miserable end of the new-slain
Emperor, aimed also at the Crown, making himself absolute Master of all the
Forces.

The Inland Wars in Japan are very cruel.
From hence proceeded a bloody War, Kings and Princes dividing the Country,
appropriating Territories and Provinces to themselves; which was not done
without much trouble: for by this means, not only Country against Country,
and City against City, but also petty Villages had peculiar Wars one with
another; those which were Conquered, were sure not to find the least mercy: for
they neither spared Houses nor Temples, nor indeed poor Infants, consuming and
destroying all by Sword and Fire, so that in short time whole Cities lay buried
in Ashes.

Mioxindeu^ opposes Cubo.
This new Cubo overcoming all, at last settled himself on the Imperial Throne;
which was but for a small time: for when he thought himself surest, not
thinking of the least Insurrection, Mioxindono, whom he had entrusted with all
his Forces, joined in conspiracy with Dajondono, Lord of Nara, who had gotten
an Army (as we said before) of twelve thousand Men, which they drew up close to
Meaco. Soon after Mioxindono, accompanied with a strong Lifeguard, entered the
City, under pretense to congratulate the Emperor for some prime favors which he
had pleased to show him. And to that purpose, that he might the better bereave
the Emperor of his Life privately and without disturbance, he invited him to a
Banquet in the Cloister of the Bonzi near Meaco, where he intended to put in
Execution his bloody Design. But the Emperor Cubo scenting the business,
suspected it the more, because he had information that the Army was drawn up
near Meaco, made all things in readiness for his escape, who being on the Way
was persuaded and called back by some of his Council, telling him that they
could not perceive any such danger in the business, accounting it ignoble for
an Emperor to fly from a Prince which was his own Subject.

But in the interim Mioxindono entered the City Meaco with all his Forces, and
drew up toward the Palace, but before he committed any hostility, he sent to
the Emperor Cubo, demanding to send him the Heads of some of his Nobles, whose
insupportable Greatness (as he pretended) stood in his way; which if the
Emperor would grant, a Peace should immediately be concluded, and he would
suddenly withdraw his Forces, and depart from the City. The Herald brought a
Letter, in which was written the Names of those Grandees which Mioxindono would
have Executed: An ancient Courtier being sent from Cubo received the Paper,
which not without many reproaches to the Rebels he tore to pieces; and
returning again to the Emperors Presence, One of the Emperors Courtiers stab,
himself.
drew out a Stilletto, with which he desperately Stabbing himself, fell dead on
the Ground at the Emperor's Feet.

The Revenge of a Son taken for his Father.
After the same manner six more made away themselves: But the Son of the old
Courtier seeing his Father weltring in his own Blood, on a sudden ran out
amongst the Rebels, where having wounded and killed several of them, he himself
was slain.

Whilst Mioxindono set the Palace on Fire in four places, Cubo rather choosing
to fall by the Sword than be consumed by Fire, cleared himself from the
embraces of his Mother, and rushed out with two hundred resolute Men with drawn
Scymiters. Cubo being foremost fought valiantly, and receiving three mortal
Wounds, The Emperor slain.
fell down dead: the remaining part fighting bravely, were soon all cut off,
dying upon the Spot, laying themselves in a heap one upon another, after they
had shown a sufficient testimony of their great Resolution and true Valor, not
one falling without slaughter of the Enemy.

But most remarkable was the behavior of a tender Youth, scarce to be called a
Man, who astonished the Foe with his desperate fierceness, having wounded
several, and slain many of them, made his way to the Emperor's Corpse; which
looking upon with great grief and anxiety of spirit, vented his Passion thus:
Why should I live, my Master thus Murdered by accursed Traitors? I have done
what I could for my Honor, his dear Love, and my Allegiance: Which as soon as
said, he threw away his Sword, and with a Dagger cut his own Throat;
notwithstanding which Wound, though mortal, to dispatch himself the sooner, he
stabbed himself to the Heart.

Miexindono takes Cubo's Palace.
In the mean while the Enemy, where the Flames had not possessed, took
possession of the Palace; where finding the Emperor's Mother and Daughters,
them they cruelly massacred, Horrible Murder.
excepting only two, which kneeled down ignominiously, begging Quarter of the
Murderers, who secured them in a strong Prison near the Palace:Then they broke
into the Treasury. The Court-Ladies, most of them being of high Extraction,
fled into a Hall not yet touched by the Fire; where by their loud shreeks, and
lamentable ejaculations, they were discovered by the Soldiers; who breaking in,
stripped some of their Clothes, ravished others, and made an inhumane Massacre
of the rest, not sparing any for Tears, Youth, Beauty, or whatsoever is taking
in the Female Sex. Others observing the horrible inhumanity of these Butchers,
rather delivered themselves to the merciless Flames, than the unmerciful
Murderers. But the Empress with some of her Attendants making her escape, got
into a Cloister of the Bonzi who soon after being discovered, was in like
manner, without the least pity or reluctation, dispatched.

Thus the Palace being utterly destroyed, and most of them that belonged to it
burned with it, Mioxindono commanded those two hundred, who made that brave and
desperate Sally, and by which he had lost many Men, to be thrown into the
Flames, where they were with the Palace consumed to Ashes.

The Bonzies prevailed so much with the Conqueror, that they obtained leave to
bury the Emperor Cubo in a Cloister of their own.

A strange Action of a Friend of Cubo's.
Frojus relates in a Letter from Canga, an Isle in Japan, Dated Anno 1565, that
a Favorite of the Emperor's hearing of his miserable misfortune, hastened with
all speed to Meaco, and viewing the Place where formerly the Palace stood, with
bitter Execrations and Curses he cried out against those inhumane Traitors that
had Murdered his Lord and destroyed his Palace: From thence going to the Tomb
where the Emperor was buried, he ripped open his own Bowels, falling athwart the
Grave, hoping so to be united with him in everlasting happiness in the other
World.

Cubo's Sisters marder themselves.
Of Cubo's Royal Family there remained only his two Sisters, and as many
Daughters alive, his Sisters having long before betook themselves to a
Cloister: These, though they were under the sanctuary of the Bonzi, suffered
many great Calamities, which not being able to endure any longer, desperately
became their, own Executioners. His two Daughters were Entertained by an
ordinary Citizen.

Yet besides these, Canadonus Vajacata, youngest Brother to the deceased
Emperor, had also escaped the cruelty of his bloody Persecutors, who spat'd his
Life because he was one of the Religious Order belonging to the Bonzi: but that
they shouldnot be in fear of any Insurrection that might happen by his means,
theyorder'd him to be kept close Prisoner: The Emperor's youngest Brother being
kept Prisouer breaks forth.
from whence breaking forth at last, he went to Vatadono, Governor of Loca, as
we have beforementioned

Vatadono and Nebununga assist the Emperor's Brother.
This Vatadono stirred up all his neighboring Princes, and chiefly Nobunanga,
against the Emperor's Murderers, to the end they might aid Vajacata, as being
the next Heir to the Imperial Crown.

This weighty Concern took good effect; for Nobunanga brought an Army of sixty
two thousand Men into the Field, and with thief Forces made so great a
progress, that Vojavata obtained his desires, and became chief Governor of all
Japan.

WHen the Rebels (as we said before) were destroyed, and the deceased Cuba's,
Brother set on the Throne, Vatadono. went with a great part of the Army to
Saccai, and Nobunanga with Vojacata to Meaco. Vatadono being in Saccai, held
correspondency with Lodowick Frojus; for whom he got so much Liberty by the new
Emperor and Nobunanga, that the banished Jesuits might freely return again to
Meaco. But this business afterward proved much to his disadvantage and
inconvenience: for he had appointed a public Disputation to be held in the
presence of Nobunanga, between a famous Bonzi, called Nichioxines, and Lodowick
Frojus, concerning the Japan Religion, and also about Martial Discipline: Bun
Nichioxines fell so much short with his Arguments about the Immortality of the
Soul, which every one obferving, proved to his great disgvace and dishonor;
which he seemingly bore with patience, but in his heart concealed bitter
malice, resolving to take revenge of Vatadono, who soon after fell into a great
Sickness: which opportunity the Bonzi making use of, went to Nobunanga, and
accused Vatadona with many false Aspersions; to which purpose he had corrupted
Witnesses, ready to affirm whatever he said; which Nobunanga believing,
Vatadono lost Nobunauga's savor by means of a Bonzi.
bred an inveterate hatred against his old Friend, which at last broke out so
far, that so soon as Vatadono had recovered his Health, he banished him from
his Court with shame and disgrace, and abated him twenty thousand Ducats
annually of his Revenue. A Whole Year he wandered up and down, despised by all
the Bonzies, who bore an irreconcilable malice against him. Become friends
again.
At last being permitted to the Prefence of the Emperor and Nobunanga, ht made
his Case so clear, that he was not only promoted to his former Dignity, but
also was presented with ten thousand Ducats above the forementioned twenty
which were taken away from him.

Vatadono's Wars with the King of Iquenda.
VAtadono enjoyed these his great Revenues but a small time; for he soon after
died by this following Accident: He had built two Forts on the utmost of his
Borders, near the Territory Iquenda, which the King of that Country could no
ways digest, and therefore would have them both to be pulled down; and because
he Governed a great number of valiant Men, he was the bolder in that his
Command. Vatadono, though he thought himself able to Engage with the other, yet
stood amazed at his peremptory Command, to pull down that which brought him in
so much Revenue yearly. These Orders were sent before, which the King of
Iquendo followed himself, and lay down before the Forts with a considerable
Army; in which at that time Dario Tacajam a resided, who immediately sent
information to Vatadono, being then at Fort Tacacuquim, of his present
Condition; whereupon he Mustered up all his Forces which were near him, and
with those he marched to Encounter the Enemy; who had information how in
considerable all his Forces were, for he could number of all that he had raised
not above two thousand Men; but his Son followed him with five hundred more.
The Enemy, which was ready to take all advantages, hid most of his Men behind a
Mountain, and so enticed Vatadono to Battle, by showing only a few of his Men,
near the Place where the rest lay ambuscado'd; for he feared that else he might
have gotten into some Fortification or other, and so have worn out the time
till fresh Forces might come to his assistance: This Plot of the Enemies proved
very successful for Vatadono, who wore a Scarlet Cap, given him by the
Portuguese, as soon as he drew near the Enemy, he lighted from his Horse, and
with one of his Companies assaulted the Enemy very fiercely, In the Enceunter
Vatadono was slain
whilst on a sudden those that lay in Ambuscade appeared from behind the Hill,
and set upon him with great eagerness on all Corners, yet keeping close
together fought very valiantly for a considerable time; but seeing no
likelihood of those fresh Supplies over which Vatadono's Son was Commander, and
how unequal the Match was, returned back, and took possession of the Fort
Tacacuquim.

A Contest between Nobunanga and he Emperor, and the reason.
Mean while the Emperor and Nobunanra fell at variance: for the one boasting
continually his Merits, that by his sole Conduct he had set the Emperor on his
Throne: which proud vaunting of his he not being able to bear, Princes
especially not enduring the good Deeds that have been done for them to be cast
in their Dish, also judging himself to be under Tutorage, and not absolute,
whilst he boasted and vain-glory'd that he was an Emperor of his own making.

These Murmurings and Mutterings at last broke forth into open Flames, and
Civil War, the Emperor Mustering all the Forces he could possibly get together
against Nobunanga, with which he thought to make a sudden end of the business,
and the better because Nobtmanga was gone to the Kingdom of Boari: But he
hearing of the Emperor's great Preparations, raised also (scarce to be
believed) another as vast an Army; with which he Marched directly to Meaco: and
though he sent Messengers daily, with all humility imploring and proposing
Peace, Nobunanga destroys all.
offering Articles of Agreement, yet destroyed the Imperial Territories with
Fire and Sword wherever he came; so that in a short time a hundred Villages,
and several Cities, lay waste, being buried in their Ashes. But the Emperor
disdained the Proposals, relying solely upon the Forces which were promised
him, which incensed Nobunanga the more; and therefore he resolved to Storm
Meaco, and taking it, to spare neither Woman nor Child: his first Vengeance he
designed should be the upper part of the City, where most of the Nobility
resided: which to prevent, and to mollify his fury, they sent him proffers of
great Sums of Money, that so he would be pleased in mercy to spare them; all
which Nobunanga refused: yet he gave strict command through his whole Army,
that they should not commit the least outrage in the lower Meaco; but the upper
part of the City he gave them free leave to Plunder.

Upper Menco Miserably burnt.
But before his Army drew near Meaco, several Conspirarors had already set Fire
on many Places of the City, that so they might enrich themselves with Plunder
before the Enemy came thither. In one Night almost a third part of the upper
Meaco lay in Ashes, whilst Nobunanga came in on the next Day, and destroyed all
what was remaining.

This Fire consumed at least eight thousand Houses, twenty Cloisters of the
Bonzies, and the two famous Temples of Amida and Xaca, besides eighty lesser
Temples.

Bonzies burnt.
Into one of these, sixty of the poor Bonzies, which gathered Alms at Meaco, for
the re-building, of the decayed Temple, Consecrated to the Idol Dalbud in the
Province of thematis. taking their refuge there, were consumed by the Fire.

The lower Meaco escaped this destruction, for not one Soldier durst offer to
enter there, Nobunanga having on pain of Death charged them all to the
contrary. But whilst one Corner of upper Meaco burnt very fiercely, the Fire
drawing near the lower City, in which was the; Temple of Yzum, the Bonzies
began to be much concerned for that Idol, and the more, A strange Idol called
Yzum.
because it was his Office to conduct the Souls of the Deeeased to a place of
punishment, from whence after being purified by Fire, he brings them to the
place of happiness ptepar'd by Amida. This Image is terrible to behold, holding
in its right Hand a Trident. The Bonzies thus highly concerned for this their
Deity, entreated him by Responses to signify to them, whether the Fire would
consume his Temple, and if he would be removed to another place: they imagined
from the Statues fixed looks, that he would be removed, and secured from the
Fire: Whereupon they immediately prepared all things in readiness, the Bonzies
with many others bringing the Image with great State and Ceremony to a pare of
the upper Meaco, which lay a great way beyond the Fire: But Nobunanga soon
after setting all parts of the upper City on Fire, their god Yzum was also
burnt there; and his Temple standing in lower Meaco, though not protected by
its Deity, being spared by Nobunanga, was preserved.

The Emperor besieged by Nobunauga.
But the Emperor looking from a high Tower on these horrible outrages, saw with
an undaunted courage the richest part of the City involved in Flames and utter
ruin, whilst he expected daily fresh Forces to relieve him, with whose help he
resolved to satiate his Revenge: but before any came, Nobunanga had so
straightened the Royal Fort with a strict Leaguer, that the Emperor began to
hearken to Terms of Peace, Nobunanga threatening, that he would surrender the
Crown to the Dayro, to whom it anciently and justly belonged.

At last Articles of Agreement were Signed, Makes Peace.
with no small diminution of Power and Honor to the Emperor. Persons of Quality
were sent from both Sides as Pledges to confirm the Agreement: all which, as
soon as the Emperor's promised Assistance came, he broke.

Nobunanga makes himself Emperor.
But this help proved his utter ruin, for Nobunanga, highly incensed the breach
of Peace, marched up again with all his Forces to Meaco, defeating the new-come
Party, took Vojocata the Emperor, and soon after assumed to himself the
Imperial Dignity. This absolute Conquest brought him thirty Kingdoms, Anno 1573.

But no sooner settled in the Imperial Throne, but he met with as many, or
rather more difficulties and troubles to break through than his Predecessors:
for who-ever thought well of him at first, and were helps to his great
advancement, finding that he took no care of keeping his Promise, but suddenly
broke the soletm Oath taken at his Coronation, to protect the People according
to the ancient Law, and be as a Nursing Father and Mother to them: but in stead
thereof he proved to be a greedy devourer of his People, tyrannizing by
arbitrary Power, making his Will a Law, and grew more hated and detestable by
his ambition of aspiring to be a god: to which purpose he set his own Imperial
Crown on an Image representing himself, in the Temple at Dubo, as
beforementioned.

Loses the love of all the Poeple because of his pers^cuting the Bonzi.
But most of all the People were instigated against this Emperor by the Bonzi,
who suffered extremely by his means in Vojocata the former Emperor's Reign; of
which hear two principal Examples, which were thus:

THe Mountain Frenoiama having very high Precipices, lies two Leagues Eastward
from Meaco, eight hundred years since a Japan King built here three thousand
eight hundred Temples, and by every one a Cloister for the Bonzi, and that they
might there without any molestation follow their Devotion and Study, he removed
all the Rustic Inhabitants from thence with their Cattle, lest any noise
should disturb them in their Retirements. At the Foot of this Mountain
Frenoiama he built two Villages, calling them Upper and Lower Sacomotum, from
whence the Bonzi fetch daily their Provisions:They had also a third Part of the
Revenue of the Kingdom of Vomis allowed them. Strange Temple and Cloisters.
These Edifices from time to time grew more and more in splendour and
magnificence, because that continually some of the Emperor's Relations, or at
least a King's Son, was kept there, which made it so famous, that all Matters
of consequence were decided by these Monks, and all Disputations concerning
their Religion were held in this University, and there, as in the chief
Academy, all Scholars Commence.

But in process of time, and chiefly by the Wars, this vast number of Temples
which stood on the top of Frenoiama, were reduced to eight hundred; and also
the wanton and luxurious lives of the Bonzies, being given over to all
Debaucheries, made them break out into all manner of outrages, and dissolute
courses, oftentimes throwing away their Books, taking up Arms: and whilst they
grew formidable to maintain a War, they made the Highways, and all Places
dangerous by their several Murders and Robberies; The Bonzi become villaous
Murderers.
nay, they grew so impudent at last, that without the least regard to the
Dayro, by the Japanners honored as a god, Commit great outrages ic Meaco.
they set upon, and Stormed Meaco, in the Year 1535. burning the whole City to
Ashes; and not only slew all those which escaped the Fire, but tender Infants
in the Cradle.

This barbarous piece of Cruelty remained unpunished a long time; until thirty
six years after they received a. sufficient reward for their bloody
inhumanities: A great War arising between Nobunanga and the King of Nechier,
the Bonzies furnished the Nechiers with all manner of Provisions and other
Necessaries, and blockt up the Passage and Avenues against Nobunanga: which he
taking very hainously, resolved to be revenged to the full: and accordingly to
put his Design in execution, he returned to Boari, which he Commanded as being
King, Nobunanga crucifies the Bonzi.
and there drove all the Bonzies out of their several Abodes, Nailing all he
could find on Crosses.

Goes to Erenoiama.
But not thus satisfied, he raised a new Army, with which he marched toward the
Mountain Frenoiama. The Bonzies not being able to make resistance, hung down
their Heads, sending Commissioners, offering great Sums of Money for a
Pacification: but Nobunanga being incensed, and full of wrath against them,
would by no means accept of their Proffers, but marched on: Then they
endeavored to persuade him, by telling him of the Sanctity of the Place, and
Reverence which was to be shown to the gods, whose Temples and Altars stood
upon Frenoiama, which had been kept unviolated many Ages. But Nobunanga told
them, that he scorned their proffered Money; neither feared he those gods they
worshipped, that had committed so many inhumane and horrid impieties, but by
the help of better Powers would deal with them according to their merits. So
left utterly out of hope, they desperately prepared themselves for resistance,
and so fight it out to the last.

On the top, or highest Spire of this Mountain stands a stately Temple,
dedicated to Canon, Son of the famous Amida. This Image has thirty Arms, and
as many Hands, in each two Arrows, a Face representing a handsome Youth, on his
Breast seven humane Faces, with a Crown of Gold, richly inchas'd with Pearls,
Diamonds, and all sorts of Precious Gems.

The Japanners come hither from all Parts of the Country, paying there their
Devotions, because they believe that he grants them a long and happy life.

A great Fast fet Idol Canon.
Every year the Bonzies keep a great Fast to the honor of this their god Canon;
which Day draws such a concourse of People that repair thither, that it would
seem fabulous to recite.

In Osacca stands also a Temple of Canon; but the Image of the god quite
another Figure, which is a custom amongst the Japanners, never to make the same
Deity alike.

Bonzies fortify themselves.
The Bonzies chief place of Defense was on the top of the Mountain, near Canon's
Temple: Thither they Mustered all those that were able to bear Arms; and there
they fortified themselves as well as they could, whilst Nobunanga burnt the two
Villages, the Upper and Lower Sacamotum, from whence they had formerly all
their Provision: And as the amazing Flames and Smoke ascended the Sky, he and
his Army marched up the Hill, having before blocked up all the Passages of the
Descents with strong Guards, that not one of the Bonzies might escape, then
giving a general Storm to their Fort, which they defended aslong as they could;
but being overpowered, they shrinking from their Stations, were as soon
possessed by the Enemy; who falling in like a Deluge, made a speedy Execution:
Are all slam.
those that escaped the Sword Were burnt in the Temple, and others that escaped
away by the Declivings of the Hill, were cut off and hunted up and down like
wild Beasts by the Guards. Yet this general Massacre little appeased the wrath
of the Enemy: for soon after he also fired four hundred Temples, with their
Cloisters and Colleges.

Four hundred Temples burnt.
We may easily conjecture how terrible the Mountain Frenoiama smoked, having so
many Temples and Cloisters, toward the Building of which in. seven hundred
years more than the King's Revenues have been from time to time bestowed on the
same. This destruction is reckoned to have happened Anno 1571.

The Vehisamidono erects a new Order.
This done, Nobunanga marched through toward Meaco, and fifteen Miles beyond
the City he set upon the famous Bonzi Taquieno Vehisamidono, who having lately
raised a new Sect to the honor of Xaca, and to that end put away his Wife, and
his Head and Chin, according to their manner, Shaven, having four hundred
Scholars under his Tuition; for whose Education at his own Charge he had built
a stately College, which got him great applause and affection amongst the
People; of which growing proud, he boldly and bitterly inveighed against
Nobunanga in the presence of the Emperor Vojocata, saying, That Nobunanga,
though aspired to such a height, would suddenly fall and drop like a rotten
Pear from the Tree: of which Nobunanga had information, and happening to light
upon him in his way homewards, though the Emperor much persuaded him, yet he
utterly destroyed him and all his Relations, levelling his Cloisters, and
banishing nis Wife and Children; but all this was not enough to satisfy his
revenge.

The famous School Facusangin.
He had a long time observed the famous School Pacusangin, which the Bonzies had
been Masters of, and possessed it in peace and quietness six hundred years
together. To this School, or University belongs several Cloisters, and a
thousand Habitations, no less convenient than costly, which also to destroy he
wanted some fair pretense, to hide his unsatisfi'd revenge; yet at last he
found a way that answered his desire.

Some Robbers having pillaged the Kingdom of Boari, carried their Booty to the
Facusangin Bonzies; which opportunity he neglected not, for having his Hands at
liberty, and a Peace being concluded between him and the Emperor, he thought it
the best time to satisfy his spleen: Is ruined by Nobunanga, and all the
Boinzies slain.
whereupon he unexpeedctly fell upon Facusangin, and destroyed all the Bonnes,
setting most of their Houses on fire, Anno 1573, which was the same Year that
Nobunanga became Emperor.

These were the occasions that set the Bonzies so much against his being chosen
Emperor, by whom stirred up, none more opposed than Xinguien King of
Cainochuno; who having banished his Father, and also imprisoned his eldest
Brother, set himself on the Throne; and wanting just Claim, he betook himself
to other practices, that might better strengthen and improve his Title; and
therefore the Cloak of Religion must be his Royal Robe, seeming Sanctity his
Scepter, and so shaving his Head and his Chin close, he took the Order of the
Bonzi, performing all their Ceremonies and religious Duties, punctual in all
the stiff Formalities of well-dissembled Holiness, attended constantly by six
hundred Bonzies; the rumor of which spread round the Country, the Japanners
not being accustomed to see a King play the Priest, and Officiate at Divine
Service, and that thrice a day, straight believed (so had he gained upon their
Affections) that he, and only he, was appointed to re-establish the shaking
Church, and restore to its Pristine Glory (now almost utterly defaced) their
Ancient Religion: On which great Multitudes from all Parts resorted to his
Palace, he giving out, That he would Re-erect the destroyed Temples and
Cloisters on the Mountain Frenioama, and also the famous Temple Consecrated to
Canon.

These Promises and fair Pretenses tickled the Ears of the Vulgar; for
Frenioama was always held to be the Supreme University for the Education of
their Youth, both in the Mysteries of Religion, Study in Philosophy, and other
abstruse Learning. Here also stood Canon's Temple, highly esteemed, and so
venerable amongst the People; to whose Feast yearly great Multitudes, from the
several Territories round about, use to resort, invited by the hopes of the
proposed Rewards of Everlasting Bliss, for all such as repair annually thither.
He also boasted, That he would outdo, if possible, the Renowned Xaca himself,
in Vindicating and Establishing their pure and ancient Religion, under which
their Ancestors lived happily, ever since they first Planted in Japan.

His Letter to Nobunanga.
Thus the Business prepared, and a good Ground-plot laid, by this time his
Admirers in several Places offered themselves and Forts, their Lives and
Fortunes, to serve and be under his Conduct: So that suddenly he grew as
powerful and as great a Prince as the Emperor; of which Nobunanga being
sensible, and perceiving his Power daily to increase; and also not a little
shaken with a ranting Epistle from the high-flying Xinguen, who subscribed
thus: Taindino Taxuxamon Xinguen; that is, Xinguen the King of Kings, and
Patriarch of all Religion: The Emperor contrarily subscribing thus; Dainoquin
Tennomavon Nobunanga; which is, Nobunanga, the Great Commander of Devils, and
Prime Leader of Wandering Spirits.

Besides Xinguen, appeared also the Prince Aquechi, bred a Soldier, who after
slew Nobunanga before Meaco, in the Imperial-Blood-Grove, Nobunanga slain.
so called (as we said before) from his Death.

Amongst his Captains, was a Prime Leader, of a Noble Aspect, called Faxiba,
whose Extract, Life, and Right to the Imperial Crown, we will here relate.

Faxiba, from whence he got that Name.
THis Name Faxiba the Emperor Nobunaga had given him, when he led a puissant
Army of the Emperors against the King Amanguci; for when he was ready upon his
March, he entreated him to give him a new Name; which Nobunanga granting,
whereas formerly he had been called Toquixiro, he denominated him Faxiba, which
is to say, Fly above the Wood; by which the Emperor expressed his hopeful
Success: for the King of Amanguci, against whom Faxiba was to fight, bore the
Name of Maridono, which two first Syllables signified A Wood, and the last,
Lord: By which also Nobunanga would have them to understand, That his new
forementioned General should by Conquest of his Enemy, fly like a Bird over the
Wood.

Serves a Rustic to cut his Wood.
This Faxiba, formerly called Toquixiro, was of a very mean Extract, being
Servant to a Rustic; his business to cut Wood from a neighboring Hill, and
carry it home. This was hard Labor, the Mountain being very steep and craggy;
and his Master consumed daily much Fuel, who on a time had laid on more than
he was used to do; which Toquixiro observing, took some of the Wood from the
Fire, putting the remaining Sticks up in such order, that a few of them cast an
exceeding great heat. His Master taking much notice of this his handsome
contrivance, to make a greater and better Fire with much less Fuel, judged hi^
Servant was fitter for other Employment, than to be his Slave. Whereupon he not
only commended him, and freed him from his bad Service; How he gets out of his
Service, into the Emperors.
but giving him Money, bid him seek his Fortunes in the Wars, or elsewhere; not
doubting, but the Gods had better things laid up in store for him.

Soon after this, Toquixiro began to have a more elevated opinion of himself,
and his swelling Thoughts aiming at something higher, he traveled big with
hopes to Meaco, where at first he got into the Service of a great Merchant, and
soon after he was preferred to a Nobleman, a Prime Favorite of the Emperor
Nobunanga's; who one day happening to go with the Emperor a Hawking, and
Toquixiro being amongst the Faulconers, and others of the Court-Retinue, it
chanced that one of the best Hawks, flying at his Game, hung tangled about the
Bough of a high Tree, by the Vervils; and when none of them were able to climb
the Tree, Toquixiro's Master bid him see what he could do, which he performed
so well, and with such comely agility, and taking dexterity, that the like
having not been seen before, the Emperor and all his Train admired the Man that
so much out-did all the rest, especially Nobunanga himself; so that he took him
into his Service, and preferring from place to place, he came to great Dignity;
insomuch that the rest of the Courtiers that saw him rise before them, and grow
more and more in the Emperors favor, spited him extremely, their former Love
turning into hatred, and never rested contriving Plots, not only to bring him
down in his Pride and Greatness, but utterly to ruin him: When an Accident
happened pat for their purpose, which they were not negligent to lay hold on; and
thus it was. A very rich Scymiter, plated with Gold, which the Emperor highly
esteemed, being stolen from the Court, and much inquiry after, his Enemies
insinuating, whispered, that no body could steal it but Toquixiro, Is accused
with Theft.
having, as they said, often praised, and taken more than common notice of it:
This buzzed about, his Greatness having left him few Friends to shake off the
Aspersion, it was the general Talk, and most of them being willing, believed;
when an Intimate of his advised him to fly; for when once it came to the
Emperors Ear, there was no way to avoid an ignominious Death. He being of a
quick Apprehension, took his Friends Advice, and absented; but he was no sooner
missed, than his Enemies taking hold of the Advantage, made the Business no
more doubtful, but all were satisfied, that he, and no other, was the Thief;
the Emperor sending every where to apprehend him, that he might receive condign
Punishment for his so heinous Offense. Whilst he thus absconded, in a miserable
condition, fearing every minute to be taken, and so die without mercy, he
secretly went up and down amongst the Goldsmiths, inquiring cunningly after
such Plates as those that were on the lost Scymiter, as if he would buy such
Golden Plates: So by great accident he lighted upon them: Then with a kind of
Authority, being a Courtier, he questioned and threatened the Buyer; who
frighted, to save his own Life, found the Seller, and so from hand to hand, at
last the Thief himself; Manifests innocence.
whom bringing to the Court, he was clearly acquitted of all, and had the honor
to be Executioner himself; Cuts off the Thieves Head.
so cutting off the Malefactors Head, laid it with the recovered Plates at the
Emperors Feet, who straight receiving him into former Favor, still advanced him
the more, vexing those by that means that had so falsely accused him.

Toquixiro at last obtaining to be a Governor, Is made a Governor.
managed his Affairs with such Moderation and Prudence, that he got the Love,
Applause, and Estimation of all that were under his Concern, which straight
preferred him to a higher Place, and of more Dignity.

THe Impregnable Castle which held out against Nobunanga and all his Power,
long after he was chosen Emperor, still sallying out with strong and bold
Parties, fetching in Booty, and often doing much damage and mischief round
about in several Places, now supposed altogether impossible to be taken in;
Nobunanga considering the Activity and Subtlity of this his Favorite, he
thought once more to Attaque it: Leads an Army into the Field.
So making Toquixiro General of the Forces appointed for that purpose, and
Commissioning him at large, set him upon the Work, though with small hopes of
carrying so considerable a Business: But beyond his expectation, and all others
that scoffed at it, as a ridiculous Undertaking, he behaved himself so well,
and showed himself so great a Master of Arms, that without much ado, what had
remained a Goad so long in the Emperors side, and had baffled him so often, Takes
the Castle of Nangafama.
he took in.

Thus the Emperor encouraged with his Success, sent him out against the King of
Amanguci, whom with the like good Fortune, Subdues the King of Amanguci.
and without any great difficulty, he subdued. Thus being one of Nobunanga's
Chief Lieutenants, after his Defeat at Meaco, being slain in the
Imperial-Blood-Grove, he took upon him the Authority of Protector of his third
Son, an Infant of three Years old, whom he kept in a Castle, showing him all
possible Reverence, due to so hopeful and great a Prince: For Nobunanga's
eldest Son was slain with his Father, and the second ran distracted.

The Deceased Emperors Wives Brother, called Xibatadono, being the nearest of
his Relations left alive, stomach'd much at the Proceedings of Toquixiro, and
opposed him in what he might; whom to remove, being such a Block in his way, he
resolved, if possible, to destroy, and immediately sat down and vested the Fort
wherein he resided with a close Siege. Xibatadono finding himself thus suddenly
surprised, and so straightned that there was no means left to escape, called a
Council of all his Friends, thus saying, You all know our hard Condition; and
for my part, rather than yield to the cruel Tyrant, I am resolved to end this
woeful Life by Self-slaughter: All my Request is, That after Death, Self-murder
committed by Xibatadono, and by all the Besieged.
you will see my Funerals in Fire, and that nothing be left of me for that
inhumane Rebel to boast of. As for your selves, make what Agreement you can for
the Preservation of your Lives. But there was not one in all the Company, but
approving of his Resolution, were resolved to follow his Example.

Xibatadono returned them all Thanks for their Fidelity toward him: But before
he took leave of this World, he made them a Funeral-Feast, loading his Tables
with all Varieties, the Roofs resounding with Vocal and Instrumental Music,
such as the Place afforded; Bowls of their beloved Chiaw, and Wine still handed
about. So after they had Treated to the height, they rose, first filling the
Hall with Combustible Matter, as Bavins, Brush-wood, and the like, which
firing, and the Flames at last ascending through the Roof, then the bloody
Banquet began. Xibatadono first fell upon his Wife and Children, and their
Servants, running them through, or otherwise mortally wounding them; who was
followed by the rest of his Captains and Officers, in like manner dispatching
their Relations and Retinue: Then throwing their Bodies into the Flames, and
standing upon them, they ripp'd up their own Bowels.

Toquixiro takes Xibatadono's Fort.
Mean while Toquixiro seeing the Smoke of the Castle ascending toward the Sky,
and thinking that the Fire had happened accidentally, thought to take hold of
that Opportunity, and so presently ordered a general Storm; where finding no
manner of Preparation, nor Resistance, neither at the Gates, nor on the Walls,
entering, he saw only some Bodies, not yet quite consumed, broyling on the
Coals: Which much represented the Misfortune that happened to the ancient City
Saguntus.

THis City Hannibal Stormed in three Places, and chiefly against a low part of
the Wall, which he set upon with several Engines for that purpose: But the
Besieged bestirred themselves so valiantly against the Assailants, that they
made great Slaughter amongst them: Hannibal himself, being wounded in the Thigh
with a Pike, was forced to Retreat, and the Army rested till their General was
cured; who then mustering his Forces, afresh Besieged the City closer than
before, Strange destruction of Saguntus.
a hundred and fifty thousand being daily in Arms, against whom the Saguntines
were forced to keep Watch on all Corners.

The Enemies Battering-Engines had by this time made Breaches in the Walls in
several Places; three Towers undermined, also turned topsie-turvey: So that the
City lay in a manner open and undefended, and the Soldiers which filled the
Breaches were naked and without shelter, having neither Battlements nor
Breast-works against which Hannibal drew up his whole Army. Hope spurred on the
Assailants, and Desparation kept the Defendants in their Stations; so the Storm
was very fierce, long, and well maintaind: Hannibal, if his Men did their
parts, not doubting but to carry the City, made a fierce Assault; the
Saguntines making good their Breaches with Throngs of Soldiers, matched with
equal Valor the Carthaginians, in so close a Body, that the Enemies Arrows
never mist a Mark.

The Saguntines answered them with thrown Javelins, Strange Darts.
carrying Wildfire; which were so terrible, and did such Execution, that
Hannibal was forced to Retreat.

Thus both Parties being tired, there happened a short Cessation: Only the
Saguntines labored day and night, to make up the Breaches of their ruined
Walls. Soon after Hannibal giving the Plunder of the City to the Soldiers, made
a more fierce and general Assault.

Saguntus is divided in the middle.
But the Saguntines having divided the Town, raised a new Wall with the old
Houses. Here they made fresh Resistance against the Enemy, it being then eight
Months that they had suffered so great a Siege. In the interim, their Wants
began daily to increase, and their Hopes of being Relieved by the Romans
vanished; the Enemies never ceasing from Storm: For though Hannibal went with a
part of his Army against the Oretans and Carpetans, which he much feared; yet
Maharbal, Hamilcar's Son, went on so fiercely, that none could observe the
Generals absence, pulling down the new Wall in three several Places, and
setting upon them with such fury, that he made himself Master of some of their
Fortifications. The Business seeming thus to be finished, the Besieged besought
that they might Treat with Hannibal concerning Peace: But the disturbed General
was too much incensed to give ear thereto; yet by the Entreaties of the
Spaniard Alorcus, they obtained so much at last, that Hannibal would permit the
Saguntines to depart, and inhabit in such Countries as he should appoint for
them; but that they should leave all their Gold, Silver, and other Treasures
behind. With these Proposals of Agreement Alorcus went over the Walls into the
City; at whose coming, all the Council gathered: Thither the People also
repaired from all Corners, to hear the News. The chiefest of the Council,
without giving any Answer upon the proposed Articles, departed and went away,
bringing their greatest Treasures into the Marketplace; where setting Fire on
them, they also stabbed themselves, The Saguntines burn themselves and their
City.
and fell in the Flames. This occasioned a sudden Alteration, which was
agitated by a great Cry from the Fortification; for a Tower having been stormed
and shaken a long time, fell to the Ground, which making a great Gap in the
Walls, a whole Band of Africans, seeing the Guards fled to the Marketplace,
thronged in: Of which Hannibal having sudden notice, immediately entered the
City, without any resistance, with several thousand Men: But the Citizens, in
like manner as Xibatadono, in a moment set Fire on all their Houses, choosing
rather to be burnt with their Wives and Children, than to be slain by
Hannibal's Sword.

Thus Toquixiro having Conquered Xibatadono's Castle, he returned to Meaco,
where he not only changed his first Name Toquixiro, but also his second,
Faxiba, which Nobunanga had given him, calling himself Cambacundono, that is,
Supreme Lord of Japan; and after that, Anno 1504. took upon him the Name of
Taicosama, that is, Mighty Emperor.

Policy of Taicosama.
BUt though he had thus brought under his absolute Subjection the whole Island,
yet he warily considered how to prevent future Inconveniences, and what might
happen to his prejudice under his new Acquirements: For several of his
Substitute Kings being of Ancient Royal Blood, would not easily submit
themselves to an Emperor of so mean an Extract; and that if any of them should
but once appear against him, it might shake his new-laid Foundation, and the
whole Fabric of his Government, the rest of the Princes being ready to follow
their Examples, which might suddenly cause a general Defection, and so his
utter Ruin: To prevent all which, he had need to be very circumspect.
Whereupon, after serious consideration, Taicosama thought no way convenienter,
than to employ these Princes, and busy them where they might spend their Time,
and show their Valor in some Foreign Country. Which Design to effect, the
neighboring Corea gave him a fit Opportunity.

Description of Corea.
THis Country is divided into eight Territories, namely, Kinki, Hoanchai,
Kyangyven, Civenlo, Kingxan, Changoing, Kaokiuli, and Pingan. On the North it
joins to Niuche in Tartary; the South respects the Island Fungma; the West is
washed by the Stream Galo, and the remaining part the Ocean borders. The
Chinese call it Chaosie. Its Length extends to two hundred and seventy German
Miles, and its Breadth thirty. The Province Kinke is adorned with the
Metropolis Pingjang. The whole Country is exceeding Populous: The Towns very
many; most of them built square, after the Chinese manner, whose Fashions,
Language, Letters, Religion, and Government, the Coreans follow; which is no
wonder, because the Chinese Emperor Hoavus subdued them two hundred Years
before.

The Transmigration of the Soul into all manner of Bodies, Their Religion.
is firmly believed amongst them. Their dead Corpse are laid in Coffins,
curiously adorned, and not buried before the third Year after their Death;
Strange customs.
but to keep in the ill scent which might get through the crevices, they glue
the Coffins close up with Lime or Clay, called Cie. The Chinese account them
barbarous, because they give their Women so much liberty, suffering them walk
in the Streets, or come in the company of men when they please; and also,
because their Marriages are performed without the liking of any of their
Friends and Relations, the choice thereof being only left to the Bride and
Bridegroom.

The Soil of this Country being very fruitful, produces Rice, and Tares twice
a year; no place affords better Paper and Cie, by some called Sandaracha, than
this Isle: This Sandaracha is much used by the Chinese and Japanners, for they
Plaster all their Walls with that Lime.

Great wars in this half Island.
MOreover, Corea has oftentimes been destroyed and ruined, and lately in the
Year twenty seven, it suffered extremely, both by the hands of their Enemies,
and supposed Friends.

The Chinesy General, Maovenlung, had an Army that quartered here against the
Tartars; his Soldiers being spread over all parts of the Country, and lying
idle, committed many outrages on the Coreans, which at last grew so
unsufferable, that they called in the Tartars for their Aid, who embracing this
proffer with great eagerness, contrived a subtle Plot, which redown'd to their
great advantage; for the Tartars Army came marching with a Vanguard of Coreans
in the Front, on purpose to surpress Maovenlung, by mistaking them to be all
Coreans; which as contrived, happened, for by this means, the Tartar fell
suddenly into the Chinesi's Quarters, and e're he could rally his Forces lying
about, he suffered great losses; but after a while gathering, and being drawn
up in a Body, he gave them so sharp an Entertainment, which put them to a
stand, the event thereof doubtful, on what side the Victory would fall; yet at
last, the Tartars pressed so upon them, that Moavenlung lost ground, and
retreated so by degrees, that getting near the Sea, he saved most of his Men
aboard of several Ships that lay there: This Victory cost the Conqueror dear,
and being the more displeased, because Moavenlung had thus got off from him;
which to revenge, fell treacherously upon the Coreans.

The four Northern Territories bordering next to Tartary, he had already
miserably ruined, when the King of Corea raised an Army to oppose the Tartars
(who then designed to Besiege the Metropolis Pingjang) choosing a convenient
place for Ambuscade, to surprise them in their March, and, as designed,
suddenly sallied out upon them, suspecting there no Opposition; both Sides
fighting very fiercely: Yet the Coreans, for all their Advantage, had been
utterly defeated, A cruel battle betwixt three enemies.
but that Moavenlung accidentally fell into their assistance, being newly
Landed, galling the Tartars in the Rear; who seeing themselves blocked up, as
in a Sack, steep Mountains on each side, before them the Coreans, and behind
the Chinese, would not stand still in this exigency or danger, for they saw no
way to get out, but what the Sword must make, whereupon they gathering fresh
courage, a cruel fight began, the like scarce ever heard of by Antiquity: The
Tartars at last made their way through the Chinese, and fled Northerly toward
the Kingdom of Niuche, leaving behind him (as they say) on the spot fifty
thousand men; neither had the Chinese, nor the Coreans this Victory for
nothing, for the first bought it with ninety thousand men, and the other with
seventy thousand, insomuch, partly, that neither could boast their victory, or
pursue the flying Tartar.

Taicosama sends a mighty Army of Japanners to war against Corea.
TO this Peninsula, Anno 1595. Taicosama sent his new-raised Army, being minded
to free himself from the powerful Kings in his Country, which he feared might
join their Forces together, and remove him, being of mean Extract, from the
Imperial Throne, he pretended that Japan would be mightily enriched, if Corea
could be joined to that Crown, and such a weighty matter might easily be
performed, being able to raise an Army that should conquer five such places as
Corea; Whereupon the Kings which he feared most, were sent for to come to the
Emperor, who giving them several Commands, Embarked them with sixty thousand
men for Corea, where Landing, they found more work than they expected, so that
the War continued a long time; The war lasts seven years.
during which, Taicosama sent them friendly Letters, and fresh Supplies, yet it
pleased them not to be absent so long from their own Country, Wives and
Children, and to be amongst their Enemies, without seeing any hopes of being
released; for none durst return home without the Emperors License.

Description of the Philipines.
DUring the War in Corea, Taicosama's mind was also busi'd with other matters
of Consequence; he sent in the beginning of his Reign a Letter to the Governor
of the Philipines, who was the King of Spain's Viceroy, and kept his Court
within the City Manilla. The Castilians discovered these Islands, Anno 1564.
and made themselves Masters thereof with little trouble; because the
Inhabitants belonging formerly to China, deserted that Government, and since
lived wildly without any Laws; but though the Chinese lost their Government
there, yet for the fruitfulness of the Islands, they still Traded thither,
sending yearly twenty Jonks, or more, Bartering Cotton, Silk, Purceline,
Brimstone, Iron, Copper, Mill, Quicksilver, Gunpowder, and Linen, for
Buffles, Deer-Skins, and Civet Cats.

A Letter of Taicosama to the Governor of the Philipines.
BUt concerning Taicosama's Letter, the Contents of it were thus: Japan, which
has so long been shaken by a Tempest of War, is now calm and settled in quiet,
which ceased not before the gods fixed him in the Imperial Throne, being the
labor of ten years: Now I have leisure, I will fall upon the Chinese, and if
you perform your duties, acknowledging me with all humbleness, to be that which
I am, your Chief Commander, you shall not receive any damage by the Japan Arms,
which else I will send to you, and endeavor to possess the Philipines to your
utter destruction.

The Governor of the Philipines stood amazed at this strange Letter, very well
knowing the Power, Pride, and Ambition of Taicosama, whose Friendship, if he
would preserve, he had no other means but to answer him with all respects; for
which purpose, he sent Lupo de Liano, with Missives to signify to the Emperor,
That the Philipines Governor had received a Letter from his Imperial Majesty,
but without being Signed by his Royal Hand, therefore he had not the confidence
that he could willingly have wished for, especially, because the Jesuits in
Nangesaque (who held some Correspondency with him) had given him no manner of
Intelligence thereof.

This Answer, not only displeased the Japan Emperor, but he was much startled
thereat, because no Transactions, nor ought else, private or public, that was
worthy of information could happen, Hazart. Church Hist 5.6.9.
but as Father Hazart says in his Church History, the Jesuits gave
Intelligence of to their Concerns abroad, which they well observed, and left no
stone unturned, that might improve their intelligence.

This jealousy of the Emperor was fomented by an Apostate Castilian at Saxuma,
who being revolted from his Religion, became a severe Persecutor of the
Christian Faith; insinuating to the Emperor, that the Jesuits would never be
obedient, longer than needs must, to his Commands; and the whole Design was, to
introduce their Doctrine amongst the Japanners, which was no other, but to
ferment Sedition to such a Rebellion, that first might tread down all
subordinate Authority, and at last supplant the Emperor himself, and so bring
the whole Nation under the Subjection of that Catholic Tyrant, the King of
Spain.

A second Embassy from the Philipines to Taicosama.
Upon which, Taicosama sent another Mandatory Letter to the Governor of the
Philipines, which, the Ship being lost by the way, he never saw; but soon after
hearing thereof, sent a second Embassy over. The Chief in Commission was Peter
Gonsalves, his assistance four Franciscan Monks, Bartholomew Ruiz, Francisco de
Sancto Michael, Peter Baptista, and Gonzales Garcia, Anno 1593. they had their
Audience before Taicosoma, presenting him with Gifts of great value; which
pleased the Emperor so well, that his former jealousies being quite blown over,
The Franciscans built a Church in Japan.
he granted the Friars leave to build a Church and Cloister near Meaco,
provided, that they should not meddle with his Subjects, nor persuade them
neither in private or public concerning matters of Religion, all which they
promised, and in a years time raised a Church, Consecrating it to the Virgin
Mary of Portiuncula; but however, notwithstanding all this, they busied
themselves clandestinely and often in public, to raise Proselites, which
Doctrine spread every where in short time amongst the Japanners, who embraced
Christianity with such eagerness, and came flocking to them in such multitudes,
that these four were not able to perform their Functions at the Ceremony,
belonging to their Conversion and Baptism; for which cause they sent for
assistance to the Manilla's; from whence soon after came the Franciscans,
Augustine, Rodrigo, Marcello Ribadeneyra, and Hieronimo de Jesu, with Letters
and Gifts from the Governor of the Philipines to Taicosama, to whom the
Presents were very acceptable; but the Letters unpleasing, seeing they answered
him not to what he had written.

Franciscans build Cloisters in Japan.
Peter Baptista, was the chief of the Friars which so spread their Religion,
that they built another Cloister, calling it Bethlehem in Osacca.

Moreover, they obtained liberty of the Governor of Meaco to build a third
Cloister at Nangesaque, under pretense of two sick Brothers, Peter Baptista,
and Hieronimo de Jesu, which could not agree with the Air about Osacca, so that
for their health-sake, they were necessitated to remove: These two went and
resided in a Chapel Dedicated to Lazarus, standing near Meaco, between two
Almshouses, which were governed by the two Brothers of Mercy. Thither a great
number of people flocked daily from the City to see them perform Mass, and hear
their Disputations.

A Japan Nobleman, erects an Order of the Virgin Mary.
AMongst whom came a Noble Person, called Didacus Gonnoi, who soon after
embracing the Roman Religion, was a great Promoter of it in the Territory, near
the City Macava; insomuch, that he Endowed a Brotherhood with Means, and built
a College, Dedicating the Society to the Holy Virgin, who also invited the
Heathens to the hearing of the Gospel.

Why Taicosania permitted the Friars to be in Japan.
Taicosama seemed to wink at this nestling of the Monks, sent from the
Philipines to Japan, because those Islands brought him in yearly a great
Revenue; and amongst other Rarities which came from thence, were certain Pots
or Cruises, called Boioni, which might be had there at a mean Price, but by the
Japanners valued above Gold, because no Vessels whatsoever preserves their
Liquor, mixed with the Powder Chia, better than these Cruises: This Drink the
Noblest men in the Country make with their own hands, in a peculiar place of
their Houses, built for that purpose.

Trades in Cruises.
Taicosama sent two Persons to the Philipines, to buy up all these Pots, being
certain to make vast profit thereof. But these his Factors found in the City
Manilla several Japan Christians, which bought up all those Vessels, with
intention to dispose of them again in Japan. Taicosama being informed thereof,
took all those Traders, and seized upon all their Cruises which he could light
on, and forbad them upon pain of death, not to bring any more thereof into his
Dominions; so they escaping narrowly with their lives, were again released.

Promotes his Brothers Sons to high dignities.
BUt before Taicosama began the Wars with the Coreans, he Promoted his Brothers
Sons, having no Children of his own, to high Dignities and Honor; the eldest,
whom he allotted to be his Successor, he Crowned King over five Kingdoms; the
second over three, lying near Meaco; and to the youngest, he gave two;
preserving fifteen for himself, with the Supreme Command over all. The
remaining Provinces and Territories were divided amongst his Courtiers,
Generals, and nearest Friends, with Proviso's, to pay an Annual Tribute to the
Emperor. But those Princes which were not removed, were oppressed by Taxes,
that they were scarce able to rebel, living continually in fear, on one time or
other to loose life and all.

His intention about the common War.
And indeed it was so designed, for he had no other intention to make Wars with
the Coreans, but that those Kings which he sent thither might be ruined there,
or at least so much Work to do, that they should not disturb him in his
Dominions; or if they should in any time Conquer Corea, then he would give them
the Conquered Territories in exchange for those in Japan, that so he might be
absolute Governor over his own Empire at home.

Pretends to give over his authority.
And that none might suspect this his Design, he pretended that he would no
longer Administer, but give over his Imperial Authority to his eldest Nephew of
twenty five years of age; Whereupon he nominated him the Quabacondono, which
name is only given to those that are Heir-apparent: But this was but
dissembled, for though he Nominated him, yet he no ways intended, nor did part
with his Authority.

But the Kings and Princes which he employed for Corea, never scented in the
least that he had laid this Plot for their destruction, and the enjoying of
their Estates, pretending nothing, but the care of theirs and the public good;
so that they went cheerfully abroad, with an Army of sixty thousand men, Japan
Forces goes to Corea.
and soon after followed a hundred and forty thousand more, which Forces
Landing in Corea, in a short time carrying all before them, made themselves
Masters of the Metropolis Pingjang, and most part of the Island; yet often they
met with repulses and great obstructions for the Chinese Auxiliaries, Chinese
assist the Coreans.
which still came fresh and fresh, maintaining a doubtful War six years, and
drove them at last toward their Landing-place, Beat the Japanners from Corea.
where they were sorely galled by twelve well manned Fortresses, that often
Sallied out upon them; so that they were forced to make a dishonorable Peace,
the relinquishing of all their Conquest in Corea.

Thus ended the War, which exhausted Taicosama's Treasure, and spent him a
hundred thousand men, amongst which, his second Nephew, whose youngest brother
died before.

Quabacondono commits great outrages in Japan.
The eldest made Quabacondono, was yet living, he being witty and quick of
apprehension, yet was most inhumanely cruel, for his greatest delight was
Butchering of Men in a humane Shambles, which he had thus contrived himself, in
a place near his Palace, in the middle of an open Court, enclosed with a Wall,
and strow'd all over with white Sand, stood a great Table, whereon, when he
wanted Criminals, who ever he had a picque against, or had a desire to see how
he would die, where laid according to his Fancy, then began his sole Delight
and chief Recreation, This he Quarters with great Art and Dexterity; which
done, rips up his reaking Bowels, yet alive, and when perceiving with the
effusion of Blood and Spirit before his last Gasp, to feast his Cruelty, chops
off his Head; That he binds to a Post, so that he may not stir, then takes his
Bows, Arrows, and several Guns, taking aim here and there, where Wounds are
not Mortal, and when he perceives him full of Torture with Bullets and Arrows
hanging in his Legs and Thighs, then to Crown his pleasure, shoots him in the
Breast and Belly, whilst dying, to close up the Tragedy, he claps a Brace of
Bullets into the Head: But when thus he has satiated his Cruelty upon Men, to
renew his delight, he takes a Woman with Child, and in stead of Butchering,
Anatomizes alive, viewing the Infant in the Womb, and making inspection through
all the Labratories of Nature, concerning the Formation, Production, and the
Birth of Mankind; and (as they affirm) what ever infliction has been exercised
by the most cruellest Tyrants, he has so much exceeded, that he may be called
The Prince of such Bloody Butchers; Phalaris Bull, and many other of the like
inventions, Cruelties of Phalaris. Of Atreus. Of Tullia.
seeming to this but easy torments; besides, he excelled all those Masters of
Cruelty, because he troubled none with the horrid Office, but was their Salvage
Executioner himself.

The reasons from whence the malice proceeded between Quabacondono and his
Uncle Taicosama
But this inhumane Monster, not long Reigned thus, perpetrating such unheard of
Murders, for his Uncle Taicosoma, though he had chosen him his Successor,
declaring him Heir-apparent, and already put him in possession of five
Kingdoms, suddenly this his sweetning and love toward him turned into hate,
upon several occasions; for though Quabacondono was Elected by his Uncle, and
styled Emperor, this his great Name bore but small Command, for he administered
in all Affairs of State himself, keeping the Reins of Government in his own
hands, whilst the Favorites and flatteries about the young Emperor wearied his
Ears, insinuating, that he was but a Nominal Prince, and how the People mocked
at his great, but empty Name, which signified just nothing, calling him Emperor
without Empire; and that the blindest might see Taicosama's aims, who had twice
intended to send him to Corea, where he might either be dispatched, or
lingering in such a long War, loose all his Interest at home, but encouraged
him, not only with the Conquest of that Isle, but that he would enable him
with Forces to Conquer the main Land, China, and there make himself an Emperor:
But the business of Corea falling unsuccessful, what e're he flattering,
pretended, or secretly intended, the whole design fell, and came to nothing.

But concerning the practices of both these Princes, Uncle, and the Nephew,
and their Plots of destroying each other, since the Relation stands for an
attested truth, we shall at large give you the whole account.

Taicosama has a son in his old age.
QUabacondono's Fears and Jealousies daily increasing on several occasions, but
more especially exasperated thus: Taicosama being without any Issue, on which
account he made him Heir-apparent, and had Invested him in all his own
Regalities, now had a Son, who by Birth and Laws of Nature might possibly sway
the Empire after his Father Taicosama's Decease; whose Genethliacon, or
Birthday was kept with all the Joy and Celebration that could be imagined in
Festivals, and Thanksgiving to their gods through all the Cities in Japan, that
Quabacondono, beyond all expectation, had an Heir in his old Age: This stung
him to the heart, being evidently bereaved of the Empire; but that which more
embittered his grief, were his three Sons, the hopes of his Family, which he
had already designed to bear the Chief Commands under him in the Empire: His
hopes thus vanishing like a Dream, all that he could bethink himself of, for
present redress, was to cast out, that this Son was none of his begetting, and
that they might well have spared their Festival Rejoicing, if the truth were
known: The Emperor Taicosama being informed that this Fame was of his Nephew's
broaching, stirred up private Animosities the more, so that the whole Nation
sat as in a Theater, expecting on the Japan Stage the Bloody Tragedy, either of
the Uncle, Nephew, or both.

Strange custom in Japan, when the Emperors give over their Government.
DUring these private Grudges, the time came on in which Taicosama, according
to the Japan manner, was to give his Nephew Quabacondono a Visit; for it was an
ancient Custom, that when the Chief Governor voluntarily deserts his Authority,
investing another, being grown old and retiring to privacy, that not only he,
but all the substitute Kings should address themselves, and honor him with a
Visit; which Confirmation of his Authority, the manner of which being so
expensive and Magnificent, it will not be amiss here to relate.

The Emperor preparing for his Progress, and the Nephew to Entertain his
expected coming, sent Huntsmen by thousands to ransack the wide Forests for
Venison; as many Fishermen searching the Sea, Ponds, Lakes, and Rivers for
Scaly Banquets.

How the Japanners keep their feasts.
THe Japanners at Meals sit cross Legged on the ground one behind another, each
at a peculiar Table, which being square, are a Foot and a half high, and
according to the conditions of the People, more or less, Costly; some made of
white shining Wood like Glass; some richly Varnished; other Waxed, after the
Indian manner; and some Inlaid with Gold, according to the greatness of the
Feast, or the number of the Tables; at ordinary Dinners, or at the first
Course, three Tables set before every one with great Variety, Dish'd up all
Gilded: At the last Course, they bring three Tables more full of Salt Meats to
relish their Cups. At the Emperors Feast, a great Golden Bowl called
Sacansuchi, is carried about, Cup called Sacansuchi.
out of which the Princes are invited to drink.

Quabacondono had prepared against this Feast thirty thousand of these Tables,
of several fashions, both for Men and Women: The Women sit out of the sight of
the Men in a Hall apart.

On the other side, Taicosama was ready for the accustomary Visit to
Quabacondono, who in like manner was ready to receive him.



Taicosama puts off his journey.
When an eminent Person that had the Emperors Ear privately informed him, That
these gallant Preparations veiled a secret Plot for his Ruin; This warning
wrought so on Taicosama, that he put off the Journey, which Quabacondono
resented very ill, having prepared all things in a readiness, which were now
lost, and all his Cost and Charge bestowed in vain; and besides that, he
suspected some mystery that should thus suddenly retard him, being ready for
his intended Progress.

Mean while, he carried himself so cunningly, and with such humility, taking no
notice of his Jealousies or Discontent, that he made him change his Resolution;
so that he set forth eight days after the first appointed time on his Progress;
for if he had not gone, it would have been looked upon as ill-natured, and that
he slighted the company of the several Princes, which were to be also at the
Feast.

The Progress was performed in the following manner:

Goes to visit Quabacondono. Sumptuous train of Mandocorosama, Taicosama his
Consort.
TAicosama sent his Empress Mandocorosama before him, which then resided in
Fissima, three Miles from Meaco: In sumptuous manner she led the way, before
her went a great number of Nobles, marching in order, more than an hour passing
along; these had several Files of Musketeers, being their Guard walking before
them, their Arms being Varnished, glittered against the Sun like Gold; behind
the Nobles were carried three great Waxed Chests, with the Empress
Mandocorosama's Apparel; after these came fifty more that bore Vestments of her
Ladies of Honor; these were followed by sixteen brave Horses, Laden with Gold,
covered with Sumpter-Clothes Imbroyder'd with Pearls, Plumes waving on their
Heads, the Richness of which amazed the beholders: Which Gold was an accustomed
Present from the Emperor and Empress to the young Emperor. Next, marched in a
Cavalcade bravely Mounted, fifty prime Lords belonging to the Court, each
attended by thirty Pages; then came eight Quirosols or Sedans, each carried by
thirty two men, in these the prime Ladies of Honor sat, which were followed by
Mandocorosama in a Sedan, carried on the shoulders of Persons of great Quality;
this Sedan, or rather, Moving-house, was so curiously Wrought with Carved Work,
that the Artists not only got great Reputation for their several hands, but an
incredible Sum of Money for their Reward of well-doing, from the Empress; in
this she sat so private, that she could be seen by none, but her self might
see whom she pleased, then followed a hundred Sedans more, of the same fashion,
but of less value, in which sat several Queens and Princesses, gaudily dressed,
attended by a hundred and fifty Ladies of Honor, all gallantly mounted, with
Silken Vails, each of them attended by a great number of Lacquies, and a Groom
waiting, with two led Horses.

And lastly, The whole Procession was closed by the several Maids of Honor,
carried in little two-Wheel'd Chariots, which as the Print represents, are shod
at the ends with Plates of Silver and Gilt; the Spokes of Cedar, Carved and
Gilt, the Fellies of the Wheels shod also with Copper; the Seat in the Stern,
fitted to hold one in great State, spread with Tapistry, which hangs down
betwixt the Wheels; the empty part before fashioned like an Oval, is open, she
having a stately Canopy over her, defends her from Rain and the Sun, and when
she pleases, she draws her ty'd-up Curtains to keep off the Wind, being driven
along by a lusty Man, with two Poles athwart his shoulders: With this Train,
Mandocorosama entered the Borough Jurazu, presenting to Quabacondono a great
Mass of Gold, and other inestimable Jewels; which kindness of hers was
bountifully rewarded by Quabacondono, who was also very liberal in bestowing
the like rich Presents on her.

Sumptuous train of Taicosama, going to Quabacondono.
The following day, Taicosama came from his Castle, from whence, a little
before, most of the Japan Nobility went to Juraru; the ways between Taicosama's
Palace and Juraru, were Guarded on both sides by Soldiers, each standing two
strides from the other, Armed with a naked Scymiter; these belonged, and were
under the Command of the Lord of Mino, Grandson of the slain Emperor
Nobunanga, and therefore the just Heir to the Crown: Between these Guards, past
first three hundred Persons of prime quality, every one having their several
Escutchions, with all their Emblasonings, carried before them, with clusters of
Pages and Lacquies; after these came several Princes, some of which carried the
Swords, others the Daggers and other Arms of Taicosama. These were again
followed by Taicosama, Taicosama's rich Chariot.
who sat on a rich and magnificent Chariot, which had cost him several Tun of
Gold, for the sides and middle were adorned with unexpressable Imagery and
Carved Work, and also the four Seats covered with Massy Gold, were much to be
admired; with the Axeltree on which the Wheels turned, and the Spokes and
Fellies were all of Silver. This Chariot was drawn by two black Oxen with
Gilded Horns, their bodies spread over with Purple Clothes, Embroidered with
Precious Stones. Taicosama used these Oxen, not for want of Horses, for several
thousands served him in this Train; but as a testimony, that he observed the
Ancient Customs, established many Ages before by the Dayro's, which were always
drawn by Oxen, when ever they went to any grand Entertainment, still attended
by a Guard of Nobles.

Thus attended, Taicosama entered Meaco, where he was met by a thousand, all
Persons of Quality, sent from Quabacondono; who as soon as ever they drew near
the Emperors Chariot, light from their Steeds, those before Taicosama doing the
like; these dividing to each side, standing close up, made a Lane for the
Chariots to meet. Soon after Quabacondono appeared in his open Chariot, no way
inferior to that of Taicosama, being followed by the Cunghi Lords, all related
to the Dayro, each attended by their several Trains.

In the most eminent Streets they drew near, making a stop, whilst Quabacondono
dispatched the Viceroy of Meaco, to congratulate Taicosama's Aggress, who sent
the Lord of Tangi, to Complement the Messenger sent from Quabacondono.
Quabacondono meets him.
Both meeting and Saluting betwixt the Chariots, and having done their several
Congees, the Lord Tangy's Coach returned; whereupon the Viceroy called after
him, saying, Quabacon vonariscens cu Banazi, that is, Quabacon wishes that your
coming to his House may be in the presence of Millions, and last ten thousand
Ages; which was answered by Taicosama in his Coach with a loud voice, Sachighe
Icatei Icarei, which signifies, Let him drive before, and I will immediately
follow.

The whole Train enter the Castle Jurazu.
At the end of this Ceremony, the Lords which Guarded one side of the Street,
re-mounted their Horses, and followed Quabacondono to Jurazu. Taicosama staying
some small time, also went on in a good Order: Before the whole Solemnity was
past, the Sun had almost finished his days Journey.

The Master of the Ceremony, to whom the whole Care and Conduct of this Feast
was committed, was Genefoin, Governor of Meaco.

When Taicosama came before the Castle Jurazu, Riding over the Bridge to the
inner Court, there being welcomed by all the Princes, where he delivered his
Presents to Quabacondono; who seemed not able to express the high esteem and
value thereof: And that he might no way be indebted to his Uncle for these his
great Favors, he returned his kindness by giving him also many rich Gifts.

Sumptuous Entertainment there.
Three days did this great Reception and Entertainment last, nothing being
wanting that either delighted the Eye, Ear, or Palate: the Tables still
covered, and full of all manner of Varieties, which the Earth, Sky, and Sea
could afford, Dish'd up with all the skill their Cookery could invent, to
invite the Palate, and add fresh appetite; Vocal and Instrumental Music,
according to their manner, every where, and in every Room; each day their
Theater thronged with the primer sort, where they had several Comedies prepared
by the Learned, and those who were skilful in Poesy, for the present
Entertainment, Description of their Tilting.
not wanting variety of Scenes according to the Argument; also in running at a
Carved Head (to which sport came the Emperor and all his Nobility,) some
running at it with a Spear, others striking at it with a Bill, and some
shooting at it with Bow and Arrows, or Guns, in manner as appears by the
following Sculp.

But whilst these Jollities and continual Feastings were performed to the
height, with all the Pomp and Decorum imaginable, the Emperor Taicosama had
but little relish thereof, still alarmed with fresh fears and jealousies,
which Melancholy and Age made greater and more imminent than they were; and
though there were something of reality, yet he startled at as many shadows,
which often his troubled Fancy presented, expecting hourly some Bloody Plot
should discover it self to the danger of his Life: to prevent which, for his
better safety, being very subtle, he set private Guards and Watches of those
whom he could trust, who still shifting Places, kept all Passages to the
Emperor's Lodging, so that none could stir upon any Conspiracy or private
Design, but they would as suddenly perceive their Motion, whilst the old Man, a
cunning and experienced Dissembler, showed not the least sign of suspicion, but
with all complacency and kindness, even to doting, courted and flattered his
young Nephew, seeming not able to forbear to pour out his dear affection, and
how much he loved him, which appeared evidently by what he had done, and should
be more manifest by what he would do for him; and also told him, that he did
assure himself of the like returns of his affections and kindness toward him,
since nothing could be more impious and inhumane, than for him to contrive any
thing detrimental to his Honor, or dangerous to his Person.

The young Emperor was no way wanting in his Expressions, and soft returns to
his Uncle, wishing on himself, with many Execrations, some mischief might
befall him, or any that ever harbor'd the least thought which migh be
prejudicial to his dear Uncle and kind Father, who by his adoption had made
him Heir to his Empire, and already possessed him with five wealthy Kingdoms,
and now had confirmed all this by the honor of his Visit.

Thus both vizarding their intentions, they played a hard and wary Game, whilst
all the Court and City saw through the young Man's subtle glozings, that he
had no less design, when ever opportunity presented, than the utter ruin and
destruction of his Uncle; which his intention on the second Night of this
great Entertainment, was verily believed to have been put in execution, by an
accident that then alarmed the whole City, which was this:

A strange Accident in Jurazn.
The Royal Theater being much too little for so mighty a Concourse as at that
time repaired thither, Noblemen, Princes, nay, Kings themselves, if coming
late, were forced to return back again, the House being crammed so full, and
many that were within so thrust and crowded, that they rather suffered torture,
than any delight from the presented Comedy: to remove this inconvenience, that
there might be nothing wanting at so high an Enterview, and Meeting of so many
Princes, there was immediate order given to erect another Theater that Night
against the next Day, ample enough to contain so great an Audience: The
multitudes of Workmen which were thus suddenly emploi'd, bussling up and down
with Lincks and Torches, making every where a confused hurry and noise, which
awaked the Court and all Meaco, every one starting from their Beds, believing
that what they so much feared, was in agitation, at least the death of an
Emperor: but daylight approaching, the mistake vanished, finding that all this
stir was only about a new Theater.

So this magnificent Feast ended as silently as it began, without any other
disturbance than the error of that Night.

A sumptuous Banquet prepared by Fidandono.
From thence both the Emperors were invited with their whole Retinue, to a
Dinner prepared by Fidandono, one of the greatest Princes in Japan; which was
performed with such wonderful abundance and Magnificence, that you may compute
the extraordinary Charge by the Leaf-gold, which only tricked up their Dishes,
amounting to above four thousand Crowns, but the charge of their Potations rose
much higher; foreach Draught that he drank to the Emperor, which must be nine,
the first costing him by way of Present ten thousand Crowns, the second more,
so increasing, till the last, doubling the first, came to twenty thousand
Crowns; so that the whole Charge of the Treatment seems incredible, being
scarce to be reckoned: all this was to keep in, and preserve his favor with the
Emperor.

And also by Gietazo.
Next day the Emperor Taicosama Progress'd to Gietazo, Governor of eight
Provinces, where he was Entertained with no less State than by Fidandono.

Taicosama comes to Fissima.
At last returning to his Court at Fissima, where he invited his Nephew
Quabacondono to a Feast, who accordingly came at the appointed time; where he
got so much praise and applause by his Dancing, and other more manly Exercises,
that Taicosama grew more jealous at this his rising popularity in his own
Court. Amongst other great Men and Princes in his Palace was Gefonio, Nephew to
the late Emperor Nobunanga, whom Taicosama privately incited, by commending of
his agility in the like Exercises, that so encouraged he might get the same and
praise from his Nephew: But he being more wary than to stir up any displeasure
from Quabacondono, whom he supposed would succeed in the Imperial Throne,
performed his Exercises rather worse than better, so keeping in favor with the
young Emperor: which Taicosama observing, called Gefonio aside, and changing
his note, commended now his Prudence beyond his Activity, telling him that he
was much troubled, that the Son of such a Father, raised to that Dignity and
Honor which he now enjoyed, should be sent thus by his Nephew as an Exile,
under the pretense of Commanding an Army, to the utmost Confines of his Empire;
but he would for his Unckles sake prefer him on the next opportunity to a
nearer Employment, and make him a Governor of more Provinces than one; and for
the present, as a testimony of his favors, he desired him to accept of ten
thousand Bags of Rice.

But Quabacondono being sumptuously entertained in Fissima, would no ways be
behind in repaying such Favors to Taicosama: And having erected a stately
Palace at Fissima, where he prepared a rich and costly Banquet, invited his
Uncle Taicosama thither; who fearing to deny the Request, yet put it off from
day to day, under a pretense of indisposedness. which continued so long, that
Quabocondono observing it to be only an excuse, Quabacondono parts
discontented from Taicosama.
returned much displeased to Jurazu: This stirred up in him distrusts, and
thoughts of self-preservation, and his Unckles destruction; but all this he
kept secret, as if he seemed not to have the least thought thereof, spending
much of his time in seeing Sports and Exercises, inviting whoever were famous
for Dancing, Fencing, Wrestling, Archery, Martial Discipline, and the like,
with several Prizes and Rewards to the Victor, whilst he exercised himself in
that cruel and bloody sport of Butchery, in public showing his dexterity and
skill in mangling humane Bodies as we said before; and also more insinuating
himself with flatteries and doing good offices, into the favor of several Japan
Princes: Endeavors by Scirabingo's means to obtain the King's Favorites.
To which purpose he employed his prime Favorite Scirabingo, whom he sent every
where to inveigle the Princes to take the Oath of Allegiance, and Sign it with
their own Hands, and that they would be ready upon the Command of Quabacondono,
to raise and bring as many Men into the Field, as his occasions should require:
Whereupon Scirabingo dealt first with Achiromar, King of nine Provinces; but he
refused, saying, Why should I take an Oath of Allegiance, never being suspected
in the least that I ever would revolt: Yet several others took the Oath, and
delivered it Signed to Scirabingo. All these Writings were committed to the
custody of an ancient Matron residing in Quabacondono's Court.

But Achiromar who refused the Oath, gave private information to Taicosama
concerning the Proposals made to him by Scirabingo, in behalf of his Nephew
Quabacondono.

Quabacondono refuses to come to Taicosama.
This Plot seemed to be of great concern to Taicosama, thinking it fit to lose
no time, seeing his Life and all he had lay at stake: whereupon desiring
Quabacondono in a friendly manner to come and speak with him about a business
of great consequence; but he subtle and conscious of his own private Designs,
mistrusted some greater matter, and of imminent danger to his Person lay hid,
so humbly craved his excuse, pretending to be troubled with fits of the Spleen,
and overflowing of the Gaul.

Requires Answers on five Demands to his Nephew.
But Taicosama would not take it so, but sent five Princes, his Favorites, which
then resided at his Court, to Quabacondono, impowering them to demand an Answer
to his five Queries, which were these: First, How it could be, that one so
infirm, as he gives account of himself, could be able daily to perform robust
Exercises, only fit for healthy Persons in their full strength and vigor?
Secondly, How it suited with the honor of an Emperor, to cut and mangle in
public his innocent Subjects? Thirdly, Why he kept so many Soldiers in Arms,
thereby disturbing the Empire with fears of some great and sudden alteration?
Fourthly, Why he doubled his Lifeguard, being Musketeers, with a thousand
Men? Lastly, Why he dealt in private with the Japan Princes, to take the Oath
of Allegiance to be faithful to him? Closing with a desire to know if he had
any thing to allege against him.

Mean while Taicosama sent a subtle Negotiating old Lady, well stricken in
years, to Quabacondono's Court, to pry into affairs, and gather what she could
from the present Humor and Discourse there, but especially concerning their
opinions of the five Queries.

Quabacondono's Answer.
The Commissioners presenting the Queries to Quabacondono, he not asking long
time to answer, told them, That he was much troubled with the rising of the
Spleen, and overflowing of the Gaul, and by the advice of his Doctors he was
ordered to lay all business aside, and affairs of State, and follow bodily
Exercises for his recovery; That playing the Executioners part was prescribed
also for his Health, and that none suffered by his Hand, but such as were
notorious Malefactors; That his Soldiers and double Lifeguard were not to
embroil in War, but to preserve the Peace of the Empire, but more especially to
defend his dear Uncle, now grown old, from sudden Insurrections that might
arise from the already-murmuring People; and lastly, That the Oath which he
required of the Princes, was to keep them in Unity amongst themselves, and
better under the subjection of his Imperial Majesty.

Whereupon the Commissioners replied, That Taicosama would without all doubt be
well satisfied with, these his Answers, if he would but be pleased to Write and
Sign them with his own Hand; which Quabacondono performed, and sent with all
speed to Taicosama: who as soon as he received and read the Paper, cried out
aloud, saying, O apparent testimony of my dear Nephew's innocence! how
deceitful is this wicked World! who could believe that scandalous and
backbiting Tongues, still buzzing Tales, should raise such misapprehensions
between me and my always-faithful Quabacondono?

These emphatical Expressions of the old and cunning Dissembler were believed
to be real, and immediately sent in Writing by his Friends to the young
Emperor, which so lulled him asleep, that he dreamed of nothing less than the
secret displeasure of his Uncle: which Taicosama did to no other end, but to
get time to strengthen his Forces, which were then too weak to encounter with
his Nephew, who was in a ready posture of defense; so that he could not do any
thing but by fair means, Raises Forces privately.
till such time as his Militia (which he privately raised through all Japan)
were drawn to Fissima. And indeed he carried his Design so closely, that
Quabacondona had not the least information of it, little suspecting any thing,
because the Princes from all Parts made daily Addresses to him, with joyful
Congratulations for the happy and undoubted Reconciliation betwixt him and his
Imperial Uncle, whose affections were such, that he would (now growing old)
soon establish the sole Government upon his dear Nephew.

During this kind correspondency between both, Taicosama had information, how
that the Princes which he had commanded, were marching on in their Way from
Vacaza to Fissima. And now the time came which he had so long expected to
perfect his Design: Threatens Quabacondono exceedingly.
whereupon he sent Messengers to Quabacondono, with strict Commands to come to
Fissima, and there to answer to whatever should be objected against him; which
if he refused, he would take such a course, that the present World should
tremble thereat, and his Successors stand amazed when ever related: for first,
he would utterly destroy the Castle Jurazu, and all other Buildings rected by
Quabacondono, with Fire; and whoever he found that made the least resistance,
should perish without mercy by the Sword; and if possible, utterly eface, and
cut off his Memory from the Earth.

Quabacondono saw himself now in the Trap, and that it was then altogether too
late to make the least resistance, since Taicosama had gotten so great an Army
together, which he was not able by any means to withstand; so no way but
patience, Quabacondono surrenders himself to his Uncle, and is by him banished
to the Cloister Coja.
he with a small Train delivered up himself to the mercy of his Uncle: the
Ways being all beset with strong Guards, about Noon he came to Fissima, and
passing by the Palace he took up his Lodging in a private House; but in the
Evening he received Order from Taicosama to retire to the Cloister Coja, built
on the craggy Mountains in the Kingdom of Chinocuno.

This Coja was the Residence for all banished Princes, before the barren Island
Faitsintchina, fourteen Leagues at Sea Eastward from Jedo, was made fit for
that purpose.

The same Night Quabacondono, being accompanied with Taicosama's Lifeguard, was
conveyed to the place of Exile.

The faithfulness of Sacondono to the banished Emperor.
Amongst other Nobles belonging to Taicosama was Sacandono, of eighteen years
old, Son to the Viceroy of Meaco; he being informed that Quabacondono was
forsaken of every one, and as a banished Person was in his Way to Coja,
immediately Mounted, and posted after him to proffer his Service to
Quobacondono; but coming amongst the Emperor's Guard, he was stopped, and
commanded to return, if he did intend not to incur his Majesty's displeasure:
but he neither regarding their advice, nor fear what they threatened from the
Emperor, said, Should I leave my Prince, though he be forsaken by every one?
No; now is the time for me to manifest my Love, Duty, and Loyalty: There is no
Touchstone like Danger to prove a Friend by: Who will not help those that are
in Prosperity? and who forsakes not a Friend in Adversity: He is not worthy the
name of a Friend, that in his assistance will undergo the worst of Fortunes,
and smile at Death it self: which having said, put Spurs to his Horse, and
Riding post, by midnight found the young Emperor, who exceedingly rejoiced to
see one so kind and faithful to him; but that he might not prejudice so good a
Nature, as to bring Sacandono to his utter ruin, which would not ought avail
him, he seriously persuaded him to return. But soon Taicosama had information
of all this; and had it not been for the good Service of his Father, he had
undoubtedly perished in his prime.

Quabacondono is shaven, and changes his Name.
But Quabacondono since his departure from Fissima Lodged one Night in Tamamizu;
where he was forced, according to the Japan manner, to have his Beard and Head
shaven, and his Name exchanged for another; for in stead of Quabacondono, he
called himself Doi, that is, I will clear my self by Reason: At last coming to
the Cloister Coja, he was conducted in by Mocusico, one much esteemed by the
Bonzies.

In his Way thither he met with several of his Retinue disguised like Beggars,
that they might not be known by any of Taicosama's Guard. All these expressed
their grief with tears, not daring to utter their minds in words.

Ten of his chief Favorites went him into the Cloister, where being but meanly
Treated, he told them, saying, Not long ago I could have given you Provinces
and Kingdoms: my Fall has been the undoing of many. And now for my self, of
all my Pomp and Magnificence I have scarce so much left as to keep you and me
alive. O inconstant Fortune! thou have raised me on purpose to the height of
Greatness and Glory, that so my Fall might be the greater, and I more wretched.

Is liept close Prisoner.
These Complaints he had free liberty to utter in the fatal Cloister Coja, for
no other privilege was allowed him, insomuch that he could not speak nor
deliver the least Note to any Person whatsoever; and the business was so far
gone, that he lost all hopes of ever obtaining his Liberty.

Mocusico Conjures for Quabacondono.
Mocusico, the Head of the Monastery, repaired to his Idols, and with Charms
performing peculiar Ceremonies, with great zeal begged of the gods, that
Quabacondono might once more be restored to the Imperial Dignity; but none ever
were slower in their assistance than these their deaf deities: for it happened
that this came to Taicosama's Ears, who the sooner resolved on Quabacondono's
Death, which fell out on the fifteenth of August, Anno 1595.

It Is certain that Quabacondono, being wearied with his misfortunes, did a long
time before resolve to be his own Executioner; but his Friends observing his
intention from his discontented Countenance, and strange Carriage, sometimes
walking up and down like a Frantic, anon sitting exceeding pensive and
melancholy, still when in private muttering to himself, and fetching heavy
sighs, then breaking out with strange Expressions, showing the deep sense he
had of his present Condition; but they endeavored by all means to appease him,
and bring his Mind to a more equal temper, to bear his Sufferings like a Man,
chearing him up with this persuasion, That his Uncle would after a while grow
mild, his high displeasure cease; and that it was impossile for him to be so
unkind to such a Nephew: He had oftentimes before been displeased, and was as
easily reconciled; what madness would it be for him to bereave himself not
only of Life, but of the Imperial Throne? and though he had no hope of it, yet
he ought not to despair; and fortune was so unconstant, that oftentimes the
meanest were raised to high Dignities: and that it behooved a Prince to have and
bear a noble courage in his greatest calamity, and not suffer any sorrow
whatsoever to take possession of his heart; and that without dispute Taisacoma
could not live long, at whose Decease they doubted not but to be released, and
he restored to his former Honor. The Japanners were now curbed and kept in
fear, but so soon as they could be freed thereof they would not be so
forgetful, but remember that Taicosama had given the Empire to Quabacondono, to
whom it belonged in his Lifetime, and therefore was most justly his after the
Emperor's death.

Quabacondono and all his Company are commanded to rip up their own Bowels.
Thus chearing him up with future hopes, they kept him a while from laying
violent hands on himself, when soon after Taicosama sent a Messenger, to
command him and his Company, according to the Japan manner, to rip open their
own Bowels. No sooner had they received their Condemnation, but they all
prepared themselves to die. The first that cut up his Belly was Quabacondono's
Page, being a Youth of nineteen years of age; who whilst he was struggling with
Death, Quabacondono, after he had embraced him, chopp'd off his Head, which he
set in a Charger on a Table: The like he performed to two more of his Servants.
The next that was to do the cruel Office on himself, was the Bonzi (Biuscirtus,
whose Grandmother was sent by Taicosama to Quabacondono's Court as a Spy; and
because she had carried her self well in that business, her Son Biuscirtus he
commanded to be saved: but he refused the Emperor's mercy, saying with an
undaunted courage to him that brought the Order, I scorn to take any thing from
that Bloodhound that should deserve my thanks, for I will rather choose to die
with Quabacondono, than to live in slavery under such a grand Tyrant: this
said, he desperately stabbed himself; but suffering much under the agony of a
lingering Death, Quabacondono gave him present ease by chopping off his Head;
which was no sooner done, but with the same Weapon he stabbed himself. One
only remaining, slew himself with his Masters Scymiter. The Execution was no
sooner finished, but the Bonzies, performing their Office, consumed them
together in one Funeral Fire.

Taicosama destroys all the Confederates of Quabacondono.
But Taicosama rested not thus; but following his Blow, hunted and destroyed all
those his Friends and Intimates that had been Abettors with Quabacondono in
this Conspiracy. The first with which he began, were three Persons of great
Quality, that were fled to a Cloister of the Bonzies: The next was Scirabingo,
who made the Kings to Sign the Oath of Allegiance to Quabacondono, for which
Crime he was judged to suffer a cruel Death: But none was more lamented than
Chimura, who had done Taicosama great Service, both in War and Peace; but
because he had held private Correspondence with Quabacondono, he was also
condemned to be his own Destroyer.

Chimura's Son hearing of his Fathers Misfortune, who was then in Saicoure,
wrote to him, That a Wiseman might easily look Death in the face, especially
if he suffered innocently; and that it was no trouble to leave this World, for
a far more happy Life, which would last for ever: And thither he was resolved
to accompany him, as his Father; for he would not live after his Death, of whom
he had received Life. So whilst he expected to hear the sad Tidings, he called
for a Chest of Scymiters, out of which choosing the best, he girded it about his
Waste. In the interim the News of his Fathers Death, and Taicosama came to him
together; the Emperor proffering him Life, notwithstanding he was Chimura's
Son, who ought, according to the Japan Laws, for his Fathers Crime, to suffer
Death.

But the Youth returned Taicosama Thanks, telling him, That he was bound in
Conscience to take Revenge of the horrible Slaughter committed on his Father
Chimura; and seeing no possible Means to effect such his Design, he would
rather die than live, wanting satisfaction for his Fathers Death. Thus said, he
immediately deserted the Court, and went to Meaco, where going into the Temple,
there offering his Devotions to the Idol Fotoco, ripping up his Belly, he
Sacrificed his Life before the Altar. Not long after, Taicosama particularly
ordered Chimura's Consort to be Beheaded in the Temple of Amida.

Cruel Persecution of Taicosama against the Wives and Children of Quabacondono.
IN this cruel manner proceeded Taicosama against all Quabacondon's, not only
his Ministers of State, or whoever he had a kindness for, but his Wives,
Children, and Relations; not leaving to persecute them, till they all suffered
miserable Ends: In Meaco he brought one and thirty Ladies, partly Noblemens
Daughters, partly Persons of Honor belonging to Quabacondono's Consort, and
part of them his Concubines, which last he fetched from the Castle Jurazu: All
these he conveyed in Coaches to the place of Execution, with their Children,
whose innocent Shrieks and Tears, mingled with the doleful Lamentations of the
Spectators, would have made a Tiger relent: But there was no room for
Compassion; for no sooner arrived they at the fatal place of their Deaths, but
the Executioner first showing them Quabacondono's Head, to which they ail
reverently bowed, began the Slaughter, first with the Children, that were one
by one beheaded; next the Women, thrown to the Ground, were inhumanely
slaughtered, and their Bodies cast into a deep Pit, over which the Tyrant built
a Structure, which he called The Temple of Beasts.

Murder committed by Scirabingo's Widow.
After that he condemned the Widow and Children of Scirabingo to suffer Death;
but when the Coach that brought her stopped before the Palace, the Widow, to
free her self from the opprobrious Insultings of the Tyrant, and the Shame of
her undeserved Death, first stabbed her three Sons, and one Daughter, and ere
the Fact could be thought of, sheathed the same Dagger in her own Bosom, and
immediately fell breathless on her murdered Children.

These savage Barbarisms perpetrated on Rational Creatures, he raged next upon
inanimates, falling upon the Castle of Jurazu, which he pulled down to the
Ground, with three hundred Palaces more, carrying the Timber and Stones to
Fissima.

BUt this was not Taicosama's first Persecution of the Christians, having begun
before, in Anno 1587. if Father Cornelius Hazart may be credited upon this
occasion. The first occasion why Taicosama persecuted the Roman Christians.
The Commander Domingo Montero came from Portugal into the Haven of Firando,
with an exceeding stout Vessel, in the forementioned Year: All the Inhabitants
admired its Beauty and Largeness, that the Fame of it came to Taicosama's Ear;
who being desirous to see it, commanded the Ship to be brought to Facata, where
he then resided; in order whereto, he directed the Governor of the Jesuits to
write his Pleasure to Montero; who so soon as he received the Letter, went with
all speed to Facata, telling the Emperor the danger of the Voyage, by reason of
the abundance of blind Rocks, Shoals, and Shelves, that lay in the way between
Firando and Facata. This Taicosama seemed to accept as an Excuse; but indeed
took it exceeding ill to be thus denied his Request, and resolved of a speedy
Revenge: For on the next day he published Edicts, That all the Jesuits should
depart Japan in twenty days, because they endeavored to bring a new Religion
amongst them, contrary to the Japanners, which had been established there many
Ages. The Emperor would have done this long before, but that he staid till he
had subdued the Kingdom Ximo, in which most of the Christian-Teachers resided.

Five Franciscans and three Jesuits crucifi^d.
But it rested not here: For Anno 1596. he proceeded cruelly against the
Christians, without distinction, commanding Gibonoscio, Governor of Nangesaque,
to take five Franciscans, and three Jesuits, and having Crucified, run them
through with Spears. Hazart reports, That the Franciscans were Gonsalves
Garcia, Philip de las Casas, both Mexicans; Peter Baptista, Franciscus de Saint
Michael, and Martin de Aguirre, three Spaniards: The Jesuits, Paulus Miki a
Japanner; Joannes Goto, and Jacobus Kisai.

AS to what the same Hazart writes concerning the Miracles wrought by these
Priests, Hazart, Chapter Hist. l. 6. c. 2.
let him believe, who according to St. Augustine, desires and depends upon new
Miracles for establishment of Religion, already confirmed by Wonders: Several
Miracles.
However take it as related; That Peter Baptista being sent Ambassador from
Manilla to Tauglama, cured a Japan Maid of the Leprosy by touching of her; and
that at the same time the like Fiery Tongues descended from Heaven, upon the
whole Congregation present at the Cure, as formerly fell on the Apostles in the
Feast of Pentecost: That Philippo de las Casas, sailing from Manilla to Mexico,
and by stress of Weather driven upon the Coast of Japan, by the way saw in the
Air a White Cross, which soon after turned Red, and at last was covered with a
black Cloud. This Cross, they say, had the same shape as that on which he was
afterward Crucified. That Franciscus a Saint Michael immediately cured a dumb
Japan Woman, and afterward an Indian, mortally wounded by the Sting of an
Adder, by signing them with the Cross.

But concerning the Opinion of these Relations, Erasm. Argin. lib. Conf. August.
Erasmus says thus: What shall I say of you, which endeavor to delude the
Common People, by telling them strange Wonders and Miracles wrought by your
Fraternity? Certain I am, some have judged, that by these fair Relations and
handsome Stories they stirred up the People to Zeal and Piety; but I hardly give
credit to such Tales.

I will here annex some other Testimonies, extracted from the primest of the
Catholics. That famous Melchior Canus, Bishop of the Canaries, Cani Loc. Theol
l. (...) c. 6.
one of the Chiefest in the Council of Trent, says, I must needs speak it with
sorrow, That the Lives of the Learned Heathens, described by Laertius, is with
more Uprightness, than that of the Christian Saints. -- Most of our Writers
follow their own Imaginations, and relate so many Fictions, that I am ashamed
thereof.

Nicholas de Lyra, the younger Brother, who flourished about Anno 1320, says,
Lyr. in Dan. ca. 14.
In the Church too many Delusions and vain Fantasies are admitted, affirming
variety of Wonders, performed indeed by the Priests, and their Associates, for
Profit sake.

So also Cornelius Agrippa tells us, Agrip. de Vanit. Scient. cap. 97.
That the Writers of the Saints Histories seem to surpass one another in
Fabling; declaring a new Doctrine, and Teaching the Word of God with too great
mixture, only for Lucre and Profit.

And Josephus Acosta, who had been through most part of the Western Indies,
Acost. lib. tit. 4. cap. 12. de Proc. Indor. Sa^ute.
cries out, saying, What is our Preaching? What is our Faith? We do no
Miracles: There are no Wonders of our own that we can producce, to confirm the
Words of the Gospel.

Taicosama falls sick of the Bloody Flux.
BUt to return: Taicosama, now wearied with murdering, fell sick of the
Bloody Flux, in the latter end of July, Anno 1598; first vomiting up his Gaul,
with some Blood; afterward in his Stools appeared the Excoriatings of his
Guts; at last pieces of corrupted Flesh came from him, with a horrible stench,
and great pain. On the fifth of August greater Signs of Death appeared, he
being continually in a cold Sweat; and seeing thus his End to approach, yet
seemed not the least dismayed, still ordering his Imperial Affairs as when in
perfect Health; his chiefest Care being only for Fideri, to set the Crown on
his Head: And after serious consideration, he found it convenient to make use
in this weighty Concern of Ongosschio, King of eight Provinces, and in great
esteem with the Japanners, whom he sought by all means possible to oblige; and
to that end, sending for him to Fisstima, when he came into his Presence, the
Emperor now very weak, faintly declared his Mind to this effect.

His Speech to Ongosschio.
Death sits on my Lips, but I fear it not, since it is incident and common to
all Men: The greatest of my trouble is for my Son, but six years old, and
therefore not in condition to take present Possession of my Empire: His Age
requires a Guardian, one no less Faithful than Prudent, and who will, when he
attains to his fifteenth Year, with the usual Ceremonies, according to the
Japan manner, establish him in the Throne. I therefore have thought none more
fit than your self, by reason of your admired Wisdom, to undertake so grand a
Concern. And here I leave you my Empire and Son, that you may restore it to him
when he is fifteen years old. If those former Favors, which I do not doubt but
you acknowledge with Thanks, do not bind you to a faithful performance of this
Trust, yet I hope your Care will be the more, when my Son shall marry with your
Daughter, by which means the Empire will ever be Commanded by our Race, and
both our Successors sway the Japan Scepter.

Here Taicosama's Voice failing, he was necessitated to leave speaking; but
soon after recovering his spirits a little, which Ongosschio observing, made
this Reply:

Ongosschio's Answer.
Most Illustrious Prince, When Nobunanga was slain, I was only King of the
Province Micaua: but since the Gods have set you on the Throne, you have added
seven Kingdoms more to my first; all the eight called by one Name of Quanto;
for which I can return Thanks to none but your Majesty: Besides many other
Favors received, which (considering my own unworthiness) makes me with
admiration gratefully to record your exceeding Bounty: The greatest of my
Performances can never sufficiently make known how much I own my self obliged;
nor can my greatest Services declare such suitable Resentments as I would
readily upon a fair occasion show. However, all my Abilities shall be laid out
to yours and your Sons Service, in such manner, that had I a thousand Lives, I
would freely and with much joy sacrifice them all for the sake of Taicosama and
his Seed: And indeed have made it my sole Study, since your Majesty's Sickness,
to use all Care and Diligence for the promoting of Fideri, before you your self
made your Will known to me. But since (most Mighty Prince) you have bestowed
two Favors more upon me, which so much exceed the former, that I am amazed
thereat, I should be most unworthy, if I did not spend my Endeavors in the
Service of Fideri, over whom you have chosen me as Guardian, not without having
the Chief Command over all Japan for a time; and also to be his Father-in-law,
by his Marrying of my Daughter.

These Words Ongosschio uttered with a passionate grief; and having ended his
Speech, the young Prince Fideri and Ongosschio's Daughter came before Taicosama
lying on his Deathbed, Marriage concluded between Fideri and Ongosscio's
Daughter.
there to be joined in Marriage, according to the Japan-Customs: And
notwithstanding the Emperor lay striving with Death, yet their
Wedding-Solemnities were performed after the ancient manner, only narrow'd
into the compass of one day.

Taicosama takes the Oath of Allegiance of the Kings.
After the Feast ended, Taicosama required all the Kings and Viceroys to swear
Allegiance to Fideri, and that they would establish him in the Throne in his
fifteenth year; and mean while give due Obedience to Ongosschio, as being his
Guardian till of Age. Ongosschio sealed this Oath with his own Blood: And
Taicosama, to oblige those which had sworn, gave them all, according to their
several Qualities, many rich Presents: And this Bounty extended so far, that
several of his old Servants got great Riches by it. Besides Ongosschio, he
chose four Counselors of State, to assist him in the Government, and presently
after appointed Asonodangio, a Person highly esteemed in his Favor, to be
President of the Council; and in the mean while, to leave all Officers in their
respective Places, and to break no manner of Laws or Orders established in his
Lifetime.

Then he advised the Council to be Faithful and Loyal amongst themselves,
without which no Government could subsist long: And for the preservation of
such a Unity and Peace, Makes Marriages to keep them all in peace.
he made several Nuptials upon his Deathbed, joining those of the Noblest
Houses in Marriage together, taking several Kings Daughters, and bestowing them
on other Kings Sons.

Why he enlarged the Castle of Osacca.
He enlarged also the Castle of Osacca, and built therein many Palaces, in which
the chiefest Lords, with their Families, were to reside: For expediting which
Work, thousands of Artificers were employed. And to the end he might obtain his
desire, he commanded, that his Death might be kept private for a time; which he
did, because Japan upon the Decease of the Emperor being subject to many Civil
Wars, the forementioned Castle should be fully finished; and that the Kings
which were far from their own Country, and without any Forces, might be kept
there as in a Prison, till the Council were fully settled in their Authority.

Would be honored as a God after his death.
BUt long before, Taicosama had taken great care to make himself Immortal: For
which purpose he in his Lifetime built a Temple, reckoned amongst the
stateliest in Japan; in which he erected a Golden Image, representing him to
the life, which stood on Marble: His Body he ordered to be put in a Coffin,
without burning, according to the common Custom. When he served for a
Day-laborer, he was called Toquixiro; after that, Faxiba; and at last, coming
to the Imperial Throne, Taicosama: But at his Death he desired to be made a
Came, which is a Supreme Deity, and would be styled Xin Fachiman, that is, The
new God of War, by reason of his many valiant Exploits. This was his Request
when he lay on a Flock-bed, covered with Silk Japan Quilts, miserably
tormented, and consumed to nothing but Bones.

Is carried into a higher Chamber.
At length he desired to be carried (out of the hearing of any Noise) into an
upper Chamber, in the Castle Fissima, that he might lie quietly, without any
disturbance: So taking leave of all the Princes, and his Son Fideri,
admonishing him from that time forwards to call Ongosschio Father, and show him
due Reverence and Respect, being now delivered into his Custody, and he chosen
as his Guardian: And also gave order, That few Nobles should come in his
Chamber, and his Physicians should not stir from his Bedside; and, if possibly
they could, to study for some Medicines to preserve his Life.

Causes a great sorrow.
Upon this parting, all the Courtiers began exceedingly to lament, seeing their
Emperor, by whom every one expected to be preferred, carried away, never after
to be seen alive. The Noise and Cry was so great within, that it was heard
without the Castle, whose Gates were strongly guarded; but this coming to the
Peoples Ears, gave supition that Taicosama was dead.

The report of his death occasions great Uproars among the People.
The Report of which spread up and down the Country like Wildfire: Whereupon
the Thieves sallied out from their several Recesses, robbing and pillaging whom
ever they met; and in some places the People began to Mutiny, not much unlike
the Roman Tumults, whilst the Cardinals are about the Election of a new Pope.
But the chief Insurrection here was in Osacca, Meaco, and Fissima, insomuch
that the Great Council were too weak to quell the Rebellion. This Rumor of
Taicosama's Death was credited the more by the Common People, because the
Council had guarded the Fort of Fissima round about with new Soldiers, and
Listed Forces in all Parts, wheresoever they could get them.

How it is found not to be true.
Ten days together this Belief continued: But the Emperor in this interim
growing somewhat better, sent two of the Council to Osacca, with Orders to get
the Castle finished, that was to be built there, with all expedition; and also
gave to the several Princes designed to go from Fissima thither, diverse Bags of
Rice, and great Sums of Money. About the Out-walls of this Castle, The Castle
of Osacen a strange Fabric.
containing three Leagues in Circumference, a thousand Men wrought daily, all
which were paid off every Night. Within stood above seventeen thousand
Merchants and Artificers Houses, which were all pulled down in three days time,
and every one commanded, upon forfeiture of their Goods, to carry away their
own Rubbish, and to clear the Ground: Which done, a new Field was allotted them,
to build new Houses on, according to a Platform staked out by Surveyors; and
whosoever was backward in Building, should lose his Ground; where none might
raise a House under two Stories high. These Orders once published, the Work
went on day and night; insomuch that a new City and Castle appeared at once.
This Building stopped the Rumor that went of the Emperor's Death: for every one
might well judge, that the Council would not take so great a Work upon them.

Taicosama is trouble for his Son Fidery.
MEan time, on the third and fourth of September, Taicosama seemed more and
more to recover; so that he spent his time in the firm Establishing of the
Empire on his young Son Fidery: But on the fifth of September his Sickness
began again to increase; Grows worse.
whereupon all the Gates were strongly guarded, to the end the noise of the
Emperor's Death might not be spread amongst the Common People. Thenceforward
the Distemper increased daily, till the fourteenth of the same Month, on which
day he lay a considerable time without any appearance of Life, so that he was
judged by all his Attendants to be dead: But at last fetching a deep Sigh, he
came to himself; Is distracted.
yet in few Hours after lost his Senses, so that he began to talk idly; but
they might understand by his distracted Expressions, that the Establishment of
his Son Fidery did still trouble him, of whom he spoke till his last gasp, Dies.
which was Anno 1508, the sixteenth of September, being sixty four years old,
and after fifteen years Reign, having succeeded Nobunango, slain before Meaco
by the Prince Aquechi.

Aquechi aimed first at the Crown.
This Prince being encouraged by his many Victories, aimed at the Crown; but
being treacherously slain by a Day-laborer, left the place for Taicosama, who
knew exceeding well to take the advantage of such an opportunity. Nobunanga had
three Sons: The eldest, Voxequixama, lost with his Father, the Battle, and his
Life: The second, Oxiacen Fongedonu, was distracted: And for the youngest Son,
being but three years old, Taicosama took upon him the Authority, pretending to
be his Guardian, and to rule the Empire in his behalf, and for his advantage,
till he attained fitting years to Govern; but soon after, tasting the sweetness
of Power and Sovereignty, he got so many Forces together, that Nobunanga's Son
was forced to be contented with the Kingdom of Mino, and deliver up his just
Title of the Imperial Crown to Taicosama.

Taicosama's death is kept private.
ONgosschio and the Council kept the Emperor's Death very private, binding all
those that knew of it by Oath not to divulge it; but a blabbing Courtier
forgetting his Oath, accidentally told it, and as a Reward for his Garrulity,
was immediately Crucified. This his Punishment kept all others so in awe, that
every one held his Tongue, and locked up the Secret; yet not long after it was
discovered.

Ongosschio and the Council clash.
In this small time the Council fell at variance with Ongosschio, whose Design
of getting the Empire they all observed: Whereupon they consulting together
against him, decreed, That he should not be Guardian over Fidery any longer,
but should return, and satisfy himself with his eight Kingdoms. The
Counselors seeing the Government lay too heavy upon them, chose four Eminent
Princes more to their Assistance; and being thus strengthened, they seemed not
in the least to fear Ongosschio, who was not idle during their new Election.

It is the Custom among the Japanners, that Noblemen upon several Accidents
change their Names; Japanners oftentimes change their Names.
according to which, Ongosschio was called Jyavasu, and Giciasu: but putting
off those three, he exchanged the same for Daifusama, which Name we will
observe in his following Story.

Taicosama is made a god.
ANd now, as if free from fear or danger, they were busy in Creating Taicosama
a God. The Temple and his Image being ready for that purpose, his Corpse was
Interred in a Vault, with all Funeral Solemnity, and his Name changed into Xin
Fachiman, as he had before designed.

This Exchanging of Names, when Men are Registered amongst the number of the
Deities, was formerly very common, both with the Greeks and Romans: For Romulus
was called Quirinus; Juno, Matuta; Leucothoe, Albunea; Melicerta, Palaemon;
Leda, Nemesis; Circe, Marica; Nersilia, Hora; Rhea, Mother of the Gods; Idaeda,
Dindymeda; Philena, Pissinuntia; Cibele, Berecynthia.

To Create Princes for Gods, for their Valiant Exploits and Noble
Achievements, took not its Original in Japan, but was a Custom above two
thousand Years since; which the ancient Father Lactantius Firmianus witnesses,
Lactant. de Falls. Re^g. lib. 1. ca. 5.
saying, Those whom the ignorant and foolish People call Gods, worshipping
them, none can be so weak, as not to imagine them to have been Men. If any
shall ask, Why are they believed to be Gods? Because they were the Greatest and
Powerfullest Kings, and are for Commemoration Consecrated, for a Reward of
their Valiant Acts, or for their Bounties, or Noble Arts found and invented by
them; and because beloved by their Subjects.

St. Augustine tells us, That the great Gods, which Cicero calls by peculiar
Names, Aug. de Civic. Dei, l 8. c. 5.
as Jupiter, Juno, Saturn, Vulcan, Vesta, and several others, which Varro
endeavors to make Governors of the World, are all found to have been Men.

Moreover, Diodorus Siculus says, Diod. Sic. H^st. lib. 1.
That Julius Caesar was for his valiant Achievements in the Wars called a God:
His Successor Augustus promoted him above the Stars. Of which, Manil. Astron.
lib* 4.
Marcus Manilius the Latin Poet says thus: Himself makes Gods, and a fresh
Numen treats:
The Stars admire Hero's should take their Seats
Amongst them; but not we, who understand
Augustus, the Worlds Lord, did so command.


Pliny in his Panegyricks sung before the Emperor Trajan, Plin. Panegyr.
Consecrated Heaven to his Predecessor Augustus: Nero made Claudius a God, on
purpose to mock him: Titus made Vespasian a Deity, and Domitian, Titus; the one
to be the Son of a God, as the other a Brother.

Common amongst the Ancients to make Men Gods.
It was common amongst the Greeks to Worship deceased Heroes for Immortal
Deities: As the Lacedaemonians did Agamemnon, General of the Army that lay ten
Years in Siege before Troy; and with him, his Brother Menelaus, the Spartan
King. The Arcadians reverenced Aristaeus, because he taught them first how
decayed Bee-hives might be supplied with fresh Bees.

Far more strange things did the Lybians, as Arsenius Monembasiensis
witnesses, Monemb. Apophthegon.
who worshipped Psaphon for a God, that was a Man of mean Condition, but had a
peculiar Art to teach Birds to speak, of which he learned some to say, The
Birds make a God.
Psaphon is a God; which when they could perfectly do, he let them fly one
after another: These Words being often heard in the Air, were at last so taken
notice of, that many People flocked together from all parts of the Country to
hear them. And to win a firm belief to his Design, he spared no labor, still
teaching fresh Birds the like Words; which having taught them, he let fly.

The Carthaginian General, Hanno, having had private Information thereof,
endeavored by the same Art to be esteemed as a God: But he, Aelian. Hist. li.
24. c. 30.
as AElian witnesses, bestowed his Labor in vain; for having not taught them
perfectly, they in stead of saying, Hanno is a God, when they were let loose,
sung their own natural Notes.

The Argives honored Perseus as a God, for his Noble Exploits. The Epidaneans
worshipped Aesculapius, because he had found out many Mysteries for Curing of
Distempers; which not long after the Greeks followed, and at last also the
Romans, which after built him a Temple without Rome.

The Athenians adored the Soothsayer Amphilochus, Live. lib. 45.
whose Temple, as Livy relates, though very ancient, yet was pleasant to
behold, being surrounded by Fountains and Brooks of Fresh Water. Moreover most
of the Athenian Kings are Registered among the number of the Gods. In like
manner they chose Triptolemus for a Deity, because he first invented Plowing
and Sowing; and Euricthonius, because he was swallowed up by the Earth, with a
Chariot and four Horses. Cicer. de Not. de Or. li. 3.
Erechteus they promoted with his Daughters above the Stars, because the Father
obeyed the Oracle at Delphos, presaging the Victory to the Athenians against
the Thracian Eumolpus, if the King did Sacrifice one of his Daughters; and the
Virgin, because she died willingly for her Countries sake in the Village
Hyacinthus, was made a Goddess.

Theseus also, having fought valiantly against Taurus, which was Minos the King
of Creta's General, had a Temple erected in the middle of Athens, in which his
Bones were worshipped.

The same Honor was done to Codrus, because he went in Beggars Weeds into the
Peloponnesian Army, there wrangling with the Soldiers, till he was killed, that
by his Death the Conquest might fall on the Athenians side, as the Delphian
Oracle had foretold. Curt. lib. 7.
Therefore Augustus says, The Athenians worshipped Codrus as a God, because he
went and sought his own Death for his Countries good.

The Thebans adored their King Liber, he being the first that pressed Wine out
of the Grape: And besides Liber, his beautiful Ino, with her Son Melicerte,
because they both leaped from a high Rock into the Sea. This Custom is still
held in use amongst the Japanners; they being taken there for Saints, who for
the Honor of Amida, Xaca, or any other of the Japan Gods, hanging great Stones
about their Necks, drown themselves, as we have before related.

Furthermore, there were formerly few Kings, and chiefly over Egypt, Persia,
and India, which if they had used no Tyranny, were either in their Lifetime,
or at least after their Death, worshipped as Gods. Cleo, Shield-bearer to
Alexander the Great, says thus in Curtius's History; The Persians worship not
only their Kings for Gods with great Zeal, but very circumspectly; for
Hercules and Bacchus themselves were not installed amongst the Gods, before
they overcame the Malice of their Maligners.

To Create Kings Gods, Colnitz Comp. Georg. lib. 2. cap. 13.
is a present Custom amongst the Tartars. The fourth part of Tartary is Catay,
or Kitay, in whose Metropolis Cambula, the Residence of the Great Cham, so
great a Trade is driven in Silk, that scarce a day passes, wherein there come
not above a thousand Wagons laden therewith, to Market. Kitay is divided into
seven Provinces, namely, Caimul, Engimul, Caindu, Tendac, Thebet, where they
make use of Coral in stead of Money; Menly in for the women.
Carazan, noted for its strange Custom, the Men lying-in forty days after their
Women are delivered of a Child; and lastly, Tanguth, in which Territory
Printing was in use above a thousand years ago. The Jesuit, Father John
Gruberus, as Athanasius Kircher tells us in his China-Book, traveled through
Tanguth, where he was kindly received by the King, whom the Tartars call Deva,
Images of the Tartars Han and Deva, by them worshipped as Gods.
and commanded to Pourtray the Image of Deva, and also of Han, who was formerly
King of Tanguth, and Father of fourteen Sons, and for his great Prudence and
Justice was worshipped by the Inhabitants: Both these are to be seen standing
on square Altars. Han is of a sallow Complexion, on, a Chesnut-colour'd Beard
mixed with gray Hairs, goggle Eyes, with a Furred Cap on his Head. But Deva
appears with a young Visage, without a Beard, the Hair of his Head close
shaven. Over both their Heads hang three burning Lamps.

Strange Customs used by the Romans when they made Gods.
The Romans made strange Preparations, when they gave the Heavens to their
Deceased Emperors. They built a Funeral Pile, like a Tent, adorning it with
Gold, Ivory, and costly Pictures; and being sharp on the top, they placed a
Crane upon it, building it as it were with three Stories, which they stowed
full of rich Gums and sweet Perfumes. Under the lower Story stood a rich and
stately Bed of Silk, with Coverings of Purple, embroidered with Gold; on which
lay the Image of the Emperor. The Consuls, Knights, and other Persons of great
Quality, attended the Bier to the Funeral Pyre, singing Eulogies, and showing
great Reverence to the same. The Tent was set round about on Fire, and the
Smoke and Flame thereof made the Crane fly up directly into the Air, and
thereby was judged to carry the Soul to the Gods, whilst the Flame purified the
Body from all Corruption. This done, the Senate made a firm Law, That the
Emperor from that time forward should be honored as a God.

BUt to return from this Digression: Whilst the Council and Daifusama were
busy to make Taicosama, according to his earnest desire, a Xin Fachima, or God
of War, they fell at variance amongst themselves. The Council strengthening
their Party, by choosing four more to their assistance; and Daifusama
traveling, as we said before, to Quanto. The Difference in short time grew to
that height, that it could no ways be decided but by the Sword: Whereupon both
Parties raised all the Force they could possible.

The Council studied at last to stop all the Ways toward Meaco, and Listed
many Soldiers in Isci and Mino, two Kingdoms bordering on Voari, so to get that
Kingdom from Daifusama, having already subdued three strong Places in Mino.

Here stood also the invincible Castle Guifu, over which Ciunangodono, a young
Man about two and twenty years of age, had the chief Command, in the Name of
the Council.

The Council intend to subdue the Kingdom of Voari.
This Person had information, that Gibunoscio had ready at hand seven thousand
of Auxiliaries from the Council; with which united Force he intended to fall
upon Voari, and there to face Daifusama's Army.

Daifusama subdues the Fort Guifu.
But while the Council assembled, whose Results upon Business and Debates before
were so slow, losing much time, Daifusama being twenty thousand strong, drew
toward Guifu. Before the Fort raised a high Mount; behind which lay the
greatest strength, as a Reserve: Seven hundred drew close under Guifu, and
attaqu'd the Garrison; Ciunangodono, full of resolution, sallied out of the
Fort against the Enemy; who after some opposition made them to retreat: a while
after he fell unawares into the midst of the Rere-guard. The Besieged being too
weak for so great a multitude, retreated back toward the Fort; but the Enemy
pursuing them so close, that they pressed into the Fort with the Retreaters.
Here he made great slaughter and havoc amongst them, the Sword sparing none.
In this extremity Ciunangadono got into the Tower of the Fort with some others,
Ciunangadono taken Prisoner.
where not being able to make any great resistance, he was forced to yield.

The Conqueror bringing the captive Governor to the Fort Vaori, left a strong
Garrison in Guifu, and marched with his victorious Army toward Gibunoscio. By
the Way two thousand Soldiers fell among Daifusama's Party, and afterward a
thousand more, which were all so routed, that not one was left to carry tidings
of the overthrow to Gibunoscio. Daifusama kills three thousand Men.


The business thus standing, the King or Sassuma and Augustine Tzunocamindono
brought some of their Forces before Gibunoscio; which as soon as Daifusama
discovered, he rallied his Men, and marched down along the Shore of the River
Jocatangauwa, to hinder their coming over. He discerned on the other side of
the River the new Auxiliary Forces by their Colors, under the Command of two
stout Generals, wherefore he remained on the other side of the River, fearing
also that some Ambuscado's might be in the way, for he could not imagine that
Gibunoscio would else stand against his Army, being full as strong again.

While the Forces on both sides lay in this posture, doing little, watching all
opportunities of advantages, Faction having divided all Japan into Parties;
first clashing in their Disputes as they were affected, and soon after taking
up Arms one against another.

In the Kingdom of Bungo, Quambioiendo gat information from the Army of
Daifusama, by a Messenger sent from his Son Cainocamo by Water, of the Victory
obtained; whereat encouraged, he fell with eight thousand Men upon Francisco.
This was the Son of the deceased King of Bungo, who had been long kept in hold
by the command of Taicosama in Meaco, but was now released by the Council, and
sent away with four thousand Men to Bungo, in hopes the Subjects there might
join with him as their lawful King against Quambioiendo; but it fell out quite
contrary: for Francisco had scarce set Foot in the Country before he was
overthrown and taken, not being able to stand against an Army stronger than his
own: and within few days by this Rout, the whole Kingdom of Bungo assured to
Daifusama. Thus the Grand Council met every where with oppositions.

Canzviedono overthrew Fingo.
THe Kingdom of Fingo being under two Lords, Canzviedono possessed the one
half, and Augustine Tzunocamindono the other; the first was of Daifusama's
part, the second of the Council, who lay at that time along the River
Jocatangauwa against Daifusama, when Canzviedono fell into his Country, and
wasted all with Fire and Sword, and closely besieged the chiefest Fort Uto.

Dissension among the Council.
Furthermore there arose a great Dissension among the Lords of the nine
Kingdoms, called by one Name Scimo; some declared themselves for the Grand
Council, others for Daifusama, and many were willing to stand Neuters. The
Princes Arimandono, and Omurandono, first joined themselves with their Forces
to the Grand Council; but being ordered to march with their Parties nearer to
Meaco, they fell off and sided with Daifusama.

The Grand Council had sent several Forces through the Empire to encounter with
with those that joined with the King's. The business growing thus to a Head,
Forces Mustering from all Places, they were resolved to put it upon the Dye,
and try their Fortune in the event of a Set-Battel, They join their Strength
together.
designing the Place of Rendezvous for their best advantage to be in the Plains
of the Kingdom of Mino; where not long after their whole Forces were drawn
together, being about fourscore thousand Men, much too strong for Daifusama,
who had scarce thirty thousand.

The Council miserably perplexed the whole Business and Affair, by tedious
Controversies and scrupling Delays, being thirty Days in making ready before
they set upon the weak Enemy; who in that time made benefit of their tardiness;
for Daifusama sent his Son away with a part of the Army toward Congueraso, and
the rest he carried to Oari; to which out of Mino and other Countries he added
so many as now made up fifty thousand Men, with which he not only faced, but
first engaged the Council.

The shameful and horrible overthrow of the mighty Army of the Council.
The Battle was scarce begun, but Ciunangodono, Nephew to Taicosama's Wife, by
whom came the Kingdom of Cicugen, delivered out of the Prison in Voari, where
he was put when he quitted the Fort Guifu, revolted with his Regiment, and went
over to Daifusama: after him followed three other Regiments with their Princes,
who contrary to the Design of the Council, took this opportunity to do Service
to the other Party. Hereupon there arose aloud murmuring, and a voice through
the Army, crying Treachery, Treachery; and withal a sudden disorder, that the
Officers neither could keep them in Rank nor File, deserting their Colors, and
crowding, trod one another under foot. The Vanguard thus totally routed, fell
into the Main Body, and disordered them also, Morindono, who had the left Wing,
wheeled off, not striking one Stroke, and fairly fled away; and the Rear seeing
the Van routing the Main Body, fearing they would both fall foul upon them,
threw down their Arms, each one shifting for themselves, so that in few hours
the Field was clear: but though they ran thus early away, yet they escaped not
so, for most of them perished by their own Weapons, or the Enemies, who
suddenly poured himself in amongst them. Amongst those which were taken by
Daifusama, was Gibunoscio, and Augustine Tzunocamindono: the first
acknowledged, that he had not the heart to rip himself up; the second refused
self-murder, being a Christian; but most of the rest that fled, not knowing
where to shelter themselves, were their own destroyers.

Daifusama prosecutes his Victory.
Daifusama made no small use of this Victory, the Field lying covered with
threescore thousand Bodies who opposed him. Being thus crowned with success, he
marched on, and first took all the strong Holds in Mino; and then entering with
his Army into the Kingdom of Omi, the fame of his Victory came before him to
the Castle of Savoiama, belonging to Gibunoscio, whose Brother at that time was
Governor there; who much startled at the sad News, and seeing no possibility to
withstand his Forces, he bethought himself of a Delivery by a Happy Dispatch,
for so the Japanners call Self-murder; on which having fully resolved, he first
distributed what Treasure was in the Castle to the Soldiers, bidding them take
that and shift for themselves: next killing his Wife and Children, Horrible
Murder within the Castle of Savoiama.
he set fire on several places of the Castle, and at last was his own
Executioner.

Daifusama was afraid of Morindono.
The Conqueror finding the Fortress all in flames, supposed it no fit place to
make a halt, no longer than to look upon it, but that he might loose no time,
marched directly for Morindono, having brought off the left Wing from the last
Battle entire; and having re-inforc'd himself with forty thousand more, fearing
this gathered Cloud now impending, and ready to break upon his head, therefore
he marched speedily from thence to be further from the danger, since the
fortune of War is doubtful; for the Conqueror was sufficiently wary, least any
slur, or the least accident should happen or cast a blemish on so signal a
Victory.

His great strength.
But that which troubled Daifusama more, was the strong Castle of Osacca, not to
be paralleled in all Japan; so that a great Army lying down before it might
easily be moulder'd away, e're they could make the least advantage, to hope
thereby to obtain the place; and what made it more difficult was, that
Morindono kept there the Treasury of the whole Kingdom; there were in custody
all the Hostages, even those that held with Daifusama, and Fideri himself,
Taicosama 's Son. The strength of the Castle of Osacca.
Moreover, there lay within the Castle so much Provision of Victuals, and
Ammunition for War, that the Garrison might hold out a Siege of many years,
without the least want or distress.

The contrivance of Morindono.
Yet notwithstanding all these advantages, Morindono possessed with a strange
Consternation, utterly deserted it without being once summoned by the Enemy,
and retired to his Palace near Osacca, from whence at least he might make an
escape to his own Kingdom, and set himself at more distance from his Enemies,
of whose mercy there was little hope.

Daifusama gets the Castle of Osacca.
IT seemed almost incredible to Daifusama, that he should become Master so
easily of such an impregnable Hold, which had it stood out, had stopped the whole
Course of his Victory, that lingering there, had probably ruined him and his
whole design; so with this, whatever could be desired fell into his hands, all
places striving who should first submit to the Conqueror, who durst not so much
as offer, or once think of opposing him, now ready to ascend the Imperial
Throne. Fideri, the only Block to stop the ambitious Aspirer in his
Enterprise, that Rub removed by his Death, there was no other obstacle to
hinder him from being sole Emperor of Japan: And therewith all Japan.
Such was his success, that he slighted Cangueraso, as if no body, who was yet
in Arms, and raising Forces in behalf of the Grand Council, on the utmost
borders of Quanto, and also the King of Sassuma, The dexterity of the King of
Sassuma.
of whose Valor he had sufficient proofs in the last Battle; for being quite
out of hope of Rallying his Forces, to give the Enemy another Charge, made his
way only with sixty Men through the main Body of the Army, with which, hasting
to Osacca, where with an addition of five hundred Men, he took Shipping,
Sailing to Sassuma, a hundred and fifty Leagues from Osacca, where he settled
himself, daily Mustering up new Forces, to be able for a second Engagement, in
behalf of the Parliament.

Daifusama spares Morindono.
But Daifusama sending for the Cowardly Morindono, who appearing in a despicable
manner, looking upon him as no dangerous Foe, gave him his Life, but took from
him, for his kindness, nine Kingdoms, and seven inestimable Silver Mines, so
that besides his eight Kingdoms of Quanto, and nine from Morindono, he subdued
all those Territories which Taicosama formerly possessed.

And although Ciunangodono, in the late Battle happening between the Council
and Daifusama, revolting, went over to him; by that means throwing so great a
Victory into his Lap, yet he was so far from making any kind return, or
acknowledging in the least so high a benefit, that on the contrary, he
dispossessed him of the Kingdom of Cicugen, and secured him in the Cloister
Coja, being a Prison for Prime Persons, and kept by the great Master of the
Bonzi, where Quabacondono three years before did Execution upon himself; where
also he and many other Persons of Quality suffered in like manner.

The Castle of Vto defended it self stoutly.
WHile Daifusama thus domineered every where, nevertheless, Canzviedono fell
into a part of Fingo, belonging to Tzunocamindono, and there stormed the Castle
of Uto, yet spent all their labor in vain, for the Garrison behaved themselves
exceeding manfully; their Assaults were repulsed with great Losses, and their
Sallyings forth, daily weakened the Besiegers, so that they began to loose
their courage: Canzviedono endeavored by all ways and means to make known to
them, that the Grand Councils Army was overthrown, and the Castle of Osacca
taken; that Daifusama Triumphed victoriously every where, and that their Lord
Augustine Tzunocamindono, for whom they fought courageously, was Executed. But
the Garrison in the beginning of the Siege, had sworn to one another, upon pain
of Death, not to receive any Letters or Messages from the Enemies; wherefore
being mutually agreed, they cast all the Arrows which had written Papers wrapped
about them instantly, without reading, into the fire.

The Jesuits were sought to for the delivery up of Vto.
Canzviedono was amazed at this stubbornness, who could not remove his Seige
with Honor nor Advantage, and his Power and Policy being spent in vain, he then
at length applied himself to the Jesuits, (as the Jesuit Valentine Carvaglio,
writing from Nangesaque, the five and twentieth of February, in the Year
sixteen hundred and one, to Claudius Aquaviea, Chief Governor of the Society of
Jesuits makes mention) to whom he sent Letters to Nangesaque to this purpose:

Since it was known to all the world, the downfall of Daifusama's oppressors,
and Tzunocamindono's Death, which could no ways be made known to the Besieged
in Uto; by which, their ignorance of that Affair they held out so obstinately,
as if their Councils Cause were not ruined, and their King slain: Therefore my
desire is, that you send a Jesuit to me at my Leaguer, that he may unfold the
present State of things to the Garrison, in which are five Jesuits: If they
were obedient herein, they should no way find him unthankful for it; else they
were to expect Daifusama's displeasure.

They are cast down at this demand.
But the Jesuits were amazed at this Command, and chiefly, that there should
be a change of Government (as Japan was many times subject to such alterations
of State) therefore they besought with gentle Entreaties to put it off, saying,
They were Spiritual Persons, and taught the way to Heaven, and transitory
Affairs was not their concern, especially the business of War; and if they
should so do, they might seem rather like mad men, than Counselors.

Canzviedono did no ways accept of this their excuse, but threatened to put the
five Fathers in Uto to death; and furthermore, to banish all the rest out of
Japan, as being Daifusama's Enemies: So at last the Garrison received all
information concerning the Transactions between the Emperor and Council; by
which they judged it better to make an agreement, being not able to stand out
alone; so that Canzviedono, after being sufficiently wearied out, obtained his
desire.

Vto yields. As also the Castle of Giatusciro.
The Besieged delivering up the Castle Uto into his possession; and not long
after, according to that example, also the Castle Giatusciro, of which
Mimazaca, a grand Favorite of Tzunocamindono's, had the chief Command, who
having had certain intelligence, that his King being slain by Daifusama, for
whom should he then fight for any longer? All hopes of assistance on their part
being utterly lost; What then could he effect alone? none being to be found
that were in Arms against Daifusama, but the King of Sassuma, who was a hundred
and fifty Leagues distance from Giatusciro: For all which reasons, he thought
it best to deliver up the Castle to Canzviedono, upon good and honorable
Articles; and coming to an Agreement, had liberty to go with fifteen hundred
Men by Shipping to the Haven of Sassuma; And Gianava.
after that, Canzviedono subdued the Castle of Gianava, by which he got the
whole Kingdom of Fingo into his possession, whereas he had only half of it
before.

Daifusama becomes Master of Japan.
DAifusama being thus become Master of all Japan, he Tyraniz'd not after his
obtained Victory, Rages not after the custom of the Japanners.
as other Emperors had done before him, which was, to defile their Conquests
with cruel Massacres, without sparing any that had formerly obstructed them,
and with razing of Towns, Castles, and Cities, of which sufficient testimonies
are to be seen to this day, by many places lying buried in their own Ruins,
Houses, Churches and other stately Edifices hid in Ashes, being destroyed by
raging War. But Daifusama took a more gentler course with his Captive Enemies,
which he took in the Field-battel fought between him and his Parliament, He put
three eminent persons to shameful death.
or grand Council: Only upon three Eminent Persons he took Sanguinary
satisfaction; for though he spared others, yet he Condemned Gibunoscio King of
Onu, to die an Ignoble Death, for leading the Grand Councels Army against him;
Tzunocamindono, King of half Fingo; and Ancocugio, whom Morindono had used for
his Councellor; being taken Prisoners by Cainecamio, were first entertained
according to their Dignity, but soon after put into the Custody of a cruel
Commander, and at last close Prisoners in Osacca, where they received their
Sentence of Death, being set upon lean Mules, and led through the Streets of
Osacca in great derision; then they were carried in Carts to Meaco, crowded all
about with great multitudes of people, some seeming to pity the disasters of
such Noble persons, whilst others laughed and mocked at their misfortunes.
Sentence of death was executed against the Kings Gibunosciro, Tzunocamindono,
and Ancacugio.
Gibunosci riding in the first Cart, was followed by Ancocugio, and on the
hindermost sat Tzunocamindono; before each went a Trumpeter, who cried aloud,
that these Traitors to their Country were Condemned to shameful Deaths,
because they were found to fall off from the King of Tensa.

The stout courage of Tzunocamindono.
Tzunocamindono seemed not the least dismayed or daunted, but bore up with a
Manly Courage under all these Contumelies; but the other two, testifying their
Innocence, complained against such cursed Authority: Whilst they drew near to
the place of Execution, several Bonzies coming from a place not far from
thence, not only admonished them, but used many ridiculous Ceremonies, to
purify them from all their Crimes, that so they might appear in the other Life
before Amida, without polluted or unclean Souls; which comforted the Condemned
not a little, to be assured of an Immortal Life in this Mortal. But
Tzunocamindono rejected the Bonzi, and acknowledged himself to be a Christian,
who abhorred such abomination.

Being upon the Scaffold, the Supreme Bonzies came to them, who is not used to
go forth, but when great Persons are to suffer, attended with a considerable
Train of Japan Priests, and Xaca's Consecrated Book in his hand.

After much juggling, when Gibunoscio and Ancocugio were just ready to die, he
offered them the Book to kiss; but Tzunocamindono charged the Supreme Bonzi of
Blasphemy, declaring his Christianity again; and pulled out from his Girdle, a
small Picture of Jesus, and the Virgin Mary, which the Portugal Queen
Catherine, Sister to the Emperor Charles the Fifth, had presented him by the
Jesuits.

He kissed a Portraiture with the Image of Jesus, beheaded after the two
others, and buried by the Jesuits.
This Picture he took in both his hands, and looking steadfastly upon it, said
his Prayers, then offered his Neck to the Executioners Sword, who struck three
times before he could cut it off: In the same manner the two others were
Executed, whose Corpse were presently burnt; but Tzumocamindono was in Mecao, by
the Jesuits, wrapped in a long Shroud, Burying him with all the Ceremonies
used by the present Romish Church.

The horrible Murder of Trunocamindono's Son.
Leaving one Son of twelve years old behind, to whom Morindono, together with
his Officers, gave free leave to dwell close by Firoscima; but a few days after
the Beheading of Tzunocamindono, he sent for the Child to Osacca, where he then
was: The Halberdiers that fetched him, knowing of Morindono's bloody intent,
discovered it; Nevertheless, though the Child was terrified at that sentence of
Death, he desired not to live, having nothing in the world to trust to, since
his Father was put to so shameful a death: He acknowledged a Christ, by whose
Death, a door was opened to Heaven for the Dead; there he should find his
Father, when he put off this Body: No sooner came the Youth within Osacca, but
Morindono caused him secretly to be Beheaded, and sent the Head to Daifusama,
to obtain his favor; but he abhorred the deed, and would have taken vengeance
on him for it, had not Morindono been secretly informed of his displeasure on
which he reported, that the Youth had first ripp'd up his own Belly for grief
of his Fathers death.

Daifusama spared many of his enemies, as also their Allies and Kindred.
Besides these three, since Daifusama's Conquest, he scarce put any to death in
cool blood, but went on in a mild way, that thereby he might draw the minds of
the people to him, and settle the Empire upon his Son, according to the Laws of
the Country; Tzunocamindono's Wife and Children should have suffered death; as
also many other Widows and Orphans, whose Fathers and alliance were in Arms
against him, but he spared them all.

The courage of Acascicamon.
NOne more disordered, and did more mischief to Diafusama's Army, than
Acasicamon, and Sassuma; for Acasicamon retreated not, but rushed into the
midst of them, and made great execution, judging it better to die by the Sword
of the Enemy, than to lay violent hands on himself: Where, whilst he was
hemmed in, and no hope of escape, A wonderful accident in the stress of the
fight.
he broke into a Regiment led by Cainocami, who knew him by his Behavior and
Arms, and crying aloud, said, Save him, The Speech of Cainocami.
Soldiers, save him, for be shall be my Prisoner; upon this Command, they
stood all still, and he going toward Acasicamon, embraced him about the neck,
and shedding many Tears, said, My dear Friend, how hard have the Fates been to
me to make us Enemies? that we should thus, in a lamentable dissension, which
shakes the very Foundations of the Empire, Fight one against another, because
you led the Parliament Forces, and I the Kings; you have gained honor enough,
though you are defeated by making your way thus through the Conquering Army.
Which said, Acasicami, so soon as he was able to speak, replied thus, If you
are my true Friend, as I believe, now or never show it, and presently dispatch
me with that Sword, with which you would spare my Life. But Cainocami on the
contrary, set him upon his own Horse, and assured him his life.

Daifusama distributes Kingdoms, and rewards to those that fought for him.
FUrthermore, Daifusama thought it convenient to distribute his Bounty and
Rewards on those that had fought for him against the Council, giving some great
Kingdoms for lesser ones; others had larger or smaller Territories; so that all
Japan was in confusion: Some removed from their Houses, Cities, and Towns, with
their new King and Government, the Inhabitants going from their ancient
Habitations to other Countries, appointed by Daifusama. Nangoioca received for
the small Fort of Tango, the Kingdom of Bungo: Facuscimadono, the Castle
Firoscima, and the Countries thereunto belonging: To some Christians of Noble
Extract, Daifusama gave several Livings in the Kingdom of Mimaraca, because
they had bore Arms, and fought valiantly for him: He released also the five
Jesuits without Ransom, which were put in Prison by Canzviedono, when the
Castle of Uto was rendered up, giving them free Conduct to Nangesaque: To
Cainocamio, the Son of Quamboiendono he bestowed the Kingdom of Cicugen.

Lives in quiet.
Since that time, Daifusama had rest and quiet, and ruled Japan with Imperial
Command, as Guardian of Fideri: He removed the Court from Fissima to Surunga,
and changed his Name of Daifusama, He changed the name of it again.
into Goyssio Samma: Anno sixteen hundred and eleven, he was visited by several
Ambassadors from Europe and other places. The Portuguese and Castilians behaved
themselves so ill, that Goyssio Samma seemed to be much displeased thereat;
Spex and Segerssoon were very acceptable to Daifusama.
Jacob Spex, and Peter Segerssoon having far more free Audience from the
Emperor, and their Presents being kindly accepted. A Copy of their Embassy
written in Japan Language, and left with the Chancellor Cosequidonne, so that
they might have a quicker dispatch at their return from Jedo; being instructed,
that it would be fitting to Complement the Emperors Son there, which the
Castilian Ambassadors had done before them, but committed a great error
therein, by visiting the same before their Father.

Their journey to Jedo.
On the eighteenth of August, in the forementioned year, they made their Journey
thither: Cosequidonne prepared all things necessary for them in that
Expedition: But the Netherland Ambassadors going by daybreak out of Suringa,
came by noon to the Village Jesare, where they lay that night, in which
happened such a dreadful Tempest of Thunder, Lightning, and Showers of Rain, as
if the world had been at an end, which constrained them to stay till the next
day. About thirty years after, the Ambassadors, Frisius and Brookhurst lodged
there as their Landlord told them: In the morning they departed from thence in
foul Weather, and came to Missina, and thence through Fovisauwa and Toska into
Jedo.

^eir strange adventure ^do.
Here, by means of one William Adams, they made their coming known to Sadadonne,
President in the Council of the Emperors Son, and excused themselves, that for
two years (when they had visited the Emperor at Suringa) they had neglected to
pay their respects to the young Emperor; which was, The Emperors Son is
desirous to see the Netherlanders.
partly because they knew not the way, and partly, for their speedy return,
upon which the safety of the Netherlanders Ships depend. At which, Sadadonne
seeming to be satisfied, said, That the Emperors Son had Information, that
there were Ships come out of remote Countries, into the Haven of Firando, two
years since, and he desired to see those People, whose Warlike Deeds, and
rational Managements of Affairs, were known all over India; therefore they need
not any way doubt, but they should be welcome: Besides, that they might loose
no time, he prepared all things, to get them Audience before the Emperors Son.
Moreover, proffered to do them all the kindness the Hollanders themselves would
require.

The next day the Ambassadors repaired to the House of Sadadonne, and presented
him with five Else of Crimson Cloth, two Pieces of Black Lute-String, one Piece
of Black Damask, five Pieces of White Sattins, three Glass Flasks, one Carbine,
and a Powder-Horn. These Presents were thankfully accepted, though with
intimation, that it was against their Custom; but being the first time that he
had seen the Netherlander Rarities brought so unmeasurable a distance thither,
not without great labor and charge, they should be accepted: Further he
acquainted them, That last night he had made known their coming to the Emperors
Son, who seemed to be well-pleased thereat.

The discourse between Spex and Sadadonne.
This their Discourse together continued above half an hour, Sadadonne enquiring
of them concerning the State, and the Affairs of the Netherlands, and wondered,
that a Country of so small a compass should manage such a War against the
greatest Prince in Europe, the King of Spain, and compelling him to an
Agreement, settle Plantations in many places through the world: During this
their Discourse, he Treated the Ambassadors with such Dainties, as the Country
would afford and though he was very feeble with age, and troubled with the
Gout, and at that time scarce able to go, yet he led Spex and Segerssoon out at
the Gate, promising them in the afternoon to conduct and procure them an
Audience in the Castle; which Sadadonne performed, The Netherland Ambassadors
appear before the Emperors Son at Jedo.
for at two of the Clock they came before the young Emperor, at whose Feet they
laid two Pieces of fine Stammel, one Piece of Carsey of the same color,
fifteen Else of Green Flowered Grogarin, nine Else of Crimson, Flowered Black,
one Piece of Damask, one Piece of Cloth of Gold Tissue, five Norenburg Carpets,
one Piece of Satin Flowered with Roses, one Piece of Lutestring, three
Elephants Teeth, an hundred Bars of Steel, one Musket, two Carbines and
Powder-Horns, five less Flasks, and some Pounds of shot.

The Emperors Son thanked the Ambassadors for their Presents, and they were
joyful that he had accepted of them, whose favor to obtain, the Hollanders had
endeavored long before; then bowing his head, the Emperor retiring, ordered
Spex and Segerssoon to be conducted through the Palace, without the Castle, by
Sadadonnes Gentlemen, with a Command for Horses, Letters of Conduct, Soldiers,
two Japan Coats, and several other Presents; both to Spex and Segerssoon, and
his Protection wheresoever they went.

Were very lovingly entertained.
Afterward, the Ambassadors were invited to a Dinner by the Governors Brother
of Firando: and while they were resolving to take Shipping to Sail to the Haven
of Wormgouw, Sadadonne prepared a Galley for them, and a Bark for their Goods:
Never any Europeans whatsoever were received more kindlier at Jedo than they;
for the Spanish Ambassador, though he had a little before made his entrance
there with great Pomp, yet waited many days before they were admitted to
Audience, where also they met but with a cold Entertainment. The five and
twentieth of August, Spex and Segerssoon set Sail in the prepared Vessels, and
arrived in the Evening in the Haven of Wormgouw, where they lodged in William
Adam's House, and found a Ship, which Sailing along the weather Shore, had
narrowly escaped a great Storm, which else would certainly have been cast away
on the North of Japan.

The Pomp of the Spaniards in Mexico, to entertain the Japanners.
This Vessel brought the Japanners back, which some time before Sailed over with
Roderigo de Riduere to New-Spain, where they were so sumptuously entertained,
that it cost the King of Spain above fifty thousand pieces of Eight, bearing
all their Expenses from Acapulco to Mexico, where they were received in great
State.

How New Guinee was discovered.
Two Netherlanders Sailing in the Ship, informed them, that the Castilians from
Manilla, had discovered on the unknown South Country New-Guinee, lying under a
temperate Climate, and Inhabited by civil people, full of all sorts of
Provision, besides Nutmegs and Gold; two of the Inhabitants being stolen from
the Country, were carried to Madrid, so to learn the Language, and give them
further information concerning the discovered Coast of New-Guinee, which seemed
to be of great importance to the Castilians, who promised themselves great
advantages, in sending Ships from the Manilla's thither, wherefore they left
several men ashore to make further inspection into the Country, and also in
time to People it with their own Nation.

The Captain of the Ship sent three of his Officers to Complement Spex and
Segerssoon, and soon after several Messengers to invite them to a Collation;
but the Netherland Ambassadors, judging that he ought first to give them a
Visit, they excused themselves.

The request of the Castilians to the Emperor of Japan.
They also were informed, that the Spaniards were very earnest with Goyssio
Samma Emperor of Japan, to obtain leave for to sound the Japan Havens, because
many Ships richly Freighted, Sailing over from Manilla to New-Spain, were
oft-times loft at Sea, suffering by stress of Weather, which if they might
Harbor upon the Coast of Japan, they would escape the like danger; but they
durst not adventure, because they knew not the depth and sounding of the
Havens. Lastly, they requested, that they might build Ships in Japan, because
Wood and other Materials, nor experienced Ship-Wrights were so easily to be had
in Manilla and New-Spain, as there.

The description of the habit of a common Citizen of Japan.
The Netherland Ambassadors having notice thereof, went on their way through
Oiso and Justivarra, and Surunga; about noon, on the nine and twentieth of
August, they took Horse there amongst a great throng of People. Their Habits,
as of all other common Citizens very costly: Their Crowns shaven after the
manner of Friars, their Hair tied up behind in rowls, with Fillets; when they
are Married, one Lock hangs down by the Roll. Their Coats are tied with
Girdles, broad as our Belts, of several Colors, in which, below the left
Breast sticks a Cutting-Knife, by them called Siakkin; a two-handed Sword also
sticks in their Girdle, thrust under the left Arm, the Handle covered over with
a Shaggerine or Fish-skin: Their Coats are made with very broad Borders, and
Embroidered with variety of colored Flowers, all walking with Canes in their
hands; in stead of Shoes they wear Clogs, not unlike the Carmelites in
Brabant, made fast with a string about the great Toe, by which they draw it
along when they lift up their Foot.



But Spex and Segerszoon arriving at Mexico, The Netherlands return again to
Surunga.
made their return from Jedo known by William Adams to Cosequidonne, who also
immediately sent one of his Gentlemen to welcome them thither, and to enquire
concerning what success they had in their Journey; whereupon they made Answer,
They could never be thankful enough to Cosequidonne, for his kindness showed
them, he being the means, that all things in Jedo happened according to their
desire. Furthermore, the Japan Emperor, as William Adams understood from
Cosequidonne, had inquired about the Lading, which the Netherland Ship had
brought to Firando; upon which, the Ambassadors rested not, but instantly drew
an Inventory of all her Lading, which they sent by William Adams to
Cosequidonne, with a request, that he would speedily dispatch the desired
Letters of License, that the Netherland Ships might Trade without any
molestation in Japan: In answer whereof he brought them word, That the Letters
of License lay ready, only they wanted the Imperial Signet, which should be
ready on that day, or at farthest, on the morrow.

Where whilst they staid waiting for it, they saw in their Lodging one Jacob a
Japan Christian; being Captain of Junck, who formerly had been kept by Wittert,
Governor of the Manillies, and complained much of the injury done him by the
Netherland Mariners, who gave out, That they prejudiced only the Castilians
and Portuguese, but indeed, they made a prey also of the Japanners, and said,
If this misdemeanor should come to the Emperors Ear, it would be bad for the
Netherlanders.

Cosequidonne in the mean time, toward the Evening, sent twenty Japan Shifts
to Spex, and ten for Segerszoon, to demonstrate (as the Messenger expressed it)
his affection toward them. The last of August, Williams Adams received the two
requested Letters of License, with the Imperial Seal; instantly, the
Ambassadors caused them to be Translated out of the Japan Tongue, into
Low Dutch, and found them word for word, which were to this effect:

The contents of the Japan Letters of License.
The Holland Ships that Sailed to Japan, be they Anchored in what Haven soever,
none under our Command shall any way disturb them, but on the contrary, show
them respect and afford them all manner of assistance.

The Ambassadors were much troubled at the expressions in this License, being
not full enough to their desire and intentions, wanting the chief and grand
concern, viz. That they should not be molested with Searchers and Customers, in
the Delivery, Lading, and Sale of their Goods, which were vexatious to all
Merchants whatsoever, especially as they found, to the Netherlanders, the
chiefest being Saphidonne, Saphidonne suppressed the Netherland trade in Japan.
who exacted Fees, Duties, and Customs more than any, being very greedy and
troublesome, of which, were the Emperor informed, would cost him his life,
though his Sister was one of the Emperors Concubines.

The condition of the Netherlanders with their Letters of License.
But it was very difficult to lay the Plot for the destruction of this
Saphidonne, who was so eminent a Person; and certain they were, that the
Emperor would enquire why the Netherland Ambassadors should insist so
particularly upon him, that by virtue of the Letters of License, their Goods
should not be stopped nor seized by his Majesty's Officers of the Custom; also
they would run no less danger, to request the amending or augmenting of a
Letter Granted by the Emperors Favor.

Yet at last they concluded to venture on one of them, whereupon, on the first
of September, Spex and William Adams made their Address to Cosequidonne; Spex
thanking him for the speedy procuring the Letters of License; who asked, if
there were not enough inserted in; they answered, Yes: only there wanted the
Emperors permission, for the Netherland Ship to deliver and sell the Goods
without the disturbance of Waiters and overseers; whereupon, Cosequidonne
assured them, that none should in the least molest them; wherefore he had sent
a Letter to Saphidonne, commanding him not to hinder the Netherlanders in the
delivery or sale of their Merchandise, for he had received certain information,
that Saphidonne, according to his own pleasure, and not in such a manner as he
ought, seized their Goods, and hindered their sale, of which they had never
complained, but for great reason. Spex requested Cosequidonnes own Handwriting
to make use of, if they should hereafter suffer more injury by Saphidonne; and
also, if he found the business of so weighty a concern, to procure from the
Emperor his Imperial License, to deliver and sell, without molestation; but
Cosequidonne judged it to be needless, so long as William Adams staid, in
Surunga, to whom he might write over concerning any miscarriage, against which
there should speedy order be taken.

The cunning management of Spex with Cosoquidonne.
But Spex feared much, considering that time run away e're any Order could come
from the Court, for if they could, not be fully Laden in nine Months time to
come away, that then they were necessitated to lie five Months at Panama, not
without great damage to them. Cosequidonne apprehending the weight of the
matter, then promised, that if the Ambassadors Journey reequir'd speed, William
Adams might stay, to procure of the Emperor the desired License of
free-delivering and Trading: Spex thanked Cosequidonne for that singular
courtesy, and presently caused a Petition to be drawn in the Japan Tongue, to
that purpose; which the same Evening, William Adams delivered into
Cosequidonne's hands, who immediately reading it over, ordered William Adams to
wait in the Morning at the Court, and there deliver the Petition himself, that
his Imperial Majesty would be pleased out of his special favor to grant them
their request.

The Netherlanders obtained of the Emperor their request, to the admiration of
every one.
It happened just the very next day, that Sicusabrondonne, who especially
favored the Netherlanders, was present at the business: These two persons
talking together, went and found Goysio Samma the Emperor, and finding him in a
good humor, delivered the Petition; which being Granted, Signed, and Sealed,
William Adams presently conveyed it to the Ambassadors, with a command from the
Emperor, That the Netherland Ambassadors should go on their Journey without
molestation, and next year bring new Merchandise thither. Sicusabrondonne, and
Cosequidonne, sent each of them a Nobleman for Spex and Segerszoon, about this
Express, which never any Nation before could presume to, commanding them not to
stay longer, but come the following year with new Netherland Commodities, else
they would perhaps incur the Emperos displeasure.

They were maintained freely for their Journey.
William Adams was ordered to conduct them down, and to take care for all
things in behalf of the Emperor, necessary for their Journey. The Ambassadors
humbly thanking them for their so great Bounties, assured them, that they would
never be found ungrateful, or to fall into the Emperors just displeasure:
After, having taken their leave, they took Horse, and rode through Cacingam,
and by midnight arrived at Arei, defended by a Castle.

The City Astanamia.
TWo Miles further lies Astanamia, a fair City, whose Inhabitants drive a
great Trade in Timber; all the Streets and Lanes are full of great Wood-yards,
their Houses built all behind; by the way lives a Broker, who deals for the
Merchants.

The journey of the Ambassadors.
BEtween Mia and Quano, the Sea makes a Bay into the Land, seven Leagues broad,
over which Sailing, after having Landed, they refreshed at Quanto, a handsome
City, also fortified with a strong Castle. In the Evening they arrived within
Cammiammi; by Daybreak, mounting on Horseback, and going on their Journey,
they were surpised about Noon near Znitzamma by a Thunder Shore, but not
stopping, though the Weather continued foul, in the Evening they came to
Vitzibe.

In Oets the Ambassadors parted, for Spex and William Adams traveled to Meaco,
to deliver Cosequidonne's Letters to Itacura Fovimendonne, and once more to
present him with four Else of Crimson Cloth, two Pieces of black Lute-string,
one Piece of Stripped Silk, and some Pounds of Lead: After many Apologies, he
took the Presents, rather, because the Netherland Ambassadors otherwise might
doubt of his affection to them, than that ever it was accustomed so to be.
After their departure, Spex took some Wax-Work along with him, which in his
Journey thither he had bespoke; and went on to Fissima, where Segerszoon and
John Cousins were arrived with their Goods: Here meeting one another, They meet
again.
they went all aboard of a Bark, in which they Sailed to the Suburbs of Osacca,
where the Wind blew so hard against them, that they were forced to Land, not
being able to get further.

They travel to Saccai to observe trade.
In the mean time they went on to the City Saccai, famous for Trade, being three
Leagues from Osacca, to enquire out the manner of their Dealing, and very
happily met there with Melchior Zantfoort, who suffering Shipwreck on that
Coast, staid in this City, where he had narrowly observed all their Customs, of
which he informed Spex, who gave them such satisfaction, that they no way
repented their Journey thither.

They come to Firando.
Thence from Cussima, the Suburb of Osacca, they went on their way, and on the
nineteenth of September, Anno sixteen hundred and eleven, they came to an
Anchor before Firando, where they were honorably entertained by old Foyesamma,
and the young Governor Donnesumi; and after the reading of the Letters
delivered, written by the Council in Surunga and Jedo, and especially the
Emperors, the two Waiters were immediately Commanded from the Netherland Ship,
called The Brake, then lying in the Harbor.

The Governor of the Country of Firando is the cause of the Trade of the
Netherlanders in Japan.
Foyesamma obliged the East India Company exceedingly in this Embassy; for he
not only provided Spex and Segerzoon with a Gentleman to recommend them at
Court, but also, Anno 1603. fitted out a Jonk at his own Cost and Charge, to
carry Quackernaek and Melchior Zantroort (who lost their Ships on the Japan
Shore) to Patane, there to declare the benefit of the Japan Trade to the
Netherlanders. This Voyage cost Foyesamma about two thousand Pieces of Eight.

Afterward, Anno 1609. when the first Ships, being the Red Lion with Arrows,
and the Griffin, that came from Batavia to Firando, he furnished the chief
Merchants, which sought for a free Trade by the Emperor with a Galley of fifty
six Oars, which was out two Months, and returned so sadly Weather-beaten, that
she was soon after broke up.

Mean while the forementioned Ships left great store of Pepper at Firando,
which Foyesamma bought in at the dearest Rate, because Saphedonne, the
Emperor's Governor in Nangesaque, should not ingross the Pepper-Trade to
himself; so that no other Merchant durst proffer any Price for it: but
Foyesamma losing above twelve hundred Pound thereof, the Charges and Damage
which he suffered for, or by the East India Company was very great: Neither
were his Losses repaired, though he received the year before out of ten Chinese
Jonks, above four thousand weight of Pepper in Presents.

Presents made to the Governor of Firando.
The Netherland Council at Firando taking this into consideration, that
Foyesamma might not be discouraged for his great Favors, and his noble
Undertaking, they thought it fit to present him with some rich Presents, though
their small Cargo could scarce allow of the same; yet they were as bountiful as
they could, and gave the old and young Governor and his Uncle such Gifts, that
they were all kindly received. And this was the second Embassy which the
Netherlanders sent to Daifusama the Emperor of Japan.

Why Daifusama promoted the Foreign Trade.
Daifusama, first called Ongoschio, and at last Goyssio Samma, was exceedingly
pleased with such foreign Courtesies. He also endeavored by means of the
Outlandish Trade to enrich and employ his Subjects, and therefore all Strangers
were protected by the Emperor, and secured from all Affronts; yet not long
after a bloody Persecution of the Christians began in his Empire.

Persecutes the Roman Christians.
The Jesuit Cornelius Hazart mentions several Martyrs, as Johannes Gorosaimon,
Simon Giffioje, Magdalena, Agnes, Melchior Bujandono, Damianus, Leo Xiquigemo,
Michael and Martha, besides several Children, which were either beheaded,
burnt, or Nailed on Crosses. Moreover, as to what is related concerning
Fayaxinda, his Wife Martha, Daughter Magdalena, and his young Son Jacob,
besides Adrian Tacafaxi, Joanna, Leo Canyemon, and Paulus Danyemon, I leave to
the pleasure of the Reader to believe. Father Hazart relates their Martyrdom
thus:

Hazarts Relation of some Martyrs.
HAlf a Mile from Arima stands a House in a Valley, built on eight Pillars,
covered with Straw, and the Walls of Wood. On the seventeenth of October, Anno
1613. they were led out of the City; at which time it was present death to be a
Christian, and yet twenty thousand Christians came together, and divided
themselves into several Companies, carrying lighted Torches, and wore red Caps,
walking six and six in a row, in the same manner as they go in Procession in
Rome and Antwerp, strowing the Paths which they passed with Coral and Bays, to
the honor of all the Saints. The Martyrs went forth from amongst the Company
into the forementioned House, where every one embraced a Wooden Pillar; but
whilst the Executioner was tying them fast one after another to the Posts, Leo
Canyenon, none knew how, got upon the top of the House, and called from thence
with a loud voice, saying, Brothers, this day appears the power of Faith in
Jesus Christ, whilst we gladly endure the Flames, which can scarce devour our
Bodies; but we shall be raised out of the Ashes, to be preserved at the day of
Judgment from everlasting Fire in a most blessed Life: Brothers, be constant to
the Law of God, and account him above your lives and fortunes. Thus having
finished his Discourse he descended, and suffered himself to be tied to the
eighth Pillar. When they were all bound, the Jesuits Commander, Gasper, showed
them the Picture of Jesus tied to a Post, and miserably Whipped in the
Synagogue; and calling upon them said, Look how much you resemble our Savior
when he suffered under Pontius Pilate: This is he for whose love you die, who
expressed his affections beforehand when he died for you, to live in him that
arose alive from death: He will crown you in Heaven with glorious Crowns. The
Executioners staid for the finishing of Gasper's Speech, then setting the
Stakes about the Straw-house on fire, the Martyrs standing about three Foot
from it, that so they might roast by degrees. Mean while the Strings with which
Magdalen, Fayaxinda's Daughter was made fast being burnt, she fled, not from
the Fire, but went and took many glowing Coals, placing them on her Head like a
Crown. The Cord of Jacob's young Son was also burnt, and he ran to his Mother
Martha, who bid him call upon Jesus Maria. Thus much in short of what Hazart
relates, with many Circumstances of Words and Deeds described at large.

Daifusama persecutes the Roman Christians.
But it is very well known, that Daifusama did persecute the Christians very
severely, and by strict Edicts commanded all his Substitute Kings to prosecute
and punish them according to the Laws; so that in the Kingdom of Bungo they
were burnt, and in the Province Chicuin hanged up by the Legs.

And here Orbedono sat in the City Facata representing the King, at the
entrance of one of their Temples, with four Judges, holding a great Book,
indors'd thus, A Catalogue of the Names of those that denied Christ: In which
every one were to subscribe that returned again to their former Faith; and
those that would not were sure to suffer intolerable punishments and death.
Amongst great numbers were only Thomas and Joachim that did not apostatize
from their Christianity; therefore they were immediately Hanged on a Tree by
the Feet on two Boughs, that the uppermost his Head, touched the lowermost his
Feet: thus they hung half a Day, and a whole Night, the Japanners deriding them
as they passed by, looking upon them as Fools that would suffer so cruel a
Death for a strange Religion; but they not regarding their Discourse were soon
after beheaded.

Cruelties used against them in Xiqui and Arima.
In the Island Xiqui the Christians were carried about naked, Nailed on Crosses,
beheaded, and with many other exquisite tortures put to death.

But above all the Apostate King of Arima exceeded them in their tortures,
having amongst other things two sharp Pieces of Wood, between which their Legs
were put, and after beat close together, which occasioned such a grievous Pain,
that most forsook the Roman Faith.

Hazart Church Hist.
The Reasons which stirred up Daifusama to this cruelty, and chiefly since the
Year 1613. the Jesuit Hazart says, are chiefly four.

The first Reason why the Japan Emperor persecuted the Christians.
The first was Daifusama's suspecting the Spanish Forces, which spread daily
more and more over India, insomuch that great Islands and vast Provinces did
already bow to them. In the West they had subdued a whole new World, called
America; and still not being satisfied with so great a Conquest, was come
through the unknown South Sea, and had there made himself Master of several
Territories in the East; the Molucca Islands, the Castle Malacca, and the
far-spreading Philippines being all under his subjection, from whence he might,
when he pleased, send over his Forces to Japan; not that they are so near that
the Philippines may be seen from Japan, as Hazart without reason sets down,
their nearest Promontories being at least two hundred Dutch Miles distant from
each other, but that Japan being already full of Foreigners which were up in
Arms, and also well stored with Christians; who knew, but that together in a
short time they might deliver it up to a Christian Prince?

The second Reason.
The second Reason Hazart tells us was this: A Ship lying at Anchor in a Japan
Haven, one Yamondono, a Gentleman of that Country, desirous to see the same,
went Aboard, where he found the Master looking over the Map of the World:
Yamondono entreated him to instruct and inform him concerning the Territories,
Mountains, Rivers, Cities, and Havens therein. Nothing more amazed him, than to
see the Spaniards have Command over so great a part of Europe, America, and
Asia, and that they still held their Possession. But the Master being examined
farther, told him, That his Countrymen drove a Trade with all the World, and
that no People suffered any damage by them, but what wrong any did them they
righted by Arms; with which they had subdued many Kingdoms. Yamondano desired
to know if they did not send their Ministers beforehand, to gain the hearts of
the Inhabitants by Preaching the Doctrine of Christ, and to stir them up
against their Heathen Governors, to the end that when any Insurrection should
happen, they might by a conjunction with the malcontent Natives, enable
themselves to a more easy Conquest: The Master acknowledged that was the
Design of their Priests: which Yamondono laying up in his mind, soon after sent
word thereof to the Emperor; who slept not upon so weighty a Matter, but
resolved suddenly to free himself of the Popish Clergy, as his Predecessor
Taicosama did, Anno 1587. commanding them all in twenty days to depart from
Japan.

Fathom the Japan Harbors.
This News of Yamondono was backed by another casual Information given to
Daifusama, That a Spanish Pilot had fathomed, and with a Plummet sounded the
depth of several Japan Harbors, which was suspected to be done for no other
end, but that they intended to Land in some of those Places, and to subdue
Japan, as they had done many Provinces both in the East and West.

The third Reason of the Persecution Hazart lays upon the English and
Hollanders.
The third Reason of the Persecution, Hazart lays the blame thereof upon the
English and Hollanders, who reported that the Spaniards had aimed along time to
make themselves not only Masters of Europe, but the West part of the World;
and to that end, not many years since they had made great slaughter in Peru,
Mexico, France, Netherlands, and other Places, that no Age ever heard of so
many and so cruel; That they sent their Priests beforehand to prepare the ways,
and under a cloak of Religion to draw the People to their humors, extorting
great Riches from them; and making them believe, that the Pope has an absolute
and unlimited Power, to dispose of all Kingdoms and Provinces, according to his
will and pleasure, and that Subjects therefore are not tied to be always
obedient to their Heathen Governors, but might release themselves when they saw
a convenient opportunity; That the Jesuits crept in every where, and by subtle
Plots and Contrivances sought to dethrone Princes, causing many Murders and
Uprores wherever they came; for which cause several Christian Princes
oftentimes, banished them from their Courts and Countries. In France stood a
long time an Iron Plate, whereon was Engraven all the Villainies for which they
were banished out of that Country. The Sorbonne in France presented some years
past a Writing to the Court, wherein they showed, that the World never bred
more traitorous and bloody Villains than the Jesuits. The Cities Antwerp,
Padua, Bruges, Toulouse, Bourdeaux, Prague, and other Walled Places, oftentimes
for their horrid and abominable actions have thrust them forth. And had not the
wisdom of the Venetian Governors been deluded along time by their dissimulation
of Zeal, they had not so long been pestered with them: But quickly the English,
Scots, and several other Kingdoms, had rid their hands of them by banishment.
This Hazart, being himself a Jesuit, sets down as the most prevailing Reason
and Motive that stirred up Daifusama against the Roman Christians, and chiefly
the Priests.

The fourth Reason.
But the last Fast Fault he lays upon the Japan Prince Portasius, who being King
of Arima, pretended to be highly in Favor with the Emperor, because his Son had
married Daifusama's Niece, and therefore sought no small share of the Province
Figen, which by Inheritance he laid claim to: For the obtaining this his
desire, he sent Paulus Daifachi, an expert Courtier, and great Favorite of the
Emperor's, with many rich and costly Presents, to deliver to Daifusama; which
he refusing, were imbezell'd away. Upon notice whereof, and observing the
Protractions used in his Business, Protasius was displeased with Daifusama's
Dealings, and apprehended some danger therein. The best way for prevention
whereof, and to know where the business halted, he resolved in Person to go to
the Emperor; to which purpose he went accompanied with his Son Michael and
Daughter in Law: But both of them had a wicked design in their Heads to Murder
Protasius, because he would not, according to the Japan Custom, being
overgrown in years, resign up his Province. Protasius having received a denial
concerning his business, was banished, and Daifachi came to a miserable end,
being condemned with his Wife to Ride on galled and sore Horses through the
Streets of Surunga; and on the one and twentieth of April, Anno 1612. tied to a
Stake surrounded with Fire, at three Foot distance from him, and so by degrees
was roasted to death: His Wife obtained some favor, having with patience viewed
her Husbands deplorable end.

This Protasius had been a chief promoter of the Roman Religion in Arima, which
was ill resented by Daifusama, and the more because he did not deliver up the
Crown, being ancient, to his Son, as the Japan Custom was, but kept the
Authority in his own hands.

The fifth Reason why Daifusama persecuted the Christians in Japan
Besides these Reasons of Hazart, I find a fifth the occasion of the Persecution
in Japan, mentioned in the daily Annotations, or Journal of the Embassy of
Frisius and Brookhurst, namely the Portuguese Priests (as the Japanners say)
had formerly great privileges allowed them, insomuch that they Preached their
Doctrine, and spread their Religion, as if they were Natives of the Country,
whose Faith was grounded with the peopling of Japan. They built also Churches,
Cloisters, and Schools, planting religious Orders, as in one Place, The Society
of the holy Virgin, by Didacus Gonnoia, besides many others, as well
Franciscans and Dominicans, as Jesuits, had spread themselves all over Japan,
and by their Masses, Confessions, Purgatory, and such like, got an incredible
sum of Money of the poor innocent People, bringing every year little less than
a Tun of Gold out of the Country, insomuch that where ever they came, they
generally undid all the People; yet notwithstanding they charmed them in such a
nature, that their Word amongst them was a Law. They had now also gotten a
Bishop at Nangesaque, and were Plotting to depose the Heathen Emperor from his
Throne, and to set the Crown on the Head of a Christian Prince, under whom they
might have free liberty of publishing their Doctrine; but the Letter being
discovered, in which the King of Portugal had advice to make himself Master of
Japan, the Emperor was so exceedingly enraged thereat, that forthwith he
determined without mercy to destroy all the Portuguese. Of which not long after
receiving informations, A bloody Battle between the Japan Christians and
Heathens.
the Japan Christians drew together for their own defense; by which means they
formed a considerable Army of betwixt seventy and eighty thousand Men: Against
whom the Imperial Forces drew into the Field, but were shamefully beaten and
routed; yet soon after being again reinforced with fresh Recruits, they were
commanded to fight to the last Man, and destroy the Christians without mercy:
whereupon ensued another Battle, with resolution either to Die or Conquer; a
long time the Victory was doubtful on whose side it would fall, but at last the
Christians were worsted.

Cruel destruction of Japan Christians,
Soon after followed inhumane Cruelty and Murdering, whereby not only the
Portuguese and Japan Christians were to suffer, but the Heathens swore revenge
to the fifth and sixth Generation; nay, so far proceeded their malice, that
whole Streets were carried to Execution, if only one Christian had resided in
it.

The forementioned Examples did Daifusama follow in cold Blood, beheading all
the Christians: But because that did not seem a Death cruel enough to terrify
them, he afterward commanded them to be crucified.

The Romans used in former times, Dogs Crucified
betwixt the Temples of Sumanus and Inventus, to Nail a living Dog on a Cross
made of Box, tying a Goose on the top of it: This was done in Commemoration of
the Senones coming from Gaul with a victorious Army, making themselves Masters
of Rome, wasting the City, and putting all the Inhabitants to the Sword, except
only a few that escaped into the Capitol, where they defended themselves
manfully, frequently beating off the Senones; who having made diverse attempts
in vain, at length in a dark Night stole up the Hill; the Guards and Sentinels,
tired out with Duty, and fallen asleep, were like to have been surprised, had not
some Geese which were Grazing upon the sides of the Hill, afrighted by the
approach of the Enemy, by their loud Gagling, waked the Sentinel and Guards,
and consequently saved the Capitol. But the Romans in process of time crucified
Men in stead of Dogs, of which the Slave which Plautus presents in his Comedy,
says thus: I know the Cross must be my Grave, Plaut in Milite.
threaten no more; my Ancestors carried it before my Fathers, Grandfathers, and
great Grandfathers time. But the Romans used not to crucify Slaves, Who were
Crucified, and wherefore.
unless they had committed great Crimes; as for example, if any one complained
falsely against his Master to a Magistrate, or if he went to Soothsayers to
enquire of his Master's death, or if they ran away: However, this kind of death
was ordained for Malefactors, whose Condition was mean, and Crimes very
heinous; but the better sort of Criminals were beheaded, of which the Roman Law
says thus: Paulus L. V. Cent. 13.
It is thought fitting that all Murderers, if extracted of a good Family, shall
be beheaded, and the meaner sort crucified, or thrown to wild Beasts. When the
Roman Privilege was debarred by the tyranny of the Emperors, oftentimes,
especially in the Army (where Law gives place to Arms) several Commanders, as
Captains, Majors, Field-Marshals, and others, were Nailed to the Cross.

But besides the Romans, Thucyd. ^.1.
most known Countries have cruel ways of Executing their Malefactors, which the
Greek Writer Thucidides testifies of King Inarus, who being taken by
Conspiracy, was crucified by the Egyptians.

Crucifying usual in all Countries, Rerod. Thebia.
Herodotus relates, That Polycrates subdued the Island Samos, and all Greece,
rejoiced at his victorious Arms: his good fortune continued so long, that
doubting it would at last prove cross, as an endeavor to prevent the turn
thereof, he threw a Precious Stone into the Sea, which not long after he found
in the Belly of a Fish, that being boiled was brought to his Table. But
Polycrates died not so happy, for the Persian Orcates by subtilty taking him
Prisoner in Magnesia, fulfilled that which Polycrates his Daughter dreamed the
Night before her Father went away, to wit, that she saw him taken up into the
Air, and washed by Jupiter, and dried again by the Sun; which Orcates performed
in crucifying Polycrates, when the Heavens poured down upon him, and the Sun
scorched him in such a manner, that his Fat dropped and ran down by the Cross.

Plutarch. in Vit, Herod. in Coll.
In like manner did Alexander the Great crucify the Physician Glaucus, and two
thousand Tyrian Slaves; and Xantippus the Athenian, the Persian Artyacta.

They performed this bloody Office themselves purposely to delight the
Spectators, who satisfied their Eyes by beholding them shrink up their Bodies,
working of the Sinews and Veins, and pleased their Ears with the doleful cries
of the miserable Wretches, dying by degrees.

The Germans and Gauls used this kind of punishment to Traitors and Rebels: But
nore were more expert at it than the Africans; and amongst them the
Carthaginians, oftentimes so using their Generals, if they came off vanquished,
notwithstanding they had fought valiantly, nay sometimes though they came home
Victors; for if any thing of misdemeanor could be found against them, they died
without mercy.

Diverse ways of Crucifying.
But they do not observe in all Places one manner, or way of Crucifying: for
first, the Crosses differed in shape, and when great numbers were condemned,
they oftentimes made Trees serve for that purpose. At other times they used
single Poles, on which they Nailed their Hands and Feet one over another.
Others were made of two Pieces of Wood, or more: sometimes both Pieces are of
an equal length, joined together exactly in the middle, so that the hindmost
part of the Crucified comes just to the Place where it is joined, and his Hands
and Feet being stretched out, are made fast by four great Nails. The Church
Histories tell us, That the Apostle St. Andrew suffered in that manner.

Tertullian adds hereunto the Actions of Jacob, Tertul. de Bapt. c. 3.
which laid his hands across when he blessed Ephraim and Manasseh, whereby he
signified, that future blessedness should accrue to Mankind from the Cross of
our Savior.

At other times the Crosses were made of two unequal Poles, the longest of
which being set in the Ground, and the shortest fastened toward the top, so
that a small part of the longest appeared above the other, on which was Written
the Crime for which they suffered; or else they carried the occasion of his
Death on a Board before him to the Cross, or by a Crier made it known to all
the Spectators. Some Crosses had more than two Pieces of Timber; for besides
the upright and thwart Poles, there was a crooked Piece of Wood, in which the
cross Pole rested: or on the upper end of the longest were two Pieces of Timber
nailed cross one above another: or else from the middle Piece hung two other
Pieces of Timber downwards; or else the long Pole had two Sticks nailed across,
one above, and the other below; on the uppermost of which they made fast their
Arms, and on the undermost the Feet. This last was in use amongst the
Japanners. How the Japanners make them fast.
But in stead of nailing they tied them, sometimes laying the Cross down on the
Ground, and there raising that and the Crucified up together. At other times
they first made the Cross fast in the Ground, setting three Ladders against it,
on the middlemost of which the Sufferer ascended, being pulled up on both sides
by Ropes made fast to his Hands. Sometimes they tie the Condemned to a cross
Pole by his Hands, and then by two Ropes with a Pulley hoise him up to the top.

The Japanners also torture their Crucified after another manner than the
Romans, Greeks, Syrians, Persians, Africans, and other People. The Romans and
Greeks caused them to be Whipped with Scourges full of sharp Rowels, either
tied to a Pillar in the Courthouse, or else all the Way till they came to the
Cross.

The like relates Philo, how that the Roman General Flaccus caused a great many
Jews in Alexandria to be nailed to the Cross, which had before, in the open
Court, been miserably Whipped.

And Curtius relates, Curt. l. 7.
That Alexander the Great resolutely caused the Sogdian Arimazes to yield up
and withdraw from their invincible Rock, with thirty thousand Soldiers; of
which he took the chiefest Commander, and Crucified him at the Foot of the Rock.

How the Japanners Crucify.
Moreover, others strip them stark naked as they were born: but the Japanners
tie them on two cross Pieces of Timber with their Clothes on. This Custom was
also used by the Romans, though but seldom.

Concerning the Apostle St. Andrew, Abdias Hist. Apol. l. 3.
the Historian Abdias relates, That the Viceroy Aegeas in Edessa, gave strict
command to the Executioners not to nail him to the Cross, but to bind him, that
he might be the longer dying: for at other times they use great Nails, whose
number was left to the pleasure of the Executioner; most commonly they drove
one through each Hand near the Wrist, and the Feet near the Leg: but at other
times they strike several through their Hands, which they do chiefly when they
fear that the Nails will not hold, Cruelty used in Crucifying.
but slip through the Hands, by which the whole weight of the Body hangs. The
Martyr Agricola being made fast with diverse great Spikes, died under the
Executioners hands.

This cruelty seemed less barbarous than that, when they made a great Fire
under the Cross, so burning the Malefactor, or choking him up with the Smoke.
This kind of Death thousands of Christians suffered, while they were persecuted
above three hundred years: Tertul. Apol. Cult.
wherefore, according to Tertullian, they generally went by the Name of
Takkebos-Men, because they were burnt by the Boughs of Trees on the Cross.

The same Death the Martyr Polycarpus died. Eusebius. l. 4. c. 17.
It is remarkable what Eusebius Writes concerning him: when the Executioners
would nail him to the Cross, he said, Let me stand loose in the Fire, I shall
be able, by Gods assistance, to endure it with patience: whereupon they only
bound him to the Cross without Nailing.

It was accounted also a merciful Death to the Crucified, to let Lions, Tigers,
Bears, and other Beasts of Prey, eat them from their Feet upwards: which manner
of cruelty Nero used to the Christians. But commonly the Heathen endeavored to
make them undergo a long and lingering Death, therefore sometimes tying them
with their Heads downwards, Nailing their Arms athwart underneath, and their
Feet on the upper part of the Cross.

The Martyr Victorinus being thus Crucified by order of the Emperor Nerva,
Martyr^l. Sep. 5. May. 3.
lived three days, and Timotheus and Maura, nine, admonishing one another to be
constant in their Faith; so that they oftentimes died of Hunger, whilst the
Blood slowly dropping from them occasioned great faintness, and at last death:
nor did their tyrannous rage end with their lives, but remained barbarously
salvage to their dead Bodies, which they permitted no Burial, but left exposed
as a Prey for the Fowls of the Air.

Thus was the Sentence pronounced against the Martyrs Claudius, Asterius, and
Neon: Let them be Nailed to the Cross, that their Flesh may be devoured by the
Ravens.

Those that were not by excess of Scourging beforehand tired out, lived a long
time on the Cross: whereof some, according to Seneca, did spit on those that
stood gazing on them. Others, Just. l. 22.
as Justinus witnesses of the Carthaginians concerning their General Bomilcar,
railed at those that had caused them to be Crucified. Bomilcar unhappily lay in
Sicily in the Field against Agathocles, from whence returning, he was taken in
the Marketplace in Carthage, and Nailed to a Cross, and from thence, as from a
Stage, he related the treacherous dealings of his Subjects, charging sometimes
Hanno, then Gisgo, and at last Hamilcar with several Crimes, of which he wished
them to clear themselves.

Whilst these cruel ways of Crucifying were used, it happened sometimes, though
very seldom, that by the favor and compassion of the Princes, the Crucified
were taken off, and recovered.

Josephus in sua vita.
Josephus relates, how that going from a Village to the Roman Army, he saw a
great many Jews hanging on Crosses; amongst which were three that had formerly
been his intimate Friends; and seeing them in that miserable condition, he
immediately went to the General, Titus Vespasianus, to beg of him that he would
grant him leave to take them down, which he permitted; but of those three,
only one was preserved alive.

To Rack the Crucified for a quicker dispatch, was performed on the two
Murderers which suffered with Christ; but that is not according to the Roman,
but the Levitical Law, as you may read in Deuteronomy: Deuteronomy. 21. Verse. 22, 23.
If a man have committed a sin worthy of death, and he be put to death, and
thou hang him on a tree, his body shall not remain all night on the tree, but
thou shall in any wise bury him that day (for he that is hanged is accursed of
God) that thy land be not defiled, which the Lord thy God gives thee for an
inheritance.

Ambrosius gives us his opinion thereof: It seemed, says he, Ambr. in c. 3. in
Romans
to be enough for a condemned Person that he is hanged up, and dies on the
Wood: for if he should hang longer, his Death would suffer more shame than his
Crime had deserved, and would be a continual disgrace to his Posterity, when
his Death should daily be reported up and down.

Rack the Crucified.
But Racking was not usual with the Romans, who sought by long torturing to make
their Death the more miserable, so delighting their Ears with the Cries and
Shreeks of the poor dying Wretches: Yet the Spectators seemed not satisfied by
beholding only the misery of these poor condemned Creatures.

How it is.
The Roman Emperors Dioclesian and Maximinus began first to Rack the Crucified,
which they performed in this manner: They held an Iron Anvil under their Legs
and Arms, whilst another with a great Mallet broke their Bones all to pieces.

Why the Heathens and Japanners Crucify the Christians.
It is thought that the Heathens in ancient times, and the Japanners under
Daifusama's Government, chose that Death on purpose for the Christians, because
they believed in a Crucified Christ: Wherefore Daifusama also gave them charge
to run them through the Sides with two long Spears, because our Savior was
transpierced. And whilst the Heathens sought thus to disgrace the Christians by
Crucifying them, they took it as a great glory, dying the same Death as the Son
of God had done for their Sins.

Concerning this kind of Punishment, and the Cross it self, several Authors
have Written at large, especially Minutius Felix, Maximus Taurinensis,
Tertullianus, and others; Justin. Apol. 2.
I will out of all select only two, viz. Justin Martyr, who says, View all
things in the World, can they be Governed, or any ways used without the Sign of
the Cross? The Earth is not Plough'd without it. The Diggers perform not their
Labor, nor other Handicrafts, unless they have a Cross amongst their Tools or
Instruments. Man differs no way in his shape from a Beast, only that he is
upright, and can spread his Arms into the form of a Cross.

Hieronymus says, Hieronim. in Mar. c. 11.
The fashion of a Cross represents the four corners of the World. The Birds
when they fly in the Air take upon them the shape of a Cross. A Man Swimming,
or Praying, shows also like a Cross.

It is also worthy our observation what Ruffinus, Ruff. l. 2.2. c. 29. Sozom.
l. 3. c. 15.
Sozomenus, and Suidas have published, namely, That in the time of the Emperor
Theodosius the Great, the Idol Temples were all pulled down.

In Egypt was also destroyed an ancient Temple, dedicated to the famous
Serapis: The Walls round about being pulled to the Ground discovered several
Stones Engraven with strange Characters, which only the Priests of Serapis
could Read, many of which were made like a Cross, signifying the Life which was
to come.

Lactantius Firmianus relates, Lact. l. 4. c. 13.
That the Oracle of Apollo long before our Saviors Birth, roared out this
Verse of Christ's Suffering,

By Nails and Crucifying Pain,
A bitter Death he did sustain.
It seems no wonder that Daifusama, according to the example of the Roman
Heathens, for the Reasons aforementioned, when he perceived that the Beheading
of the Christians seemed too easy a Death, he Crucified them.

The Spanish Forces the occasion of the Japanners persecuting the Christians.
But among the five Occasions which made Daifusama persecute the Christians, was
the suspected Forces of the Spaniards, who made themselves Masters of diverse
Places in the World, as the far-spreading Coasts of Guinee, and Angola in the
Confines of Africa; and to the West, a whole new World, divided into New-Spain,
Mexico, Peru, Chili, and Chaca, besides many brave Islands which they had
Conquered. And since Anno 1581. the Portuguese fell under the King of Spain,
all those vanquished Territories in India were likewise become their Acquests;
so that they could in a short time bring great Forces from Goa, Malacca, Macao,
and other Places, to Sea.

But chiefly the Spaniards in the Philippines were most suspected, as being too
near the Japanners, they not desiring such Potent Neighbors, who but a few
years before had Landed there, and since endeavored continually to enlarge
their Dominions. But this business requires our farther Description.

Who first discovered the Philippines.
AT the time when Lodowick de Velasco, in the Name of Philip the Second King of
Spain, bore the Chief Command over Mexico, he received Orders from Madrid, Anno
1564. to Rig out a great Fleet, and with them seek to discover some of those
Islands that lay to the Southward of Japan, where formerly Ferdinand Magellanus
first Landed, when he girdled the Universe, by Sailing round about it.

The Fleet set Sail from the Haven Nativitad, under the Command of Michael
Lopez de Legaspi; who making his way through the South Sea, discovered those
Islands, which from Philip the Second are called Philippines; where settling
himself in the City Manilla, he soon after built a great Church, and three
Cloisters; the first for the Augustine Monks, the second for the Franciscans,
and the third for the Dominicans. The Spaniards possessed these Islands
quietly, till a Fleet from China gave them disturbance, and the first occcasion
of War.

The Spaniards in Manilla are set upon by a Chinese Pyrate called Limahon.
One Limahon, born in a City of China, by name Trucheo, a Person of mean
Extract, had a long while made the Seas dangerous; for in a short time a great
Company of Pirates and Robbers joined with him, to the number of two thousand,
with which he Ransacked and Pillaged all the adjoining Country: Therefore the
King of Cuytan raised all the Forces he could possible, to take Limahon; but he
having notice of it, retreated to a Seaport Town, not having a sufficient Army
to encounter the Viceroys Forces.

At the same time the Harbor lay full of Ships, which his Men taking, and
setting Sail with them, stood off to Sea; making all Prize whatever he met
with: And being forty Sail, all well Manned, on a day he descried another
Chinese Pyrate, called Vintoquiam, who had twenty Sail more than he; yet
Limahon resolved to set upon them, and had such good Success, that he conquered
and made himself Master of fifty five Vessels more, Vintoquiam himself hardly
escaping with five. Thus being encouraged, he resolved to set upon all Seaport
Towns and Villages; by which means, all China was in an Uproar, and in few days
the Viceroy of Cuytan set out a hundred and thirty Vessels to Sea, Manned with
forty thousand Seamen. Limahon having notice thereof, made Sail toward the
desolate Isle Touzuacotican, to hide himself from the Navy, Conducted by the
Knight Omoncon.

Limahon's Actions.
Whilst he lay lurking there, he seized on two Ships, richly laden, and bound
from Manilla to China: The Prisoners which he took gave him information, That
there were not above seventy Spanish Soldiers in Manilla, the rest being
employed to discover the adjacent Isles; and how that the Country was fruitful
and populous, and the Inhabitants unprovided for War, neither were they used to
be disturbed by it. This News was very acceptable to him; whereupon he steered
his Course thither, and Sailing beyond the Islands Illocos, ran in sight of the
New City Fernandina, built by John de Salzedo, and there fell upon a Spanish
Galley freighted by Salzedo to fetch Provisions, which he set on fire, and
without mercy put all the Men to the Sword. Salzedo affrighted by so great a
Fleet, which steered directly toward Manilla, immediately sent thither fifty
four Spaniards, to make resistance against the Enemy, and to give them at
Manilla notice of the Invasion, to the end they might prepare all things in
readiness against their coming. But Limahon, who was forced to Victual at the
nearest Islands, came after Salzedo, whose Fleet was stored with all manner of
Provisions, arrived at Manilla in the Evening, on the last of October, Anno
1574.

And had the Wind blown any thing hard, that Night would have laid Manilla in
Ashes, and drowned the Inhabitants in their own Blood: For Limahon sent in the
darkest part of the Night four hundred Men on Shore, which he commanded to
spare neither Fire nor Sword: But the Sea going very hollow, they could not
possibly Land till next Morning at eight of the Clock. About a League below the
City they leaped ashore, and marched up along a plain Field in good order, with
two hundred Musketeers in the Front, and as many Pike-men in the Rere, toward
the City Manilla. The Country People discovering them, brought the News to the
Spaniards, of which not one would believe it, every one thinking it only to be
an Uproar made on purpose by the Natives.

Storms Manilla.
Mean time the Chinese came to the first House of the City, in which the
Field-Marshal Martin Goyty had his Residence, which they fired, and slew him,
with all his Family, except his Wife, which fled desparately wounded into the
City. By her every one might see how the Business was; whereupon some Soldiers
ran disorderly to encounter the Enemy, but being all slain in a short time,
made the rest more wary, who marching up very orderly against the Enemy, forced
them to retreat, and at last drove them back to their Ships.

Limahon hearing this News, weighed Anchor, and Sailed to the Haven Cabita, two
Leagues beyond Manilla. At this time Guido de Labassares was Governor of the
Philippines, in the place of the Deceased Michael Lopez de Legaspy. Labassares
saw no likelihood to keep off so great an Enemy with Pallisadoes, with which
Manilla at that time was only defended; and to fly from thence, would be too
great a Reproach and Disgrace for the Spanish Nobles: Therefore they thought it
convenient to leave the City, and on a Hill not far off, with all speed to
throw up a Platform: The Spaniards raise Fortifications.
Two Days and Nights all those were employed that were able, to finish the
Work, ramming Poles into the Ground, against which they nailed Planks, throwing
Earth against them, and Barrels with Sand. Four Iron Guns (for so many they had
in the City) were planted on a Point of the New Fortification. It so fortuned,
that Limahon made some stay in the Haven Cabita, whilst Salzedo brought fifty
four Spaniards to Labassares Assistance.

Limahon burns Manilla.
The Fort was scarce finished, and Salzedo entered with his Men, when Limahon
dropped Anchor at break of Day before the City Manilla, and put six hundred Men
on Shore, which ran into the City, and set the same on fire: That done, Storms
their Fortification.
they marched toward the new Fortification, where they met with so stout
Resistance, that in short time two hundred of the Chinese were slain, and as
many wounded; Is beaten off.
where on the contrary, the Spaniards lost only two Men, an Ensign called
Sancio Ortiz, and another named Francis de Leon.

The Pirates being thus roughly entertained, durst adventure no more; wherefore
they Sailed back to Cabita, and from thence forty Leagues up the great Stream
Pangasinan, Goes to live near the River Pangasinan.
where he found a pleasant and fruitful Country, and a convenient place to
hide himself from the Chinese Forces. So Sailing up a League into the Country,
he raised a Fort on a Promontory, and forced the Inhabitants to pay him
Tribute, as their Prime Lord. From hence he sent Ships abroad continually,
which Cruising too and again about that Coast, let not one Vessel escape they
met with, reporting, That he had utterly routed the Spaniards from the
Philippines.

These Tidings, by many believed for Truth, caused no small Consideration in
Labassares: For the Natives being kept in by the Valor of the Spaniards, might
upon this News break forth, and by their great numbers easily overpower and cut
off a few, unless he reestablished their former Authority: Which to prevent,
he judged it fit in open War to set upon the Pyrate: So gathering all their
Forces and Vessels together, from the Islands Pintadoes and Philippines, they
set forward.

Salzedo besieges Limahon.
In the Fleet were two hundred and fifty Spanish Seamen and Soldiers, and two
thousand five hundred Indians, being all under the Command of Salzedo, who
brought the Fleet about break of day, Anno 1575. the twentieth of March, into
the River Pangasinan, the Mouth of which he blocked up with Vessels chained to
one another, and put his Men ashore, with four great Guns. Scouts being sent to
learn how Limahon's Forces lay, found them all unprovided, he not suspecting
the least danger from the Spaniards, which he thought had so much to do in
repairing their Losses, that they could not think of taking Revenge.

This Intelligence was very pleasing; whereupon immediately Gabriel de Ribera
marched by a private Way to Limahon's Fort: The Commanders Peter de Chaves, and
Laurence Chacon, Rowing with small and nimble Skiffs up the River, to the end
they might also fall upon the Pyrate by Water, when Ribera set upon him at
Land. Salzedo himself lay in Ambuscade, for a Reserve. Chaves and Chacon found
Limahon's Fleet unmann'd, at an Anchor under the Fort, which they presently
fired, as also the Houses and Pallisadoes ashore, Burns Limahon's Fleet.
and fell so furiously upon the Chinese, that above a hundred of them were
slain, and Limahon escaped very narrowly into the Castle.

A Skirmish between Salzedo and Limahon.
Here he took a little breath, and sent out the valiantest of the Besieged,
which opposed the Spaniards, who now tired with Fight, and enfeebled with
excessive Heat, and other Labors, were necessitated, notwithstanding they had
fresh Supplies came to them, to retreat, with the loss of five of their own
Men, and thirty Indians, besides many wounded. The next day very early Salzedo
drew up his Men in good Order before the Castle, daring the Pyrate to a Battle.

Limahon fortifies himself.
He having been busy all Night, had planted three great Guns, besides many
smaller, on his Bulwarks, and lined all his Curtains with Firearms; insomuch
that Salzedo thought it dangerous Storming, but judged it fit to besiege the
Fort at distance; and the rather, because most of Limahon's Provisions, and
other Necessaries, were burnt with the Ships, so that he could neither escape,
nor hold out long.

Three Months Salzedo lay before the Castle, during which time the Spanish
Ships went to and again, from thence to Manilla for Provisions, and other
Necessaries; when Michael de Loarcia saw just without the Haven Bulian a Vessel
from Sangley, which he chased, and overtook: In the Ship happened to be a
Chinese, called Sinsay, who had a long time drove a Trade in Manilla; he
desired them not to fire a Gun, before they did very well know what Vessel it
was: Whereupon boarding one another, they informed Sinsay, That they had the
Chinese Admiral Omoncon aboard, The Chinese Admiral Omoncon comes to the
Spaniards.
who had left his Fleet to inquire after Limahon. The Admiral being then
informed by them of the whole Business, went to Salzedo's Army, whence having
been courteously received, he departed for Manilla, (for it was judged that
Limahon could not possibly escape) where he staid some time; but because the
Business lasted longer than he expected, and so long absence from his Fleet
might be inconvenient, he Sailed thither, resolving in a short time to return,
and fetch Limahon to China.

With Omoncon went also Martin de Herrado, and Hieronimus Marius; the first
extracted from Pampelona, The first Europeans that went to China.
the other a Mexican, both Augustine Monks; and with them, Peter Sarmiento, and
Michael de Loarcia, which were to bring back the Adventures that should happen
to Herrado and Martin, to the end such a weighty Concern might immediately be
written to Madrid, because the Empire of China would prove very advantageous to
them: And these were the first which are known out of Christendom to have set
Foot therein.

The manner of the Chinese Sailing.
Omoncon set Sail from the Haven Bulian, and steered his Course according to
the Chinese manner, after a Compass with twelve Points; so Sailing from one
Island to another, not daring to venture far into the Offin: Wherefore he
exceedingly admired, when Sarmiento told him, That the Spaniards Sailing from
Mexico to the Philippines, Steered through the Southern Ocean, without seeing
Land in three Months time.

Omoncon reckoned himself to be near China, by the depth of the Water, which
about seventy Leagues from the Shore is eighty Fathom, and then grows shallower
by degrees, as they approach the Coast, At last he discovered the stately City
Tutuhul, beautiful to the Eye, by reason of its many Towers and magnificent
Buildings, lying in the Territory Chinchy. At the Mouth of an Inlet stood a
Sentinel, on a high Rock, who gave sudden notice to seven Ships, that lay at an
Anchor behind a Promontory, that he discry'd a Sail afar off at Sea: Whereupon
weighing with all speed, they chased Omoncon, who bore up to Tutuhul; and
though he was commanded by several Guns to strike, yet he went on, and regarded
them not. The Governor himself was gotten into a nimble Skiff with Oars, which
Omoncon fetched up by degrees; and they perceiving the Colors, took in their
Sails, and lay by to receive the Governor, whom Omoncon courteously
entertained, Omoncon courteously received.
and proceeded on his Voyage to Tansusa, a pleasant and strong City, fortified
with Walls.

Here, betwixt firing of Guns and Muskets, he put the Augustine Monks ashore,
having had free leave and permittance from the Governor of Tansusa; to which
purpose, according to the Chinese Custom, a small white varnished Board was
brought him from the Governor, signed with his own Hand; the Letters which were
written upon it were these, Permit the Strangers to Land freely.

Why the Spaniards are forced to go from China.
But after the viewing of several Chinese Towns, and other Curiosities, they
were commanded to depart, the Chinese suspecting, that the Spaniards having
Plantations in most Countries, were come over purposely to make an Inspection
there. This Jealousy began to increase the more, because the Rumor was, That
Limahon (who was said to be blocked up in the River Pangasinan, that it was
impossible for him to escape) destroyed and ransacked all along the Seacoast,
and had there ruined and pulled a City down to the Ground. It is certain, that
Limahon had prepared some small Vessels in his Castle, and in a dark Night made
his escape between Salzedo's Watch: Yet he was falsely accused concerning his
Pyracy; for Toacay, a Friend to the other noted Pyrate Vintoquiam, and
Limahon's Enemy, had and did still invade the Coasts of Chinchy.

MEan while the Grand Council of Chinchy assembled together, before whom the
Spaniards appeared, to give an Account for their coming to China; who replied
so well, and gave them such Reasons, that having before been kept close
Prisoners, they obtained Liberty.

It being then New Mood, at which time all the Soldiers in China must appear in
their Arms, the Spaniards had leave to go out of the City, to the Field where
the Militia was drawn up, namely, Brave Exercising of their Militia near the
City Ancheo.
twenty thousand Pike-men and Musketeers, all prepared for an Encounter upon
the Sound of Trumpet and beat of Drum, in a moments time ready to Engage,
spreading the Army in a larger Circumference, or contracting it into narrower
Limits. Here, like Skirmishing, they fired at one another with Powder; then
falling in, they endeavored to break their Ranks, and defeat the whole Army;
the Pike-men fiercely encountering one another, sending their broken Pikes in
pieces into the Air, to testify their Masters Strength. Those that were not
expert in Exercising, were soundly beaten by their Commanders, that by such
severe Correction they might learn to do better. Four Hours were spent in
training them up in their Martial Discipline; of which the Spaniards gave
Testimony, That the like Exercise and Soldiers were not to be found in any
Country in the World besides.

AT last the Spaniards, receiving Commands from the Chief Governors, were
forced to set Sail from the Haven Tansusa; and to get in the Winds way, they
steered their Course toward the Islands Laulo and Chautubo. The last is full
of Villages, the chiefest called Gautin, Gautin, a place of defense and safe
Harbor against Pirates.
fortified with five Towers raised of Freestone, which served for
Light-houses, and sheltering places against Pirates, which generally frequent
and molest those Coasts.

This Island of it self is Sandy and Mountainous; yet the Soil produces great
store of Rice, Wheat, and all manner of Roots, besides many Oxen and Horses.
The Inhabitants acknowledge no Supreme Authority.

Afterward they came to an Anchor before the Island Corchu, and next at Ancon,
much more fruitful, though uninhabited, than Corchu. Strange accident happened in
the Island Ancon.
The Chinese relate concerning this Island, That Ancon was formerly very
Populous, but by a strange Accident became desolate; which was, That a Chinese
Fleet was so separated by a great Storm upon the Coast of Ancon, that the
Admiral could by no means get them together again; whereupon judging that the
Ships were run ashore upon the Island, and the Seamen destroyed by the Natives,
he fell eagerly upon the innocent People, slew a great number of them, and
carried the Remainder to China; whose Innocence, though at last it was made
manifest, yet they returned not to their old Habitation, choosing rather to live
upon the Main-Land, than go home and expect the like Misfortune.

FRom Ancon the Spaniards Sailed over to the Island Plou, where they received
Information from a Fisher, That Limahon had gathered up in the Night the Timber
and Planks of his burnt Fleet; and that within the Fort, being Besieged by
Salzedo, he had made Boats, and was fled to the Island Tocoatican. The Chinese
Admiral Omoncon, who Sailed with the Spaniards to Manilla, The Chinese are
very much concerned at Limahon's Escape.
resented these Tidings very ill, crying out to the Spanish Seamen, Is this
your Faithfulness? Do the Spaniards sell their Honesty for the Gifts of a
Pyrate? How was it possible else that he could have escaped? You reward my
Courtesies well, that have opened China for you, which is locked up from all
Strangers. But the Spaniards sought to assuage his anger, telling him, That
without all peradventure, the Governor of Manilla would give him such
satisfaction, that Omoncon should no ways distrust the Fidelity of the
Spaniards.

They are at variance amongst themselves, whether they should set upon Limahon.
Mean while they got sight of the Island Tocoatican; whereupon they had several
Disputes: Omoncon would there fall upon the Pyrate Limahon, who being, as he
supposed, tired out by a long Siege, and unprovided, might easily be taken
Prisoner, or slain. Others withstood this his eager Design, telling him, They
must not account that thing done, which was to be decided by Arms, and in the
Hands of wavering Fortune, and might as well have a bad as good Event. They had
to deal with Men that were encouraged by desperate Designs, and those that
would fight till the last drop of Blood: And their own Fleet, laden with Horses
and Goods, was more fit to proceed on in their Voyage, than to engage with an
Enemy. The Command which they received from the Viceroy was, to carry the
Spaniards back to the Manilla's; and Limahon, if they took him either living or
dead, to deliver him to the Viceroy in China. The last Arguments seeming of
greatest concern, they left Tocoatican on their Starboard; and from the Haven
Plou, in which they were kept three Weeks by contrary Winds, they Sailed by the
great Island Tangarruan, to Manilla; where the Chinese being nobly
entertained, not long after returned home well satisfied.

Limahon dies of grief.
BUt Limahon finding himself too weak to make resistance, if the Spanish or
Chinese Fleet should happen to come and invade him in the Haven of Tocoatican,
Launched all his Boats into the Sea, and rowed toward a desolate Island. Here
his Condition was very mean; and he who formerly had been a terror to China,
had now scarce Roots and Plants to feed upon: Which taking to heart, he fell
sick of excessive Grief, which in a short time cut off the Thread of his Life;
which his Associates seeing, every one sought for a Place where he might be
most secure.

The Spaniards went a econd time to China.
IN the interim, the Spaniards went on very succesfully in their Plantations of
the Philippines, and made a second Voyage to China, Sailing thither Anno 1578.
with the Franciscans, Peter de Alfaro a Sevilian, John Baptista an Italian,
Sebastian de Francisco Barca, and Augustine de Tordesillas, and three Soldiers,
being Franciscus de Duennas, John Diax Pardo, and Peter de Villarol; besides
four Manillians, and a Chinese Youth taken in the War against Limahon, and
since instructed in the Spanish Tongue. At last the Spaniards got Footing in
China, and together with the Portuguese Crown, gained vast Territories both in
the Eastern and Western Indies.

The Japanners fear the Spaniards.
THe Island Malacca, Macao, and Manilla, lay too near Japan, to free them from
jealousies of the neighboring Spanish Forces; and the more, because Japan
fostered an innumerable company of Christians, which made it their daily
endeavor to spread that Religion through all the Country, and one of their
prime Governors had already embraced the Faith of Jesus Christ. This was the
chief Reason that made Daifusama seek their Destruction.

Daifusama seeks to settle the Crown on his own Family.
And whilst he was busy with this his bloody Design, being overgrown in Age,
he was exceedingly troubled for his Successor. And though he had promised to
Taicosama by an Oath, and Sealed it with his Blood, That Fideri, when he
attained to the age of fifteen Years, should possess and enjoy the Imperial
Throne; yet now, forgetting all ties of Oaths, or other Obligations, he
resolved to dispatch him out of the way (notwithstanding he had married his
Daughter) or else he could not deliver the Scepter to Conbosama, and so
establish the Crown in his own Line.

This Plot required to be hid under some fair Pretense: Whereupon seriously
debating the matter, he at last accused Fideri, That in the last Civil War he
had chosen to be on the side of the Opposers, and had privately conspired to
take the Government from him; and that he took an Imperial Authority upon him,
before he was Crowned Emperor; and also endeavored to take away his
Father-in-law's Life.

Besieges Fideri with a great Army.
These Complaints and Accusations he sent before, whilst he with all his
Endeavors raised a mighty Army in the Kingdom of Surunga. Fideri kept his Court
in the Castle Osacca: Thither Daifusama marched with his new-raised Forces, and
Besieged Fideri. Three Months did he valiantly withstand all their fierce
Assaults; but at last, growing too weak, sought upon reasonable Articles to
deliver up the Castle: Fideri's Request denied.
But the Emperor would not hearken thereto; for he desired nothing more than
the Life of Fideri. And he understanding his bloody Design, said, How was it
possble that a Father-in-law could thus forget all Natural Affections, and
desire to make his own Daughter a Widow, and his Grandchildren Orphans? The
cries of the Innocent would move a stony Heart to have compassion. If Daifusama
judged that he was not just and faithful, and did not deserve to wear the
Imperial Crown, notwithstanding it was his Father Taicosama 's Will and
Pleasure, and though he was the just and lawful Heir to the Throne, yet he
would freely resign up his Interest, and be contented with the least of the
Japan Kingdoms, nay a mean Lordship. Why should he thirst after Blood? Why
persecute his own Relations? If Daifusama feared any Rebellion, he might easily
keep Fideri so low, that he should never dare as much as think of enjoying the
Japan Empire.

Why Daifusama resolved to kill Fideri.
These mild and courteous Entreaties Daifusama regarded not; for he saw it
apparent, that if he left him alive, the Crown would fall to him, he being now
come to full Age; and the rather, because Fideri was exceedingly beloved
amongst the Common People, every one acknowleding him as the true and lawful
Successor of his late Father Taicosama. Therefore he resolved to dispatch him,
or else his Family would be in danger to lose the Japan Scepter. Fideri sent
his Consort, Daifusama's Daughter, to her Father, humbly to beseech him to
spare Fideri's Life, who would immediately become his Vassal; but she was not
permitted to have Audience.

Storms the Castle Osacca.
Daifusama had by this time pulled down the Out-walls of Osacca, and thrown
them in the Moat, and raised a Platform therein, notwithstanding it was three
hundred and ninety Foot broad, and three and thirty deep. The upper Breastwork,
made strongly of Clay, and Plastered on the outside, was some Rods distant
from the other. Next, those Walls which he had undermined fell to the Ground,
and through a Gap made by Storming, he broke into the Castle: Takes the outmost
Castle
But in the enclosed Place, where several Palaces were built, he met with some
Resistance; yet the Opposers being overpowered, were forced to yield.

This made Daifusama absolute Master of the outer Castle: But now his Career
was stopped at the second Moat, being of the same depth as the outermost, but
only two hundred and fifty Foot broad. The chief Bridge over that Inner Lake
has Rails of massy Gold; the Gate is also covered with Golden Plates. Over
this Bridge Daifusama sought to force his way, Storms the inner Castle.
which with little difficulty he did, because the Besieged neglected to make
resistance. Takes it.
The Gate being broke open, made room for the Enemy, which had soon taken hold
of Fideri, had he not suddenly hid himself on the inner Mountain, enclosed with
Walls, and of a noble Aspect, by a Palace whose Roof is covered with Golden
Tyles, into which he fled, with his Mother, Consort, and a considerable number
of the Prime Nobles.



Daifusama's cruelty to his Son-in-law.
Daifusama had by this time secured them in the inner Palace; and to the end he
might destroy all those at once, which opposed him from settling the Crown on
his own Stock, he caused great Heaps of Wood to be laid round the Palace, which
being lighted, immediately set on fire and burnt the Court, with Fideri, and
the Chief of the Japan Nobility, to Ashes; so that not the least appearance of
any of them was ever seen more. After this, all those were to suffer, which had
at any time been familiar, or had any Correspondency with Fideri. This cursed
Tragedy was acted in Japan, Anno 1616.

NOt long did Daifusama enjoy the benefit of his bloody Tyranny; for dying
within ten Months, Daifusama dies.
he left the Japan Crown to his Son Conbosama: His Son is made Emperor.
The beginning of whose Reign became remarkable by two eminent Passages, not
easily to be forgotten.

Horrible storm and flood in Japan.
The first was a mighty Storm, which began and so increased more and more every
Hour, that in the Havens the Ships broke their Cables, and driving on the
Shore, were split in pieces. Those at Land also were not free from danger, the
Wind blowing up great Trees by the Roots, casting down pieces of old Walls,
shaking the Houses and Temples, and tumbling them down on a sudden: In the
Streets the Houses often falling down one against another, slew those which
stood there for shelter. Several in the Country were lifted up from the
ground, and carried a good distance from the Place whereon they stood. The Sea
also raged with impetuous Billows, that clogging the Rivers with the Surges,
the Water finding no vent, overflowed the Banks, so drowning the adjacent
Countries. Where the Rivers were enclosed with Banks, those were all broke by
the swelling Waters. The Sea beat with such violence against its bordering
Coasts, that it washed away whole Towns and Villages; and the Salt Water flowed
into the Country for several Miles together.

After these Tempests, and violent Motions of the Wind and Water, followed
another Mischief, no way inferior to these; Persecution against the Christians.
being a Bloody Persecution against the Christians, raised by the Emperor,
through the Advice of a Japan Councellor called Safioie, which made it his
only endeavor to destroy the Christians. The Reason pretended to move them to
it, was this.

After Antonius Mota, Franciscus Zeimot, and Antonius Pexot, Sailing from Dodra
to China, were driven by stress of Weather on the Coast of Japan, so
discovering the same accidentally, the Portuguese got still greater Footing, to
drive their Trade there. A Japan Youth, as we mentioned before, called Angar,
to escape Death, whereto he was condemned, fled, as Father Tursellinus tells
us, Tursell. in vita Xaverii, lib. 3. cap. 12.
with a Merchant named Georgius Alvaresius, to Malacca, and from thence
traveled to Goa. Francis Xaverius, Cosmus Turrensis, and Joannes Ferdinandes,
being persuaded by him, took upon them the Voyage to Japan, where Xaverius
staid three years and a half, at the Charge of John the Third, King of
Portugal, who spent above a thousand Ducats on that Voyage.

It will not be amiss to annex here the Letter written by Xaverius, from Cocin,
Xaver. Epist. ad Ignat. Loyolam.
the twenty ninth of January, Anno 1549. to Ignatius Loyola, Master of the
Jesuits Order. Since I am here informed by credible Witnesses, that Japan lies
not far from China, and the Inhabitants thereof, having neither Saracens nor
Christians amongst them, are very desirous of Novelties, whether Natural or
Spiritual; I am resolved, so soon as possible, to travel thither. In the
College of the Holy Hope, in Goa, is a Japan Youth, by Name Angar, of a quick
and noble Apprehension, who sends a large Letter to you. He has learned in
eight Months time to speak, write, and read Portuguese, and sufficiently
understands the Mysteries of our Christian Faith. I hope, by God's help, to
bring many of the Japanners to embrace the Christian Religion; for I am
assuredly promised, upon my arrival, to speak with the King, and have leave to
visit their Schools or Colleges.

In another Letter Xaverius writes thus: Xaver. Epist. 1550.
I have oftentimes disputed with the Bonzies, which far exceed others in
Wisdom; and chiefly with him who is accounted the Learned among them, and
higly esteemed for his Age, being eighty years old. He is as their Bishop, and
is called Nitrix, that is to say, according to the Japan Tongue, A Heart of
Truth: With him I have Discoursed, and find him oftentimes wavering in his
Arguments concerning the Immortality of the Soul: Sometimes he acknowledges the
same, and at other times he denies it. It is almost incredible, how strangely
he affects me; and how most of the Bonzies, and several others, take delight in
our Conversation. The most they wonder at, is, That we should come from
Portugal to Japan, being above six thousand Leagues distance, on purpose to
treat with them about Matters of Religion.

The Christian Religion has but small success amongst the Japanners* Tursell.
in vita Xaverii.
Yet for all this, the Christian Religion went on but slowly; partly because
Angar, according to Tursellinus, could not well describe the Articles of the
Christian Faith in the Japan Tongue, and withal writ so badly, that the
Japanners could not make any sense thereof; and also the Japan Tongue being
exceeding difficult, Xaverius could not easily learn the same: Yet in Cangoxima
were those that affected Christianity, insomuch that there was some hopes of a
few that would embrace the same; but this soon vanished. The King of this
Country had kept Xaverius a considerable time, and permitted him to Preach the
Doctrine of Jesus Christ, and Baptize those that believed therein; which he
did, not that he was any way concerned for the Christian Faith, but because he
was informed, that the Portuguese Merchants Ships brought very rich and costly
Commodities from Europe and Goa, which might prove very advantageous to
Cangoxima, if they came thither. But because the Portugals in the interim came
constantly to an Anchor at Firando, the King of Cangoxima was much displeased,
and chiefly had a bad opinion of Xaverius, because that he being of great
esteem amongst the Portuguese, could easily persuade them to remove their
Staple or Factory to Cangoxima. The Bonzies watching for such an Opportunity,
stirred up the displeased King the more, because Xaverius had spoiled their
Heathenish Doctrine, The King of Cangoxima is enraged against the Christians.
and declared their abominable and wicked Lives. Whilst thus the Progress or
the Christian Faith was stopped, there was published an Edict, That none should
Apostatize from their Forefathers Religion, which was established in the
Empire of Japan.

Xaverius observing, that no good was to be done, parting from thence, went to
Firando, where he converted about a hundred Persons, which he performed in this
manner: First reading to them the Grounds of the Christian Faith concerning the
Trinity, and of our Savior Christ, and that by his means we must be all saved.
Angar had translated these Articles out of the Portuguese Tongue, into the
Japan Language; but not without great Mistakes. This done, Cosmus Turrensis had
a regard over the new Christians, whilst Xaverius and Joannes Fernandez
traveled to Amungucium, How and what the Jesuits learned in Japan.
where they found several Inquisitive People, as well amongst the Nobles as
Commons; but were never the better: for they being not able to speak the Japan
Tongue, their best way then was to read twice a day at the corners of the
Streets, Angar's Translation of the Christian Belief; which Doctrine seemed
very strange to many, some jeering thereat. The Children and Boys running after
the Jesuits, mocked them with what they had said, and chiefly with such Words
as they could not pronounce plainly, because of the difficultness of the Japan
Tongue: Yet others invited them into their Houses, and besought of them farther
Instructions.

Their Deeds in Amangucium.
Xaverius and Fernandez having spent some days in Teaching the Amangucians,
they were commanded to come before the King, who demanded of them, Of what
Country they were, and why they came to Japan? Whereupon they answered, That
they were come from Portugal, a place above six thousand Leagues distant from
thence, to the end they might declare God's Laws, and Preach the Gospel, in
which the Savior Jesus Christ was described, without whom none could be saved.
The King desired them to declare the Grounds of that never-heard-of Religion;
which Xaverius performed, by reading Angar's Translation; at which the King
laughing, ordered them to depart.

Yet after this, Xaverius and Fernandez gave not over, but Preached along the
Streets in the forementioned manner: But seeing their Labor bestowed in vain,
they resolved to travel to the Metropolis Meaco. Xaverius travels to Meaco.
Two Months and much Money did they spend in this their Journey, suffering also
much by Robbers, and extreme Cold: Yet having a Japan Convert in their Company,
whom they had Baptized Bernard, they hoped with less difficulty to perform
their Business, having an Interpreter with them. But they soon found their
expectation frustrated; for after long Preaching, and using all possible means,
yet they could not be permitted to the presence of the Cubus; Why they could
effect nothing there.
and also the Citizens at that time being up in Arms against a crew of Rebels,
had neither Time nor Ears to hearken after a New Religion.

They give Presents to the King of Amangucium.
Thus seeing that nothing could be done here, they returned back with mean
success to Amangucium, and there presented the King with a curious Watch, and
many other Rarities, which the Portuguese Viceroy of the East Indies, and the
Bishop of Goa had sent them, to give to the Cubus in Meaco: But having no
Audience there, they bestowed the Presents on the King of Amangucium, who was
desirous of nothing more than Foreign Rarities; yet he proffered them in return
of their Gifts a great Bag of Silver and Gold; but the Jesuits modestly
refusing it, desired only that he would be pleased to permit them to Preach
the Doctrine of Jesus Christ, which he granted.

Why he put himself in rich Apparel.
Mean while Xaverius, observing that the Japanners valued a Man according to the
Richness or Meanness of his Habit, having hitherto gone in poor Apparel, found
that he was little or not at all regarded; therefore resolved to put on a rich
and stately Coat, that so he might be better regarded, and because the
Japanners out of Curiosity would look upon him the more: And indeed it proved
so; for teaching therewith in the Streets, he had a far greater Congregation
than formerly: Then the People began private Disputations amongst themselves,
concerning that Religion; and chiefly the Bonzi were at variance amongst
themselves, concerning the Articles of the Christian Faith.

A strange accident by which a Japanner became a Christian.
THe first Converting of these Heathens in Amangucium, was occasioned by a
strange Accident, which Tursellinus relates in this manner. Johannes
Ferdinandez standing in the Street, surrounded with a great number of People,
read the Book of Angar's Translation, which a Japanner passing by, heard;
whereupon he made his way through the People, and spat Fernandez full in the
Face; which be suffering with patience, wiped off, and proceeded without the
least sign of anger, in reading of his Doctrine. One Auditor amongst the Crowd,
seeing his admired Patience, was amazed thereat, and as if inspired, judged in
himself, that without doubt it must be the True Religion, which was taught by
so mild a Person; and afterward being better Instructed by Xaverius, was the
first which received Baptism in Amangucium. Several others followed his
example, amongst which, Bernard Eenoog, afterward by Xaverius made a Jesuit.

King of Bungo shows great kindness to the Christians.
WHilst the Christian Religion went on thus prosperously in Amangucium,
Xaverius was sent for by Jacotondono King of Bungo, in whose Harbor a
Portuguese Vessel was come to Anchor. He covetous of Lucre, proffered the
Portuguese all Civility and Kindness, sending an Embassy to Goa; and promoted
the Christian Faith at Amangucium. His Brother, though with great resistance of
the Council there, being accepted of as their King, interceded also for the
Christian Religion.

Notwithstanding all these Favors, yet Xaverius found great opposition by the
Bonzi, insomuch that he Baptized not one in the Province Bungo, only
Instructing some in the Christian Doctrine. The King seemed also to have a
great inclination to the Christian Belief; but feared, if he should become a
Convert from the Japan Heathenism, that his Subjects would rebel against him:
Yet though he remained a Heathen, he provided for those Jesuits that came after
Xaverius a convenient College, and gave free leave to Balthazar Gago and
Johannes Fernandez to Preach the Gospel.

Insurrection in the Kingdom of Bungo against the Christians.
These Actions of the King of Bungo were ill resented by his Subjects, who took
up Arms against him: But soon after Jacotondono took the chief of the Rebels,
which were commanded speedily with their Relations, Wives, and Children, to be
executed. Yet after that, a Company of fresh Rebels rising again, the King
brought an Army of sixty thousand Men into the Field, and after various
Successes, became Conqueror and absolute Master, getting also by that means
Facata, Fiuago, Amangucium, and the Island Taso. Anno 1554. he sent from Bungo
to Goa a Portuguese called Antonius Ferreira, sending his Arms to the Viceroy,
with which he had subdued Fiuago; as also a Letter, entreating his Friendship,
and that he would be pleased to let Xaverius come over again.

Miracles wrought by Xaverius.
But Xaverius had two years before been killed in China, not far from Canton,
after having several times laid Tempests, asswag'd Earthquakes, raised twenty
five dead Persons to life again, if we will believe those Relations which have
been divulged thereof.

Embassy from Goa to the King of Bungo.
The Viceroy of Goa rested not upon this Business, but dispatched with all
possible speed the Jesuits Melchior Nugnez, and Ferdinand Mendez Pinto, to
Jacatondono: With a Train of forty Portuguese, richly clad, they made their
appearance before the King, who told them at large how many Inconveniences and
Troubles he had undergone in his Kingdom, since he permitted the Christians to
set footing in his Dominions, insomuch that not long since he was necessitated
to slay thirteen Princes, with sixteen thousand of their Confederates, in one
day, besides a great number which he had banished; and withal, he saw it
apparent, that there would be no end of Bloodshed, if he did in the least
uphold them in their Proceedings in Japan; which before he did, he would first
see better Times. In vain did Nugnez use the Persuasions of the uncertainty of
a Man's Life, and the certainty of Eternal Damnation for Unbelievers.

Thus Jacatondono cutting off all hopes of being Converted, Depart fruitless.
Nugnez departed returning fruitless to Goa: And after that, the King declined
it daily more and more, building in the City Usuquin a stately Cloister for the
Bonzi, bestowing great Revenues upon the same; and sent for the most Learned of
the Pagan Priests, which had been Tutors to Princes, and betook himself to be
of their Order; King of Bungo becomes 2 Bonzi.
and daily Study and Endeavors, obtained so much of their Learning, that he
surpassed the best of them. Yet notwithstanding all this, he molested not the
Christians; but his Wife, on the contrary, persecuted them with Fire and Sword.

Divorces his Wife.
This her Cruelty so displeased the King, that he divorced her from him, and
took for his Consort a Princess of a mild and affable disposition, whose
Daughter was Married to a Christian Prince call Sebastian. The King thus
Wedded, was oftentimes admonished of the Christian Religion, which his Consort
and Daughter embraced; to which he began now to hearken, and received Baptism
of Capriales; Is Christened Franciscus.
and in Commemoration of Xaverius (who preached the Gospel seventy years before
in Usuquin) took the name of Franciscus. But he changed not only his Name, but
also his manner of Life; for though he was not fifty years old, Resigns up his
Kingdoms.
yet he resigned up all his Kingdoms and Dominions, and retired to the
Territory of Fiungo, where on a pleasant Plain he resolved to build a New City,
and to People the same with none but Christians, to the end they might there
all together live after God's Laws and Ordinances.

Travels to build a new City.
The fourth of October, Anno 1578. he set Sail with his Fleet, the Pennons and
Flags of white Damask, embroidered with red Crosses, spreading from their Masts
and Yards. The Jesuits Capriales, Lodowick Almeida, and John the Japanner, with
a considerable number of Christians that were to inhabit the new-built City,
were Shipped aboar'd. Upon his departure, Franciscus commanded his eldest Son,
whom he appointed his Successor in all his Dominions, That he should no ways
molest the Christians, but rather assist them in all things.

His Son is kind to the Jesuits.
The New King promised to perform his Fathers Command faithfully, and indeed did
more than he promised; for he pulled down the Temple of the Idol Camis and
Fotoques, and allowed the Jesuits Means, giving them also a place to build a
stately Church in Usuquin, and crossed the Bonzies in all their undertakings,
acting all things after the Christian manner. Against which resisted many
Princes in Bungo, being backed by Riogozes King of Ximo, which were too hard
for the young King, oftentimes loosing many Men in Skirmishes: Cities and whole
Dominions were taken from him, either by Riogoze's Forces, or mutinous
Subjects; in short, it was so decreed, that Jacatondono his Son should be
Disinherited of all his Jurisdictions. Most of the Loyallest Subjects Voted,
that Jacatondono should Re-possess his former Authority, Why he is in great
danger.
to the end, that the Crown of Bungo which was near lost, might again by his
Prudence be settled before it was quite Demolished.

Mean while, Jacatondono, now called Franciscus, expecting daily that he should
be forced out of his new Christian City in Fiunga, marched Armed into the
Fields; and his Necessity requiring Policy, he came forth, no less Prudent than
Circumspect; Franciscus re-possesses his throne.
four Counselors having by their ill advice ordered their Affairs badly, those
he drove first out of the Country; then getting a considerable Army together,
he marched against Chicacuro, the head of the Rebels: Both Parties lay Encamped
one over against the other; Franciscus inviting them daily to fight, by
Embattelling his Men; but Chicacuro; who had no very good opinion of his
People, would not hazard his Life in the hands of wavering Fortune; during
which time, most of his Men quitted his Army, His Conquest.
and went over to Franciscus Camp, insomuch, that all left him but eight
hundred, which being slain, brought Peace and quietness to the Kingdom of Bungo.

After which, the Conqueror went again to his new City Cuchimochi, but lived
not long after to enjoy the advantages of his gotten Victory: For being upon
his return from the Japan Emperor, he was taken with the Plague at Usuquin, of
which many died at that time; yet notwithstanding, though the Distemper
threatened nothing but death, yet he was desirous to be carried to Cuchimochi,
and being come within nine Miles of the place, his Sickness so increased, that
he was necessitated to stay at Sucuma, where soon after he gave up the Ghost,
Dies.
Anno 1587. The Jesuit Laguna had the ordering of the Funeral-Solemnity, to
which an incredible number of people came flocking from all parts of the
adjacent Countries. The Corpse was carried by four of the chiefest Peers; Is
buried.
on both sides went meaner Lords, carrying Banners with red Crosses; next
followed the Queen and her Daughter, and then a great company of Noblemen
closed up the whole Train.

BUt besides the Province of Bungo, several others have embraced the Christian
Religion, which happened thus: When Xaverius, Anno 1551. in November, traveled
from Japan to Goa, he took with him two Christian Japanners, Mattheus and
Bernard, which were sent to salute his Holiness in Rome; But Mattheus dying at
Goa, Bernard us proceeded in his Journey alone, and was the first of the
Japanners that kissed his Holiness Feet: He in his return home-ward, died at
Conimbrica in Spain. Xaverius himself traveled to China, Xaverius leaves the
Jesuits in Japan.
there to Preach the Gospel, for the Japanners cried continually, that the
Chinese, from whom the Japan Religion was Extracted, did not embrace the
Christian Faith.

There stayed behind in Japan, Cosmus Turrianus, and Joannes Fernandez; besides
two Japan Converts, being Paul of the Holy Belief, and Lawrence One-Eye; by
whose extraordinary diligence, the Christian Religion was embraced by many of
the Commonalty (the Jesuits teaching them the Commandments, and the Gospel of
our Savior Jesus Christ, and the Holy Trinity) in Cangoxima, Firando,
Amangucium, and Bungo. Xaverius a little before his death, sent from Goa to
Japan, Balthazar Gago, Edward Sylvius, and Peter Alcacova; after that went over
thither, also Casper Vilela, Lodowick Almeida, Gonsalves Fernandes, Franciscus
Caprialis, Lodowick Frojus, Joannes Baptista Montanus, Organtinus Brixiensis,
Peter Diasius, Arias Blandonius, Arias Sanctius, Duartes a Sylva, Melchior
Mugaez, Franciscus Perezius, and others. These effected so much in few years,
that Christianity began now to increase wonderfully, and as an effect of their
Zeal, they built several Towns, Cloisters, and Churches, being every where
highly respected, and much esteemed: These successful Progresses gave hopes of
a happy Event, especially, for that now Cosmus Turrianus, and Edward Sylvius,
besides many Citizens in Amangucium, Converted two Bonzies of Meaco; and
indeed, Christianity so prevailed both in strength and number, that the
Rusticks near Amangucium began to dispute with the Bonzi, of which, some
falling short in the Arguments of their Religion, were forced to fly for shame.

Not long after, Turrianus built a great Church in the City, intending there to
perform in public all Divine Services; Some of the Courtiers were by this time
also become Proselites; and amongst the rest, the King's Treasurer Ambrosius
Eunadus Faisumius, who soon after Dying, was Interred in the following manner:
Edvard. Sylv Epist Bungo 1555.
Besides the Jesuit Edward Sylvius, above two hundred young Christians went to
his Burial; a great Cross was carried before the Corpse, and a considerable
number of Torches round about, which turned the day into night, not without
great admiration of the Inhabitants, by whom the Funeral Solemnities were
performed quite contrary. Fasumius his Widow feasted the Poor four days
together after the Funeral, A new Almshouse in Funaco.
distributing much Household Stuff, and many Clothes among them. Moreover,
Turrianus built a double Almshouse, or Hospital in the City Funaco; one side
being for those that had the Leprosy, which came flocking thither from all
parts of Japan (that Country being very subject to that distemper) the second
partition was for other sickly Persons; over both these, Turrianus made a Japan
Christian Master, one that was experienced in Physic.

How the Japanners kept their Feasts.
THe Province of Amangucium, was beyond all other Dominions, full of
Christians, because the King embraced that Faith, and promoted the same; the
People upon Festival days, flocked to the Temples in great numbers, where the
Jesuits represented the Sufferings of our Savior, hanging a large Vane on the
top of the Church, with a Crucified Man in the middle; which done, all the
lights were quite put out, and every one having stored themselves with Whips
and Scourges, disrobed the upper part of their bodies, and Disciplined
themselves so long, till the fiftieth Psalm was read out. On Palm Sunday, Also
Palm Sunday.
they distributed Consecrated Branches, and went in Procession, having a great
Cross carried before them, locking the Church-doors round about; without stood
a Jesuit, holding a Cross in his hands, saying aloud, Open, O ye Eternal Gates;
whereupon those within answered, Who is the King of Honor? At last, walking two
by two into the Temple toward the Altar, a Jesuit Celebrated Mass.

At other times they walked about the Churches with Torches, Casp. Vilela
Epist. Eirando 1557.
when hiding a Man in a Grave, they placed two Armed Portuguese, and two Youths
with Helmets on to Guard the same; then the Man arose out of the Grave, so
representing the Resurrection of Christ. In the middle of the Church stood the
great Altar, on both sides of it were built several Chapels, all hung with
stately Pictures and rich Tapistry, showing the Crucifying on Golgotha, the
Resurrection, Several representations in Japan, to establish the Roman Religion.
and Ascension from Mount Olivet; round about the Walls were placed a great
number of Wax-Candles; before the Altar, in the corner of the Chapel, hung a
black Cloth, behind which stood a Jesuit, in the Habit of a Priest.

Nine times they sung Kyrieeleyson; which done, the Cloth was suddenly drawn
aside, and there appeared on the Altar the Cross, and other Images, with many
Ornaments, then also the Jesuit came in open view, whereupon the Bells Were
rung; then their Singers, with Garlands about their Heads, and lighted Torches
in their Hands followed the Host, who was carried through the Church under a
rich Canopy.

The Province and City Amangucium suffer many inconveniences.
This manner of Worship the Japanners were mightily taken withal, and chiefly in
the Province Amangucium, where the Catholic Religion was no way less
exercised, than in the middle of Spain or Italy; notwithstanding the City
Amangucium had suffered much for it, being in the space of five years twice
pulled down to the ground, and was scarce Rebuilt, when Anno 1557. the
Drossaert Moridono laid the whole City the third time in Ashes: the King with
all the Christian Nobility and Soldiers, flying to a Castle five Leagues from
Amangucium, was slain there with all his Retinue.

IN other places the Jesuits enjoyed themselves in Peace and quietness, and
received yearly Revenues of the Lords of the Countries, for the promoting and
teaching their Doctrine. In the Royal City Facuta, The Jesuits build several
Churches in Japan.
they had built a stately Church, and in Firando, one to the honor of the
Virgin Mary, to which they got three more of the Bonzi which fled from thence.
In Meaco they bought a large House, which they turned afterward into a Church;
in Cangoxima they nestled first of all.

The King of Vocoajura proffered them a piece of ground, twenty Miles in
circumference, where no heathen Japanners, but only Christians were permitted
to live. Within the City Saccay Villela built also a stately Church; and
another not altogether so costly, was erected in the City Ximabra: But those
built by the Jesuits at Nangesaque, exceeded all the other in splendour and
magnificence.

The Japan King of Omura becomes first a Christian.
AMongst the first of the Japan Kings that received Baptism, was Xumitanda King
of Omura, whilst the poor and needy also embraced the same Faith; because
(that according to the Testimony of John Peter Maffeus) the Roman Priests
taught them, that every one according to their Abilities, must assist the poor
with Alms; this King at his Baptism took to him the Name of Bartholomew.

It seems that the Jesuits brought this manner of changing of Names out of
Europe to Japan, according to a Custom used amongst the Popes, who leave off
their Christian-Name when they take upon them the Supreme Government of the
Church. Changes his name.
The first original of this exchanging of Names, Onuphrius and Cardinal
Baronius, ascribe to Pope John the twelfth, but most to Sergius the second, who
would be called so, when he was chosen Pope, Anno 844. upon the dislike of his
own Name, which before was Bocca de Porco, as Platina, Stella, Bocca de Porco.
or Swinessnout. Suffrid. Epist. 1.
Suffridus, and Aeneas Sylvius testify.

Civil Wars against Xumitanda King of Omura.
But Xumitanda soon found great opposition, for his relinquishing his old
Heathenism, for the Bonzies the prime Actors in this Plot, stirred up
Gotondono, base Son of the Deceased King, against Xumitanda, pretending for a
reason, that he broke in pieces his Predecessors Image, which before his
Conversion, he was wont to Perfume with Incense. By this seeming zealous
Pretext, Gotondono soon got great Aid, for every one was much enraged, that the
Old Religion should be banished from Omura, and a New one brought in by the
Portuguese: Whereupon, the Rebels joining in a Body together, set Omura on
fire, and stormed the Palace; but the King throwing a Tiger skin athwart his
shoulders over a white Silk Suit, on which was Embroidered the Name Jesus, with
a Cross of Massy Gold on his Breast, and a Garland of Roses about his Neck,
made his escape, both through the Enemy and Fire, to a Castle near the
Seashore. But Gotondono pursued him closely, and getting several Ships from
Goto and Firando, Besieged him both by Sea and Land.

How he escaped great danger.
Xumitanda could not possibly have escaped, had not his Father Xengandono, by a
subtle Policy, made the Besieged fall at variance, and fight among themselves,
for when he proffered the King of Arima's Daughter in Marriage to the chief of
the Rebels, he immediately sided with Xumitanda; by which Conjunction, being
enabled, he Sallied out, and slew the greater part of the Enemy; and from
thence forward, for a considerable time he ruled in Peace and quietness, till
Isafay his Brother-in-Law made private Combination with the Lord of Firando,
who sent a Fleet to Sea, whilst Isafay laid the City Omura in Ashes. Xumitanda
at that time resided with a small Train, Obtains many victories.
in a Castle situate near the Sea: Thither Isafay marched with all speed, and
had undoubtedly slain the King, had not some unexpected Forces happily come to
his assistance; with which he Marched to meet the Enemy, and after a sharp
Conflict, utterly routed them: The Ships belonging to Firando, being separated
by stress of Weather, were lost. The last that rose against Xumitanda, was
Riogoses, King of Ximo, who also coming off with great loss, paid dearly for
his Insurrection. But Xumitanda, Promotes the Jusuits.
after having erected forty Churches or Chapels for the Jesuits, and banished
Paganism from his Dominions, insomuch, that a little before his death, not one
Heathen was to be found in the Province; Omura, according to the annual
Observations, kept by the Jesuits in Japan, died Anno 1587. Far less trouble
did the King of Arima find, when besides those of Bungo and Omura he also
embraced the Christian Religion.

Those were the three Kings, which Anno 1582. sent to his Holiness at Rome, the
Ambassadors, Munico Ito, Michael Cinga, Julianus Nacaura, and Martinus Fara, as
we have already related at large.

The Japan Ambassadors which went to Rome, proved very beneficial to the
Jesuits.
COncerning the return of these Japanners, Linschot says thus: The Japanners
went to Sail from the Haven of Lisbon, in the Ship St. Philip, (which in its
return home, was taken by the English Admiral Drake, and was the first Ship
that was lost in the East India Expedition; about which were several opinions
at that time, because the Ship was by the King of Spain's Name) and whilst I
was at Goa, they came thither Clothed in Cloth of Silver and Gold, in a most
costly manner, after the Italian fashion, and were received with great joy by
the Jesuits, who had finished that their great Design; to that purpose,
Publishing a Book in Spanish, containing the Voyage and Travels of the
Japanners, as well by Water as by Land, and their several Receptions by the
European Princes. Going from Goa to Japan, they occasioned no small admiration
in their Countrymen; the Jesuits desired this (as they pretended) for two
several Reasons: First, To make the Japanners the willinger to embrace the
Christian Faith, and also, that they might be Eyewitnesses of the glorious and
excellent Cities, which none could possibly persuade them to believe: But
indeed, the chief reason was to make their Order famous, and also to get a Mass
of Treasure thereby; for they kept most of the Presents that were given to the
Japan Princes for themselves, and they obtained likewise an Order from the
Pope, and the King of Spain, that no Portugal, nor any other Christian, might
settle in Japan without their License; so that the Jesuits turned out other
Friars, keeping only a few Priests and Portugal Artificers, without which they
could not possible be. To others, of what Estate or Degree soever, their
admission into the Country was on this Proviso, That as soon as ever their
business was finished, they should depart; but if they were minded to stay
longer, they should buy that liberty for Money of the Jesuits, for they were
most Eminent and Powerful in all places of Japan, where the Doctrine of Christ
was Preached. They make the Japanners believe what they list; they are honored
by them like gods and Saints: They also obtained leave of the Pope, that they
might out of their Order chose a Bishop over Japan, notwithstanding it is
against the Law of their Order; He that was sent to perform this Office, was
coming from Portugal, but dying by the way, another was Elected in his place;
in short, the Jesuits endeavor to get all things here under their Command. Thus
far Linschot.

The manner how the Jesuits spread the Christian Religion in Japan.
IT is also worthy our Observation, how the Jesuits spread the Catholic
Religion over most part of Japan: Xaverius began first, telling them of the
Creation of the World, and how God had Created all things, and that the Son of
God, in the fullness of time, had taken upon him Man's Nature, and Died on the
Cross, was Buried, rose again, and Ascended up to Heaven, from whence he will
come to Judge the Quick and the Dead. This Doctrine Translated out of Portugal
in the Japan Tongue, Xaverius read the easier to the Japanners, because it was
written in Portugal Characters.

Cosmus Turianus, and Joannes Ferdinandez Preached most of the Miracles which
Christ wrought, and taught the Auditors to make Crosses with the right hand,
and to begin at the Head, In the Name of the Father; and so Sign themselves
down to the Breast, In the Name of the Son; and then from the left shoulder to
the right, In the Name of the Holy Ghost: They also instructed them to Pray on
Garlands of Roses, telling them over knob by knob, and saying, Jesus Maria.

A strange way how the Japanners became Christians.
Paul of the Holy Belief used a Picture, representing the Image of the Virgin
Mary, and the Child Jesus sitting in her Lap, which he held before the King
Cangoxima, to the end, to make him loathe the Heathenish Idolatry. Other
Jesuits showed them, that the Angel Michael was the Guardian over Japan,
unfolding to them the occasions of Thunder and Lightning, gapings of the Sky,
Rain-bows, Storms, Hail, Snow, and such like Meteors, grounded on Nature.

THe Italian Joannes Baptista Montanus, relates in a Letter written from Bungo,
Anno 1564. That when he set foot on Japan, being sent thither by Cosmus
Turrianus to the King of Bungo, who had above a year and a half desired to have
a Priest, he was courteously received by him; yet the King remained still
amongst the Sect of the Bonzies, None taught the Japanners better than the
Jesuit Montanus.
which denied the Mortality of the Soul, but showed a great respect to all
Christians. Moreover Montanus relates, what course he took in Converting the
Japanners in Bungo: First, He contradicted with strong Arguments the Japan
Religion, showing them, that it was impossible to attain Salvation thereby:
When they understood this, then he told them, That one God had Created all
things of nothing, and made Men according to his own Image, to govern all: But
the wicked that run headlong and wilfully to the Devil, had no share therein;
and that our Sins had brought Death upon us; and how Men were still inclined to
wickedness, acting against the Laws of God and Man, nay, against God himself;
and since our Sins provoked so Omnipotent a God, they deserved Everlasting
Punishment: But the second Person of the Holy Trinity had taken upon him Man's
Nature in the Virgin Mary, to the end, he might in Man's Nature (which could
only suffer) die for our Sins a most cruel Death, and by reason of his
Godhead, prepared for us after this transitory Life, an Everlasting Being,
where there is the fullness of all Joys. Then he explained them the Laws,
Customs, and Mysteries of Baptism, and at last, answered the Bonzies to their
several Contradictions, which they made against the Christian Religion.

Trojus converts the Japanners after a ridiculous manner.
Trojus hung a Cross about the Necks of those that were Baptized, giving every
one a string of Beads, and a Consecrated Piece of Wax, on one side the Name
Jesus, surrounded with a Thorn Crown; on the other, the impression of three
Spikes; a great Box full of those Wax-Meddals (in Rome called Agnus) Trojus
brought with him from Goa to Japan; the value of which was esteemed the
greater, because the Pope himself had Consecrated them. An ancient Woman in
Tacata, after many entreaties getting one of those Meddals from Trojus, showed
it to every one she met, insomuch, that the common report went, that a great
piece of Sanctity being sent from Rome, was to be seen at Tacata; upon this
news, whole Vessels with people came from Firando and the adjacent Countries,
if possible, to get some of the same Meddals, or at least see them. Which
Trojus observing, seemed to be very bountiful, distributing above fifteen
hundred pieces of the Consecrated Wax amongst the people; at large declaring to
them the Mysteries thereof.

The Jesuits made Japan songs.
Some of the Jesuits made Japan Songs, containing the Histories of the Old and
New Testament. When on Christmas they kept holy the time of our Saviors
Nativity, and before Easter for his Suffering; then they sung to one another
all that the Prophets had foretold of the Birth and Sufferings of our Savior;
then walking about, they carried under a Canopy a Picture, which they would
have honored as Christ, being the true God and Man; before which walked a
Jesuit clad in a Priests Habit, with a Garland of Roses about his head, singing
in a Japan Tune and Language.

Tell us Maria, what you meant,
And what you looked at, as you went?
To which an old Japanner striking on a Water-Cruse, answered in Rhyme:

My Lord they have taken from me, therefore I
In piercing Sorrow, overwhelmed lie.
Sometimes the Jesuits represented on Stages made in their Chapels, Acted
Plays.
the Transactions of the Old Testament: Then they Acted the Children of
Israel's departure from Egypt, and Pharaoh's Destruction in the Red Sea, in
which they used many strange Arts, never heard of, or seen by the Japanners:
Then they played Jonas his part, curiously representing the Sea, Waves, and
Ship. Then they amazed the beholders, showing them the fall of Adam, Abraham's
Offerings, Joseph's Flight, Samsou's Death, and the like Scripture-Histories.

Vilela, in October and November, covered a stately Tomb with a black Cloth,
Preaching over it, and describing the Day of Judgment, the tortures of
Hellfire, and the happy condition of God's Children.

Troj. Epist. 1565. Histor Conc. Erid. l. 5.
Anno 1565. the Jesuits in Meaco and all the adjacent Countries kept a Jubilee,
first commanded by Pope Pius the fourth, to the end the Council of Trent might
have happy success; though the Pope seemed jealous of the Council, judging, as
it appeared by his advising with the Cardinal Moronus, that by such a
Church-Congregation, no good was to be expected for the Popes Authority. Mean
while, the year of Jubilee in Japan was Celebrated with all Solemnity, the
people flocking from all parts of the Country to keep the same.

A strange accident amongst the Japanners with Sanctified Corn, and Veronica's
Cloth.
Moreover, the Jesuits distributed Consecrated Water on the Sabbath, reporting
every where, that they received Sanctified Corn from Goa, and Veronica's
Sweating-Cloth; for which cause, several people hired Vessels to carry them to
Meaco, some that lived above seventy Leagues off came thither, and chiefly from
Amangucium, and Facata, came great numbers; notwithstanding the Inhabitants at
that time were much in trouble, both Cities being burnt down, and the people
were busi'd in re-building their former Habitations. Those that desired any
Blessed or Sanctified Corn, Fasted and Prayed eight days beforehand; then
applying themselves to some of the Portuguese (not daring to speak to the
Jesuits themselves) to intercede for them, and procure some.

Among others, was Bartholomew King of Omura, who also came for Sanctified
Corn, which he received of the bountiful Father Turrianus, who caused it to be
laid in Gold for him, presenting him also with an Ave Mary, made of Seahorse
Bones; both which the King hung about his Neck, not without imagining it to be
highly Sanctified by them. But the greatest care of the People, was to see
Veronica's Handkerchief, in which the Icon of our Savior Face was Imprinted.

Jacob Frecensis, Aubert. Eir^i. Ber. Relig. Annals 1249.
a Cobblers Son, but afterward called Pope Urban the fourth, found Veronicas
Cloth, when he managed the Laudanian Arch-Deaconship, giving it to the Cloister
of the Cistercian Monks, in the Bishopric of Laudun, Anno 1249. where to this
day it is constantly reverenced; yet notwithstanding, this went for the same
Cloth in Japan, perhaps multiplied by the same Miracle as our Saviors Cross,
whose pieces would make up a Ships load, and yet they affirm it to be the same
Cross on which our Savior died in Golgotha, if you will believe all related
thereof.

Remarkable arguments by the Japanners against the Christian Religion.
It is to be admired, that the Jesuits brought their design so forward in Japan,
having so many grand Oppositions. It is very well known, that the Japanners are
of a quick apprehension, and much given to Disputations, which the Jesuits
found sufficient testimonies of, by their several contradictions: When Xaverius
first Preached in Cangoxima, and amongst other things, terrified them with
Hell, where the deceased (had it not been for our Saviors suffering) are
continually tormented in such a nature, that after the expiration of many ages,
they have no hope of any deliverance, or ease of their Torments, because, that
in the Flames they blaspheme God, and suffer everlasting Punishment for their
sinning against an Omnipotent Judge: Whereupon the Japanners replied, saying,
Do you, O Xaverius, place our Parents and Predecessors, Children and nearest
Relations in an unquenchable Fire? do those burn there, that received their
lives out of our Loins? do they die to live there for ever, and there live to
be always dying, for whom if we had a thousand lives, would wish to die as many
times? are those which brought us into the world tormented by Diabolical
Fiends, without any cessation? cannot God help them? how can it then be
possible, that he is Omnipotent? or will he not help them? how is it then that
he is merciful? and what enjoyment can Heaven be to us, if we should be
transported thither through death, having so many Relations, Children, Fathers
and Mothers, who weep and roar continually for their insufferable torments? And
what Reasons can there be given, that the merciful Creator should take delight
in punishing everlastingly the poor Creature?

Xaverius tells us, That he convinced and resolved them on all their Arguments
and Demands, but gives us no account with what Reasons he satisfied them; only
he relates, that he shed abundance of Tears when he spoke of the damned
condition of the deceased Japanners.

Moreover, when Xaverius told them, That there was a beginning of all things:
they immediately replied, That that beginning must be either good or evil, and
did God create both good and bad at once? How can he be God, and confine all
good in himself, and be the only occasion of all good out of himself? If he be
good, from whence are these bad Devils? Did God create them bad? where then is
his abundant goodness? Or did he give over those to evil, which he could have
kept from it? Was Man created to serve God in holiness? why does he suffer the
Devil to tempt him to wickedness? Why is Man left to himself, that cannot
subsist without the Spirit of God? How can it also agree with Gods goodness, to
create Men unable by their weakness, to be condemned for their sins, and by
their damnation for ever miserable? And why are there such Laws ordained, that
no Creature on Earth is able to perform, the least breach of which is eternal
damnation? insomuch that upon necessity the whole Race of Mankind, by the power
of that Law, must be cursed, he being born in sin. The Japan Religion was
established on better grounds of Gods Mercy, in that they had no everlasting
Hell. The Worshippers and Servants of Amida, Xaca, Canon, and other Japan gods,
exchanged by death their transitory Life for everlasting Salvation: and if it
happened that after death they suffered some torments for their sins committed
in this Life, that continued but a short time, according to the Crime.

Arguments of those Japanners that intended to be Christians.
These were generally the controverted Questions which Xaverius was to answer:
but after these arose a new stop in the way. The Japanners, who by this time
gave some ear to the Jesuits, could no ways understand why God did make himself
known to none but those Strangers which came thither from Portugal? they told
them, That their Forefathers lived very retired; but those which for Theft,
Adultery, Murder, or neglect of the Japan Religion, as it was taught them from
time to time, could not be admonished in their Lifetimes, must they according
to the Japan Christian Faith be therefore tortured in everlasting Flames? who
must bear the blame of that spoil? Had the Portuguese Preached the Gospel
sooner in Japan, then they should have been sooner saved: O miserable Parents
and Children, which died before the Jesuits came hither!

A Letter of Fernandes conce^ining the Japan contradictions.
But the better to understand the daily oppositions and contradictions of the
Japanners, we will give you some Extracts of a Letter, Written by Johannes
Fernandes, from Amangucium to Franciscus Xaverius, Anno 1551. wherein he says,
That since the departure of Xaverius, the Japanners came daily slocking to the
Jesuits Houses, troubling them continually with several Questions; particularly
they desired to know of what Materials God had made the Soul? as for the Body,
they knew that the Earth, Fire, Water, and Air had joined it together.
Moreover, they demanded of what Shape and Color the Soul was? What manner of
Creatures the Devils were? Why they tempted Men to sin, and chiefly aimed at
his destruction? How they came to be so wicked, since God created all things
good? They inquired what God was, and where? If he could not be seen? Why he
had blocked up the way to Heaven with so many troubles, where goodness only
resides?

The Bonzies curse the Jesuits.
Mean while the Bonzies spent their time continually in their Temples and
Cloisters, in railing against the Jesuits: They Preached publicly before the
People, That the Christians were Cannibals, or Men-eaters; That the Devil had
spoken from a Brazen Image, prognosticating that Amangucium should in a short
time be utterly destroyed for their wickedness, in embracing the Christian
Religion. Not long after they say, that themselves saw in the Night a of Fire
descending from Heaven on the Palace of Amangucium, Terrible Fire.
which suddenly burning, made their foretelling true; for the City burnt eight
days together, and then Murder and Cruelties spared neither young nor old, not
so much as the poor Infants, which were Sucking at their Mothers Breasts. Those
which sought not to escape by flight, died a most miserable death: whereupon
the general Cry of the Bonzies was, That the unknown God of the Christians must
be a most horrible Monster, by whose Religion, if it took footing in their
Country, Japan would be utterly destroyed.

The Reason why the Roman Religion went on so prosperously in Japan.
Notwithstanding these grand oppositions, yet there is no Country, either West,
North, or South, that has been discovered by Navigation, which has taken so
large an impression of the true Faith, as Japan: notwithstanding the
Blood-Baths which were made there, the cruel Persecutions, the barbarousness of
their Tortures, the meekness of the Sufferers, the infinite numbers of Miseries
which happened in so short a time, that can scarcely be paralelled by any other
People in the World: for which cause we will relate the way by which the
Christians in Japan went on so successfully.

The first Reason why the Jesuits spoke for the Poor.
The Jesuits soon after their arrival were much frequented by the poorer sort of
People, which are very numerous in Japan, the Country being so exceeding
populous, that they seem to undo one another, the Nobles living on the gain of
their Subjects, who bring them in so much, that they scarce know their own
Revenue, whilst the meaner sort undergo extreme Poverty; and the more, because
Compassion is banished from the Country, and nothing less found there than
Charity to the Poor, The Jesuits Preached against their hard-heartedness,
teaching them, That the Christian Religion required bountiful hearts toward
the Poor, that Men should have compassion of one another miseries; he deserved
to be forsaken in his misery, which will not act for his Neighbors relief: what
is it that can happen to one, but it may happen to another? who will forget a
poor Man, that is himself subject to all frailties? This Doctrine the poor
Japanners embraced the more willingly, because it pleaded for their poverty;
but yet it took a deeper impression when the action it self followed: for when
the Jesuits had gotten some of the Princes to embrace their Religion, Build
Almshouses.
which allowed them great Revenues, they immediately built Almshouses,
dividing them into two several Apartments; in one of which those that were
infected with the Leprosy had their Lodgings, and in the other those that had
other Sicknesses: great multitudes came flocking thither, and at the entering of
the Almshouse received Baptism. Thus the Jesuits numbers increased daily to
their great Cost and Charge, none but poor and needy People coming to them out
of necessity, were Baptized. The Letters may be seen wherein they make heavy
complaints, that the Japan Christians consisted most in diseased and decrepid
poor People, which were Converted only to be Maintained by them. Bonzies are
cruel to the Poor.
And these came the more because the Bonzies never regarded them, neither
bestowing Alms, nor taking care of their Burial, or to provide such things as
their Religion requires after death, to the end they may live in joy and
happiness with their gods Amida and Xaca. But it is no marvel why the Bonzies
neglect the Poor, and bestow their labor for the Rich, when we consider their
self-endedness; and therefore they are so carless, because they leave nothing
behind them for the Bonzies. It was also very pleasing to the poor Japanners,
when the Jesuits told them the way to heaven was much more troublesome for the
Rich to pass than the Poor, and how that earthly Treasures were as Weights and
Clogs to hold Men's Souls from getting into Heaven; and those that found not
Riches in this World, should obtain and enjoy the more in the World to come.

Covetousness of Princes the second Reason.
Besides these winnings upon the Poor, Covetousness induced and won upon the
Princes, whose Dominions bordered the Sea: for the Portuguese sending several
Vessels richly Laden from Goa, Malacca, the Philippines, Macaw, and other
Places, to Japan, great benefit did those Territories reap where these Ships
came to an Anchor. The Kings of Bungo, Arima, Cangoxima, Amangucium, and
Firando, had the most convenient Havens; and every one of these sought to
bereave another, and ingross the Trade to themselves; which they could not do
without the Jesuits: for who ever got them for their Friends, might command the
Portuguese Vessels where they pleased, the Commanders not daring to Unlade but
by their directions: for which cause the Jesuits always against the time of
their Countrey-mens coming went to Sea, to meet with the Ships, so to order
them to Anchor in such a Princes Haven, whose Favor they wanted for the
promoting of the Catholic Belief.

Lodowick Frojus relates, Epist. Eroj. Firand. 1564.
That he was forbid to Preach in Firando, notwithstanding the King seemed to
have some inclination to become a Convert. I will set down something which this
Place requires, of Frojus his Letter. In the interim, says he, two Portuguese
Vessels were seen to steer hither, whose Commanders durst not come into the
Haven of Firando without my Orders and License, which the King observing, and
instigated with the hopes of Profit, excused himself, that he had not
Entertained and Complemented me before that time; and withal earnestly
entreated me, that I would not forbid the Portuguese from coming to an Anchor
at Firando: for which Courtesy he would in few days give order for me to have
the same Privilege in Preaching as heretofore: Whereupon the Portuguese upon
my permittance came into the Harbor, and to the King, asking him if he would
fulfill his Promise, to let them at their own Charge re-build the Church which
he had pulled down? But the King endeavored by putting us off to gain time, and
at last deceived us. At this time the Ship called The Holy Cross appeared on
the Coast; I my self being at Sea discovered her first, and going Aboard
persuaded the Commander, Peter Almaida, to drop Anchor in the Road a League and
a half from Firando: soon after Almaida himself came on Shore, and threatened
the King, that he would depart with his Ship from thence, and Sail to some
other Port, if he did not perform his Promises to me. The King desired some
days to consider; but at last being fearful if he should delay the time any
longer, that Almaida would weigh Anchor and go to another Port, which would be
to his great damage, he granted me free leave to come again to Firando, and
re-build the Temple.

The like footing the Jesuits had in other Kingdoms; where they obtained
liberty of the Princes to Preach, upon condition to cause the Portuguese Trade
to be brought thither.

This was the Reason for which the King of Cangoxima gave free leave to the
Jesuits to instruct the Natives in Christianity, and to build Churches and
Cloisters for the same purpose. But afterward being informed, that two
Portuguese Vessels were gone to Unlade in the Haven of Firando, he forbad the
Jesuits from any farther proceeding, he laying all the fault on them, they
having the sole Command of the Ships, to cause them to Unlade in what Harbor
they please.

The third Reason why the Roman Religion met with such good success in Japan.
Besides these two former, there is a third Reason why the Christian Faith took
so soon footing in Japan, which was the ignorance of the Japanners in Natural
Philosophy; for which cause they were much amazed when the Jesuits told them
concerning the Weather, and all sorts of Meteors; How that the Fire which was
either kindled in the Air, or Crevises of the Earth, made horrible
Representations; That the Air, or Region under the Moon produced flying Sparks,
flaming Torches, burning Lamps, and falling Stars; That in the Harvest-time,
when the Earth is neither Frozen by extremity of Cold, nor dried up by excess
of Heat, abundance of Vapors arise, which cause those Ignes fatui, or as the
Vulgar call it, Jack with a Lantern. The Jesuits teach them Philosophy to their
great admiration.
They declared also the Generation and significations of Comets, that when they
appeared bloody, duskish, or bright, with a long Tail, they either signified
Drought, excess of Heat, Storms, Earthquakes, Famine, or Deluges. And likewise
they declared the occasion of Thunder and Lightning: whereof some being
enclosed in the Clouds, does rattle and make a noise only; other breaks forth,
battering all that they meet with, or set it on fire; and that in the Night it
Lightened more frequently than in the Daytime, and chiefly in the heat of
Summer. They told them the reason of the appearing of Rain-bowes, whether they
proceed from the Sun or Moon, and though commonly appearing after Rain, yet
must be looked upon as a Divine Token, that God will no more destroy the whole
World in a general Deluge. Moreover, they showed the reason of the opening of
the Sky, and Circles about the Moon; That white Clouds, and also red in the
Evening, were signs of fair Weather, but in the Morning foreshew'd Storms, and
abundance of Rain; That the Clouds, which were the Receptacles of Thunder, bred
Rain; and besides Water, also sometimes sent down, to the admiration of Men,
Milk, Blood, Frogs, Stones, and such like. They also taught, That Snow was a
thin Cloud, which in the falling Freezeth into that Nature as it comes upon the
Earth; That Hail detaining some warmth, is sooner subject to Cold; but the
higher it Congeals and Freezes in the Air, the smaller it is, and the lower the
bigger, and chiefly in the Summertime, because of the great difference betwixt
Cold and Heat. They informed them with the occasions of Dew, Mists, Fogs, and
Ice; That a timely Thaw and Mizling Rain brought great Profit; That the Heat in
Winter, remaining in the Caverns of the Earth, preserved all manner of Roots,
and that the Dew in the Summer moistens the Ground, and nourishes the Plants;
whereas otherwise the Sun would scorch the Grass and other Products, and
untimely Frosts kill the early Buds. They also instructed them, That the
Fountains and Rivers had their original from the Sea, and passing through the
Caverns of the Earth, lost their saltness; unfolding to them also many
Mysteries of the depths and shallowness of Waters, and the ebbing and flowing
of the Ocean. But especially they discoursed at large of Earthquakes, because
they frequently infest Japan, sometimes shaking it like a Skiff tossed by the
Waves; at other times lifting it up and down, and swallowing whole Villages,
Towns, Cities, nay, great Tracts of Land, leaving in their steads unfathomable
Pits; all which wrought strange effects in the Japanners. But they were much
more concerned, even to admiration, when the Jesuits told them beforehand the
Month, Week, Day, Hour, and Minute, when the Sun or Moon would be Ecclypsed;
the first by the Moons passing before the Sun; the second by the interposition
of the Terrestrial Globe betwixt the Sun and Moon.

Japanners are desirous of Learning.
These Discourses concerning; Lightning, Thunder, Clouds, Rain, Hail, Fountains,
Floods, and other natural Motions and Meteors, delighted the Japanners the
more, because they are much addicted to learn knowledge of Mysteries. Johannes
Fernandes relates, That they came daily to his House, spending the time in
asking all manner of Questions concerning God and his Divine Works.

The fourth Reason may be known by the Bonzies.
The fourth Reason of the happy and prosperous success of the Catholic Religion
in Japan, may be drawn from the Bonzies, who not only taught wicked and
abominable Doctrine, but lead also very debauched and vicious Lives: What
Lodowick Frojus writes in a Letter from Firando to the Indian Jesuits
concerning their abominable Religion, Their wicked Religion.
may serve for a pattern: He tells us of a Gentlewoman that was ninety years
old, who had paid her Devotions in several of the Japan Temples, and bestowed
great Revenues upon some of them; this Bounty of hers was requited by the
Bonzies with a Paper Coat, which they esteemed very highly, for the Life of
Amida was at large written therein; and it was accounted an extraordinary and
peculiar favor to purchase such a Coat with a great sum of Money: for the Woman
dying in the same, was immediately transported to the happy Place of Amida's
Residence, without suffering any pain to cleanse her from her former offenses.
But Johannes Fernandes being fetched to a sick Person, of kindred to the
forementioned Gentlewoman, discoursed with her, laying open the vainness of the
Paper Coat; against which he used so many arguments, that she tore and burnt it.

The other wickednesses of their Religion appears by murdering themselves to
the honor of Amida, Their Cruelties.
Xaca, and Canon.

The Bonzies live very debauched.
And no less abominable were the Lives of the Bonzies, whose Debaucheries,
Drunkenness, Whoring, Murdering, and other outrages, were known to most People:
nay, they accounted it no sin to Rob upon the Highways, and go a Pyrating upon
the Sea, oftentimes venturing to set upon whole Towns and Villages, burning the
Houses to the ground, and putting the Inhabitants all to the Sword, not so much
as sparing the poor Infants: for which their Cruelties the Emperor Nobunanga
burnt their Cloisters; and as many as he could get of the Bonzies, caused them
to be nailed on Crosses, to die a lingering Death.

This made the way clear for the Jesuits, who told them they were come above
six thousand Leagues over the Sea to Japan, to no other end, but to teach them
the right Road to Salvation.

The fifth Reason is the alliance of the Japan Religion with the Catholic.
At last the little difference which was between the Japan Religion and the
Catholic, made an easy way for the Jesuits to settle it

Xaverius relates, that the Bonzies themselves told the first Jesuits, That
happily they might prevail among the common People, for that betwixt the two
Religions was but small difference; yet then they declared only the Doctrine
of the Trinity. But after they got greater footing, they performed all their
Church-Ceremonies in public, at which the Japanners much admired; and
furthermore Preached the Roman Doctrine.

And certainly there was a great resemblance of the Japan Religion to the
other; according to which the Dayro in Meaco governs himself not much unlike
the Pope at Rome. Moreover, the Japanners have an infinite number of Cloisters,
full of Priestesses, and Nuns, who punish themselves for their sins, and
account Marriage unlawful in some of their religious Orders. They are
persuaded, that the more largely they show their Charity to the Cloisters, the
sooner they shall go to Amida's happy dwelling; so that their Bounty in those
particulars makes them equal in their future happiness: for the Heirs of the
Deceased, with Gifts and Presents, beseech the Bonzies to deliver them by their
means from their Pain. They all Read their Prayers by Beads. Concerning matters
of Religion, none may Judge but the Dayro and a Cloister. They account it great
Piety in any to visit the Tombs or Shrines of the Japan Saints.

These were the chiefest Reasons why the Catholic Faith went on so
successfully in Japan; which nevertheless for diverse causes beforementioned
met with such oppositions, that at this day there is scarce one Christian to be
found in the Country. Nobunanga, Taicosama, and Daifusama, as we have already
mentioned, begun to persecute them; but being continually busi'd with Civil
Wars amongst themselves, they found their hands so full, that their Cruelties
gave some little intermissions.

The first Persecution of the Christians.
But when Conbosama took possession of the Imperial Throne, he feared none, since
Fideri was burnt with the chiefest of the Nobility by his Father Daifusama.
Thus suspecting no manner of Insurrection. Anno 1617, he began anew to raise
Persecutions, endeavoring totally to subvert Christianity and utterly root out
all its Professors, with the greatest torturing that could be thought on:
therefore when to be nailed on Crosses, and run through the Sides with two
Lances, seemed too easy a Death, and to be beheaded was far easier: Therefore
he resolved to make them feel a more painful and lingering Exit; and that he
performed by roasting them to death in this manner: Christians are Roasted.
First a great Post was driven into the Earth, placing several Pyles of Wood
about it, and only leaving a Gap or Passage open toward that Corner from
whence the Wind blew, through which those that were to suffer passed to the
Stake, to which they were bound by the Hands with a Rope of twelve Foot long;
and about the same distance the Wood lay about the Post, excepting only where
the Gap was left, to the end the Wind might blow away the Smoke, that the
Martyrs might not suddenly be choked up, and so die sooner and easier than
those bloody Persecutors desired, so that they were roasted by degrees, and
died, if it were possible, a thousand Deaths in one, undergoing the miserablest
torture that could be imagined. Burning of Men very ancient.
This kind of burning of Mankind had a long time before been used in the World,
but never in so cruel a method as in Japan. The Holy Scripture tells us of
Juda, that he condemned his Daughter in Law to be burnt, because she had
committed Adultery; Genesis 38.24.
of which Moses says thus, Bring Thamar forth and let her be burnt. The Rabbin
Jews affirm, that Thamar was the Priest Melchisedech's Daughter, and therefore
for her Uncleanness was to be burnt by order of the holy Law, Levit. 31.6.
which says, If a Priest's Daughter play the Whore, she polluteth her Father,
therefore she shall be burnt with fire. But the Rabbin Jews are very ignorant
in their reckoning of Time, in which they commonly make great mistakes, as
taking Thamar to be Mechisedech's Daughter, not only without testimony, but
also against apparent truth: for there is above two hundred years difference
betwixt the Age of Melchisedech and Thamar. Anno 2490 after the Creation,
Abraham and Melchisedech met one with another, and Judah committed Adultery
with Thamar a hundred and ninety years after that meeting. Luther is of opinion
that Judah performed the Office of a Priest amongst the Canaanites, Luthers
opinion concerning Thamars burning.
and that a Daughter in Law was held to be as an own Daughter; and therefore
Thamar was condemned to be burnt, being a Priest's Daughter. But most judge the
chief reason of her condemnation to be for committing Adultery, being found
with Child when she was promised to Shelah, Judah's third Son. According to the
Laws of several People, all Adulterers were condemned to die; and chiefly the
Roman Emperor, Opilius Macrinus, burnt all those alive that were accused of
that Crime.

The Ancients worshipped Fire.
IT is worthy our labor to set down the great Reverence the Ancients showed to
the Element of Fire. When the Royal Consort and Daughter of Julianus the
Emperor appeared in State, they always had holy Fire carried before them. The
Roman Emperors also themselves ever followed such a Fire: which Custom they
learned of the Persian Mace-bearers. The Romans, when any Marriages were
solemnized, made the Bride and Bridegroom touch Fire and Water, which they set
on an Altar. Nimrod, by some called Ninus, the first of the Assyrian Monarchs,
commanded Fire to be worshipped as a god, in Ur, a City in Babylon, so called
from that kind of religious Worship.

Hieron. Quaest. in Genesis.
St. Jerome relates, and besides him the Rabbis, Solomon Jarchy, and Moses
Gervedensis, That Abraham was condemned to be burnt, because he would not
worship the Fire in Ur, according to the Chaldeans example, and when he stood
in the midst of the Flame, Divine Providence preserving him, he fled to Canaan.
But St. Jerome looks upon the Story as not authentic, but one of the Jews
Fables.

Persians worshipped Fire.
The Persians also (according to the testimony of Julius Firmicus, Maximus
Tyrius, Hilarious, and Isidorus, fell down daily on their Knees, worshipping
Fire as an Image of God. Concerning whom also the famous Historiographer
Socrates relates a strange Story, That Maruthas, Bishop of Mesopotamia, Socrat.
Hist. ^^7. c. 81.
being dispatched from Constantinople to Isdigerdes, King of Persia, got
exceedingly into his Favor, for his great Holiness and obliging Carriage; which
the chief of the Persians could no ways digest, but looked upon with great
envy. Isdigerdes used daily in his Chapel to worship Fire; under which they
dug a Cave, and privately hiding a Man in it, ordered him to call to the
King as he was kneeling before the Fire, telling him, That he would certainly
lose his Kingdom if he showed favor to the Christian Bishop. This voice
Isdigerdes took as an Oracle, and thereupon resolved to put away Maruthas,
notwithstanding he had cured him of an intolerable pain in his Head: But
Maruthas discovering the Cheat to the King, soon after obtained free privilege
for the Christians in Persia. Ammianus Marcellinus farther adds, Ammian. Mart.
l. 23.
That they reported the Fire was fallen from Heaven, preserved on everlasting
Hearths.

Strabo the Greek Geographer averrs, Strabo l. 15.
That the Cappadocians built several Temples for their consecrated Fires; in
which about the middle they erected an Altar, and set the Fire upon it.

Rabbi Benj. in Jouthasins.
Rabbi Benjamin, in his famous Hebrew Book of Travels, on which several Learned
Men have Commented, says, That he Sailed from Haanlam, now called Zeilan, to
the Asiatick Isles Chenerag, inhabited by such Idolaters as were called
Dug-Bijim; where he found their Priests to be the greatest Sorcerers in the
World.

The Greeks and Romans worshipped Fire.
But these were not all, for the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans, also worshipped
Fire: Amongst the Greeks the chiefest were the famous and Learned Hippasus the
Metapontine, and Heraclitus the Ephesian: wherefore the greatest Offerings were
not sacrificed without Fire by the Heathens.

Lastly, the Vestal Virgins in Rome, and the like in Greece at Delphos and
Athens, as its Priestesses, tended the Everlasting Fire.

The Northern Tartars, and also the Lituanians, worshipped Fire for a Deity;
and Alexander Gaguinus affirms, That the Lituanians, Alex. Gaguin. de prise.
Lituan. Relig.
till they embraced the Christian Religion in Anno 1230. continued the same
sort of Worship.

The Chaldeans, Medians, and Assyrians, offered Sacrifice to Fire, presaging by
the Flames thereof future Events.

Those Priests that belonged to the Temple of Diana Echatana, whose care it was
to look after the consecrated Fire, were not permitted to have any conversation
with Women.

The ancient Britains worshipped Minerva, their Temple being famous for an
unquenchable Fire, that wasted not into Ashes but into Stones.

Corpse, by whom and why burnt.
THe Massagetes, and also Thales, one of the Learned among the Grecians,
maintained, that the Custom, formerly used in most Parts of the known World,
which was to burn dead Corpse, was to be esteemed wicked, because the Fire,
being the greatest of the gods, was corrupted by dead Bodies. But others
maintained the contrary, holding it best to cleanse and purify the Body by the
Flame, that so it might neither rot, nor occasion any noisomness or stench:
which Opinion was held by most of the Eastern People, as also amongst the
Germans, Spaniards, Gauls, and Britains. Plin. l. 8 c. (...)
But this Custom of burning the Dead was a long time after entertained by the
Romans: for which Pliny gives this Reason, because their Enemies would
oftentimes dig the dead Bones out of the Graves, carrying them away as
Trophies; which to prevent, they followed that fashion of the Germans and
Indians: but whether that were the true reason or no, sure we are, that the
first among them recorded to be burnt, was the Consul Sylla, which he himself
commanded, fearing to be served in like manner as he had done to his Competitor
Marius, whom he dug up out of his Grave.

After the Romans had once thoroughly entertained this Custom, Pli^. l. 12. c 18.
none were equal to them, for the magnificent preparations of Funeral Pyles,
furnishing the same with the sweetest Perfumes, for which they bestowed great
sums of Money.

The Emperor Nero, according to the forementioned Pliny, burnt more Perfume
with the dead Corpse of his Empress Poppea, than all Arabia Felix could produce
in one year.

When Germanicus's Lady traveled with the Ashes of her burnt Husband through
Calabria, Apulia, and Campania, to Rome, the Inhabitants of those Places
through which they passed, came to meet them all Clothed in Black, and the
Nobility in Purple, every one burning, according to their abilities, all manner
of Perfumes, Tacit. 3. Aunal.
and other sweet Scents, such as Tacitus says are commonly thrown on the
Funeral Pyles.

But the Heathens burnt not only their Dead, but their Living also, for
certain Crimes.

The Egyptians stuck the Body of one that had murdered his Father, full of
sharp Canes, then cutting him in many places, they at last threw him on a great
heap of Thorns, which being set on fire consumed him.

Other Nations have condemned less Offenders to be burnt, partly because that
punishment is exceeding painful, and partly by the Fire to cleanse them from
their offenses.

The Murders of the Emperor in Fissima.
AS soon as Conbosama, after the decease of his Father, possessed the Imperial
Throne, he began his Reign, as we in part mentioned with exceeding Tyranny: for
traveling through Fissima, he commanded the Governor Ingandono to cause all
Christians, Men, Women, and Children, to be roasted to death.

During the Civil Wars, since the Dayro lost his sole and unlimited Authority,
every King in his own Realm played the Master. And seeing they endeavored, as
we said before, to bereave one another of the Profit which the Portuguese
Vessels brought them, seeking to invite them to their Harbors, they were forced
to keep fair correspondence with the Jesuits, they having the sole Command of
the Trade and Vessels, and so accordingly to grant them free leave to Preach
the Catholic Doctrine.

But after Daifusama became Conqueror in many Battles, reducing the whole
Country of Japan under his subjection, the Kings Authorities and Power were
all limited; so that they all depended on the Emperor, and were strictly
commanded for no sinister ends to permit the Christians to teach their Belief.
Being thus ordered, all of them were forced to obey, making great search for
the Roman Priests, of which he took at last Peter ab Ascensione a Franciscan,
Johannes Baptista Machada a Jesuit, Alphonso Navarre a Dominican, and Ferdinand
a Santo Josepho an Augustine, and caused them all to be beheaded in Omura.

Why the Christians were burnt.
But this way of Execution seeming too mild (the Christans in the least not
dreading it,) the Japanners began to destroy them with Fire; the preparatory
solemnities whereof they performed after this manner: The day before, How the
Japanners are used to proclaim it the day before they burn the Christians.
a Wagon was drawn through the City by two Oxen, in whose forepart stands a
Copper Bar, neatly Turned, and made fast in the bottom; at the top of the Bar
hangs a great Copper Basin, by them called Gom, near which stands a Servant
with a Mace of Iron, with which at the end of every Street he strikes on the
Basin, at the noise whereof all the People come running out of their Houses,
and when a great multitude have assembled, after silence proclaimed, a Crier
that Rides before the Oxen on Horseback begins to Read out of an Edict. Each
House near the Place where the Execution is to be, must procure a certain
quantity of Wood, either more or less, according to the number of those that
are to be burnt: This done, the care to see it performed is left to the
Master-Warden, who is to answer for it if any thing be wanting. Behind him that
stands knocking on the Basin sits one of the Emperors Servants, and also a
Tradesman on a Carpet spread all over the Wagon; the first holds a scollop'd
Flag, on whose top hang two Tassels; the other holds a long Cane, at the end of
it hangs a bunch of Grapes made of Brass, whereto is tied a String full of
Knots; the Wagon guarded on each side with a Fyle of Pike-men and Musketeers,
and the like Guard marching before and behind; at the end of every Street they
all stand still, where the Crier tells them aloud what every House is to do.
Afterward, at the Place of Execution, as many Posts are driven into the Ground
as there are Persons to die, and great heaps of Wood are laid almost round
about; at last, at the appointed time the Prisoners are brought, and the Fire
kindled, where (as we have already related) by the distant Fire they were
lingringly roasted, so dying a long and most miserable death.

Why the Japanners throw the Ashes of the burnt Christians into the Sea.
When Peter de Zuniga an Augustine, and Lodowick Flores a Dominican, born at
Antwerp, were to be burnt in Nangesaque, besides twelve others that were
beheaded, there came in the Night several Portuguese, who had cut from the
halfroasted Bodies of Zuniga and Flores, great pieces of Flesh, which they
preserved as holy Relics, insomuch that the next day little or nothing was to
be seen of either of their Corpse: This being very ill resented by the Governor
of Nangesaque, to prevent the same another time, on the next Month, being
August, Anno 1622. when they had condemned Carolus Spinola the Jesuit, and
Franciscus de Morales the Dominican, Hyacinthus Orfanel, and Alphonso de Mena,
caused their Bodies to be thrown into a deep Pit full of Wood, there burning
them to Ashes, which being raked together, was carried a good distance from the
Shore, and there scattered abroad into the Sea by the Wind, to the end there
might nothing of them remain.

But besides the forementioned Jesuit and Dominican, others were also burnt at
the same time, amongst which was a Brusseller, who coming within the Pyles of
Wood would not be tied with one Hand to the Post, but falling down on his Knees
held fast about the bottom of it, and so died; others which stood upright,
scorched and burnt by degrees, till at last they died through excess of most
intolerable pain. Hyacinthus Orfanel stood most in the Wind, and was least hurt
by the Flame, ^rsanel was sixteen hours (...) burning.
so that he was full sixteen hours miserably tormented before he gave up the
Ghost. Two of the Company were tied out of the Wind, which made the Flames
strike so vehemently upon the Posts, that the Ropes burnt with which they were
tied, by which means they got loose and fled through the burning heaps of Wood,
desiring that they might apostatize from the Christian Religion: But
Xuquendaino sitting on a costly Carpet, surrounded by Japan Nobles and
Soldiers to see the Execution performed by order of Goneocu, Governor of
Nangesaque, commanded those that fled to be driven back, and pushed into the
Fire, with Pikes and Staves, judging it was not out of zeal that they would
embrace the Japan Religion, but because they could not endure the pain of the
Fire; so that it was then too late for them to consider that which they might
have done before.

After this Camilius de Constanzo the Jesuit was in like manner burnt neat
Firando, and Paulas Navarrus in the City Ximabara.

Horrible Persecutions in Jedo.
AMongst other Persecutions, that was very terrible which happened at Jedo,
Anno 1623. Cornelius Hazart in his Church History, and the Letter from Japan to
Mutius Vetelesius, Governor of the Jesuits at Rome, differ much in Relation of
this unhappy Accident. The Letter deserving more credit than Hazart, How it
happened.
gives this account: Daifusama caused a Nobleman, called Fara Mondono, to have
his Toes and Fingers to be cut off, and to be burnt in the Forehead, because he
inclined to the Christian Religion; but being received into Favor, and restored
to his former Dignity by the Emperor Conbosama, who was his near Relation, he
left not to practice in private the same Religion: But being betrayed by his
Servant to Jenoquidi Cambioie, Governor of Jedo, was by the Emperors command
condemned.

Soon after, by means of tortured Christians, were discovered the Jesuits
Hieronimus ab Angelis, and Franciscus Galves a younger Brother.

The Life of Hieronymus b^ Angelis.
AB Angelis Sailing with Carolus Spinola to the East Indies, was necessitated
by a fault of their Vessel, to fall upon Brasile, and immediately after to Sail
back to Portugal: in which his Voyage homewards he was taken by the English;
but making his escape from them, not long after, coming again to Lisbon, he
Sailed again for India, and at last came to the Empire of China, where he
stayed a considerable time, and then went to Japan; where being chief Governor
of the Jesuits Residence in Fissima; he stayed some years in that City: then
traveling to Surunga, where the Emperor at that time kept his Court, purposely
to erect a Temple: he laid his Design so cunningly, that he taught the Roman
Religion in private there: and having also ordered all things according to his
hearts desire, when within Jedo he was about buying of a House to make a Temple
of, he was discovered, and forced to fly to Surunga, and immediately after to
Nangesaque. But when, Anno 1614. a considerable number of Christians were
banished from Meaco and Osacca, to the cold Country Sangaer, in the
Northermost part of Japan, by command of the Emperor Daifusama, Ab Angelis
traveled thither, and at last back again to Jedo; where he undertook again his
former Design, to buy a large House, in which he might perform Divine Service:
But being busy about these his intentions, he was sought for by Cambioie's
Lifeguard; of which having notice, he privately made his escape, and the
Soldiers out of Revenge raged against those where he Lodged; which coming to
his knowledge grieved him exceedingly, that for his sake they should come to
any inconveniency, who had received and Lodged him in their House: whereupon he
traveled thither, and went to Cambioie, accompanied with Simon Jempo a
Japanner, who had spent his youthful days amongst the Bonzies; but embracing
the Christian Religion, Served the Jesuit for a Dogico, that is, A Clerk. Ab
Angelis told the Governor, that he was a Priest sent from Sicily to Japan,
there to Preach the Roman Doctrine.

Galves makes his escape, but is taken again.
The younger Brother Francis Galves, being informed that he was discovered, fled
to Camacura, a Mile beyond Jedo, where he thought to escape but was overtaken.
Mean while forty seven Christians were taken in Jedo; which were all condemned
by Conbosama, with Ab Angelis, Galves and Jempo to be burnt: the fourth of
December, Anno. 1629. their Sentence was put in execution. The Executioners put
strong Cords about the Necks of the Condemned, and tied their Hands behind
their Backs: Ab Angelis Rid on a Horse, with a Letter on his Breast, on which
his Name was written in great Characters; behind him came Jempo and fifteen
others on foot: Franciscus Galves and Fara Mondono were also bound on Horses,
every one followed by a train of Martyrs. Fara Mondono, the Nephew, condemned
to be burnt.
But before Fara Mondono Rid a Crier, or Herald, who when the Drummer left off
beating on the Copper Basin, Read out of an Edict these words: The whole World
might apparently behold and guess, how much the Emperor Conbosama abhorred the
Christian Religion, condemning his own Nephew to be consumed by Fire, because
he had embraced it. Not far from Jedo toward Cami, stood fifteen Stakes, three
of which were somewhat nearer to the City than the other, all surrounded with
great heaps of Wood, about one Fathom and a half from the Posts. The Soldiers,
though they surrounded the place of Execution, to keep off the multitude of
Spectators, which were innumerable, yet could not hinder their sight, the
Stakes being all driven in a plain Field, near which lay a high Mountain, that
swarmed with People: and several of the chief Nobles had built Scaffolds in the
hanging of the Hill, to have the clearer view of the Execution, in this manner
performed: First they made fast seven and forty of them, Fifty Romans burnt
near Jedo.
tying their Hands to the tops of the several Stakes, and their Feet to the
bottom; their Names were Leo Taqueua Gonfiqui, Fanzabusus Quaxia, Chesaiemon,
Simon Jempo, Peter Xixabucus, Johannes Matagaremon, Michael Quizaiemon,
Laurentius Cacuzaiemon, Laurentius Gagiqui, Matthias Juraiemon, Matthias
Quisaiem, Thomas Jofacu, Peter Santarius, Peter Saiemon, Matthias Xigigemon,
Ignatius Chorimon, Simon Muam, Decius Joccuno, Isaacus, Bona Ventura, Quidairi,
Johannes Xinocuro, Hilarious Mongazaiemon, Franciscus Quisaiemon, Saximononia
Jinxiquir, Johannes Chosaiemon, Romanus Goniemon, Emanuel Buyemon, Peter
Quicheiemon, Quisaburus, Peter Choiemon, Andreas Disuque, Raphael Quichaiemon,
Quizequi, Anthony, and thirteen others, whose Names are not expressed in the
forementioned Japan Letter.

Ab Angelis, Galves, and Mondono, saw their Companions burnt first.
Whilst the Fire flamed round about, and the Martyrs made a doleful and terrible
noise, Fara Mondono, Ab Angelis, and Galves sat still on their Horses, to the
end they might first behold the miserable conditions of those that suffered.
And when Fara Mondono was first tied to the Stake, and next Ab Angelis, and at
last Galves, there were some of the former that yet struggled betwixt life and
death.

But Hazart relates farther, That two Noblemen being amongst the other
Spectators, lighted from their Horses, and crowding through the People, Watch,
and Pyles of Wood, one ran to Galves, the other to Ab Angelis, and holding them
about their Necks, suffered themselves to be burnt with them. But of this I
have no great testimony, only the forementioned Japan Letter mentions two
Women, who when they saw the forty seven miserably roasting, they forthwith
went to the Judges, and declared themselves openly to be Christians, whereupon
they were immediately carried to Execution.

Farther Cruelties in Jedo.
But these Cruelties ceased not thus, for Maria Jageia, Mother of Leo Gonfiqui,
who was burnt among the last, had Lodged Ab Angelis in her House: for which
cause she with thirty six more that had entertained Christians, or Let them
Houses, or were their Security for the Rent (amongst which were also Heathen
Japanners) were condemned to the Fire. Unheard Of wickedness committed upon
Children.
Nay, it raged after a most unheard of barbarity against Children; for leading
them with the sound of Instruments to the Place of Execution; they were before
their Parents Eyes either beheaded, or split in the middle, or cut in small
Pieces, and with all other imaginable Tortures put to death.

An Edict against the Romans.
Immediately after it was proclaimed in Jedo, and other adjacent Countries, That
if any one could give information of a Christian, or him that entertained them,
or Let them Houses, should have for a Reward, the Mansion of him that Let it,
besides thirty Pieces of Gold worth fifteen hundred Crowns. Upon this,
Murdering began to spread it self as Wildfire all over Japan.

Are slain at Scondai.
In the City Xenxai, Didacus Cervalio the Jesuit, with sixty Christians, were
discovered in Myne-diggers Apparel, all which were put to death in Scondai, in
the cold Winter Nights, putting them to Freeze up in the Water.

At Omura.
In Omura, Peter Vasques the Dominican, the Franciscan Lodowick Sasandra, and
Sotello, and one Michael Carvalho a Jesuit, were condemned to be Frozen to
death in like manner.

At Arima.
In Arima, Vincentius Caun, a Native of Corea, fell into the hands of the
Persecutors, who broke his Fingers with Iron Pincers, setting him up to the
Throat in cold Water, and at last burnt him.

At Farina.
At Farima the Christians were only banished.

At Fingo.
In Fingo, Michael Maxima was miserably Scourged with Rods, and hoised up to a
high Post, The Strappado.
and so on a sudden let fall to the Ground; that done, cold Water, mixed with
blood, was poured down his Throat, which they made him disgorge by trampling on
his Belly, then laid they him in the heat of the Sun, and at last carried him
to the boiling sulphurous Waters at Singok, and so long washed therein, that
he gave up the Ghost.

At Tiroxima.
In Tiroxima died on Crosses, and by the Sword, Joyama, Sintaro, Xobara,
Schizaimon, and others.

In the Province Figen the greatest Persecutor of the Christians was Nobexima
Cami, who was one of the Spectators at Jedo, when Conbosama burnt fifty
Christians.

Persecution in Nangesaque
In Nangesaque they also sometimes burnt a Portuguese and a Japanner, for
Religion: but the Governor Gonrocou seemed not to delight so much in Murder as
other Commanders, who aimed by their Cruelties to exceed each other; he being
most commonly troubled with a Distemper, that would scarce let him rest either
Night or Day: So that he regarded the Christians but little; being also very
intent in desiring his Nobles to let him resign up his Authority.

Kauwaytsdo is made Governor of Nangesaque.
This at last was granted him, and Kauwaytsdo sent by the Emperor to succeed,
not without great trouble and amazement to the City Nangesaque, and especially
to the Christians; because Kauwaytsdo was a stern and high-spirited Person; and
the rather, because heretofore Nangesaque had always been Governed by ordinary
Merchants, who by the Command of the Emperor had their Residence there, to the
end they might buy all things necessary that the Imperial Court required.
Whereas the Japan Nobles are so exceeding proud and high-minded, that they look
upon all Tradesmen as Dogs; which made every one stand in fear of Kauwaytsdo
the New Governor.

Begins instantly to murder the Christians.
Anno 1626. in June, he came to keep his Court at Nangesaque. The second day
after his arrival, he commanded fifty three Stakes to be drove into the Ground,
and according to the custom, to place Piles of Wood round about them. The next
day after were led thither the Japan Bishop Franciscus Parquero, Balthazar de
Torres, who had lain a whole Year hid in a Cave under the Floor of a House;
Baptista Sola, Overseer of the Jesuits Cloister at Arima; besides five
Japanners, which had lodged the Priests; and as many Portuguese, namely,
Albemen Josse, and his Son of fourteen Years old, Diego de Costa, Johan de
Costa, and Balthazar de Solse, the last two being Pilots. The Portuguese became
Apostates, embracing the Heathen Religion; but the rest remained constant.
After that, five Men and three Women more were burnt, because they had also
entertained the Priests in their Houses: One of the Women saw first her Child
of six years old Beheaded.

Finds out a cunning way to make them apostatize from the Christian Faith.
But Kauwaytsdo found more Work in this his Murder, than he expected; for he
saw, that he must destroy at least a thousand more, before he could root the
Christian Religion out of Nangesaque: Therefore he bethought himself of another
way. Forcing the Christians to declare by Oath what they were worth, and what
Moneys they had out, either in the Hands of Portuguese, Japanners, Chinese, or
their own Servants, whether upon Interest, or otherwise; all which he kept, and
seized upon for his own use. Besides thus depriving them of their Estates, he
threatened them also with intolerable Tortures, and a horrible Death, if they
continued to persist in the Romish Belief: But if they would Apostatize, they
should reap great Benefit: Which indeed those that did, immediately received;
for Kauwaytsdo gave them the Houses and Estates of those that were burnt, and
also forced the Chinese, which come yearly with above sixty Vessels to an
Anchor before Nangesaque, to Lodge in their Houses, for which they should pay
them Ten in the Hundred of whatever Commodities they sold; by which means many
poor People on a sudden raised themselves to considerable Estates. Moreover,
the Portuguese Merchants might neither lodge with the Christians, nor drive any
Trade with them.

Many embrace the Japan Doctrine again.
In October, Kauwaytsdo commanded all those that had Apostatized from
Christianity, to come before him; who being all clothed in rich Habies, made
above fifteen hundred. He speaking to them very courteously, promised to show
them more and greater Favors.

Cruelty used in Mongy.
MEan while the heat of Persecution in several Places increased. A Mile from
Nangesaque stands a Village named Mongy, belonging to Bongemendo Governor of
Arima, where seven Men and five Women were put to death: Being brought before
the Executioners, they were first Stigmatized with hot Irons in the Foreheads,
and immediately after demanded, If they would renounce the Christian Religion?
Which refusing, they were again burnt on both Cheeks: But still remaining
constant, they were stripped of their Apparel, and their Legs and Arms
stretched abroad, with great Scourges so outragiously beaten, that they lay a
considerable time for dead: Then being asked anew, If they would not change
their Opinions; which they denied, with detestations of the Japan Idolatries;
whereupon the Executioners began their Tortures afresh, burning their
Privities, and other tender parts of the Body, with glowing Irons, and cutting
off their Fingers and Toes. It seems a matter worthy no small admiration, that
a Child of six Years old, being amongst these twelve Martyrs, endured all the
forementioned Tortures with inexpressible Courage. Thus punished, they were
cast into Prison. Mean while the number of the discovered Christians amounted
to one and forty, which all patiently endured the forementioned Afflictions;
insomuch that at last the Executioners seemed to be more wearied and tired than
the Sufferers; of which seventeen, having large and heavy Stones tied about
their Middles, were carried a good distance into the Offin, and there thrown
overboard; amongst which number, was a Man and his Wife, and three Children,
the one seventeen, the other thirteen, and the youngest six years old; who
being terrified with such strange Preparations, began to cry when the
Executioners laid hold of him to tie the Stones about his Waste; whereupon they
asking the Parents if they would have the Child to live, and they replying No,
it was drowned with the rest.

Japan Children very hardy, enduring the greatest Tortures.
IT is very common in Japan, to put to death or destroy Children for their
Parents Offenses: Yet the Parents have an unlimited Power over their Children,
of either Life or Death, and it is at their choice to let them live, or cause
them to suffer with them. But there was scarce a Japan Child, that went not
willingly to encounter Death, and endured their Tortures with exceeding Courage.

In the City Usacca two Youths, the one ten, and the other five years old,
voluntarily died with their Father Alexius Morifoibioye; and a Sister, being an
Infant of four days old, was Decollated. On the Island Necaie a whole Noble
Family were all condemned to the Slaughter, amongst which, several Children.

Japanners have little knowledge of the Christian Religion.
These Examples manifest sufficiently, that the Japanners are not only of Noble
Hearts, but constant Resolutions, enduring the greatest Tortures in their
Infancy with inexpressible Valor, for a Religion, the first beginning whereof
they scarce understood: For besides reading the Pater Noster, Ave Maria, and
some Prayers to the Saints, they have little or no knowledge of either the Old
or New Testament: Therefore we may judge the Japan Martyrs to be very Zealous
and Constant.

Far more holy were the Sufferings of these Infants, if they had understood the
Grounds of the Christian Faith, than the Child which Romanus (being tortured in
Antioch by Asclepiades) called from amongst the Multitude of Spectators, Anno
304. The Story in brief this. Asclepiades told the Martyr Romanus, That he
believed in a Christ that was nailed on the damned Cross: Whereupon Romanus
answered, That he was ready to contradict such Blasphemy, did not Christ forbid
him to strew Pearls before Swine. Mean while Asclepiades had a desire to
understand of a Child, Whether the Heathen Gods, begotten and born according to
the course of Nature, famous for their Lusts, Adultery, and other Debaucheries,
were to be worshipped; or whether that Honor belonged to the Savior: To which
end, Asclepiades commanded a Child before him from amongst the Multitude,
asking him his Opinion concerning the Gods; who gave him so excellent an
Answer, by rendering an Account of the whole Christian Faith, that he being
displeased thereat, persecuted him with all imaginable Tortures. After having
most miserably whipped the poor Child, he caused him to be Beheaded before his
Mothers eyes, Unusual death of a Christian Child. Psalm. 116. v. 15.
who sung whilst the Executioner prepared the Ax to perform the cruel Office,
the words of the Psalmist, Precious in the sight of the Lord is the Death of
his Saints.

The Japan Children died with more Holiness under the Hands of their
Executioners, if they had understood Gods Word in the Old and New Testament;
than the Waldensian Youths, of which the Sorbonne Doctors at Paris gave
Information to Lewis the Twelfth, King of France, That they had lately received
no better Instructions concerning Religion, than they had heard from the
Waldensian Youths.

A strange way how the Japanners harden their Children to be constant in the
Christian Belief.
Now the Japanners harden their Children against a cruel Death, not with
instructing them in the Gospel, but by terrifying them with unusual Cruelties,
which Hazart witnesses, relating, That Johannes Catouneme, a Nobleman in the
Kingdom of Deva, had a Son aged seven years, whom he daily instructed to be
constant. I will set down Hazart's own Words concerning it. A little before
Catouneme was taken Prisoner, he said to his Son, If it were so that you saw
the Executioners coming, would you suffer your self to be burnt alive, or deny
your Faith? Whereupon the Child asked, Father, what would you do? To which he
replied, I would suffer my self to be burned: Whereon the Youth again made
answer, So will I too. Then said his Father, Come hither, I am resolved to try
if you will be so constant as you say: Take and hold this Coal in your hand,
till I command you to throw it away. The Child immediately opening his Hand,
the Father laid a glowing Coal in the same: The Youth held it fast, without
showing any concern thereat, notwithstanding his Hand was burnt to the Bone,
yet he threw it not away till his Father gave order. When they asked him, If
the Fire had not hurt him; he made answer, Any one that is ready to burn alive,
as I am, must not make any scruple to hold a burning Coal in their Hand, for so
short a time as I have done. And who can find more of the Aged Japanners,
Ignorance of the Japan-Christians.
in any Observation kept by the Jesuits themselves, that they either said or
did more, whilst they were under the Executioners Hands, than to hold a
Crucifix, and the Picture of the Virgin Mary, repeating the usual Prayer,
Jesus, Maria.

Horrible Tortures with the boiling Waters of Singok.
BUt besides their burning them by degrees, the Japanners used also the Waters
of Singok, that is to say, Hell. These Waters being Sulphurous and hot, flow
from the Foot of an exceeding steep Mountain, with such force and noise, that
it strikes terror and amazement to the Beholder. It rushes forth between the
Rocks, and sends its noysom and choking Vapors up to the Sky.

Hither several of the Christians were brought from Arima, and their naked
Bodies washed over with this boiling Water; and when notwithstanding the
Torture, they refused to deny their own Religion, and embrace the Japan
Idolatry, they were carried bound to the top of the Mountain, and thrown down
from thence into the scalding Stream.

A Priest is a great help o the Japan-Christians in heir Sufferings.
In Nangesaque the Governor Kauwaytsdo, since his return from Jedo, proceeded
unmercifully in his Persecutions, especially against the Priests. Amongst
others that were condemned to the Fire, was also a Japan Priest, Thomas Soyse,
by whom was found a Catalogue of some thousands of Christians, Which lived very
privately about Nangesaque, Ombra, and Arima, who not long after fell into
great Miseries.

Kauwaytsdo himself stood amazed to see so great a number of them, as would
make no end of murdering; and the Multitude which he was to condemn to death,
exceeded his Commission which he had from the Emperor: So that he thought on a
new way,

There were already, according to the Catalogue found by Soyse, a great number
condemned; amongst which were two ancient Persons, which in the time of the
former Emperors had been Governors of Nangesaque, and in great esteem at Court,
for their Quality, Riches, and Nobility. These Kauwaytsdo sent with a Train of
eleven of his nearest Relations, and Brothers-in-law, to the Imperial Court at
Jedo. Cruel Persecution of them.
The remaining Numbers he drove out into the Mountains near Nangesaque, and
placed a Guard round about them, that the Banished might neither come into the
City, Villages, nor any Houses, to beg for Provisions: Neither would he suffer
them to build themselves Huts, nor make any other Shelter, to keep them from
the Heat of the Sun, Rain, or other Weather; so that at last most of them
perished for want.

Their Houses are nailed up.
In Nangesaque their Windows and Doors were nailed up; so that they and their
whole Families were starved to death, if not relieved by their Neighbors; which
though it was straightly forbidden, yet some found ways to give them Sustenance
through private Holes. None may employ them.
None durst employ any Tradesman that was of the Christian Religion; nor carry
any one to Sea, unless he became an Apostate, and believed in the Japan
Doctrine. Many seeing themselves in that necessity, Many Apostatize.
forsook their new-gotten Religion, and embraced the old; as also diverse of
those which were in the Mountains, whose Bodies were miserably swollen by Heat,
Cold, Rain, Wind, Trouble, and Hunger, and continually tormented by the Cries
and Lamentations of their Wives and Children, forsook at last the Doctrine
Preached to them by the Christian Priests; yet some remained constant their
very last.

Forty two Japan Nobles are banished.
Soon after Kauwaytsdo took five Persons of Quality, with their Wives and
Children, who (being strangely preserved, whilst their Lord Fideri the Lawful
Heir of the Japan Crown was burnt, as we have before declared) had embraced the
Catholic Religion; which being known, they were Shipped aboard a Portuguese
Galley that sailed for Macaw, with a Proviso, That they should immediately
depart for Goa. If the Portuguese did not perform that Command, they should
lose both Life and Goods, if ever after they happened to Anchor in any Japan
Harbor. The banished Japanners, with their Wives, Children, and Retinue,
amounted to thirty two; of which in few Weeks none remained but one old Woman.
It is easy to be judged, that they dispatched them by Poison, that so the
Portuguese might rid themselves of such troublesome Companions, and likewise
obtain thanks from the Japan Governors, who were fearful to condemn the
forementioned Persons, either for their high Extract, or their great Relations.

WHilst the Portuguese were thus busied, Kauwaytsdo, according to his Custom,
went to Jedo to the Court; during whose absence, those that were driven into
the Mountain had some liberty, and were permitted privately to come into
Nangesaque, to visit their Friends, and lodge in their Straw Houses. But at the
return of Kauwaytsdo to Nangesaque, the Banished, being three hundred eighty
four that remained constant, were sent to Arima, Horrible Cruelties used
against the Japan-Christians.
where they were most inhumanely used; their Bodies washed with scalding Water,
stigmatized with red hot Irons, beaten with sharp Canes or Reeds, at Noonday
set naked in the Sun, at Night in the Cold, and also in Tubs full of Serpents;
Children destroyed after a horrible manner, before the Parents Eyes: and when
some were almost ready to give up the ghost, by reason of their endless
Tortures, Physicians were provided to revive them again, to the end they might
afresh feel their Cruelties.

These kind of Afflictions some endured thirty, forty, nay sixty days, before
they would Apostatize. Amongst all the rest, five remained still constant,
whose Flesh being putrifi'd and rotten, stunk, though living, like Carrion; and
being thus miserably tired out by their fesh Tortures, they at last fell down
dead under the Executioners Hands.

The Emperor Conbosama dies.
THe forementioned Blood-baths had their beginning in the Emperor Conbosama's
Reign; after whose Decease, Anno 1631. his Son Toxogunsama succeeded, not
without too apparent Testimony of inveterate malice to the Christians; for soon
after he began to Persecute them.

In Nangesaque he placed a new Governor called Onemendonne, whom the Emperor
Conbosama had long used as Judge and Overseer of the Japan Empire, to the end
he might be very vigilant, to see that no Insurrections should happen any
where. Onemendonne, being a stern, fierce, and cruel Man, Onemendonne Governor
of Nangesaque tyrannizes much.
was sent to Govern in Kauwaytsdo's Place, who notwithstanding his inhumane
Cruelties, yet seemed mild, and of too good a Nature, to destroy all the
Christians at once; which he thought to be easier, because Kauwaytsdo delivered
him a Catalogue, in which were written not only their Names, but also their
Dwelling^ places.

The common report was, That Onemondonne came marching on with seven hundred
Japan Soldiers; but it proved to be scarce four hundred, amongst which were
several Noblemen with their Attendants, which at Night lodged without
Nangesaque, and in the Daytime came and attended at Court.

Onemendonne at his coming set up several Posts in the City, piling, Erects
Burning-posts.
according to the Japan manner, great Heaps of Wood about them. None knowing
certainly for whom it was done, some judged it to be for the Governor Moor,
Hieronimus Masleda, and four Portuguese, which a considerable time before had
been Condemned: Others thought, that those Japanners which had entertained any
Priests, should be burnt; for such was their Malice, that not only those that
lodged a Priest under their Roof, keeping them in private, were put to death;
but also the two next Neighbors, notwithstanding they were Heathens, assuredly
known to be so, and perchance ignorant of the Entertainment.

But though Onemendonne drove so many Stakes up and down in the City, yet
nothing else followed, than that the thirty Noblemen, with some Soldiers, made
strict search in all the Streets of Nangesaque for the Roman Priests; Strict
Watch in Nangesaque.
which was the easilier performed, because Nangesaque is divided into eighty
eight Streets, which in the Night are all locked up with Gates. Every Street
having its peculiar Name, has also an Overseer, or Master-warden, under whom
are those whose Business it is to look and watch over five Houses, and in the
Morning to give an Account to the Master of that Ward, what has passed in
those Houses, who afterward returns those Accounts to the Chief Overseer of
the City, who Governs all things, except the Matters which are brought before
him are of such grand Concern, that he dares not take them upon him; then the
Prime Governor decides them. Onemendonne caused strong Watches to be set all
about the City Nangesaque, both by Land and Water; the Gates of the Streets to
be locked up early, and not opened till daylight.

How they searched for the Christians.
After that, the Soldiers ran up and down from Street to Street, breaking into
the Houses wherein the Christians (according to the Catalogue written by
Kauwaytsdo, How treated.
and delivered to Onemendonne) dwelt, asking them, If they had not yet
forsworn: If they said Yes, the Soldiers noted them down; if No, they persuaded
them to Apostatize; which refusing, they were commanded to appear before the
Governor, who without hearing them plead, locked them in a large Storehouse
built of Stone: First the Master of the House was secured, whilst his Wife,
Children, and the rest of the Family were instructed; who when they would not
deviate from the Christian Religion, they were also sent to Prison, an Account
being taken of all their Goods, and their Windows and Doors nailed up, and
sealed.

Inhumane Tortures done with the Water of Singok.
Onemondonne having gotten a considerable number together, sent them to the
boiling Water at Singok. At this place several great Pieces of Timber lie at
the foot of the Rock, reaching over the Water, on which small Huts were built,
the Floors whereof were bored full of holes, and the Roofs covered with Grass,
Turf, and other Materials. In these Hovels he locked them in the Nights: By
each man was placed a Sentinel, whose Business was to take care and see, that
if any by reason of the Sulphurous smell which arose from the under running
Water, should fall into a swoon, or be in danger of suffocation, they should be
taken out of their Houses, the rest remaining still within. In the day time the
Executioners used small Dishes, with which taking up Water out of Singok, they
poured over their naked Bodies, only preserving their Heads, fearing that else
they might die sooner than the Torturers would have them: For the Water, by
reason of its corroding quality, eats through Skin and Flesh, to the Bones.
There are several other boiling Springs and Rivers; but none so venomous as
this at Singok.

The Reasons of the Hot Watters are sought after.
The Learned have spent much Labor and Time to find out the Reasons of these
boiling Springs. Some are of Opinion, That a Fire under Ground heats and causes
the Water to boil, as if a Pot hung over a Flame: But that Opinion is not
grounded on Reason; for it is the nature of Fire, being enclosed in Caves under
Ground, to break forth with great rage, if it has the least vent. Here also it
is to be observed, That the Fire dries up the Water, or the Water extinguishes
the Fire, so soon as the one gets the Mastery of the other: So that without
contradiction, the force of the Fire must either dry up the flowing Waters, and
consume the Earth underneath to Ashes; or else the Water, which has passed
through it so many Ages, must needs have quenched the Fire. For who will
believe that Water and Fire are of one force and power under Ground, and so
agreeable in Nature, that the one should not extinguish the other.

Moreover, where is there any scalding Waters, by burning Sulphurous places?
yet if it be any where it must be there: The Italians reckon little less the
fifty boiling Waters, but not one of them by which any fire has been found.
The Mountains Vesuvius, Aetna, Hecla, and others, which continually belch out
hideous Smokes into the Air, and sometimes horrible Flames, yet produce no
manner of hot moisture.

The best reason of the hotness of the waters.
But the wisest Philosophers judge the occasion of the heat in Sulphurous
Waters, to proceed from the swift motion with which it pours down from steep
descents into the Crevises of the Earth, and so still running forwards, that it
becomes hotter and hotter; for experience learns us, that a quick motion
occasions heat. This reason seems to our stupid judgments to be nearest the
truth, yet we must herein acknowledge a great ignorance, and a Bridle for our
understanding, which seems to be wanting, and stops as amazed at such mysteries.

Who can disclose the reason, why the Fountain near Matilga, a City of the
Garamantes, has from Noon to Midnight Water boiling hot, which from Midnight
to Noon is as cold as Ice? as Augustine, Isidorus, and Pliny witness: why the
Fountain Consecrated to Jupiter Hammon, as Diodorus, Salinus, Amianus,
Lucretius, Plin. lib. Hist. 5. cap. 5. Wonders of waters.
and Pliny, thus relate, changes also hot and cold: of which Ovid says,
Horned Hamon's Water, in the Morning hot,
And at the Evening, boiling like a Pot,
Yet from what reason, to the Learned unknown
Grows Chill, like Snow, and cold as Ice at Noon.


Who will dive with his judgment into the Mysteries which the Territories of
Epirus manifest by a strange Fountain, which not only lights a Torch when held
to it, but also puts out one that is lighted?

What man will find out the reason, that a Lake in a Jewish Plantation (if
Isidorus deserves to be credited) drys up, Sabbatical River.
or rather stands still every Sabbath day? And why the Fountain of the Hill
Anthracius, when it overflows, signifies Plenty, and by its scarcity of Water,
(as is to be seen by Pliny) foretells Famine?

Those that are tortured with Singoks water Apostatize.
BUt to return to those miserable Wretches at Singok, who when they began to
pant for Breath, by reason of their unsufferable Pain, were delivered up to
Surgeons to prolong their Lives, to enable them to more sufferings; for so
soon as they recovered any strength, they were sure again to be brought to
Singok: They spent most part of August in this cruel Persecution, insomuch,
that all those which resolved to be constant, became Apostates, except one
Youth, who scarce had attained the eighteenth year of his age, was the only
person that died under the hands of the merciless Torturers.

Horrible cruelties inflicted on the Japan women.
The Women generally suffered more than the Men, for besides dropping Singoks
Water upon them, they drove the Maids stark naked along the Streets, forcing
them to creep on their Hands and Feet, and causing them to be publicly
ravished: The Widows they stripped of their Clothes, provoking their Sons to
commit Adultery with them; some Women they held fast by their arms and legs
under Stone-Horses; so committing all the outrages of Sodom; they forced the
Children to pour Singoks Water on their Parents, and the Parents on the
Children standing close together betwixt Stakes drove round about them; some of
the Women suffered no less by shame, than other by torture, their Privities
being stuffed full of Flax and Hemp, with which also they tied up the young Men's
Members; and the Daughters were forced to set fire of the heaps of Wood which
were to consume their Fathers.

Several hundreds went in companies, ranging up and down in the Woods, all
Stigmatized on their Foreheads, every one being commanded on pain of death not
to give them any sustenance.

Tortures with water.
In several places near the Seaside, many Enclosures were erected, in which
they locked up whole Families, which at low Water sat dry, but at the time of
Flood, above half way in the Salt Water; these having leave to eat and drink,
Of Children with their Parents.
lived generally twelve or thirteen days: Moreover, the Parents were
hoodwinked, whilst their Children which were miserably tortured night and day,
cried, Fathers and Mothers take pity of us, forsake the Christian Religion, it
is impossible to endure these cruel Torments; which doleful cry took such deep
impression into some of their hearts, that for mere grief they died.

Several had their Nails pared off, Inhumane cruelties.
others had their Arms and Legs boar'd through with Drill-Irons, which
occasioned great pain; also they filled some of their Bellies with Water, which
they poured into them through a Tunnel; then being laid on their backs on the
ground, the Executioners stamped upon them so vehemently, that they made them
disgorge the same through their Mouths, Noses, and Ears.

After these kind of Cruelties, they used another more barbarous, placing the
Martyrs on a Bench, bending their Arms across on their breasts; they made their
bodies fast behind to a Post, and then drove betwixt the Nails of their Hands
and Feet sharp Spikes; which tortures they renewed five, six, or more days
together: Moreover, they placed some Women in a large Coope full of Snakes and
Serpents, which crept into their Privities, eating up their Bowels.

Hanging them up by the legs, an intolerable pain for the Japanners.
But amongst all the tortures, the most cruel was hanging them by their Legs on
a Gallows, with their Heads down in a Well, over which a Gibbet was placed, and
at the end thereof, a Block was made fast, through which a Rope was drawn, and
tied to the Legs of the sufferer, who being thus tied, was let down with his
Head into the Well, so low, that his Feet appeared just on the top thereof; In
the Heads of those that hung, several Wounds were cut cross-wise, to the end,
the blood might by degrees drop out, and not overwhelm their hearts; some lived
five, six, nay more days, before they gave up the Ghost.

Francis Caron relates, That he spoke with those that had hung three days in
that horrible manner, but at last forswore the Roman Religion, not being able
to endure this pain, which exceeded Fire, and all other imaginable cruelties;
their Bowels sinking down into their Throats, seemed to force all their
intrails out of their Mouths, the Blood also dropping out at their Eyes,
Mouths, Noses and Ears.

The first that was killed after this manner.
The first that was thus Martyred, if Hazart deserves to be credited, was a
Japanner, one Nicholas Kean Fucananga, who died in the Well, on the fourth day,
being the last of June, And the next.
Anno 1633. After that, several others were put to death in the same manner; as
Emmanuel Borges, Joseph Reomuy, Ignatius Kindo, Antonius Giannonius, Joannes
Kidera, Joannes Zama, Benedictus Fernandez, Paulus Saito, Joannes de Acosta,
Julianus Nacaura, Antonius de Souza, and Sebastian Viera; of which, some were
Italians, and Portuguese, but most of them Japanners; of whom, some hung three,
others six, seven, nay, nine days before they gave up the Ghost: Nacaura being
carried to the Well, cried aloud, That he had kissed his Holiness (Pope Gregory
the thirteenth) his Feet in Rome, being sent thither by the Kings of Bungo,
Arima, and Omura, Anno 1582.

Most of the Japanners Apostate.
THis Persecution brought those that remained constant to a miserable end, and
the faint-hearted to Apostasy; insomuch, that in sixteen years time, scarce one
was to be found of four hundred thousand.

How they Apostate.
Roger Gusbrechtzoon, an eyewitness, relates, That Anno 1626. there were in
Nangesaque above forty thousand Christians, of which in three years time, not
one was to be seen, for most of them had signed it with their own blood, taken
from their little finger, to show and perform due Worship to their gods, Amida
and Xaca.

The Apostates are in danger of their lives.
Mean while, an account was kept of all Apostates, and those that saved their
lives by betraying of Christians, against which a private plot was laid, to
destroy them all at once, just like the French in the Island of Scicily, who
when the Evening Bell rang for our Savior's Resurrection, Anno 1282. were
Murdered in such a rage, that the Scicilian Women big with Child by Frenchmen,
were all slain.

TOxogunsama having by this time sufficiently extinguished Christianity in
Japan, sent a special Edict against the Portuguese Traders in Macaco, in which
(it being Signed by the Camy's, which as much to say, as Counselors of State,
Cangano, Sanuquino, Voudino, Cambuno, Runo, Bungane, and Teuxumano) Anno 1639.
He forbad strictly, that no Shipping should come from Macaco to Japan, and if
they should offer against his Command to come thither, The Japan Emperor
banishes the Portuguese.
their Ships should be broke up, and the Seamen punished with death, because
that the Portugese sent privately Priests over thither to teach the Catholic
Religion; so making the Subjects to rise up against the Emperor, as two years
before, seventy thousand Christians were in Arms near Arima, between the Hills,
and in a well fortified Valley; but being so rudely entertained, most of them
died by the Sword.

Macaco sends an Embassy to the Japan Emperor.
IN the interim, the Inhabitants of Macaco were much concerned, seeing that
profitable Trade of Japan was forbidden them; and therefore they thought it
convenient, to send an Embassy thither, to inform the Emperor, that the
Portuguese never sent any Priests thither, nor that they had the least
knowledge of the Insurrection at Arima. The Ambassadors, Lovis Paez Pacheco,
Roderigo Sanches de Paredes, Simon Vaz de Paiva, and Gonsaho Monteiro de
Carvalho, spent a whole years time in their Preparation. In the middle of
Summer, Anno 1640. they set Sail with sixty nine Officers, coming in the Haven
they were fetched in by the Governor Babasuro Zayemon, their Guns immediately
taken out of the Ships, and a Guard set to look after their Seamen.

The Emperor condemns the Ambassadors and their retinue to be beheaded.
Immediately, Zayemon sent word thereof to the Emperor, who sent two Persons of
great Quality, accompanied with as many Executioners, as there were Portuguese
come from Macaco to Nangesaque. The Princes, Canga Chuminimbu and Novaga
Manximbioye sent for the Portugal Ambassadors, asking them, Who made them so
bold to Land in Japan, contrary to the Emperors Commands? Whereunto they
answered, That the Emperors Edict only forbade the Trade; their Ship brought
no Merchandise thither, but were only come on an Embassy, to Treat with the
Emperor concerning his Prohibiting of their Trade. The two Japan Princes gave
no reply to their answer, but read the Sentence which Toxogunsama had
pronounced against the Portuguese.

Contents of the Proclamation.
The Contents were, That since the spreading of the Christian Religion in Japan,
(apparently contrary to the Emperors Edicts,) Wickedness, and Debauchery was
grown to a great height in that Empire, therefore necessity forced them to
execute great Punishments upon them, and at last to give a stop to all private
Dealings with the Portuguese, on Forfeiture of his Majesty's high Displeasure;
Those, that notwithstanding his Commands, ventured to come to Japan, where to
this day, many Priests were privately kept, whose design was nothing else, but
to stir up the People against their Just and Lawful Governors, to turn the
Empire into a Blood-Bath, and bring it under the Subjection of a Foreign
Tyrant: And though the Portugal Ambassdors informed them in Person, that they
neither sent, or kept any Priests in Japan, yet the Macaco Letters make no
mention thereof, therefore what was said, they dis-own'd, and suspected them
not without great reasons; and for that cause, the Emperor Prosecutes such
Malefactors that offend his Authority, Condemning them all to the Sword, except
some of the meanest Seamen which were spared alive, to the end, they might give
an account of this Adventure to the Portuguese in Macaco; and also that those
should expect the same that durst hereafter adventure to Anchor in any Japan
Haven.

The Edict being read, and Translated out of the Japan Tongue into Portuguese,
the Condemned were carried on a Hill near Nangesaque, being in all sixty one
Persons, Sixty one beheaded at once.
some Portuguese, Castilians, Chinese, Bengaloisians, Cafrians, Malians,
extracted from the Islands Solor and Simor, Malabaer, Achenen, Lanannen, and
Macassacren, which were Beheaded by sixty one Executioners: Their Bodies were
buried betwixt four Walls; the Crime for which they died, was Engraven on the
Wall; twelve were saved alive, which Sailed to Macaco, being commanded to carry
the news thither, that if the Spanish King Philip, nay, the Christian God
himself should Land in Japan, they should bow their Necks under an Executioners
Sword.

Their tormenting with Ropes, after what manner.
BUt besides the forementioned inhumane Cruelties, every Persecutor invented
still newer and newer ways of tortures; sometimes making fast four Ropes near
the four corners of the Fire, tying the Christians in the middle, so hoisting
and retching their Bodies with the Ropes, pulling them up a great height, then
on a sudden let the Cords go at once, that the Tortured fell with great force
to the ground, which in a manner bereaved them of Life; whereupon, the
Executioners ran to them with all speed, pouring Cordial Liquors into their
Throats, by which means they revived again; but no sooner did these miserable
Wretches breath, but they were afresh afflicted.

With Canes filled with sulphur.
At other times they filled hollow Canes with Sulphur, and other strong burning
Ingredients, shutting their Mouths close together, and putting one end of the
Reed or Cane into their Nostril, and set the other a fire, which made not only
the skin come off from their Faces, but scorched their Heads inwardly: With
sharp Reeds, lighted Torches, and Scourges.
They also cut their flesh with sharp Reeds or Flags, tearing the Wound open to
the Bone; then burning the body with lighted Torches, insomuch, that the Skin
shriveling together, hung like Lappets: Others were stripped stark Naked, and
tied by their Arms and Legs, cruelly beaten with Japan Canes.

Cruelties against the Mothers.
Mothers of young Children suffered above all others, for the Executioners with
great violence struck their Childrens Faces against theirs; and the more the
Children cried, the more the Mothers were tortured: To others they applied
green Flags, which making very hot, they laid them on their naked Bodies, till
all their Skin from Head to Foot was burned black; they also put glowing Coals
into their Hands, which if they threw away, should be a sign of their denying
the Christian Religion, according to the Verdict given by the Japan Judges. And
Children.
The Children had their Flesh torn from their Bones with hot Pincers, and their
Ears and Noses cut off.

In Ximabara, Bungodono kept fifty Christians Prisoners, which in a disgraceful
manner, were led through the Streets of the City to a Plain near the Seaside;
against seven of them he was very severe, namely, Thomas Chibioius, Paul
Nagata, Leonardus Sacuzaiemon, Joannes Gonzaiemon, Jenixus Dines, Maria, and
Clara, Nagata's Wife, because they had been instruments to the spreading of
Christianity; therefore, in the forementioned Field were dug seven Pits,
three Fathom deep and six wide, at an equal distance one from the other, in
each of them stood a thick Post, with a piece of Timber nailed on the top
thereof, like a Cross: the Condemned sat down whilst their Arms being
stretched out, A cursed way of Execution.
were made fast to the cross piece, their Necks were locked betwixt two thick
Planks made hollow in the middle, so that their Heads appeared immovable above
them: Bungodono was one of those that performed this Office; first
Sacuzaiemon's right Arm was leisurely Sawed off; then they began to file the
Necks of those that were made fast with sharp tooth Canes, strowing Salt into
the Wounds; five days they continued their filing, without unbinding them, or
letting them have the least rest. The Executioners releasing one another, the
Physicians were also ready, which through small Tunnels poured Cordial Liquors
down their Throats, to the end they might be the longer dying.

The remaining three and forty, stood the first and second day as Spectators,
but on the third and fourth, they were tied Hand and Feet, and placed on a
sharp piece of Wood, with a great Stone in their Laps, close by the Martyrs.
Against the Evening, they were carried through the City to their Prison, the
Japanners shouting and hallowing at them, when any chanced to fall from their
sharp piece of Wood. In the Jayl, their Tortures began with lighted Torches,
pieces of sharp Canes drove betwixt their Nails, Pails full of Water poured
through Tunnels into their Bellies, and trampling On their Bellies to make them
disgorge it; but in a short time, all the forty three became Apostates, The
tortured Apostatize.
except Michael Xozaburo, a Youth of Conga. The seven also which were near
Ximabara remained not constant, for on the first day, five forsook their
Baptism, and on the last night Nagata also denied the same; only Thomas
Chibioius endured all their Tortures full seven days; when on the last of May,
Anno 1630. the Executioners being tired with their bloody work, Sawed off his
Head. The others were let loose out of the Pits, but Nagata, Sacuzaiemon and
Gonzaiemon, though they had renounced, yet by order of Bungodono were slain.
Clara died soon after those Tortures which she had endured, by the excessive
pain, being so bereaved of sense, she never came to her self again; and
Gonzaiemon repenting of his Apostasy, had his Head cut off by a Wooden Saw,
Some recall the renouncing of their Religion.
and cut through in the middle with a Scymiter.

Horrid Prison in Japan.
NOt far from the City Tomioca, in the Island Xiquo, the Governor Tobioio had
erected in a Field a large Prison, with several Apartments for Men, Women, and
Children; but so little, that every Prisoner was forced to sit on his Knees,
not being able to rise up, nor stir himself the one way nor the other; the
Walls and Roof being stuck full of sharp Canes and Spikes, so that many for
want of sleep and continual pain, gave up the Ghost in the Prison. In Amacusa
they nailed up their houses, so starving them to death.

Emperor Toxogunsama dies.
ANno 1653. The Emperor Toxogunsama died without Issue, so that Daifusama his
Family ended all in the second Generation. The next to the Crown was Prince
Quane, who was immediately after Toxogunsama's death set on the Throne, under
the tuition of five Overseers, Congono, Bongono, Inhano, Oyemo, and Sannikino.
The Christian Religion was now fully rooted up, wherefore those strict Edicts
heretofore Issued out against them, began to be forgotten; it seemed as if the
Emperors Overseers had a greater mind to a foreign Trade, The Peers govern more
mildly.
and therefore Governed a quite contrary way to that of the Emperors. They
first winked at those Sanguinary Laws, so letting them decay by degrees, by
which means many Traders suddenly came ashore.

The Spaniards also had no small hopes to regain their former Trade, and the
Japanners themselves had leave to Trade in other foreign Countries, which
liberty they had been debarred of a long time.

Jesuits intend to return to Japan. Haz. Church Hist. fol. 182.
But chiefly the Jesuits took fresh courage, who immediately spread themselves
over the neighboring Provinces of Japan, as Tunquin, Councina, and other
places, to the end, they might be near at hand, that as soon as any fit
opportunity presented, they might Land on Japan, and go on afresh with their
former design; but it has to this day had no success, for the Overseers of the
Emperor Quane kept strict Watch against their incroachings, though they seemed
not so eager in erecting the forementioned Blood-baths, according to those
strict Edicts published by Toxogunsama.

Toxogunsama a great Sodomite.
IT deserves farther our Observation, how Quane obtained the Japan Crown;
Toxogunsama having no Issue, he being exceedingly inclined to the Sin of Sodom,
when he had attained to some years, acknowledged no Successor that was sprung
from his Seed; for which cause, not without great reasons, Civil Wars were to
be feared, if the Emperor should die without Issue. The Dairo himself seemed to
be concerned about this business, wherefore he chooses two beautiful Maids
nearly Allied to him, which he sent to Toxogunsama, to the end, he might choose
one out of the two, to honor and make her a Miday, which is as much to say,
Marries.
as an Empress. The Emperor chose her which he judged for the most beautiful,
yet he went on in his old way of Sodomy, which the Empress took privately to
heart, yet bridled her self with patience, that she might not incur the
Emperors displeasure; when her dislike of his actions should be known to him.
Mean while, the Empresses Guardian, or Foster-Mother came to hear of it, who
being held in great Respect for her Age, faithful Services, and Noble Extract,
found her self necessitated to watch for a good convenience, and to stir up the
Emperor to love his Consort; It happened, that on a time she found Toxogunsama
in a fit Humor, in which she thought the time was come wherein she might effect
her Design, The Empress Guardians discourse to the Emperor.
saying, How can your Imperial Majesty take such a contrary course of Love?
What benefit will such shameful Conversation with Men bring you in the end?
Leave that wicked course, and seek to get a Successor, that may be sole
Governor over Japan, keep the Empire in Peace, against all Civil Wars; it being
the occasion of great Bloodshed, when every one may according to his Ambition
aim to be Chief? Has Nature also ever brought a more Beautiful Creature into
the World, than your Empress? Would not the World rejoice with Toxogunsama, if
Toxogunsama's Stock did not die; but that the Japan Government might remain
amongst his Issue many Ages.

The Emperor being incensed with anger against her presumption, was silent, but
sent for his chief Builders, and commanded a Palace to be erected like a
Castle, with strong Walls, deep Moats, great Gates, and many stately Rooms.

He locks up the Empress.
Not long after, this Edifice being finished, he sent the Empress thither, with
her Sister, Mother, and Retinue, there to keep her from the sight of all Men.

And though it looked so ill to the Empresses Fostress, yet it concerned the
Emperor's Guardian to unite him in Marriage: To which end she sent into all
Parts of Japan for the most beautifullest Women, which she cunningly at several
times brought before Toxogunsama. Matries an ordinary Man's Daughter.
Amongst many others he fixed his Eye on an Armorer's Daughter, which soon
after was with Child by him. Her mean Extract occasioned great murmuring and
dislike amongst the Peers of the Empire, Courtiers and Ladies of Honor;
therefore they privately conspired to murder the Child in its Birth, that there
might not one of so mean a Mother ever come to Reign over Japan. The Emperors
Child is Murdered.
This their resolution was at last effected, but kept from the knowledge of the
Emperor, who else would have punished such a Crime with the greatest severity.

By this Accident Quano succeeded, he being the nearest in Blood to Toxogunsama.

Thus far we have spoken of the Persecutions of the Japan Emperors, and their
Transactions till Quano's Reign.

Frisius and Brookhurst travel for Nangesaque.
THe Netherland Ambassadors, Frisius and Brookhurst, Anno 1650. took their
leave, and traveled for Nangesaque. They came on the twenty seventh of April to
Meaco, where they stayed three days and a half; Come to Meaco.
which they spent, upon their Hosts Invitations, in viewing the greatest and
most eminent Houses in the City, which are already described in their Journey
to the Court: they were carried in Sedans amongst great throngs of Men, Women,
and Children, who out of curiosity flocked together to see them.

Apparel of the Japan Women.
THe Women, both Married and Unmarry'd, go very neatly dressed in their Hair,
Combing it daily, and smoothing it with Whites of Eggs, insomuch that it shines
like Glass, and is black as Jet; behind hangs a Braid, or Tuft thereof, over
their Shoulders, and one Lock on their Forehead: by the bigness of their Heads
they are known from all other People: Both Men and Women wear long Semarrs,
which reach down somewhat below their Knees, and are made with wide Sleeves,
turned up very broad, faced with Silk or other Stuffs: about their Middle they
tie a broad Girdle, curiously embroidered. There is scarce any Woman that has
not a Fan with a long Handle when she comes abroad.

Description of the Temple of Daiboth.
AMongst other stately Temples which the Ambassadors Frisius and Brookhurst
viewed in their Journey, was the Temple dedicated to Daiboth, being no less
costly than large and artificial: on each side of the Gate stood two great
Images, representing two horrible Fiends, with Stilletto's in their Hands, and
Hangers by their Sides, the one looking fiercely upon the other, seeming just
ready for an Encounter. Through this Passage they entered into a square Court,
with a Gallery round it, supported with Stone Columns; on the top of each
Pillar hang curious Cabinets like Lanterns; before the second Gate are two
exceeding great Lions hewn out of Stone, between which the Passage leads into
the Church; wherein there appears a terrible Image, sitting like a Tailor with
his Legs across under him, yet is of that height, that it reaches the Vaulted
Roof of the Church: it is made, according to the relation of the Japanners, of
Wood, and Plastered over with Mortar, and that covered with Copper, double
Gilt; the Hair upon the Head shows black and curled like a Negro's. The bigness
of this Idol may be judged by his Hands, which far exceed those of an ordinary
Man, yet are but small in proportion to the other parts of his Body: the whole
Statue represents a Woman sitting in a Ring of darting Beams richly Gilded:
within the Beams of this Circle are many smaller Images of several shapes and
fashions, and on both sides several other hewn to the Life, with shining Radii
about their Heads, just as the Saints are drawn in Print, all richly Gilt.

The Ambassadors Frisius and Brookhurst were each of them carried in a Sedan by
Japanners into the Temple, before, behind, and on both sides, went a great
Train, consisting in Servants that belonged to the East India Company, and all
degrees of Japan Men and Women, which altogether pressed into see them; two
Trumpetters stayed at the Entry, where they sounded all the time of their
tarrying there. This noise brought a great number of People together, whilst
Frisius and Brookhurst viewed with admiration the wonderful great Image. The
Altar on which it sits is raised a little from the Ground; over which hang
several burning Lamps.

Hither the Japanners come daily to their Devotion, some laying themselves flat
on the Ground, others bowing their Heads down to the Earth.

Description of the Ox-Temple.
BUt besides Daiboths Temple, there is also to be admired the Ox-Temple: which
Beast is made of Massy Gold, with a great Knob on his Back, and a Golden Collar
about his Neck imboss'd with Precious Stones, butting his Horns against an Egg,
whereon he stands with his Fore-feet, his hindmost resting on Stone and Earth
mixed together; under which and the Egg appears much Water, kept in a hollow
Stone, which has for its Basis a square Altar; whose Foot is Engraven with
many Japan Characters.

The Bouzies false Relations concerning the Ox.
Strange Stories and Fables do the Bonzies relate to the Japanners concerning
this Ox, namely, That the World before the Creation was enclosed in a great
Egg, the Shell of which consisted of Brass: With this Egg the World drove on
the Water, till at last the Moon by her piercing light drew up some of the
bottom thereof, which afterward growing together became Earth and Stone; on
which the Egg lay fast, and the Ox finding it, butted so vehemently against the
Brass Shell, that breaking it, the World came forth: But the Ox blowing very
much, being heated with such hard Labor, his Breath entered into a Calabash,
which grew to be a Man. The Calabash the Bonzies call Pou, and the first: Man
Pourang, because he owes his original to a Calabash.

The Devil King of the Oxen.
Gasper Villela relates, that the Devil in his time possessed the Japanners,
that he was the King of Oxen, and that he would not leave off punishing them
till they had built him a Temple, and worshipped him in the shape of an Ox; for
which reason in some of the Japan Kingdoms it is present Death to kill an Ox.

It deserves no small admiration, Romans 1.23.
that the Heathens which changed the splendour of a never-dying God into the
likeness of mortal Man, Birds, four-footed Beasts, and creeping Animals, but
chiefly, and most of all chose the shape of an Ox; which made the Indians flock
by thousands to the mountainous Province of Nakarecit, belonging to the great
Magor, to offer to the Cow Matta, standing in a costly Temple, on a far more
rich and costly Altar. The Floor and Cieling of the Temple consisted of Golden
Plates fastened together, the Altar Inlay'd with Pearls and Diamonds: But the
Sacrifices themselves above all are to be admired at; for the Indians cut off
their Tongues, burning it before Matta.

The Romans and Greeks were much concerned in the use of an Ox.

On the Hill Aventinus in Rome, the Temple dedicated to Diana was hung full of
Ox-Horns.

Those that were banished from Athens to Argiva, were said to keep the Ox,
because a great Copper Ox was erected there, and worshipped.

The Thracians and Egyptians offered Wine out of Ox-Horns when they promised
Marriage, or made other Obligations to one another.

The ancient Romans had a long time no Coined Silver nor Gold; but made Money
of Ox-Hides. They also made a Law, That no Judge should lay a greater Fine on
any Criminal than thirty Oxen, every Ox being reckoned at four Shillings.

Julius Obsequen. de Prodig.
And how common is it amongst the Latin Writers, to ascribe the Language of a
Man to an Ox; for an Ox spoke in Sicily when the Roman General Marcellus broke
up the Siege before Nola, and routed Hannibal in the height of his Victories.

Another Ox made a noise in Privernum, when Hannibal fled from Marcellus.

The same is ascribed to this Beast among the Romans, when Scipio subdued the
resisting Spaniards.

At Formii an Ox cried out, O Romans, look to your selves, when Antiochus came
down with a mighty Army.

In Campania another Ox spoke whilst the Romans made themselves Masters of
Sardinia.

At other times the distinct Language of an Ox was a bad Omen: Volater. l. 25.
for in Frusimo an Ox was heard to speak when the Roman General Cneius Octavius
was slain by the Guardian of the young King Antiochus: and also another when
the Romans received a great Overthrow near Numantia: and another when the
Cimbrians marched with Victorious Arms to Italy; about which Speech a Council
was called, that sat under the azure Canopy of Heaven.

In Sinuessa Cows brought forth Horses, which signified the destruction of
Posthumous in France.

In Rome an Ox ran up Stairs, and leaped down from the highest Story, letting
them know by that, that the Romans should be miserably beaten by Hannibal near
the Lake Thrasimenes.

An Ox also in Essium breathed Fire.

Moreover, the Roman Priests offered a white Ox of five years old, fetched from
the Menanian or Felician Fields, to Jupiter, in the middle of every Month; but
the Egyptians a red Ox to Typhon: and Pythagoras, who else forbad the killing
of Beasts, because humane Souls transmigrated into their Bodies, a gray Ox to
the nine Muses.

Where Oxen may not be killed on pain of Death.
The Greek Lawgiver Solon forbad very strictly the killing of an Ox, either for
Sacrifice or otherwise, according to the opinion of the ancient Greeks, who
accounted the killing of a Man to be a less sin than killing of an Ox:
wherefore Prometheus underwent great reproach, because he was the first that
cut an Oxes Throat: and Homer the Greek Poet says, That the Sun was exceedingly
enraged against the Mariners of Ulysses, that did not scruple to eat Ox-Flesh.

At Chusa, an Egyptian City, Venus was formerly worshipped with Ox-Horns on her
Head.

Columella relates, That the ancient Latins condemned him to die that had
killed an Ox.

Oxen highly esteemed by the Indians.
And what the Opinion is of the Oxen on the Coasts of Cormandel, Malabare,
Calicut, Gusaratte, and in other Indian Territories, Abraham Rogerius relates
from the Mouth of the Brachman Padmanaba; these are his words: That as amongst
all Beasts, the Cows; amongst all Fowls, the Bird Garronda (which is a red
Sparrow with a white Ring about the Neck;) amongst all Trees, the Ranasettou;
so amongst all Men the Generation of Brachmans was most acceptable to God.

Moreover, Padmanaba relates, That the Inhabitants of Cormandel are divided
into four Tribes, or Families, namely the Brachmans, Settrea's, out of which
the Kings are chosen, Weinsja's, divided in Comytis and Sitti-weapari, and
lastly the Soudra's. The Settrea's and Soudra's eat Fish and Flesh, that of
Oxen only excepted; but the Brachmans and Weinsja's eat no Food that ever had
lived, according to the Commandment in their Vedam, for so those Heathens call
their Law-Book.

Why those Souls are the happiest that assume the Bodies of Oxen.
These four Tribes hold the Pythagorean Transmigration, making the Soul wander
into other Bodies, and esteem that Soul the most happy that enters into a Cow;
for which they give this Reason: Eswara, who next to Wistnow is their prime and
chief Deity, has a Consort called Parvatia, by which he begat five Sons, viz.
Viegneswara, Vierrepadra, Beirewa, chief Judge over Men, who after Death
changes the Wicked into evil Serpents, Comara Swami, and Nandi, which are also
called Baswa and Basanna. Handi is an Ox, and Wahanan, that is, A Bearer,
whereon Eswara is carried.

The interring of Oxen very sumptuously performed.
Rogerus witnesses, that he has seen a dead Ox to have had a more statelier
Funeral than a Person of Quality; sounding of Trumpets is usual where any one
dies, covering the Ox, and offering Frankincense before him.

In like manner the ancient Egyptians made great Sorrow when one of these
Creatures died.

In the time of King Ptolomy the Wise, an Egyptian bestowed all his ready Money
on the Funeral of a dead Ox, and borrowed forty thousand Ducats of the King to
make the Funeral the more stately.

The Learned Julius Scaliger is of opinion, Scal. Exer. 258. l. 1.
that the Eastern People have learned the worshipping of Oxen from the
Egyptians; As formerly, says he, the Ox Isis was by the Egyptians held for a
god, so at this time the Ox called Tambaran amongst the Indians.

Julius Maternus, who lived in the time of the Emperor Constantine the Great,
affirms, That the Egyptian Apis being a black Ox, with a white Head and shag
Hair, represented the Patriarch Joseph.

And Ruffinus in his Church History says thus: Some say, Ruff. l. 2. Hist.
Eccl.
that the Image of Apis is erected to the honor of Joseph, for his distributing
the Corn, by which he assisted the Egyptians in the time of Famine.

It seems that the Name Joseph is changed to Apis, because the People should
serve a more supreme Deity, and not worship a Man.

Augustine, or the Writer of the Wonders of Scripture, relates, That the
Egyptians placed an Ox by Joseph's Burying-place, because it is the usefullest
Creature in Tilling. and Joseph's explaining Pharaoh's Dream, in which he saw
seven fat Oxen climbing out of Nylus, and after that seven lean ones: There is
a great Mystery in it, that the Oxen should just come out of the Nyle; for
Egypts scarcity and plenty depends on the same, according as the River flows
more or less over the Country.

Pliny says, Plin. l. 5. c. 9.
That Egypt suffers Famine when the Nyle is eighteen Foot above the Ground;
nay, that they want still, though it be nineteen and a half; but one and twenty
brings them plenty, and four and twenty abundance.

Moreover, Joseph explained not only the King's Dream, but gave him exceeding
good Counsel, That the fifth part of the Growth the Subjects should give to the
King; and Storehouses were built for the reception thereof.

Furthermore, to represent the plenty and scarcity of Egypt, nothing was more
convenient than fat and lean Oxen: Therefore the Romans, in honor to the
Overseer of their Provisions, Lucius Minutius, erected a Gilded Ox without the
Portcullis'd Gate, because he brought down the Price of the Corn, and sold it
to the People, as Livius relates it. Livius lib. 4.


According to the fruitfulness of the Year, Bread is either cheap or dear. But,
as the Greek Historiographer Diodorus relates, Diod. lib. 1.
the Oxen have brought the most Profit to the Sowers of Corn, by helping them
to till the Land, and do all other necessary business belonging to Husbandry:
Varr. l. 2. E. H. c. 5.
therefore the Learned of the Romans, Terentius Varro, calls an Ox a
Companion for Men in Husbandry, and a Servant useful to advantage the Growth of
Corn.

The Ancients did so much esteem an Ox, that they condemned those to death that
killed one.

Ealianus adds hereunto, Aelian. l. 5. c. 14.
That there was amongst the Athenians this Law established, An Ox which draws
either Plough or Wagon you shall not kill, because he is a Laborer and
Companion in humane Society.

But Pharaoh, being amazed at Joseph's wisdom and understanding, showed him
exceeding great honor, insomuch that he made him Viceroy over all Egypt. He
also gave him a Ring, which he put on his Finger, not only for a testimony of
his honor, but also to Seal his Letters Patents; and changed his Name Joseph
into Saphenath Paneah, which Onkelus says, signifies A Man to whom Secrets are
disclosed; Hieron Quaest. Hebraic.
but Hieronimus says, in the Egyptian Tongue it is Preserver of the World,
because he delivered it from the threatening Famine. The King also gave him
Asnah to Wife, she being the Daughter of Cohen, Governor in On; so that Joseph
received all imaginable honor in his Lifetime.

It was then customary amongst the Egyptians, to preserve the Memory of those
Princes which had done Service for the Public, and to Posterity, by erecting
their Images: But they thought there could be no better Representation to
express Joseph's noble and beneficial Deeds than an Ox. And without doubt this
honor in the beginning was not common, for otherwise Joseph would not have
permitted them to make an Idol of him, or suffered himself to be worshipped;
which the Priests performed by keeping an Ox, which was shown to the People to
put them in mind of Joseph's goodness in the time of the seven years Faminc.

Joseph worshipped in the shape of an Ox.
After the expiration of of some years this private Honor became a public
Religion, for valiant Men that had performed noble Exploits and Achievements
in their lives, were by the Greeks interred in stately Tombs, with their Images
and Characters Engraven and set on them, and a peculiar Worship appointed them.
What wonder is it then if the Egyptians, who were wont to acknowledge their
deceased Princes as gods, which in their Lives had Governed their Subjects with
wisdom and prudence, invented a method for worshipping of Joseph, who when he
lived was called Saphena Paneah, that is, Preserver of the World: And so great
was the impression his goodness left upon that People, that after-Generations
without contradiction believed, and have shown more honor and reverence to
Joseph than to any other.

Quintus Curtius relates concerning the same, Curt. lib. 4.
of Calisthenes contradicting the Sicilian Standard Bearer Cleo, who would have
Alexander the Great whilst alive, to be worshipped as a Deity; says he, For to
be taken for a god is very requiste: for always their Successors requite noble
Hero's with such thanks: divine honor oftentimes follows a Man, but never
accompanies him: The humane frailty of Hercules and Bacchus was hid from mortal
Eyes, when Fame once carried them to Heaven.

Hereto is added, That Joseph enriched many of the chief Egyptian Princes; and
without doubt raised his Relations to the highest Dignities, and therefore was
in great esteem and favor and by that means the easier, according to the Japan
manner, worshipped under the form of the Ox Apis, in the chief City Memphis,
which would not be inferior to Heliopolis; wherein, according to Plutarch, the
black Ox Mnavis was religiously adored.

The original of the word Apis.
But the original of the Name Apis the Learned Gerard Vossius looks for in the
Egyptian word Ap, which is to say, Father, for so Joseph was called: nay,
Pharaoh caused to be proclaimed before him the Name Abrech, which Rabbi Solomon
Jarchi says is Father King; though Hieronimus embraces that Opinion of Rabbi
Judah and Jonathan, which explain Abrech to signify a A Tender Father; Tender
because of Joseph's Youth, and Father because of his Wisdom, Prudence, and
Fatherly Care he had for Egypt in the time of Famine.

Lastly, Jun. in Deuteronomy. 33.17.
it is worthy our observation, that Moses when he blessed the twelve Tribes of
Israel, the Progeny of the House of Joseph, he divided to Ephraim and Manasseh,
whom he likens to a firstborn Ox, according as Franciscus Junius says, Joseph
is represented in Egypt.

The Japanners Ox-Religion from whom.
By all this it appears plainly, that this kind of worshipping of Oxen had its
first original in Egypt, and so by degrees spread it self amongst other
Heathens, and at last reached the far distant Japanners; not unlike an
infectious Disease, that runs from City to City, and from Country to Country,
till at last the Contagion becomes Epidemical.

The Japanners Opinion concerning the Egg in which the World lay is very
ancient.
BUT concerning the Egg, in which, according to the Bonzies, the World was
enclosed, before the Ox broke the brazen Shell, the Eastern People have had
many strange Opinions before the Birth of our Savior, so that the Japanners
conceit thereof is very ancient: for the famous Sorcerer Zoroaster, a Scholar
to Azonaces, taught amongst the Persians and Medes above two thousand years
past, That all things had two beginnings: the good acknowledged Oromasdes,
extracted from the purer Light, for an increase of the World; all bad things
proceeded from Arimanius, and himself came from Darkness; That Oromasdes made
the Stars and good gods, and laid them together in an Egg; but Arimanius
created the Devil, and broke the Egg; from whence arose not only envy between
Arimanius and Oromasdes, but also a mixture of the good with the bad.

The most ancient Heathens, as appears by the Phoenician Writer Sanchuniathon,
represented the World by an Egg.

The Inhabitants of Thebes in Egypt worshipped the Creator of all things, in
the shape of a Man spitting forth an Egg out of his Mouth.

A strange Representation of the Creator of the World in the Temple at Meaco.
MOreover, besides the Ox-Temple in Meaco, there is also to be seen the stately
Chapel dedicated to the Creator of all things; who is represented in a very
strange manner. In the middle of the Temple is a great Pot full of Water,
surrounded with a Wall, seven Foot high from the Ground; in the middle of which
appears an exceeding great Tortoise, whose Shell, Feet, and Head, stands in the
Water; out of its Back rises the Body of a great Tree, on the top of which sits
a strange and horrrible Image, under whom are laid twelve Cushions, reaching a
good way over the Tree. The Statue placed after the Japan manner, with the Legs
under the Body, has a Golden Crown on its Head, which together with the Breast
is as black as Jet, the Hair like that of a Negro, but the Crown runs up
taporing, and ends with a sharp Point turned, and beset with Pearls, the
whiteness of the Eyes shines exceedingly above the blackness of the Body, about
his Neck is a double String of Pearls, and a rich and costly Diamond tied to
the same; the Coat that covers the Body is open before, insomuch that the
Breast appears naked down to the Belly, which is covered with a Cloth tied
close with a Girdle; on its Breast hangs a String of Oriental Pearl, and under
the left Arm a Scarf of Gold pleited; somewhat lower hangs another on the right
Side; the Edge of the Coat is also beset with Precious Stones, and hangs in a
Bag over the Belly, betwixt the Knees: the Image has four Arms; one of the
left Arms he holds upright, and about its foremost Finger a great Golden Hoop;
from the Elbow of this Arm appears a second, of which the Hand is clenched
together holding a Lilly; somewhat below the right Shoulder is another Arm, the
Hand of which grasps a Cruise, from whence Water issues continually; the other
right Hand holds a Scepter. The Idol is all over black, which Color among the
Japanners signifies Joy. Brazen Tree whereon the Creator sits.
The Tree whereon he sits, is of Brass; in which were enclosed all the
Materials of which (according to the Bonzies relation) this Idol was made;
about the middle of this Tree an exceeding great Serpent has wreathed it self
twice, whose Head and Body is on the right Side held fast by two horrible
Shapes, the remaining part thereof to the Tail, two Kings, and one of the Japan
Sages stretch forth.

Why the Japanners worship Snakes.
Without doubt the Japanners have left some Place for the worshipping of Snakes
in their Religion, as also for evil Spirits, because they should not prejudice
them; so that both of them are feared, because they are hurtful. And indeed
India breeds Serpents whose Stings, Hist. Indic. l. 2.
as Johannes Petrus Maffeus affirms, are mortal.

Serpent Porphirus what kind.
The Serpent Porphirus has a white Head, and Purple-colour'd Body, but no
Teeth, his Breath exceeding poisonous. Those that catch him hang him up by the
Tail, putting two Kettles under his Head; in the one they catch the Droppings
that come from his Mouth, in the other the putrefying Matter that comes from
the decaying Body: The first Poison in a moment bereaves Men of their Lives in
a most terrible manner; for all the Limbs of the Body are miserably tortured,
the Eyes turn in the Head, and the Brains drop out of the Nostrils; the second
operates two years after it is taken.

Moreover, some Serpents are so exceeding poisonous, that those that tread on
the Ground, on which in few hours before these venomous Creatures have crept,
will immediately fall down dead.

Serpent Polpoch very terrible.
The Serpent Polpoch, so called because it makes such a noise, bites with its
Mouth, and stings with the Tail, climbs on Trees, hides its Tail in the Mouth,
and winds it self about Travelers, whose Flesh thus bruised rots in three
days; insomuch that those hurt in that manner die like a Man that is laid
asleep by drinking two much Liquor.

Strange power of small Snakes, or Serpents.
There are also little Snakes no bigger than a Quill: these set upon Men
sleeping, and can by no means be taken off; they creep in at the Wounds, and
eat so long till they have quite devoured him: which without doubt is the only
reason that the Japanners have learned from the Indians to worship Serpents,
that they might not be hurt by them.

A long time before the Birth of our Savior, the Egyptians adored an Adder; and
the Indians, Dissertat. 38.
according to the relation of the ancient Writer Maximus Tyrius, a Serpent.

This kind of Idolatry may be said to be derived from China, the native
Country of the ancient Japanners; and from Tartary, bordering on China, which
brought it thither; for it is known, that not only India, but also all the
North showed a great reverencee to these poisonous Animals many Centuries past.

Julius Scaliger relates, In Arist. Hist. Anim. l. 2.
That in the Kingdom of Calicut, Serpents with very great Heads, not much
unlike those of Swine, were worshipped by the Kings as gods.

In Sarmatin. Euxopaen.
Alexander Guaginus also relates, that the Lyflanders believe Adders and
Serpents to be gods; for which reason they showed them all honor imaginable,
every Master of a Family, noble or ignoble, keeping one in his House, which
they worshipped and fed with Milk and Cocks-flesh: It was held for a certain
ill Omen, if any misfortune, or ill happened thereto, and the unfortunately
wicked Offender that hurt the Vermin, was generally cut Limb from Limb.

The Prusians, Antiquit. Boruss. l. 1.
according to the account of Erasmus Stella, lived several Ages, without
acknowledging any Religion, till at last they became devoted adorers of
Serpents.

The same ignorance is at this day a Custom amongst the Samogithes: if any ill
happen to them, they presently judge, that it proceeds from their
House-Serpent, which has not been well treated.

Sigismund, Baron of Herbenstein, tells us, that he came from Muscovia to
Troki; Comment. Muscovia.
where his Host, in whose House he had Lodged the Year before, told him, that
at that time he had bought some Bee-hives of a Servant to a worshipper of
Serpents, who by many convincing arguments was become a Christian; for which
cause he slew his Serpent, which till then he had religiously worshipped; but
afterward going to the Field to view his Bees, he found by their Hives a Man
with his Mouth wide open to his very Ears, and of strange shape: This deformed
Creature cried out, I have laid violent hands on my god, the Serpent, and am
therefore thus purnish'd, and if I do not return to my deserted Religion, I
shall suffer ten thousand times more.

Of whom the Japanners have learnt to worship Serpents.
It appears that the Japanners, and also other ancient and later People have
erected the Images of Serpents in their Temples, because Eve was deceived by a
Serpent: for who will contradict, that the Heathens do not hide Gods Truth
under their seeming Ignorance, and show through their greatest darkness a
glimmering of light, although by the Devils policy, and falsness of Mankind,
the glory and splendour of the holy Bible has been more and more darkened? which
the Greek and Latin Poets have neatly adorned, and chiefly that which they
relate of the never-sleeping Dragon, that kept the Golden Apples in the Garden
of Hesperides, which Hercules slew at last, bringing away the Golden Fruit to
his Father Eurystheus. Is not this a likeness of the Serpent in Eden, whose
Head our Savior bruised to pieces? and does it not represent the Religion of
the ancient Greeks? According to the testimony of the Greek Writers, Hesychius,
Clemens, and Plutarch, the Greeks say they cry aloud on their Feast-days, Clem.
in Protrept. Plut. in Alex.
Eva, Eva, pointing together at a Serpent. And what a pudder the Ophites, which
came forth Anno 132. made about a Snake, may be seen in the Church-Histories.
Ophites what kind of Heretics.
They Preached that Christ was the Serpent that deluded Eve, and afterward
entered into the Virgin Mary in the shape of a Snake. They kept not the
Sacrament without bringing forth by Charms a Serpent out of her Hole, and
sometimes out of a Box, judging the Bread to be vile, and not holy, if the
Viper had not tasted, or at least touched it.

The Serpent under the Japan Creator of what kind.
BUt to return again to the Japan Serpent about the Tree, whereon the Idol of
the Creation fits: This Snake stretches its Head to the right side of the Idol,
where two horrible Fiends stand on the edge of the Wall that incloses the Water
and Tortoise before mentioned.

Description of a Japan Devil.
The foremost Spirit has two hairy Feet, a long Tail, a Scarf wrapped under his
Arms, which hangs on his Back; about his Neck a rich String of Pearls; with
both the Hands holding the Serpent close by the Head; the Ears are great like
an Asses that stand upright; but Headed like a Dog with a long Snout.

In former times Anubis, a famous Deity amongst the Egyptians, appeared with a
Dogs Head, because Isis made use of Anubis, that thereby she might seek for her
lost Husband Osiris King of Egypt, who was murdered by his Brother Typhon, and
at last in Syene found him in several Pieces.

Another very terrible.
Moreover, between the Image with the Dogs Head and the chief Idol, stands a
second Shape, likewise laying hold on the Serpent, Clothed in a Coat, cut
sloapingly above the Knees, a Scarf about his Neck, made fast on his Breast,
the longest end thereof hanging over his right Arm: His Head is most like unto
that of a Roe-buck, holding its Mouth wide open, with large Ears, and a pair of
Harts-horns.

These two Monsters, as they say, used all their Force and endeavor to hinder
the Creation of the World. Why the Japanners offer them Sacrifice.
The Japanners offer Sacrifice to them when Herbs and Plants are in their first
Growth, to the end they should not hurt the tender Plants.

The worshippnig of the Devil brought from China to Japan. Maff. Histor. Indie.
l. 6.
It seems that this worshipping of evil Spirits was brought from China to
Japan; for the Chinese worship the Devil, not for any good they desire of him,
but because he should not hurt them.

The Images of these Devils rest on horrible Dragons; that spit forth Fire from
their gaping Mouths, and are made after a terrible manner. Of them they desire
to know the event of such things as they take in hand; which they do thus:
Strange dealings with evil Shapes.
They have two Wooden Buttons as big as Acorns, which are split in the middle,
and strung on a piece of Thread, which they throw down at the Feet of one of
these evil Spirits: if they both fall with the flat sides downwards, or one on
the flat, and the other on the round side, that they look upon as a bad Omen:
for which cause they rail exceedingly against their Deity; but immediately
after, as if they repented, they again flatter him, and sue for pardon, by
offering Sacrifice: and whenever their lot falls out unluckily, they fall from
Words to Blows, throwing the Image into the Water, or burn some part off from
his Body: then they fall again to Praying. This kind of scolding and
worshipping continues so long, till both the Buttons fall flat on the Ground;
whereupon they all rejoice, thanking the evil Spirit, presenting him with all
manner of Dainties curiously dressed, as Ducks, Geese, Rice, and Swines Heads,
accounted one of their best Dishes, and a Can of Wine: When they have laid a
little scrap of the forementioned Dishes on the Altar before the Image, as the
Tip of the Hogs Ear, the Claws of the forementioned Fowls, and some drops of
Wine, they fall upon the rest themselves, and eat it up with a great deal of
mirth and good appetite.

There are also Priests amongst the Chinese, established by Lanzis, whose
Mother went big with him eighty years. These draw on yellow Paper horrible
Shapes of evil Spirits, which they stick on the Walls of the Houses; then they
run all over the House, making a noise, as if they were Devils themselves; and
by this means they pretend to banish the Devil.

The worshipping of evil Spirits spread far and near, Vertoman. l. 5. Navigat.
BUt this worshipping of evil Spirits is not only usual in Japan and China,
but also in the East and West Indies.

The Calicuters believe, That Tamarini, Creator of the World, has resigned the
Government thereof, that he might live the better at ease; but that he has
given the Command thereof to the Devil Deumam, whose Image being made very
horrible, is religiously worshipped by the Brachmans, that he should not
prejudice them.

Practiced in the time of Moses.
This adoring of diabolical Fiends has not only spread it self over a great
part of the World, but also is very ancient: for in Moses his time this
wickedness had gotten great footing; he speaks of it in Levit. 17.7. And they
shall no more offer their Offerings unto Devils, after whom they have gone a
whoring. And again in Deuteronomy. 32.17. They offered unto Devils, not to God.

Furthermore, many Heathens so respected this diabolical Worship before the
Birth of our Savior, that they took Infants out of their Mothers Wombs,
burning them to the Honor of the Devil; Lut Pharsal. lib. (...).
of which Lucan says thus.

The unripe Fruit, ripp'd from the tender Womb,
Against Natures Laws, finds a too cruel Tomb,
On Wooden Altars, covered with their Gore,
To show how highly Devils they adore.
But on the left hand of the Japanners Creator, two Kings and an ancient
Philosopher hold the remaining part of the forementioned Serpent to the Tail.
The nearest King toward the Image wears a Crown with three Points, The first
King that holds the Japan-Serpent^
and turns up behind, under which hangs a Golden Scarf; about his Neck is a
double String of Pearls; on his Breast, a costly Diamond, tied with a Silk
Ribbon; his Coat is open below the Belly; his Face represents that of a young
Man, and looks upon the two Evil Spirits, that stand on the right side of the
Image. This King resided some time near the Sea, and joined with the Devils, to
hinder the Creation of Heaven and Earth.

The ssecond King has four Heads.
The same Intentions that King had which stands next: He likewise grasps the
Serpent with both his Hands; a single String of Pearls hangs on his Breast; his
Coat covers above half his Legs; a Scarf hangs over his Right Shoulder; he has
four Heads, each with a picked Beard, and all covered with one Golden Crown,
like a Bonnet, on which are several Tops, some smaller than others, all running
with a Point upwards. These four Heads signify four thousand Years, which this
King lived.

An ancient Japan Philosopher.
The old Philosopher with his right Hand holds the Body of the Serpent, with his
left grasping the Tail: His Coat just covers his Knees; his Beard long, and
parted in the middle; his Face represents that of an Old Man; behind on his
Head appears the Image of a Dragon, looking toward the right side, and toward
the left his contorted Tail; on his Forehead he has a golden Circle.

Gods with many Heads in Japan.
But as to what concerns the Four-headed Idol, the Japanners have diverse Gods
with several Heads; for they oftentimes make Xaca with three, which they cover
all with one Cap: Sometimes they represent Canon the Son of Amida with seven
Heads on his Breast. Father Gruber relates, That he found several Temples in
Necbal, a Province in Tartary, in which were Idols with diverse Heads; and in
some Places, six Heads without Bodies were set on a Table, with three Ascents,
on the lowermost of which three of them were placed in a row; on the
middlemost, two; and on the top, one; each standing betwixt the Vacancy above
the other. On both sides stood Vessels, all of Oval fashion, for the burning
Incense; and flat Dishes, with Offerings to the Heads.

But to come to our Description: Between the forementioned Ancient Philosopher,
and Four-headed King, an Image appears representing the Sun, rising out of the
Water, clothed in a Vest, part of it seeming under the Water; over his left Arm
a Scarf, and in the same hand many sharp Spikes; his Beard long, and on his
Head a Crown of golden Rays; his right Hand armed with a Steeletto, or sharp
Iron Bodkin, with which it seems to prick and push the Tortoise, on which the
Brazen Tree, and the Creator (as they call him) rest, to cause it to turn;
which moves so slowly, that they say it comes but once about in a thousand
Years.

Nothing is less to be admired, than that the Japanners worship the Sun also in
their Temples; for no Idolatry whatsoever can boast to be so old, in which they
did not worship the Sun; whose Adoration was more Venerable, and spread it self
further than any Idol whatsoever; concerning whose Antiquity, Job speaks thus;
Job 31.26.27.
If I beheld the Sun when it shined, or the Moon walking in brightness: And my
heart has been secretly enticed, or my mouth has kissed my hand. Here this
Adoration of the Celestial Bodies, after the manner of the Heathens, is
apparent, according to which, the first Worshippers of the Sun kissed their
Hands, in token of Honor; App. Met. lib. 4.
though afterward, according to Apuleius, they bent only their foremost right
Finger toward the Thumb, whilst they turned themselves round, Deuteronomy. 4.19.
and prayed to the Rising Sun. Moses also says; And lest thou lift up thine
eyes unto Heaven, and when thou see the Sun, and the Moon, and the Stars,
even all the Host of Heaven, should be driven to worship them, and serve
them. But notwithstanding Gods Commands, the Israelites have chiefly learned
the Sun-worship from the Syrians, which called the Sun Bahal, that is to say,
Lord; the Phenicians, Beel-Samen (according to Philo, from the Ancient Writer
Sanchoriathon) which is, Lord of the Heavens: The Inhabitants of the Phenician
City Accaron, gave the Sun the Name of Baal-zehaim, signifying, The Lord of
Offerings; but afterward that Name was changed to Baal-zebub, that is, The God
of Flies, to whom in bad Times, De Abstinent. Animal. lib. 2.
as droughty Seasons, when those Insects, ushering great Sicknesses, rage, they
offered their Children. The Ammonites understood the Sun likewise by their
Moloch or Milcom, to whose Honor the Parents carried their Sons and Daughters
betwixt two Fires, or caused them to be led by Priests to be cleansed; and at
other times they were burnt in that Image of Moloch, which was divided into
seven Copper Caverns, which when they are made red hot with the Image, the
Officer, according to Rabbi Simeon, throws into the first Division fine Flower;
in the second, a Turtle-dove; in the third, a Sheep; in the fourth, a Ram; in
the fifth, a Calf; in the sixth, an Ox; and in the seventh, a Child. These
seven Chambers represent the seven Planets, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus,
Mercury, and Luna: Therefore the Sun of old received the chiefest Offering,
being held for the most eminent God.

The Emssenians in Syria Apomena built for the Sun, Saturn. l. c. 23.
by them called Heliogabalus, that is, God of the Mountain, an exceeding great
Temple. Macrobius relates, That the Assyrians ascribed to the Sun, called Adad,
the chief Command over all, and made the Goddess Adargatis his Viceroy. Adad's
Image shot its Beams downwards, and Adargatis upwards: By the first they gave
to understand, That the Power of Heaven consisted in those Sunbeams that
reflected on the Earth; and by the second, That all things were drawn up from
the Earth. The Arabians offered to the Sun daily, on Altars made on the Roofs
of their Houses, Frankincense and Myrrh. The same and no other was the Idol
Chamis, and Baal-Peor of the Moabites and Midianites. Hieronymus says, In
Esai. 15.2.
That in the City Nabo was the Consecrated Idol Chemosh, which was also called
by a second denomination Baal-Peor.

The City Baisampsa, near the Red Sea, was exceeding famous amongst the
Arabians, it being consecrated to the Sun; Sampsa in the Arabian Tongue, as
Stephanus witnesses, signifies The Sun: So that Baisampsa is as much as to say,
The House of the Sun. Why three peculiar Feasts to the Sun.
The Persians held the Sun for their Chief and Supreme Deity, to whose Honor
they kept three Feasts yearly, because they observed in him Prudence,
Benignity, and Omnipotence; and also to express the three Operations of the
Sun, by Heat, Splendour, and distinguishing of the Times; or lastly, for its
altering the Days, as in Harvest and Summer long, and short in Winter. The
Armenians, Massagetes, and Persians offered to the Sun a White Horse.

Ovid. l. 1. East.
To Mithra, for so the Persians call the Sun, that precious Gem called Mithridax
is consecrated, because according to Pliny and Isidore, the Sunbeams shining
upon it, give it various and still changeable Colors. The Egyptians worshipped
the Sun under the Name of Osiris: Heliopolis, or The City of the Sun, was most
famous amongst them, wherein the Ox Mnevis was dedicated to that Deity. Saturn.
l. 1. c. 21.
But this Statue of the Sun was in the time of the Egyptian King Senemuris
carried from thence to Assyria; Apias, an Agent to the Assyrian Standardbearer
Delebores, brought it thither, which Macrobius describes thus: It is (says he)
of massy Gold, without a Beard; in the right Hand it holds a Whip, after the
manner of a Rustic; the left Hand holds a Sickle, and an Ear of Corn.

Strange Sacrifice to the Sun.
The Moors also took the Sun for the chiefest God, calling him Assabin, and
offered him Sacrifice in the following manner. Their Priests only had the
Liberty to gather Cinnamon, with a Proviso, That they should first kill to the
Honor of Assabin forty four Oxen, and as many Goats and Rams; neither should
they seek to gather the Cinnamon, but either before or after Sunset. The
Cinnamon-sticks, brought together, were divided by the Priests in Holy Ground.
That part which remained for the Merchants, was by them carried away as soon as
paid for: Then the Priests took every one their part; but if any was imbezilled
in the sharing, it was instantly known; for if justly divided, the Sunbeams
fired the Fragments and broken Pieces that were neglected and left scattered
behind, otherwise not; as Theophrastus, Pliny, Heophr Hist. Ph. l. 9. c 5 Plin.
l. 12. c. 19. Solin. c. 31.
and Solinus aver.

The Suns Feast.
The ancient Greek Writer Proclus describes a Solemn Feast amongst them, in
honor of the Sun, which thus they perform: They hang upon a great Pole store of
Laurel, and all manner of Flowers, in the first Quarter of the Moon; then they
placed on the top of the Staff a great Copper Ball, from which hung many
lesser; the middle of the Pole adorned with three hundred sixty five Garlands;
the bottom covered with a Woman's Vestment died yellow. The uppermost Ball
signified the Sun; the lesser, the Stars; and the number of Garlands, the Days
of the Year.

There are scarce any People that have not been guilty, or at least made
themselves so, of that Idolatry of Worshipping the Sun: For the far-distant
Massagetes worshipped the Sun, Herod. lib. 1.
as Herodotus relates. The Germans also were ravished with the Worship of this
Celestial Luminary, before they embraced the Christian Religion. Geothic. Rer.
lib. 3. cap. 2.
Moreover Olaus Magnus relates, That the People in the most Northern Parts of
the World prayed to the Sun, when after a six Months Night it appears above
their Horizon, and brings Light and Comfort: And what is more common among the
Western Indians, than the Worship of the Sun? For which cause they mocked at
the Spaniards, when they told them of a Savior; telling them, That they had a
better God, which appeared every Morning in Glory.

Josephus Acosta relates peculiarly concerning the Peruvians, Hist. Mor. Var.
Jud.
That they mentioned Viracocha for their Prime Deity; and next him, the Sun;
and for the third, Ictillapa, signifying Thunder, a Man armed with Stones and a
Sling. All three of them are worshipped after one manner, viz. with Hands
lifted aloft, making a noise like the Smacks of Rusticks, and then praying for
what ever they want. In Lusco they offered living Children to the Sun.

Eastern-Indians have a long time used to worship the Sun.
Amongst the East-Indians the Sun was Religiously worshipped long before the
Birth of our Savior. Ctesias relates of them, That they travel yearly fifteen
days to an appointed Place, to keep a Feast in honor of the Sun, praying, That
it would please him to grant them thirty five days cool Weather, that they may
not be scorched, whilst they are coming, worshipping, and returning home.
Benjamin Tudelensis the Jew relates also of the Inhabitants of Haaulam (if the
Learned Vossius takes not Haaulam to be Zeilan, or rather Sumatra After seven
days Travel I came to Haaulam, which is the beginning of the Kingdom where they
worship the Sun in stead of God: A People derived from the Astronomer Chus. The
Sun is worshipped by them on several great Altars, built in all Places about
two Miles distant from the City. They commonly run to meet the Sun early in the
Morning, to which stand dedicated several Images on all their Altars, seeming
by Necromantick Art to dart Beams, which when the Sun rises, seem to crackle;
at which time both Men and Women offer their Sacrifices.

Furthermore, it is requisite for us to know how the Japanners, and besides
them, many other ancient and late Heathens, amongst their other Deities,
worship the Sun. Arist. de Coelo. lib. 1. cap. 3.
The general Opinion of all Men, as Aristotle, Simplicius, Themistius, and
others witness, is to place the Omnipotent Godhead in the uppermost Region that
surrounds the Earth; Why the Japanners worship the Sun.
for which cause, those that pray lift up their Hands to Heaven: And since the
Heavens represent nothing more glorious than the Sun, that is held for the
only and chief Deity, whether it be for its Beauty and Splendour, or its
Bigness, being one hundred and sixty times greater than the Terrestrial Orb; or
its quick and sudden Motion, by which it runs ten hundred thousand Miles in an
Hour, as they held, the Earth being the Center; or its fecundating Power, whose
Warmth preserves all Plants, and is the Breeder and Fosterer of all Living
Creatures; or its necessary Light, beneficial for all Humane Affairs; or
measuring of the Days by a Motion from the East to the West; or the Seasons of
the Year, by a Course from the South to the North, or from the North to the
South; or whether it be, that one Sun performs so many excellent Effects: All
these taken together, amaze the Heathens, who with great admiration wonder at
the Mystery thereof, and so honor one of the Celestial Luminaries, in stead of
him that Created it. In Symb. Aposs.
Thomas Aquinas compares these Idolaters to Country People, that entering a
Princes Palace, take the first gay Courtier they see, for the King, to whom
they make Legs, and show Reverence, as if he were the same, being deceived by
his outward Apparel.

But the Japanners differ from the Ancients in their representation of the Sun,
which they drew resembling a Beardless young Man, in his prime and vigor,
because the Sun neither grows old by Time or Labor: For which reason the Youth
at Athens, Rome, and Italy offered to the Sun their Hair, when they were first
shaven. The Japanners would perhaps signify the Suns Age by its Beard.
Furthermore, the Tortoise which the Sun pricks to turn round, was Religiously
worshipped long before the Japanners came from China; Plin. lib. 9. cap. 11.
fox Pliny relates, That the Troglodites have horned Tortoises, which guide
themselves in the Water with their Horns; and wherever they happen to come
ashore, they are adored as Holy.

Netherland Ambassadors leave Meaco.
But to return again to the Ambassadors Frisius and Brookhurst; They departed
from Meaco, Anno 1650. the thirtieth of April: But before they left the City,
they viewed the great Temple consecrated to Dayboth, and the Cloisters
inhabited by the Bonzi, as well without as within the City. A Japan King, about
nine hundred years since, Incredible number of Cloisters belonging to the Bonzi.
built on the Mountain Fronojama three thousand eight hundred Colleges, of
which Nobunanga laid a great part in Ashes: But the Mountain which lies
opposite to Meaco had formerly seven thousand such Buildings, in every one of
which lived ten, fifteen, twenty, or more Priests. One of these Cloisters
exceeds in Riches and Beauty all the rest. The Kings, when they prepare for
War, promise great Sums of Money to them, for their Enlargement and
Maintenance; which they punctually pay, after they have gotten the Victory.

To this place poor People, driven by extreme Necessity, take their flight.
Every Cloister has an Overseer, whom they call Ninxir, that is to say, The
Heart of Truth.

The Bonzies Employments.
The Office of the Bonzies bred up there, is to Bury and perform the Obsequies
of the Dead, especially of the Rich; reading and praying before the Statues of
their Gods every fifteenth Day, or once in three Months, preaching in public,
and unfolding the Mysteries of their Divine Worship. These are the Seminaries
in which they are bred; and here the Masters, How they teach their Youth,
according to their manner, give them their Lessons to perfect, and Themes to
enlarge upon; the whole Argument consisting in the several Articles of their
Faith, and also what they shall say in their Spirit at the last gasp, and how
to answer Death and the Devil, when they appear to them most terrible: So
setting them their several Tasks, commanding them to perform their Exercise
well, and punishing those that are negligent and dull in their Duty.

Will not refer their Doctrine to any Princes.
They keep up their Doctrine to such a height, that they suffer not Kings, nor
the Emperor himself, to decide any Controversy, or intermeddle with any Matter
concerning Religion.

Father Tursellinus, writing the Life of Xaverius, tells us, That Xaverius had
a Hearing granted him before the King of Bungo, to declare at large what he
could say concerning the Christian Religion, and to dispute the Articles of
their Faith with any of the Japan Doctors; to which the King listening, and
seeming to be taken with several Reasons unfolding diverse Mysteries, a Bonzi
called Faciandono (standing by, and perceiving the King to be pleased too well,
highly offended, broke out in a great rage, saying, That in Matters of Religion
Kings were not competent Judges, being altogether unexperienced in the Divinity
thereof; and if he pleased, he would by the Defense that he should make,
utterly convince him in all his Arguments, that had so lately tickled his Ear.
So the King being silent, hearkened to, and gave them leave to speak. Whereupon
Faciandono began, after having studied a considerable time, to discourse upon
the Grounds of their Faith, and the several Tenants and Mysteries of Religion;
to prove the Truth of which, there needed no more than the exemplary Lives of
the Bonzi, whose Zeal, Piety, and strictness of Holy-living, must be above all
others acceptable to the Gods; first, for their Chastity, and their abstaining
from Fresh-fish; their pains and diligence in the Schools, in instructing of
Youth in their Divine Knowledge and Philosophical Learning; for giving to those
that pleased to receive, after their Deaths, besides Eternal Bliss, ten times
as much as they lay down in this World, of which none doubts, or is so impious
to question, but at sight to have present payment; for rising at all Hours in
the Night, their Watching, and Nocturnal Prayers to their Gods, for the Health,
Safety, and Preservation of the People: But that which advanced them to the
height of Religious Dignity, was their usual Conversation, when rapt up into
the Heavens, with the Sun and Moon, and all the Celestial Luminaries. Then he
turned his ranting Discourse, and fell upon the King; which he not taking well,
but much displeased at his endless Railing, wanting not much of distraction,
the King commanded Silence, telling him, That he well remembered one of the
Bonzi, a special Pattern of Piety and Sober Life; but he was fitter in his
judgment to serve the Devil, and the Fiends of Hell, than be any ways
instrumental in the Worship of the Ever-just Gods, Eternal haters of all
Debauchery. But Faciandono no ways daunted with this smart Expression of the
Kings, but rather more discomposed, in a rage replied thus; Well Sir, the time
will come, when such will be my Power and Authority over Mortals, in the other
World, that I shall dispose of them at my Leisure, and how I please: And you
King of Bungo, though you look so big in all your Greatness now, then shall
address your self to me, scarce regarding such a Trifle as a King, or any
Prince whatsoever. This arrogant return of his was very ill resented; yet
Faciandono raising his Voice, ranted higher, saying, May Fire from Heaven
consume thee, thou King of Bungo, that dare offer, or once open that thy
Mouth, to Blaspheme the holy Priest of the just and ever-living Gods.

THe Bonzies are divided into twelve Sects, though some lessen the number.
Amongst all of them, those are least esteemed, that acknowledge Combadaxis for
the Learned Man. What the Bonzies of Combadaxis Sect are.
The Combadaxis-Bonzi have several Cloisters in the famous Territory of Coja:
They lock up themselves in their Habitations, and shave off the Hair of their
Heads, as a sign that they forsake the World, and take a Holy Life upon them;
under which pretense, they act all manner of Debaucheries. Besides a great
number of Servants, there dwell in those Parts above six thousand Bonzies. If
any Woman dares approach that place, she is immediately punished with death.
Combadaxis himself lived about eight hundred years ago, Combadaxis a great
deluder.
who though a very Villain, yet by his dissimulation and eloquent Language,
obtained the Name of a Saint. He is held to be the Inventor of those Characters
which the meaner sort of the Japanners use.

When Combadaxis attained to a great age, he buried himself in a deep square
Pit, commanding strictly, That none should open the same; telling them, That he
died not; but being wearied and tired with the Troubles of this Life on Earth,
he went to take rest for a hundred thousand years under Ground; after the
expiration of which time, there would a most exceeding Learned Man, called
Mirozu, appear in Japan; and with that Mirozu he would also return. Round about
his Grave burnt an innumerable company of Lamps, sent thither from all the
Japan-Territories; for every one that is of Combadaxis Sect, imagines and
believes, That by the giving of those Lamps they shall obtain Earthly Riches;
and after death, find Combadaxis to intercede for them in the other World.

Bonzi-Neugori much hated.
YEt above all others, the Bonzi-Neugori, that have promoted the Deluder Cacubau
to the Dignity of a Numen are the most hated; their chiefest Residence,
Fatonochaiti, being a mere Den of Murderers: For they live without a Superior,
and determine on nothing but with a general Vote; so that oftentimes differing
in their Consultations, they fall at variance, and go together by the Ears,
insomuch that they kill one another.

Their strange Conversation.
These Neugori bring up a considerable number of Youths to Thieving and
Defrauding of the People: Such as exceed the rest in Wit and Cunning, are
chiefly instructed about the Descents and Exploits of the Japan Kings, and
State Affairs; being also exercised in Martial Discipline, and taught the Art
of Rhetorical Speaking. And thus instructed, they travel to the remotest
Kingdoms, where they give themselves out to be the Sons of Japan Kings or
Prince, living in another part of the Empire; being the rather credited,
because they appear in Kingly Apparel, and carry themselves exceeding Stately:
And when they have brought their Game to the height, then they ask for Money,
as wanting Bills of Exchange to furnish them for their present Occasions. It is
very seldom but they find one or other that will disburse Money for them, upon
giving them a Note, not without promise of great Interest. So soon as they have
thus filled their Purses, they return with the Booty back to their Cloisters:
For which cause, Are every where kili'd, if known.
if the Neugori from Fatonochaiti are known any where, they are without mercy
Stoned to death. Notwithstanding this hatred which the Japanners bear against
them, yet they are afraid of them, because they are very expert in Arms.

Their Order is divided into three Sects; some observing their Religion; others
make and deliver daily five Arrows a Man; the third sort exercise themselves
continually in War, not unlike the Knights of Malta; Maintain War.
so that they often raise Rebellion against their Princes. Anno 1561. they
brought thirty thousand Men into the Field; and Encamping themselves between
Meaco and Saccai, fought a great Battle against the Cubus, and getting
victoriously into Meaco, set the City on Fire. Yet not long after, Success
making them negligent and careless, they were surpised, and expelled with no
small Loss: Yet were they not so routed, but that they since encountered with
the Powerful King Nobunanga; but with such ill Fortune, that most of them were
slain on the Spot.

The Bouzi-Ikkois are highly esteemed.
ALl the other Bonzies are held in high esteem; and chiefly the twelfth Sect,
called Ikkois. Their Governor is carried in a Sedan, Kingly Honor shown him,
and worshipped by his Followers.

These Bonzies have great Privilege beyond the other; for they have leave to
be merry, and eat all manner of Food that the Sea and Earth affords. Some of
their Temples receive a yearly Revenue out of the Emperors Treasury, or else
from the Customs and Tolls growing due in that Country where they are founded:
Others are maintained by the ordinary People. Every one contributes to the
Maintenance of his Chapel and Priest to which he belongs; for every Sect of
the Bonzi have their Congregation. They never trouble each other about
Differences of Religion; nay, the Citizens never dispute about their Opinions
in matter of Faith, though their several Sects differ much one from another.

Most of their Temples are Houses of Good-fellowship; for which reason, many of
them are built in the most delightful Places; where they come oftentimes
together, The Recreation of the Bonzi.
no otherwise than to a Drinking-Club, in the presence of all their Gods.
Common Strumpets are brought thither: Concealed Adultery the Bonzies wink at.
Yet other Bonzies live more retired, coming sometimes at Midnight, on certain
Hours, together, to say their Prayers; and in order, taking it by turns,
perform their Offices, which they read out of the last Book of Xaca, called,
Foquequium, before their Altars. In the Evening every one has his Task set
him, to get by Heart against Morning, and to declare it to the Head Bonzies.

BUt the Bonzies of the eleventh Sect exceed the rest in a strict and retired
Life; for they abstain from Women, and all manner of Food that ever lived; and
if it be known to the Magistrates, that any of them has transgressed, Strange
Punishment inflicted on some Criminal Bonzies.
or broken his Vows, the Criminal is put into a Hole, and covered half way with
Earth, being made fast in the same; and every one that passes by, though it be
a Nobleman, must give a cut with a Wooden Saw on the Neck of the half-buried
Priest: So that generally it is the fourth day before he comes to his End.

Why the Bonzies are highly esteemed.
A Retired and Abstinent Life brings the Bonzies into great esteem; and
therefore several of their Sects live only on Pot Herbs, Water, and Rice.
Besides, many Bonzies are of Noble and Princely Extract; for when the Fathers
are over-charg'd with Children, fearing to leave them but small Shares, they
put some of them into Cloisters, to the end their Goods at the time of their
Death may go the farther, and that so they may keep up their Family.

The Bonzies Sermons.
THe Doctrines which the Bonzi teach, are commonly Reprehensions against
Worldly Care, by which the ordinary Man is so taken up, that he minds nothing
of the Laws tending to Salvation; for which the Bonzi proffer their Service, to
take upon them their Offenses, and sue for their Pardon from the Gods; so that
none shall be damned, how great soever their Sins are; for the Gods will
deliver them from the Flames of Hellfire: Yet with this Proviso, If they set a
high esteem on, and are bountifully liberal to the Bonzi that intercede for
them.

Women and poor People can scarce be saved.
This Promise of Salvation is only to Rich and Eminent People; but for the Poor
People, there is no Redemption from Hell. The Women's Condition is also very
bad, not withstanding they give great Presents to the Bonzi, because by their
natural Purgations they are stained with many filthy and grievous Sins, so that
it is very hard for them to attain to Salvation.

Bonzi give Bills of Exchange.
The Bonzi also, in their Public Preachings, declare, That those that give them
any Money, shall receive the same again, with ten times the Interest, in the
Life to come. And since few there are that misdoubt so great a gain, the
Bonzies have labor enough to make them Bills of Exchange for their Money, which
they preserve very carefully; and chiefly, all dying Persons give strict
charge, that they bury the forementioned Bills with them, that so they may
receive both Principal and Interest in the other World; and also because the
Devil flies from all such Papers.

Description of the Bonzies Preaching.
The Bonzies make their Sermons in a handsome manner; for he that Preaches,
stands on a high Pulpit, hung round about with a rich Japan Cloth: The Ascent
thereof is made on the right side, not without curious Rails and Steps: On the
left side sits an Idol, with his Legs under him, after the Japan manner, on a
high Altar, either of Amida, Xaca, Canon, or any other, according to the Sect
of which the Bonzies are. Next to the Idol, are those that bring Offerings,
being all manner of Dainties; which after performance of Service, they and the
Bonzies together devour. Both the Idol and Offerers sit on a high Seat, railed
about. Over the Pulpit is a square Covering, which rests forward on two thick
Pillars, made fast behind in the Walls. On the top also hang on both sides of
the Preacher two burning Lamps, each hanging by four Strings, and with as many
Lights. Before the Pulpit stands a square Scaffold, railed in on three sides,
and three Foot in height; in the middle of which stands the Pulpit: On this
Scaffold sit or stand the Readers or Servants to the Bonzies: In the Pulpit
lies the Holy Book of Foquequium; and near it, a Shell. The Priest getting into
the Pulpit, looks a considerable time about him: In his right Hand he holds a
broad golden Fan; his Head is covered with an Umbrello of Silk, not much unlike
a Straw Hat. Before he speaks aloud, he makes a great show in silence of his
intended Design. Lastly, he rings the Bell, as a Sign commanding Silence; after
which, none makes the least noise. Then the Priest begins to read some Rules
out of their Law-Book Foquequium, on which he makes a long Sermon.

Bonzi speak well in their Sermons.
Gasper Villela, well-experienc'd in the Japan Tongue, relates, That he has
oftentimes admired the excellent Language of the Bonzi, which are no ways
inferior to any Greek or Latin Preachers, either in their complete Behavior and
elegant Style, or for their curious Words, and moving Arguments to their
purpose. The Nobleness of their Discourse borrows also a little from the Luster
of their Apparel; for the Minister standing on a rich Stool, is clothed in Silk
from Head to Foot; about his Middle is tied a broad Girdle. The Applications to
their Sermons are commonly these, or the like: After what manner they end their
Sermons.
It is requisite to bestow good and plentiful Gifts on the Cloisters, because
Priests reside in them, that intercede for Men to the Gods, by their Prayers
and Pious Works; so that in this Life they receive Worldly Blessings by their
means, and in the Life to come, ten times more than they bestow on the Bonzi.

Description of the Auditors in the Japan Temples.
The Auditors flock in great numbers to their Churches, which are generally
crammed full to the very Doors. At the sound of a Bell they all fall on their
Knees, and pour forth a Prayer with great Zeal; this continues a whole Hour.
Their Hands and Beads they lift up toward Heaven, (for they are used by them,
crying often very loud, Namu Amida ambut, that is, Amida give Salvation; which
Prayer is only used by that Sect which acknowledge Amida for their God and
Preserver. Others call upon Xaca, Canon, or any other Idols; yet the greatest
number believe in Amida: Wherefore the Poor, when they ask for Alms, cry,
Ichinem Amida but Sucumet Muriro zai; that is, Whoever calls upon the Holy Name
of Amida with an upright Heart, shall be saved.

During the time that one of the Bonzi preaches, the rest sit one by another on
the Steps of the Altar, with their Hands wrapped in their Coats, and their Eyes
cast downwards. All the twelve Sects affirm, That none can be saved without the
Holy Book Foquequium; but as for other things, they differ in their Opinions.

Those that show Reverence to the Idol Canon, Amida's Son, would be taken for
the most Pious and Religiousest Persons, going with their Beads in their Hands,
and praying in all places without ceasing.

The Bonzies Sects differ amongst themselves.
Moreover, the Bonzi, according to their several Sects, wear different Apparel;
some going in Black, others in Gray; between which two, great Contests and
Quarrels oftentimes arise. And as there are a vast number of these Bonzies in
Japan, so there are also an incredible company of the Clerks belonging to them:
For every one has free liberty to be of either of the twelve Sects, when he
betakes himself to the voluntary Retirements of a Cloister.

And also the Japanners.
In like manner, all the Japanners embrace and hold with that Sect which they
fancy best; so that oftentimes in one Family, the Father is of one Sect, the
Children of another, and the Mother differs from both. Some hold, That there
are three hundred and fifty Commandments; yet all agree, That there are five
Principal ones, which observed, make Men capable of Salvation; namely, Not to
murder, Not to steal, Not to commit adultery, Not to lie, and, To abstain from
Wine. In what they all agree.
All of them believe and affirm, That their Gods suffered willingly long and
painful Tortures, that they might free every one that really believes in those
Sufferings, and worships them with Zeal, and an upright Heart. In their
Devotions they use (as Xaverius relates) long Strings, with round Knobs or
Beads; and at the end of every Prayer, they turn over or let fall one of them.

FUrthermore, the Japan Idolatry is mixed with many pleasant, or rather
ridiculous Fantasies; as amongst others things they affirm, Xaca, how often
born.
That Xaca was Born eight thousand times; which Opinion seems somewhat to agree
with the Doctrine of the Bramines, Wistnow born ten times.
whose Supreme Deity Wistnow took upon him to have been bom eight times, and
that first he appeared in the shape of a Fish called Matsja, to pursue a
Raetsjasja, who was fled into the Sea with four parts of the Heathens Law-Book,
but he was overtaken and killed by Wistnow. The second time he took upon him
the shape of a Tortoise, because the Mountain Merouwa was thrown into the
Ocean, that Amortan, that is, Dispeller of the Poison Callecote Wisjam might be
found; but the Mountain weighed so exceeding heavy, that it began to sink,
which forced Wistnow to transform himself into a Tortoise, that he might bear
up the World on his back; but though the Tortoise carrys the World on its back,
yet he is carried by the Hog called Sersja, and Leesja is bore up by the Sea:
The third time, Wistnow appeared like a Hog, wherefore a Hog growing out of the
Earth, in the famous Temple Adi Warraha in the City Trinottam, was religiously
Worshipped. The fourth time he appeared like half a Man, and half a Lion: The
fifth time, by the name Wainana, on purpose to subdue the Devil Belli, and soon
after he became Paresje Rama, Dajerratha Rama, Cristna, Bouddha, and the Horse
Celki: His chiefest appearance was when he became Cristna; for as the Bramine
Padmanaba related to Abraham Rogerius, The Gate to Paganism, 2, k. 3.
That Wistnow appeared in all his other shapes but with part of his Godly
Glory, as a spark of Fire which flies from a great Coal; but that in Cristnaes
shape he appeared in full Splendour, with all the Host of Heaven attending him;
insomuch, that the Heavens were empty and without a God.

Little Japan gods.
THe Japanners have besides their chief, also lesser Deities, which they call
Fotoques and Camos; the first were Priests, which many Ages before taught their
Doctrine: The second valiant Hero's, who by their Noble Achievements, or new
Inventions, made their Names famous. The Fotoquis procured such things as were
necessary to Salvation, and the Camo's Temporal Blessings. Their gods Nequiron,
and Denichi Maristines, preside matters of War: Difference of their gods.
but Daibut, Tamondea, Besamondes, Hemocondis, and Zajolis, busy themselves in
ordering the Course of the Heavens.

The Sects of the Bonzies are twelve.
THe Sects into which the Bonzi divide themselves, Xaverius reckons nine: But
Caron in his Description of Japan, sets down twelve: The Xingovini Bonzi, honor
the Idol Dinichi; the Jenxuani,serve Fobem; the Foquexani, their Mion; the
Jondaxuenses, Amida; the Xintani, Quoquium; the Baracacque spend their time in
Study; the Icoxuani teach, That there is nothing more requisite to Salvation,
than the Merits of Amida; so that nothing can be more to his prejudice, than
for any one to depend on their own good Works, for so much as a man ascribes to
himself of Salvation; so much he bereaves of the honor of Amida, who alone
merited Salvation.

Icoxi Bonzi.
Over the Icoxuani, or Icoxi, a prime Bonzi, has the Command, who commonly,
though addicted to all manner of Vices, yet is highly esteemed by the People;
insomuch, that they often fall down, crying before him, entreating him to
Intercede for them, and sue for a Pardon and Forgiveness of their Offenses. The
Neugori place Cacubau for their Chief and Supreme Deity, and are divided into
Praying, Arrow-making and Fighting-Persons. The Legi-Oxi judge the Hamacuten
Clerks to be of the same Order. The Jamambuxi, who after sixty days suffering
all Inconveniences, are Installed by the Devil himself, who appears to them in
a horrible manner, on the top of the Mountain Fusinojamma; their Prayers the
common People buy for great sums of Money: But the twelfth Sect of the Bonzies
are the Ikkois, Ikkoi's Bonzi.
whose Respect and Power exceeds all the other: Then Gengues, Harboribonzjj,
and Jammoboos, are also Japan Priests, extracted out of Asia, and experienced
in Necromantick Arts; but because of their poor and mean condition, and their
solitary life, they are not accounted amongst the Bonzies.

The Feast Gibbon, how kept.
THe Deceits and Fictions of the Bonzies may be plainly discerned by the
Feast-days which they chiefly observe.

In August, the Japanners have a Holiday which they call Gibbon, (which word
signifies A Man) and is Consecrated to Men. This day is kept in the following
manner. They erect Scaffolds in every corner of the City, according to the
number of Handicrafts-men; when the day is come, the multitudes flock together,
no otherwise than to a great Feast, fifteen, or sometimes twenty Wagons
covered with rich Silk Clothes lead the way, every one of which is drawn by
forty Men. In every Wagon sits a great number of Youths, singing and playing
on Drums or Pipes; the Men and Women of every several Trade or Company, buy
their own Wagon: Soon after, more Wagons follow with Armed Men, in like
manner covered with Silk Clothes, on which are Painted the Valiant Exploits and
Noble Achievements of ancient Japan Hero's. This Train passes along slowly by
their Temple: Against the Evening, two Sedans are brought out of the Temple, in
one of them sits the Idol whom they Worship, and in the other his Consort: The
bearers of the first Sedan seemed to swoon under it, being so exceedingly
oppressed by the presence of the Godhead; but soon after appears the Sedan in
which the Idols Goddess sits, she being advised by Messengers, that her Husband
comes to meet her with his Concubine, the bearers of the Sedan run to and again
like Distracted Persons, by which they express the great sorrow which the
Goddess receives by her just anger for the Idol her Husbands Adultery; and
whilst the bearers of the Sedan run thus madly up and down, the People cry
aloud after them, pitying the condition of the Goddess, comforting and Praying
to her on their bended Knees: At last, the three Sedans are brought together,
and are set down in their Temple, which done, Gibbon's Feast ends.

The bloody feast of Maristenes.
FOr their God of War, Maristenes, they keep a bloody day in Lent; after Noon,
they all flock together, every one having the Picture of his Image Painted on
his shoulder; upon a sudden, they divide themselves in two Parties, the Boys
beginning first to throw Stones, which done, the graver and older Persons of
both sides go forth between the Youths, their first business then is to
exchange a Bullet or two, then drawing nearer to one another, they pull out
their Japan Scymiters, and fight so long, till one or other of them leaving the
Field, betakes themselves to flight.

Amida's feast, how kept by the Icoxi Bonzi.
THe Icoxi Bonzi keep yearly a Feast to the honor of Amida, to which flock such
multitudes, that many times several are crowded to death in the Cloyster-door,
nay, some fall down wilfully to be trampled to death, thinking, that by that
means they shall go to Amida: At night, a Bonzi makes a Funeral Sermon over the
departed, extolling, and highly applauding his gallant Resolution, whilst the
multitude make a doleful Lamentation over the Corpse.

Description of the Japan Wrestlers.
BUt besides these strange Customs belonging to their Religion, the Japanners
have also several bodily Exercises, amongst which, Wrestling is none of the
meanest: The place wherein they Wrestle is surrounded with a square Rail, about
which the Spectators stand, and look over it, reaching up to their middle; on a
Hillock, under a square Roof, supported by four Pillars, the Judge of the Field
has his Seat: The Wrestlers put their Hair under a Net, made in the fashion of
a Cap, which they draw close, and make fast on the Crown of their Heads, from
whence hangs a small String over their Backs; their Bodies from the middle
upward are quite Naked, only about their sides and Backs they wear a Copper
Plate, with the Emperors Arms Engraven thereon, open on their Breasts, and made
fast about their Middle with two Cords; the like kind of Plates they tie also
on their Skins; their Breeches are tied up betwixt their Legs with two Strings
made fast to the Plates. Thus Accouter'd, they fall very eagerly one upon
another, he that Throws his Antagonist, goes to the Hill on which the Judge
stands, and receives Silver or Golden Plates, sometimes marked with the
Emperors Arms, and sometimes not.

It may not be contradicted, but that the Japanners have the same intention in
these Exercises, as formerly the Greeks and Romans had, which was to make them
expert in War, and accustom their bodies to labor; Art. Gymuast. l. 5. c. 5.
for Hieronimus Mecurialis cites out of Hypocrates, That Wrestling warms and
strengthens the Flesh, Sinews, and Nerves. Theodorus Priscianus judges this
Exercise also to be good against a bad and cold Stomach: and Oribasius reckons
it a notable remedy against the Dropsy. Other Physicians (on the contrary) are
as much against it, especially, if done with eagerness; but the Wisdom and
Custom of Antiquity may well over-poise their single and more novel Opinions.

De Legib.
And to prove, that Wrestling is very ancient, Theseus King of Athens, Trained
up all his young Soldiers to die War, first with that Exercise. Plato sets down
Antheus and Circion, Who were the first Wrestlers,
for Inventers of that Art, in which, those employed themselves, which
afterward gave proofs of their Experience in Races. Besides the Heathens, the
antiquity of this Recreation appears by Moses, who relates, That the Patriarch
Jacob Wrestled with God, and became Lame thereby: Therefore the Children of
Israel eat not of the Sinew which shrank, Genesis 32. v. 32.
which is upon the hollow of the Thigh, unto this day: because he touched the
hollow of Jacob's Thigh, in the Sinew that shrank.

Stately bridge in Meaco.
THe Ambassadors, Fristius and Brookhurst, Riding on the thirtieth of April,
Anno 1650. from Meaco, were amazed at the costly Bridge over which they passed
out of the City. This Bridge, being two hundred and thirty Paces long, leads
over the River which cuts Meaco in the middle, and rests on large Columns, hewn
out of a Rock; the top being very strait, is Walled on both sides with Stone,
Adorned and Beautified with great Brazen Balls. The Ambassadors Dined that day
in the delightful Village Fissima, where they hired four Barks to Sail down the
River to Osacca, passing by the City Jonda, Castle of Jonda.
defended with a strong Castle, continually supplied with fresh Water by two
Mills. Over the River lie two Artificial Bridges, not unlike that of Meaco.

It appears, that the Ancient and Modern World has spent much time with no
less Art than Charges, to make the Waters flow faster than their ordinary
Course. Bridge of Trajanus.
Famous is that Bridge, which the Emperor Trajan laid over the Danou, the
greatest River in Europe. Paulus Jovius relates, That in his time there were
yet remaining of it thirty six Arches, hewn out of square Stone, every one a
hundred and fifty Foot high, sixty broad, and a hundred and seventy Foot
distance one from another.

Slaughter-Bridg of Caligula.
And who has not read Writers, of the Slaughter-Bridge, made by Caligula? This
cruel Tyrant caused the Inlet between Baja and Puteoli, being three thousand
and six Paces long, to be laid over with Vessels, two and two tied together,
and made fast with Anchors, which Ships he covered with Planks, and the Planks
with Earth: Over this new Way he Rode to and fro, the first day on a stately
Horse, on his Head a Garland Pleited of Oak, his Body covered with a Cloak of
Gold, in his Hand he carried an Ax: The second day he sat in a Chariot, Darius
the King of Parthia's Son walking before, and the Roman Nobility following him:
On the third day, a considerable number of Spectators came flocking thither,
which were all thrown into the Sea.

Wonderful Bridge at Peru.
The Art of the Americans of Peru, deserves also our Observation; for between
Chicuito and Callao in Peru, is a Lake no less broad than deep, over which
leads a Bridge of Rushes, Pleited together in such a manner, and made so fast
on both sides, that great Loads may pass over the same without any danger.

From whom the Japanners learned to make Bridges.
But it appears, that the Japanners brought the Art of making Bridges from
their Native Country China; for there is scarce any place in the World that
has gained so much Reputation in that particular as the Chinese, either for
their Curiosity, or great number; insomuch, that some eminent Cities, as
Nanquin, Hancheu, and others, reckon every one above ten thousand Bridges, in
all which there is a Vie of Art, and curious Workmanship.

The Bridge Cientao.
In the Territory of Xensi, between the Cities Hanchen and Siganfu, lies that
mavelous Bridge Cientao: to the building of which Changleang, General to the
Emperor Lieupang, employed several hundred thousand Men, besides his whole
Army, some cutting a Way through the Mountains, some securing and making even
the Valleys, other carrying Timber cross the River, and ramming in Pillars of
exceeding bigness, and supporting them by lesser Arms on both sides.

Chogan's Bridge.
The Bridge that leads betwixt two high Mountains over the River Fi, near
Chogan, merits admiration, consisting of one Arch, four hundred Yards broad and
fifty Rods high, the Sides strengthened with Stone Curtains.

Bridge on Chaina.
In the Country Junnan, the Emperor Mingus raised a Bridge about sixteen
hundred years since, of twenty great Iron Chains, made fast betwixt two Rock
sover a mighty Water-fall; which Chains he covered with huge Timber, and large
Planks, which (when any great weight passes over it) moves to the amazement
and terror of the Traveller.

Gangin-Bridge.
The Bridge in the Town Gangin is also very famous for its Foundress, who after
the Decease of her Husband, Parents, and nearest Relations, spent all her
Treasure that she had on the building of it; and the Work being finished, she
leaped into the River and drowned her self.

Loyang-Bridge, above all wonderful.
But the Bridge Loyang in Civenchau, the second Metropolis in the Territory of
Fokien, exceeds all the former, being three hundred and sixty Rods long, and
one and a half broad, cost the Governor Cayang fourteen hundred thousand
Ducats, and would have cost twenty times more, if the Chinese Laborers were not
forced to work on all Structures for the public good for nothing, only the
neediest have some small matter for their daily Labor. All the Bridge consists
of black shining Stones; and is not supported by Arches, but rests on three
hundred great Pedistalls, made like a Ship, sharp before, purposely to break
the steep of the Water: on whose uppermost part lie from Pillar to Pillar five
large Stones of an equal bigness, every one eighteen Paces long, two broad, and
of like thickness, and make up the number of fourteen hundred. The Defenses on
both sides are adorned, besides other curiosities, with Lions hewn out of
Stone, standing upon high Pedistalls: This is the form of the Bridge from the
City to the Castle; but on the other side of the Castle the remaining part is
somewhat smaller.

Bridge Tiensen.
The Bridge Tiensen, near the City Liping, made over the River Tanki, consists
of one Stone.

Of this kind of wonderful Stone China it self is able to produce more than all
the rest of Asia, Europe, Africa, and America; therefore we may easily guess
from whence the Japanners learned the building of artificial Bridges.

THe Netherland Ambassadors leaving the City Jonda, got about the Evening
beyond the handsome Village Firaskatta, and about two a Clock in the Morning to
Osacca.

Description of the wild Japan-Bonzi*
Along the Way which they came, resided many wild Bonzies, which generally go
two and two together, wearing tattered and torn Apparel, through which in many
places their naked Bodies appear. They never Shave their Beards, nor Cut the
Hair of their Heads, so that they appear like wild and salvage Men. But though
they Cut not their Hair, yet they Pare their Nails, because they may not be so
much like the Dairo, who neither Cuts his Hair nor his Nails. On their Heads
they wear six-corner'd Caps, wrought like a Net, two Points sticking upright,
two before, and as many behind. They are always provided with Table-Books to
Write in, a Cloth, a Calabash, and a Chain of small Horns, by which they tell
over their Prayers. Their Temples stand on the very top of the Mountains, to
which commonly a craggy broken Ascent leads.

These wild Saints are in great esteem with the Japanners, generally spending
their time amongst sick and dead Persons, with whom they sit whole Nights
muttering in their holy Language (which differs quite from the common Japan
Tongue,) without ceasing their Prayers to reconcile the Sick and Dead with
their gods Amida, Xaca, Canon, or any other Idol, which in their life and
prosperity they served.

A large Description of the strong Castle in Osacca.
THe Ambassadors Frisius and Brookhurst being got to Osacca, went and addressed
themselves on the third of May to the Governor and Commander of the Castle, to
present them (according to the Custom) with several Presents. By which means
they had an opportunity to view the Fortress, being three Leagues in the
outermost Circumference; it stands about two Mile to the Southward of Osacca,
on a Hill belonging to the City, so that it looks down on all the other
Buildings, and is the glory of the Province of Osacca; for here the richest
Merchants reside, the meanest of which commonly poffess thirty thousand Crowns.
The Castle is built of blew Stone rarely polished, and each a Fathom long; the
Walls are raised to an equal height.

Depth and breadth of the Moats.
The Retinue of the Netherland Ambassadors relate, That standing on the Edges of
the Walls, and looking down on the Moat, their Eyes dazzled, that being also
exceeding deep: The Ground of the outmost Trench being covered with three and
thirty Foot Water, is three hundred and ninety broad. The same depth has the
inner Moat, but wants a hundred and forty in breadth.

Who made the Castle Osacca so big, and why.
None has bestowed more Cost and Charges toward the building of this Castle,
making it the eighth wonder of the World, than the Emperor Taicosama, who
falling sick in Fissima, troubled himself exceedingly for his young Son Fideri,
his sole design being to settle him in the Throne, and make him Monarch of the
Japan Empire.

Amongst many other cunning and subtle Inventions to bring the forementioned
Design to pass, he caused the Castle of Osacca to be made much larger, and more
invincible; whilst his Sickness grew daily to a greater height, he set
thousands at work to finish this new Structure. Within the Walls stood above
seventeen thousand Houses, which in three days time were all pulled down: the
Rubbish every one was commanded, on forfeiture of their Goods, to carry away in
four and twenty hours: Those whose Houses were pulled down, had Ground provided
in a spacious Field to build on, according to the Marks made by Surveyors in a
direct Line. The new City went on with no less speed than the enlarged Castle,
about which Taicosama was exceedingly concerned, sending Messenger after
Messenger to forward the Work.

He had by this time chosen five Counselors of State, who with Ongoschio
should be Guardians of Fideri, binding them all by Oath, That when Fideri came
to be fifteen years old, they should Crown him Emperor; but because his Decease
might occasion some Insurrection, the Japan Kings being ambitious of higher
Authority, he thought if convenient to get them out of their own Provinces, and
by securing so disenable them; to which purpose the Castle in Osacca was the
most convenient Place, whether they were commanded to remove their Courts from
Fissima. The Charges of so great a removal were born by Taicosama.

Civil War in Japan.
But though Taicosama had ordered all things with so much prudence before his
Death, yet notwithstanding soon after all Japan was turmoil'd in a Civil War.
The Counselors of State took up Arms against Ongoschio, who being Conqueror in
a Field-Battel, marched with his victorious Army to Osacca, where the Castle,
that (being nobly stored with all manner of Ammunition and Necessaries) might
have endured the greatest Siege imaginable, was by the cowardly Commander
thereof, Morindono, treacherously delivered up, that otherwise would have
proved an invincible Fort.

Description of the mighty Outworks of the Castle Osacca.
After which time Fideri kept a most magnificent Court there; but was at last
set upon by his Father-in-law Daifusama, and burnt with the innermost Castle;
which Loss at last was renewed and made good, for the Edifice was rebuilt much
costlier than before, according to the splendour in which at present to
admiration it may be seen: The Out-work is raised from the bottom of the Moat
with gray Stone a Foot above the Ground, and built with Inlets according to the
Bulwarks. Near the three Gates they appear higher and higher: and the
Stone-Walls about the Moat rise above the Water a hundred and eighty three
Foot; on whose top stand Breast-works of Clay, Plastered on both sides with
Mortar.

The chiefest Fortifications have on their Out-points large Towers three
Stories high made of Stone; two of the Stories have peculiar Roofs, that jet
over the Walls; but the uppermost is smaller: yet the Chambers are very
pleasant and convenient to discover any Enemy at great distance.

In these Towers, being sixteen in number, lies an incredible store of all
manner of Ammunition, as Darts, Armor, Helmets, Shields, Javelins, Battel-Axes,
Swords, Pikes, Daggers, large Knives, Skeans, Match, Bandileers, Bows,
Mortar-Pieces, Builets, Muskets, Fire-hooks, and other Japan Arms.

The Way toward the Gate of the Castle after what manner.
To the chiefest Gate leads a Cawsie, made over the Moat, on both sides
fortified with a Stone-Defence, joynd to the Outworks, and reaches to the top
of the Wall, being even with the Gate; whose Square is covered with a Roof that
runs taporing behind and before: Passing through this Porch you enter into a
Quadrangular Court, on all sides Fenced with a high Wall; on the left-side
stands a great Tower, and within on the righ-side of the Entry through the Gate
a fair Watch-house; from hence a Way leads under the Tower through an Entry
into a spacious Court: on the left-side thereof is a long square Inlet, whose
Entrance inwardly faces the interior Castle.

An Inlet in the Castle full of Palaces.
Here are diverse Palaces, which Taicosama caused to be built, forcing the Japan
Princes to remove thither. They are very large, within full of spacious Rooms,
and without showing several Courts, being no less convenient than costly: But
on the right hand of the first Plain lies a third, two of whose Walls are those
that belong to the Castle: The third Wall parts this square Inlet from another
long one: The fourth stands near the spacious Palace; and here the Gate appears
which leads to the Plain, where several sumptuous Edifices are erected.

A long Inter with double Walls.
Next you come to a long Inlet with double Walls, the outermost rising from the
Moat, has many handsome Palaces, whose Roofs appear above Osacca: they being
built on the upper Ground of the Works, the inner Wall runs half way between
the outermost, and another which surrounds the first Moat of the inner Castle.

Adjoining to this appears another Inlet, not so long as the first, yet adorned
with several large Fabrics, though inferior to the other in beauty.

Above this lesser Court the out-Wall has two Indentings; in the last stands a
square Platform, with a very strong and neat Watch-house; from the Platform a
Wall runs direct against the Breast-work, which goes through the Moat, rising
in height from the Outworks to the second Gate; The second Front-Gate.
which is not much unlike the first, and looks inwardly on a square Plain,
enclosed within a Wall, having on the left-side a Corpse de Guarde close by the
Wall, and on the right a a high Turret on the Breast-work.

Somewhat farther appears a long Plain, encompassed with Buildings, but of an
ordinary sort. This Plain is within fortified with a double Bulwark, and
without with one of the sixteen Towers.

Warehouses.
Over the Bridge next the Wall, stand two Storehouses, the one bigger than the
other: on the sides of which a Wall runs cross, beginning at the outward
Fortification, and ends against the enclosure of the inner Moat.

Not far from the Front of the little Storehouse are two opposite Gates, to
which you go betwixt two Stone-Walls, one raised against the inner Trench, the
other parts three by-Ways from the common Road between the two Gates. The first
of these Streets is the largest, and adorned with several fair Edifices; from
which you go into another also full of curious Buildings; the Way that goes out
of it brings you into the forementioned Road between the two Gates; the third
lies before the third Gate likewise square, and has a great Bank, or Cawsie,
over which they pass to the outward Gate.

This Plain, or Court boasts on the right-side of its Entrance on the inner
Wall, a stately Hall, under which you go to the enclosed Street; whose
right-side Wall reaches a considerable way farther than the left, and ends near
a Gate not far from the Bridge of the inner Castle. This Gate being exceeding
high, they go down a sloaping Bridge to that spacious Plain, where, as we said
before, most of the Palaces are seen in a Walled Street. On each Aseeldinge
vant Magbeh Keyerlyck Casteel Osacca geleegen int groot Ryck Jappan beuyden de
Stadt Osacca inde previnie Qioo. The Castle of OSACCA.
side of the Bridge stand Warehouses of Stone, Storehouses against Fire.
built for safeguard against Fire; whereof two are built against the inner
Moat, seven against the outer Wall, and behind five more, which all serve to
keep the Emperor's Treasure from any Casualties of Fire.

Description of the inner Castle.
The inner Castle, surrounded by a Moat of two hundred and fifty Foot broad, and
thirty three Foot deep, with great Banks on each side strengthened with
Breast-works; that rise higher and higher toward the Gate, which being Plated
over with Copper, gives Entrance to a broad Street, ending near a square
Marketplace. But the second Gate lies on the other side of the Fortifications,
where the Trench is not filled up, but an exceeding costly Bridge lies over it,
the Rails being Plated over with Gold, and the Gate also, A Gate Plated over
with Gold.
insomuch much that they are valued at several Tuns of Gold.

Within this Gate appears a spacious Court enclosed with Stone-Walls; on the
right-side thereof stands a small Gate, through which they pass to a large
Walled Street, and at the end of that to another more stately, Fronting a long
Plain, wherein stand three great Storehouses against Fire, in which the
chiefest Treasure of the Emperor is kept.

Treasure of the Japan Emperor.
The Riches stored up here can scarce be numbered; for if the Japan Emperor,
according to Caron's account, spends Annually on his Lords in his Courts and
Life-guards above two thousand four hundred Tuns of Gold, and yet hoards up
continually, we may easily conjecture, that the Treasures hid in this Place are
unvaluable.

The Wall of the inner Castle.
The Wall of this inner Castle appears above the Water one hundred sixty three
Foot, being raised of gray Stone, and strengthened with twelve Forts, in each of
which a strong Tower. Here lies stored up all manner of Ammunition, either for
Horse or Foot, either to lay a Siege, or endure one.

Third Fort.
Near the Center of the Borough appears a third Fort; which is seen above all
other Buildings, the Foundation being raised on a blue Stone-Wall, built square
after the manner of a Castle, surrounded with Bulwarks: the Stones being very
large are neatly joined together, rising from the upper Ground of the Castle,
little less than two hundred Foot.

The Emperors Banqueting House.
In this Place stands also the Emperors Banqueting House: the lower Story
consists in spacious Arched Galleries, built; the first Roof jetting ove^ the
Windows and Entrances; over the first Story are five more, each one as you go
higher growing less than the other, so that on the second Story are seven great
Halls; as also on the third, but much lesser: the fourth numbers six; the
fifth, five; and the sixth, four. The first and second Roofs are covered with
Stone, the third and fourth with Lead, the fifth with Copper, and the uppermost
with Tyles of Massy Gold.

An open Place of Recreation.
After the same manner is the Roof adorned of another open Place, wherein the
Emperor recreates himself, which standing on one side of the Tower joins on the
top to a stately Seraglio, full of the Emperors Concubines.

Two Places.
But on the other side of the Tower appear two Royal Buildings more, erected
against the blue Wall: the Floors in each of them are covered with a thousand
Mats, every one six Foot and a half long, and four and a half broad; before the
Palaces is a square Court Walled in, where upon one side appears a Gate
beautified with two Golden Balls, which leads to the Stables, Stabies,
all covered with Golden Plates.

Not tar from thence stands another Gate, through which they must p^ss before
they can come into the inner Castle.

There are also several pleasant Gardens, Gardens.
with delightful Banquetting-houses near the two forementioned Palaces; in
which the Emperor walks oftentimes when he keeps his Court in the Castle of
Osacca.

A pleasant Mount.
Hard by the Gardens is an artificial Mount, with a curious House on the top; in
the Front whereof are six Storehouses against Fire: in three of which the
Emperor keeps his Silver, and in the other his Gold.

These kind of stately Buildings are another testimony of the Japanners Extract
from China; for indeed no Place in the Universe boasts so many mavelous
Structures as that mighty Empire of China.

A strange Mountain of those that make the Devil their Father-Confessor.
NOt far from this famous Castle is that high Mountain, on which the Jamabusci
climb yearly, to perform the following Service to their black god Goquis, that
is, the Devil, appearing to them in humane shape. They walk one by one toward
Goquis, and repeat their sins in such a mournful note, that they are heard by
the whole Company; and whilst they thus spend their time, a Sword hangs pendant
in the Air; according to Peter Davity's Description of Asia.

This kind of presentation occasions a strange alteration amongst the
Spectators, some Laughing, and others Crying: those that have confessed right
return with the multitude; but those that conceal their sins, are by Goquis
thrown down the Hill, so breaking their Necks.

The Netherland Ambassadors departure from Osacca.
THe Ambassadors Frisius and Brookhurst having dispatched their Affairs in
Osacca, took Shipping the sixth or May about the Evening, but the Wind being
Westerly, they made little Way; yet at last getting out of the River, they
entered the Sea, and left Sacai on their Larboard, and near it the great Temple,
built by the Dairo, and in the City the Temples built by the Saccaians to the
honor of Daimaogini.

A strange Feast of the Idol Daimaogini.
This Daimaogini is held for a Saint, having been a Companion of an ancient
Japan Emperor. His Feast they keep holy in a detestable manner in July; the
method this: First they block up the greatest Streets of the City with Timber
and Planks, only leaving one place open about two hundred Paces, into which
the ordinary People may not so much as look. In the afternoon the Idol
Daimaogini is brought forth amongst a vast number of Men. The Idol Riding in
the Front on Horseback, with a naked Scymiter in his Hand, betwixt two Youths,
the one carrying Daimaogina's Bow and Arrows, the other his Hawk; after these
comes a handsome Cavalcade in several Divisions, with peculiar Marks; then a
Company of Foot, who by Promise are obliged to tend upon their Idol on that
Day: these Dance and Sing after the former, often crying aloud, Xenzaira-quu,
Manzaira-quu, that is, A thousand years of joy, ten thousand times ten thousand
joys: next these come the Bonzies, Singing Eulogies in praise of their Idol;
then all the Nobility of Saccai, well Mounted in good Order; in the last Rank
six Witches Clothed in Linen, and accompanied with a great number of Women,
which continually mutter Charms and Incantations amongst themselves; then the
whole Procession ends with a considerable number of Armed Men. So at last the
whole Train marches to the Street that is enclosed with Planks, from whence
they fetch Daimaogina's Settle-bed; which being Gilded all over is brought
forth on the Shoulders of twenty stout Men, with continual Singing variety of
Sonnets, the chief being the beforementioned Xenzaira-quu, Menzaira-quu; so
soon as the Settle-bed is seen, they throw Gotzenhaus ausserhalb Sackai De
Groote TEMPEL Buyten Saccay The great TEMPLE without Saccay.
Money amongst the common People to scramble for, and religiously worship the
Bed.

Description of the great Temple near Saccai.
THe Temple near Saccai, built by the present Dairo's Father some years since,
is a most excellent Piece of Architecture, Art, and Cost, seeming to have made
a vye which should outdo the other in fitting it. The Situation on boasts a
most delightful Plain, one side bordering fertile Valleys, the other shaded by
a pleasant Grove of lofty Cedars, both large and delightful: at some distance
appear the tops of those Mountains, at whose Foot the City Saccai is Founded:
betwixt the Cedar-Grove and the Temple flows a pleasant Stream, that runs
through a great part of the Temple: then you discover a large Porch, whose
Doors Varnished with Wax after the Indian manner, lead the Way to the Brook; at
the entrance on the right-side stands a spacious Gallery on five Columns;
betwixt each Pillar appears a large Window; looking through that nearest the
Gate you see a second Portico, through which goes the Way to the Temple; under
the Windows a thick Wall, Railed on both sides, affords a stately Walk, each
side verg'd with pleasant Trees, that yield a most delightful Prospect: the
Roof of the Gallery covered with Copper Tyles, are kept so bright and clear,
that they give a dazzling luster when the Sun shines bright; on the left hand of
the Watergate stands a stately Hall, built on three Ranks of great Pedistalls
five Foot from the Ground, the out-parts having each a thick Ledge on which the
Walls are raised; which being adorned with Flower-work and three-corner'd
Windows, makes a lovely sight to the Eye.

Houses and Gardens belonging to the Temple.
On one side of this Hall is a Garden full of all manner of Plants, Flowers, and
Herbs, kept in order by the skill of choice Gardners, wherein are two Walks
between Copper Rails curiously Painted, that reach from the forementioned Hall
to the Brook, along which a crooked Wall, sloaping on the top with several
Windows, reaches to the end: between this Wall and the Copper-Rails, a Way
leads toward the Treasuries and Habitations of the Priests: Of which Buildings
three stand in a Row, each Front facing toward the Cedar-Grove, the Roofs
jetting a great way over the side-Walls, are supported by six Pillars; under
which are five Walks like Piazza's; behind these three appear several other
Houses of the same fashion, but much bigger, wherein reside Japan Priests to
perform their Service in the Temple. Over these Houses may be seen the top of
the first Gate, being exceeding large, and artificially covered with thick
Copper Plates.

A stately Turret.
Close by stands a stately Turret, almost three hundred Foot high, being eight
Stories one over another, with eight Angles; every Story boasts many spacious
Rooms and other Apartments, from whose Windows is a most delightful Prospect of
several Villages, Mountains, Woods, Champain-grounds, and the City Saccai:
between the Turret and the Gallery along, the Rivulet, stands the stately
Temple, within curiously adorned with Imagery; on whose top appears a square
and very large Chamber, the Floor being on the Roof of the Temple Paved with
Freestone, on each side thereof four Pillars, and between each Pillar three
Windows: the octangular Roof rising to a Point in the middle is all covered
with Massy Gold.

The Riches of the Temple near Saccai.
The Dairo, at whose Charges this Edifice was erected, settled a Revenue of two
hundred thousand Tail of Silver on the same Annually, every Japan Tail valued
at five Shillings Sterling.

THe Dayro, according to the Japan Chronicles, has always bore the chief
Commands in that Empire: But since Anno 1550. his Throne being shaken by Civil
Wars, which were occasioned by the Dayro's youngest Son, brought it at last to
that effect, that the Dayro had nothing left him, but only the Name of Chief
Commander in Ecclesiastical Affairs; the Emperors keeping all the other Power,
without any Limitation, in their own Hands: Only they go once in five or six
years to Meaco, where, as a token of their Obedience, they present the Dayro
with many rich Gifts, and drinking out of a Silver Cup, then breaking it in
pieces, preserve them in their Pockets; which Custom amongst the Japanners is a
token of great humility: Wherefore not only the Dayro, but nine of his nearest
Relations, esteem themselves above the Emperor.

Apparel of the Dayro
The Dayro goes clad in a black Coat, with a red Cape or Collar, o which hangs
a Cloak full of great Pleits: On his Head a Bonnet, about which hang diverse
Tassels. In his Palace are three hundred sixty five Idols, of which one is set
every Night before his Bed, to take care of his Welfare. If notwithstanding the
Idol, Scourging of Idols, why.
any disaster befall him, then the Idol that watched that Night is soundly
beaten with Sticks: which Punishment suffices not; for besides, he banishes
him a hundred days from his Palace; after the expiration of which time, the
Idol returns, and takes possession again of his old Station.

Chief-Priest Ninxit,
The same Custom the Chief-Priest Ninxit otherwise called Jaco, or Xaca,
maintains: He being chosen amongst the Bonzi, keeps House in Meaco, and has
also three hundred sixty five Images, like the Dayro; and the Power to make and
elect Tondes, that is, Bishops.

Dayro's Seat.
The Dayro in the day time sits with his Legs under him, on a pretty high Seat,
having a Hanger on one side, and on the other his Bow and Arrows; in each Hand
a Silk Towel or Handkerchief; his Forehead painted black and white; sometimes
wearing a black Shirt, over which one of Purple, and upon that a Silk Coat. How
he may be deposed.
The Dayro's Honor and Dignity may be taken from him (but none dare bereave him
of Life) if he touches the Earth, pares his Hair or Nails, or kills any one.
His Counselors are generally called Bungies, with whom he orders all Matters
concerning Religion, and giving Titles of Honor, of which the Japanners are
very covetous, buying their Nobility with great Sums of Money; His Riches, from
whence he has them.
from whence it proceeds, that the Dayro, though he possesses neither Lands nor
Customs, yet is accounted amongst the richest in Japan; for the Chiefest
Princes continually have their Envoys at his Court, and in Person come yearly
to visit him with great Presents, that thereby they may obtain newer and
greater Titles of Honor, which make them in higher respect and esteem amongst
their Subjects.

His Women, and delightful Recreation.
The Dayro also has twelve Wives, besides a great number of Concubines: Each
Wife has a costly Palace, which standing six in a row, face each other.
Against the Evening, the Meat is prepared in those twelve Palaces, in new
Earthen Pots; and both Vocal and Instrumental Music, delighting the Ears of
those present: But to that Palace where the Dayro is carried, thither they
bring all the prepared Dishes, and eleven of his Wives walk thither, amongst
the Musicians and Ladies of Honor, to wish Joy to her with whom the Dayro does
intend to sleep that Night; and all things which delight the Eye, Ear, and
Palate, are there prepared for his Entertainment.

Bringing up of the young Dayro
When the Dayro has a Son by one of the twelve Women, he immediately chooses
eight Young and Beautiful Women out of the Noblest Families, who being
accounted worthy to be Nurses and Foster-Mothers to so great a Lord as the
Dayro's Son, receive with great Ceremony Titles of Honor and Dignity, which the
forementioned twelve Women, and nine prime Lords give them. This done, a
sumptuous and costly Banquet is prepared; on the next day, they choose forty
out of the eighty, to which they show more Honor than before, and yet greater
Favor is shown to ten which are taken out of the forty; the which ten they
reduce to three, and show them far more Respect than either of the former: But
on the third day, they elect one out of the three, which they settle with such
State and Ceremony in her place, that it is scarce to be expressed, all the
Dayro's Court, being as it were in an uprore: their Feast and other various
Pastimes being over, Strange election of a Nurse.
the new Nurse receives greater Titles than any of the eighty before had done.
And thus being thought worthy to Suckle the young Dairo, Milk is squeezed out
of her Breast into the Infants Mouth, which Ceremony being ended, the Child is
put into her Arms.

Farther relation of Frisius his going by water.
But the Netherland Ambassadors, Frisius and Brookhurst, left Saccai and the
Dairo's Temples, and Sailed toward the South Sea along the Coast, by
Ammanasacoi, and the Village Fiungo, formerly a stately City, where the
Emperors sometimes kept their Court, but since, exceedingly ruined by Fire.
Then leaving Swria on their Star-board, they Sailed along the Shore, and passed
by Takessima, Akas, Firmensi, and Muro, where they Landed in their Journey, and
after having been nobly Treated in the Town, Japan Baths.
they refreshed themselves by going to a Bath, much esteemed and used by the
Japanners, as formerly by the Jews, Greeks, Persians, Romans, and several other
Nations; and chiefly the Romans, And also the Romans.
who set a great esteem upon their Baths, in Rome being an incredible number of
them; so that there were not only public Baths, but scarce any one Person of
Quality but had one for his own Convenience; and if the Baths any where
decayed, or grew foul, Officers were appointed for their cleansing.

Afterward, the Emperors spent great Sums of Money on their Baths, and the
more, because the Romans had great need of them, they having little Linen to
shift themselves withal; so that they had them not only for Pleasure, but also
for Necessity, to wash off their Sweat, and other gathered Dirt; the bottoms
and Walls of those Baths were generally anointed with Perfumes, the Water
coming into some of them through Silver and Golden Pipes.

Marcus Agrippa built an hundred and seventy Baths, all which were free for any
one to Bathe in, but not in the night. The Emperor Adrianus commanded that none
should Bathe before eight in the Morning, except in time of sickness: Alexander
Severus took off that Roman Law of not Bathing in the Night, and not only
permitted it, but provided Oil for the Lamps in the Baths. Antonius the
Philosopher parted these places, that the Men and Women should not come
together: In like manner, amongst the Carthaginians the common People were
locked out of the Noble-mens Baths. But this distinction was not observed by
the Romans, who one among another flocked thither, insomuch, that the Emperor
himself often Bathed amongst the Vulgar Rout, as Titus Vespasianus relates. The
concourse of the ordinary Baths was sometimes so great, that the Attenders of
them being quite tired out, took the Seed of wild Lupines (which occasions the
Headache) throwing it in the Fire, so to drive the multitude from thence, with
the stink thereof.

THe Netherland Ambassadors leaving the forementioned Places on their
Starboard, steered between the Islands Jessima and Wota, and sailed close by
the City Oussimato. And here we cannot pass by, without a particular
Observation of what is often seen in this Voyage, viz. a Fight betwixt the
Scorpion and Pismires, of both which Vermin the Japan Barques are generally
very full: Nay, the Scorpions in some Countries increase so exceedingly, that
the People are necessitated to quit their Habitations. Plin. lib. 8. cap. 30.
Pliny relates, That a great Province of the Moors, Cinamolgi, lies waste by
reason of the abundance of Scorpions. Nicander reckons, In Theriacis.
That there are eight sorts of these Animals, all which have a Sting sticking
out of their Tails, wherewith they offend others, and defend themselves. If,
according to the Arabians, they wound the upper part of the Body, a Swelling
appears, and a continual rising of the Stomach; but if they sting the lower
part of the Body, the Belly swells immediately with Wind. If it be a Man that
is hurt, he is troubled with a continual Priapismus, and the Poison congeals in
his Groins. De Loci Affect. lib. 3. on. 6.
Gallen tells us, That a Person stung by a Scorpion met him accidentally, whose
whole Body was as cold as Ice, and yet seemed to drop with Sweat. This Animal
preys on Flies, and sucks up the fattest Moisture of the Earth: And, according
to Aristotle, is accustomed to kill their Dams, so soon as they are able to
shift for themselves: Yet they are not mischievous and hurtful in all places;
for there are some in Italy and Egypt which afford good Food. The sting of a
poisonous Serpent is cured by a House-Mouse, cut open in the middle, and laid
upon the Wound; and also a roafted Locust, drunk up in Wine; likewise a Barb,
and a Crey-fish. Moreover, it is a testimony of Divine Goodness, that a
Scorpion, and most of all other Poisonous Creatures, being killed, and their
Flesh laid raw on the Wound which they made, cures it in a short time:
Fasting-spittle has also a great Operation to dispel this Poison. The ancient
Father St. Ambrose relates concerning this Creature, Hoxaem, lib. 6. cap. 6.
That he kills a Lion, and is himself destroyed by Pismires. But to return to
our Story.

Strange Battle between the Pismires and Scorpions in the Voyage to Nangesaque.
IN the Voyage between Osacca and Nangesaque, it is often seen with great
admiration, that a Scorpion being surrounded with an innumerable Army of
Pismires, who storm him on all sides, biting his Feet so extremely, that not
being able to bear it, nor seeing any way to escape, at last kills himself with
his own Sting, running the same into his Head, of which he immediately dies;
whereupon they join all their Forces to carry him away: In which Work, it is
pleasant to behold how they help one another; some shoving the Prey forward
with their Feet, while others haul it along with their Mouths, and the
remaining part creep under, to bear it on their Backs; always having fresh
Supplies, to release those that grow weary.

God represents in this small Animal the exact Image of Virtue; wherefore the
Holy Scripture admonishes the Slothful to take Example by them. And indeed
their Care is exceeding great; for they make their Nest with so many crooked
Entrances, that it is secure from all hurtful Creatures: The Earth which they
scrape out, they stop before their Holes, to keep out Rain: These Holes are
divided into three Partitions; in one the Males and Females live together; in
another the Females breed up their Young; and the third serves them for their
Storehouse, wherein they lay their Provision.

Majolus relates, That near Barleta, a City in Terra di Barria, he found a
strange Nest of Pismires, under a great piece of Timber, which being easily
taken away, there appeared a City, with four Corners, City of Pismires.
almost four Foot long, and one and a half broad, lying so direct, as if it had
been made straight with a Line; a Street going through the same long-ways, was
a Finger broad, and one deep, made in a Clayie Ground; three lesser Streets
also, which came into the forementioned middle-way, of the same breadth and
depth; at one end thereof a Marketplace, and at the other end a Style made of
Egg-shells. On the other side of this Pismires City appeared several deep Pits,
so full of Corn, that it lay scattered on the Ground about them. Along the Ways
the Pismires passed to and fro, like the Inhabitants of a Populous Town.
Toward the South-West, exactly in the middle of the longest Wall, was the
Gate, through which some came in loaded with Corn, others went out empty to
fetch their Burdens, the eldest of them creeping before, who also climb the
Blades, biting off the Corn, whilst the young ones stand below, and pick every
Grain out of the Ear; that which is too heavy for them to carry, they shove
before them; those that are empty, make way for those that are laden; and that
the Corn should not sprout, they bite that end that uses to shoot; and if
accidentally it happens to be wet, they bring it forth, laying it to dry in the
Sun, which is a certain sign of Fair weather. Moreover, they labor continually,
resting neither Night nor Day.

Hist. Anim. lib. 6. ca. 50. A conceited Passage of the Pismires.
Aelian relates, That Cleanthes once observed some Pismires which carried away
a dead one to the Hole, from whence it was used to come forth when living; and
coming before it, stood all still, they belonging to another Hole; upon which,
some Pismires that were in the same, came immediately to the Strangers, and
went several times in and out, as about Business of great concern; at last
bringing out a rotten Pear, as a Ransom for the dead Prisoner, and a Reward for
their Labor, they took the Deceased with them, to bury him, as it is very
common amongst them. By this Spectacle Cleanthes concluded, That Beasts could
speak, and especially the Pismires: about which Opinion. Pythagoras, Cicero,
Celsus, and other Learned Heathens, have often held great Disputations.

Farther Voyage of the Ambassadors.
BUt to return again to our Ambassadors Frisius and Brookhurst, who proceeding
forward in their Journey, and Sailing by the Islands Fibi, Simeia, Samnik,
Syrais, Caroto, Szuwa, Jowe, Camro, Mianofimi, Moeko, and Mettagamma; left on
their Starboard, upon the main Coast of Japan, Binga, Bignatum, Mewarri,
Tantonomi, Jocosimi, Caminagari, Cammenosacci, Simonisicci, and Ximontchequi.
In this Voyage they met in several Places, and chiefly about the Islands,
diverse Japan Fishermen, who have generally their Wives with them: The Men
commonly have the Crown of their Heads shaven, Japan Fishermen how clothed.
only a Ring of Hair just about their Heads, not unlike the Roman Priests.
Their Coats they fold over their Breasts, being girt with a broad Girdle, in
which they stick a great Cutting-knife. On their Shoulders they carry a Yoke,
at which hangs on each side a long and square Vessel, wherein they carry their
Water, and also keep their Fish alive when they bring it to sell. The Women
wear a Scarf wound about their Heads, with a Tuft hanging down on their
Foreheads; their Breasts covered with a square Cloth, interwoven with several
Flowers of Silk; about their Necks a long Cotton Cloth, that hangs down their
Backs; their Coats both full and long, hanging down to their Ankles; their
Shoes, or rather Soles only, are made fast behind with a kind of Strap, and
betwixt the two great Toes with a Knob.



Frisius and Brookhurst arrive at Nangesaque.
THeir Excellencies Frisius and Brookhurst at last Sailed through the
Straights, where on the one side, upon the main Coast of Japan, lies the City
Simonisicci, and on the opposite Shore, the great Island Bungo: So Weathering
the Point, they got into the Bay Kokero; thence getting into the Corean Sea,
they run between the Island Simissima, and the Bongian Village Assia, by
Jobeco, Auroo, Firando, Nanatzjamma, Zetta, and Foucunda, into the Haven of
Nangesaque, on the twenty second of May, Anno 1650. where they found their
Contrymen all in good health, and were informed of the strict Customs and
Laws of the Japanners, After what manner the Netherland Ships sail to
Nangesaque.
about the Netherland Ships; who when they come between the Priest-Mountain,
and the low Cliffs called the Hen and Chickens, passing by the Emperor's three
great Block-houses, must discharge their Guns three times, at which the Japan
Barques, full of Soldiers, come aboard, taking an account of the Ships Crew,
setting them down by their Names, and also their Age and Conditions, which they
are again demanded at their going away: therefore every one must well observe
how he has described himself; for being found in a Lie, is as much as their
Lives are worth.

How the Japanners deal with them.
So soon as they have dropped Anchor before Nangesaque, they must again
discharge their Guns, strike their Flags, and untie their Boats, which driving
away, the Fishermen lighting upon them, make use thereof till such time as the
Ships are again ready to set Sail. Moreover, two Japan Skiffs, with two
Soldiers in each of them, are ordered to lie one at the Stern and the other at
the Head of the Ship, who keep Watch there day and night, never so much as
entering into the Vessel, except in stormy Weather.

The next day after the Vessel comes into the Haven of Nangesaque, the
Bonjoisen goes aboard, who sits down on a rich Carpet, brought over for that
purpose from Batavia; then enquiring after the whole Cargo, they rip open
Packs, Bags, and Chests at their pleasure; for the performing of which Offices,
they use Servants, called The Companies Porters, not one Netherlander daring
any ways offer to touch the Goods, nor bear the least Command in the Ship; the
Captain and Merchant of the Vessel being forced to stand and look on all things
with patience, a Japan Seaman bearing the chief Command: The forementioned
Porters receive for their daily Labor ten Styvers, for which they work from
Sunrising, till it sets again behind the Hills of Nangesaque. These People
carry a little Board on their Sides, with the East India Companies Arms carved
thereon: Every one of them receives a Ticket from the Bonjois, signed with
Japan Characters, which they show to the Watch at the Gate through which they
go to the Netherlanders Storehouse: The forementioned Ticket serves them also
as a Privilege to unlade the Dutch Merchandise, and other Materials; yet a
Netherland Commander has the Liberty from the Bonjois to choose one, whom he
will have to work on such a day.

They chiefly observe when they are unlading a Vessel, if they can find any
Crosses, or other Church-Ornaments used by the Catholics; for if they find the
least of them, the Dutch not only lose their Ship and Goods, but their Lives
also. They likewise make strict Search for Dutch Money and Books; therefore
when they draw near Japan, Insupportable Pride of the Japanners.
every one puts up his Money and Books, and marking and sealing it with their
own Names, deliver it up to the Captain, who putting it all together into a
Barrel, seals it up. When they have unladen the Ship of all the Merchandise,
then the Japanners search their Guns, to see if they be not charged, and weigh
the Anchors, that nothing of any Privacy be tied to them, and carry all their
Match, Powder, Muskets, Pistols, Pikes, Hangers, and all other Ammunition
ashore, with the Barrel of Money and Books; the Hollanders not once daring to
ask whither it goes.

Seal up the Hatches.
The Hatches are also sealed with the Emperors Arms on a Paper, made fast upon a
Straw Knot, in such a nature, that no Netherlander is able to untie it: Over
the Seal they nail a square Cover, made of Boards, that none may accidentally
tread on the Emperors Seal. When the Ship is ready to depart, the Seals which
are on every Hatch are taken off, and the Straw Button shown to a Bonjois, to
see if the Seal be not broke. If the Steward of the Ship has occasion for
Water, Wood, or any other Necessaries, he makes a sign; whereupon an
Interpreter, who has twelve Guilders a Month and his Diet allowed him, in the
Netherlander Storehouse, on the Isle Disma, before Nangesaque, comes aboard,
asking what they want; and receiving answer, he goes to one of the Ports in the
Stern of the Ship, and lying on his Knees with his Head against the Boat,
without seeing those that are in it, he desires that which the Ships Crew want;
and having delivered his Message, the two Watchmen send the Interpreter to the
Governor of Nangesaque, who immediately gives order for a Boat to bring them
Water and other Necessaries. Formerly the Japanners used to take off the Rudder
from the Ship; but of late they have left that Custom. When the Netherlanders
Goods are brought into the Storehouse, they are received by a Bonjois, with
the forementioned Tickets.

The manner Trade betwixt the Netherlanders and Japanners.
In October are their Days of Sale; when a Catalogue of the Goods that are
brought over, is set up in all places of Nangesaque: These Market-days they
proclaim by going up and down, and beating on Kettles and Basins; at which
noise, great numbers come flocking together.

Apparel of the Inhabitants on the Island Bongo,
THe Inhabitants of Nangesaque, and those of the Island Bongo, differ not only
in their Speech, but also in their Apparel, from the other Japanners. The
Bongian Men cover their Heads with a loose Cotton Cap; their Coats not so long
as those in Japan, theirs being like the Polanders: The Lappets of these Coats
they fold one over another on their Breasts; about their Middle a broad Sash,
of which one end hangs down to their Knees. The Women go in their Hair braided,
one Lock thereof hanging over their Shoulders; their Coats or Flowered Cotton,
tied above the Hips with a broad Girdle, reaching down half way of their Legs,
and being open before like a Gown, under which another Coat appears, curiously
Embroidered.

BUt to return: On the Day of Sale the Packs are cut open; on the Monday all
the Goods may be seen, the Storehouse of the East India Company being then
opened; What Merchandise they barter.
and in Silver Vessels are placed Deer-skins and Buff-skins, all manner of
Cotton Cloth, the finer the better, Quicksilver, Scarlet Cloth, Speckled-wood,
all manner of Drugs, Brimstone, Ambergreece, Musk, Toquin-pelings, and diverse
other Merchandises. The forementioned Dishes are placed on a Counter, Where and
how shown.
standing in the Gallery which goes quite through the Netherland Storehouse on
the Island Disma. This Warehouse has three hundred convenient Rooms, to hold
Goods, standing all next the Ground, which are sealed up every Night with the
Emperors Arms, in the presence of a Japan Burgomaster, who, during the time of
Trade, diets with the Agent for the Netherland East India Company, and is
served with Silver Vessels, by Japanners. The Japanners who are employed in
this Business being three hundred, are paid by the Netherlanders.

Description of the Gallery before Nangesaque.
The forementioned Gallery being square, is twelve Foot high, resting on turned
Pillars of Speckled-wood, a pair of broad Stairs leading up to it, and at the
end thereof a Hatch; the Floor of the Gallery covered with Tapestry. Round
about the Table on which the Goods are to be seen, stand Stools of
Speckled-wood, with Cushions of Silk, on which the East India Companies Arms
are Embroidered: Before the Japan-Merchants go to sit down by this Table, they
pull off their Shoes, that they may not soil the Tapestry with Dirt. This Table
stands in the middle of the Gallery.

When the several Merchandises have been viewed on the Monday, they Contract
for them the next day; on the Wednesday the Goods are delivered, and weighed in
the Emperors Scale; on Thursday the Watergate of the Netherlanders Storehouse
is opened, before which above a hundred Barques lie daily to lade and unlade;
on the Sunday the Japanners rest, as well as the Christians.

This Trade lasts a whole Month, during which time, it is just like a Fair on
the Island Disma; the Japanners making Booths of Sail-Cloths, What the
Japanners bring to sell.
wherein they sell Camphire and Camphire-wood, Japan-Cabinets and Coats,
China-Roots, Porcelane, and all manner of rough and wrought Silver.

When the appointed time of Trade is expired, the Ships must immediately stand
off to Sea, notwithstanding great part of their Goods lie on the Decks
unstow'd: Nay, if there blow a contrary Wind, and a Storm, yet they must away,
so soon as their Ammunition is brought aboard again. If the Seamen are not
quick in weighing their Anchors, immediately a hundred Soldiers are sent to
every Ship, to cut their Cables, and carry them out beyond the Priest-Mountain,
whether it be Night or Day, making no distinction. In the like hurry the
Ambassadors Frisius and Brookhurst came from Japan, and at last arrived safe in
Holland.

A Second and Later DISCOURSE Concerning the EMPIRE OF JAPAN.
Japan Kingdoms.
JAPAN divided into five Provinces, viz. Jamaystero, Jetsengo, Jetsesen,
Quanti, and Ochio, besides Saykok and Chiekok, therein reckons these several
Kingdoms, according to Peter Davity; that is, Nangato, Inami, Suno, Isxumi or
Juxumi, Aqui, Foqui, Inaba, Bichu, Mimazaca, Fatima, Tanqueina, Tamba, Tango,
Barosa, Xamixiro, Xamato, Inzumo, Quiy, Jechigen, Bonni, Inga, Xma, Ixe, Mino,
Cangan, Noto, Jetchu, Fitaqui, Ximano, Boari, Micava, Cay, Jenchingo, Deva,
Chaneuque, Tuttomu, Furanga, Izu, Mucazi, Ximonojuque, Sangamie, Xila, Bungo,
Figen, Arima, Omura, Saxuma or Sucuma, Fingo, Chicugen, Chicungo, Buigen, Tosa
or Tonsa, Quiloo, Aba or Ava, Sanoqui or Samuqui, Ho or Hyo; besides the
Islands Sado, Voqui, Ceuxima, Iqua, Abagi, and Iniunoxima, each of which makes
also a Kingdom,

Chief Cities in Japan.
Nangato has for its Metropolis the City Amanguei bordering the Sea, and
reckons ten thousand Houses. The chief City of Mino is Guefu; and also
Funamaca, of the Kingdom Boari. The Kingdoms that lie Northerly, belonging to
Saykok, are Buge, Figen, and Chichugen; the Southern, Fiunga or Finga, Bonzumi
or Ozumi, Saxuma, Bungo, and Chungo. Finga is divided betwixt two Lords; the
first Governs over Emacusa, and the other over Xiqui. But as the Dominion of
Nangato is oftentimes called by the Name of its Metropolis Amanguei; so also,
for the same Reasons, the Kingdom Bonni is called Concor, in which is very
famous the strong Castle Saojama. Moreover the Islands Firando and Goto belong
to Saykok. The Kingdom of Bungo boasts (besides other eminent Places) the Towns
Vozuqui or Uzuqui, Funay, and the Fort Ximabara. Next to Bungo, joins the
Territory Figen, famous for its Metropolis Riosoge. The Dominion Arima borrows
its denomination from the chief City; besides which, are also the Towns Arye,
Ximaga, Canzula, Chingia, Saigo, and Facirao. This Realm Arima is by an Inlet
of the Sea, commonly called The Bay of Arima, divided from Fingo, whose most
eminent Cities are Uto, Cateuxiro, Nonzuy, Consura, Tondo, Xiqui, Catatinova,
Fondi, and Amacusa. The Metropolis of Omura is also called by the same Name as
the whole Realm; besides which, there are the Towns Coru and Sonuguy. Saxuma is
famous for the City. Cangoxima, Mye, and the Invincible Castle Cogiro. Chicugen
contains the eminent City Facata, inhabited by many rich Merchants; and also
the Towns Chinsuchi, and Xataqua. In Chicungo stands the great City Corumi,
fortified with a strong Castle: In Quiloo, Osacca: In Quanto, the Imperial
Residence Jedo: In Caquinay, that famous City Meaco.

Unlimited Power of the Japan Kings.
EVery King has an unlimited Power within his own Territories; only such as are
too much oppressed, may appeal to the Emperor for Justice: Nay, every Master
has the same Authority over his Servants, and every Father over his Children;
and yet all Persons, even the Kings themselves, are in such subjection under
the Emperor, that he does with them what he pleases: So that the Subjects must
do what their Governors are desirous to have them, and expect to be put to
death when they think fit.

Pride of the Japan Nobles.
NO Persons whatsoever are so ambitious of Honor, so high-minded and proud, as
the Japanners; for not only their Kings, but Cunixes, that is, Dukes; and
Tones, which are like our European Barons; nay, ordinary Noblemen, account
themselves too good to answer any one with Words, scorning almost to give the
least Signal by Beck or Nod, for what they would have to be done, but sometimes
write it down in Paper; not valuing in the least to be beloved, nor fearing to
be hated by their Subjects.

When any Person is removed by the Emperor from one Command to another, his
Subjects are always removed with him.

It seldom happens that the Crown remains long in one Family, because for small
occasions, according to the Emperors pleasure, they are delivered to others.
Not. Pol.
It seems strange which Justus Lipsius relates of the Japan Emperors, that at
their Coronation they promise by Oath, Strange Oath of the Japan Emperors.
To provide Necessary Rains and Sunshine, and also to prevent Storms and
Floods, hurtful to the Plants.

IN the more barren parts of Japan, the Inhabitants are valianter than
elsewhere. Firando and Goto produce much Salt, which they barter for Rice.

The Breeding of their Children in Japan.
The Japanners breed up their Children not only mildly, but very prudently; for
if they should cry whole Nights, they endeavor to silence them by fair means,
without the least snapping, or using hard Language to them. Before their Youths
come to be seven years old, they put them out to School, where being tutored by
the Bonzi, they learn to Write and read till they are fourteen; of which their
Writing is the most troublesome, Strange manner of Wri^^^g
having four several sorts of Characters, which differ not only in shape, but
signification; some Letters and Words being used in Writing to Noblemen,
others to the Common People; one Form of Speech in their Verses, and a far
differing Dialect in Prose.

The Teaching of Youth, (...) what manner.
Their Teaching is performed without rashness; for there is no Japanner that
will do any thing by foul means: But they provoke the Children with Honor to
strive one against another; which seeming to be born in them, they seek with
their utmost Endeavors to exceed one another in Learning. In their twelfth year
they begin to wear Swords. How they wear their Hair
The Hair of their Foreheads the Children pull out with a pair of Pinchers; the
Burgesses half their Hair; the Noblemen shave their Heads quite bare, leaving a
Tuft behind, as a sign of his Nobility; if they differ about Buying or Selling
Commodities, their Children decide the difference.

Japanners are very mannerly
ABove all things it is much to be admired, to see the Noble and Ignoble,
Citizens and Rusticks, Youth and Age, so mannerly and of a civil Deportment and
Carriage, as if they had been bred in an Emperors Court. They abstain from Beef
and Mutton, as the Europeans do from Horseflesh, feeding most on Rice, Fish,
and Venison, and are very Moderate in all things to prolong their Lives, and
indeed they attain to a great and healthful Age. Live long.
Women with Child destroy their Fruit, Childbearing women destroy their fruit.
when they have not wherewithal to bring up their Children, the Bonzies not
accounting such Murder for Sin. They have not the least Pity or Compassion on
Strangers: Are unmerciful*
They wonder at those Christians, that preserve any from Perishing in Want:
They never disclose their Troubles: They break not easily out in a Rage, but
being once angered, will never be reconciled: None can justly accuse them for
Deceit, for if any one chances to give more than is their due to have, they
will restore it again to the Donor: Their excellent Arts may appear by their
Coats, Wax'd-Chests, and Cabbinets.

Married men much more privilege than the women.
THe Marry'd-Men have much more liberty than the Women; for a Man may without
the least Regret be common with a Whore, and can send his Wife upon any Offense
home to her Friends: But this kind of Divorcing their Wives, is only customary
amongst the Common People, for when a Nobleman begins to have an Antipathy
against his Wife, he puts her not away, because of her Quality, but provides
her in his House with all Necessaries, and delights himself with those which he
fancies best: But the Women being thus kept in awe, do all things possible to
please them, and the rather, because that for a small Offense, and mere Trifle,
viz. but speaking with any other Man in private, they are by their Law to
suffer Death; from whence it proceeds, that Married Women here are generally
very Honest and Chaste.

A strange passage that happened in Firando about a chaste Woman.
A Passage which happened in Firando, Anno 1646. on August 15. may witness the
same. Jacatai, a Person of Quality, having Contracted Marriage with a young
Lady; and soon after the Wedding, having some occasions, went to Meaco; a
Nobleman having formerly been denied in his Courtship to the young Married
Woman, (under a Pretense, that he would never Marry) observing this
opportunity, came with a considerable Train of Servants to his late Mistress,
and forced her to satisfy his Lust: She thus Injured, resolved on Revenge,
desiring him to stay with her, giving him also hopes of more such Enjoyments as
he had lately had: In the Interim, Jacatai returned home, for whose Welcome
they prepared a noble Feast on the top of the House; she had also ordered, that
her Gallants, Friends, and he should be invited thither: Where, whilst they
were in the midst of their Mirth, Jacatai's Wife standing up, related, that
there was a Woman in Saccai that had been lately Ravished; asking, what
Punishment she deserved? whereupon, all those there present judged the Villain
that had committed the Fact to suffer death, and not she that was Ravished?
Which said, she cried aloud, I am she, and there sits he that did it, I pray,
take my Life, that the shame of suffering such a D^^d, may not stain other
honest Women, nor one so base as I be found amongst Men. Every one startled
thereat, and chiefly her Husband, who proffering his Love to her, promising
also from that time forward, never to remember the Fact, she having been forced
to it against her power. These kind speeches satisfied her not, but she said,
Will you, because of my Dishonor take no Revenge on me? then I will take it my
self; which she had no sooner said, but leaping from the top of the House,
broke her Neck. The Ravisher amongst the Crowd of his Friends, got down Stairs
into the Street, where ripping up his Belly, fell down on the dying Woman, so
to accompany her in death, whom he loved so exceedingly in his life time.

(...) No less strange passage happened in the Realm of Fingo.
ABout the same time, almost the like Passage happened in Fingo: A Nobleman
residing there, was Married to a Lady so exceeding Beautiful, that the King of
Fingo being Enamored of her, could not rest before he had satisfied his desires
by enjoying her. But because her Husband stood in his way, he resolved to
dispatch him; which Murder put in Execution, the Widow was presented to the
King, she having information, that her Husband was killed by the King's order,
told him, O King, I account my self happy, that I have this Body to serve you,
if your Love to me be real, pray let me have one proof thereof, which will be
by granting me two Requests; First, That you will please to grant me thirty
days to bemoan my Murdered Husband; and afterward, that you will plepase a
Feast at your House, that there I may take my leave of the Deceased's Friends:
All which the King granting, provided a noble Dinner in one of his Royal
Banqueting-Houses, where when they were all in the height of their Mirth, the
Widow rose from the Table, and stepping toward a Belcony, said, I will not
satisfy his Lust that Murdered my Husband; the words being scarce uttered, but
she leaped down, and so bruised her self, that she died on the spot whereon she
fell.

Japanners are very wicked.
THe Chastity of the Japan Women is as much to be praised as the Men's Vices, who
openly perpetrate all manner of Villainy, to be abhorred; for they stick not to
hold the Sin of Sodomy a Virtue: Punish whoredom in women after a cruel manner.
In the mean while, punishing Whoredom both in Married and Unmarry'd Women,
after a cruel manner: The Lord of Firando caused Anno 1636. three Maids of
Honor to be taken from his Female Retinue, and put in a Chest alive, which was
drove full of Iron Spikes; because the one had committed Adultery with a
Nobleman, and the other two knowing of it, kept it private and would not
disclose it.

Another, not much unlike the forementioned Passage happened about the same
time: A Man coming home out of the Country, found another Man with his Wife,
whom according to the Japan Custom, he immediately ran through; which done, he
tied the Woman to a Ladder, and on the next day, invited all her Friends, who
coming, sat down whilst he untied the Woman, putting on her a Death-Garment,
and a Box in her hand, commanding her to bring the enclosed Dainty to his
Guests, and there to open it, which she performed, and opening it, found the
Members of the Murdered man curiously decked with Flowers; upon the sight of
which, falling into a Trance, the enraged Husband immediately cut off her Head.

Women of quality are in great esteem.
Women of Quality are highly esteemed amongst them, and especially those that
are sent by the Emperor to be Wives to some of his Princes; for it belongs
solely to his Majesty to make Matches betwixt great Persons. When the Emperor
gives a Noble Lady in Marriage, the Bridegroom makes daily great Feasts,
causing a Palace to be built for the Bride, wherein she may keep her Court,
being provided with a great Train of Ladies and Maids of Honor, the number of
which amounts to fifty, a hundred, or two hundred, as the Bridegroom is more or
less able. These Women's Lodgings are curiously Varnished with Wax, Gilt, and
adorned with Imagery.

Stately progress of the women.
Once a year, the forementioned Woman visits her Friends in great State; her
Ladies and Waiting-Maids following her in above forty or fifty Sedans: Which
being curiously Varnished, and In-laid with Gold, are carried in good order,
two Fathom from one another; both sides thereof attended by Footmen and Pages
in handsome Liveries. The Sons which she bears, succeed their Father in his
Dominion, but if she die without Male issue, it generally falls to another
Family, on whom the Emperor pleases to beslow it, for no base Son, begotten on
a Concubine, can Inherit.

Delightful places in women's Palaces.
In the Women's Palaces, nothing is wanting that Art or Cost can procure for
their Delights, there being pleasant Ponds well stored with Fish, fine Decoys
for Wild Fowl, Gardens full of Trees, and all manner of Plants and fragrant
Flowers, wherewith the Beds and Walks are made exceeding Delightful to behold.
There are also daily Comedies Presented, and both Vocal, and Instrumental
Music heard from Morning to Night, so seeming to be in an Earthly Paradise, to
which no man can have access, but only her nearest Relations, and that but
very seldom.

Degrees of Ladies and Maids of Honor.
Upon the least Misbehavior or Offense, their Waiting-Maids and Servants are in
danger of their Lives, so that they must be very Circumspect in all things, and
chiefly the Women to be in no company with Men: These Women serve their Lady
and Prince with the greatest Humility and Submission that can possibly be
expressed; every one of them know their Office, according to which they are
Clothed; so that some wear Red Clothes, with green Girdles, and Head-Attire;
others Yellow Apparel, and about their Middle a Violet Girdle, and Ribbons for
their Head; others again wear White Coats, and Red Girdles, yet all agree, in
being richly Embroidered with Gold; every Order or Degree commonly consist in
sixteen Maids of Honor, over which is the Mother of the Maids, who keeps them
all in good Decorum: None of all these but is of a Noble Extract, and exceeding
well brought up. Every one of them received into Service before their fifteenth
Year; when they attain to eight and twenty; or thirty, then their Prince
bestows them in Marriage, to one or other of his Courtiers; and those that stay
above, they are generally made Overseers of the rest.

Japan Nobles spend great sums of money.
BUt their Country Governors, notwithstanding they have great Revenues, have
also extraordinary ways for Expense; for besides the Charges of the Women, they
must defray others far greater, viz. the Emperor maintains a strange Custom
amongst his Peers, by which his Pomp increases, and fear of their Insurrection
vanishes, which proves very fatal to the Princes. The business thus:

Keep their Courts half the year in Jedo.
The Emperor keeping his Court in Jedo, all the Kings and Princes residing to
the North, and East from Jedo, must exactly on the set-time, take up their
Habitations in the Emperors sight for six whole Months, so to add a Luster to
his Imperial Greatness, and are also at his pleasure, either to loose or keep
their Dominions: At their coming and going, they give great Presents to the
Emperor; When the half-year is expired, then those Princes from the West and
South part of Japan repair thither also, so that half of the chief Nobility in
Japan are continually at the Emperors Court. Those their Charges are Augmented
the more, because every King, Prince, Duke, or Baron will strive to exceed one
another in State, during their Residence there; So that they generally come
with as great a Retinue of Guards, Servants, Soldiers, Horses, Gentlemen, and
others, as possibly their conditions can bear; the meanest Lord keeping a
thousand Servants in his Palace at Jedo. They also spend much Money on their
Buildings, in Repairs or Enlarging them. The Liveries which they give to their
Pages and Footmen, and the sumptuous Banquets with which they Treat one
another, cost them also very dear.

How the Emperor oppresses his Subjects, that they cannot rebel against him.
ANd though most of them spend all their Revenues, yet the Emperor still
oppresses them by fresh Taxes, that being poor, they cannot be able to resist
him; Commanding them to build here new Castles, there enlarge a Fort, yonder a
strong Hold, all at their own Cost and Charge, whereby every one knows partly
what it will amount to. It is to be admired, if thus Commanded, how each will
strive to outdo the other, in Building larger, costlier, and with more speed,
not sparing any Charges toward the promoting of the Work.

Rerenue of the Princes.
By this means and several other, the Revenues of the Nobility are commonly
wasted, which consist not in Custom or other Imposition, but in the Ground-Rent
of the Houses, which they yearly raise, either more or less, according to the
bigness of the Building: Are known to the Emperor.
Each House must at a set time provide a man to serve their Lord. Moreover,
because Japan produces Copper in one place, Gold, Silver, Iron, Tin, Lead,
Rich-Wood, Purcelaine, Hemp, Cotton, Silk, Camphire, Rice, and other
Commodities in another: Every Lord has out of the several Products particular
Revenues, which the Emperor knows to a Penny; for he keeps a trusty Steward of
his own in every Lords House, without whose knowledge none of these Lords can
act any thing.

The King keeps wise men to advise him.
It deserves no small wonder, that the Noblest Princes amongst others of their
Retinue, keep some particular Persons of an exceeding quick apprehension, and
brave understanding, who are daily to observe, and freely to disclose all
Errors committed by their Prince, with whom they are continually, and chiefly
at Feasts and other Merry-meetings, noting down all, what is worthy of Praise
in his Lord, or deserves Laughter.

Their names.
The Princes, whose Jurisdictions spread themselves far and near, call their
Lands by the name of their Residence. They all have three Names; for in their
Infancy they have a Child's Name; in their Manly years another; and when grown,
they assume a third: Their Sur-name they put before the other, because they
preserve and detain that from their Predecessors.

Strange custom of the Japanners, who murder themselves at the death of their
Lord.
WHen a Lord dies, generally ten, twenty, nay, thirty rip up their own Bellies
to die with him: The number of these Self-Murderers is either more or less,
according to the Ability of the Person. Many of them oblige themselves to it in
their lifetime, for when they have received any Favors from them, after an
humble return of Thanks, they say, Most Noble Lord, the number of your Faithful
Subjects is great, How have I deserved to receive such Honor? From whence does
this Requital proceed? This Body which already is yours, I give you, and
promise to die by a violent Death, so soon as you give up the Ghost. To the
Confirmation of which, the Lord drinks to his Servant in a Bowl of Wine; after
which, the Servant at the Death of his Master, cannot recall his Promise, for
all Obligations Sealed with a Cup of Wine, may not be broke. The cutting of
their Bellies is performed in the following manner: He that is to perform the
Office, invites his nearest Relations into a Temple, the middle thereof covered
with Mats, where they have a Noble Treat, at which are some of the prime
Bonzies; after having Eat and Drunk their fill, he cuts his Belly athwart, so
that his Bowels and all his Entrails come gushing out upon the Floor: Some that
are a little wiser, besides ripping open their Bowels, cut their own Throats,
and the more they Massacre themselves, the greater Honor they gain.

This kind of Dying with their Lords is very ancient, for it was a Custom in
Gallia, before the Birth of our Savior: Julius Caesar relates, That the
Soldurii bound themselves to their Lords, in like manner as the Japanners.

Japan servants suffer themselves to be buried alive under a Wall.
Moreover, they maintain a second Custom of Self-Murder: When a Prince, by the
Emperors Command, or for his own safety, is to build a Castle or strong Wall;
his Servants entreat him to let them have the honor to lie under the
Foundation, imagining, that such Walls built on living Men are invincible; And
why.
so that there is scarce any great Building to be found, but the Foundation
thereof is laid upon one Man or more.

Strange manner of execution in Japan.
Each Lord is Judge over his own Servants; there is scarce any Crime, but they
suffer death for it; as for Stealing the value of a Farthing, or Playing for
Money, for which Offenses, he only that has committed them dies, otherwise,
for greater Faults, his nearest Relations also die with him: Those Crimes which
they account great, are to break the Emperors Command, viz. unjust Dealings of
Judges placed by the Emperor, falsifying his Coin, setting Houses a Fire,
running away with Married Women; for all which Offenses, a whole Family is
destroyed; yet the Women making their innocence known, often escape with Life.
The Goods of the Condemned are delivered to Officers which preserve the same,
to repair Temples, Bridges, and mend the Highways: Their Punishments are
several, according to the greatness of the Crime, ripping open their Bowels
being only granted to Persons of Quality, and for small Offenses; for at other
times, they Burn them, Roast them alive, Boil them in Oil or Water, or else
pull them asunder by four Bulls, with their Heads hanging down: But when the
Emperor dies, all Criminals are set at liberty through all Japan, in one day
and hour; and the Poof and Needy receive Money, that they may take something in
hand whereby to live.

Very remarkable Voyage of Henry Schaep.
THe Japanners very False and Treacherous, which their Qualities may partly
appear by what happened to Henry Cornelizoon Schaep a Merchant, and a Factor
William Bylevelt, sent in the Bresken's Ketch, with the Fly Boat Castrecom, by
the East India Council at Batavia, to discover by the East of Japan, the
Northern Coasts of Tartary. The River Polisange, the West-most part of America,
and the rich Gold and Silver Islands. On the third of February, Anno 1643. the
two Vessels set Sail. The Ketch Breskens, happened about the latter end of July
to get into an Inlet on the East Coast of Japan, Falls on Japan.
lying in forty Degrees North Latitude before a Village inhabited by Fishers.
The Seamen obtained liberty to Barter some Netherland Commodities for Rice and
other Provisions.

Are kindly entertained there.
A Japan Noble, happening to come Aboard, invited the Captain and other Officers
to his House to a Dinner, where according to promise, he kindly entertained
them, furnishing them with all manner of Herbs and other Provisions, and free
liberty to come ashore, and go when they plea'd. Against the Evening, the
Nobleman returned again Aboard, with the Governor of the Village, bringing a
Bale of Japan Rice with him; for which, receiving thanks, was entertained by
the Captain in his Cabinet, with Arak, Spanish Wines, and Tent; and as a return
for his Rice, gave him a pair of new Shoes, and Silk Stockins, with which he
seemed to be highly satisfied: After having eat and drank sufficiently, the
Captain Henry Cornelizoon Schaep, William Bylevelt, Sieward Johnson the Purser,
Peter Gerritszoon the Cooper, Henry Elsfoort Gunner, Jurian Sholton, Abraham
Spelt, Hans Slay, and two Youths, Jacob de Paw, and Aert Bastiaenszoon,
accompanied with the Japan Gentlemen, went ashore: The Captain taking with him
some Linen, and a few ordinary Clothes, to Barter for Provisions for the sick
Seamen. The Nobleman carried them all again to his House, which stood close
by the Shore, entertaining them with Japan Wine; after which refreshment,
Schaep desired to see the Village, and to buy some necessaries, which the
Nobleman not only granted, but went himself with them in Person, bringing the
Netherlanders to the Governor of the Town, who likewise drank to each of them
three Cups of Japan Wine.

A Japan Nobleman betrays the Netherlanders.
From thence he carried them by a way, on one side washed with the Sea, and on
the other side bordered with Fields full of little Cucumers and Radishes; and
having walked half an hour, they came near a Hill, from whence they had a most
delightful Prospect of Valleys, Rice Fields, and Pasture-Ground, in which, some
Cows and Oxen were Grazing; about a stones cast from them was a Rusticks House,
toward which they walked altogether, and went in to rest and shelter
themselves from the Sun; where sitting down, they desired something to drink;
on which, the Nobleman made signs to them that he had given order for it
already, and that it would immediately be brought them; but staying an hour and
nothing coming, the Netherlanders would have taken their leaves, and been gone
aboard.

A cunning Plot of his.
Whereupon, he again signified to them to stay a little longer, for he saw some
Horses coming thither, on which they might ride back to the Village, which the
Seamen refused, saying, Their Legs were able to carry them. But he continued
earnest in his Request, whilst the Horses approached the Houses, so that he
forced them to get upon them; every one being Mounted, were on each side held
by three Japanners, under a pretense of Civility, to hold them fast on their
Horses: In this manner they rode down the Hill, through the Valleys into the
Country, by which they suspected not without great reasons, that it was some
treacherous design; which fear was augmented, because one of the Japanners
desirous to see Captain Schaep's Hanger, which he giving him, would not return
it, but kept it under a pretense to wear it for his sake.

The Netherlanders are surprised, and all taken Prisoners.
The Netherlanders drew nearer and nearer to a River, where on the opposite
side, abundance of People were riding on Horses, whither they were led, which
sight so amazed the Netherlanders, that they fell from their Horses, and would
have returned the way which they came, but looking about, saw themselves beset
by a great number of Japanners, some thought to escape toward the Sea with
some Japan Boats that lay in the River: But none of them could possible get
away, for twelve Japanners with drawn Scymiters fell on every Hollander,
throwing them on their Bellies to the ground, tying their hands behind them,
and putting a Rope about their Necks; thus misused, the Japanners asked, If
Captain Schaep and his Company would appear before their Emperor; and Worship
him? which they willingly accepted, signifying to them, that the Hollanders
were at peace with the Emperor, and carried him yearly great Presents in Jedo;
and that their Governor lived at Nangesaque, who drove a great Trade there.

Japanners use the Prisoners after a strange manner.
The Japanners understanding these their signs, carried them to a Brook, where
they washed off the Dirt from their Faces; which no sooner done, but they saw
the Governor of the Town, whom they had Treated aboard, coming toward them with
a great Train of Servants, Colors, and Pikes; three stately Sumptre-Horses,
being led before. This Company the Seamen thought were come to Execute them,
so that they expected nothing but death; but when drawing near, the chief of
the Netherlanders were set on Horses, and the rest on Stiers, (which the
Japanners use very much in stead of Horses) and carried up into the Country.

Travel to Jedo.
They had ridden full two Leagues, when they entreated the Japan Governor to
permit them to write a Letter to the Seamen, that they might stay at Anchor,
and wait for their return from Jedo; the Governor making no reply to them,
commanded their hands to be untied, and only Pinion their Arms together, and
leave the Rope about their Necks.

About Sunset, having rid five-Leagues through bad way, they came into a
Village: The Captain, Merchant, and Boys Lodged in a Rusticks House, the rest
were kept three and three together in other places, and meanly treated. Here
they observed the Nobleman and the Governor to give order, That they should
give the Prisoners a little Rice, Salt-Fish, and Japan Wine: Are meanly treated.
No delight could they take in this Diet, yet were forced to show no
Melancholy, that it might not in the least appear by their Looks to be troubled
at their going before the Emperor. In the Interim, they found an opportunity to
signify to the Nobleman that they were Hollanders, being in a League of Amity
with the Japan Emperor, and that yearly eight Ships came Laden with rich
Merchandise to Nangesaque: But all these Sayings could not procure them the
least Liberty, for though the old Cords were taken from them, yet new ones were
put on; And the Gentleman going away, set a strict Watch about the House, so
that they expected nothing but Death the next Morning.

Receive Orders to Write to their Ships.
On which, an hour after the Sun was risen, the forementioned Gentleman came to
them prepared for a further Journey, bringing along with him an Ink-horn, and a
little piece of Paper, commanding them to write to their Vessels, and order
them not to stir from thence, but remain there till their return, which would
not be till thirty days; whereupon the Letter was sent containing to this
effect:

We were yesterday treacherously betrayed, and already carried five Leagues up
in the Country to make our appearance before the Emperor in Jedo; which
Journey requires a Months time, mean while entertain the Japanners with all
Civility; take great care of the Ship and Goods, and also send us some Clothes
for fear we should want.

The Letter finished and delivered, they went on in their Journey, the
Commanders, as before, Riding on Horses, the rest on Oxen: The Captain and the
Merchant asking their Companions how they had been entertained? replied, But
meanly, and that they had their old Ropes also exchanged for new.

Japanners make Wooden Crosses.
Moreover, the Japanners had Wooden Crosses, which they showed to the
Hollanders, so to find out if they were Papists, but observing them not minded,
they threw them away. The remaining part of the Way was very narrow and
troublesome: about Noon they drew near a Rusticks Hut, where they Lighted and
refreshed themselves.

A Japan Village full of Boards, with Characters Engraven thereon.
Toward the Evening, having passed eight Leagues, they came into a great
Village, where at each Corner of the Streets several Boords were nailed up full
of Japan Characters, with thirty Golden Knobs round them. The Troopers,
Soldiers, and Servants, told the Hollanders, That every one of them should have
Gold from the Emperor for every Christian they brought him, according to the
Contents written on these Boords.

Are visited by several Japanners.
In the middle of this Town the Hollanders were Lodged. The Noblemen before
mentioned came to comfort the Prisoners, commanding their Landlord to provide
store of Meat for them; which accordingly was performed. But when the
Prisoners, after having refreshed themselves, thought to take some rest, a
great number of Japanners, each wearing two Swords, came thronging into their
Inn: amongst the Men also came store of Women, which did not a little amaze
them, expecting every Minute in that barbarous Country to be slain; but indeed
was to no other end than out of curiosity to view the Hollanders: and chiefly
the Women took great delight in seeing the Youth Jacob de Paw; whom they made
to show his naked Bosom: They came in great numbers till midnight, asking
several times if they were Papists? making Crosses with their Fingers, pointing
toward them that they should kiss and worship them: But the Prisoners
slighting seemed to abhor them: at which the Japanners taking great delight,
cried Hollande, Hollande.

They desire their Names for a Remembrance.
Next Morning came many more to view the Hollanders, troubling them very much,
by making them write their Names, which they would keep in remembrance of them.

Amongst the Spectators were some, who by their fierce angry Looks, and strange
Gestures, seemed to threaten death to the Hollanders, turning up the Whites of
their Eyes, and making a horrible noise; whilst they thought that ^he bloody
Council was gathered to give their Sentence, which they expected every Minute,
especially because it was almost Noon, and they heard not the least talk of
going farther.

Whilst they were in this fear, the Nobleman came in, and bid them be of good
cheer, and not trouble themselves about any thing, but prepare for their
Journey; and after Dinner Mounting, they went for the most part Westerly
through pleasant Valleys, by murmuring Streams, Rice-fields, and several
Hamlets, from whence came great numbers that followed to see them. Rusticks
come to see the Hollanders. Lodge in a small Village.


An hour and a half before Night they entered a small Village, having traveled
six Leagues, where the Captain, Merchant, and two Boys, were Lodged in one
House together; the rest were quartered in other Places; where the Nobleman
and Governor of the Village before which their Ship lay, came to Visit them,
commanding them to be untied, Are untied.
and the Ropes to be taken from them, being now assured that they were
Hollanders: whereupon they bowed their Heads down to the Ground, thanking them
for so great a Civility. The Governor also showed them a Letter yet Sealed,
which they supposed to come from their Ketch Breskins, and gave them also a Cup
of Japan Wine. Here the Nobleman also told them his Name, which till then he
had kept private, being called Ontido Consaimondonne; upon whose departure and
the Governors, they ordered their Servants to untie all the rest of them.

The Prisoners thus delivered of so great a Burden, began to take courage, and
hope for a good Event, and also to take their Rest in quiet, whilst great
Companies of Spectators came thronging in and out to see them. But about
Midnight, the People going home to their several Habitations, they just laid
themselves to sleep, when some of the Japanners came in Armed with two
Scymiters and a Quarter-staff, which startled both the Captain and the Merchant
out of their Sleep; but being informed that they were some of the Watch, they
rested all the remaining part of the Night without any disturbance.

A Letter from their Ship
On the first of August, Consaimondonne delivered to Captain Schaep two small
Packs, made up in Mats, with a Letter from his Ship, which advised him, that
they had received information by his Letter concerning their carrying away, and
the whole Circumstance thereof; on which they thought it convenient to Ride a
little farther from the Shore. Observing a sudden change amongst the Townsmen,
which come daily Aboard of them; and withal, that they would stay as long as
possible they had whereupon to live.

Consaimondonne ordered the Captain to answer their Letter, and withal advise
them, that Consaimondonne had given order to the Villages to furnish them with
Rice, fresh Waters, Fish, Wood, and other Necessaries; therefore they might
stay without repining at it.

Captain Schaep's letter to the Ketch Breskins.
Soon after the Captain Writ again a second time what Consaimondonne commanded
him; and withal added thereto, That they should remain where they were, though
he stayed away four Months, that he might not be taken in an Untruth by those
Princes before whom he was to go, but that their Ketch was Dutch built, and
belonged to the Hollanders; or else the East India Trade, and his Life, besides
all those that were with him, would be in great danger.

The Hollanders proceed in their Voyage.
The Letter being Sealed and delivered to a Priest, the Captain and Merchant
Mounted on two stately Steeds, the Saddles curiously Varnished. Every one held
now the Reyns of the Bridle in their own Hands, and were attended with two
Servants, which made them to admire their Civility.

The fair City Fitachi.
After they had traveled six Leagues they came to a great Walled City, standing
in a most pleasant and delightful Soil. They could no ways understand the Name
of it; but thought it must upon necessity have been Fitachi, known to be seated
in that Tract of Land. The spacious Streets presented stately Houses, and in
the Houses curious Shops.

Hollanders are kindly entertained,
The Hollanders were at last Lodged in a brave House, standing at a Corner of a
Street; where Consaimondonne came to see them, and gave order to prepare a
noble Dinner; and immediately after ordered them to put on those Clothes that
were sent them from Aboard in the Straw-Mats.

Thus Clothed, Consaimondonne took Captain Schaep, the Merchant Byleveld, the
Pursor Siward Johnson, the Gunner Henry Van Ebsfoord, and the two Youths with
him through the City: and had not the Soldiers cleared the Way, it had been
impossible for them to have passed for the great Concourse of People which came
flocking from all Corners to see them; so that the whole City out of Novelty
was in an uprore.

Palace of the King at Fitachi.
Thus being led through many Streets, they came at last into a great
Marketplace, and through a pair of great Gates into a stately Court, with
several Avenues, which all came out at a costly Ascent of six Steps, leading
into a spacious Hall; where entering, they found a high Table standing in the
middle thereof; on which lay two naked Scymiters cross one another. Several
Japanners sitting in rich Apparel, with their Legs under them, kept Watch there.

Here the forementioned Governor came to the Hollanders, and ordered them to
pull off their Shoes, and immediately after went with him and Consaimondonne up
several broad Steps; then entering into a stately Gallery, very artificially
built, the Governor commanded them to kneel and wait for the Kings coming:
Where whilst they stayed in that posture, they saw several Courtiers richly
Habited, Hollanders appear before the King.
Saluting and Complementing one another. At last the King appeared in a very
stately Hall at the end of the Gallery; whither the Hollanders were conducted
and placed right against him one by another. The King, whom they guessed to be
about forty years old, spoke to them with no less State than Friendship,
Hollande, and immediately gave order, that all sorts Flesh, Fish, Fruit, and
Japan-Wine, should be brought before them. But they, surpised at such
abundance of Kindess and great State, could not eat any thing; which
Consaimondonne and the Governor observing, thought that their refraining from
their Meat was for fear of being poisoned; who to clear them of that doubt,
went and eat a little of every Dish: at which they also fell to, and drank each
of them two Cups of Wine.

Strange Entertainment.
After Dinner they were removed to another part of the Chamber, and placed next
the King: Who asked them if they were Christians? making Crosses with his
Finger, showing he would have them to imitate him, and kiss and worship the
Crosses. Whereupon they signified to his Majesty that they were Hollanders, who
yearly coming with great Ships, drove a Trade at Nangesaque, and brought great
Presents to the Japan Emperor. Mean while each Hollander was commanded to drink
two Cups of Wine more. No sooner had they drank about, but an ancient Japanner
came out of a Corner, and whispering Capt. Schaep in the Ear, said, Are you
Portuguese, Castilians, French, English, Danes, Switzers, or Cretensers? This
Japanner speaking very good Portuguese, Crossed himself several times also,
which he desired the Hollanders to perform: But they showed by their Behavior
that they abhorred all Crosses whatsoever. At last the King caused the Picture
of the Virgin Mary, with the Child Jesus in her Arms, Engraven in Copper, to be
brought before them, to see if they would worship it; but the Hollanders
desired, if he would suffer them, that they might break it in pieces. Whereupon
the King laughing, threw it away, and commanded one of his Servants to carry it
to another Place: At which the Purser Sieward Johnson unbuttoning himself,
showed his Breast, and the several Wounds which he had gotten at Ceylon by the
Portuguese, mortal Enemies to the Hollanders; at which the King was exceedingly
delighted. At last they returned back to their Lodgings, where, on the next
day, Consaimondonne came to Visit them, giving order, that they should have
their foul Linen washed; and was asked by Captain Schaep, When they should go
to Jedo? He answering Jedo, Jedo, pointed on his Fingers, signifying fifteen
days; and immediately called for a costly Banquet, where they had plenty of
Peaches, Apricocks, Apples, Nuts, Venison, Wine, and many other Dainties.

These Entertainments lasted till the twelfth of August, when in the Night a
strange noise awaked the Hollanders, not without being much frighted thereat:
for a Japan Secretary watched over them in their Chamber; who being called,
went out, but soon returning, waked them all, and bid them put on their
Clothes, and wash themselves. In an instant the whole House was all in a hurry,
the Men and Maidservants being all busy, sweeping of Chambers, shaking out
Mats, and sprinkling their Halls with Water. The amazed Hollanders asked their
Watch, what those kind of Preparations in the Night might signify? Whereupon
they were answered, That some Ladies and Persons of Quality were coming to see
them, which satisfied them a little, sitting up three hours by as many great
Wax-Candles. Then the King of Fitachi entering the Chamber nodded to the
Hollanders, and sitting down, commanded Captain Schaep and the Merchant to play
on the Tables, which they had made to pass away their time withal; and whilst
they were busy about their Game, two Japan Knights, accompanied with a Bonzi,
entered the Chamber.

The Habit of the Japan Knights.
The upper Coats which they wore (by them called Korrekorre) were of several
Colors, very richly embroidered; underneath which hung another, on the Skirts
of which, their Arms were curiously wrought. Their Breeches exceeding long,
trail'd after them on the Ground; and also in their going they trod upon them:
Their Scymiters very great, hung on their left sides; of which the Handles
being at least two Foot long, were covered with Gold Wyre, and in-laid with
Precious Stones; the Scabbards also richly Embroidered: Their Heads all shaven,
except one tuft of Hair, left in the nape of their Necks. There are great
numbers of these kind of Knights in Japan, who never come abroad, but they are
attended by five, ten, fifteen, or more Servants, which carry after them Fans
and Umbrello's.

Examination of the Hollanders by a Japan Bonzi.
But the Bonzi which went in with the two Knights, speaking good Spanish, and a
little English, asked the Hollanders, if they were French, English, Danes, or
Swedes? What Place they came from? What they were freighted with? Why they came
so much to the Northward from their Coast? Moreover, Whether any of them
understood the Portuguese of Spanish Tongues? Amongst the Hollanders were some
that spoke Portuguese; but they thought it better not to acknowledge it, so to
prevent further Examinations: Therefore speaking nothing but Dutch, they told
him, That they set Sail from Batavia to Ternata, and from thence steered their
Course to Tayoan; but being overtaken by a great Storm out of the South-west,
they were driven to the Northward, and after four Months happened to come to an
Anchor in a Japan Haven, there to refresh themselves; which they were indeed
forced to, most of their Seamen being sick. The Hollanders understood plainly,
that they took them for Dutchmen, but such as no way concerned the East India
Company; and that many of them had been formerly sent from Micau, or the
Manillas, with Priests to Japan.

Moreover, the Japanners inquired of them, If they were not come through the
Straights of Le-maire, or the Waygates? Upon which they answered, No; but from
Batavia, over Ternata. A whole Hour they spent in these Examinations, when at
last the two Knights commanded, That every Hollander should have a Glass of
Wine filled them; which done, the King, Knights, and Bonzi taking their leave,
went away: But in their going out, the Bonzi stepping toward the Captain and
Merchant, whispered them in the Ear, That he could speak Spanish, eat Hens,
Eggs, Fish, and all manner of Japan Dainties, and that two days hence he would
again come to visit them; which Promise and Sayings occasioned many troublesome
Thoughts in them: Wherefore they advised one another to observe well what they
spoke, if they should be Examined one by one.

The Hollanders travel to Jedo.
ON the fourteenth of August, 1643. they receiy'd Orders to pack up their
Clothes, and make themselves ready for their Journey to Jedo; two Noblemen,
besides several Servants, being also ready. One amongst the Company told them,
That Mosysuoque Chyoboyedonne was sent to supply the place of Oritido
Cansaymondonne (he being gone home) to conduct them to Jedo. At last came the
Bonzi and the Knights, that two days before, in the Kings presence had examined
the Hollanders: In their Company was also the Lord of the Village before which
the Ketch Breskens lay at an Anchor. Soon after, a large Table was covered, and
filled with all manner of Varieties: The Cups with Wine going freely from one
to another, and their good Journey being also drank round, the Captain and the
Merchant went each into a Sedan, and their other Men mounted on Horses, having
Paper-Cloaks given them to keep off the Rain.

Their Ferrying over, and Entertainment.
After having rode four Leagues, they came to a quick Stream, which between two
pleasant Shores flows with a great swiftness: Along the way which led toward
the Ferry stood several Crosses, on which hung diverse Men, after a most
horrible manner; some being Racked, others run through with Spears, others had
their Bones broken, and all died lingering Deaths, Being all Ferried over, and
Landed on the opposite Shore, they entered into a delightful Village, where they
staid and dined after a Princely manner. The two Knights which came with the
Bonzi told them their Names, the one being called Isy Cavova If a Jemondonne,
and the other, Poechy Chennemondonne; which they gave the Hollanders great
charge to remember, and gave them their choice, either to ride, or be carried
in a Sedan: But all mounting, they rode most South-West, and after a Journey of
eight Leagues, about the Evening they entered into a great Village, where they
were nobly entertained: Jemondonne and Chennemondonne bidding the Hollanders
welcome, asked them if they were not tired with riding? And setting a Watch
about the House, left them for that Night.

Japan Cocks carried long Journeys.
The next day at the Rising of the Sun they Traveled further toward the
South-West, through a Hilly Country: By every Hollander went two Japan
Soldiers, and seven Grooms, each of them carrying a live Cock, tied behind them
on the Horse in a Straw Basket, which sometimes they took out, and carried on
their Hands. This day they traveled eleven Leagues, taking fresh Horses seven
times; and in the dusk of the Evening they entered into a small Village, where
they found but mean Entertainment.

A Bonzi cunningly examines the Hollanders.
Here the forementioned Bonzi coming to them, asked several Questions, viz. What
Employment Schaep and Byleveld followed? Who had the Command of the Ketch
Breskens in their absence? How it was called? How many Seamen they had aboard?
What store of Provision and Ammunition they had, and what they were laden
withal? From whence they came, and whether they designed to go? To all which
the Captain answered as little as possible could be, fearing to be trepanned
into an inconveniency by the Bonzi, whom they took to be an Apostate Castilian,
because he spoke not only Spanish and Portuguese, but also broken English and
Low Dutch.

The Hollanders Answers to his Demands.
But they warily answered, That Schaep was Captain of the Ship, and Byleveld a
Factor; That the Mate bore the chief command in his absence; That he had fifty
Men aboard, which came with him from Batavia to Ternata, and were going to
Tayoan; but since by dark stormy Weather, and a great Storm out of the West,
they had lost their Admirals Ship, called Castrecom, they were at last driven
to Japan, where they came to an Anchor, because the Japanners were at Peace
with their East India Company; and the more, because their Ship being much
Weather-beaten, and most of the Seamen sick, the Ship wanted mending, and the
Men refreshment. All which the Bonzi noted down.

Their further Journey to Jedo, how.
At break of day they went on in their Journey; and after nine days Travel, they
came into a Village about a League distant from Jedo: The Way thither sometimes
pleasant, by Rice-fields, and Groves of Cedar-Trees; sometimes by spacious
Plains and Commons: and in other places troublesome, for its craggy Ascents and
steep Precipices; and also dangerous, by means of the quick Floods and deep
Lakes, over which both Horse and Man were forced to be Ferried: But on the
Shores of all such dangerous Passages, are generally small Villages built,
which make them so much the safer, because upon all Occasions the Inhabitants
are ready to assist in any thing.

Their remarkable Entertainment.
EVery where, both in Town and Village, the Hollanders found noble
Entertainment, the Burgers and Merchants accounting themselves highly honored
when they entertain the Emperors Prisoners; and besides that, they discoursed
with a People that were come from so remote a Country, many hundred Leagues
from Japan, at whose Habit and Custom they stood all amazed; every one desiring
a Note from the Hollanders of their Names, with which they accounted themselves
fully satisfied for their Expenses in entertaining them: Yet notwithstanding
this kind usage all the way, the Netherlanders were continually guarded by six
Bonjoises, and a hundred and thirty Soldiers.



Description of the Japan Musicians.
DUring these nine days Travel, they met with several of the Japan Musicians,
which go up and down the Country, to delight and entertain all such young
People as are desirous of Music, and chiefly to inquire out Weddings, or where
any great Feasts are kept, being all Whores and Vagabonds one amongst another.
The Women sit with their Legs across under them: On the top of their Heads is a
black Paper Roll, from whence falls a long Scarf over their Backs: Their
Tunicks, with Embroidered Collars, are open before, betwixt which space appears
a pleited Girdle: In their Hands they hold two Sticks, plated over with Copper,
on which they play very curiously. Behind the Women sit Men, on high Stools,
with their Legs across: These are also clothed in short upper Vests, open
before; their under Garment made all of one piece; their Breeches hanging over
their Feet; their Doublets tied about them with two pleited Girdles, one about
their Breasts under their Arms, and the other about the Waste; in the lowermost
stick their Swords: They hold in each Hand a Whip, the Ends whereof being tied
together, have a hollow Block, with Bells in the middle, which waving to and
again over their Heads, makes a noise pleasing to their Ears, keeping Time with
their Feet on the Stool. On both sides of the Women that sit, others stand
bare-headed: Over their right Shoulder lungs a broad Belt, to which, coming
under their left Arm, a round Wheel with Copper Bars is made fast, which they
turn with their right Hands by an Iron Handle, whilst they strike with the
other on the Bars with a Bell, to which Music they dance very neatly. Before
these, sit others, with their Faces muffled, in their left hand holding a great
Umbrello, and in the right a Fan, acting several Antic Postures.

The Hollanders come to Jedo.
THe Hollanders being sometimes thus delighted, came within a League of Jedo,
where the Lord of the Village before which their Ketch lay took his leave,
telling them, That their Seamen had weighed Anchor, and were gone to Sea; but
he knew not the time when. This caused great fear in the Netherlanders, who
thought they should certainly be taken for Spies, that came to make Inspections
into the Country; and according to the Japan Cruelties, expected nothing but
Death.

In the Afternoon they entered the Imperial City Jedo, where they were Lodged
in the usual place of Residence for the Holland Ambassadors, when at a set time
they come thither from Nangesaque, to present the Emperor with many rich Gifts.
Here they were informed, That it was not the City Fitachi, but Namboe, from
whence they went on the fourteenth of August, after having staid there fourteen
days; and also, That the Haven wherein they rode at Anchor before the Fishers
Village, was part of the great Inlet Namboe. They rode one day with another ten
or eleven Leagues, and saw by the way above a hundred close-built and populous
Villages. In this their Journey from Namboe to Jedo they changed their Horses
eight times.

Are very jealous of a Japan Nobleman.
But the Hollanders had scarce sat half an Hour to rest themselves, when Oritido
Cansaimondonne, who took leave of them in Namboe, and they thought long before
that time to have been at his own House, came into their Chamber, to the great
amazement of the Hollanders, they being always fearful to be unjustly dealt
with, thinking by that means Oritido might enrich himself with a part of their
Ship and Goods, if they should be condemned at the Court; which they feared the
more, because they being Strangers, had none to plead for them, and declare
their Innocence. Consaimondonne seemed to be highly displeased, that he saw the
Hollanders lodged in the usual Inn for the Netherland Ambassadors, fearing that
he might be deceived and frustrated in his expectations; yet he showed a feigned
Friendship. Captain Schaep asking him concerning the two Letters given him in
Namboe to deliver, received no Answer; which made him judge, that he had
detained, and not delivered them.

Hollanders are commanded to come to Court.
AGainst the Evening, Captain Schaep, the Merchant Byleveld, and the Youth
Jacob de Paw, were commanded to appear before the Governor Inovii Sicungodonne,
and Sabrosaimondonne Governor of Nangesaque, whither they went, accompanied by
their Landlord, and two Servants. Thus being carried to the Commander
Sicungodonnes House, How entertained there.
into a stately Hall, after a little stay, they were led into a Princely
Chamber, where fitting down a while, they were afterward commanded to draw
near Sicungodonne and Sabrosaimondonne: Both showing a friendly Countenance,
said, O Hollande. Next to them sat the Spaniard, an Apostate Priest, which had
accompanied the Netherlanders from Namboe.

Are examined about their Journey.
This Bonzi, by the command of the two Lords, questioned them, From what Place
they put to Sea, and whither they intended to Sail? Why and to what end they
came so far to the North? Why they put into the Haven Namboe? The Hollanders
mixing broken Japan, Portuguese, and Dutch together, answered them to most of
their Questions: Then the Spaniard fetching a Map of India, commanded the
Hollanders to show them their Voyage in it, viz. both what they had already
Sailed, and did intend; which being performed, they received each two Cups of
Wine, and leave to depart.

On the next day all the Hollanders appeared before the same Lords; and whilst
they stood in the forementioned Hall, the Lords being not ready to come forth,
they saw several Japanners, which also came thither for Audience; amongst
which, were two which spoke very good Portuguese, The Japanners seek
acquaintance with the Hollanders.
and said that they were Merchants, and lived in Nangesaque; that they knew Mr.
Elsrake, Overtwater, and other Netherlanders in their Storehouse on the Island
Disma; asking them also, if none of them could speak Portuguese; and, if they
had no acquaintance with those Persons which they had named? The Hollanders
signified to them, That they were not experienced in the Portuguese Tongue; but
that they had seen Elsrake and Overtwater in Batavia. These Merchants seemed to
be much concerned at the trouble into which the Hollanders had brought
themselves.

After they had thus waited two Hours, came the Secretaries belonging to
Sicungodonne, accompanied with some Portuguese and Spanish Priests, which had
apostatized from the Christian Religion: Are anew examined.
These inquired again concerning their Voyage, asking them also what they
intended to do in the Bay of Namboe? In what Latitude the Inlet lay? Which they
a second time showed them in the Chart that they brought, according to which,
it lay in thirty nine Degrees; That they lost their Admiral in the Night,
before an unknown Country, in a dreadful Storm; and that afterward they
endeavored to get up to Nangesaque, but through contrary Winds were driven to
the Northward.

During this Discourse, Captain Schaep, the Merchant, and the Youth, were led
to a spacious Gallery from the other People, where Sicungodonne and
Sabrosaimondonne sat in State, having just before been busy about Trying of
Prisoners for their Lives: But being set down before the two Lords, they were
asked nothing of any consequence; only each of them being commanded to drink a
Cup of Wine, they had leave to return to their Lodgings. In their going out,
they saw in an open Court of the Palace four old, yet strong Sedans, made very
fast round about; in each of them sat a Prisoner, Roman Priests Prisoners.
being Portuguese Fathers.

Strange Passage which frighted the Hollanders.
But the remaining seven of the Hollanders, which were examined by the
forementioned Priests, were not a little afraid: For whilst they sat there, two
great Chests of Portuguese Coats, Clokes, Surplices, Books, Writings, and also
Iron Hand-cuffs, Fetters, Chains, and other Instruments for Torture, were
brought into the Hall; every one of them judging, that they were fetched
thither on purpose for them; being asked also, at that very instant, if they
were not Roman Catholics. This their fear was the more augmented, because the
Hollandeas had scarce rested half an Hour in their Lodging, but they were
commanded by Sicungodonne to return again to the Court; by which they judged,
that the condemned Priests had accused them of something that might be
prejudicial to them.

Japanners deal severely with four Jesuits.
Entering the Palace, they found the Executioners busy in torturing four
Jesuits, of which, according as they guessed, the youngest might be forty, the
other fifty, sixty, and seventy years old: They were Habited after the Japan
manner, yet might easily be distinguished from them. The Executioners used them
very barbarously, locked their Hands in Iron Cuffs; their Feet they loaded with
weighty Chains, and Pinioned them up in such a manner, that they could not stir
one Limb.

This Sight did not a little terrify the Hollanders, who were again strictly
examined concerning their Voyage; and chiefly the Spanish Priest which came
with them from Namboe, asked, If their Ship Breskens had not taken in some
Portuguese Priests, either at the Manilla's or Macau, and put them on Shore in
the Bay of Namboe at unseasonable hours? If they were not Roman Catholics?
Both which Demands Captain Schaep answered with No: Sieuward Johnson opening
his Breast, showed them also the great Wounds scarce whole, which he had
received from the Portuguese at Ceylon, and therefore would never desire a move
joyful Day, than to revenge himself on the Portuguese Nation: in which Relation
Sicungodonne and Sabrosaimondonne took peculiar delight.

The Names, Age, and Offices of the Hollanders are written down.
Then the Hollanders returned again to their Quarters, where at Night they were
visited by the Spanish Priest, and two Commissioned Lords, which were to write
down every Man's Name, Age, and Office; so that they writ down in a Book Henry
Cornelison Schaep Captain, aged thirty two years; William Byleveld Merchant,
four and twenty; Sieuward Johnson Purser, thirty three; Peter Gerritson Cooper,
twenty six; Abraham Pieterson Spelt Gunner, twenty two; Henry Elsford Mate,
twenty; Jurian Sholten, also his Mate, twenty seven; Hans Slay Boatswain,
twenty; Aert Bastianson a Youth, fifteen, and Jacob de Paw, a Boy of fourteen
years old.

Two Japanners discover themselves.
The Two Lords making themselves known, told them, That they had served their
East India Company for Interpreters, and that one of them was called Kitsbioye,
and the other Phatsiosaimon, and were sent from Nangesaque to conduct the four
condemned Jesuits thither. They told them moreover, that there were two Dutch
Interpreters coming from Firando to Interpret for them before the Magistrates,
who would for that purpose be in Jedo within thirty days; at last telling them,
that they should Lodge in the House with a Priest that had apostatized from the
Christian Religion; yet they should no ways be daunted, for there was not the
lead danger in their Concern; and they ought the less to fear, because they
assured them of the Lords Sicungodonne and Sabrosaimondonnes Favors, and
Sicungodonne had given order to their Landlord, that he should not let them
want for any thing. After this nothing happened to them of any remark in nine
days time, only that the Interpreters now and then visited them.

Hallanders are exceedingly frighted.
But the first of September seemed to put an end to their Tragedy, so that they
all prepared themselves for Death; for the Interpreters Kitsbioye,
Phatsiosaimon, Siovan, and a considerable number of the Emperor's Guard,
carried the Hollanders out of the City Jedo; Description of the Japan Horse and
Foot.
the Foot wearing little round Helmets, wrought like a Shell on the top, their
Coats being of Mayl, hung half way over their Bellies, tied about their Middle
with a Sash; in every ones Girdle stuck two Scymiters, one long, and the other
short, which below the Handles have round Shells of Ebony-wood, by which they
hang; their Breeches like the Noblemens hung over their Feet; on their
Shoulders they carried Muskets not unlike the Europeans, only the Cocks
thereof struck from them, and instead of Bandileers or Powder they had square
Baskets pleited of Rushes. But others belonging to the Emperors Lifeguard Rode
on Horses; which being trained up daily by skillful Riders, Curvetted all the
way they went, with rich Caparisons Edged with costly Fringe, their Heads also
covered with a rich Cloth: but in Service they wear Helmets adorned with Plumes
of Feathers, and Scarfs coming under their Arms, and made fast on their left
Shoulders; a thick silken Cord with two Tassels hangs about their Necks, and on
their Backs a great Bow; under their left Arm a Quiver full of Arrows; in
their Girdles stick two Stilletto's, or long Daggers, with their left Hands
guiding the Bridle, in the the right holding a great Lance, their Legs covered
with Waxed Boots.

Hollanders prepare for Death.
The Hollanders thus Guarded on all sides both with Horse and Foot, were carried
out of Jedo.



Close by the City is a great Palace about the bigness of a small City, which
entering, after having past several Avenues, they came before a dismal and dark
Prison; before the Grates of which the four condemned Jesuits sat laden with
great Fetters and Chains, with some other Japan Christians; from thence they
were conducted into a spacious open Court, in which stood Gibbets, Crosses,
Gallows, and great Wells full of Water. The Place swarmed with People, and
chiefly one Leaded Entry Paved with Freestone, was continually full of all
manner of Courtiers, private Officers, Executioners and Hang-men, which passed
to and again, expecting Commands. At last the Jesuits and the Japanners were
brought out of their Dungeon, to come before the chief Magistrate of Japan. And
whilst the Judges were busy in examining them, most part of the Day was spent:
Mean while the Hollanders stood in the open Court next the Guards, which had
brought them from their Inn thither, where they saw all Passages; and that they
might not faint in so great a Crowd, they had Sweetmeats given them to eat;
which they judged was by Sicungodonne's order. At last they were led through a
small Gate, to a very pleasant Place, having on one side a Wooden Gallery
covered with Mats; through which passing and entering into a Princely Hall, they
were commanded to kneel before Sicungodonne, sitting on a high Throne
surrounded with a great number of Counselors, who by the Interpreters asked
the Hollanders these following Questions:

Questions asked the Hollanders, to which they return Answers,
From whence, whither, and when they put to Sea? Why they Anchored in the Haven
Namboe?

The Hollanders answered, That they set Sail the third of February, Anno 1643.
from the Road before Batavia, and steered their Course toward Ternata, from
whence they weighed Anchor the fourth of April; but afterward driven by great
Storms, were necessitated to Anchor in the Haven Namboe.

Then Sicungodonne asked them if they were Christians, though no Papists? If
they did not desire to speak with the four Jesuits in private?

Their Answer hereupon was, That they were Christians, but no Papists; and
believe in one God, Creator and Governor of Heaven and Earth; for which
Religion they were ready to die; and had nothing to say to the Jesuits, but
held them for their greatest Enemies.

The other Questions which they were asked were these following:

How many Netherlanders, Chinese, and others, lived in Batavia? Where their
Governor kept his Court? How many Ships has he in his Service? What Places do
they Sail to? Do all manner of Artificers live in Batavia? Do Shoemakers,
Tailors, Weavers, and other Handicrafts reside there?

The Hollanders told them, That there lived about twelve hundred Hollanders in
Batavia, besides three thousand Chinese, and a considerable number of
Malabars, Javans, Bandaneesen, Amboiners, and Mardikers, and also all manner of
Handicrafts, resided in the City: but the number of the Ships which Sailed to
Persia, Ceylon, Cormandel, Malacca, Siam, Molucco-Islands, Tayoan, and other
Places from Batavia, was unknown to them.

They were also asked, If the Hollanders saw any way by which they might
Conquer Nangesaque, Are silent in one Question.
as they had done Quilang? But making as if they understood them not, this
Question was not answered.

Sicungodonne inquired of them also, Why their Ketch Breskens had fired her
Guns several times in the Haven of Namboe, which had frighted the Fishermen,
and all the Country People thereabouts? Also if they had not a Minister aboard?

The Hollanders acknowledged, That the hady fired with bare Powder on the
entreaty of some Japan Gentlemen which came Aboard of them to view the Ship;
and that they had not the least intentions to scare the People, which they not
once thought of, being accustomed to do the same before Firando, when any
Gentlemen desired it: but out of fear they denied that they had a Minister
Aboard.

At last they were asked if they could not swim, as they had seen many
Hollanders do at Nangesaque?

This Question amazed them much, not knowing why they should ask it; yet they
replied, That some could swim, and others not.

Sicungodonne leaving off to make any farther Examination, gave the Hollanders
leave to go to their Lodgings; where they rested till the three and twentieth
of September, without any farther molestation. Then the Secretary told them,
that their Landlord was gone to the Lord Sicungodonne's House, to ask for some
Clothes for them, because the cold Weather began to pinch, and they were used
to go warm Clothed.

Sicungodonne promised to furnish them with Coats. He also signified, that the
imprisoned Jesuits and Japanners, not being able to endure the exquisite
Tortures, had denied Christianity.

The next day the Interpreters Kitsbioye and Fatsiosaimon, with the Renegado
Priest Siovan, came and brought for every Hollander two Japan Coats made of
Cotton by Sicungodonne's Order. Which kindness the Hollanders knew not how to
return sufficient thanks for.

A new fear arises amongst them.
Mean while understanding by some of the Servants, that the next day they were
to appear before some of the Magistrates, they were exceedingly afraid, and the
more, because they very well knew the two Dutch Interpreters expected from
Firando, could not yet be come to Jedo. And whilst they sorrowfully sat
considering of these Matters, the Walls of the House began to shake, the Timber
to crack, the Roofs to rent, the Doors and Windows flying open, and the Ground
to move under them: At which the Japanners signified to them, that a horrible
Sea Monster struck his Tail so vehemently against the Shore, that he made all
things to shake and tremble.

The Japanners Opinion concerning Earthquakes is ancient.
But under this kind of ignorance seems to lie hid the ancient Opinion of some
Greek Philosophers, which gave to Neptune the Name of Ennosigaeus, that is, A
shaker of the Earth, because it creeps into the Crevices thereof, and breaks
the Foundations with its swelling Waters.

This Opinion Thales and Democritus Abderita affirmed with these Arguments,
viz. Because that in Earthquakes new Fountains often broke forth, and great
Places lay hid under almost fathomless Lakes and Plashes of Water.

But others with much more seeming Reasons attribute tke Earthquakes to the
Winds enclosed in the Caverns of the Earth.

Agellius puts both the said Reasons together; Who are not, says he, Nost. A.
A. l. 2. c. 19.
sufficiently instructed by Nature, whether the shakings and gapings of the
Earth are occasioned by the power of imprisoned Winds, or enclosed Waters,
swelling within the Earth: Wherefore the Romans ordered a solemn Day of
Humiliation to be kept, when any great Earthquakes happened; but they expressed
not of what God they sought for help, because they knew not whether it were
Aeolus, Commander of the Winds, or Neptune, Lord of the Seas, that shook the
World.

Japanners are much terrified at an Earthquake.
The Japanners are exceedingly terrified at Earthquakes, knowing by dear
Experience, that Mountains have sunk into deep Pits, Villages turned
topsieturvey, Cities and whole Territories swallowed up; therefore when the
inner parts of the Houses began to crack, the Walls to totter, the Mats which
covered the Floors to move, and other Houses here and there began to tumble,
every one ran to seek for a Place of safety, their amazedness was so exceeding
great; which indeed was no wonder; for who would not be afraid when the firm
Earth affords no sure Footsteps? when it falls in under Towns and Villages? An
enemy may be repulsed by high Bulwarks, and inaccessible Ways; against great
Storms, Harbors are sure Guards; Fire follows not those which fly from it;
raging Sickness, though it empties Cities, yet swallows them not up: but the
Earthquakes hide oftentimes under heaps of Rubbish, or almost bottomless Pits,
Mountains, Cities, nay, whole Territories, without leaving the least Mark
behind; so that whole Generations of People are buried with the Ruins of their
Habitations.

Why the Hollanders were less afraid.
The Hollanders seemed to be less afraid than any, because they not only knew
of their Mortality in what Place soever they were, but that they might easily
suffer an involuntary Death, not yet knowing how they should come off, but that
they were at the pleasure and dispose of a barbarous Nation. It would be no
great matter of difference to them, if some merciful Japanner (if such a one
might be found any where) covered their Bodies with Earth, or if the Earth it
self performed the Office: for without doubt they should suffer a far more
easy Death under than upon the Earth.

Strange alteration in Japan by an Earthquake.
Most part of the Evening this Trepidation continued, only giving several
shakes: for at other times Japan feels greater sorrow by these Earthquakes,
because it often happens there, that the Earth sinks, or makes terrible
gapings, Rivers swelling overflow, cooling hot Springs, and making hot cold;
that Flames break forth from the Mountains, or on the contrary, that burning
Mountains are quenched by Earthquakes; that plain Countries become Mountains,
and Mountains turn into Plains; that Islands are blown up out of the Sea, and
others sink under Water.

The reasons of Earthquakes descrid d after diverse manners.
We must acknowledge it to be a great Wisdom, which is not only satisfied by
the outward appearance of such horrible Motions, but also searches into the
Secrets of Nature, to find out the Reasons of such Trepidations. The Japanners
(as we said before) ascribe it to the Water, or rather (according to their
Custom and idle Fancies) to a Sea Monster. But those that ascribe it to the
Water, differ in their Opinions: Some maintain (according to Thales Milesius)
that the Earth swims upon the Sea, and is moved by it almost like a Ship.
Others say, That the Earth is cut through by continual flowing Streams, by
immense Lakes, inhabited round about by a People which know not one another,
and by Fountains that never cease to spout forth Waters through
undiscoverableble Springs, which all have their original under the Earth, and
either flow gently there, or else descend into some deeper Caves, and gather
together again in several Places, by which means swelling they lift up the
upper Grounds, so shaking the Earth, and all that which it bears.

But Anaxagoras makes Fire to be one reason of Earthquakes; so that the Fire
has the same operation in the Earth as in the Air, when it drives the Clouds
and rents them with Thunder. Amongst the Modern Philosophers some are of
Opinion, That the dreadful gapings and Hiatus of Earth is occasioned by Fire,
not unlike a Mine, in which Powder being laid and set on Fire, blows up the
Earth, according to the Invention which the Biskainer, Peter Naverius, being
taught by Francis George of Scenen, tried first upon the Castle Ovi, close by
Naples.

Pliny also says, Lip. 2. c. 79.
That the shaking of the Earth is like Thunder in the Air. Moreover, it cannot
be denied, but that the Earth feeds. Fire under it, which appears by the
continual Smoke, and sometimes by the Flames which ascend the Sky from several
Mountains, Burning of Mountains.
whereof Vesuvius in Italy; Aetna, in Sicily; in Island Hecla, and in Japan,
Siurpurama, lying eight Leagues beyond Meaco, near the great Lake Meacosche,
are sufficient testimonies.

The reason of the sinking of Cities.
It is not therefore improper which some believe, That the sinking of Cities and
Countries proceeds from the Earths being consumed by the Fire, which requires
Food; not unlike a House, which (the Pillars and other Timber being devoured by
Flames) wanting Supporters tumbles down.

Some also hold, that the Fire in the Earth produces continual Smoke, which
finding no Vent, forces and breaks its way out; so that if the Smoke be very
strong, it rents and cleaves the Earth asunder; but if it be weak, it causes
only a shaking of the upper Grounds.

But Anaxagoras judges the Earth it self to be the reason of her own
unfirmness; for he says that it is nothing without which moves it, but great
Pieces within falling, either loosned by moisture, or consumed by Fire; or the
Winds which rage under Ground, blown down, or else being decayed by Age, like
an old Building, of which the Foundation being rotted, and not able to bear the
Superstructure, tumble down. These Pieces are the great occasion oftentimes of
a general sinking, or at least, a shaking of the upper Grounds, by the blow
which they give in the fall.

Winds the reasons of Earthquakes.
This Opinion is contradicted by Archelaus, Aristotle, Theophrastus, and most of
the chief and Learned Geographers, which ascribe the Reason of Earthquakes to
the Winds, viz. The Earth produces always Mists, either dry or moist, which
rise so high up into the Air, that not able to get farther, they descend again,
and creep into all the Crevises of the Earth, which when they have filled up,
and the one Wind seems to force in upon another, makes it seek for Vent: which
kind of striving occasions those violent Emotions oftentimes bursting open, and
swallowing up all that is on the top.

Several Opinions concerning it.
Yet some are of another Opinion concerning the Winds, judging that it is with
them as with a humane Body, which is moistened by Blood, and moved by the
Spirits or Vitals, which get in and out by some little Pores, but gather in far
greater Places, so long as the Body is of a good Temper, the Pulses beat
temperate: But if it meets with any stoppage inwardly, then the Breath is
stopped and troubled, and sometimes strange Convulsions produced; so likewise
the Winds in the Earth being molested, and wanting Vent, make a rumbling and
terrible motion, till at length they force out their way.

It has often been observed by the Japanners, that the greatest Earthquakes
have happened in calm Weather when the Winds are shut up into the bosom of the
Earth.

But amongst all others (according to our Judgment) the famous Philosopher
Epicurus seems to come nearest the truth, who is of Opinion, That Earthquakes
may proceed from the falling of the Earth into deep Pits, or its consuming by
Fire, whether the sulphurous Grounds occasion the Flame, or whether a
collection of fiery Spirits changes into Fire, and breaks forth like Lightning,
or enclosed Winds have the greatest force.

But the Dutch Prisoners in Jedo were not so much in fear for the Earthquake,
as for a far more terrible Death than to be killed by the fall of a House; for
they knew the Japanners cruelty: neither could they expect any good in their
preparation, being ordered to come before some of the Council; so that they
spent the whole Night with melancholy thoughts without sleeping; yet in the
Morning the Earthquake and their fear ceased both on a sudden, at their coming
the Interpreters Kitsbioie and Phatsiosaimon, who brought them information of
the occasion of their being commanded to come forth that day, was only to
return the Council thanks for the Presents of Japan Coats; and accordingly the
Interpreters conducting the Hollanders to the Presidents Palace, they made
humble returns of their thanks.

Strange dealings of the Counselors with the Hollanders.
But the Counselors delighted themselves with asking the Hollanders, If they
knew not where their Ship Breskens was at that present time, having weighed
Anchor, and was gone from the Haven Namboe? If they took the Roman Religion to
be the only true Faith?

Whereupon Captain Schaep answered, That he did not know whether the Ship was
gone to Batavia, Taiovan, or Nangesaque; and that they abhorred the Papists
Religion.

After this every Hollander received two Cups of Wine, which having drank, they
were commanded to show them some antic Postures, to make wry Faces, and look
asquint, to go splay-footed, and swing their Arms to and again, which the Japan
Lords took great delight to see: when they were at the height of their
Pleasures they were commanded to depart.

Costly Buildings in Jedo.
Being conducted back to their Lodgings by the two Interpreters, they saw in the
Way which they passed several Palaces, in which Beauty and Art seemed to strive
with each other; being built exceeding high, the Roofs in the Front jetting
over before, each Corner supported by Gilded Dragons and Bulls, all the Front
adorned with Carved Imagery, the Windows richly Trimmed with Gold.

The Dutch Prisoners are much troubled, and why.
In the interim the Hollanders were exceedingly troubled, because they had not
told the Design of their Voyage at Court, which was to Sail for Tartary, and
the River Polysanga, to discover the Western America, and the Gold and Silver
Islands, which Mr. Elserak might possibly have told to the Governor of
Nangesaque: Wherefore if they should be accused with Untruths, they had nothing
to expect but a miserable Death. After serious Consideration of so weighty a
Matter, they found it convenientest not to acknowledge that they they
understood Portuguese, in which Language they were examined by Kytsbyoye and
Phatsyosaymon, before Sicungodonne; and also resolved to give a full and true
Relation of their intended Voyage, when the two Dutch Interpreters should come
from Firando.

A Letter to the Dutch Prisoners.
Mean while they received a Letter from Nangesaque, subscribed by John van
Elserak and Peter Antonizon Overtwater; the Contents as follows.

This Instant, being the tenth of September, we are advised by the Governor of
Nangesaque, That Captain Schaep and the Merchant Byleveld, coming to an Anchor
before the Territory Mansany, were enticed ashore by the Japanners, and carried
Prisoners to Jedo, they not knowing what People you were; but understanding now
what Nation you are of, you will without doubt in a short time be set at
Liberty. Here all things are well. Five of our Ships lie before Disma at an
Anchor, which have made a Voyage from Batavia hither in a very short time. The
East India Company will reap great Advantages this Year. Agree amongst your
selves, and doubt not. We expect your coming hither. We should have written
more at large, were not the Letters sent by the Governor of Nangesaque's Post.
Whilst we are busy concluding, we received a Letter from Jedo, written by
Kytsbyoye, That there are ten Prisoners of you, all lodged by the East India
Companies Interpreters, and well entertained. We hear also, that the Ketch
Breskens has weighed her Anchor, and is gone from Namboe.

Their Discourse with the Interpreters.
The day after the receipt of this Letter, Kytsbyoye, Phatsyosamon, and Syovan,
being told by Sicungodonne, That Elserak had informed the Governor of
Nangesaque, that the Council in Batavia had fitted out two Ships the third of
February, Anno 1643. to discover a place of great Trade in Tartary; this place
being already known by eminent Writers: And also a Native Tartar was in one of
the Ships, which would assist in promoting that Undertaking; and Elserak
believed, that Breskens was one of those two Vessels. This being told to the
Hollanders by the Interpreters, they acknowledged it to be really true; but
because they had lost their Admiral Castrecom by a Storm in the Night, they did
not proceed in their Voyage; and chiefly, because he carried six Tun of Rice
for the Ketch Breskens, for want of which they were drove to a great strait,
and their Provisions growing very short, they concluded either to Sail, if
possible, to Nangesaque, or Tayoan, or else to return back to Batavia. This
their Resolution they were not able to perform, being driven by Storm still
further and further to the Northward.

Japan Maps, after what manner.
WHilst they gave this Account, Syovan fetched a Map Printed on Japan-Paper,
like unto a half Globe, which contained in a small Circumference the Provinces
of Japan and Amboyna, Molucco Islands, Manilla, The South Sea, Borneo, Celebes,
Malacca, Formosa, Corea, and other Territories lying in that Corner of the
World. They found also in the same Map the Country which they lighted upon in
forty two Degrees, spreading East-North-East from the North-West part of Japan,
sixteen Leagues off at Sea: But they could see no Passage that went through
betwixt that and Japan; so that they took that Coast for the Country of Jesso,
which joins to Japan: For the Inlet betwixt Sungaer and Jesso washes not
through, reaching scarce forty Leagues upwards, being there stopped by the
Mountains, which spread themselves over the Japan Province Ochio.

Description of Jesso.
THe Bigness of Jesso (full of Mountains and rich Furs) is, as we said before,
unknown; notwithstanding the Japan Emperors were so much concerned at the
Discovery thereof, that they sent Persons thither on purpose, if possible, to
learn how far Jesso extends it self: But they traveling over high Mountains,
and deep Valleys, a vast way into the Country, could find no end, but brought
Information to the Emperor, That the Inhabitants were a Wild and Salvage
People. So after a toilsom Journey, they were forced to return with no Effect.

The Hollanders found Jesso to be in forty seven Degrees, seeming to spread it
self a vast Way to the North-East. This Map shown by Syovan, represented Jesso
to lie a hundred Leagues from Japan; notwithstanding it joins with the Province
Ochio to Japan. Moreover Jesso spreads it self so far, that it borders the
Northern America; so that the Straights of Anian, generally by Geographers
placed between Kataya or Kitai, and the Northern America, is not found in the
forementioned Map; and accordingly no Passage from the Frozen Sea, into the
South Sea, which was always held infallible: Wherefore several Europeans, and
chiefly since the Year 1380. have sought a way by the North, through the
Straights of Anian, to Sail to the East Indies.

The first Undertaker of this, was Nicholas Zenet; being afterward followed by
Gaspar Cortez, who discovered a new River; and going again a second time, never
returned.

That of (...)
Michael Cortez, Gaspar's Brother, undertook again that Voyage, with as bad
success. King Henry the Seventh ventured also to open a Passage through the
Straights of Anian to the East Indies.

Of Gabottus.
Sebastian Gabottus a Venetian, taking the Business in hand not long after,
returned fruitless, and brought his Ship through a thousand dangers, being
sadly damaged by the Ice, into an English Haven.

Of Varasanus.
Yet all these unfortunate Expeditions terrified not John Varasanus, who related
such pleasing Stories to Francis the First King of France, that he Equipped a
Vessel at his proper Charge, which Anno 1524. set Sail for the Northern
America: But Varasanus going ashore, with most of his Men, on the Promontory of
Britain, was there destroyed by the Salvages, and scarce Men enough left in
the Ship to carry her back to France, with the News of this Accident.

Of Gomez.
Notwithstanding this sad event, Sebastian Gomez a Spaniard went the Year after,
steering his Course toward the North Pole, where he suffered a considerable
time by extremity of Cold, and great floating Castles of Ice, which so opposed
him, that he was forced to return with like bad success.

Of Willoughby.
England not satisfied with that fruitless Voyage of Gabottus, prepared a
second time for the Voyage, Anno 1553. for which purpose, Sir Hugh Willoughby,
a little before the death of Edward the Sixth, got a Ship, wherewith he Sailed
to seventy two Degrees, through the Ice, where he died of Cold; but a few being
left alive, brought the Tidings of their unfortunate Success to the King.

Of Bor^^^
Somewhat better Success had Stephen Burrow, in his Voyage; who setting Sail
three years after Willoughby, discovered in the North Galgoivia and Nova Zemla;
but then was hindered by the Ice from going further to the Straights of Anian.

Of Forbisher.
After that Martin Forbisher set out two small Vessels; but because he came
after the time, and too late in the Year, was forced to leave the Frozen Ocean,
and return. Yet he was not so satisfied; for Queen Elizabeth took such a liking
to Forbisher's Design, that she gave him a Vessel of three hundred and sixty
Tuns, with two Ketches, and stored them with six Months Provision. The twenty
sixth of May, Anno 1577. Forbisher set Sail from Harwich: On one of the Islands
of Orkney he went ashore, but found all the Inhabitants fled from their Huts,
in the middle of which they had their Hearths without Chimneys: On one side
were the Peoples Lodgings; on the other, a place for their Cattle; and in a
Corner lay some dried Fish, and a few Oats. After having Sailed six days, since
they left the Haven of the Orkneys, he met for a whole Month with several great
Trees, which without doubt had by extraordinary Floods been washed up, and so
carried into the Ocean: This was the less dangerous, because he had continual
daylight. At last Forbisher Landed on the North of America, The Northern
Americans are very wild.
in sixty eight Degrees; where he found a Gigantick People, with long Hair, who
endeavored subtly to murder him, they being exceeding Salvage: Their Clothes
made of Wild-Beasts Skins, of which the Tail hangs between their Legs: Their
Tents made of Whalebone, are covered with Hides, and the Entrance faces the
South. They use Bows, Arrows, Slings, and two sorts of Skiffs, whereof the
biggest, carrying seventeen Men, is made of several pieces of Wood joined
together, and on both sides covered with Leather: The little ones are also
covered with Leather, and not unlike a Weavers Shuttle; in the middle of which
is a Hole, for one Man to sit, who ties the upper Covering of the Boat about
his Middle, and with one Oar makes exceeding swift way through the Water.

The Soil is very barren of any kind of Fruit or Grain; only it feeds abundance
of Deer, Hares, Wolves, Sea-Bears, and Hogs, not unlike a Wolf: The raw Flesh
of these Beasts serves the Inhabitants for Food.

It seems that this Country is exceedingly troubled with Earthquakes; for in
many places were seen pieces of Hills, and in other places whole Mountains,
that were strangely rent from one another.

The fourth of August, Forbisher returning, came safe on the seventeenth of
September into Milford-Haven, and brought besides his Ballast of glittering
Stones, a Salvage Man, his Wife, and Child, who signified so much to them, that
the Man's Name was Calichoe, the Woman's Egnoge, and the Child's Nutive; yet
though notwithstanding they were fed, according to their Custom, with raw
Flesh, they lived not long after being brought from their Country.

Besides Forbisher, Arthur Petreus and Charles Jackman discovered some Coast
higher, Davises Voyage.
belonging to Nova Zembla: And John Davies Sailing North-West to sixty one
Degrees, entered a Channel which to this day bears denomination from him, but it
is not known how far it extends.

After that, Hudson's.
Hudson ran into an Inlet or Bay beyond Davises Straights, and found a great
Sea in the Heart of the North America.

Thomas Button Steering after Hudson, Button's.
also directed his Course Westerly, and discovered a great Inland Sea in the
Heart of the North America, lying in fifty seven Degrees.

Thomas Jacobson's.
King Charles the First also fitted out two Sail, under the Command of Thomas
Jacobson, Anno 1631. and Sailing into Hudson's Straights, he Steered Southerly
to fifty Degrees; but there stopping, returned with no other Success, than
calling that vast and barren Country of America, lying between Hudson's
Straights and Button's Inland Sea, New Britain.

All these, besides Peter Jackman, have sought for the Straights of Anian,
Sailing Westerly through the Northern America.

William Barenson'^.
But William Barrenson thought to find the Passage behind Russia and Tartary,
and so through Anian to reach the Empire of Japan, which that way is judged to
be but twelve hundred thirty five Leagues from Holland. On the fourth of June,
1594. he set Sail with four Ships, and got through mavelous great Flakes of
Ice, to the height of eighty seven Degrees, where they saw several Bears,
either swimming toward their Ship, or running over the Sholes of Ice. They
found also very many and large Sea-Calves, Sea-Calves, what Creatures.
being Amphibious Creatures, living both in the Water and on the Land: They
have a Mouth like an Ox, out of which stick two Tusks, each half a Yard long,
which are accounted as good as Ivory: Their Skins of so great a hardness, that
no Sword, Pike, Battel-Ax, or other Weapon whatsoever, can pierce it, nor kill
them, unless hit in the Temples of the Head.

The time began to expire, when William Barrenson Steered his Course through
the Waygates, by him called the Straights of Nassaw, Sailing close by the
Promontories and Capes of Nova Zembla, when he discovered a Cross, placed on a
high Point; where Landing, he found several Men's Footsteps, and six Sacks of
Rye-Meal: A Musket Shot further, stood another Cross, by three Houses, built
after the manner of the Norwegians: In these they saw only some Tubs of Salt
Meat.

The fifteenth of August the three Ships which had Sailed more Easterly came to
their Admiral Barrenson, having been much cumber'd and troubled by the Ice, but
since gotten through the Straights of the Waygates, and Sailed sixty Leagues
into the Tartarian Sea, which was very salt, full of Whales, and the Bottom not
to be reached by our Line. And although this was all they did in that
Expedition, yet they hoped for a good Event.

Hemskerk's Voyage.
The States of the United Netherlands taking the Business in hand, fitted out
the Year after the first Voyage seven Sail, under the Conduct of William
Barenson and Jacob Hemskerk: In seven Weeks time they got into the Waygates,
where fifty four Men went ashore, and traveling two Leagues up into the
Country, found a Track of Footsteps of several Men, Hedges laden with
Train-Oyl and Furs, and a Hill, whereon were placed several hairy Images,
before which lay Ashes, and the Bones of burnt Deer, which without doubt had
been killed there for Offerings. After that, Hemskerk received certain
Informations b^^^ Skiff from Pitzore, laden with Sea-Calves Teeth, Train-Oyl,
and Geese, being to load in the Russia Ships which Sail through the Waygates
and Tartarian Sea, by the River Oby, to the City Ugloita in Tartary, where they
Winter. The Pitzoreans signified moreover, That the Waygates would be froze
about ten Weeks after that time. At last, nine of the Seamen that went up into
the Country, met with twenty Samoyedes, going five and five together: They
being asked concerning the Situation and State of Nova Zembla, informed them,
That beyond a Promontory lying about five days Journey from thence, toward the
North-East, was a great Sea, which spread it self toward the South-East
several hundred Leagues: So without making any further Discovery, the Fleet
returned home, after a Voyage of four Months and sixteen Days.

Thus having had no better Success for two several Expeditions, the States of
the United Netherlands prepared a third Fleet, promising great Rewards to those
that could open a Passage for Ships to sail to Japan by the North; at which
Amsterdam seemed much concerned, though nothing had been effected in it:
Whereupon they set out two Ships, the biggest of which was Commanded by
Hemskerk, His second Expedition.
and William Barrenson Chief Pylot; and the other, by Cornelison Riip. Both of
them Sailed through vast Seas of Ice, to eighty Degrees, where they discovered
a Grassy Country, full of Cartel; whereas Nova Zemla, which lies seven
Degrees more Southerly, has neither Grass, nor any Cattle, unless Foxes and
Bears. They found in a Bay of this Green Country two Islands, and on them,
diverse Eggs of Sea-Fowl. Till the eight and twentieth of June they Sailed
backwards and forwards, along this Coast, to see if they could find any Way
that led through; but the Ice increased at last so upon them, that they were
forced to return. Hemskerk and Riip also could not agree to go any further: At
last they concluded, That each of them should Sail where he pleased. Riip
endeavored in eighty Degrees to find a way into the Tartarian Sea; but being
forced to leave his Design, returned to Holland with no other Success.
Hemskerk, on the contrary, inspected all the Coasts of Nova Zembla; so getting
to the Island Orange, lying before Nova Zemla, at the utmost Northern Point,
where he was hemmed in by the Ice, which according to their Plummet, was twenty
Fathom thick under the Water, and twelve above. The Ship driving against these
Mountains of Ice, received a great Leak in her Prow. September began by this
time to come on apace, at which time the Sun begins to hide it self there for
three Months: The Place desolate and unhabitable, the Cold insupportable,
Firing scarce, no Houses nor Provisions to be found any where; so that they had
all expected Death, had not some of the Seamen traveled up two Leagues
Southerly into the Country, where they found a sweet River, full of Trees, and
Planks driving in it, Is very remarkable.
which served them for a Hut, which they built not without great danger of
Bears, and exceeding trouble, by reason of the extraordinary Cold; not having
finished it before the latter end of October. After that, they were miserably
tormented, within by the Smoke, and without by Bears, North-East Winds, and
Mountains of Snow, betwixt which they were forced to pass, to carry their
Firing into the Hut: Thus they spent their time till May, which drawing near an
end, and also their Provisions growing scant, they prepared their Boats; and
though grown weak by their Wants and Sufferings, yet they stood out to the
Offin. In these Boats they passed through the wide Ocean; and when the Waves
went too high, they hawl'd them on the Ice, where they were assaulted by the
Bears. In this their Voyage home, William Barrenson died, and several others;
twelve Men only escaping with Life, through a thousand dangers coming at last
to Kilduin, from whence they Sailed to Amsterdam.

The Straights of Anian not mentioned in the Japan Map.
So that all the Voyages which have been made, to Sail to the East Indies by a
Westerly Course, through the Northern America; or Easterly, along the Coast of
the Samoyedes, and Tartary, through the Straights of Anian, have been of no
effect. And if the Map shown by the Apostate Japan Priest Syovan be right, then
all Voyages to the East Indies, if Sailed Northerly, would be in vain; because
no passage is found therein between Catay and America, from the Northern Ocean
(which the Samoyedes call Marmare) to the South Sea.

In the same Map, Jesso was made to border on America, and Tartary lay to the
Inland, and separated from those Coasts: Wherefore Syovan asked the Dutch
Prisoners, How they could have saild to Tartary, since it lay so far Southward
from the Sea? And on the North though it be washed by the Sea, yet they could
not put in there, because there is no Channel runs between Tartary and the
South Sea.

Hugo Grotius his mistake concerning the Inhabitants of America.
By this plainly appears the Mistake of the Learned Hugo Grotius, who says,
That America was Peopled out of Norway, over Yseland, Friezland, Greenland, and
Estotiland, through vast and Icy Seas. For if there be no Water-passage betwixt
America and Cataya, then the Peopling of America may more probably be from
Cataya, than from Norway. Without all doubt, one People or Nation have driven
another from their Countries, the Weaker still giving place to the Stronger.
The Passages of Ancient Times manifest this sufficiently. It cannot be denied,
that the spreading of Mankind over the Earth after the Flood, must be sought
for on the Armenian Mountain Ararat (which the Turks call Agri Dagh; and the
Armenians, Messis Saur) on which Noah's Ark landed.

Armenia it self borders on the North with Colchis, Iberia, and Albania; on the
West, with Cappadocia; on the South, with Mesopotamia; and the East is washed
by the Caspian Sea.

The Generations of Mankind increasing and multiplying, sought in all places
for newer and greater Habitations: Those which sprang up in the North-East,
took Tartary and Catay into possession, from whence they spread themselves
further over America: And that this happened many Ages ago, may appear by those
Europeans that discovered America; for they found this Country, and all the
Islands, which lie scattered up and down in great numbers, so exceeding
Populous, that they might well stand in competition, for the Number of
Inhabitants, with Europe, or any other part of the World; but are so different
in their Language and Customs, that the one has not the least resemblance with
the other; whereby it may partly appear, that as they removed their Stations
presently after the Confusion of Tongues that happened in the Valleys of Shinar,
the Passage from Catay to America, about the North, is very easy; whereas that
from Norway thither, is much farther, and more troublesome, between Flakes of
Ice, and under a Cold Heaven: For no where America borders on Asia, but near
the Straights of Anian, if such a Channel were found; but more probably on the
Territory of Catay. However, the first Plantations of People belong originally
to Asia. Forbisher found the Northern Americans to be broad Faced, with long
and black Hair, Camosie Noses, woolly Beards, and of a swarthy Complexion:
Their Religion, worshipping the Sun, which they called Hyout. By all which,
they seem to be rather of a Tartarian Extract, than from Norway.

Syovan's Arguments to the Hollanders concerning their Voyage to Tartary.
These Reasons persuaded Syovan, that it was impossible for the Hollander to
Trade by Shipping into Tartary, because the most Southerly part of that
Country lay a great distance from the South Sea; and the North was not to be
Sailed to out of the South Sea, because the Straights of Anian was not
mentioned in the Japan Map. Whereupon Captain Schaep replied, That Tartary,
Schaep's Answer concerning the Tartarian Trade.
so called from the mighty River Tartar, is washed on the North by the
unnavigable Ocean Mamare; the West bordered by Muscovy; the South jutting
against the Caspian Sea, Bactriana, India, and China; the East borders America,
and is divided into five several Territories, which are these, viz. The Wild
Tartary, whose Inhabitants keep no constant Place of Residence, removing daily,
according as the Pasture for their Horses, Cows, and other Cattle lasts; yet
although they range thus up and down without Law, they have their own
Enclosures, beyond the Limits of which they may not go: These Parks or Forests
are called Zarolhia, Casane, Nagaia, Schibanoka, Casakka, Astoacan, Baskirda,
and Tumen, all being under the Emperor of Russia, besides Tumen the Tartarian
Province, Zagatai is very famous for the Inhabitants called Kircasii, and the
Cities Sakasba, Bichend, and Samarcande, the native Country of Tamerlane. The
Province Turchestan has the Cities Taskent, Cotam, Cascar, and Jarkem. The
fourth Province called Cataia, under the great Cham's Jurisdiction, is divided
into seven Territories, viz. Tendue, Camul, Engimul, Caindu, Thebet, and
Carazan, where the Men in stead of the Women, when delivered of a Child, keep
their Beds two and forty days; the seventh Territory is Tangud, where Printing
was used a thousand years ago.

The Tartarian River Polisange.
Moreover, Captain Schaep signified to Siovan, That the River Polisange came
flowing out of the Tartarian Territory Cataie into the South Sea.

The Banks of this River Polisange, whose original is a hundred Leagues from
the Sea where it disembogues, are adorned with the famous Trading Cities,
Quinsen, (in which Paulus Venetus says are twelve thousand Bridges, under
which great Ships may pass with all their Sails spread) Jangio, Brema, and
Cambaly, whither the chief President of the East India Company in Batavia had
sent the Ship Castrecom and the Ketch Breskens, to discover that River, and all
the other Cities: but he being separated from the Ship Castrecom, whom he
feared was lost, he found himself necessitated to put in for some other Part,
and leave off that Design. At last Captain Schaep told him, That since he
understood not the Portuguese Tongue, and much less the Japan, he would give a
full Relation of all his Adventures to the Emperor's Privy Council so soon as
the two Dutch Interpreters came from Firando to Jedo. Upon which Answer
Kitsbioie, Phatsiosaimon, and Siovan, departed from the Hollanders.

Hollanders advise amongst themselves.
Mean while the Hollanders concluded with one accord to declare to the Council
that which they had oftentimes said before, viz. That since the eleventh of
June, when they came for fresh Water into the Haven of Namboe, and put out
again, they stood direct into the Sea, plying it up by a Wind two hundred
Leagues, to Weather the South-Point of Japan, that so they might attain to
forty Degrees Northern-Latitude; and at last being tossed and driven up and
down by a Southern Storm, they were necessitated a second time to put in for
Namboe, Furthermore they found it convenient not to declare their intentions of
going to the Gold and Silver Islands.

Whilst the Holland Prisoners tarried in the Dutch Inn in Jedo, they were
visited by some Japan Nobles; amongst which also Phoechychemon, Isicauwa, and
Joaiemon; who comforted them, asking them if they were entertained with good
Meat, Drink, and Clothes against the Cold of the Night: Phoechychemon fetched a
Paper full of Itsibos, which is a sort of Japan Gold-Coyn, giving it to Captain
Schaep, and withal promised him more if he desired it, then giving him a Roll
of the Men's Names belonging to his Ship, which he had required of him between
Namboe and Jedo: he desired him to Transcribe two fair Copies of it, which he
promised to keep in memory of the Hollanders: Captain Schaep taking the Scroll,
assured him to prepare the Copies according to his desire against his next
coming.

The two Dutch Interpreters arrive at Jedo.
On the last of September in the Evening, the two Dutch Interpreters came from
Firando to Jedo, and immediately visited the imprisoned Hollanders; the eldest
of them was called Tosaimon, and the youngest Maniekebe, both seeming to bear
an affection to the Hollanders, advising them how to carry themselves before
the Council, viz. That they must answer quick and short upon any Question that
was asked them, in which the Japan Lords are used to take great delight. They
also told them, that they were not to Lodge in their Inn, as they had been
misinformed, but that they should be Entertained in Tonnosamma's House, Lord of
Firando.

The Hollanders are Examined before the Council concerning their Voyage to
Tartary.
The next day their long-expected Examination began before Sicungodonne in this
manner: The Interpreters, Tosaimon and Maniekebe, proposed the following
Questions by order of Sicungodonne, to Captain Schaep, the Merchant Bylevelt
and Jacob de Paw: When, and with how many Sail did you come from Batavia, and
since from Ternata? Whether did you design your Voyage? How came your Ship so
far to the North? Why did you stand to and again before the East-Coast of
Japan? and why dropped ye Anchor in the Haven of Namboe?

Their Answer.
To which they answered, We set Sail from Batavia on the third of February, Anno
1643. and steered our Course for Ternata, with two Ships called Castrecom and
Breskens; the fourth of April we weighed Anchor from Ternata to Sail to
Taiovan, and from thence to Tartary, that there we might discover a Place for
Trade, according as we had been informed: But Sailing on with this intention,
were driven by a great Storm that happened in the Night on an unknown Coast;
after which we lost the Ship Castrecom, judging that she may be split against
the Rocks; yet we sought for it along the Japan Coast, though we had little
hopes of finding it: mean while we suffered under a great inconvenience, by
reason of the scarcity of our Provisions, because the Ship Castrecom carried
six Tun of Rice for our Pink, to be put aboard of us when our need should
require it; therefore because she could not be found, we were forced not to
proceed in our Journey for Tartary, and according as Wind and Weather would
permit to Sail to Taiovan, Nangesaque, or Batavia, so soon as we were furnished
with fresh Water, which we had great want of on the East-Coast of Japan, and
therefore stood directly thither. The tenth of June we entered into the Mouth of
the Haven Namboe; where we came to Anchor, and were courteously received by the
Inhabitants, and instantly furnished with what Water we required; so that on
the next day we stood again to Sea, and steered directly Easterly, that we
might first Weather the South-East Point of Japan; at last we laid it over due
West, but by Southern Storms and contrary Currents were so driven toward the
Japan Shore, that we fell a whole Degree to the Northward from our intended
Course, having then according to Calculation, Sailed about two hundred Leagues
from Namboe: Thus tossed by Tempests, and the Vessel requiring necessary
repair, and the Seamen weakened by four Months endurance on the Offin, and most
of them sick, some speedy refreshment was necessary; for obtaining which the
Haven Namboe was the nearest to Sail to; and having before been kindly
entertained there, we returned thither, but staid with our Sails haled back
till some of the Inhabitants came to us in Boats; of whom we asked leave to
Anchor in the Haven before the Village: which Request was granted by the Chief
of the Town; so that upon his leave our Men rowed ashore to fetch him Aboard;
who desired to barter some of our Merchandise for Provision, of which they had
great store.

Questions asked the Hollanders by the Council, on which their Answer is
required.
Moreover Tosaimon caused them to be asked where Tartary lay, or the City
whither they were sent? and also if ever any European Ships Sailed to those
Places for Trade? Whereupon the Hollanders answered, That to their knowledge
never any Europeans had Sailed to Tartary; and they had likewise no Map nor
Chard to direct them thither, but had Orders from the Governor of Batavia,
which was, That when they came beyond the utmost North-part of Japan, to steer
their Course North-west to forty five Degrees, where the River Polysange
disembogues into the South Sea. On the Banks of which River stand the Cities
Brema, Jangio, and Cambaley, all three famous for Traffic; but because they
never got to above forty Degrees, they received no other information, neither
could they say any more concerning it, but what had been told them in Batavia,

Their other Questions were these: If they should discover Tartary, what would
they do to understand the Inhabitants?

Captain Schaep replied That they had three Seamen Aboard of the Ship Breskens
that understood and spoke the Muscovitish and Polish Tongue, which most of the
Tartars understood: and in the Ship Castrecom a Native Tartar.

Tosaimon asked, How they came by that Tartar? What Age is he? What Office
performs he?

The Russians (said Schaep) making an Inroad into Tartary, amongst the
Prisoners which they took was a Youth, whom they sold to an English Merchant,
that carried him Amstredam, to where he learned to speak Dutch, Write and
Cipher, and at last was entertained in the East India Companies Service; so
that he was sent as an under-Book-keeper to Batavia: which Office he supplies
to this day, and is twenty years old if the Ship Castrecom be safe, and not
cast away.

The Hollanders Answer to Sicungodonne.
Sicungodonne then caused them to be asked, Why they stood so long off and on
upon the Japan Coast? If they did not do it to discover their Creeks and
Harbors? Why they fired their small and great Guns before Namboe?

Their Answer was, That the Officers of both their Ships calling a Council,
agreed before Ternata, making a Letter of Obligation; in which both were bound,
that if by Storm, Current, Mist, or otherwise, they should be separated between
Ternata and Japan, that they should look one for another on the Japan Coast,
and in dark Weather now and then to fire a Gun, that by that sign they might
the easier find one another; but notwithstanding this Agreement they Shot but
once, which was in thirty seven Degrees and a half, out of a sixteen Pounder,
for their Boat to come Aboard again, that was sent to a Japan Fisherman, to
enquire concerning the Ship Castrecom. In the Haven of Namboe they had fired
several times only with Powder, which was done upon the entreaty of some Japan
Lords that came to see the Ship. Manikebe interrupting him said, Why have you
not made it known heretofore that you intended for Tartary? Schaep answered,
That it was through ignorance of the Japan and Portuguese Tongue in which they
were Examined, so that it was impossible for them to answer and give an exact
account of things they understood not; and since that the Lord Sicungodonne
himself telling them that they would be strictly Examined before the Council,
so soon as the Dutch Interpreters came from Firando to Jedo, made them refer
answering punctually till then.

After that the Hollanders had one days rest: the third of November they were
again carried out of Jedo to the Court, where in twenty eight days they had one
Hearing; at that time having no Watch upon them but the two Interpreters, and
having waited two Hours they returned to their Lodging, the Council not meeting
that day by reason of the abundance of Rain that fell till the ninth of the
said Month, all which time the Hollanders stayed in their Inn, and then were
again carried to the Court, Appear the second time at Court to be Examined.
notwithstanding the great Showers of Rain had made the Ways almost unpassable.
Entering the Court with the Interpreters, they were carried into a Place where
they never were before, which caused no small suspicion in them; which was
augmented, because the Nobleman Phoechichemon fetched the Captain and the
Merchant from the rest of the Hollanders, which he left half an hour standing
in the Rain to wait for the Council, which were then at Dinner; at last they
went for shelter under a a Portal, from whence they entered into a spacious
Hall, where Phoechichemon being busy about filling them some Wine, the News
came that the Council sat; whereupon they immediately went thither, and Captain
Schaep and the Merchant were commanded to kneel by a Wooden Gallery; before
which Sicungodonne sat in a Princely Throne, who again asked those Questions
which had been demanded of them at his House concerning the two Ships,
Castrecom and Breskens; to which the Hollanders answered as before they had
done. Behind Sicungodonne the Council was placed, which they could not have a
full sight of.

New Questions put to the Hollanders by the Council.
Their Examining began thus afresh: When, where, and wherefore did you come on
the Japan Coast? How could you entertain any good thoughts, when you stood to
and again from our Shore, and firing your Guns.

Captain Schaep answered, The one and twentieth of May, in the height of seven
and thirty Degrees and a half, we had sight of Japan, and there lay off and on,
so to find our Admiral, whom we had lost, according to our Agreement before
Ternata; and notwithstanding it was concluded on in a dark Night, the the
better to give one another notice to fire a Gun; which was not done above once,
and that only for to give their Boat warning to come Aboard, which was sent to
a Japan Fisherman, to enquire for their Admiral Castrecom, and they staying
somewhat longer than ordinary, Shot according to their Custom to command them
Aboard.

But Manikebe asked them, Out of what insight did not your People declare that
you were Hollanders when you went Aboard of a Japan Fisherman, ten Leagues
beyond Jedo, exchanging Rice for Fish? and hence you could not but know, that
the Emperor of Japan keeps Guards on all the Promontories and Points of Land
along the Seacoast, to watch for the Portuguese Ships, who commonly put their
Priests ashore in such private Places; Why did you not whilst you Cruised on
the Coast send some of your Officers ashore, that might tell our Magistrates
you were Hollanders? your neglecting of this Duty made the Inhabitants of
Namboe suspect you: The Emperor also resented it very hainously, that you
should offer to fire several Guns on his Coast, which is certainly reported to
the Council, though you deny it, for which Crime you are liable to be punished.

The Hollanders Answer.
These Questions Schaep answered thus: The Japan Fishers received full
satisfaction for their Fish: and moreover they entertained them with all
civility, giving them Arak, and what else they desired, by which they might
well judge we were Friends and no Enemies; besides, we informed them as well as
we could possible, that we were Hollanders; but whether they understood it or
not, because not being able to speak the Japan Tongue, we know not.
Furthermore, we have not the least knowledge concerning the Emperors Watches,
nor of that Order of coming ashore to make themselves known: and as for often
Shooting they were altogether ignorant of, because they fired but once, and
that was for the Reason aforesaid: and as for what happened, and was done in
the Haven of Namboe, was upon the entreaty of some Japan Lords; so that if any
other great Guns have been heard to fire, they must needs have been from the
Ship Castrecom, or some other Vessels.

Tosaimon's Examination.
Whereupon Tosaimon again replied, Since you are Hollanders, to whom the Emperor
grants a free Trade, why did you not freely ask for Masts, Yards, Rice,
Provision, and other Necessaries, of which you might have had enough in the
Haven of Namboe? Why did none of you go before the Magistrates then? Did the
Governor of Batavia command you to put in for Japan, or did you come thither of
your own accords? What Officers have the chief Command of the Ketch Breskens
and Castrecon? Who will certify the Emperor that your Voyage was for Tartary,
and not rather to Land Portuguese Priests, because at present there is Peace
concluded between the Portuguese and the United Netherlands?

Schaep's Answer.
Captain Schaep answered, When on the first time they entered the Haven of
Namboe, hundreds of Japanners came flocking Aboard of them to see the Ship, who
being kindly entertained by us, granted that we should furnish our selves with
fresh Water, which then was all we defir'd, and also told them that we were
Hollanders: after which being tossed by Tempest, we were a second time forced
to stand for Namboe, but entered not the Harbor before we had leave from the
Governor; who also granted us to buy all manner of Necessaries for the Ships:
for which purpose coming ashore, we were carried Prisoners to Jedo, without the
help of Witnesses to certify that we were Hollanders; and accordingly the
Emperor's Friends. Furthermore, they had no absolute Command from the Governor
in Batavia, nor the Indian Council, whether to put in for Japan, nor to keep
off from it; but to make a Letter of Agreement before we came from Ternata, to
the end that if their Ships should be separated by Storm, or otherwise, they
might the easier find one another again: by both their Ships Council before
Ternata the Japan Coast was judged to be fittest for that purpose, because it
lay in their Way. The Command over both the Ships belonged to the Merchant,
Captain, and Pilot. Lastly, although the War between the United Netherlands and
the Portuguese be laid aside for some years (concerning which a Writing was
made by the Prince of Orange and the States, under which the East India Company
are comprehend) yet notwithstanding that the Portuguese Priests were sworn
Enemies to them, because of an irreconcilable difference in their Religion:
wherefore they would willingly suffer the cruel'st Death that could be
imagined, if they could any ways be accused to have put any Priests on the
Japan Coast.

Manikebe's Examination.
Manikebe asked moreover, Whereabouts Tartary lay? How they could find it
without a Map? How they came to know that such Cities for Trade were seated
there? How can your People (said he) be without Maps, whereas you have those of
the whole World, where Tartary is also? Without doubt the Pilot of the Ship
Castrecom has a Map of Tartary; and would you not be amazed to see such a one
sent from Nangesaque.

Schaep's Reply.
On these Questions Captain Schaep again made this answe: We could not get a Map
of Tartary any where, but had Orders from the Indian Council, that when we had
Weathered the utmost North-Point of Japan, to steer North-west, and if we could
meet with no Land, to keep on till forty five Degrees, then stand to the
Norch-east to six and fifty Degrees Northern Latitude, where the River
Polisange disembogues into the South Sea. On the Banks of this River are
erected several famous Cities for Trade, accordingly described in credible
Books; but because no European Ships have ever Sailed thither, we could not
find a Map of that Coast, and therefore would not regard any Chard that should
be made by Art which was not real: and from thence it proceeded, that the
Hollanders, though they have Maps of the World, yet they place no Seacoasts
therein, but what are discovered by Navigation. They could also with real truth
affirm, that the Ship Castrecom was unprovided of such a Map; and if a Map of
Tartary might be seen from Nangesaque, it must without doubt be one of the
Inland-Countreys, and not of the Seacoast, because to our knowledge never any
European Ship Sailed thither to discover them.

Enquiry after the Religion in Holland.
Manykebe asked moreover, Are the Hollanders not Christians, and believe in the
same God that the Portuguese do? What Fast-days do they keep? Keep they not
holy the day on which the Cross was found? Are there no Popish-Priests in
Holland? What difference is there between the two Religions of the Hollanders
and Portuguese?

The Answer thereupon.
These Questions were thus Answered, The Hollanders are Christians, and
acknowledge the Trinity, by which the World and all things therein were Created
about six thousand years ago, and is yet preserved and governed: They keep no
Feasts, but one day in seven, called, The Lord's Day, on which they rest from
all manner of Labors, and go in great companies to their Churches. In private
there lived some Roman Priests that had small Congregations, for which they
were often times punished by their Judges, by reason of the great difference
between the Roman Religion, and that Opinion which the Hollanders embraced, who
abhor the Pope and all his Doctrine, and are only bound, neither to add nor
diminish to one Book or Word Written by God himself, through his Apostles: As
for any farther difference, they were not able to give them any account,
because from their youth they had been brought up at Sea; and it was the least
of their business to enquire after the Roman Religion, being well satisfied
with the knowledge of the true Faith which their Forefathers had embraced.

Japanners enquire concerning the manner of the Dutch Sea Fights.
Moreover, Sicungodonne caused them to be asked, What Design those Ships had
that Sailed yearly from Batavia, and Cruis'd about the Cape Spirito Sancto, and
before, the Manilla's? If ever they Engaged and Conquered any Spanish Ships on
that Coast? If a small Ship can overcome a great one? If they carried no
Breast-Works or other Defenses from Shot in their Ships? The manner of a
Sea Fight? What use they made of their Hangers, Battel-Axes, Grenades,
Fireballs, Muskets, Harnesses, and Helmets?

Captain Schaep told them, That the Council at Batavia sent Ships to Cruise
before, the Manilla's, and there to wait for the Spaniards Plate-Fleet, which
came yearly thither through the South Sea; but yet had missed of it till that
time, only some years ago they met with one Ship which was sunk.

The manner of a Sea Fight was thus; When two Sail of an equal bigness,
discover one another, every one seeks at first to get to Wind-ward of the
other; so soon as one has his desire, he falls down upon him that is to
Leeward, Fires at him, afterward claps him Aboard, sends a Company of his Men
over into the Ship, with Hangers, Grenades, Fireballs, Pistols and
Battle-Axes; upon which, both Parties Engage so fiercely, that either the one
Party or the other, is for the most part slain: The Ship to Lee-ward being
Smothered by its own and the Enemies Smoke, has his Enemy Aboard before he is
aware. But a great Ship is very hard to be taken by a small one, except it be
well-Man'd and a good Sailer, and in a dark Night, claps the great Ship Aboard,
putting Men enough in her to Master her; and whilst both Ships Fire Bullets,
Croes, and Iron-Bars, none are Shot-free, but what stand on the Ballast; for
the Iron-Balls which fly to and again, not only batter all they touch, but
kill most of the Men with the Splinters which fly from the sides of the Ships:
Lastly, Harnesses, Helmets, or any other Iron Armor was not used Aboard, but in
their Battles on Shore.

Concerning the taking of Quelang.
Sicungodonne proceeded asking, How have you Hollanders Conquered the Fort
Quelang? Lay there any Guns on the Castle, or not? By what Nation was it
Besieged? The English which Traded formerly in Japan, with whom are they at
Peace, and drive a Trade? Whereupon Bylveld answered, None of us both, said he,
has ever seen Quelang, but of what we have heard we shall relate; The Fort was
well provided with Guns, when the Hollanders made Trenches to the Moat of the
lower Castle, where they threw up a Platform, from whence they fired so
fiercely with Half-Canon and Morter-Pieces, that the Besieged disheartened,
quickly Surrendered. After which, the upper Castle made but little Resistance,
so that the Soldiers having leave to depart with their Lives, Surrendered: It
was Garrisoned by Spanish Soldiers, and Inhabited by Spaniards. As to the
English, they drive a great Trade in many places in India, viz. in Surrat,
Cormandel, Macassar, and Bantam, are friends with France, Spain, Portugal,
Germany, and Holland, and embraced the same Doctrine that was taught in
Holland; yet some Popish Priests also lived privately amongst them.

The Hollanders are strictly examined.
Till this time, their Examinations passed without any great suspicion of
Danger; but now, Sicungodonne broke forth in a great Rage, and caused them to
be asked by the Dutch Interpreter Tosaymon, How durst the Hollanders in the
Ketch Breskens drop a Popish Book in the Bark of the Japan Fisherman, with whom
they Bartered for Fish some Miles beyond Jedo? They should immediately make
known the Contents of the Book, and what Design they had in so doing, or else
their Executioners knew a way by Torture to make them relate the truth, of
which they might see several Examples by the Japan Priests.

Captain Schaep and Byleveld, testified both together, That they had not the
least knowledge of the Book of which they were accused; But if such a thing was
done out of ignorance by any of the Seamen, they would according to their
Ship-Laws, for an Example to others, have him punished severely.

Toysaman interrupting them in their Answer, said, It is a Popish Book full of
Pictures of Saints, and though you Hollanders seem to testify your Innocence
in this Business, it shall not be a sufficient Excuse for you. Sicungodonne
also said, The truth hereof will in a short time appear; to tell apparent
untruths before the Japan Council is a Crime so great, that no punishment
whatsoever is sufficient for it. Schaep and Byleveld replied agan, That they
would willingly suffer Death with all imaginable Tortures, if they could any
way accuse them, to have erred from the truth.

After these Examinations, the Council rising, parted; and Schaep and Byleveld
came again to the rest of their Company, which they found sitting in a great
open Court under a Pent-House, observing, and seeing many various Passages, all
sorts of People walking by them, amongst which were some Women accompanied with
Boys that carried Dishes of Meat to sell. Description of a Japan whore.
The Women Apparel'd in Japan Coats, that trail'd after them on the Ground, and
folded over before in such a manner, that the Nipples of their Breasts were
bare; about their middle, a broad Girdle adorned with Flowers; their Sleeves
large and wide, through which appeared under the right Arm another Sleeve, all
Slashed, which hung out on the top of the left Arm; their Hair hanging loose
about their Head, only one Lock behind tied full of all sorts of Ribbons,
which the Hollanders understood afterward to be common Whores, which generally
sit in open view under a Pent-House before their Doors, on three cornered
Stools, with Dishes of Meat in their Laps; on both sides of them stand two Pots
covered, being full of Meat and Drink; so inviting those that pass by to a good
Entertainment, and their kind Embraces at a cheap Rate.

Strange entertainment of the Hollanders by the Japanners.
But the forementioned Seamen, who waited with a longing desire to know how the
Examination between their Captain, Merchant, and the Council passed, were
exceedingly amazed; when both the Captain and the Merchant were a second time
fetched from them, without having time to speak one word, and were carried by
Phoechemon through a little Door, at the end of the great open Court, which
made the Seamen judge, that so pitiful an Entry must needs lead to a place of
Torture.

The same thoughts had Captain Schaep and Byleveld, and expected a reserable
day, for no sooner being passed through the Door, but they came into a little
Yard, wherein stood three great Tubs full of Water, they well knowing that the
Japanners used them as their greatest and chiefest Tortures: When the
Executioner lays the Sufferer on his Back upon the Earth, so tying him fast,
and pouring this Belly full of Water, makes him disgorge it by stamping on his
Breast and Belly; but soon after their fears vanquished, being carried to the
Interpreters, Taysoman and Manyckebe, in a Princely Hall, where by
Phocchychemon they were entertained with Wine, Rice, and other Dainties, and in
the Evening carried to their old Lodging.

The next day they were again Examined, and Schaep and Byleveld being brought
before Sicungodonne, were commanded to answer to all those Questions which had
been asked, and they had answered to before; which was done, only to see if
they agreed in their Story: But besides the former Questions, these were added.

Questions of the Japanners.
The Japan Council can no way believe, but that your People have a Map of
Tartary; perhaps the Pilot has it, and you do not know of it; for there is no
Ship that comes to an Anchor before Nangesaque, but what has a Map: How is it
possible to Sail blindfold without this great and necessary help? After what
manner could you Sail to Tartary without it? To these Questions Schaep Replied
thus:

Honored Sirs, As to what was said Yesterday, that we had no Map of Tartary in
our Ship, is very certain, and nothing but truth: We are also assured, that the
Pilot has no such Chart. Concerning the Ships that Anchor before Nangesaque,
their business is clear contrary, for they may easily have Maps, because they
come along a Navigable Sea, of which Maps are made ready to their hands. But
because no European ever Steered for Tartary, therefore the Seacoast thereof
cannot possibly be mentioned in any Map; however, The manner of Sailing by a
Compass.
our Ketch is furnished with Compasses, which are a great help to us, for when
we come from any known place, we can by taking an Observation of the height of
the Sun, and the North-Star, (yet not without a Compass) return to the place
from whence we came. Furthermore, our Order was from the Indian Council at
Batavia, That when we came so far as our Maps directed us, which is to thirty
nine Degrees, and Weathered the utmost North-Point of Japan; then to Steer
according to the Globe, of which we had two in the Ship, and so to make a Map
of our own Discoveries, Steering North-West to find Tartary, in forty five
Degrees.

Japanners have a Duth Globe.
Schaep added moreover, And if it please his Lordship Sicungodonne to produce a
Globe, we will show you where Tartary lies, and also the River Polysange, and
the rich Cities for Trade, seated along its Banks; that we may plainly show you
whether we design our Voyage: Sicungodonne caused immediately a Globe (which
had formerly been given him by Master Elserak) to be fetched; but still looking
grimly upon them, did not Command the Hollanders to show him any thing in it,
only showed it them afar off; and going on in his Discourse, said, For what
reasons did you not tell the Council, that your People wanting a Map of Tartary
could make use of a Globe, of which you had two Aboard? Schaep Replied, We
answered on all things that were proposed; but concerning the Globe or any
other helps in Navigation, they were not Examined about.

Tosaymon in Sicungodonne's Name asked them again, Why did you Fire your small
and great Guns before our Coast, which is taken exceeding ill by the Emperor:
and though you deny it, yet it is told us for certain truth? How often did you
shoot in the Haven Namboe?

Byleveld's argument against Japanners.
Byleveld Replied, That they could not help it if any false Accusation came
against the Hollanders; yet they would testify upon Oath, that they fired but
once on the Japan Coast: And being Anchored upon free leave of the Governor in
the Harbor Namboe, several Persons of Quality came Aboard to see them, and
entering into the Cabin, they found their Pistols and Muskets lying in their
usual places, which they taking up, wondered that they would go off without
Fire, wherefore out of curiosity, they pulling the Tricker Fired: Afterward
upon their Entreaty, the great Guns were shot off about fourteen times with
nothing but Powder.

But Tosaymon said, How could the Japanners Discharge your Firelocks, when as
they know not to handle them? What kind of Arms are those Firelocks and
Pistols? We are also informed, That the Hollanders shot their Guns off
themselves, and not the Japanners, who are too ignorant to learn those things
in so small a time.

To which Schaep Replied, It is a small Art to Discharge a Pistol, for we our
selves Charged them, and afterward Delivered them; these Arms strike with a
Flint on a Steel, which making Fire, blows up the Powder in the Pan, by which
means the Piece goes off.

Tosaymon said, That he had seen such kind of Arms in the Netherland Ships
Riding before Firando: Upon which Sicungodonne caused a Dutch Pocket-Pistol,
which had formerly been given him, to be brought into the Court, and asked
Tosaymon, If those that he had seen were like that? who told him, that they
were of the same fashion, but longer.

Then Schaep proceeding on, said, It need not seem strange, that the Japanners
can use the Hollanders Arms, there being nothing else to be done, than to pull
the Tricker toward them with the foremost Finger: Whilst these Examinations
passed in Sicungodonne's House, there sat a Japan Priest next the Hollanders,
who oftentimes would accuse them, and tell it to Sicungodonne.

Further accusation against the Hollanders.
Moreover, Manykebe asked them, Why did you resist with Hangers drawn when you
were taken Prisoners? Did you not expect that the Emperor would resent it very
hainously, for you to come as Spies, and make Inspections into his Coasts? Why
did you not make known that you were Hollanders? Have none of you ever been in
Japan? Do you know Mr. Elserak, Overtwater, Kockebakker, and Caron? Will not
Caron come again from Holland to India?

Their answer to it.
These Questions were answered by Schaep, who said, Believe most Honored Sir,
that we are falsely accused of making refistance, when under the pretense of
Friendship we were Betrayed, and misused like the worst of Villains. Why should
we resist, being in a strange Country, and beset round about, and saw not the
least place to escape? Should eight Hollanders go to make a way to their Boat,
which without doubt was Guarded with hundreds of Soldiers; none of us were
provided with Arms, but only I with a Hanger, which we did, because we knew
our selves to be Friends to the Japan Emperor, therefore we expect to be
released from our Imprisonment, being kept without any cause? And who would
accuse true Friends for Spies, because by order of a Letter of Agreement, we
sought for our Admiral Castrecom on the North-Coast of Japan which was in our
way to Tartary; and had we known that our Cruising there would have been so ill
taken, we would rather have chosen to have perished with hunger in the Ocean,
than incurred the Japan Emperors Displeasure. Moreover, We have declared
several times, that we were Hollanders, but we cannot help it that it is
denied, or that being not experienced in the Language, we could not make them
understand it. None of the Prisoners have ever set foot on Japan before this
time; but I have been twice in Firando, from whence about three years ago I
carried Mr. Francis Caron to Batavia; and I spoke with Elserak and Overtwater,
a little before my coming from Batavia: I also knew Kockebakker, who at this
time lives and is Married in Holland: Concerning Caron's return to India, I
know no certainty.

Sicungodonne requires and obligation from the Hollanders.
At last, Sicungodonne asked them, If they were willing to Sign an Obligation,
in which they should be bound to be ready at all times upon the Emperors
Command, to appear before the Council; and if ever they were found guilty of
bringing over Portugal Priests into Japan, then the Obligation to be forfeited:
And for performance of this, not only they then present should be Bound, but
also the Netherland Governor in Nangesaque, with all the Goods belonging to the
East India Company, on the Island Disma with them; Captain Schaep and the other
Prisoners embraced this proffer freely, being all very well assured, that they
never had any thoughts to bring over Romish Priests in their Vessels Breskens
and Castrecom: For, said they, being sworn Enemies to all their Profession,
should we venture our Lives and Fortunes, to accommodate those we always hated?
And therefore they doubted not but the Governor at Nangesaque would without any
scruple embrace this Proffer, there being not the least danger in it.

After this proffer, and their acceptance of it, Sicungodonne rose up, going
some Paces from the Hollanders, setting himself down at the end of the Gallery,
where he drew a Draught of the forementioned Obligation; whilst the Letters
that were written the tenth of September, by Elserak and Overtwater, from
Nangesaque, Dutch Letter translated into the Japan Tongue.
were delivered to Schaep and Byleveld, that they might be interpreted into the
Japan Tongue, and given to the Council; about which they had great trouble, to
make Tosaymon understand the Contents of the Letter, the Interpreter having but
little knowledge of the Dutch Tongue; so that he spent most of the time in
asking to whom the said Letter did belong; for the Japan Council doubted, that
the Prisoners belonged to the Netherland East India Company: Wherefore
Tosaymon, Examination concerning. Elseraks Letter.
by Sicugodonne's Order, strictly examined them to whom the Letter was written;
whereupon he was answered, To Captain Schaep the Merchant, and the other
Prisoners: But, said Tosaymon, Have Elserak and Overtwater given you no advice
in their Letter, how you should carry your self, and what you should answer
before the Council. On which they replied, That the Letter contained nothing
but their sorrow for our Imprisonment, which they had heard from the Governor
of Nangesaque; the Arrival of five Netherland Ships in the Rode before Disma;
their hopes of making good Advantage that Year; an admonishment of being at
peace and quiet amongst our selves; and a strict charge of carrying our selves
with great respect to the Japan Council.

Sicungodonne shows himself courteous to the Hollanders.
These Contents were translated by Tosaymon, who instantly gave it to
Sicungodonne, and he delivered the Obligation to Tosaymon, that he might
translate the same into the Low Dutch, so that they might sign and return it to
him again. Sicungodonne also sent one of his Secretaries to Schaep and
Byleveld, who told them, That to morrow he would carry the Obligation to the
Council, and intercede to them for their Discharge, though he could not
certainly promise that their Liberty would be granted instantly: For which kind
Proffer, the Hollanders thanked him, and Sicungodonne in whose Name he was
sent. Then Schaep and Byleveld went with the Interpreters Tosaymon and Manykebe
to their Inn.

Stubbornness of the Interpreters.
These did not any way repeat, or as much as speak of what had passed all that
day; which was partly out of high-mindedness, and partly out of exceeding
Pride, of which both were guilty: Only snapping at them, said, If you did not
mistake in speaking before the Council and Sicungodonne, you had long before
this time been released. Yet notwithstanding their sharp Language, they gave
them not the least Counsel to mend their Faults; so that Schaep and Byleveld
were ignorant where the Mistake was: And though they besought earnestly, that
Tosaymon and Manykebe would be pleased to tell them wherein they offended, yet
they got no answer, both only giving them the hearing, sometimes scornfully
denying their Request, and at other times, without giving any answer, they went
out of the Chamber; which occasioned great trouble to the Hollanders.

But the Obligation written by Sicungodonne, being signed by Schaep and
Byleveld, and delivered to the Secretary Inowy Sycungono Cammysamma, was to
this purpose: Henry Cornelison Schaep, and William Byleveld The Obligation
signed by the Hollanders.
witness, with the Holland Prisoners, That they fired some Guns from their Ship
Breskens, according to the Hollanders Customs, not knowing it to be forbidden
to do any such thing on the Japan-Coast; wherefore they sue for Pardon for that
Fault. They testify moreover, That they Sailed from Batavia to discover
Tartary; and excuse themselves, that they are not guilty of ever having carried
or brought Portuguese Priests into Japan: But if in any of these they shall be
found false, and taxed with Untruths, they shall on the Emperors Command come
hither, from what part of the World soever they are in, that they may appear
before the Japan Bench, and receive Sentence of Punishment, according to their
Deserts.

Notwithstanding this Obligation, which was again delivered to Sicungodonne,
yet they had not their Liberty granted them; but on the second day the two
Interpreters, Kitsbyoye, Phatsyosaman, and the Apostate Priest Syovan, came to
their Inn, asking if they had not a Map aboard of their Ship Breskens? If they
had not fired in the Haven Namboe? Byleveld told them, That they had Charts of
the Seacoasts of Java, Ternata, Tayovan, and Japan; but none of Tartary: And
also, That upon the entreaty of the Japan-Gentry, they had fired several times
in the Haven of Namboe, and once before the Coast, for their lost Admiral
Castrecom. O false Hollanders! cried Kitsbyoye; The Dutch Interpreters
interpret wrong for the Hollanders to the Council.
How false and basely have your Words been interpreted? Tosaymon and Manykebe
have interpreted to the Council, That your People never carried any Maps in
your Ship; and that you never shot, either on the Japan Coast, or in the Haven
Namboe: Therefore the Japan Lords suspect the Business, and your Answers to be
nothing but Lies. Schaep and Byleveld now well observed what the reason was
that the Interpreters kept themselves at such a distance with them, and still
snaping at them, said, You relate Untruths before the Council: Therefore they
humbly besought them, That Kytsbyoye, Phatsayosamon, and Syovan, which now
understood the Business, would take the trouble upon them, to intercede for
them to the Lord Sicungodonne, for the Mistake which had been made by the Dutch
Interpreters: Which Request they all three granted; and going from them, bid
them be of good courage.

Private dealings amongst the Interpreters.
And indeed they seemed to be much concerned thereat; for on the next day they
came again to the Hollanders Lodgings, where finding Manykebe, they told him,
That he, and chiefly Tosaymon, had falsely interpreted for the Hollanders to the
Council; and therefore it was high time that Manykebe his Brother were made
acquainted therewith. But Manykebe laid all the fault on Tosaymon, at whose
command, as being Chief Interpreter, he was forced to be silent. At last, the
news thereof coming to Tosaymon's Ears, he neglected not to speak to the
Hollanders concerning it; and excusing himself, said, That the fault was not in
him, but Sicungodonne, he having faithfully translated Word for Word, which
Sicungodonne sometimes told the Council quite contrary: Yet it appeared
sufficiently by Tosaymon's, Countenance, that he was not without fault;
therefore Schaep desired him, That for the future he would have a better care,
and observe the Questions and Answers, that the Japan Council might come to a
right and true understanding of the whole Business, and free them from further
danger: Which he promising to perform, took his leave.

Why the Hollanders are kept longer Prisoners.
After this, the Interpreter Phatsyosamon brought them word, That the Emperors
Mother was fallen exceeding sick; wherefore the Court would not hear any Causes
whatsoever, till such time as she was recovered: Therefore they must have a
little longer Patience, if they got not leave to go for Nangesaque so soon as
they expected.

See many Novelties.
The next day Manykebe, Syovan, Kitsbyoye, Phatsyosamon, and their Landlord,
brought a considerable number of Japanners into the Chamber where the ten
Hollanders sat, which out of curiosity came to see them, holding a great
Discourse amongst themselves, which the Hollanders (they speaking the Japan
Tongue) could not understand; only they now and then heard them mention the
Names Elserak and Overtwater: Manykebe at last interpreting to Schaep, said,
That one of the Japanners there present was lately come thither from
Nangesaque, and at his departure from thence, spoke with Mr. Elserak and
Overtwater, and several other of their Countrymen, which he left all in good
health: But no other Account would Manykebe give him; for when Schaep asked him
any thing concerning their Releasment, he refused to answer him, and scornfully
commanded him to be silent.

The Youth Paw is examined.
Since this Visit, the Hollanders had many that came to see them; and the Youth
Jacob de Paw was by their Landlords Son carried to Sicungodonne's Palace, under
a pretense, that some Japan Ladies were desirous to see him: But returning at
night, related, That he had seen no Ladies, but Sicungodonne's Secretary, and
the Dutch Interpreters Tosaymon and Manykebe, who examined him concerning their
Shooting in Namboe, and how often they fired? and if the Japanners discharged
any Pistols or Firelocks on board of the Ship? All which the Youth answered as
the rest had done before.

A Meeting of the Japan Council, before which the Hollanders appear.
The nineteenth of October the four Interpreters had a Meeting in the Hollanders
Inn, where the ten Dutch Prisoners were brought before them, and told by
Tosaymon, That they should make themselves ready to morrow Morning, an Hour
before Daylight, because a Meeting was agreed on by the Council at
Sicungodonne's House to have another Hearing about their Business. They
answered, That they would gladly be ready; though in their Hearts they
suspected Danger, because they were commanded to appear so soon, which they had
never done before. But at the appointed time, going thither accompanied with
the four Interpreters, the Apostate Priest Syovan, their Landlord, and his Son,
they staid above an Hour waiting in a Princely Hall, which looked out into an
exceeding pleasant Garden: But being carried out of this Hall to the usual
Waiting place, they staid till Noon. Mean while Sicungodonne's Secretary
treated them with Pieces of Bread, and two Cups of Wine apiece; and being
carried into the Place of Audience, they were commanded to sit down on Mats by
four Jesuits, The Hollanders are placed next four Jesuits.
who looked exceeding pitifully; their Eyes and Cheeks strangely fallen in;
their Hands black and blew; and their whole Bodies sadly misused and macerated
by Torture. This Company amazed the Hollanders, who were not able to judge the
Reason of their being placed by the four Jesuits.

These, though they had Apostatized from the Christian Faith, yet declared
publicly to the Interpreters Kytsbyoye and Phatsyosamon, That they did not
freely Apostatize; but the insufferable Torments which had been inflicted upon
them, had forced them to it. The Council asked them at large concerning their
Opinions, and the Power of God; on which one answered faintly, but the rest
were much more resolute.

The Hollanders fearing to give any occasion of suspicion in the Council, durst
not seem to take notice of their Questions and Answers; yet because they sat
close by the Jesuits, and Kytsbyoye interpreted the Japan Questions into
Portuguese, which some of the Hollanders understood, they heard, amongst
others, these following.

Questions put to the four Jesuits by the Council, and their Answer.
O despairing Jesuits! What Confidence can you repose in your God, who has so
shamefully forsaken you? Is he the Creator and Governor or all Things? Why does
he not release you from your Troubles, by which your Bodies seem rather to be
Anatomies than Living Creatures? Cannot the Japan Emperor do with you whatever
he pleases, without asking leave of the Christian God? One of the Jesuits
answered; "It is apparent that God has forsaken us in this World, as the
Children thereof; yet he has never forsaken those that trust in him, because
he helps us in our greatest Extremities, when a tortured Person is not sensible
of his Pain, the Soul being rapt with Heavenly Contemplations; and considers,
that these Temporal Torments last no longer than Life. The third Jesuit said;
God visits us, for our manifold Sins, with great and several Afflictions; yet
the Soul remains untouched by any Executioner. When the Soul leaves the Body,
she goes to Purgatory, where (though not without great pain) she is long
cleansed and purified, till she is fit to go to a Heavenly Elysium, there to
enjoy all Happiness. God therefore forsakes not his Children, because he brings
them to Everlasting Life, notwithstanding the way thither is very troublesome.
It is true, that these poor and miserable Bodies are in the Emperor's Power,
which he would not have, were it not granted him from God: Also all Humane
Authority ceases over Man, when the Soul is departed out of the Body. The last
Jesuit concluded the proposed Questions after this manner; Without the True
God, is no Salvation; and without his Will and Permittance, nothing either good
or bad can be done.

The Japan Council not well experienced in the Romish Religion, wanted
Questions to ask them, and therefore called for Syovan the Apostate Priest, who
was there ready for that purpose. So soon as he saw the Jesuits, he looked very
fiercely upon them, notwithstanding he had formerly been one of their Order,
and in a scoffing manner laid, Syovan despises the Jesuits very shrewdly.
Now fie upon you Jesuits, that make this World in an Uproar. How you vapor of
your God and Salvation? Are none saved but Jesuits, or those that embrace your
Opinion? In what consists your Interest in Heaven? Is it because you privately
dissemble with, and defraud all Princes; and gathering, hoard up the Worlds
Treasure? Had you remained still in your usual Pleasures, the Japan Prisons had
not harbor'd such a crew of Antichrists; nay, Japan had never shed so much
Blood: for thousands, by your Delusions, were taken from their Worship of the
ancient Gods Amida, Xaca, and Canon, and embraced the Christian Religion, for
which they suffered the cruellest Deaths. Was it under a pretense to win Souls?
Why did you then carry so many Tun of Gold yearly out of Japan? And why did you
plot to bring Japan under the Subjection of the Spanish Tyrant, and so to order
all things according to your pleasure? But now, what is the Power of the
Christian God? Look upon your miserable Bodies; can he not help you? Where then
is he Omnipotent? Will he not help you? Where is his Mercy? O foolish thought
of Salvation! You are distracted, to continue thus in your stubborn humor,
imagining to receive great Rewards from God, and great Esteem of your
Successors, in suffering wilfully your Bodies to be thus tormented. I ask once
again, Why does not your God help you? Certainly your Life is not in his Hands,
but in the Emperors of Japan, who when he pleases can punish and torture you
more than ever he has done yet.

This the Hollanders understood very well, because Syovan spoke with a loud
Voice; and they also were used to his Style, by reason of their conversation
with him in their Inn. To the great satisfaction of the Council.
But whilst Syovan railed thus at the Jesuits, he seemed exceedingly to please
two of the Japan Council, Sackay Sammoccysame, and Matsodairo Ysossamma, with
his Discourse, and chiefly when he spoke of Amida and Xaca.

IT is worthy our Observation, that not only the Japanners, but also all other
Heathens, nay, such Pagans that acknowledged one God, yet gave not Divine Honor
to the very true God: For understanding by the Light of Nature, that there must
upon necessity be a God, that Created Heaven and Earth, and required to be
Worshipped, they ascribed the Godhead to the Creature; not unlike the blind
Man, John 9. v. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
of which St. John the Evangelist makes mention; for he, when he saw the Son of
God, of whom he had received sight, asked him, who was Gods Son? because him
whom he saw, he knew not who he was. Ignorance of the Ancients concerning God,
and especially the Japanners.
So in like manner all the Heathens look to this day on the Invisible God,
openly in his Visible Works: They hear him calling with a loud, yet silent
Voice, I am the Creator of the World, the Preserver and Governor, to whom all
Divine Worship belongs: But they shut their Eyes from seeing, and stop their
Ears from hearing, no otherwise than if they dreamed; and following their own
Imaginations, put the Visible Creature in the place of the Invisible Creator.
And so the Japanners acknowledge a God; and yet Amida, Xaca, Canon, and other
Idols (whose Beginning and Original they deny not) they give Divine Worship and
Honor to.

But this Error is very ancient: The Apostle Paul says thus of the Heathens;
Professing themselves to be wise, Romans 1. v. 22, 23, 24, 25.
they became sools: And changed the Glory of the uncorruptible God, into an
Image made like to corruptible Man, and to Birds, and four-footed Beasts, and
Creeping things. Wherefore God also gave them up to uncleanness, through the
lusts of their own hearts, to dishonor their own Bodies between themselves: Who
changed the Truth of God into a Lie, and worshipped and served the Creature
more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever, Amen. Gods Truth is changed
into Lies, when Divine Worship is shown to any thing but to the real God: For
it is a Truth, That there is a God; and to say that the Creature is God, is a
Lie.

Alexander ab Hales says thus concerning it; To keep Gods Truth, Alex. ab
Hales, p. Summae. q 30. de Adorat. a. ^.
is to serve God; to change his Truth into Lies, is to serve the Creature in
stead of the Creator: For the right Worship consists in the Service of the
only true God: Therefore if the Idolaters serve the Creature in stead of the
Creator, they change the Truth into Lies.

The Reasons of Idolatry.
It seems that Man, because he saw not God, therefore most wickedly made that
God which he saw: For since it is just and right, to give to every thing its
due; yet the Heathens have given that Worship to the poor Creature, which
belonged only to God: so not only bereaving God of his Honor, but also
ascribing this Honor to that which never was, nor ever can be God.

What the Learned Heathens thought of God.
Those which were somewhat wiser than the Vulgar, had not such foolish thoughts
of God as the Common People; yet they suffered themselves to be carried away by
the general Example, judging it to be sufficient to think of a God, whether it
was the right or no, that governed Mankind.

The one seemed not to be concerned to seek after God by the Light of Nature,
because they pursued their Pleasures, and made their Bellies their Gods; as the
famous Roman and Greek Gluttons, which searched both Sea and Land, to find
Dainties for their never-satisfied Appetites. Other Heathens were too busy in
purchasing Honor, or else too covetous; and others were too poor to lose time
from begging for their Living: Why they sought ^^ter God.
So that they found so much to do on Earth, that they never studied for
Heavenly Enjoyments. Few were earnest to seek the Lord, if happily they might
feel after him, and find him, Acts 15.2^
though he be not far from every one of us: In the interim, they became vain in
their imaginations, Romans 1.21, 2^
and their foolish heart was darkened: Professing themselves to be wise, they
became fools; only observing the Vanities of the Heathen Religion, neither
caring nor desiring to know which way to turn.

However, this Truth is very evident, That God enlightened the Pagans with some
Beams, Because that which may be known of God, is manifest in them, Romans 1.19,
20.
for God has showed it unto them; (as the Apostle speaks) For the invisible
things of him from the Creation of the World are clearly seen, being understood
by the things that are made, even his Eternal Power and Godhead. The Truth
stirred them not up to the working for Salvation. The Creation of the World
manifested sufficiently Gods Goodness, From ignorance of God proceeds
Wickedness.
Wisdom, and Power; and required therefore, that Men should be at his service,
as well for his exceeding Greatness, as Goodness, and certain assurance of
everlasting Salvation, which was prepared for all those that feared God: But
the World would rather idly and scornfully, without earnest Observation, look
upon the Works of God, and give no Honor to the Creator; nay say, That no God
created it: Therefore they thus forsaking God, he forsook them, and according
to his Judgment gave them over to Wickedness, of which the Chiefest and
Learned Heathens were no way clear.

The chiefest of the Learned Heathens very wicked.
How highly do the Greeks esteem the sweet-flowing Xenophon? What a great deal
of Judgment lies hid in the famous Tabble of Tebes? And who has so famous a
Name, for Constancy, Temperance, Patience, and Learning, as Socrates? Plato is
so admired, that Greece ascribed the Name of Divine to him. But all these
Plutarch accused, De Educat.
that they were inclined to the foul sin of Sodomy, and using Catamites: De
Vita Contemplat.
And Philo the Jew chides Plato, Socrates, and Xenophon exceedingly for that
very thing.

The Prince of the Latin Poets, Virgil, seems to take pride in the like Acts,
in his second Eclogue.

Catullus, and that brave Orator Cicero, stand also accused thereof; so that
though formerly the Learned Heathens, if by an easy light of Nature they
have exceeded the Common People in a little knowledge of God, yet they have at
once denied God by their foolish Works. Japanners are given to the sin of
Sodomy.
And at present the Japanners, though otherwise they are exceeding wise,
account Sodomy, and unnatural Communication with Mankind, no sin; which is no
wonder, because they know not the true God, nor worship him; so that they are
given over to their own inventions, Romans 1.27.
Men with Men working that which is unseemly, and receiving in themselves that
recompense of their error which was meet.

The true Worship is a Duty from Mankind to God; but Idolatry is committed so
often as a Man adores with Zeal (which is only due to God) that which is not
God.

The Spiritual Workings are three sorts.
These kind of religious Instigations are observed to be three, being either
outward, or outward and inward joined together, or only outward. The inward
workings embrace above all the Love of God, Fear of God, Trust in God. The mixed
workings are all religious Worships, which remain inward, because they proceed
from the Heart; and outward, because uttered with the Mouth. The Praying with
the Heart and Mouth consists in Thanksgiving for received Benefits, and partly
entreating for continuance of old Mercies, and for the obtaining of new. The
outward Zeal appears by the Behavior in religious Matters; to which belongs the
building of Temples and Altars, killing of Sacrifice, keeping Feast-days; or
else by the actions of the Body, either bending down their Bodies forward, or
lying flat on the Earth, bowing their Heads, folding and kissing their Hands:
which Ceremony is performed to express they acknowledge God as the Donor of all
good things, and Redeemer from all bad.

Common Civility.
But it is quite otherwise in the respect and honor that is shown from Man to
Man; Genes. 33.3.
for so Jacob bowed himself seven times to the ground till he came near to his
Brother Esau: Chap. 23.7.
and Abraham also stood up and bowed himself to the people of the Land, even to
the children of Heth. But this honor may be changed into a religious Worship,
as may appear by Nebuchadnezzars Image.

Japan Idols what they are.
And so it is with the Japan Idols, who formerly were Kings, or other noble
Persons, that either kept their Country from Invasion of Enemies, or for their
several Victories and other Achievements, prudent Government, or else for the
inventing of some noble Art by which they reaped much profit, in their
Life-times were highly honored, and after their Decease, and in process of time
were worshipped as gods.

Amongst which number are Toranga, a Huntsman in Corea, who slew eight Japan
Tyrants, and therefore is represented with as many Arms and Hands Armed with
Clubs, Swords, Dagger, Scymiter, Pole-Ax, Bow, Pike and Gauntlet.

And also Xaca, who was the first that taught the Japanners the Pythagorean
Doctrine concerning the transmigration of the Soul: The Place of his Birth is
said to be in India.

Likewise Han and Deva, both Kings of Tanguth, were for their prudent and wise
Government in their Life-times, after their Decease religiously worshipped by
their People.

So is also Canon, Amida's Son, with thirty Arms and Hands, in each two Arrows.

In like manner their new Idol Xantai in the City Anzuquiama, erected by the
Japan Emperor Nobunanga, that he might be worshipped in that Image.

Something belonging to the Japan Religion is strange.
Concerning these Japan Idols something is very remarkable, namely, That the
Japanners ascribe a beginning to Amida, Xaca, Canon, Xantai, Toranga, and other
Devils; whereas the true God is without beginning; so that upon necessity they
must acknowledge an ever-being God; but they worship him not, and are so
ignorant of his everlasting Essence, that they have not a word whereby properly
to express God.

The same Joseph de Acosta ascribes to the Inhabitants of Peru, a part of the
West Indies, who (if the Learned John de Laet may be credited) are Extracted
from Tartary, bordering on the North of America.

Moreover, the Chinese acknowledge their original to be from the Tartars, and
the Japanners from the Chinese: All of them have their own Names for their
several Idols; but they cannot properly name the true and ever-being God.
Peruans and Japanners cannot name God.


The Persians, says Acosta, believe in a Supreme God, by them called
Viracocha, and also Pachacamac and Pachaiahacu, that is, Creator of Heaven and
Earth. They gave him also the Title of Usapu, signifying Wonderful; but yet
they cannot find a word whereby they may properly express, as many other
People, the Name of him whom they serve in chief; so that whereas the English
call him GOD; the Hebrews, EL; the Greeks, THEOS the Latins, DEUS; the Peruan
Tongue will not bear any of the words. Wherefore the Spaniards being sent to
Peru to Preach the Gospel then, taught them them the Spanish word Dios,
signifying God, which they use now every where.

The same Peruans serve the Creator in the stately Temple Pachumac; yet make
Offerings to other petty gods.

The Japanners also know of an everlasting Being; but, as we said, want a Name,
and worshipped him not: whereas on the contrary, thousands of Temples are
erected in Japan for their Deities Amida, Xaca, Canon, Toranga, and others;
nay, there is scarce any Country on the Earth able to stand in Competition
with Japan for Temples.

Jesuits Answer to Siovan's Reply.
TO return again to our Relation, when Siovan had replied to the four Jesuits
sitting by the Hollanders, he asked them also, Why does not your God help you?
How comes your Life in the Hands of the Emperor of Japan, if it be at the
dispose of your God?

To these blasphemous Discourses the wisest of the Jesuits said,
Notwithstanding these words come from Siovan, yet they ought to be reproved;
and I tell you, that we believe, that without Gods permission none can hurt one
Hair of our Heads, neither is there Salvation for the immortal Soul without
God; and to forsake him, either for worldly ends, or cruel torments, must upon
necessity be a great sin: mean while God denies not mercy to those, that in the
last hour beg it, if they are penitent, and depend on their Savior Jesus
Christ.

It seemed as if the Jesuit would have said more, but that the Counselors
Sackay Sammoccysamma, and Matsodairo Ysosamma gave a sign that the four Jesuits
should be led from thence, and the Hollanders put in their place, opposite to
the two Counselors, when Sammoccysamma began to speak with a stern Countenance
in these words:

Examination of the Dutch Prisoners by a Japan Councellor.
You Schaep and Byleveld acknowledged your selves to be Commanders, and chief of
the Ketch Breskens, how then comes it that the Ketch is gone to Sea out of the
Haven of Namboe without Officers? Do the Hollanders keep such small Command
over those that are under them?

Their Answer.
Byleveld answered, That the Pilot in the Captain and Merchants absence,
according to their Custom, bore the chief Command in the Ship, which the other
Seamen ought to obey. But the Pilot must give an account concerning his
Command, therefore they knew not how he could answer it before the Indian
Council at Batavia: for he, notwithstanding their earnest entreaties by
Writing, desiring him not to weigh Anchor from Namboe, yet on the contrary set
Sail, without staying for his Captain and the Merchant. The Reasons that moved
him thereto may be better guessed than poke for truth. Perhaps he was fearful
of further danger, seeing us thus violently carried away; by which he might
judge, that the Hollanders were not priviledg'd to come on the North of Japan,
though the Emperor gave them leave to Trade to Nangesaque. Moreover, none in
the Ship to our knowledge was ever in Japan to know it; wherefore the Pilot
might think, that we could sooner get from Jedo to our Countrymen at
Nangesaque, than to the Ship in the Haven of Namboe.

Father Examination and Answer concerning the State of Portugal.
Samoccysamma replied, This present Emperor did not only grant free leave of
Trade to the Hollanders; but also his Father and Grandfather were no less
Courteous to them: But how comes it, that after a long War with Portugal, sworn
Enemies to the Japan Empire, you have made Peace with them? which dealing the
Japan Emperor cannot but suspect and dislike.

The King of Spain's Power related to the Japan Council.
Byleveld answered, That the Spanish King, had upon the Decease of a Portuguese
King, made himself Master of that Country by force of Arms, and enjoying it a
long time in Peace and Quiet, seemed by his growing Power to bring an
unavoidable trouble on Europe: In Italy he possessed the Kingdom of Naples, and
Sicily over against it: he was served by the mighty Dukedoms of Millan,
Burgundy, and a part of the Netherlands; all Spain belonged to his Crown,
besides many vast Countries in Africa, and the East and West Indies, and
chiefly the great Provinces of Peru, Chili, Chica, Mexico, and other Places in
America. This great Potentate (whose Dominions the Sun views over all the Earth
wherever it Rises or Sets) Holland, with the help of some others, has
engaged and maintained a no less bloody than stout War against this seventy
years together, both by Water and by Land, and so behaved themselves, that to
the admiration of all People, they have won from this so powerful Prince in all
Parts of the Earth; several Fortresses, Cities and Countries, being taken from
him, and many great Fleets spoiled at Sea. The Portuguese, who unwillingly bore
his Yoke, looked after their ancient Freedom, that so they might be Governed by
a Native King; so getting courage by the Spaniards downfall, and the more,
because he depended on the Hollanders assistance, which they proffered freely
in that weighty Concern, not out of love to the Portuguese, but by that means
to disable the King of Spain; so that Holland, though they sent Aid to the
Portuguese, yet they bore an irreconcilable hatred to them; wherefore there
was no Peace concluded, but only a Cessation for some years. Moreover, the
East India Company are under the subjection of the States and the Prince of
Orange, who sending advice thereof to Batavia, made us forbear our Quarrel.
Mean while the Japan Emperor, whose Favors are esteemed most highly by the
Hollanders, shall find them to be true and Loyal Friends.

Japan Counselors make enquiry after the difference of Religion between the
Portuguese and Hollanders.
But Sammoccysamma went on in his Examination; The Portuguese Priests (said he)
teach, That they can help themselves and others by Prayers and Offerings to I
know not what, not only in this Life, but also in the other: Do you Hollanders
also believe that you can reap any benefit by that means?

Most mighty Lord (replied Schaep) how should we be so foolish to expect good
from those that prosecute our Souls and Bodies: for indeed very great is the
difference between the Portuguese and Dutch Clergy, which in the time of the
Popish Priests were murdered by thousands: and at present, since they cannot
destroy us by violence, they condemn us to everlasting damnation, accounting us
Vagabonds, that must for ever burn in unquenchable Fire; so that if they could
save us, they would not: But how can they? Why do they not help themselves?
Ought they not to use that Art, and rid themselves from so many tortures? We
believe that the Emperor of Japan can give us free leave that we may go for
Nangesaque.

Which Discourse of Schaep caused all the Japan Lords to laugh. But during this
Examination, a Secretary sat next to Sicungodonne, who took an exact account
of, and set down all the Questions and Answers that passed between the Council
and the Netherlanders.

Description of a Japan Inkhorn.
They write in this manner: The Inkhorn is like a long Box, out of the Top of
which appears the Mouth of a long Flask, covered with a Wax Lid to keep it from
breaking: the Box is divided into three Partitions, one is the Place in which
the Writing-Pencils lie enclosed, of which the top is made fast with Pins; at
the bottom of the Box, in which the Flask stands, is a place wherein they
preserve their Cakes of Ink, which are sometimes red, but generally black, and
cost much Money, because they use them but little. These Cakes must be marked
with the Emperor's Arms; and tried by his Officers; and if they are found to be
good, they set certain Letters upon them, without which mark upon pain of death
they may not be put to Sale or used.

Japanners are great Artists in Writing.
Hereby it plainly appears, that the Japanners have great skill in the noble Art
of Writing, which like a Master domineers over Death, because it not only
shows on Paper the Transactions of Man, and communicates to us the Knowledge of
others in the Mysteries of God and Nature, but also preserves things against
the wearing of Time to all Posterity, therefore the ancient Greek Philosopher
Anaxagoras judged, that Man was the wisest and strongest of all Creatures,
because he had Hands which would write things that Death could not blemish; for
Learned Books last many Ages, and by that means instructed their Successors.

Japan Pencils, after what manner they are made.
But the Japan Pencils are made of Copper or Silver, and at one end eight
square, and flat on the top, on which every ones Arms are Engraven for to Seal
their Letters withal; under the Seal is a round hollow Joint, full of black or
red Powder, according to the color of their Ink; about the middle Images are
Engraven, which serve for Ornament, and below appears the Pencil, with which
they Write in this manner: The forementioned Box has a round Case on one side
for the Pencil, and on the other side a long square place, wherein are four
Indentings; at the end thereof are eight Copper or Silver Pins; in the four
holes they pour their Water for to make their Ink with, which they make either
black or red, according as they please, and dipping the Pencil first into the
Water, they rub it on the Sealed Cakes of Ink.

How they Write.
They Write quite after another manner than the Europeans; for the Japanners
take not the Pencil with which they Write between their three Fingers, but in
their whole Hand, so that the upper end thereof appears between the Thumb and
Forefinger, and the middle part they grasp in the Palm of their Hand, and
after that manner they make exceeding good Letters, and Write very fast with
their Pencil: their Paper not unlike the European, is somewhat browner, but
smoother, and the one side which is not written, represents Silver Checker-work
on a blue Ground.

Several ways of Writing.
Here also is to be observed their four several ways of placing their Letters:
The first and oldest has always been used, as also to this time by the
Hebrews, Chaldeans, Syrians, Arabians, and Egyptians, Writing from their right
Hand toward their left; whereas on the contrary, the Latins, Greeks, Cel^s,
and other Europeans Write from their left to their right. The ancient Greeks
had another way of Writing, as may be seen by the famous Laws of the wise
Solon, which was, where the first Line ended the second began directly and
upright, and where the second ended there began the third, and so accordingly
the rest, not unlike Roads in Countries, which take a beginning where others
end, and oftentimes are cut through one another. Genial Dies. l. 2. c. 36.
Lastly, the Chinese, a great part of the Indians, and all the Japanners,
begin on the right-side, and so Write from the top downwards.

Alexander ab Alexandro relates, That the ancient Moors in like manner in
former Ages, placed their Letters one amongst another; and also the Mexicans
according to Acosta.

Great care has been taken at all times to promote the Art of Writing.
Moreover the Ancients have much tired themselves in this Art, every one
inventing a new way: first all public Acts were Engraven on Plates of Lead;
but peculiar Accidents of single Persons noted on Linen. Egypt was the first
that afforded Paper, made of Plants pasted together. In Rome also were used a
long time Tablets covered with Wax, of which two, three, or five were sowed
together, being either of a Saffron, or Egg-colour, Green, or Purple on three
doubles they writ Letters; on five doubles, Titles and Offices of Honor; and
on the double ones, peculiar Secrets. The Grecians sometimes used the Bark of a
Lint-tree in stead of Paper. Attalus fitted Goat Skins to Write on in the City
Pergamum from whence to this day all over Europe it is called Pergamenum, or
Parchment. The Brachmans, ancient Philosophers amongst the Indians, made use of
fine Linen, on which they drew black Letters.

Inventers of Characters, and chiefly Chinese and Japanners.
Moreover Cadmus brought the Grecian Characters from Phaenicia to Greece;
Radamanthus furnished the Assyrians; Memnon and Anubis, the Egyptians;
Hercules, the Phrygians; Carmenta, the Latins; every one with several Letters
or Characters. But the Japanners Extracted from China, Write antienter
Characters than any other Country.

The Chinese Chronicles make mention of Fohi, who was the first King of China,
and Reigned about three hundred years after Noah's Flood, that he invented
Letters, which he made of Serpents, Snakes, and the like, strangely tangl'd and
wound up together: wherefore his Book of Astronomy is by the Chinese called
Fohi Xi-lum-zu, that is, Fohi's Book of Serpents. Strange Characters used by
the ancient Chinese and Japanners.
After that several Kings in China found diverse strange Marks for Writing:
Xum-num invented the Pictures of Husbandry; Xan Hoan, of Birds; Chuem Kim, of
Oysters and Worms; another, of Herbs and Plants; Choan Ham, of Birds Feet; Yao,
of Tortoises.

Besides these kind of writing Marks, the ancient Chinese and Japanners used
in their Writing several Marks of Peacocks, Herbs, or Quills, and several other
Fancies, invented by the Emperor Co, or from the Stars or Planets, and also
Fishes. Besides these, also there are other peculiar Characters, of which some
are used only in writing of Law-business, others in Letters and
Superscriptions. They have also particular Characters to express Peace, Joy,
Darkness, Clearness, and Disputations, and resemble not in the least the other
Japan Marks for Writing.

Original of the Chinese and Japan Characters.
The Learned cannot agree when they enquire after the original of this Art: for
some acknowledge the Assyrians for the first inventers; but most ascribe the
honor to the Egyptians: But if the Chinese and Japanners used Marks for
Writing three thousand six hundred eighty nine years ago, according to the Book
of Serpents of their first King Fohi, then they knew it before the Assyrians
and Egyptians; yet it cannot be denied, though the Chinese and Egyptians
express their meanings by the placing of Beasts and Plants, without making any
Letters, that there is a great difference, because the Egyptians not only in
their common Conversation, but used the same Marks in their religious Matters:
therefore none might learn them but those that were commanded, and had leave
from their Governors. And also the Egyptian Hieroglyphics signified not only
the thing it represented, but also the hidden property, and sole operation of
the written Matter; whereas on the contrary, the Chinese and Japanners Writing
express and describe the Transactions of Men, and other natural things, and
show plainly the whole Matter without any farther Mysteries.

Strange Language called Quanhoa, why invented.
Moreover, the Chinese have a general Language called Quonhoa, which the have
made themselves: for China being divided into great and mighty Kingdoms,
whereof the Governors, or Mandarins, must give a yearly account to the Emperor
at his Court at Pechin, or Nanchin; and every Chinese Territory having their
peculiar Language, which is different from their Neighbors, therefore they
found out that Language called Quanhoa; which is not only used amongst the
Courtiers, but also in all manner of Contracts, and is spoke by most, but
chiefly by the best bred Chinese, by reason this Language has very short
Sentences: for though it contains many Letters, yet it has scarce three
hundred twenty six Words which begin all with one Letter, and end with one of
the Vowels, a, e, i, o, u, or m, x, n; from whence it proceeds, that one word
often has more than twenty several significations, and according to the soft
or loud pronunciation of it, signifies either this or that.

Five several People can understand it when they Read it, but not when they
Speak it.
The chiefest thing to be admired in this Mandarine Tongue, is, that when
Written it is understood by all, the Chinese, Japanners, Coreans,
Tonchinensers, and those of Couchinchina, but they cannot speak it; for then
the one Country cannot in the least understand another. It is with the
Mandarine Tongue as with our ordinary Ciphering, which signifies all one thing
quite over Europe, and when pronounced, is not understood, but by their own
several Nations, because they all give several denominations to their Figures.

Japan Tongue very lofty
Lastly, concerning the Janpan Tongue, the same sounds no less lofty than brave,
and expresses sufficiently the high ambition of the Speaker, being full of
Vowels and Consonants; Some words thereof.
for a small Example these may serve; Mos Resoucq gusarr, Give a Candle; Curi
gusavimass, Come here; Sass Massio, I drink to you; Itum takka Massio, Much
good may it do you; Icoramors, How much for that? Doukye Gousarri mass, Whether
will you go? Mis cosmis, Eat Rice; Souw Meoremas, Drink Water; Gekyo, done or
samma, Lord and Master; Nanto Moss, What say you, Friend? Mada sutta, Stay a
little; Imo gusarrimas, I come presently; Emingosamma, A Gentlewoman; Bobbo, A
Woman's Hymen Ring; Ksou, Vinegar; Warrangusar, Bad; Surry warrangusar, This is
bad; Kataskanongusarrimas, I humbly thank you; Katania, A Custom; Konatta samma
gattinnakka, Your Lord understands it wrong; Konatta samma gattinde gusarr,
Your Lord understands it right; Wataxix gattinde gusarr, I understand it;
Wataxix gattinnakka, I understand it not; Arygattinnakka, He understands it
not; Phnyx ikomassio, To come Aboard and Sail; Meditongusarimas, I humbly wish
you a good day.

Farther Examination of the Hollanders by the Japan Counselors.
TO return again to our Examination. After Schaep had answered to
Sammoccysamma's Question, If the Hollanders believed that they could be Saved
by the Portuguese Priests? He said, That the Priests ought to use their Art to
deliver themselves from such insufferable torments as they endured; which made
all the Japan Lords to laugh.

In this Hall for Audience lay a new Japan Drum, on which the Councellor
Matsodairo Ysosamma commanded the Youth Jacob de Paw, which was also Examined,
to Beat on it; who being not altogether ignorant in that Art, first beat a
March, and then an Alarm, with which he seemed exceedingly to please the Lords:
and presently after they rose up all together, and went out, and the Hollanders
got leave to go to their Inn.

Description of a Japan Lady.
On their Way home they met with some Ladies of Honor, attended by a great Train
of Servants; of which some carried waxed Devices, others Handkerchiefs, and
variety of Sweetmeats in Dishes; on the sides went their Waiting-maids with
Fans; at some distance followed two of their Maids of Honor, every one holding
a crooked Stick, between which hung a Silk Canopy, to be carried over their
Ladies Heads.

These Women, when they walk abroad, are very richly Clothed, their Hair
curiously adorned with long Ribbons tied together, hanging down their Necks; by
their left Temple appears a Golden Bodkin, at the end of which hangs a costly
Diamond; their Ears on both sides above the Hair garnished with Pearls; about
their middle they wear a broad Girdle, Embroidered with Imagery; a Japan Coat
hanging loosly over their under-Garments, made of thin Silk, and according to
every ones Degree or Quality, so that some have five, six, ten, twenty, nay, a
hundred Coats one over another.

Whilst these Persons of Honor engaged the Hollanders eyes on their Way
homewards, Schaep and Byleveld had some Discourse with the Interpreters
Tosaimon and Manikebe concerning what had passed in Sicungodonne's Palace. The
Hollanders asking, Why they were placed next the four Japan Priests, which was
never done before, and also for what reasons the Counselors Sammoccysamma and
Ysosamma went away so suddenly? Whereupon Tosaimon told them, That
Sammoccysamma had been incensed against them, and told, When he saw the
Hollanders, he must judge by their presence, that they were guilty of bringing
over Japan Priests; and chiefly when they should be placed next the four
Portuguese Prisoners. Which Answer occasioned no small joy in the Hollanders,
who were in all haste to make ready and go to the Emperors Palace before the
chief Court, the appointed hour of their Audience being at hand.

Two Jesuits recall their Apostasy.
Afterward the Hollanders heard from the Servant of the House, That two of the
four Roman Priests had recanted their denying of the Christian Faith to embrace
the Japan Religion: wherefore Siovan, who was ready to go for Nangesaque,
received a Command to stay in Jedo till farther Order, his Presence being
required when the two other Priests should be carried to their torture.

The four Interpreters are puzzled to translate two Letters.
Isaiemon, one of the Gentlemen th came with the Hollanders from Namboe to
Jedo, asked them for the List of their Men in the Ketch Breskens; which they
giving him, he immediately got it Translated into the Japan Tongue by Manikebe.
The four and twentieth of November, the Interpreters Tosaimon, Manikebe,
Kitsbioye, and Phatsiosaimon, were exceedingly puzzled, the forementioned
Counselors giving them two Letters all of one Content, but the one written in
Low Dutch, and the other in Portuguese, by the Governor of Batavia, to
Sabrosaimondonne, at Nangesaque. The Letters came from Batavia the four and
twentieth of April, Anno 1643. of which Samoccysamma was desirous to know the
Contents, and if they differed one from the other, The Interpreters having
spent a considerable time in Studying to Translate them, but could not, it was
thought convenient to command the Hollanders to assist them in it. None were
more puzzel'd than the Interpreters, Tosaymon and Manikebe, because of their
little knowledge in that Tongue, and yet would be accounted good Interpreters.
The Hollanders being better able to Correspond with the Portugal Interpreters,
Kytsbyoye and Phatsayosaymon, who both understood Portuguese very well; so that
at last they read them over so often, that they found both the Letters to
agree, and be all of one Content, and Translated them into the Japan Tongue.

Hollanders receive tidings.
The next day after Manikebe visited the Hollanders in their Inn, and amongst
other Discourse he related, That the day before he had been with Sicungodonne
and other Japan Lords, of whom he understood, that they should stay in Jedo
till Elseracks coming thither. Wherefore they desired him, because the Nights
began to grow cold to speak to their Landlord, that he would let the ten
Prisoners have six Blankets Quilted with Cotton; which Manikebe took upon him
to do, and spoke to their Host, who not only promised them the Blankets, but
all other necessaries that they required.

Moreover, Manikebe told them from Sicungodonne, That they should not be
melancholy nor troubled, but be cheerful and merry, for Mr. Elserak would
shortly set forth on his Journey thither.

Phatsyosamon told them also, That he had received tidings from Nangesaque,
wherein he had advice of the Arrival of a Holland Ship, Laden with Skins,
Pepper, and Speckel'd Wood; and also that a Dutch Flie-Boat accidentally took
Fire, yet the Flame being suddenly quenched, sustained but little damage.

Soon after, the Apostate Priest Syovan went for Nangesaque, and came to take
his leave of the Hollanders, who would willingly have given him a Letter which
they had made ready some days before, to deliver to Elserak; but Syovan
excusing himself told them, That he had received Orders from Sicungodonne,
Commanding him, not to carry any Letters for the Hollanders: Therefore they
desired him, since he durst not carry their Letter, that if he should meet
Master Elserak any where by the way, to relate the whole circumstance of their
condition to him by word of mouth; which Syovan promised, according to their
request, to perform.

On the first of October, the Interpreters, Kytsbyoye, Phatsyosamon, and
Manikebe came again to the Hollanders, and brought them advice of a Holland
Ship, that engaging with the Quinammers, was burnt; and also that Sicungodonne
permitted the Hollanders to cut and shave their Hair, which till that time was
forbidden them.

Hollanders are frightened by the Emperor.
AFter some days, Tosaymon brought the Hollanders sad News, so that they did
not long enjoy themselves, for the loss of their overgrown Hair. The Japan
Emperor not being fully satisfied, (notwithstanding the great Testimonies and
circumstantial Inferences which the Hollanders made concerning the carrying of
Priests) about the concluded Peace with Portugal; and that during the time they
were at Wars with the Portugals, they had never Sailed about the North of
Japan. The Emperor also took it for no small offense, that the Hollanders
should Steer to the rich Golden Islands, lying South-East from Japan, a great
distance off at Sea, but yet under the Jurisdiction of the Japan Emperor.

This Design was not mentioned when you were brought Prisoners in Jedo,
therefore the Emperor, to have a true account of the whole Business, has
ordered you to be kept close Prisoners till Elserak comes thither, that then
your innocence in carrying over Portugal Priests, and your Design of
discovering the rich Golden Islands, may plainly appear.

Byleveld asked Tosaymon in what degree, and whereabouts these Islands might
lie, because none of the Hollanders knew the Japanners rich Gold Islands?

The rich Japan Golden-Islands, where they lie.
Tosaymon told them, That they lay sixty Leagues at Sea from the Promontory of
Jedo; by which Schaep and Byleveld judged it to be the same Coast where they
lost the Ship Castrecom, on May the 19. in the Night, namely, about fifty six
Leagues East-South-East from Jedo.

Description of a Japan Gentleman.
Whilst they sat pondering on this News, Schaep and Byleveld were called by
their Landlord into a stately Chamber, where they found the Interpreters,
Kitsbyoye and Phatsyosaymon with a Lord, holding a Paper written full of Japan
Characters, and a square Waxed Chest, fitting in great State on a Carpet, in an
Embroidered Coat Lined through with Ermins, and bare headed, his Hair being
tied behind on the top of his Head; the Coat open before was Clasped about the
middle of his Breast with a Golden Hook; between the opening of his upper
Garment appeared a Flowered Suit, of which the Breeches hung quite over his
Knees, almost to his Feet; in his left hand a Fann, the top thereof adorned
with a Gilded-Rose; on each end his Servants were pulling out the Carpet, that
the Fringe thereof might hang even over a square Seat; in which manner, most of
the Noblemen sit at their Doors, whither they are brought through their Houses
on the Carpet; but when they go forth, they are carried in Sedans.

Strange Treaty of a Japan Nobleman with the Netherlanders.
But this Lord opened at last his Waxed Chest, out of which he took, first a
Dutch Can and a Rommer, then a red Stripped Serge, a Glas'd Chinese Pot, a Piece
of Sail-Cloth, and Ternatish Tobacco, a remnant of white Damask, a string of
French Beads, Red and Yellow mixed together; all these he showed Piece by Piece
to the Hollanders, and also to Tosaymon and Manykebe, who observing them all,
asked the Hollanders:

His Examination, and their Answer.
Do you Schaep and Byleveld know these Goods which are shown you? Were they
exchanged by Ketch Breskens for Fish, Herbage, or other Provisions?

Schaep answered, I look upon the Goods to be Netherland Wares, of which we
have some in our Ship, except the Chinese Pot, Beads, and Serge. In the
Interim, I have not the least knowledge, that ever any belonging to the Ship
Breskens exchanged these Goods: But to be certain thereof, it will be necessary
if his Lordship please, that the other eight Prisoners may also be examined
concerning it; thereupon the aforesaid Goods were likewise shown to them, whose
answer agreed with that of Schaep and Byleveld, but they desired Tosaymon to
ask his Lordship, where, and at what time this exchange was made for the said
Goods with the Japanners.

Whereupon the Lord answered, This exchange was made the five and twentieth of
August, and on the same day, when the Hollanders were brought Prisoners in
Jedo, on the East Coast of Japan, without being able to say how far it was
Northward, out of a Ship about thirty Fathom long, and twenty five Foot broad,
with sixteen Guns between Decks, three in the Gun-Room, and four small Pieces
on the Quarter Deck; on which also sat a Parret, made fast with a small Chain,
and a Smith at work: Most of the Seamen wearing Silk Clothes and Gold-Rings,
which exchanged the shown Goods with the Japanners. But whilst the Fishermen
went a Shore to inform their Governors, according as the Custom is of the
strange Vessel, which they had discovered at Sea; the Ship Steering on its
Course, was seen no more; from which Description the Hollanders concluded, that
the Flie-Boat Castrecom was not lost, which till that time they believed, for
they doubted not, but that it was Castrecom, with which the Japanners had
Bartered their Fish.

Moreover, ^
this Lord caused them to be asked these Questions, How long and broad are the
Ships Castrecom and Breskens? How many Guns do they carry apiece? What Boats do
they Towe after them? What Guns are in their Boats?

Description of the Ships Castrecom and Breskens.
Schaep answered, According as we guess, Castrecom is nine and twenty Fathom
long, and four and a half broad; when it Sailed from Batavia, they carried
fifteen Guns, amongst which is reckoned a small Gun for the Boats use. But at
Ternate, Castrecom took four Iron Guns out of Breskens, so increasing their
number. Castrecom also had no other Boats than a Pinnace and Longboat that
could carry four small Guns: Breskens was about a hundred and eight Foot long,
and five Fathom broad. Their Boat carried as many Guns as Castrecom, but we
took our Guns out of the Boat into the Ship, so soon as we had sight of Japan.

Remarkable Questions (...) Japan Gentleman.
Tosaymon receiving Order to examine them further, asked, What Yards or Masts
did Breskens loose in the Storm? Had you no Instruments to Play on, and also a
Parret and a Smith in the Ship? How many Youths and Officers in Silk Clothes
and Gold-Rings had you Aboard? Does not Breskens Tow a Boat and Pinnace after
her? Or are they hoysted into the Ship?

The Hollanders Answer.
Byleveld answering first, went toward the Wall of the Room, against which
hung a Picture, representing several Portuguese Vessels, and pointing at them,
showed, that they had lost all their Top-Masts in the Storm, and a small Boat
was by one Sea washed off from the Deck. They had one Violin, and a Flagelet on
Board, but no Smith, only the Gunners Mate served them for Armorer. The two
Parrets which they brought from Ternate to present to some person or other in
Tartary, died before they got sight of Japan; if the other two in Castrecom be
living we, know not. Breskens also carried four Boys, but they knew none that
wore Silk Clothes and Gold-Rings, but only three of the Officers whose Silk
Apparel was locked in their Chests. But in Castrecom, the Commander, Pilot,
Merchant, Purser, and Chyrurgeon wear Silk Clothes and Gold-Rings; and they
have a Flagelet, Bag-Pipe, Cittern, and Violin. Lastly, Our Boats are hoysted
in, and tied upon the Deck, when ever we Sail into the main Ocean, but drawing
near the Shore, we Tow both Boat and Pinnace.

Why the Japanners place one Letter under the other.
The proposed Questions the Lord read out of the Written Paper, but set down
between every one of them (a Blank-Line being lest) the Hollanders Answer, with
exceeding quickness, every Character signifying a whole Word, the number of
their Words and Letters being equal, and amount, according to Athanasius
Kircher, to eighty thousand: And this is likewise the reason, why the Chinese
and Japanners place one Letter under another, because every one of them
signifies a whole Sentence.

This manner of Writing confirms the forementioned Opinion of the Americans
Original, and their coming through Cattay from Tartary, over the Straights of
Anian, (if such a passage be found out of the Icy-Sea into the Southern Ocean,
for the Mexicans show no uncertain Testimonies of their Extract from Tartary,
which the Chinese also acknowledge, and the Japanners in like manner, that
they came from China. But the Mexicans write likewise with their whole Hand,
and have Characters that signify a whole Word, placing one directly under the
other, and where they want Letters, they fill up the place with Strokes or
other Scrauls.

Hist. Moral. of the West-Ind. 5, 7.
Joseph Acosta relates, That in the Mexican Territory Jucatan, Bound
Paper-Books are highly esteemed by the Indians, for they Treated on the
Dividing of Time, the Course of the Stars, Description of Beasts, Herbs,
Medicines, the Antiquity of the Mexicans, of War, Peace, and Politic
Government, Written down in Characters and Strokes after the Japan and Chinese
manner. Acosta complains not, without great reason, that a Spanish Divine
finding one of these Books, and looking upon the strange Characters to be for
Conjuration, caused it to be burnt; and for the same reason the Spaniards where
ever they Conquered and could get any of the Mexicans Writings, burnt them,
which indeed deserved rather to have been choicely preserved.

Strange way of Writing and Cyphering without Letters or Figures.
But though Mexico drive a great Trade and keep all their accounts in those
Characters, yet their Neighbors the Peruvians knew not the Art of Writing, and
understood neither Characters nor any other Strokes resembling Letters; but
used diverse colored Strings with Bedes, which served them as well as Books.
These Strings they called Quipos, and those authorized to keep the Quipo's,
Quipo Camayo, whose service is like the Book-Keepers or Clerks in Europe; for
these Quipo Caymayo's must give an account of all things, as concerning
Marriages, Obligations, Accounts, and Contracts, and what else happens between
Man and Man; in Demanding or Suing for Debts, they deliver their Quipo's to a
Judge which makes a testimony, as if a Debt-Book should be brought before a
Magistrate in Europe. It is no less to be admired, that the Peruvians without
being able to Write, exceed all Arithmeticians in expert certainty; their
Cyphering they perform with little Beads, laying here three, yonder eight, then
raking one away, lay it upon another, and so exchanging two or three after the
same manner, by which they know exactly how to bring the most difficultest
account to a right adjusting.

BUt to return again to our Holland Prisoners, who when the Lord that had read
their Questions, and writ down their Answers was gone, they asked the
Netherland Interpreters, In what Degree of Latitude and Longitude the Territory
of Matsymay lay, before which the said forementioned Ship was seen, but they
told them they knew not. The Hollanders were not a little suspicious of this
answer, and the more, because they understood of some of the House-Servants,
upon promise to be silent, that some of the Men of the forenam'd Vessel were
taken and brought up Prisoners.

The next day the Hollanders came again into the fair Chamber of their
Landlords, and there found, besides the four Interpreters, the same Lord that
the day before had read their Questions to them out of a Paper, and understood
that he was called Bongyo; next to whom sat three other Japan Nobles, which
they had not seen before, of which one looked very stemly upon the Hollanders,
being a Man as they judged, about two and forty years old, tall, and with a
great and flat Face, of an Oleaster Complexion, and an indented Nose, who the
day before had been in the forementioned Ship, and was come there to see if any
of the ten Prisoners were like unto those which he had seen.

New Examination by the foresaid Noblemen.
And Bongyo asked the same Questions he had done before, putting one before the
other, by that means, if he could, to Trappan the Hollanders in a lie. And
lastly, added these new Questions to the former; Of what Stature and Age are
the Commanders, Pilot, and Merchant in the Ship Castrecom? How many Seamen in
the Ship Breskens wear short Hair? How many Men did Castrecom and Breskens
carry when they Weighed Anchor from Batavia?

Schaep answered these Questions thus: The Head-Commander is scarce one and
forty, is a handsome tall Man, with brown Hair, and a neat Beard. The Pilot
about twenty six years old, of a middle Stature. The Merchant three years
younger than the Pilot, has no Beard; as for those that wear short Hair, we
cannot give any certain account; but as we guess, there were between fifteen
and twenty in the Ketch Breskens. Moreover Castrecom and Breskens carried sixty
Men apiece, when they set Sail from Batavia.

These Answers being again written down by Bongyo, he role up to be gone, only
stayed a little while discoursing with the other three Nobles, who looked very
sternly upon the Hollanders to their no small amazement; wherefore after
Bongyo's departure, with the other Nobles, they inquired of Tosaymon and
Manykebe, if they knew not in what degree the foresaid Ship was seen, and where
the People were taken Prisoners? And also, if no new trouble by their being
taken might happen to them?

Tosaymon answered, That the Ship Sailed with a small Gale along the Northern
Shore of Japan, Southerly. The Boat which it Towed had Mast and Bolt-Sprit, and
carried four Stone-Guns, and a small Boat was tied fast to her side: And said
Tosaymon, How can any new trouble arise from hence? It must needs be for your
delivery, when the Prisoners taken out of Castrecom, witness that you were sent
to Tartary; for their Relation concerning the same, if they agree with yours,
will affirm it to be truth.

Why the four Jesuits are set at liberty by the Japan Emperor.
After that, the Hollanders understood from Phatsyosaymon and their Landlords
Sons, that the Emperor kept the four Jesuits in Prison, till Elseraks coming
thither, (two of these four were Italians, the third a Castilian, and the
fourth a Portugal) that by him they might be carried over to Batavia: So
escaping with their Lives from a terrible Death, because they staggered in
their Religion, and discovered a Secret, at which the Japan Emperor seemed to
be highly concerned; the Plot was, that let it cost what it would, Money or
Blood, the Jesuits would a new undertake their ancient Design in Japan: It was
absolutely concluded, yearly to send Roman Priests to Japan from the Manilla's,
and in short time, two Native Japanners should be sent thither, and be received
in the Jesuits Orders, by which means they promised great matters to
themselves, because they not only understood the Japan Tongue exceeding well,
but were of the same Nature and Disposition of their Contrymen, and
therefore might be more private from the common Persecution, being less
suspected than Outlandish Priests. By this means they thought for time to
come, to play their Game, and the more, because the Christians in all places,
as if they arose out of the Ashes of the Martyrs, began to Live afresh: So that
the Emperor was puzzel'd, seeing no small danger to threaten his Crown;
wherefore, he contrary to all those that had been his Predecessors, was at the
Examination of Christian Prisoners, or Portugal Priests himself, out of mere
fear of an Insurrection.

THe five and twentieth of October, the Gentleman Isycauwa Isajamondonne
brought word, That Elserak on the ninth of that instant, was come to Osacca,
and was to appear in five days at the Emperors Court, being commanded by the
Emperor to come with all speed to Jedo, without staying to bring the usual
Presents with him, but let them alone to come after. Isycauwa told them also
for certain, that they should once more be examined concerning their Voyage,
and then be set at liberty.

The Hollanders remove their Lodgings, and why?
The next day, Kytsbyoye, and Phatsyosamon told them by Manykebe, That the
Hollanders were to remove from their Lodgings, to go to a House of their
Landlord's Son, because that place was ordered for Elserak to lodge in, by the
Lords Sicungodonne and Sabrosaymondonne, because the Emperor and Council had
commanded, that Elserak should first be examined alone concerning the Voyage to
Tartary, that so they might discern if what he said agreed with what Schaep and
Byleveld had so often testified: Whereupon, the Hollanders were carried to
their new Lodgings, being not a little frighted to fee their Lodging Room seem
more like a Prison than otherwise; but soon after, the Master of the House and
his Family bidding them welcome, and withal giving them some Wines, they were
again comforted.

Hither the two Interpreters came to them, proffering their Service to them, to
give a Letter in private to the Ambassador Elserak; Schaep and Byleveld were a
long time doubtful what to do in this Affair, whether or no they durst repose
so much confidence in them. Lastly, They ventured to advise Elserak in a
Letter, that which they had suffered concerning their Voyage to Tartary, when
being busy about finishing the same, Orders came from the Magistrates, that
the Hollanders must instantly appear in the usual Court: But the Counsel not
sitting, they returned home without being heard.

Japanners Coats of Arms. The Emperors.
On their way home they met with one of the Emperors Officers, with his Imperial
Majesty's Arms, made of Silver and Gold, hanging on his Breast by a String,
each end Clasped; the Arms it self were six Silver Stars on a Yellow Field, in
an Oval Compass, placed at an equal distance one from the other, the Edges
about adorned with Spots of Gold; in the middle of the six Stars are the four
Marks of the Emperors Authority: Moreover, they found at the ends of several
Streets, Poles sticking out, with exceeding long Pennons, with two Slits at the
end, and being Yellow, turn on the Pole, which runs through six Copper Holes;
the hinder part of this Pennon represents In a Square the Emperors Arms richly
Embroidered: In the four corners stood the Marks of the four chief Counselors:
There is scarce a City, Town, or Village in Japan, but they have their Arms and
Seals belonging to them; of which I will pick out as a pattern some of the
chiefest Places.

Of Osacca.
OSacca bears in a Square Field a Wild Bores-Head of Gold, above which stands
the Emperors Arms, four Silver Blocks placed sloaping toward the four Corners
of the Field, and distinguished by the Marks of the Emperors chief Governors of
the Castle, City, and Haven of Osacca.

The Seal of Miaco is eight Square, Miaco.
has in the middle a Half Moon, on the left side the Japan Flower, called
Toxanpinang, and on the right a Snails Shell, underneath stand three Stars, on
the top of the Shell are the Dayro's Arms, and below it the Emperors.

Quano, Quano.
a known City, lying at the Bay of the Japan Sea, where the Ferry is to Mia,
uses for a Seal three round Balls, and as many long Blocks, in a round Field,
mixed one among the other; about the Edges are the Marks of the Governor, two
Deputies, and two of the Council.

Saccai has a Scollop'd Flag, Saccai.
the Ground of the Arms a dark Green, distinguished by Golden Flames, a White
Space five Square made in the Flag, close to the Stick, represents a
Semicircle, parted in the middle, the one half White, the other Black,
surrounded by the Emperors Arms, but separated by three round O's, and the City
Mark.

The use of Seals and Coat of Arms is very ancient.
IT seems, that Signets or Arms, whether in Flags for Ornaments, or on Stamps,
or in Rings, to Seal Writings withal, are very ancient.

Cicero relates in his Disputation against Cataline, That showing Sealed
Letters to Lentulus, He asked him if he knew the Seal? Which Seals the Romans
made of Wax, but the People in little Asia, of Chalk, which in the Island of
Crete, now called Candy is very plentiful, from whence Chalk in several
Languages borrows its Denomination. But these kind of Seals are much older than
the ancientest Romans, for Thamar received a Seal Ring from Judah, Genesis 38.18.
as a Pledge of Payment for his enjoying her. Moses also says thus of Joseph,
Genesis 41.42.
And Pharaoh took off his Ring from his Hand, and put it on Joseph's Hand, that
as a Chancellor, he might with the Kings Seal, seal his Letters.

Hesychius, and Isaac Tzetzes relate, That the oldest Lacedaemonians used to
Seal with pieces of Wood eaten by Worms, before the Art of Ingraving was
invented.

Hollanders are again brought before the Japan Judgen.
THe Hollanders being brought back to their new Lodgings, had but little rest,
for the next day the Interpreters Tosaymon and Manykebe conducted them to the
place of Audience, without Jedo; before the inner Gate the Prisoners stood
still, except Schaep and Byleveld, who being commanded to enter, were amazed at
the stateliness of an exceeding pleasant Garden, through which they were led:
At the end thereof was the Entrance into a Princely Hall, wherein was a most
artificial Gallery, where the Counselors sat in such splendid State, that no
European Princes might compare to them. So soon as the Hollanders approached,
they were commanded to kneel.

Sicungodonne, as before, gave the Word, saying, You Captain and Merchant shall
in this instant speak the Truth; for if Elserak's Relation, who is hourly
expected here, does not agree with yours, you shall no way escape the most
cruel Tortures.

Schaep replied, Nothing has been said to our knowledge, but what is truth;
and we will at present give you a further account concerning what your Honors
please to demand of us.

New Examinations of Sicungodonne.
Whereupon Sicungodonne asked them the following Questions: Do you not know the
Goods shown you by the Gentleman Bongyo in your Inn, the eighth and ninth of
this Month? Have you also not seen the Ship on the North of Japan, out of which
those Goods were exchanged? What did you think, that she stood to the East,
when the Wind favored to go from the Northern Coast of Japan, to Jacatra.
Lastly, he asked, If they could not guess to what place those Ships belonged,
which some days ago sailed along the Coast of Satsammoo?

Byleveld's Answer.
Byleveld answered: Concerning the Goods which were shown to us, we have so
much knowledge of them, that the like is aboard our Ship Breskens; but because
we know not that an Exchange was made between the Seamen belonging to her, and
the Japanners, therefore we believe that the Goods came out of Castrecom, which
we judge to have been cast away in May, by a Storm which arose in the Night,
before an unknown Land. The said Ship stood to the East, the easier to Weather
the South-East Point of Japan, and so to shorten their Voyage; judging the Wind
always to blow good in that Latitude in the middle of September. But concerning
the two Ships, they could not say any thing of them, for a certainty; but that
perhaps they might be Castrecom and Breskens, both returning to Batavia, by
reason of the Imprisonment of their Chief Commanders.

More strange Questions
To the forementioned Questions, Sicungodonne added the following: Can you,
Captain and Merchant, give no Relation concerning the Forces, consisting of
Land and Seamen, which the Prince of Orange sent for Aid to the King of
Portugal? Why they mutinied for want of Pay, and so occasioned a Civil War?
Have you no Advice concerning the Event thereof? Do the Hollanders not sell the
Portuguese Commodities? What signify those Crosses and several Strokes, with
which the Wrappers of the Dutch Packs are marked? Are there no Ave-Maries nor
Wooden Crosses found in the Dutch Ships?

Byleveld's Answer.
ByleVeld answered again: The Entertainment of the Dutch Forces in Portugal,
and their Transactions there, was not known in Batavia, when we came from
thence; neither are the Portuguese so much at Peace with the Hollanders, as to
sell one another Commodities. Moreover, the Crosses and Marks on the several
Packs and Bales, signify nothing else, than the Arms of the Holland Towns in
which the enclosed Goods are to be had. Lastly, the Wooden Crosses and
Ave-Maries belong to the Roman Church; and therefore they never carried them in
their Ships.

Byleveld had no sooner ended, but Sicungodonne asked again; Is (said he) your
God the same as the Castilian and Portugal? What is his Name? Who did ever see
him? Where has he conversed? Whereby do you believe your God to be the True
God?

Difference of Religion.
IT plainly appears by the Religion of the Japanners, that they embrace the
Errors of the most foolish Heathens, Romans 1.23.
changing the Glory of the uncorruptible God, into an Image made like to
corruptible Man.

This foul Doctrine was embraced by the Anthropomorphites in Christendom, about
the time of Arius and the Nicene Council. The first Teacher was Audius, derived
from Mesopotamia, a Man who lived a very lend Life, yet in short time got many
on his side; and remaining a little while by the Church, at last forsook it,
and raised a new Opinion, which much puzzled the Ancient Fathers; and chiefly
they were contradicted by Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, F^rb. Inst. Theol.
1.36.
and Epiphanius at Salamina; but Epiphanius disputed so indifferently, that he
gave no satisfaction to the Learned.

And indeed, against this foolish and fleshly Opinion of God, the Learned
Heathens have disputed. Lact. de Irac. c. 11.
Lactantius relates of the ancient Philosopher Pythagoras, That he believed God
to be a Spirit without a Body. Plato affirms, That God is the greatest Good,
above all things in Nature; he himself being full of all Perfection, In Somis.
Scip.
wanting nothing. And Macrobius says, Plato when he would speak of God, durst
not say what he is; concluding, That he cannot be known of Man what he is: For
God is called Suprema Ratio and Ens Entium, and is also the first Original of
all things. Here is added the Relation of the great Orator Cicero, De Not. Deor.
in these Words: In his Book of the Laws, says Plato, I can better say what
God is not, than what he is: Do you ask me what or how God is? I will use
Simonides for my Interpreter, of whom when the Tyrant Hiero asked the same
Question, he desired one day to think upon it; and on that day asking him
again, he required two days; so still increasing the number of the days: Hiero
wondering at it, asked why he did so? Because, said he, the longer I study, the
more difficult I find it to resolve.

Seneca also writes thus to Lucilius, God is close by, he is in you: So say I,
O Lucilius, a Holy Spirit is within us, Ad Luci^.
that takes an account of all our good and bad Actions: This Spirit according
as it is treated by us, so it deals with us, but none is a good Man without God.

The opinion of the learned Heathens concerning God.
The Learned of Heathens acknowledged in God the greatest Perfection, which
consisted in three things.

To the first belonged his Eternity, which can be measured by no Time, being a
Life without End. So that the Heathens observed by the Light of Nature, how it
was with God, to see to that which he was not before, or not to see after that
which he was once.

Secondly, They ascribed to God a Freedom against all Power, because he has an
irresistible Power, which is as Mighty and Omnipotent as God himself.

Disown God to be a substance.
Lastly, They believed that his Godly Nature suffered no Connection to or with
himself; for where there is such a Connection, there must needs be something
equal, or alike, to connect: but in God is no want of any such connected
Assimilation; for if there were, then the Cause of such Want must precede the
Connection, and consequently be before God: but God is the First Causer of all
things. And on these grounds they could find, that God was not Substantial, and
Frail; much less consisted of Soul and Body: Which if the Learned Anaxagoras,
Master of the famous Socrates, had not understood, he would not have called God
a Spirit, and said, That all things proceeded from the Power of an Everlasting
Spirit.

The contrary opinion of the Japanners.
But the Japanners go not so high; notwithstanding the inexpressible Goodness of
God, and their own Consciences, should lead them to an Everlasting Being; yet
they ask foolishly for a visible God, that converses with Men on the Earth.

Byleveld's Answer.
BUt to return to our Story: Byleveld gave Sicungodonne this Answer; The
Castilians and Portuguese acknowledge a Trinity, as well as the Hollanders; but
they represent him in the shape of an Old, a Young Man, and a Dove; which the
Hollanders hold to be abominable: For they acknowledge God to be an endless
Spiritual Being, of whom none may or can make any Likeness, neither by Images,
or Imaginations of the Heart. Moreover, God has given himself diverse Names in
the Greek and Hebrew Tongues; but the Hollanders call him God the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost: And because he is an Incomprehensible Spirit, he can be seen by
none; from whence it always proceeds, that a Man can no way see his own nor
another Soul: Yet the Invisible God is Visible in the Works of his Creation,
Preservation, and Governing of all things. Also Gods Son took upon him the
Nature of Man in a Woman, when he was born in Bethlehem, traveled through
Palestine, did great Miracles there, and at last not far from Jerusalem died a
cursed Death on the Cross, to redeem and save those from everlasting Damnation
that believed in him; all which is written down in two Books, the first written
by the Prophets, in the Hebrew Tongue; the other by the Apostles, in the Greek.
These Prophets and Apostles were great Saints, to whom God gave the Spirit of
real Truth: And these Books were translated out of their Original Tongues, into
Dutch, by Persons experienced both in Greek and Hebrew.

Sicungodonne asked further, Sicungodonne's other Questions.
Do your Feasts agree with the Portuguese and Castilians? How are they called?
Do the Hollanders keep Fast-days? Are they not taught by Priests and Ministers,
as the Spaniards? What are those Priests? Have they a yearly Income out of the
Countries Revenue? Do they, meddle with any State Affairs? Is the Prince of
Orange under any Bodies Jurisdiction? or Governs he Holland alone?

Captain Schaep answered, Schaep's Reply.
The Hollanders, said he, keep the first Day of the Week, like the Spaniards,
on which every one rests from their Labor, and goes to Church to hear Divine
Service: Only on some extrordinary Occasion, Fast and Prayer-days are ordered
to be kept, that the Inhabitants may humbly beg of God for his merciful
Assistance. Besides, at such an accident they abstain not from Meat and Drink;
but take it, and give Thanks to God for it. Distinction of Diet is never
observed by them. Moreover, the Holland Teachers are called Ministers, which
are Men that from their Infancy have been brought up to learn the Latin, Greek,
and Hebrew Tongues, and in Public Churches Preach to the People out of the
forementioned Books, which every one may peruse, that thereby it may appear if
their Doctrine agree with them. They are paid but of the Countrey-Exchequer,
Marry, and go Clothed like other Citizens; but concern themselves with no
State Affairs. Concerning the Prince of Orange, he carried an Army against the
Spaniards, Besieging every Year his Cities and Fortresses, according to the
Advice of the States General, assembled in the Hague, and sent thither from the
Seven Provinces of the United Netherlands, of which Holland is the Chiefest.

Sicungodonne proceeded; More Questions.
If your God and the Spanish God be all one, wherein is the Difference of your
Religion, and whose Opinion is the eldeft?

Schaep replied, And Answers.
The Hollanders depend on One God, and a Perfect Savior; but the Portuguese and
Castilians place Gods Vicegerent on Earth, and Saints and Saintesses, which
assist the Savior in his chiefest Business of Salvation, in praying for those
that are dead. Moreover, the Hollanders Religion is older than the Portuguese
or Castilians, because it agrees with the two Prophetic and Apostolic Books,
without adding to, or diminishing from them: So that although the Portuguese
brag, that their Religion was publicly embraced and taught in the Churches in
Holland, before the Hollanders banished the same from thence; yet the
Hollanders Opinion has been before the Portuguese: For that Faith which is now
embraced, was the first that Holland entertained; and although oppressed by
bloody Persecutions, yet flouris'd again at last.

Lastly, Sicungodonne asked, Is Java a great Island? Who possesses it? What
kind of Inhabitants are there? What Color, and what, Names?

Description of Java.
Captain Schaep replied, This Island is divided into Great and Little Java: The
biggest is separated by the Straights of Sunda from Sumatra, and spreads it
self in length a hundred and fifty Leagues, but much less in breadth, yet
broader in some places than in others. According to the Relation of the
Inhabitants, a River flows in the middle of it, which turns Wood into Stone.
The Mataram, an Enemy to the Hollanders, possesses the greatest part thereof to
the East: The King of Bantam, oftentimes at Alliance with the East India
Company, Commands a vast Tract along the Straights of Sunda. Betwixt both of
them lies Batavia, where the President and Chief Governor of the Indian Trade
keeps his Court for that Company residing in the United Netherlands. The
Inhabitants of Java are barbarous, and not to be trusted* of strong and
well-timber'd Bodies, broad and thick Cheeks, great Eyelids, little Eyes,
small Beards, black and short Hair, and of a yellow Complexion.

After this Answer, Schaep and Byleveld were commanded to depart; and being
conducted out to their Countrymen the other Prisoners, who had with a longing
desire staid to hear the Success, found with them four and thirty Japanners,
Prisoners; of which, some sat Hand-cufft, Strange Japan Prisoners*
others had their Arms tied together under their Coats; and talking, seemed as
if they railed and complained against their hard usage. Soon after they were
carried to the place of Audience, from whence the Hollanders were come. Schaep
asked leave of Manykebe to go to his Lodging, but was forced to stay. Manykebe
told them, That those Japan Prisoners, which were by two and two led to the
place of Audience, had Christian Parents; wherefore they had a long time been
kept in Prison, and miserably tortured; which appeared sufficiently by their
thin Cheeks, hollow Eyes, and deformed Faces, seeming rather like Sceletons
than living Men.

News of Elserak's arrival.
Whilst they staid here, Phatsayosamon's Servant brought News of the Ambassador
Elserak, that on the Morrow against Noon he would come with his Retinue to
Jedo. This was told to Sicungodonne by the Masters Son of the Dutch Inn: upon
which News, the Japan Council rose.

The next Morning, being the first of December, Schaep sent privately for the
Interpreter Kytsbyoye, to whom he gave two Letters, enclosed one within the
other, containing their several Examinations before the Council, to deliver to
Elserak, that he might take notice thereof, and govern himself accordingly.

Comes to Jedo.
About Noon Elserak came to Jedo, with whom neither the Holland Prisoners, nor
the Dutch Interpreter Tosaymon and Manykebe, might speak, before they were once
more Examined: Wherefore they were again commanded on the next day to come to
Sicungodonne's House, where they staid at the usual place about an Hour. Here
sat a white lean Man, between forty and fifty years old, A remarkable Japa^ner,
and his Policy.
in rich Apparel, with a square brown Beard, who looked like a Dutch Minister;
his Hands laden with great Hand-cuffs, which being taken off, he was very
busy with Sicungodonne's Servants, taking Pen, Ink, and Paper, and writ very
fast, and sometimes broke forth in earnest Discourse, not without strange
Motions of his Body. Manykebe told the Hollanders concerning this Man, That he
had impeached above six hundred Christians that lived in Meaco; yet was kept in
Fetters till they were all Examined.

Schaep and Byleveld are strictly examined.
Mean while, Sicungodonne's Secretary, bringing Pen, Ink, and Paper, sat down by
Schaep and Byleveld, beginning thus: You Captain and Merchant, are strictly
commanded to write down every thing concerning your Voyage, since you left
Batavia, to the day you came into the Haven Namboe, where you were taken
Prisoners. If heretofore any thing has been forgotten, you may yen delare it;
for every thing being writ down, it will be compared with what Elserak and the
Governor of Castrecom (who is commanded to come hither) shall say: So that if
you err from the Truth, you Prisoners will not only run the hazard of your
Lives, but also the East India Company will suffer a considerable Damage on the
Island Disma.

Schaep answered, They were very well contented to suffer all their Torments,
if they could be any ways taxed with Untruth: But since they had always
answered their proposed Questions with candid Sincerity (which they were still
ready to do) they feared not the least danger.

Questions of the Japan Secretary.
Whereupon the Chief Secretary proceeded to their Examination, asking them, At
what time did the Ships Castrecom and Breskens set Sail from Batavia? Did any
other Ships set Sail with them? When dropped you Anchor before Ternata? Did
Castrecom and Breskens arrive there together? Did they both weigh Anchors
together? Where, and when lost you Castrecom? Did Castrecom never appear since?
What Country do you judge it to be where you lost Castrecom? Did you meet with
no Land between this and Ternata? Whither did you Steer after you missed
Castrecom? When did Breskens light on the Japan Coast? When entered the Ship the
Haven of Namboe for Water? When went it away? When entered it the Harbor of
Namboe the second time?

Byleveld's Auswer to him.
Byleveld replied, saying, The third of February, in this present Year,
Castrecom and Breskens left Batavia, steering their Course to Ternata, with
intention to seek for Tartary. When we went to Sea, we had no Company but
Castrecom, with which Ship we Anchored, after five and forty days Sail, under
the Castle Maleyen: The fourth of April we proceeded on in our Voyage, and kept
continually close together till the nineteenth of May, when in the Night we
were driven by stress of Weather on an unknown Coast, lying in about four and
thirty Degrees, where we lost Castrecom: We cannot give any Relation what Coast
it was, because we happened to fall upon it in the Night, and had as much as ever
we could do, to keep our Ship from running ashore; in which endeavor we had
such good success, that in the Morning the Land was seven Leagues astern of us,
so that we could not discern it perfectly. We discovered no Land betwixt
Ternata and the said Coast. Moreover, so soon as we mist Castrecom, we ran
toward the North-East Point of Japan, to look for him, according to the Letter
of Agreement made at Ternata. We came on the Japan Coast the nine and twentieth
of May, where after twelve days we entered the Haven Namboe, but went away again
the next day, so soon as ever the fresh Water which we came for was Shipped
aboard, and stood directly East into the Offin, so to Weather the South-East
Point of Japan, having as we judged Sailed two hundred Leagues, when the
violent South-winds, and as strong Storms from the North, so distressed us,
though we had sometimes sight of Japan, that we fell a whole Degree more
Northerly than we expected. Lastly, after being tossed to and again seven and
forty days, we were necessitated to Anchor a second time in Namboe; yet not
before we had leave from the Magistrates, who permitted and gave us leave to
furnish our selves with all manner of Refreshments and Necessaries; on which
Promise going ashore, we were taken, and brought Prisoners to Jedo.

More Questions.
Then the Secretary went on thus: What Complexion, Stature, Age, and Names, have
the Captain, Merchant, and Pilot of the Ship Castrecom? Has none of them ever
been in Japan? Does Elserak know them? What Freight had Breskens to Trade
withal in Tartary? Where, and at what time did you speak with Elserak
concerning this Voyage? Does he know any thing of the Breskens Lading?

Schaep's Reply.
Schaep answered, The Captain of Castrecom, whose Name is Martin de Uries, is
of a middle Stature, brown Hair and Beard, aged one and forty years; the Pilot,
Peter Williamson Knetchtyens, a short thick Man, is about six and twenty years
old; the Merchant, Abraham Pittavny, tall and slender, has yellow Hair, but no
Beard, and is three and twenty years of age, Moreover, de Uries had some years
ago been in Japan, and also Knechtyens, who was then Quartermaster, and the
other Mate; but Pittavyn had never seen Japan before: And without doubt Elserak
knows Martin de Uries, because they Sailed together from Tayovon to Batavia,
where he also may have seen Pittavyn: But as to what concerned Knetchtyens,
they could give no farther account, but that as before, he had once been in
Japan. Concerning Breskens Cargo, they could tell every Piece they had, because
it most consisted in small Bales, either of European or Indian Commodities,
with which the East India Company would try what Goods the Tartars most
desired: But the chief Lading was Cloth and Pepper. Moreover, we spoke with
Elserak the day before our departure from Batavia; but whether he knows exactly
our Ships Lading, we cannot tell; yet we believe that he has spoken with the
Indian Council.

A Tartar in Castrecom.
Lastly, The Secretary asked them concerning the Age, Stature, Name, and Office
of the Tartar which Sailed in Castrecom, and was to serve them in Tartary, in
the promoting of the New Trade: On which he received this Answer.

The Tartar, named David Cason, aged one and twenty years, brown and thick,
supplies the Place of Under-Factor.

Obligation required from the Hollanders.
This done, the Secretary rose up, only asking them if they were willing to sign
a Writing, by which they might give assurance, That Elserak, without a mistake,
would certify the exact time of Breskens and Castrecoms setting Sail for
Ternata? Which proffer Schaep and Byleveld willingly accepted: But whilst the
Secretary was busy writing the proposed Note, Sabrosaymondonne,
Deputy Governor of Nangesaque, passed through the Hall where Schaep and
Byleyeld sat, looking upon them with a smiling Countenance, for which they
bowed their Heads to the Ground.

The Imprisoned Hollanders hear no news of Elserak.
Mean while the Evening coming, the Hollanders obtained leave to go to their
Lodging, where they staid three days, without hearing any News of Elserak, only
that he had appeared, with the Merchant Paul Cornelison Veer, before the Japan
Council, and at Night returned home very joyfully.

Elserak and the imprisoned Hollanders appear together before Sicungodonne
THe fifth of December the ten imprisoned Hollanders were again carried to
Sicungodonne's House, which the Captain and Merchant entered, but the rest staid
at the Door, through which soon after passed the Ambassador Elserak, with all
his Retinue, and asking, for Schaep and Byleveld, was answered by the Seamen,
That they staid waiting in the next Room. Strange Transactions there
Elserak conducted thither, yet saw them not, because he walked amongst some
Japan Servants to the place of Audience, without standing still to look for
them; where sitting down, there appeared Sicungodonne and Sabrosaymondonne,
with a considerable Train of Nobles. After some Courtly Ceremonies, Schaep and
Byleveld were brought in; whereupon Sicungodonne, speaking to Elserak, asked if
he knew those Men to be such Persons as they pretended? and likewise, If he
would willingly be bound for them, that they were sent with the Ship Breskens
to Tartary, and were no ways guilty of the bringing over Portuguese Priests to
Japan, or any other bad Design against this Nation?

Elserak answered, Honored Sicungodonne, I know the Captain and Merchant very
well; this is Henry Cornelison Schaep, and he William Byleveld, who came from
Batavia the third of February, not to carry over Priests, which are sworn
Enemies to the Hollanders; but to seek a new place of Trade in the Tartarian
River Polysange, without any prejudice to the Empire of Japan: Which Truth to
affirm, not only I, but all the East India Companies Ships, which Annually
Trade to Nangesaque, will freely be bound. Upon which proffer* Elserak was
answered, That he should perform his Promise, by Sealing a Writing to morrow
before the Emperor, or at least the Chief Councellor of State; which he
willingly accepted.

Elserak tells the Hollanders of their Discharge.
Then Sicungodonne and Sabrosaymondonne conducted the Ambassador Elserak to the
Portal, where the remaining Hollanders sat, to whom Elserak said, Men, you are
redeemed. Their great joy.
It is not to be expressed what an alteration these Words caused in them,
having from Hour to Hour, and after diverse ways, strove as it were with Death,
and been a long time doubtful betwixt Hope and Despair: For what could they
expect of a barbarous Japanner, but a merciless Death? Not knowing but that the
Interpreters might interpret false, either out of their own ill nature, or else
their ignorance in the Dutch Tongue: And the more, because they knew the
strictness of the Japan Magistrates, who pass the Sentence of Death for the
least untruth. The Tears which flowed from their Eyes, expressed sufficiently
their exceeding Joy; and the sudden News, made them doubtful to credit it: Yet
they bowed their Heads to the Ground, after the Japan manner, and thanked
Sicungodonne and Sabrosaymondonne, for their kind Inclination toward them
during their Imprisonment.

Must leave Elserak's Retinue.
But whilst the Dutch Prisoners were wished Joy by their Countrymen of their
Liberty, Elserak was called back by Sicungodonne, and after some Discourse,
returned to his Retinue, being commanded, that the ten Prisoners should walk
before in the Streets, and for some private Reasons, not go amongst his
Attendants.

Schaep and Byleveld entertained by Elserak.
But Elserak invited Schaep and Byleveld to Supper with him; and coming to his
Inn he received them with all Friendship. At the Table several Discourses
passed, of what had happened to them on their Voyage, and since they were taken
Prisoners at Namboe. After Supper, Schaep and Byleveld returned to their
Companions in their new Lodging, whither they were removed to make room for
Elserak and his Retinue; who on the next day invited his two Guests again,
giving them Clothes and Bedding, which they had great need of in Winter.

Receive order to stay in their Inn.
And whilst they were thus busy, an Interpreter called Sioske came in, who
commanded the Captain and Merchant to return to their Lodgings, and to keep in
there, till Elserak had made his appearance at the Emperors Court: Which Order
was sent from Sicungodonne and Sabrosaymondonne, so that they immediately
obeyed. In the Evening they heard that Elserak had been at Court, and was
returned home: But because Sioske told them, That after two Hours time they
should again see Elserak; which Promise failing, and Elserak himself sending
them no word concerning his Success at Court, they were in great fear that the
Business had met with some new hinderance or other; Hollanders are again very
much troubled.
which trouble increased, because they heard not any thing thereof all the next
day, doing how it stood with their Releasment, or the Ambassador Elserak.

A great Earthquake at Jedo.
THey were possessed with these melancholy Thoughts, when on a sudden the Earth
was shaken, the Timbers and Roofs of Houses tumbling down to the Ground, the
Walls falling one toward another, and much harm in those places where the
Motion was greatest.

It is approved of by the most Learned Philosophers, and Experience has taught
us, That the greatest Earthquakes happen in March and September, because those
times produce the greatest Vapors; whereas in the Summer, the Earth being
opened by warmth, affords free passage for the Winds that lie in its Caverns.
In the Winter time the Ground is locked, and the Warmth too weak to occasion
great Shakings.

Moreover there are reckoned three sorts of Earthquakes. The greatest is a
Gaping, which often swallows up Houses, Villages, whole Countries, and Islands.
The great Lakes and bottomless Waters in Japan, hide under them formerly famous
Places and People, and thereby testify enough how this Empire is plagued by
such Evils. For the second, the Learned reckon that which shakes the Earth,
heaving it up and down, and shakes that which is on the top thereof, in such a
manner, that all things tremble and fall down. The third and smallest is, when
the Ground moves to and again, like a Boat on the Waves. Such a one was this
that happened at Jedo whilst the Hollanders were there.

The fore-running Signs thereof.
It has also often before, as well as now, been observed, That a little before
the Earthquake the Air was very calm, the Winds being locked in the Bosom of:
the Earth: The Air is also colder than at other times it used to be in that
Season of the year, which hinders the breaking forth of the Winds: There
likewise appeared a long thin Cloud in the Sky: The Sea raged exceedingly,
notwithstanding there was no Wind stirring: All Pools and sanding Waters stunk
very much; and the Water it self tasted of Brimstone.

This the Learned Gerard Vossius ascribes to the Fire which is under Ground,
and lies hid in deep places, under Mountains, Islands, and Seas, by which the
Earth also is shaken many Miles together; so that not only, Cities, Villages,
Territories, but whole Countries, are tottered, and turned topsie-turvey by it.

This Fire vomits out many sulphurous and burning Vapors, which Experience has
taught us, because the Earth often rending asunder in Earthquakes, sends forth
hideous Flames. The Fountains also smell sulphury, because the Spirits
ascending, mix themselves with the Water.

By this Sign Phracides, Master to Pythagoras, the Lacedemonian, foretold of an
approaching Earthquake, which he judged would be terrible, Plin. lib. 2. cap.
79.
because the Waters tasted exceedingly of Brimstone.

Hereto is added, That the Countries in which Burning Mountains are found, are
most subject to such Damages. Josephus Acosta relates the like of America; and
our daily Experience of Campania, Sicily, and other Places, wherein Mountains
either vomit forth continual Smoke, or hideous Flames, confirms this Opinion.

Burning Mountain in Japan.
About eight Leagues from Meaco, near a great Lake, lies the Mountain
Siurpurama, which sends forth horrible Smokes and Flames, that ascend into the
Sky; and below, several Sulphurous Streams.

Sicily is at the present less troubled with Earthquakes than formerly, because
the Vent or Hale of Mount Aetna being burnt wider and wider, affords a freer
Passage to the Vapors and the Fire.

Before the burning of the Mountain Vesuvius, where Pliny died, a great
Earthquake happened. It is also obferv'd by the Japanners, That the Mountain
Saperjama burns vehementest after an Earthquake.

THe eighth of December the imprisoned Hollanders were informed by the
Interpreter Phatsyosamon, That Elserak was that day to appear before the Japan
Emperor, and his Council; and that then they should have their free Liberty:
But no sooner was Phatsayosamon gone, but the Hollanders had order to dress
themselves. Hollanders appear in the Emperors Castle.
Their Landlords Son conducted them along, without telling them whither, or
what they were going about: So passing from Street to Street through Jedo, they
came at last to the Emperors Castle, which is surrounded with four Moats, over
which they passed through ten stately Gates; and coming within next to an Arch,
whereof the Floor was covered with Mats, they received order to stay, till they
were called to appear before his Imperial Majesty.

Soon after, they saw the two Interpreters, Tosaymon and Manikebe, coming
thither; and also, amongst other Courtiers, a Gentleman called
Pochycennemondonne, who showed them a great Wooden Portal, through which they
should be carried to the Emperor Owysamma.

Magnificence of it.
And whilst they staid waiting at the foresaid Place, they saw with admiration
a great many Lords, Civility of the Courtiers.
Secretaries, and other Nobles, which continually passed to and fro, showing
such Reverence one to the other, that they exceeded the most Complimental
People in that kind.

At last Pochycennemondonne brought the Hollanders over a broad Court, paved
with Freestone, through the Portal which he had shown them, before a rich
gilded Gallery, where they were commanded, after the Japan manner, to kneel,
with their Faces bowed down to the Ground. Soon after they espied the chief
Counselors of Japan, and the Ambassador Elserak, in the forementioned
Gallery. Sicungodonne speaking in the Emperors behalf, said to Elserak;
Notwithstanding the ten Hollanders here present deserve to be punished, because
they Cruised several days on the Japan Coast, as if they had some private
Design; and also for Firing their Guns in the Haven of Namboe, to the great
amazement of the good Inhabitants: Yet since they manifest their Innocence, and
since your Words agree with theirs, the Emperor sets them at liberty, and gives
the Hollanders to you, upon Proviso, That you be bound for them, Hollanders are
set at liberty by the Emperor but upon provisoes.
if at any time certain Information be brought against them, That they designed
any thing against the Japan Empire. Which Elserak accepted, as also the
Hollanders, who were commanded by Sicungodonne to promise, That they would be
ready to come from Holland, to appear before the Magistrates of Japan, if they
at any time should be accused, that they had any Design upon that Empire.
Lastly, Sicungodonne said, Well, the Emperor Owisamma discharges you from your
Imprisonment; Be at liberty.

Exceeding joy of the Hollanders.
They seemed by this saying to be raised from death, and were amazed, partly at
their delivery from so long and dangerous an Imprisonment, and partly at the
inexpressible Glory and Riches which they there beheld. No Age nor Country
makes mention of any Royal State, which does not come much short, if compared
to the Splendour of the Japan Emperor.

Alexander the Great, after he had subdued most part of Asia, and was become
Master of the Persian Power, would have denied Humane Frailty, and was
ambitious to be honored as a God. In the interim, sitting amongst his Guests,
he was filled with Meat and Drink, and reverenced by them with bowing Heads,
and smoking Myrrh, when after Meals he withdrew behind his Hangings.

The Emperors THRONE des Keisers reichssthl.


How highly is Solomon's Ivory Throne and his Riches esteemed? Of which the
Holy Scripture says thus: 1 Reg. 10. v. 16, ^7, 8, 19, 20, 21.
And King Solomon made two hundred Targets of beaten Gold: six hundred Shekels
of Gold went to one Target. And he made three hundred Shields of beaten Gold,
three Pound of Gold went to one Shield; and the King put them in the House of
the Forest of Lebanon. Moreover the King made a great Throne of Ivory, and
overlaid it with the best Gold. The Throne had six Steps, and the top of the
Throne was round behind: and there were Stays on either side on the place of
the Seat, and two Lions stood beside the Stays. And twelve Lions stood thereon,
on the one side and on the other, upon the six Steps: there was not the like
made in any Kingdom. And all King Solomon 's Drinking-Vessels were of Gold, and
all the Vessels of the House of the Forest of Lebanon were of pure Gold, none
were of Silver, it was nothing accounted of in the days of Solomon.

But though Solomon's Riches and Splendour could not be paralleled in those
Times; yet were he now in being, he could not compare to the Japan Emperor. It
cannot be described, Great Splendour of the Japan Emperor, when he gives
Audience to Ambassadors, or his Substitute Kings.
in what a proud and haughty manner he gives Audience to Foreign Ambassadors,
and his Substitute Kings, which come by turns from the Eastern and Western
parts of Japan before his Throne.

Along the inner Wall of the Court stand stately Watch-houses, built like
Galleries. In the Front thereof hangs the Emperors Flag, under which stands a
Pike-man, who keeps Sentinel. In the Gallery sit the Soldiers, who spend most
of their time with a Game called Pifango, not much unlike our Draughts, which
requires much Consideration and Care. They also smoke strong Tobacco. Along the
Walls, upon Wooden Hooks, lie their Muskets and Pikes. The lowermost Edge of
the Roof is adorned with Golden Balls. Before the tenth inner Gate stand the
Overseers of the Court, which receive the Presents of the Japan Kings and
Foreign Ambassadors, brought thither on Horses and Wains: Their Servants open
the Goods.

At the Gate stand two of the Emperor's Deputy-Secretaries, which write down
and take an account of every Piece of what shall be shown to the Emperor; which
done, they are put into the Storehouses that join next the Gate, which are
built secure against all Fire. On the corners of the Roofs lie Couchant
Dragons, all gilded, whose foremost Feet lie upon Golden Balls. Here is
generally great crowding; some carrying the Presents in, others carrying them
out, and others putting them in good order in the Storehouses. Through the
said Portal appears the Rail, by which the Imperial Throne is separated from
the open Court. One side of the Throne is guarded by Musketeers, and the other
by Pike-men. Just before the Throne is a large and spacious Field, about which
stand high Watch-Towers, built on the Out-wall of the third inner Court. Next
the Towers are stately Gates, both sides thereof guarded with Watch-houses,
built long-ways on square Pillars. More inwardly appear exceeding high Towers,
which the thick Walls of the second inner Court bear, not without marvellouss
Art and Charges. Before every Tower is a Watch-house, shut round about: The
lower Edges of the Roof are adorned with Golden Balls. In this place the Chief
of the Nobility keep Watch. On the sides you walk through the Gates of the
second Inner-Court. The Emperor sits under a Pent-house of his
Banquetting-Turret, from which a Way through a Door leads to the Throne, whose
Supporters on both sides, and upper parts, are adorned with curious Imagery of
massy Gold. Right before the Door, behind the Emperor, sit four Lords, which
are nearest allied to him in Blood: As many of the Chief Council stand on the
right side of the Throne; and on the left side, four Nobles of State: All of
them dressed in Princely Apparel, sit so low, that they can just look on the
Ground of the Throne. Behind the Counselors, Nobles of State, and Lords allied
in Blood, stand about three hundred of the other Nobility of Japan, which
encompass the Throne like a Half Moon.

Costly Roof of the Japan Emperors.
The Roof under which the Emperor sits, is covered with Plates of Gold: At each
of the two Corners lies a great Dragon Couchant, of massy Gold. The Cieling
represents all manner of Imagery, wrought in Gold, and in some places adorned
with Precious Stones. This Covering rests on four thick Columns, no less
beautiful than mavelous: The first is adorned with the Pictures of the
Heavenly Luminaries; the second, with all manner of known Beasts which live on
the Earth; on the third are wrought Fishes, and all other Creatures that reside
in the Water; on the fourth, are inlaid Fiery Dragons and Serpents of Gold.

How the Japan Kings honor the Emperor, like Slaves.
Between the two outward Pillars come one half Year all the Kings that inhabit
the West part of Japan; and the other, those of the East, and one by one throw
themselves down, with rich Presents, on the second Step upwards that leads to
the Throne: For by three Steps you ascend to a square place, whose utmost
Corners bear the two foremost Pillars. Right forward rise the Steps which
ascend to the Throne, which being seven in number, are all covered with rich
Tapestry. By the King that lies with his Face flat on the Ground, are two of
his Nobility, in the same posture, on the first Step; and behind them, the
Kings Private Guard-Man lies, in the humblest posture that may be.

No Japan King, how powerful soever he be, may bring into the Emperors Inner
Court above three Servants.

The Emperors Apparel*
The Emperor sits in a Suit embroidered with Gold, with his Legs crossways
under him: This Coat, which covers his Under-Garment, is clasped together a
little below his Chin, and the rest open before, so that the Lappets thereof
hang on each side of his Breeches. Between the gaping of it appears a broad
Girdle, stifned with Gold, and beset with Pearls and Diamonds. On his Head he
wears a little Golden Crown, which rises aloft with three spiring tops.

Japan Government, how.
BY this Splendour and State may easily be judged the ground of the Japan
Government, namely, To bring the Power of the Empire into one sole Monarchs
Hands, of whom all Persons are in fear.

Their Emperor never appears, but he is dreaded for his Power, and reverenced
for his Magnificent Splendour, which so dazzles the Eyes of the Beholders, that
no Subject, nay Prince, or King, that does not fear and tremble at his
Authority; much less dare they offer to Plot or Rebel against him. And indeed,
who would not be terrified, where the Sword being drawn, punishes the least
Offense offered against the Supreme Power; and destroys not only the
Malefactor and his whole Family, but his Relations to the third Generation? Who
would not be afraid of such a Commander, before whom the powerfullest Kings in
Japan fall down on the Earth? So that Japan is by his Strictness and great
Power kept in good Order; whereas otherwise these People are subtle, and stout
enough to plot and undertake great Designs, and in their Performance to undergo
the greatest Torments, and look upon the cruellest Deaths.

Joy wished to the released Hollanders.
AFter the Imprisoned Hollanders were by Sicungodonne discharged in the
Emperors Name, they received Order to go to the place where they waited first,
being wished Joy for their happy deliverance by Poechennemondonne, besides
other Persons of Quality that attended the Court. Lastly, the Ambassador
Elserak's Retinue came also to wish them Joy, and desired them all in his Name,
and likewise the Merchant Paul Cornelison Veer, to go to the Dutch Inn, whilst
he took leave of some of the Council, to wash away the Sorrows they had
suffered during their Imprisonment in Jedo.

Elserak's Journey from Jedo to Nangesaque.
THe four and twentieth of December, Elserak went with his released Hollanders
out of Jedo, and riding that day seven Leagues, lodged in Cawasacca: From
thence he traveled as follows: From Cawasacca, through Cammagowa, Fundaga,
Taska, where he dined, Fovissauwa, Tamra, Banio, and Firaski, he came against
the Evening to Oiso, being twelve Leagues Journey: Going from thence, he found
a troublesome way through the Mountain Toukery; so that he traveled scarce six
Leagues, and lodged in Odauro, a stately City at the Foot of that Mountain. The
next day he went as far again: For after having dined in Faukeney, where on the
hanging of the Mountain lies the pleasant Village Faccone, he came late in the
Evening through Jammakak and Scabary, to Missima: From Missima he traveled to
Nomatz; and from thence, through Farri Jussiwarri, over the River Fisicaw, to
Cambaro, where he refreshed himself; and viewing Ini and Okis, staid at
Jesares, having traveled thirteen Leagues that day. Then they viewed the
famous City Surunga, the Town Miriko, the Villages Ocambe, Tovisjeda, and
Simanda; and crossing over the River Oyengauwa, lodged in Kaneia.

Elserak's Journey farther.
Next day the Ambassador Mr. Elserak traveled along the Foot of the Mountain
Comi, whose Top is crowned with lofty Cedars, and saw in the way as he passed
the Villages Nisaca and Kakingow, refreshed himself at Foucorai, saw many
Rarities at Mitske and Nagaisum, lost some time before he could be Feried over
the River Terni, met with diverse Woods and Forests between Terni and Tannama,
where staying a Night, he went by Daybreak to the Villages Meisacca, Arei,
Straski, and Itagawa; and dining in Arei, he afterward viewed the beautiful
City Josinda: Then leaving Astanamica on the left Hand, he traveled through
Goi, and staid that Night at Accosacci.

On the first of January, Anno 1644. going on forwards, the first Village he
came to was Fuitzawa, from whence he came to the great City Occosacki; so
passing on through the Villages Siriomi and Narromi, to Mia. This City lying in
a Bay of the South Sea, is very Populous, and has many stately Buildings.
Opposite to it, lies Quano, where he rested, and afterward went through the
Villages Tonuda, Jokeitz, Owaka, Oiebakits, Zono, Isacuts, the City Cammiammy,
and lodged, after having traveled eleven Leagues, at Siceonosiro. Then he
Posted thirteen Leagues further, and by the way saw the pleasant Village Sacca,
Ferried over at Jocatangauwa to Sintzamma, situate on the Shore of the River;
and having passed by the Foot of the Mountain Coetsekajamma, dined at Minacutz;
from whence traveling on, he passed another Ferry at Jacatungauwa, and so
through the Village Itzibe, came and staid a Night in Cusatz, shaded in the
middle of a pleasant Grove, through which he rode to the River Osacci, which
brought him into the great Lake of Meaco, on whose Shore, in the middle of a
Bay, lies Jesi, a considerable City; and about two Miles further, on a
Promontory, Oets, bordered by the forementioned Lake. In Oets he eat fresh Cod,
whose taste agreed with those in England and Holland. Toward Evening Elserak
entered the City Fissima, famous for the stately Palace in which the Emperor
Taicosama kept his Court. Taking Shipping at Fissima, he left Meaco, and
sailing by Sonda, saw Achas on the right side, and Firaskatta on the left, and
at last landed at Osacca, sixteen Leagues distant from Fissima: So that Elserak
in twelve days time had traveled a hundred and forty Leagues; for so far Jedo
lies distant from Osacca. The redeemed Hollanders also spent twelve days in
going a hundred thirty two Leagues, from Namboe to Jedo.

But Elserak staid six days in Osacca.

NOt far from this City (as generally through all Japan) were seen several
Burying-places, or Tombs, on which the Japanners bestow great Cost and Charges,
as indeed most People do in Europe: Wherefore the Heathens accounted them
barbarous that misused dead Corpse: Of which the Greek and Latin Writers accuse
the Lotophagi, The strange Dealings and Cruelty of some People, used to their
dead Corpse.
which threw their Dead without Chests or Coffins, into the Sea; judging it to
be all one, if they rotted in the Earth, or whether they were consumed by Fire,
or decayed in the Water. The Sabeans cast their deceased Friends, nay their
Kings dead Bodies, on the Dunghils. The Taxili, Iberi, and Brachmans gave
departed Corpse to the Crows and Ravens to eat. This Custom also was observed by
the Barchaei; but only to Valiant Men, that were slain in the Wars: Those that
died a natural Death, they burnt. The Parthians gave the Flesh of the Dead to
Dogs, only burning the Bones. The Hyrcanians in their Lifetime bred up great
Mastiffs, that when they died they might be eaten by them. The Essedons brought
their departed Friends Bodies out at their Doors, where calling their nearest
Relations together, they cut the Corpse asunder; so mixing and boiling it
amongst Sheeps Flesh, they eat it, as a Solemn Funeral Feast. The Massagetes
carbonado'd their Dead also, and eat them. The ancient Jeren accounted it
Religious to feed upon the Flesh of their Deceased Friends, Parents, and
Relations. The Dervices slew all their Men and Women before their Altars, when
they came to seventy years of age. The Hyperboreans made Feasts for their dead
Bodies, hanging Garlands about their Necks, at last throwing them from the
Rocks into the Sea. On the Island Code, those that attained to sixty years were
forced to drink Poison, because their Provisions should not grow scarce. The
Caspians, so soon as their Fathers and Mothers were seventy years old, locked
them into a Chamber, or drove them to desolate and uninhabited Wildernesses,
that there they might die of Hunger.

Remarkable Ceremonies used about the burning of Beasts.
BUt although these People wanted Humanity, acting such unnatural things with
their Dead; yet others have bestowed vast Charges on their Funerals; nay some
have not stuck with profaneness to erect Monuments for their Beasts, of which
Lacys was one, who with great Ceremony Entombed a Goose, that whilst it lived
would not go from him. Alexander the Great made a sumptuous Feast at the Death
of his Horse Bucephalus. The Emperor Angustus, and after him Adrianus and
Commodus, built every one for their dead Horses a stately Marble Tomb. Cimon
and Xantippus, famous Generals amongst the Greeks, Interred their Dogs with
Funeral Ceremonies. And nothing was more usual and common amongst the
Egyptians, than to take dead Cats, Crows, and Cranes, and having Salted and
Imbalm'd them, to wrap them in fine Linen, and in a Coffen Interre them.

Japan toomes or burning places


Of Men.
Yet far greater Cost was bestowed on the Burying of Men. How famous is the Tomb
which Artemisia erected for her deceased Husband Mausolus? The Stones thereof
were all Marble; it contained in the Circumference four hundred and eleven
Foot, and five and twenty in Height, surrounded by twenty six curiously
engraven Pillars. The famous Architects, Scopas, Briar, Timotheus, and
Leocares, had scarce finished every one their Parts, when Artemisia died, after
having burnt the Bones of her Husband to Powder, and drank them up, and spent
all her Revenues on the beforementioned Structure.

Who has not heard of the famous Pyramids, which were the Burying-places for
the Kings of Egypt? of which three are yet remaining: The greatest is square,
and runs up sloaping; yet on the top so broad, that there may stand fifty Men:
The breadth from one corner to another, at the bottom, being three hundred
twenty four Paces, and rising aloft with two hundred and fifty Steps, every
Step five Foot high, and each Foot nine Inches long. At each of the four
Corners is a low Descent, to which none can go but stooping. Peter Belloon
relates, That he found this Pyramid, Anno 1548. built within after this manner:
Creeping through a narrow Passage, with a Wax Candle in his Hand, he came into
an empty Room, where turning on the left Hand, they found a spacious Place, to
which a curious Gallery led the way: The Gallery was paved with great
Free-stones, curiously polished, without Steps, so that he was forced to
support himself by the Rails on both sides, after which manner he ascended
sixteen Paces; at the end of which appeared a handsome square Chamber, in which
stood a Chest of twelve Foot long, five high, and as many broad, without a
Cover, hewn out of one entire piece of black Marble, wherein the Egyptian King
lay Interred that built this Pyramid: Besides these, he found several other
Apartments, and also a Well filled with Stones.

Moreover, the Athenians made so much ado about the Burying of their Dead, that
they condemned ten Commanders, because they neglected to do that Office to two
departed Soldiers.

The Hebrews neglected not to bury their Enemies.

The famous Roman Orator Paulus accounts it Death for those that dig up dead
Bodies out of the Ground.

Alexander the Great kept so magnificent a Funeral in Babylon for Hephestion,
that the Charges amounted to six hundred Tun of Gold.

Furthermore, the Ancients bestowed great Sums of Money on Pillars, Images,
Coffins, Imbalmings, and other strange Ornaments, with which they adorned the
Burying-places, every one according to his Capacity. This ancient Custom is yet
observed amongst the Japanners, Japanners burn their Dead.
where the Bodies being burnt after the Roman manner, they lay the Ashes under
stately Tombs.

It is certain, that the Romans have not always burnt their Dead; for their
ancient Law commanded, Bury none in the City, nor burn none. Cornelius Sylla, a
Roman General, was the first that ordered his Body to be burnt, fearing some
might out of revenge do to him what he had done to Marius, whose Bones he
dug up, and threw into the River Anienis. After that, the Romans used only
Funeral Pyres; which Custom decayed and became void in the Emperor Antoninus
his Reign, he commanding again, That the Dead should be buried in great State,
and have costly Tombs erected over them.

Their remarkable and strange Ceremonies used about the Dead.
The Roman Pride in those Affairs, the Japanners have taken an exact Pattern by:
for when a Person dies, they set the Corpse on a Bier, with his Head bowed
forwards, and his Hands folded together, in a praying Posture, clad in White,
over which hangs a Paper Coat, pasted together, whereon is written the Religion
of that Idol whom the deceased honored and worshipped. In this posture four Men
carry it out of the City to the Fire; then a great number of his Relations and
Friends, which attended the Corpse, stand round about the Fire, and call a whole
Hour together on the Name of the Idol, whether Amida, Xaca, Canon, or any
other, to whose Service in his Lifetime the Departed was most devote; whilst
the Bonzies play, making a horrible noise, by striking on Copper Kettles and
Basins. The Pit wherein the Fire is made, is square, hung round about with
Mats, and has an Entrance that opens toward the four Winds: The Pit it self
filled full of Wood, which is covered with a Sail. On both sides thereof stand
Tables, filled with Meats, all dressed in Blood, and Vessels filled with
Perfumes; and next them, lie great Heaps of Sweet-wood. When the Bier with the
Corpse approaches, they fasten a long Rope about it, on which every one that can
come near lays his Hand, and call all together on the Name of the Deceased's
Idol. Thus they carry the Body three times about the Pyre, on the Shoulders of
four Men: At last setting the Bier with the Corpse on the Pile of Wood, the
chief Bonzie waves a lighted Torch three times over the dead Bodies Head; which
done, he throws it away; but it is taken up again by the nearest of the
Deceaseds Relations, of which one stands on the East, and the other on the West
side of the Bier. Three times they give it from one to the other over the
Corpse; then they set Fire on the Pile of Wood, whilst others that stand next to
them pour Oil and Essences thereon; so that the Flame suddenly ascends the Sky,
and consumes the dead Body to Ashes.

Mean while, the Children and nearest Relations go to the Tables, kindle the
Vessels with Perfumes, and show Worship to him that is burnt: Which done, every
one returns home; only the Common People that followed the Corpse, make
themselves merry about the Fire, with the Meat that stands on the two Tables by
the Funeral Pit.

The next day the nearest Allies return again to the Fire, and there gather the
Ashes, Teeth, and Bones into a gilded Urn, which carrying home, they set in a
private Chamber, and cover with a rich Cloth. Seven days together they mourn,
accompanied all the time with some of the Bonzies, who receive great Rewards
for the time they spend in such Services. On the seventh day the gilded Urn is
Interred without the City, in the place where the Body was burnt; which done,
they spare no Cost nor Charges in erecting a stately Monument.

Description of the Japan Burying-places.
First great Stones are laid over the gilded Urn, sometimes three-square,
sometimes after an oval fashion, and at other times with several Corners. The
Sides thereof are Engraven with curious Imagery; either a Lion-Rampant, making
toward a Japanner, that holds his Swords in his Hand, ready to resist him; or
of Armed Men, deeply engaged in a Battle; or else of Flowers, which are
commonly the Graves of Women. On these Stones are square or round Marble
Pillars, on which are engraven in Japan Characters, his Birthday, his Life,
Employment, and other Achievements, and the time of his Death, whose Bones lie
there Interred.

Next these Graves are to be seen the Representation of the Idol worshipped by
the Deceased, which are generally cut to the life out of Marble. Then are there
Men and Women's Pictures, sitting after the Japan manner, with their Legs across
under them, every one dressed in fashionable Apparel; the Men holding their
Hands together in a praying posture: The Women, on the contrary, hold theirs
asunder, and look side-ways over their Shoulders.

Description of Siquani, the deceased Childrens Idol.
MOreover, you do not only meet with very costly Tombs in Japan, but also
large Temples dedicated to their Gods that rule over the Dead.

Not far from Osacca is a stately Temple, where the Idols Jene and Siquani are
worshipped by all Mourners. This Idol Sequani sits on a round Pedestal, covered
with a Scollopp'd Cushion adjoining to which, a silver Parrot appears on a
Perch. The Face of the Image represents a Youths; the Hair of the Head tied
behind with a String of Pearls, one Lock being curled, standing upright: His
four Arms are covered with wide Sleeves, full of sparkling Stars: About his
right Arm a Serpent is twisted, whose Head he holds aloft in his Hand: From the
Elbow of this Arm grows another, which embracing a young Child, squeezes it
against his Breast: In his left Hand he holds a Scymiter, in a ready posture to
fight: Half from the left Arm appears a second, with the Hand downwards,
holding a round String with Beads. The Child looks steadfastly toward the
Sword, with his Hands folded together, and with his Legs across under him, sits
on Siquanies wide Breeches.

But the Idol Jene is held in great Adoration by the tenth Sect of the Bonzie.
He sits in State on a High Altar, which is curious to behold; for at every
corner stands a square Pillar, a little distance from the Altar, and is joined
Arch-wise to the uppermost Ledge thereof, which is engraven with Stars, and
other Curiosities, and the Spaces betwixt, full of Japan Characters. On every
corner of the Altar stands a flat Dish; only behind the Idol, toward the
right side, stands a deep Platter, in which Perfumes are continually burnt. The
Plates serve to hold the Money which the People offer. In the middle, Jene sits
on a round Scollop'd Cushion, being represented with four Bearded Faces, the
Heads whereof are all joined together behind: He wears a Golden Crown, with
seven Spires, on whose tops are round Balls full of Diamonds. On his Breast
hangs a double String of Pearls, and at the end thereof a Rose of Diamonds: His
left Arm he holds aloft, and his folded Hand grasps a Staff, which he sticks
into a Sun: From this Arm hangs a second downwards, in the Hand holding a
pleited Garland. In the uppermost right Hand is a Japan Plant; but that which
points downwards, thrusts a Golden Staff into the Smoke over the Perfuming
Vessel.

Idol Jene rules over ancient deceased People.
This their Idol, as they say, rewards Good and Bad after Death: To him are the
Souls of aged and married People committed: Wherefore those that mourn for
their Fathers, Mothers, Wives, Husbands, or any other near Relations, come in
great numbers to this Temple, to offer for the Departed Souls on Jene's Altar.

Jene's Temple.
Moreover, this Temple is always kept locked; for the Image stands in an open
place, under the azure Canopy of Heaven, between the Temple and the Bonzies
Habitation, which look after the performance of their Divine Service to Jene.
Before the Temple is a square Portal, on whose Roof at each end rise two
Spires, of an exceeding height. On one side lies the Temple-Grove, which with
pleasant and shady Trees takes up a great deal of Ground.

This Ceremony and Custom of the Japanners, used about their Funerals; the
burning of their Dead out of the City, costly Burying-places, and Offerings for
the Deceased Souls, acknowledge a great age, and were used by most of the
People that inhabit the Earth; for long before the Birth of our Savior the
Celtes used to burn their Dead: So did the Germans, Belgians, Gauls, Spaniards,
and Britains. The Indians and Romans also had the same Custom. Of the
Teutonicks and Gauls, Lib. 5. Histor.
the Greek Writer Diodorus Siculus relates, That burning their dead Bodies,
they threw Letters into the Fire to them, which they believed were read by the
Departed. In Hispani.
Appianus Alexandrinus tells us of the Spaniards, That they placed the dead
Body of their General Variatus, richly adorned, on a great Pile of Wood, Lib.
15. Geog.
and burnt it. Strabo and Solinus acknowledge, That this Burning of the Dead
has been a Custom amongst the Indians above two thousand years; but without
any particular Ceremony or Charge: Whereas the Romans, on the contrary, spent
vast Sums of Money on Perfumes, Sweetwood, Clothes, Lib. 12. Cap. 28.
Pots with Silver and Gold, and other Riches. Pliny makes mention of the
Emperor Nero, who cast into one of those Fires more sweet smelling Herbs, and
costly Perfumes, than the whole Country of Arabia Felix could produce in a
Year: Gall. Lib. 6.
These are the Words of Julius Caesar; The Gauls throw all into the Fire, which
was acceptable to them in their Lifetime, as Beasts, nay, Servants and
Hirelings, which were known to be beloved by them, were burnt with their dead
Lords.

Moreover, though the Lacedaemonians, according to the Laws of Lycurgus, buried
their Dead in the City, and near the Churches, yet it was forbidden by other
Grecians.

In a Field not far from Athens was the Burying-place of the Athenians, full of
Posts and Pillars, on which, the Names of the Deceased were Engraven. In the
time of the Consul Cnejus Duillius, the Romans made a Law, by which every one
was commanded to bury their Dead, either near the Flaminian or Latin way, or
elfe in his own ground near Rome. Nay the Emperor Adrianus ordered, That any
one that made a Grave in any City belonging to the Power of Rome, should
forfeit two hundred Crowns; yet notwithstanding, sometimes the Ashes of some
Generals that had Conquered their Enemies, were buried in the Marketplaces,
which honor was done to the Emperor Trajan in Rome.

Elseraks Voyage from Osacca to Nangesaque.
BUt the Ambassador Elserak, after six days stay in Osacca, took Shipping on
the tenth of January, Anno 1644. and at Evening came to Anchor before the
Village Sangya, three Leagues distant from Osacca, where he was forced to stay
two days, by reason of contrary Winds, and then setting Sail, ran in the Dusk
of the Evening into the Haven of Fiungo; after that, he had a fresh Gale, with
which he passed by Swoja, Tackessima, Akas, and Firmensi, about Sunset they
were opposite to Muro; but Sailing on all Night, he reached to the end of fifty
Leagues in twenty four hours. In the Morning he discovered Bignatum, where he
Anchored. Then he left Mewarri, Tantonomi, Jocosimi, Caminagari, and Camro on
their Starboard, and the little Islands Syriais, Caroto, Szuwa, Jowe, and the
mighty Island Tonsa on their Larboard.

Apparel of the Inhabitants of Tonsa.
THe Inhabitants of Tonsa differ a little in their Apparel from the other
Japanners, the Men wear a long Cap, whose top hangs over their Faces, about
their Shoulders a loose Furred Cotton Coat, over a Silk under-Coat, their
Middle girt with a broad Girdle, in which they take great Pride, it being
richly Embroidered, one end whereof hangs over their Belly almost to the
ground. The Women of any quality carry continually a Fan in their Hand; on
their Shoulders having a thin Cotton Cloth folded together, and made fast on
their Breasts; which hangs behind half way down their Coats, their Girdles also
of Silk or Cotton, according to their Estates, are Pleited together: As for
their remaining Apparel, it is like that of all other Japan Women.

Elserak arrives at Nangesaque.
THe sixteenth of January, about midnight, Elserak came to an Anchor before the
Village Camenosacci, from thence he Sailed to the little Island Mocko. Then the
Wind coming contrary, and in regard he could gain but little by Rowing, he Rode
three days at Anchor; then setting Sail again, he entered that Evening the
Haven of Simonisacci, and the next day dropped Anchor at Aymissima; here he
stayed but little time, but went on so successfully, that late in the Evening
he came up with Firando, which passing by, he ran into the Channel of Zetta,
and on the four and twentieth of January Arrived at Nangesaque, where on the
Island Disma he found the Servants of the East India Company in good health and
condition.

Advice to the East India Company, concerning the redeemed Hollanders.
John Van Elserak the Ambassador, thus come to Nangesaque, sent advice of the
ten released Hollanders to Cornelius Vander Liin Governor in Batavia, who found
the business to be of so weighty a concern, that he Writ to the East India
Company in the United Netherlands, that setting out the Ketch Breskens, to
discover Tartary, it fell upon the Japan Kingdom Nassame, where they fired
several Guns in the Haven of Namboe, for which the Commanders of the Ship going
Ashore in their Boat, were taken Prisoners, and carried to Jedo, and were at
last (notwithstanding they were to suffer Death according to the Japan Laws)
released. The Emperor, who had (during the Hollanders Imprisonment in Jedo)
been very sick, was on Elserak's Arrival there, restored to his former health,
whom he found very well disposed, and in a good humor toward him, which proved
very luckily for the Imprisoned Hollanders. The Emperor granting them his
Pardon, because he found, that their offense was committed rather out of
ignorance than wilfulness.

Find it convenient to send an Embassy, in return of thanks to the Japan
Emperor.
THe East India Company took this Letter into serious consideration, and at
last concluded to requite the Japan Emperor by a peculiar Embassy for his Mercy
shown to the Imprisoned Hollanders, and his usual civility to their People and
Commerce at Nangesaque. To make the Embassy the more acceptable, they sent the
Emperor for Presents, two Brass-Guns that carried a Shot of forty Pound weight,
with Rammers, Spunges, and Charging-Ladles, a great Looking-Glass in an Ebony
Frame, surrounded with small Looking-Glasses in Silver; nine Pieces of fine
Cloth, of several Colors; one great Prospective Glass, enclosed in a Gold
Enammell'd Case, and one Surratish Alcative.

On this Order from the United Netherlanders, Cornelius Vander Liin, Governor
in Batavia, rested not, but Consulting with the Lords Francis Caron, Charles
Reinerson, and Garret Demmer, concluded on the following Order, the seven and
twentieth of June, Anno 1649. according to which Orders written down, the
Ambassador Peter Blockhoffe, sent to Japan in the Ketch Robin, was to carry
himself: The Contents these.

Orders given by the Indian Council, according to which the Ambassador must
carry himself to the Japanners.
STeer your Course directly for Japan, and put not in for Formosa, nor any
other Country, because it is already late in the Year, that you may not loose
the usual Trade-Winds. In your Voyage, examine the Ships Company for
Papist-Books, Pictures, or any other Trifles belonging to the, Roman Religion;
and the more, because the Japan Council strictly Examined if the Ship Breskens
had not brought Portugal-Priests from the Manilla's: When you come near the
Japan Shore, you will get Waiters on Board, which you must entertain civilly.
The Order which the Japan Governors or Commanders give you, and also what the
Interpreters and Servants to the East India Company, on the Island Disma,
counsel you, you shall observe, and not follow your own Inventions.

When you are ready to go to Jedo, Clothe your Men in Blue Serge, which Apparel
let them wear all their Journey, except when you go to any Japan Lord, or
through a great City; then let your Attendance put on their Pink Colored Cloth
Suits: When you go to speak with the Emperor or Complement any of the Council,
then let your Retinue wear their best and richest Liveries, being White and
Red.

Be careful that you are not curious to see strange Novelties, except you are
invited to it by Persons of Quality: At your first Arrival at Nangesaque, make
the reason of your Embassy known to the Governors there, and ask Advice of Dirk
Snoek, and Antony Brookhurst, and follow the counsel of the Japan Interpreters.
You must learn the Words of the chief cause of your Embassy perfect, that you
may say them by Rote; because when you appear before Persons of Quality, they
privately Write them down, and afterward modestly ask the same Question again,
to see if the last agree with the first.

Moreover, excuse your self to the Japan Lords, that you are a Stranger, and by
that means, not knowing their Customs, entreat their favorable assistance
thereof for the East India Company, and Governor at Batavia, depend solely upon
their Friendship: Show them the Inventory of the Presents sent to the Emperor;
with Entreaties, to find a means to convey them to him; proffer the Governor of
Nangesaque some of them.

If you should be asked at Nangesaque, or in the Emperors Court, or elsewhere,
In whose Name you perform this Embassy? What Authority and Power the East India
Company has? What their Employment? If they have the Government in their own
Hands? If the Presents came from the Netherlands or from Batavia? If they are
only sent to the Emperor, or also to his Council? Give them a short Answer to
all their Questions; As for example, The East India Company consists of the
Eminentest Persons of the several Cities in the United Netherlands; Drive a
vast Trade through all the World, with the great Stocks that are laid up by the
Company; They keep not one constant Government, but change sometimes: Add here,
That you were sent thither by the said Company, to officiate in that Embassy,
and to give the Presents made in the Netherlands to the Emperor; besides
several Pieces of Cloth that were to be given to the Japan Lords, according as
the Governor on the Island Disma shall judge, what every one likes best: When
you speak, use but few Words, when with silence you cannot give satisfaction;
for otherwise Silence is no where so great a Virtue as in the presence of the
Japan Lords. Present those Lords high that use to give Gifts to the East India
Company, though you give away all the European Clothes.

Concerning the Peace concluded between the United Netherlands, Spain, and
Portugal, which they very much feared would be ill Resented by the Japan
Emperor, the Spaniards and the Portuguese being his mortal Enemies: You may
tell them, That according co the Relation spread some time since in Japan, all
Christendom being tired out with a long War, were now inclined to Peace; so
that France and Spain had made a League of Amity with the Emperor of Germany,
in which League were included, Denmark, Poland, and Italy; only France and
Portugal were at Wars against Spain, yet so, that two Mediators were chosen for
the deciding of the Differences, which without peradventure would be done in a
short time, having already by woeful experience tasted the Cruelty of a long
War; whilst the Turk, a sworn Enemy to all Christians, had made himself Master
of several Fortresses, Cities, and Territories. The Peace which the Christians
make amongst themselves, is only to join their divided Forces, and so United,
engage the Turks Army which constantly lies on the Christians Borders.

The remaining Orders which Blockhoffe was to observe were these: You must well
consider of your Words before you speak them, and excuse your self, that being
a Merchant you cannot give any great account concerning State Affairs. The
Japanners are subtle enough to know, that you do not come thither to give them
an account of the Netherlanders Government; in which Relation, some sought to
gain Praise, but indeed had like to have spoiled the business of the East India
Company by it; for indeed the Japanners despise a Commonwealth, and esteem no
Government but sole Monarchy.

When you are invited to Dinner to any Nobleman, be sparing in Drinking, and
also of your Words; speak little, when with silence you cannot give
satisfaction; only the returning of Thanks for good Entertainment, or Benefits
received, repeat six or seven times over: Keep no Feasts, because the
Conversation with Japanners is dangerous; yet if any Person of Quality has a
mind to Netherland-Meat, and desires to Eat thereof, refuse him not, but
provide all things fit for his Entertainment, without sparing of Cost; and then
go you and sit at the lower end of the Table, and thank your Guest for the
Honor he has done you by his Company.

But to Citizens and Merchants observe your Authority as beseems your Office;
follow the Advice of the Interpreters, which continually bear you company, and
tell you how you must converse with Persons of Quality, and the rather, because
the Interpreters are Politick-men, on which you may depend, and because their
own welfare consists upon the good Estate of the East India Company.

What Feast the Ambassador must prepate for the Japan Lords.
In the Interim, when you are returned from Jedo to Nangesaque, and the
Presents accepted by all Persons, then prepare a stately Dinner for the prime
Japan Commanders there; you must on your Return at Jedo, Miaco, or Osacca,
furnish your self with Wine, Salmon, Habberdine, Carps done in Rice, and a
Crane, although he cost seventy Tail (every Tail is an English Crown) all which
Meats must be well Salted, and Dressed after the Japan manner; of which the
Interpreters take great care.

So soon as you Land at Nangesaque, you shall bespeak for your self and every
one of your Retinue, three pair of Buskins, and six Pair of thin Shoes of
Drefs'd Buck-Skin, to use in your going and coming from Court; for the
Japanners lay costly Mats on their Floors, which never are trod upon with
Shoes; Boots and Spurs are not used in Japan.

Your self shall wear no Weapon, but your People must every one wear a
Silver-Hilted Rapier, which they are carefully to preserve from Dirt and Rain,
that the beauty thereof may not be gone when your People Wait in the Emperors
Hall, whilst you are admitted to private Conference with the Emperor.

In Osacca furnish your self with Umbrello's made of Yarn, every couple of your
Retinue must have one of them, but each an Oiled Paper Cloak against the Rain,
which in dry Weather are laid in Wooden Chests: You shall likewise buy in
Osacca as many Waxed Lethern-Portmanteaus as your Goods require: The Blankets,
Cushions, and Quilts are in the day time Packed up, and carried on Horses, but
at Nights spread on a Floor in your Inn to Sleep upon.

From the Accounts kept by those that Travel yearly to the Emperor, you may
guess what you have to pay for the Meat which you have in your Inn; namely, to
give them twenty Guilders when they ask ten, and a hundred when fifty.

Moreover, Peter Blockhoffe shall have the upper hand of all the Japan
Governors on Disma; and next the Merchants Dirk, Snock, Anthony Brockhurst, and
Andrew Frisius shall keep their places according to their old Custom; but
Blockhoffe is not to concern himself with the Trade, though it be requested
from him by the Japanners; for he may excuse himself, that he comes only to
officiate an Embassy to the Emperor. The usual Presents must be double-divided,
because last year, by an accident, they were not parted.

Before you go from Nangesaque to Jedo, desire the Governors there to give you
Letters of Recommendation to Sicungodonne, which when you give him, show him
the same Request as you did the Magistrates at Nangesaque; and humbly desire
him, that he would be pleased to direct you, how, in what manner, and to whom
the Presents must be given. Tell him that his Name is famous in all the
Netherlands for his courteous Services shown to the East India Company: Upon
the delivery of the Presents, none shall appear before the Emperor, but
Blockoffe and Frisius, your Retinue must stay in the Hall, as you will
understand from the Interpreters.

There has oftentimes by the Emperors Command been Order given for a
Mortar-Piece, which through urgent Occasions has been neglected; but now
acquaint him, that you have brought a Man (Experienced in that Art) thither for
the Emperors Service; besides the forementioned Presents for his Imperial
Majesty, you have good store of fine light colored, black and red Cloth,
besides Crown-Serges, ordinary Serge, and Damask, to bestow plentifully on his
Nobility. Excuse your self, that you give not richer Presents, because the
East India Company know not what was most acceptable to his Majesty and his
Council.

Before you appear to the Emperor, you will be Examined, What your Embassy is
for? Reply, For naught else, but to thank the Emperor for his kind Delivery of
the ten Hollanders, and to Extol his great Favors shown to the East India
Company in Japan. Andrew Frisius is ordered to be your Secretary, who is to
keep a Journal of all daily Observations and Passages of Remark, which deserve
to be Registered. John Hakkins shall be your Gentleman Usher, and to prepare
the Silver Vessel.

Take special care that none of your People debauch themselves with Drinking or
Whoring, but punish them severely; let your People keep their Nails Cut, their
Hair Combed, and wear clean Linen, and Wash themselves in all places they can
conveniently. The Load-stones which you have, the Physical Herbs, Spectacles,
Prospective-Glasses, Tent, Wine, Cheese, Dutch Butter, Brazile Wood, Italian
Earthen Ware, Barrels for Guns, and Multiplying-Glasses, give some to every one
that asks for them: The red Beads, give now and then to Noble-mens Children,
their Servants, or your Landlords, as a thing to remember you by.

Concerning the Lord of Firando, who is Indebted twenty five Thousand Guilders
to the East India Company, you must seriously advise about it with the
Interpreters, if we should not incur the Displeasure of the Nangesaquean
Magistrates; if the said Lord be Discharged from the Debt, because being
Impoverished by Fire, he is not able to Pay. It would at least be a Courtesy
that would Obliege the Lord of Firando; yet if the Interpreters should advise
the contrary, Blockhoffe must follow their counsel, but give order, that the
said Lord hereafter be no more asked for the Debt, as heretofore they had done
yearly.

Your best Apparel, Silver-Work, and all things else which are for a show, let
them not be seen in the Streets, at your Table, nor Lodging-Rooms, unless to
some Noble Japanners: Entreat by all means, that the Ship Robin may continue in
the Haven of Nangesaque, till you have done your Embassy to the Emperor; that
then you may come directly, without touching at Formosa or elsewhere, in her to
Batavia, and from thence to Holland, with the Fleet which goes thither in
December, that the East India Company may be informed by your self, concerning
your Affairs with the Japan Emperor.

Remember your self likewise, that you never come before any Person of Quality
with your Hat off, but to Common People you need not so much observe that
State. Lastly, Because Blockhoffe went sick Aboard, Andrew Frisius had strict
Order, that if Blockhoffe should happen to die by the way, to preserve his Body
by Embalming, that it might be seen by the Japanners that were so minded: For
the making of the Coffin, the Master of the Ship had Wood provided for that
purpose.

Frisius sent to succeed Blockhoffe, was to observe all the forementioned
Orders exactly: Mean while, Blockhoffe dying on the way between Batavia and
Japan, Frisius and Brookhurst Officiated the Embassy, according to the Relation
given you in the first Part.

An Embassy of Zacharias Wagenaer, to the Emperor of Japan.
SInce their being at Jedo, the Splendid Embassy of Zacharias Wagenaer is very
remarkable: The East India Company are much concerned for the Trade of Japan,
notwithstanding they in Traffic, deliver and receive Goods through all India,
and farther.

For the Javan Cities Bantam, Molassery, Charga, Bayas, Cuconu, Cherelas,
Charita, Cheregin, Labnan, Buanium, Iscbongoir, Parmam and Punctam, Truck for
Cormandel Cotton against Pepper, Cubebes, Storax, and Cardamoms.

Jortam lying opposite to the Island Madura, has a safe Harbor against all
Winds, and affords abundance of Rice, and Cotton-Yarn.

Banda, and the Islands Lontor, Gounongapay, Pouloway, Pouleron, and
Rossangayn; near which lie three uninhabited Isles, Poulomon, Poulocapel, and
Pouloswangay in five Degrees Southern Latitude; all these produce plenty of
Coco-nuts, Lemons, Oranges, and chiefly Nutmegs and Mace; so that they can
deliver yearly three Thousand five Hundred Sokkels of Nutmegs and Cloves, every
Sokkel reckoned a Hundred Pound of Holland Weight, and Twenty Pounds of Nutmegs
to one of Mace. The Trees whereon this Fruit grows, bear thrice a year.

The chiefest Plant, by the Bandances called Eyer Ponte, which signifies White
Water, is ripe in July and August. Whilst they gather their Nutmegs, the Water
is as white as Milk.

The second Fruit, by them called Monson Java, is ripe in March; the third and
smallest, named Conarg, in October; so that there is scarce any time in the
year but the Trees bear either ripe, or at least green Nuts.

These Islands barter for Jortan and Baleian Linen, Cormandel Clothes, wove
after the Maleian manner: and amongst Provisions in scarce Times, they rather
desire Rice than Silver or Gold.

Ternata is eight Leagues in circumference, has besides several Villages
uninhabited in times of War, three Cities, Gammalamme, the Residence of the
ancient King of Ternata; Maleye, now called Orange, and Tacomy, named
William-Stad. To Ternata belong also the Isles Machian, Motier, and Meau, all
like Ternata producing abundance of Cloves, for they afford yearly two thousand
Bars, every Bar reckoned to six hundred twenty five Pound; for which in Barter
they receive Cotton, Linen, and Rice.

Amboina was formerly taken by the Spaniards from the King of Ternata; but
Steven vander Hagen, a Dutch Admiral, Conquering Amboina, brought it under the
subjection of the Holland East India Company.

The Cloves which grow here are commonly gathered green in August, and dry away
at least twenty Pound in a hundred.

Batsian, taken from the Spaniard by the Vice Admiral Simon Horn, abounds with
Clove-trees, yet few Inhabitants to look after the gathering of them.

Achyn, the chief City for Trade in the North of Samutra, barters Pepper,
Diamonds, Gold, and Tin, against Negapatan, Surat, and Aracan Cotton, as also
against Elephants Teeth and Rice.

Before Achyn lies the Island Amacau; where they find Ambergreece.

On the East Side of Samutra lie spread a vast way in the Ocean the Islands
Jamby, Palmbam, Andregiro, and Campar.

Toward the South against Samutra, lie Priman, Passaimanticos, Baros, Bedi,
Dampin, and Manancabo; all surrounded by the Ocean, and yield great store of
Pepper, but the Island Jamby is the chief of them all, and produces, as most of
them do, besides Pepper, Benjamin, and Camphire.

Queda and Pera, lying about Malacca, in seven Degrees Northern-Latitude,
produce likewise good Pepper, which they exchange for Negatapan Cotton and Rice.

Manair, before the Promontory Comoryn in the Straights, between Ceylon and
Cormandel, affords Pearls.

Ceylon yields Cinnamon, Ginger, Ivory, Saffron, Pearls, and some Pepper.

Bisnager, Narsinga, and Cormandel, produce Diamonds, Pearls, Cotton, fine
painted Linen; with which, and Cotton together, the Portuguese used formerly
to lade a Carrack at St. Thomas's, to go to Malacca, where the said Commodities
are changed with the neighboring Indians for Provisions; and when by contrary
Winds the Carrack stayed behind, Malacca generally suffered Famine, as it
happened Anno 1602. when the English Admiral Lancaster Conquered a Carrack, and
bartered away the Cotton at Bantam against Pepper.

Moreover, Malacca uses to vend Opium, Flannel, Serges, red Cloth, Coral,
Rose Water, Saffrons, red Kersies, Glasses both to Drink in, and Look in, and
Paper.

The Islands Nicuber, lying in seven Degrees Northern-Latitude, between Ceylon
and Sumatra, afford abundance of Ambergris, given in exchange for Rice, and
all manner of Provisions.

The vast Kingdom of Pegu is twelve Degrees Northerly of Nicuber: The chiefest
Cities for Trade are Martabam, Fatty, Consuim, Cabban, Camland, Ava, and Berma;
where they drive a great Trade with Rubies and Civet, in exchange for
Masulipatan, Palicatan, and Bengala Linen, Drugs from Cambaya, Silk, Stuffs,
Mace, Nutmegs, Saffron, Rose Water, Copper, Quicksilver, Vermillion, and Coral.

Cambaya and Borneo produce Benjamin, Rice, and Pepper.

On the North of Cambaya lies the Golden Lais; on the East, Campa; where
Calambak, which is the same as Aloes, is weighed against Silver. Here also is
good Timber for the building of Ships.

Bengala has that Name from its Metropolis, cut through in the middle by the
mighty River Ganges, and has besides Bengala the Cities Satigam and Catigam,
lying Northward from Pegu in twenty Degrees, it produces Cotton-Clothes painted
with Flowers, white Linen, Ginger, Sugar, Wax, Rice, and Precious Stones.

The vast Island Borneo boasts of the Towns Banjarmassing, Lave, and Sukkedan:
where against Copper, Iron, Quicksilver, Gold, Glass, Woollen Clothes, Cotton,
Paper, and Chinese Money called Papis, they exchange rich Diamonds, the best
Camphire, Mirabolans, Sugar, Wax, Rice, Cinnamon, Tortoise-shells (very much
desired on the Coast of Cormandel) and the Bezoar Stone.

To the East of Borneo lies Patany, famous for the abundance of Pepper it
produces, and great Trade there driven with the Chinese, Siammers, and
Peguahs, Trucking for Cotton, woven after the Maleian manner, Bengala Clothes,
Woollen-Clothes, and Ryals of Eight.

Cochinchina jets Eastward against Bengala, and sells Gold, Pepper, Aloes, and
ordinary Silk-Stuffs, for Silver.

The Island Agano, ten Leagues from Cochinchina produces abundance of Pearls.

Meaco, Chincheo, Liampo, and Hitium Fenquoso, the chief Cities of the Province
of Matquiem, afford Pearls, Gold, Copper, Steel, Iron, Lattin, Tin, Lead,
Quicksilver, Vermilion, Musk, Civet, Amber, Brimstone, Rhubarb, China,
Camphire, Ginger, Sugar, Porcelin, raw Silk, Cotton, Linen, and Precious
Stones: in Barter for which they receive fine red Coral, Silver, Drugs which
grow on Cambaya, Wood from Timor, English Clothes, Opium, Talicatta Cottons,
Holland Linen, Ivory, Pictures with Landskips, Spanish Wine, Crystal Glasses,
Carpets, and all sorts of Kersies.

On the Islands Lequeo and Pequeo is much Gold.

Timor and Solor produce Sandal-Wood, for Silver and Cormandel Linen.

Siam affords Benjamin, Rubies, Gold, and abundance of Provisions; which they
exchange for all manner of Netherland Commodities.

Lohor, bordering to Siam, brings Aloes and Porcelin to Market.

Cambaya borders upon the Coast of Malabare: Here is the best Indigo, either
wrought or unwrought Cotton, Sugar, Ginger, Mirabolans, Wheat, Butter, and the
Plant Ingawa, which are Truck'd against Ivory, Sandal-Wood, Tortoise-shells,
Malabarian Cardamoms, Chinese Silk, Maldivian Coco's, Quicksilver, Allom,
Benjamin, Porcelin, Musk, Netherland Kerfres, and Saffron.

What Commodities are Vended in Japan.
To Japan the Chinese carry in their Jonks, raw Silk, white and red Gilems,
Glasses, Flannels, Sattins, Flaxen Linen, Liquorish, white and brown Sugar,
Cambodian Nuts, Caimans Skins, red Leather, Allom, Wax, Steel, Cotton,
Sublimat, Cassia Fistula, Spanish-Green, Tee, Porceline-colour, Camphire,
Calembak, Musk, Chinese Mats, Buck-skins, Combs, Cow-hides, Paper and Chinese
Books.

Concerning the Trade which the Hollanders drive in Japan, the following Matter
shall at large declare.

Orders given to the Ambassador Wagenaer to observe in his Embassy to Japan.
BUt to return: Zacharias Wagenaer being dispatched by the Governor Maetsuiker
and the Indian Council at Batavia to Nangesaque, on the eleventh July, Anno
1656. to dispossess John Bouchelion, he received the following Orders:

Bear always with the high Ambition and Pride of the Japanners, that you may
preserve their Favor: Sicungodonne the chief Speaker for the East India Company
at the Emperor's Court, desires to have Looking-glasses, Crystal Eyes,
Perspective-glasses, and Spectacles; take care that they are delivered to his
hands: without leave and consent of the Governor of Nangesaque do not go to
Jedo: You may make ready for your Journey the fifteenth and twentieth of
December, Sicungodonne having assured us, that before New-years-day, by the
Japanners called Songuats, and agrees with the thirteenth of February, you
shall have Audience at the Emperor's Court. In Osacca Present the Governor
Makido Sandosamma, whose Father is a great Favorite of the Emperor's. Of
Sandosamma you must desire a free Pass; he is a courteous Gentleman, and uses
to speak with all the Holland Ambassadors that pass through there, which is
against the custom of his Predecessor Souwosamma, who would never see them.
Forget not to Present also the new Council in Jedo. The Interpreter
Phatsiosaimon, who with the remaining Interpreters accompanies the Embassy,
must enquire of Sicungodonne what is best to be done. Forget not to Complement
the old Governor of Nangesaque, who being grown ancient has retired from all
Courtly Employments; and thank him for his former Courtesies done to the
East India Company; and also Present him with some Tent, which he has desired.
Enquire by the Interpreter Schescymon of Sicungodonne, what is best to be done
with the stately Surattish Alcatiff, of late repaired, and now on the Island
Disma? If it would be fit to be Presented to the Emperor? The Water-Engine
which his Imperial Majesty has asked for, will be ready to be sent the next
year. Dutch Seed and Plants grow in Japan
Moreover, we have received advice, that the Dutch Seed and Plants grow very
well in Sicungodonne's Garden, and are much admired by the Japan Council. Take
great care for the young Siam Apple Trees, that the Roots thereof be now and
then watered in the Ground, that so they may come safe to Sicungodonne's hands.
Let also your Head Surgeon, Hans Hunke, go with the Embassy to Jedo, that he
may inform the way how to ufe the Dutch Medicines against some Japan
Sicknesses, according to the Request of Sicungodonne: in whose House are
remaining eight Fowling-Pieces and a Pocket-Pistol, which for some reasons were
the last year judged to be unserviceable; let Sicungodonne keep two of them for
himself, and give order what shall be done with the rest. The Presents which
are to be given to the Emperor, his Council, and other Persons of Quality, are
by times, as the Hollanders Landlord and Interpreter think fit, divided at
Jedo, because thereby they may raise the value and esteem of them, and an
Inventory thereof delivered to Sicungodonne, who looking it over, alters it
diverse times. Moreover, Goods required by the Japan Lords.
there has been chiefly desired by Jaabaminosamma, Lord of Odoura an
Astronomer, three Pieces of white Velvet, and two costly Perspective-glasses;
the Councellor Botsokey, a green Thrum Blanket; the Councellor Matsondeiro
Issinocamy, five Pocket Looking-glasses, one Reading-glass, and three
Spectacles; the first Counselors Son Jusiensamma, a Piece of English Died
Damask, one Piece of white Velvet, and three Pieces of black Cloth-Serge; Mito
Siovangosamma, the Emperor's Uncle, five Strings of red Coral, and three pair
of Spectacles: of all which give to every one their desired Commodities. The
Emperor's Presents.
For the Emperor we have sent with you besides, rich Pieces of Plush, Padaways,
two great Copper Globes, a rare Looking-glass, and a live Casuaeris.

Description of the Bird Casuaeris.
This Bird is taken on Banda, and much bigger than a Crane, has brown Feathers,
but neither Wings, Tongue, nor Tail; his Breast is armed with an Oval Shield,
exceeding hard, his Neck like that of a Turkey, only that his moveable Comb
being red and blue, hard and stiff, of the thickness of a Man's Finger, stand
upwards athwart his Head, his Feet yellowish, are most like unto those of an
Ostrich. The most to be admired in it is, his devouring and evacuating that
which he has eaten, swallowing not only all that comes before him, but also
glowing Coals, which come cold from him again.

Wagenaer arrives at Nangesaque.
Wagenaer arriving at Nangesaque took possession of Bouchelion's Place; who
going Aboard of the Fly-boat called The Evening-Star, set Sail on the second of
October, Anno 1656. for Batavia. After which Joffiesamma, the new Governor of
Nangesaque, went to visit the Governor Wagenaer in the East India Storehouse
on the Island Disma; where he took great delight in the Garden behind the
Storehouse, being planted after the Dutch manner. Mean while Wagenaer prepared
himself to Complement the Emperor, the Governor giving him his own liberty,
when he pleased to go; so that he concluded to set forth on his Journey the
seven and twentieth of December. Is forced to put off his Journey because of
the foolish opinion of the Japanners concerning Day^.
But the Interpreters having a Custom to make the Hollanders Requests known to
the Governor Sacquemondonne the chief Magistrate, their Journey was put off,
Sacquemondonne telling them, that the twenty seventh of December was by the
Japanners accounted amongst the unlucky Days: Which Opinion has long reigned
amongst the Heathens.

The Romans and Greeks accounted those fatal Days on which their Country or
City suffered any mischance: yet some of them despised this foolish Fancy; for
Lucius Lucullus led his Army against Tigranes on the sixth of November, by the
Romans accounted unfortunate to begin any weighty matter upon; yet it so fell
out, that Lucullus with small Forces routed a great Army.

The Macedonians reckoned the Month of June to be fatal: notwithstanding
Alexander the Great slighted that idle Opinion, when in June he encountered
with the Persian King Darius.

Ventidius also was no way daunted to venture against Pacorus the Parthian, on
the same day whereon Crassus with a great Power of the Romans had been defeated
by the Parthians.

But Sacquemondonne had another opinion concerning the Times; he thereby seemed
to be careful of Wagenaer, and thought it convenient to put off the unfortunate
Day till the tenth of the Japan Moon, which agrees with the last day of the
European December: But the Governor still putting it off from time to time,
Wagenaer did not set out of Nangesaque till the ninth of January 1657.
Wagenaer's Journey for Jedo.
leaving the Government of the Island Disma to John Odgers and Meindert
Mestecker, Left Orders concerning the Netherland Storehouse
ordering them to take care that the Storehouse should be carefully looked
after, to keep out the Rain, and other Water from spoiling the Goods; that the
Book-keepers should keep no Fires in their Chambers, so to prevent all danger
that might happen, having understood before his departure, that a great Fire
had been at Jedo; that the Chinese Jonks which come to Coxenga with Fleets
consisting of thirty Ships at a time from Anhay and Chincheu to Japan, may
easily be prohibited, because they had dealt like Enemies with the Japanners,
by Sailing to the Manilla's; by which means the East India Company would reap
great benefits; for when the Chinese come often thither, then the Japanners
raise their refined Copper Bars, and their Camphire to a high rate. The
Camphire Trees grow most in the Japan Province Satsuma.

Is forced to stay at Osacca.
Whereupon Wagenaer taking Shipping arrived in twelve days at Osacca; where in
two days he provided all things necessary for his Journey by Land: but when
ready to set forth he received Order to stay in his House, the Day approaching
on which the former Emperor died, which was kept very strictly through all
Japan: After that, Wagenaer having already hired eighty five Footmen, and six
and forty Horses, to carry the Presents, and their other Luggage to Jedo, had
leave to depart.

Japanners Marry many Women.
AS the Japanners with great state and sorrow keep the Day of the Emperor's
death, so likewise their Ceremonies of Marriage are performed in as great state
and splendour, with unexpressible joy. It is the Custom in Japan, as in most
Parts of Asia, to Marry several Women; which Custom the Japanners have brought
from China, where a Man is not bound to one Woman.

This unlimited lasciviousness took place in Asia many Ages since. And who
knows not that the Persians and Medes, nay the Israelites themselves, and
among them the wisest of Kings, Solomon, were given over to that wanton Lust.

Where a Woman has many Husbands.
But if this Crime deserves to be punished, then we may condemn the foul Custom
observed by the ancient Arabs, Nebatheans, and Britains, namely, that one Woman
was common to a whole Family; to which when any one went, he set his Stick up
at the Door, as a sign, that at that time none might come in and concern
himself with her, on punishment of Adultery.

Some Moors, as also the Garamanties and Liminiri, Lay with the Women by the
hundred, and after five years the Children begotten out of such a mixture were
distributed, every man taking one which was most like him.

The Troglodites gave the betrothed Brides first to be known to the Bridegrooms
nearest Relations and Brothers.

Of some People about their Marriage.
Yet though the Japanners take as many Women as they will, yet they hold one as
their true and lawful Wife, which only sits with her Husband at Table, whilst
the rest are like Servants. The Children also which he gets by his Concubines,
at his Death get but very little of his Estate: for those that are born of his
lawful Wife inherit all; Which Custom is also derived from China; where the
Emperor, before the Tartar made himself Master of that Empire, Married besides
his Empress, thirty other Women, being the most beautiful that could be found
in all his Dominions of China: all which remained in the Palace till the
Emperors Death; when his Successor, after the Burial of the deceased Emperor,
Clothing the thirty Women in rich Apparel, carried them to his second Palace,
there placing every one on a stately Throne: whereon sitting with their Faces
covered, thirty Chinese Princes chosen by the Emperor, entered the Hall, every
one of them taking one of the said Women by the Hand, and instantly Married
them.

Strange kind of Marriage observed by the Japanners.
The Chinese and Japanners observe chiefly, that the Brides and Bridegrooms
differ not much in their Age, Estate, and Extract. The Betrothed are in the
Morning early carried in costly Coaches, drawn either by Oxen or Horses from
their Houses out of the City, accompanied with all manner of Vocal and
Instrumental Music to a high Hill, attended by a great number of People, and
sometimes are so crowded, that they are forced to have Soldiers with them to
clear the Way: After the Bridegroom's Coach* follow several Wayns laden with
Presents, with which he buys the Bride. Which Manner they have likewise brought
out of China: for there the Man gives to the new married Woman diverse Marriage
Goods; which she delivers to her Father or Mother, as a requital for the
bringing of her up; so that the chief Riches increase from the number of their
Daughters, and chiefly when they are beautiful.

The ancient Babylonians bringing their Daughters to Market at a certain time
of the year, sold them to those that proffered most: the Price was set
according to their Beauty, those that were handsomest yielding the best Rate;
and ordinary Faces were sold for lesser Sums: yet the homeliest also went off;
for the Money which was bestowed for the fairest, was given as Portions for the
hard-favor'd; so that they in stead of being bought, they purchased Husbands
for themselves.

Far more shamefully did the Phoenician Maidens order their affairs, when they
went into the Temple of Venus to proffer their Virginities to sale, and with
that Money so gotten, bought them Husbands.

The same Custom was observed by the Cyprian Maids, who for Money prostituted
themselves so long to Strangers, till they had gotten Wealth enough to purchase
Marriage with some of their election.

Nay, the Armenians had a Law, according to which the Maids in the ancient
Temple dedicated to the Goddess Anetis, whose Image was made of Massy Gold,
should at a set time prostitute themselves in common to all Men; after which
there were none but desired her in Marriage, that had been so consecrated to
the same Goddess.

The ancient Indians brought their Daughters into the Company of fine Youths,
that they might choose one out of the number, which in Strength, swiftness in
Running, Wrestling, and well-timberdness of Body exceeded the other.

The Cathaians observe the same manner, but upon inviolable promises, that she
will be burnt with her Husbands Body, if he chance to die before her.

The Indian Women also leap into the same Funeral Fire; and those that out of
fear do not go in to be burnt with their Husbands, are accounted dishonest.

The Laxamatees, near the Lake Meosis, may not Marry before they have slain an
Enemy: and also the Carmani may not betroth themselves before they have brought
an Enemy's Head to the King.

Roman and Greek Brides must bring Portions, but in Japan the Bridegrooms.
The ancient Romans and Greeks maintained quite another Custom than the
Japanners; for with them the Brides were to bring Portions to the Bridegrooms:
wherefore the Roman Consul gave the Daughters of the famous Generals, Cneius
Scipio, and Martus Curious, their Portions out of the Treasury, because being
poor they could not be Married according to their Birth.

The like did the Athenians to the Daughters of the valiant Hero Aristides.

But Solon and Lycurgus, both Greek Lawgivers, commanded strictly, That no
Bride should bring Money into the Bridegrooms Pocket.

The Germans took no Marriage to be lawful, unless the Man produced his
promised Estate: Which Law was also observed by the Biskiners.

The Egyptians never Married for Estates; for if the Woman brought any Riches
to the Man, then he, according to their Laws, was to be her Slave.

Moreover, the Lacedaemonians durst not seem to Marry for Money: wherefore those
were severely punished, that at Lacedemon Courted Lysander's Daughters, and
after the Decease of their Father forbore their Suit; which the Judge
interpreted thus: That they had not Courted the Persons, but their Money.

Just so it is in Japan, where the Man Marries not only a Bride without a
Portion, but must give her diverse Goods for Marrying of him: Which Custom is
likewise Extracted from China; where the Bride brings no Money to her
Bridegroom, though she carry all manner of Housholdstuff to his House, as
Stools, Chairs, Umbrello's, and other things, sufficient to fill up a small
Street; for it is all bought with the Money which the Bridegroom has given her.

Confirming of Marriages in Japan very remarkable.
Furthermore, the Japanners celebrate their Marriages in the following manner:
When the Bride approaches one side of the forementioned Hill, she gets out of
her Coach, and ascends the Steps that lead to the top thereof: On the other
side the Bridegroom gets up; both their Attendants wait below, only their
Parents, with some Musicians ascend the Hill also by divided Steps; for in the
middle thereof is a broad Rail, or Partition, both sides thereof on the top
adorned with Golden Balls, by which those that get up, hold fast. The
Bridegroom takes the right hand of the Bride when he goes up the Stairs, and is
followed by the Musicians: On the left-side the Bride walks up, accompanied
with her own and his Parents; on the top of the Hill their Parents stand behind
the Bride, and the Musicians at some distance behind the Bridegroom; the
Fathers and Mothers stand two and two under a Canopy, held over their Heads by
their Servants; the Musicians on the one side are very busy, sitting flat on
the Ground, and Play on a kind of Dulcimers, Citterns, Viols, but differing
both in shape and sound from the Europeans; others stand before great Copper
Basins hanging by Chains under a sharp Roof, which rest on two Pillars; on
these they strike with thick Pestles, according to the time of their several
Tunes. Between the Parents of the Betrothed and the Musicians stands a most
Iapanische traugeprauge Ceremony van haer TROUWEN. Ceremony of their Merridge
beautiful Tent, whose Cover on the top is made of Oiled Paper, and underneath
of Japan Silk, hanging over an eight-square Frame; the top whereof rises up
sharp, with eight Balls, one lesser than the other; the Covering rests on eight
Pillars; in the middle of them stands a stately Altar, on which sits their
Wedding Idol; which spreading his Arms asunder, The Japanners Wedding Idol.
holds in the hands a strong Copper Wyre coming like a Semicircle under his
Chin. This Idol is represented with a Dogs Head, by which the Japanners would
express the faithfulness and constancy that belongs to a Married Life; and by
the Copper Thread, the strong tie of Marriage. Such was the beginning of
Idol-Images, by whose deformed shapes some realities of things are shown, by
their agreeing with the signs and the signified matter.

How they are Married.
Before the Idol with a Dogs-head stands a Bonzi, or Japan Priest, on his
right hand the Bride, and on his left the Bridegroom, both holding lighted
Torches in their Hands; the Bride lights her Torch by one of the eight Lamps
which stand round about the Tent, but not without great mutterings of the
Bonzi; which done, the Bridegroom lights his by the Brides; whereupon a joyful
shout is made, all with a loud voice wishing joy to them, whilst the Bonzi
gives them his Blessing.

The ancient Romans and Greeks used Torches at their Ceremonies of Marriage
made of Pine-branches, which were carried before the Brides in the Night by
five Youths: But among the Greeks the Brides Mother carried it.

Moreover, the Blessing which is spoke by the Bonzi, is of a very ancient
Extract: for the Israelites observed that Custom when the concerned Parties in
Beth-hillula, that is, A House of Praise, flocked together, and sung joyful
Hymns before the Bride and Bridegroom, the chief Priest taking a Cup full of
Wine, said, Blessed art thou, O Lord our God, which have created joy and mirth,
give love to the Bride and Bridegroom, a Brotherly inclination, peace, and
quiet dwelling. I pray, O Lord, let there immediately he heard in the Cities of
Juda, and in the Streets of Jerusalem, the voice of the Bride and Bridegroom.
The voice of joy and the Nuptial Bed is sweeter than any Feast, and Children
more acceptable than the pleasing harmony of delightful Songs: then he gave the
new Married Couple the Cup.

Jews and Japanners Marry under the blue Canopy of Heaven.
The present Jews also agree with the Japanners in this Point, performing the
Ceremonies of Marriage, not in their Houses, but under a Tent, that so they may
renew the Promise made to Abraham concerning the multiplying of his Seed.
Therefore the Bridegroom goes out with the Priests, and the Bride follows,
accompanied with Vocal and Instrumental Music, and Acclamations of the usual
Baruch-habba, that is, Blessed is he that comes. The Bride coming near the
Bridegroom, runs round about him, who follows after her; then both are strowed
with Wheat, thereby to express the multiplying of their Seed; wherefore the
Guests cry whilst strowing, Increase and multiply: then they suddenly turn all
their Faces toward the South. The Rabbis, or Jewish Teachers blessing the
Bride and Bridegroom, command them to drink out of a Flask with a narrow Neck,
if she be a Maid; if a Widow, out of one with a wide mouth: then he thanks God
for the perfecting of the Marriage, and gives another Glass to the new Married
Couple to drink out of it; which done, the Bridegroom breaks the Glass to
pieces against the Wall or Ground, partly thereby to remember the ruin of the
Temple in Jerusalem, and partly to show the vanity of all transitory things.

Further relation of the Japann^rs Marriage.
During the time that the Japanners are thus busy in perfecting the Marriage,
there is no less stir amongst their Guests below about the Hill; some sitting
near the Wayns in which the Money lies for the Brides Portion; others make a
great Fire, in which they throw all the Brides Play-things; others hold a
Spinning-wheel aloft, and others a Bundle of Flax. This they seem to have
borrowed from the ancient Romans, who carrying the Bride in the nightime on a
Wayn to the Bridegrooms House, immediately gave her Flax, that so she might
instantly learn what was to be done in Household affairs. Lastly, the Bonzies
killed two Siam Oxen just before the Stairs that ascend up to the Hill, and
some Sheep, which they sacrifice as a burnt-offering to their Nuptial God with
a Dogs-head, that thereby they may receive his Blessing.

The Romans differed herein from the Japanners, that they worshipped not one
peculiar Idol for Marriage, for they acknowledged several; so that a peculiar
Deity was worshipped at their several Ceremonies of Marriage. The Idol
Jugatinus was called upon when a Maid and Batchellor were betrothed to one
another; Domiducus, whilst the Bride rode to the Bridegroom; Domitius, when the
Bride entered the House; the Goddess Minturna, that the new Married People might
live long together; Virginiensis, when the Maiden Girdle was untied; Mutinus,
when the Bride, being Chaste and Bashful, sat on a Man's Privacies made of Wood;
Subigus, whilst she undrest her self; and Prema, the Goddesses Mother, so soon
as the Bridegroom was laid in Bed.

Japan Weddings, how kept.
But after the finishing the forementioned Ceremonies, the Bride at the giving
of joy to the Marriage, being put into her Coach, is carried to the Bridegrooms
House, her Ears all the way thither delighted with Vocal and Instrumental
Music, whilst the Youths are busy in the Bridegrooms House, in hanging out of
Pendants and Flags from the Roof, strowing the Floors with Flowers, and every
where, within and without about the Roof, hanging of Garlands. The Wedding
generally lasting eight days, costs them great sums of Money.

How the Japanners Betroth their Children to one another.
Moreover, the Japanners often betroth their Children whilst they are yet in the
Cradle, which afterward they inviolably perform. They also Marry very young;
but yet not so soon as the Muscovia Maids, which commonly enter the state of
Matrimony in their tenth and eleventh Year, no otherwise than as if they were
Egyptian Mice, which, as Pliny says, come big with Young into the World.

Joseph Scaliger relates, That a French Youth, aged eleven years, got his Niece
of nine years old with Child.

Hieronimus, that ancient Father says, That he saw a Girl that was big by a
Boy scarce nine years old.

Pope Gregory makes himself an eyewitness, to have seen a Girl of seven years
old, to be with Child by a Youth which was but two years older. And if any
doubt the truth of these famous Persons, none will question the sacred
Scripture, which says plainly, That Achaz at the end of his eleventh Year had
a Son, whom he called Hezekiah: for Achaz was made King in his twentieth Year,
Governed Juda sixteen years; so that he died in the thirty sixth year of his
age: at which time his Son Hezekiah was five and twenty years old; which being
subtracted from his Fathers thirty six, there remains no more than eleven when
Hezekiah was born.

But besides the Nuptial God with a Dogs-head (which seems to be derived from
Egypt, where there was scarce any Idol found but what had a Beasts Head; for
Osiris in former times was there represented with an Ox-head; Pan, with a
Bucks; Ammon, with a Rams; and Anubis, with a Dogs;) the Japanners also like
the Chinese worship the Goddess Pussa, who is adored not only for to increase
the Generations of Mankind, but also gives helps to Beasts, Plants, and Tres..

Description of the Japan Goddess Pussa.
The Bonzi relate this Story concerning the Goddess Pussa: Ten Ages ago three
celestial Virgins named Angela, Changela, and Fecula, descended from Heaven to
bathe themselves in a pleasant Stream; who whilst they washed in the Brook
spied a Tree, under whose Leaves, being longer and sharper than those of a
Holm-Tree, hung a black Fruit upon long Stalks; which Fecula tasting, found so
exceeding pleasant, that she could not be satisfied with eating.

The like Story Homer relates of three Seamen belonging to Ulysses's Fleet,
which going ashore where the Lotus grew, would not return, they being so much
delighted with the taste of that Fruit.

Several Operations are ascribed to this Plant, as being good against the
falling of the Hair, the Bloody Flux, Women's monthly Disease,
Falling Sickness, and giddiness in the Head, as Dioscorides, Theophrastus,
Pliny, and Galen have it.

But Fecula, say the Japanners, finding her self with Child by eating that
Fruit, saw with sorrowful Eyes her two Companions, Angela and Changela, ascend
again to Heaven, whereas she was forced to stay till she was Delivered: after
nine Months she had a Son, who when he was weaned she laid on a small Isle,
commanding him to watch for a Fisherman, who would bring him up, whilst she
ascended to Heaven; from whence she sometime since descended with Angela and
Changela. No sooner had she spoke these words, and took her Journey toward
Heaven, but a Fisherman found the Youth, and carried him to his House; where
he grew up in such a manner, that at last he Governed all the Country far and
near, and gave Laws to several Kingdoms. After this accident Fecula received
the Name of Pussa, which the Japanners worship in the following manner:

Worshipping of Pussa, after what manner.
On the shore of a River stand thick Posts, made of the conjoined Bodies of the
Lotus Tree; on the sides whereof appear black branches, not unlike Elephants
Teeth; the Posts are adorned with great Gilded Flowers. On the left-side lies a
flat Shell, on two thick Branches, in which Shell Pussa's Son kneeling,
represents the Posture of Praying. On the top of the Branches lies sloaping a
Cushion, on one end whereof stands a Flower-pot, on the other a crooked Branch
juts out: In the middle sits Pussa, but is only seen from the Waste upward;
her Face representing that of a most beautiful Woman, surrounded with darting
Sunbeams: Under a Cloth that hangs before her Breast appear sixteen Arms,
whereby they express, That China and Japan have been happily governed sixteen
Ages by this their Goddess Pussa. Their Worship to this Deity is thus
performed: Two Japanners stand up to the middle in Water, just before the
conjoined Bodies of the Trees on which Pussa sits; whilst a Boat made fast a
little from the Shore, has a Ram-Goat hanging over her Prow; to Sacrifice
which, a Bonzi stands ready in the middle of the Boat, before a Table, attended
by two Servants, with a Hanger in his Hand.

BUt to return again to our Ambassador Wagenaer, who staying in Osacca, was
amongst others visited by two Brothers Merchants, from Saccai, who told him,
that about three Months thence they would send four Vessels laden with Copper
to Nangesaque: Wagenaer replied, That they should be welcome; but the
East India Company would not buy their Copper so dear this Year, as they had
done the last: Whereat they looking one upon another, laughed scornfully.

Wagenaer arrives at Jedo.
Wagenaer proceeding in his Journey, came the sixteenth of February to Jedo,
and first made his coming known to Sicungodonne, and Joffiesamma the Governor
of Nangesaque, with Entreaties of a quick Dispatch to deliver the Presents to
the Emperor. Sicungodonne and Joffiesamma returned him for Answer, That he
should on the fifteenth of Songats (which is the Japanners New-year, the which
fifteenth agrees with our twenty seventh of February) appear before the
Emperor. Soon after, Sicungodonne sent not only for the Inventory of the
Presents, but the Presents also, and locked them up in his Storehouse, built
against all Casualties of Fire.

Appears before the Emperor.
The Ambassador Wagenaer being carried to the Imperial Castle at the appointed
time, waited in a Hall above two Hours, when afterward he was brought before
the Emperor, who sat on a high Throne, in a very splendid manner, to whom he
proffered the Presents, in which his Imperial Majesty took great delight, and
chiefly to see the Dutch Pistols, a Sword, and a curious Flowered Box: The
costly Alcatif was little regarded, because the often unpacking had spoiled and
made it full of Holes.

Presents to the Japan Council.
The next day Wagenaer delivered the other Presents to the three Chief
Counselors; the fourth, Kannicfaesamma, being overgrown in Years, had quitted
his Office, so that he received no Presents: But the rest of the Nobility
received their part of the Presents, according to the usual Custom; all
accepting them very courteously by their Stewards.

What the Presents and Journey amount to.
These Presents amounted to above fourteen thousand three hundred Guilders. The
Charges of the Journey were much greater; for it cost for Horses, Guards,
Interpreters, and Expenses in Inns, and for other Conveniences, almost sixteen
thousand Guilders. The remaining Goods Wagenaer sold for three thousand Tail,
every Tail being an English Crown. The Japan Nobility buying these Goods, paid
much less than they cost: And none was more satisfied than Sicungodonne,
saying, He had never seen such choice Goods.

It was always his Custom to invite and entertain the Holland Ambassadors
Asheeldinghe van de Brandt tot JEDO. a Protrature of the fire at JEDO.
in his Garden not far from Jedo; but by reason of the excessive Cold, he
invited Wagenaer to a Feast in his Palace, which whilst it was preparing,
Sicungodonne sat down next to Wagenaer, near a Window, before a great
Cole-fire, and inquired of the Chyrurgeon Hans Hunko about the preparing of the
European Medicines which he had brought for him.

IT was at this time, the second of March, Anno 1657, when on a sudden all Jedo
was in confused hurry, every one crying Fire: And soon after they saw from
Sicungodonne's Palace, toward the North end of the City, a terrible Flame
rising toward the Sky, which by strong North Winds was driven directly into
the City, the Sparks flying over Jedo: Sicungodonne goes cut to give order
about the Fire.
At which Sicungodonne excused himself, that he could no longer enjoy the
Ambassadors Presence, it being his Office in such a Calamity to order all
things requisite to restrain its enlarging: Yet he sent his three Secretaries
to entertain Wagenaer in his absence; but he desired leave to depart, that he
might see how his Affairs stood in the Hollanders Inn, which was granted him;
and mounting his Horse, he posted home; for the Fire, though it was near a
League from him, yet he saw it come on like a Sea, which impetuously breaking
in, A great Calamity in Jedo.
overflows both Fields and Banks: Wherefore he gave warning to all those where
he passed by.

Wagenaers Transactions in his Inn.
But coming at last to his Inn, he found the Merchant Assistant Cornelius
Mulock, and the Japan Servants, busy packing up the Papers in Chests that lay
on the Table, and also the remaining Presents, their Plate, Clothes, and
Letters, to secure them in the Scone Storehouses built against Fire, by the
Japanners called Goddon. Every one rested, when they heard that the Wind was
turned, and that there was no danger of the Dutch Inn, so that the Japan
Servants forbore carrying away the Goods: But between four and five a clock,
the Street in which the Hollanders Inn stood swarmed with People, and little
Wains, in which they carried their young Children and aged People: Whereupon
Wagenaer himself got on the top of the House, and saw plainly, that the Fire,
as far as he could discern, was spread more and more, and was also driven
toward them by a strong North Wind: He asked therefore their Landlord
Ginnemon, Whether he thought it best to carry the Goods of the East India
Company and secure them in the Goddon, or else to Joffiesamma. Ginnemon judged
the Goddon to be sufficient, having not long since endured a great Fire: And
here already a great part of the Goods lay; but the Bonjoises judged it fit to
carry the Cabinet with the East India Companies Money, to Joffiesamma Governor
of Nangesaque; and that which was in the Goddon should remain there, because
the Doors and Windows were already plastered up with Clay, and all things that
were too near the Goddon pulled down: Yet Wagenaer would rather have carried
them out of the Goddon; but whilst he disputed with Ginnemon, the Flame laid
hold on the Verver Street, which was but a Musquetshot from the Hollanders Inn;
it was therefore time to fly for safety. Ginnemon sending his Mother, Wife, and
Children before, who amongst a great Crowd of People got out of the Street. The
Ambassador Wagenaer, Ginnemon, and the rest belonging to the Ambassador, also
forsook their Inn, which since the last Fire was not quite finished; and
getting out of Doors, they found themselves in great danger; for the Streets
being full every where with Wains, Wagenaer and his Retinue are in great danger
to be burnt.
Chests, Trunks, Houshold-goods, and People thronging between them, that they
were not able to pass either one way or other. Here they lay heaped, being
tumbled one upon the other; there they were squeezed betwixt the Goods; yonder
with a hideous Cry they thronged their way through; some being trodden to
death, some their Breath squeezed out of their Bodies, and others crawling over
all.

Mean while the Fire approached, the Sparks and Smoke whereof was ready to
choke them: Nay, the Smoke so darkened the City, that the Afternoon seemed
rather to be midnight; only now and then the Sun pierced through the thick
ascending Cloud, and the Night seemed to come on six Hours too soon. None could
have known whether to have fled, had not the Flame lighted them: And the
horrible Cry of those that were in danger, calling to others that were somewhat
safer, to fly further, enough to deafen the Hearing,

Wagenaer and his Retinue found themselves straightened on all sides: Before them
the Street was filled with Goods and Men, that lay heaped one upon another: On
one side the Flame had passed them; on the other, it went somewhat farther from
them; behind the Fire pursued them very closely, whilst they stood in a thick
Smoke, full of innumerable Sparks, which were driven by the North Wind like
Flakes of Snow: The Fronts of Houses sometimes tumbling forwards into the
Street, so covering in a glowing Grave both Men and Goods, which by reason of
the Throng could not get away. Sometimes falling sidelong or inwards, they
seemed to cover the Flame, so as at present to keep it from seeking any farther
Food: Here cracked the Wainscots and Partitions, which suddenly taking Fire,
hastened the ruin of the Floors and Walls. The Roofs covered with little Wooden
Shingles, generally took Fire first; unless sometimes one House burning set
fire of another, either about the middle, or the bottom. There the Timber and
whole Stories tumbled down; yonder great Splinters of burning Wood flew into
the Streets; in another place the Roofs fell through into their Cellars;
elsewhere the Ground was shaken by falling Towers. These kind of Falls, and
several Blows, would have been more distinctly heard, had not the miserable Cry
of Young and Old, or those that lay scorching in the Flames, or feared being
burnt, deadned the sound thereof.

It may easily be guessed in what an exigence of danger the Holland Ambassador
was with his Retinue; which they perceiving, at last strove to save themselves,
by helping one another over the Heaps of Goods and Lumber: So stepping over
Men, Chests, and all things that lay in their way, to get farther and farther
out of the Press; and breaking through Fences, Pales, and Walls: In which Work
had not the Bonjoisen and the Interpreters been great Assistants to them, none
of the Hollanders had escaped with Life from the Fire.

At last getting into an open place, not without extraordinary danger, they
went to seek for shelter against the cold Night. They judged it convenient to
go to Joffiesamma his Palace; but the Way thither being exceedingly crowded,
the Ambassador Wagenaer went to the Lord of Firando's House, being not far
distant from them. Wagenaer can sind no Lodging.
Their Request of Lodging there was modestly denied, notwithstanding the said
Lord was indebted a considerable Sum to the East India Company, which had not
yet been demanded of him. After this, Wagenaer went to four places more, but
could not be admitted: So that walking most part of the Night to and again in
Jedo, he got at last Westward out of the City, G^ts out of Jedo into a Hut.
near the River, where he knocked at the Hut of a poor Rustic, who gave him
leave to come in; but found neither Fire nor Candle. Mean while it froze
exceeding hard; and soon after several that were fled from the Fire came also
thither, and informed Wagenaer, that half an Hour after his departure, the
Hollanders Inn was laid in Ashes.

The next day views the Fire.
At daybreak Wagenaer went again into the City, where he found all the South
part of Jedo lying in Ashes, and the Fire raging with more fierceness than the
day before; the Flame about Noon taking hold of the Emperors Castle: Here the
great Gates were burnt from the Hinges; Half the Watch-houses tumbling into the
Moats, were there quenched, and the remaining part thereof became Fuel for the
Fire. About the Evening the Imperial Palace also began to kindle: The Flame
never appeared more terrible, The Palace is burnt.
than when it blazed out of the high Turrets; for it seemed to threaten the
Sky. This Spoil went on so ragingly, that the Emperor and his Council had
scarce time to secure themselves in the Play Houses built on the North side of
the Castle.

In two days time the Imperial City lay all in Ashes, above a hundred thousand
Houses being burnt to the Ground.

Wagenaer searches for his melted Silver.
The fourth of March, Wagenaer requested of the chief Bonjois, that he would be
pleased to order some of the Soldiers that attended the Embassy, to search if
they could find any Silver under the burnt Goddon. The Bonjois approving of it,
provided him Men, with which Wagenaer and Verschuren went to the place where
the Hollanders Inn stood. Approaching the City, of which nothing remained but
the Eastern and Western Suburbs, he saw, with admiration, as far as possible he
could discern, a great Plain, smoking in several Places, where two days before
had stood a little World of Houses; the Ground heaped with whole and half-burnt
Timber, and abundance of Ashes, according as the Building had been greater or
lesser: All the Ways, far and near, miserable to behold, which but a little
before were adorned with Habitations for above a Million of Souls, stately
Palaces, fair Towers, sumptuous Temples, and the Imperial Castle, no ways
inferior to all Amsterdam: Now naught but a bare Wall surrounded the Plain,
whereon Jedo the Metropolis of Japan stood but eight and forty Hours before.

The Ambassador could scarce go ten Paces, but he saw several strange deformed
Bodies, of which some had been squeezed flat under the Timber of Houses, some
stifled in the Smoke, and others had their Limbs burnt off; and not a few were
so strangely handled by the Flames, that it was impossible to know them by what
Limbs they had left. In some places they lay three or four one upon another,
being either crowded to death, smothered, scorched, or burnt. In the Street
along which they passed to the Hollanders Inn, the Ambassador Wagenaer told
above three thousand dead Corpse.

At one of the outmost Points of Jedo, lies a corner of the City, that is
separated from the other by strong Walls and great Gates: Thither a great
number fled, thinking they should there be safe; wherefore those within locked
the Gates: But it was not long before the Flame took hold of those Houses that
stood along the Walls, so that in that small place above eight hundred were
destroyed, besides the Emperors Prisoners that were carried thither. The
Japanners reckoned the number of those that died by that Calamity, Above a
hundred thousand People burnt.
to be above a hundred thousand.

Wagenaer, accompanied with twenty Bonjoises, Verschuren, and Ginnemon, whose
House within three Years had been twice burnt, came to the ruined Goddon, that
there they might if possible dig up some of their Plate; but so soon as the
Ashes were stirred, it made such a Smoke and Heat, that they could not proceed
any farther: Wherefore they returned with no success; yet they left a Watch
there.

Wagenaer lost in the said Goddon six thousand six hundred forty three
Guilders, in ready Money, which was locked in a Cabinet, besides a great deal
of Plate for his Table, Wagenaer saved some Goods.
and that which remained of the Presents; yet most of the Treasure was saved;
for Wagenaer, upon the advice of the Bonjoises, trusted not the same in the
Storehouse; but putting most of the ready Money into a Trunk, sent it to
Joffiesamma, though not without danger: Wagenaer's People having much ado to
get through the Crowd, and afterward sought all Night through the City for
their Lord, being troubled for him, and their rich Burden.

Mean while not one of all the Ambassadors Retinue came to any mischief, but
only his Japan Cook Siobe, which sometimes served him for his Interpreter, who
being hemmed in by a broken Wall, Was there smothered to death, and when found,
was decently buried.

The burning of Troy, Rome, and London, not to be compared to Jedo.
WHo will now compare the Destruction of Troy with Jedo, though one of Virgil's
Masterpieces to describe? Or Rome, supposed to be fired by Nero, which
Suetonius relates raged six Days and seven Nights? But a Stone yet to be seen
near St. Peter's Church in Rome, has an Inscription, which signifies, that it
burnt nine Days? Or the deplorable Fire of London, which made so miserable a
Devastation, in few Days the whole City within the Walls swallowed up in a
Deluge of Fire, in which perished so many thousand Houses, and almost a hundred
Churches, amongst which, St. Paul's, the stateliest Cathedral in the World? But
yet, if we consider, this was nothing to the burning of Jedo, where there were
an hundred thousand Houses burnt, besides above as many Inhabitants, and an
infinite number of Palaces and Temples: So sudden and over-spreading was that
dreadful Conflagration.

MOreover, the Ambassador Wagenaer and his Retinue, by Joffiesamma's Order,
were Lodged in a more convenient House than where they sheltered themselves the
first Night after the Fire, from the Cold: Yet he suffered not a little; for
whilst his European and Indian Provisions and Necessaries were burnt, he was
forced to buy all things at a dear Rate; and indeed he was in danger of his
Life; Wagenaer is in danger of his life in Jedo.
for the Multitudes being almost starved, ranged up and down like hungry
Wolves, by thousands in Companies, with their Wives and Children, lying under
the cold Canopy of Heaven.

His Landlord Ginnemon was very earnest, though he had been presented with a
Piece of black Stammel and Cloth-Serge, which he preserved from the Fire, that
he might keep the melted Silver, Copper, and Lead that should be dug out of
the ruined Goddon: The Bonjoises, Interpreters, and Joffiesamma, were not
backward in interceding for him; wherefore Wagenaer was necessitated, though he
had great need thereof himself, to give the dug up Metal to Ginnemon.

BEfore Wagenaer went from Nangesaque, his Interpreter Fatsiseymon undertook to
desire of Sicungodonne to grant longer time for the Ships that Sailed from
Nangesaque to Batavia, that they might not be hastened so upon their going away,
which was to their great damage; or at least, that their Hatches might be lest
unsealed. Gunemon, Sicungodonne's Interpreter, took also upon him to entreat
the same of his Lord but he going to secure his Mother from the Fire, was burnt
with her. Moreover, Fatsiseymon durst not venture to speak about the prolonging
of time, because of this great Calamity that had lately happened.

Japan Nobility go away without paying Wagenaer
In the interim, all things were lost; for those Persons of Quality that had the
Goods that remained or Wagenaer's Presents, were spread up and down in the
Country, none having paid him a Penny, but Ando Ockiosamma, and Mitosamma; and
he could not see any way to find his Creditors, whilst he was in danger of his
Life amongst a company of hungry People: Wherefore he humbly besought
Sicungodonne, that he might have leave to depart. The Emperor granted this his
Request; yet told him by his Council, It was convenienter to stay somewhat
longer, at least ten days, because the Ways were very dangerous, the People
that were burnt out ranging all over the Country, and making Prey of whatever
they found; and also because the Emperor would furnish him with Rice and other
Provisions for fifty Men. The next day Wagenaer received, by Order of his
Majesty, six Bags of Rice, which the Bonjoises took as a Heavenly Gift, and for
so great an Honor, as the Emperors had never shown to any Ambassador in the
World: So that they concluded, That the Hollanders, above all other Nations,
were in great favor at Court.

But Wagenaer was left solely at his own choice, either to go, or stay; and
whilst he was doubtful of both, he at last resolved to be gone to Nangesaque,
because Joffiesamma, which had shown him very great Favors, urged him to be
gone, saying, The ways were not so dangerous as it was reported: And what need
you fear, since the Holland Ambassador goes not without Bonjoises, which Guard
conducts you in the Emperors Name; therefore what Man dares do do you harm,
being under their Protection? Joffiesamma added moreover, The Return (said he)
for your Presents, and Payment for the Goods sold, I will keep for you, when
they are paid, and deliver you them at Nangesaque.

Wagenaer travels out of Jedo.
Upon this Promise and Advice, Wagenaer set forward on his Journey the ninth of
March, and found great trouble to get out of Jedo; for the Bridges were every
where burnt, only in some places part of an Arch appeared above the Water; yet
he could scarce get over any where; therefore they judged it convenient to find
a Way through the Emperors Castle, Through the burnt Castle.
where the Ambassador saw all thing ruined, the Stones in great Flakes flown
asunder, the high Towers levelled with the Ground, the Sentinel-houses in
Ashes; but the Marble Bridge over the first Moat was not so spoiled, but that
they might go over it. Little less than an Hour was Wagenaer riding through the
Castle, before he could get out on the other side; but having gotten thus far,
he rode round about the East side of Jedo, and at last came into the right Road.

The Journey proved better than the Counselors foretold; for he got on the
seven and twentieth of March, without any hinderance, to Meaco, where he was
presented by the great Judge, Makino Sandosamma, with five Japan Coats of Silk,
and ten Boats of Silver. The next day getting to Osacca, he took Shipping
there, and on the seventh of April arrived safe at Nangesaque, Arrives at
Nangesaque.
and also found all things in good condition on the Island Disma.

BUt not long after there arose no small Inconveniences, occasioned by three
Reasons.

The Hollanders are at variance with the Japanners about the Chinese, and a
Fly-boat.
First, The Japanners that lived in Nangesaque took a great dislike against the
Hollanders, on this occasion. Frederick Coyet, Governor in Formosa, sent a Ship
called the Red Fox, under the Command of a Merchant named Daniel Six, to Tamsuy
and Quelang, for Coals and Buff-Skins; which Ship sailing again from Quelang to
Tayovan, was by a Westerly Wind and strong Current drove to the Northward, so
that they could neither reach Quelang nor Tayovan, but were a long time tossed
up and down in the Bay of Arima; till at last their Provisions beginning to
grow very scant, the Captain was forced to make a Virtue of Necessity, and ply
it up to Nangesaque. The arrival of this Ship out of the Season, occasioned
strange Thoughts in Quienmonsamma Governor of Nangesaque, who was not satisfied
with his making strict inquiry after Six his Voyage, though he was to answer
and give an account, When he set Sail from Tayovan? When he arrived at Tamsuy
and Quelang? What Trade he drove in those Places? How far distant Tamsuy and
Quelang lay asunder? At what time, and from whom the Hollanders took Quelang?
With how many Soldiers the Garrison was Manned? What Profit the Adjacent
Country brought? What People inhabited it, White or Sallow, Valiant or
Cowardly? These Questions asked by Quienmonsamma, and answered by Six, were
written down, and sent to Jedo: After which, no farther Inquiry was made about
it; but Six had free liberty as others, to sell his Coals and Buff-Skins.

Second Reason of the Japanners dislike.
To this first, happened a second Occasion, thus: A Chinese Jonk sailing from
Cambodia to Japan, met near Tayovan with the Ketch Domburg from Batavia, who
took several Pounds of Wax out of the Jonk, which the Men belonging to it
reported at Nangesaque, to the great disgrace of the Hollanders, that it was
done by force, and that they were Pirates: So that it little availed what the
Hollanders said for their Defense, That Hans Paris and Points, the Commander
and Merchant of the Ship Domburg, were secured in Prison by Peter Coyet, to
suffer condign Punishment, after Examination of the Crime.

The third.
The third Reason, being the chiefest, was occasioned thus: The Pink Breukelen
took not long after a Chinese Jonk betwixt the Islands Aur and Candor, and put
in the Ship Urk eleven Chinese Prisoners, three Pieces of Scarlet Cloth, eight
Hangers, sixteen Barrels of Tin, and, besides some Trifles, four small Brass
Guns. Urk being by a strong Current driven past Tayo, fell upon the Japan Coast
before Satsuma, there Cruising to and again, till at last the Lord of that
place sent a small Japan Vessel with a Pennon, called Faisena, which conducted
the Ship Urk to Nangesaque; where dropping Anchor, the Governor caused the
Chinese Prisoners, Japanners deal strangely with the Ship Vrk.
and also seven and twenty, as well Commanders as Seamen, to be fetched from
aboard, and brought ashore, which he delivered into Wagenaer's Hands, The
common Japanners are against the Hollanders.
he being bound for them all. Mean while, the Common People mutinying, threw
Stones against the Doors and Windows of the House in which the Hollanders were,
crying, There lies the Hollanders thieving Ship, which comes vaporing here with
her stolen Goods: The same Design had the Red Fox; but because it did not take,
she under a pretense brought Coals hither to sell. Moreover, they told what a
cruel Death those Pirates deserved. But the Governor quieting them, sent the
Interpreters to and again with Questions written down to the twenty seven
Hollanders, whose Answers on every Particular being also set down, were sent to
Jedo.

Then the Chinese Goods which they had taken were also fetched from aboard, at
which the People in Nangesaque cried, Fie, Dutch Pirates: What Death is cruel
enough for such Offender? And though the Chinese gave Wagenaer a Receipt, that
they had received satisfaction for all the Goods which Urk had taken out of
Breukelen, yet they came again some days after, and complained that they wanted
more Goods: Against which, it availed not that Wagenaer showed them their
Receipt: Wherefore the Magistrates of Nangesaque gave order, That the Ship Urk
should be searched a second time, for the Goods which the Chinese required.

Chinese fetch their Goods out of the Ship Vik
The eighteenth of October they went to work: The Chinese Interpreter Kioube,
and also the Netherland Interpreters, going aboard the Ship Urk, caused Packs
and Chests to be opened, in the presence of the Merchant Meindert Janson
Mestecker. They searched all things very narrowly, till at last they found in
the Sea-mens Chests six and twenty little Bales of Cotton, two Bales of Tee,
two fine Mats, a Copper Basin, four Chinese Coats; two pair of Breeches, as
many Stockins, a Girdle, a Silk Cushion, a Hair Net for the Head, and a red
Silk Suit. The Searchers, as Trophies of their Victory, went ashore with the
forementioned Goods, where thousands of Japanners and Chinese waited for their
return; they holding them aloft, carried them amongst a great Crowd of People
to the Governors, who a considerable time looked upon them, and at last gave
them again to the Chinese.

Wagenaer's Excuse is not taken.
Wagenaer endeavored in vain to excuse the Deed, by telling them of the
innocence of the Indian Consul at Batavia, who severely punished Pyracy: But
the Magistrates took not this his Testimony, thinking, that if it had happened
only once, it might have been excused; but since so many Complaints of the
robbed Jonks were brought in daily, it could not be otherwise, but that the
Holland Ships had order at Batavia for the performing such Pyracy; or at least,
the Indian Consul winked at it.

But Wagenaer afterward bringing this News to Batavia, the Consul looked upon
it to be nothing else but the insufferable peevish disposition of the
Japanners, which appeared sufficiently, Japanners set the Chinese against the
Hollanders.
because Saujoe the Owner of the Jonk made not so much ado as they, which were
no ways concerned with it; and the more, because the Jonk was not coming to
Japan, but going to China. And since the Chinese found such Interceders of the
Japanners, they thought themselves encouraged by them to bring all manner of
false Complaints against the Hollanders.

Wagenaers Proposal concerning the Japanners severity.
Wagenaer also proposed to them, That by a Letter he would inform the
Magistrates of Japan, that the Hollanders would rather part from them in
Friendship, and remove their Staple from thence, than endure the Complaints of
the Chinese, who every time they came, had Audience granted them for the false
Reports and Tales they told of them. Or else, to prevent farther trouble, it
would be convenient to give strict order to all Ships, That they should let all
Jonks, either Coxenga's or Tartarians, pass in quietness.

Mean while, some experienced in State Affairs judged, that if the Japanners
observed, that the Hollanders were in earnest to remove from thence, they would
then be better natured; for they would not only miss the Netherland Presents,
and their great Trade; but also that of the Chinese, whose Traffic would be
spoiled by the Pirates that should be sent from Formosa and Batavia: And Japan
also might fear, that the Hollanders joining with the English, Portuguese, and
Spaniards, would do no small mischief to that Empire.

WHilst this Controversy was at the highest, between the Hollanders and the
Chinese, the second Governor of Nangesaque, Joffiesamma, came home from Jedo,
the twenty second of September, and brought no more than thirty Imperial Coats,
and sixty Boats of Silver, from three of the Council, which indeed was but a
small Return for the Netherland Presents. Moreover, there was not one Penny
received of all the Debts due from the Nobles at Jedo, nor any News from
Sicungodonne.

Remarkable Discourse betwixt Kiemonsamma and Wagenaer.
AFter that, there happened a remarkable Treaty between Kiemonsamma and Wagenaer,
which proceeded from this occasion: A Japanner called Bozymon had written from
Batavia, That many died daily there of Hunger, wanting Provisions, because
those of Bantam, being at Wars with the Hollanders, prevent any Relief from
coming to them; and also, That the Condition of the East India Company in
Canton was but very mean. This Letter was given to Kiemonsamma; who thereupon
sent for Wagenaer to come to him, that from his mouth he might receive better
Information concerning that business, asking him, From what occasion the War
arose between Bantam and Batavia? What hopes they had of Peace? What space of
Ground was between the two forementioned Places? Wagenaer replied, That as for
the Famine, War with Batavia, nor the Affairs of Canton, he had not the least
Advice; which not being mentioned in his Letters from Batavia, he looked upon
it to be only a raised Report. Moreover, Bantam lay about nine Leagues from
Batavia.

Kiemonsamma asked again; Why do there come so many Frigates of War to
Nangesaque, whereas heretofore none but Flyboats came to an Anchor there? The
Emperors Order was to take the Rudder from all Dutch Ships, so soon as they
came before Nangesaque; which could not be done to the great Ships, without
cutting a hole in the Cabin; to prevent which inconvenience, he had permitted
that they should keep them on; but hereafter they would do so no more, but
follow his Order.

Wagenaer replied, That most of their Flyboats were gone, so that they were
forced to take what Ships they could get.

Netherland Interpreters.
SHortly after this, the Magistrates of Nangesaque made some alteration amongst
their Interpreters on Disma; for dismissing the old Kitsobe of his Employment,
they gave the Place to his Son Sinkits, who spoke good Portuguese, for Chief
Interpreter; to whom they gave for an Assistant one Firandees Josseyemon,
otherwise called Brasman, reasonably well experienced in the Dutch Tongue.
These to be paid by the Ottena, that is, Overseer of the East India Companies
Storehouse, who besides fed with no meaner Diet than Quails the Interpreters
Mangale, Scheseymon, Fatsimon, Sitsibe Nisfyoye, and Josseyemon, with out whom
no Business can be done, for their Voices must be in it.

The Emperor sends for two Globes.
MEan while, News came from Jedo, That Sicungodonne demanded for the Emperor a
Globe and Sphere, the former being burnt in the late Fire, with all the other
Presents. He thought also to get great esteem with the Engine; wherefore he
commanded strictly, that none should see it, but that it should be sent with
all speed to Jedo: But the Magistrates of Nangesaque little regarding
Sicungodonne's Commands, showed it daily to Persons of Quality, who, to try it,
played Water out of the same.

The Emperors Sentence concerning the Ship Vrk.
With this Advice, came other Orders from the Emperor, concerning the Ship Urk,
out of which the Chinese took their Goods. The Orders being these, were read
to Wagenaer and Bouchelyon in Joffiesamma's Hall: The Frigot Urk shall with the
other Ships go for Batavia; the eleven Chinese Prisoners in a Jonk to China:
The Goods and Jonk taken by the Ship Breukelen must be restored to the Owner.
If the Hollanders at any time hereafter plunder any more Jonks that are coming
to Japan, they shall for ever be banished from the Empire. Moreover, Wagenaer,
whom Bouchelyon was to succeed in his place, and was ready to go for Batavia,
should make the Japan Emperor's Edicts, read to them, known to Coyet Governor
of Fermosa.

Strange Request of Todo.
BUt a little before Wagenaer's departure, Todotaychosama, a mighty Lord of
that Country came and proffered a great Sum of Money for an Ostritch, which
was brought thither from Batavia with the last Ships; but the Magistrates of
Nangesaque forbad the selling of it, judging it convenient to send this strange
Bird to the Emperor for a Present, which indeed did not please Bouchelyon,
because of the great Expenses and Charge which the Carriage of them thither
amounts to. Lastly, Todo desired by the Interpreters, to have six Turkies, some
Singing Birds, two white Hearts, as many Apes, and one Pair of the least flying
Crocodiles: He received for answer; that care should be taken to enquire for
them in all places.

THe Interpreter Scheseymon brought also Tidings, Ambergreece.
That the Lord of Satsuma had a Piece of Ambergreece that weighed a hundred and
thirty Pounds, which he valued at fourteen thousand Tail. Moreover, the
Japanners also at several times brought small pieces of Ambergreece to sell in
their Handkerchiefs.

Its Original.
Concerning the Original of this Amber are several Opinions, for some think,
that it is either the Spawn or Dung of a Whale; others look upon it to be a
Spungy Earth that grows in the Sea under the Rocks, by the beating Waves washed
off in Pieces, which by reason of their lightness, Swim above the Water. But
those that seem to come nearest the truth, as the Learned Bernard Paludanus
judges, approving of Linschot's Opinion, hold Amber to be a sort of Pitch,
arising up from the Ground, and hardened by the Sun, and is found not unlike
Brimstone or Coral: But its Original from a Whale has not the least appearance
of truth; for if Amber should proceed from the Spawn or Dung of a Whale, it
would needs be found most in those places where the greatest number of Whales
frequent: But it is known to the contrary, that Green-Land, Spitsbergen, or
elsewhere, where these Sea Monsters abound, never produce any Amber; whereas on
the contrary, Soffala, Mosambique, Melinde, the Maldivian Islands, the
Promontory of Comoryn, the Province of Satsuma in Japan, and other Indian
Countries, produce Amber, before whose Coasts seldom or never any Whales are
seen to Swim.

Which is the best Amber.
The best Amber is Gray, with White Veins, wherefore it is called Ambergreece;
that which is Black yields not the Price of the Gray; the best is known when
Tried, by putting a small Stick into it, upon which it yields much Oil. The
Indian Nobility use abundance of Amber in their Meats, to provoke Letchery.
Paludanus ascribes to Amber, that with its pleasant Smell, it strengthens the
Heart and Brain, takes off Watery Humors from the Stomach, cures
Falling Sickness, and Risings of the Lights; and is generally good for all
Ancient and Decrepit People.

Why the Japanners make but little Camphire.
They were also informed on the Island Disma, concerning Camphire, that the
Workmen of Satsuma had given over preparing of it, because of the small profit
they reaped by it, wherefore most of them were gone to dig in the Silver Mines.
The Chinese. Camphire which is made in Cincheu, as also the Japan in Satsuma,
differ much from that which Borneo produces; for one Pound of Bornean would
yield sixty times as much more (by one that has skill in Camphire) as the
Japan or Chinese Camphire grows on Trees, not unlike Nut-Trees, How it is made.
being a Gum, which Swetting, drops from the main Body of the Tree: The drops
are white, and distinguished in four sorts; The Indians use also several
Sieves, so to have every sort by it self; through the finest falls the worst,
and through the greatest and coursest the best; the filthiness and Dross they
take from it with hot Water, Soap, and Lemon Juice, which dried in a Pan
becomes whiter than before: The East India Company were to exped no more
Camphire from Satsuma, because there they had given over preparing it fit for
use.

The making of Wax.
But in making of Waxed Merchandise the Japanners proceeded as formerly, wherein
the Art of the Workmen is to be admired; but much more the Pismires which make
the Wax. The Workmen beat the Wax to Powder, and melt it, then mix with the
melted Wax all manner of Colors, according as they think best; and then pour
it upon long round Pieces, which Pieces they stick on Wood made hot, about a
Nail thick; then Polish it over with Straw or dry Broom: After which manner
they make their Chests, Tables, Boxes, and other things, which Japan and China
furnish Europe with in a plentiful manner.

Concerning the Original of Wax, the Ancient Philosophers contest amongst
themselves, and chiefly the Arabians; some think as Rasis and Serapio, That Wax
falls from Heaven in Arabia on a Sorben Tree: Garcias ab Orta, That upon the
Piguan Sticks lying in the Mud, which the Rivers flowing over the Country, and
after returning to their own Limits, left behind, grow great Pismires, which
produce abundance of Wax: About the Pismires, Garcias relates the truth, but
the other Relation is but fancy; the Hollanders which have, and do Inspect
India sufficiently, find the business thus; In Pegu, a Province which lies
between Aracan, Cambodia, Ara, and China, grows a great Tree full of round
Leaves, green above, and white below, of a sharp Taste, the Blossoms without
scent, Of what Beasts, and how strangely Wax is made.
and the Fruit called Jujubes. This Tree in the Summer time swarms with great
Winged Pismires, which constantly suck upon the Gum of the foresaid Tree, by
the Indians called Ber, and as the Bees do the Honey, they make the Wax round
about the Boughs; when the Branches are filled therewith shining of a Red
color then they are cut off, and laid a drying; the less Wood there is within
the Wax, the better it is, which being peeled from the Sticks, detains some of
the Shell or Bark thereof; the Branches are like Hasel but have a thicker Peth,
and represent deep and Scollop'd Scars under the Shell; the Wax is generally
mixed with the Wings of the foresaid Pismires.

Japan Council treat concerning the Hollanders Journey to Jedo.
MEan while, Zacharias Wagenaer made a short Voyage to Batavia, but soon after
returned again, that he might officiate a second Embassy to the Emperor of
Japan; whilst he prepared all things for that Voyage, Anno 1656. much ado had
been in a Dancon, (for so a Consultation of the Grand Council is called by the
Japanners) about the usual Journey from Nangesaque to Jedo; for some thought it
fit, that from that time forward, the Holland Ambassadors should travel through
Bungo by Land to Cocero, and there to Ferry over to Simonisicci, so to shun the
danger of the Sea, which the Hollanders endured the year before on the Coast of
Facata. The Chief Counselor in Sinosamma urged on the business, but yet durst
not take upon him to give order for it; therefore it was thought fit to
acquaint the Emperor, and have his Consent therein, but Joffiesamma advising to
the contrary, saying, it was not fit to trouble the Emperor about such trivial
things; the Council proceeded no farther with it, but let the Hollanders come
their usual way by Water. Wagenaer therefore Shipped his De Stadt SACCAI The
City SACCAI
Presents, and other Goods in a hired Barque, two Bengala Oxen in a smaller
Vessel, and set Sail the second of February from Nangesaque: Before his
departure, amongst others, he gave these Orders to the Merchant Ernest of
Hoogenhock, and Cornelius Mulok, that they should constantly see Divine Service
performed every Evening, at which their smallest Youths should be present.

Wagenaer's troublesome Voyage.
Wagenaer tossed by contrary Winds, and great Showers of Hail, found a no less
dangerous, than long and tedious Passage by Water, being sometimes necessicated
to Ride several days, one after another, at Anchor; his Barque seeming more
like a Prison, than a Ship, because none could stand upright in it, but must
either lie or sit; so that most of the People by that means grew very Lousy:
The Cold Weather also did them no great good, whilst their Provisions grew very
scant. Thus having been tossed forty four days at Sea, he dropped Anchor the
seventeenth of March before Osacca.

Description of the stately Japan City Saccai.
HE Sailed close by Saccai, which made a fine Prospect into the Sea. This City
lying in the Kingdom of Quio, five Leagues below Osacca, is one of the
stateliest Cities in all Japan: The Inhabitants exceeding most of the Japan
Nobility, few but raise their Generations either to Kings or Princes: In the
Civil War which sufficiently harras'd Japan, since the Deposing of the Dayro,
Saccai stood in fear of none; when other Cities and Fortresses in great numbers
were utterly ruined, no Conqueror whatsoever durst meddle with Saccai. On the
West, the City lies toward the Sea, and is for the most part Surrounded with a
Moat, full of Water, except where it rises up against the Mountain, where it is
secured against any Enemies Invasion whatsoever, not only by an exceeding high
Wall, raised from the Ground with Freestone, but also Fortified with an
invincible Castle, built on the highest top of the Mountain; The City of Saccai.
this Castle reckons fifteen Bulwarks, to which is no passing, but by a narrow
and dangerous Path. This keeps the whole City in awe, and defends the Wall
which is built against the Mountain.

Another Castle.
On one side of this Castle stands another, in the hanging of the Mountain, yet
is equal in height; for being built of Freestone, it rises up fifty Foot. On
the other side, near the upper Castle, stands the Royal Palace, inhabited by
the King of Quio, in which Province Saccai is built. The King's Palace:
The Palace appears with two high Towers above the City, the biggest is nine
Stories high, whereof one is lesser than the other, so that at last it ends in
a Pinnacle.

Island Pyenes.
In the Sea before the Haven, lies the Island Pyenes, which has round about a
Level Shore, generally crowded with People, because those that offer themselves
to Canon come thither, not without great attendance of Servants, and Friends.
The Bonzies of the seventh Sect walk before the Multitude, Tabering on great
Copper Kettles, conducting the Consecrated to Canon, to a Japan Sioen, (that
is, a Barque, but built after another manner) made fast to the Shore. Japan
Sioen.
The Sioen has three Masts, and as many Sails, from the Masts and Yards blow
long Vains and Silk Pennons. Moreover, the Sioen is Waxed all over, and adorned
with Golden Imagery: How the Japanners drown themselves.
The Consecrated leaping and Dancing at the noise of the Basins, at last enter
the Vessel, which putting off from the Shore, hangs great Stones about his
Neck, Middle, and Legs, and then to the Honor of Canon, jumps into the Sea
before the Haven of Saccai, after having sat two days before speaking with the
Idol, in the Portal of his Temple.

This Self-murder is not always done out of pretended Zeal, but sometimes
because they are weary of Life, by reason of their Poverty or incurable Sores
or Distempers.

On this Island Pyenes (of which the middle is seen at a great distance, by
reason of two high Hills) is a great Temple, Dedicated to Canon, built of Stone
on the hanging of the Mountains, and no ways inferior to that belonging to the
same Idol in Osacca. Moreover, round about the Island lie several handsome
Sioens, and other small Vessels for the purpose aforesaid.

Opposite to Pyenes appears a Water-Castle, built on a Promontory, being the
Foot of a steep Hill, which lies at one end of Saccai. This is a most
Artificial and stately Building, a large Tower of two Stories high, and flat on
the top, standing in the middle of strong square Walls, toward the Mountain
two great Paths direct the way, at the end of which is another Square Tower,
the top covered with a broad Roof, that jets over the sides. By this
Water-Castle no Ships must pass, before they pay Custom to the City.

Haven of Saccai.
Behind this Fort, the Sea makes a Bay before the City, and Washes over against
the Water-Castle the Foot of a Rock; near which others are of an incredible
height. Walls,
Moreover, the Haven comes just before the Wall of the City, that consists of
Freestone, raised out of a deep Moat full of Water, except where it rises up
against the Mountain; for Saccai being built on the hanging of a great Hill,
the Moat is dry half way; and although the Wall by its strength and height is a
sufficient Defense of its self, yet it is Fortified by the two Castles that
Crown the top of the Mountain. Not far from the Walls that face the
Water-Castle, is the stately Palace, inhabited by the Viceroy of Saccai, which
having an exceeding high Turret in the middle of it, is seen at a great
distance. Saccai is built of Stone.
All the Buildings, both within and without Saccai, are of Stone, which the
Neighboring Rocks afford them in plentiful manner. This City is kept in such
good order, Strange Orders observed there.
that neither Robberies, Dissentions, or Quarrels at any time disturb the
Inhabitants; and if any Disturbance happens, each Street Locks up their Gates,
and the causer of it taken by an Officer, is carried before a Magistrate, where
he is sure to be severely punished; yet notwithstanding this strict Order in
the City, every one has liberty to decide his Quarrel with a drawn Scymiter, a
Stones cast from the Wall.

The great Temple of Saccai full of all manner of Images.
BUt above all things in Saccai, is most remarkable the Temple, which exceeds
all others in Japan, both in costliness and bigness; Dedicated to the strange
Gods of Aracan, Pegu, Cambodia, Tayovan, Couchichina, Borneo, Philippines,
Corea, China, Siam, and one terible Idol, borrowed from the Salvage Inhabitants
of Jesso.

Such a Temple of all sorts of Images stood formerly in Rome, which being
called Pantheon, was Built by Agrippa the Emperor Augustus Son-in-Law, to this
day the Foundation of that Temple (which Pope Boniface the third, about the
year six hundred and seven, being empowered by the Emperor Phocas, Consecrated
to the Virgin Mary and the Apostles) is to be seen, Temple Maria Rotunda.
and called, Santa Maria Rotonda, and is held (as the experienced Artichect
Sebastian Serlius relates) for the handsomest Building to be found any where,
and serves as a Pattern to raise other Edifices by, notwithstanding there is
not the least glance of its first Beauty remaining; for being Burnt in Titus
Vespasian's time, it was Rebuilt by Domitian, and afterward set on Fire by
Lightning in Trajan's Reign, and Erected again by the Emperor Adrian; the Roof
was covered with Silver Tiles Gilded, which the Emperor Constantine's Son took
off, and carried with him to Sicily, where they fell into the Hands of the
Saracens, that carried them to Egypt. In this Pantheon stood the Gods, Jupiter,
Mars, and Venus; and besides other Idol-Images, those of Augustus and Agrippa.

Temples with diverse gods where in former tunes.
Pausanias the Greek Historiographer relates, That in Athens and in other
places of Greece also, stood a general Temple for all manner of Gods: The same
is found by Zozomenus the Ecclesiastical Writer, who relates, That in the
Village Bethelia, where he was born, was a very ancient Temple, built on a
Hill, that looked over all the Village, and being Dedicated to all manner of
Deities, was called Bethelia, agreeing with the Greek word Pantheon, both
signifying, A Temple of diverse Gods.

Strange Image of a Queen in Saccai, borrowed of Siammers.
BUt besides the other several Images in the famous Temple of Saccai, the
Queens Image of melted Jems, which they had from the Siammers, deserves no
small admiration, and will be worth our labor to search after the Original
thereof: When the Queen to the King of Siam dies, A remarkable Funeral of the
Queen of Siam.
her body is kept a whole year, wanting six days, notwithstanding it stink, and
putrify before they lay it into the ground: Then the time being come to Burn
the Corpse in the Marketplace, they place a most Artificial and Royal Throne
about three hundred Foot high, whose inside consists of exceeding thick and
long Poles, pleited about with Rushes, but without surrounded with Mats and
cloven Reeds, curiously Painted and Gilt; the whole Edifice showing like one
entire Piece: Round about this Throne stand several Turrets, each about a
hundred and twenty Foot high, with a Gallery leading from one to the other:
Just before the Throne, is a Tower three times higher than the other, saving
four Portals resting within on great Pillars, curiously Engraven with Fruitage,
and stand in order like our Church-Pillars; after which manner also they stand
within the Throne, on whose Pillars lies a Roof six Fathom from the Ground,
under which, about the middle of the Square inner-part, stands a very splendid
Ascent, twelve Foot high, not only adorned with Gilt Imagery, but also
beautified with green Glass; on this the Corpse is burnt.

This Edifice stands about six Musket Shot from the Palace; between both, a
Way is made of Rushes Pleited, and Painted Red, which keeps off the Multitudes
which flock to see the Funeral in incredible numbers: Along this Fence stand
little Huts, the Roofs of which rest on four Turned Pillars, the sides
separated by Gilded Silk Curtains, within lie Iron Pots, Rice, and yellow Cloth
for Priests.

Before the Corpse come forth, their Players Act publicly in the Marketplace,
whilst several heavy Golden Balls, some great and some little, are brought
thither: The Street between the Palace and the Funeral Pire is full of Sledges
that stand in two Rows, on which appear strange deformed Creatures,
artificially made of Rushes; some representing the shape of Elephants, Dragons,
and Tigers; others, half Men and half Beasts, Rhinocerots, every ones Back
representing a Seat like a Throne, on four Square Pedistals curiously Painted,
some of which Seats are filled with Sandal-Wood to burn the Corpse: These
Pleited Monsters are made fast with Ropes one to another, by which they are
drawn forward through thousands of people. Out of one of the foresaid Houses
along the Rail of Red Rushes, comes forth the Siam Bishop, and sets himself
down on one of the artificial Tigers: Behind the Bishops, the Sons of the King
of Siam get upon the back of one of the Elephants: The youngest Son rides just
before the Chariot, whereon the Corpse of his deceased Mother lies, his Elephant
being made fast to it by Cords of fine Linen, full of Gold Rings, at least an
Inch thick. The Corpse it self stands on a Throne eighteen Foot high, which
rests on a Chariot six Fathom long.

Every thing represents either Art or Splendour; for the Chariot and the Throne
whereon the Corpse stands, is covered with thick Golden Plates, and adorned with
Imagery, Inlaid with Mother of Pearl, and green glittering Glass. The Coffin
sharp on the top, and standing upon one end, is of Massy Gold, Embossed with
Rubies and Diamonds. The artificial Elephants, Tigers, Rhinocerots, Dragons,
and other deformed Creatures, are drawn along with the Corpse by all sorts of
People, but distinguished by their several Caps. Behind the Deceased Queen,
follows the King of Siam, Riding on a She-Elephant, Capparison'd in white
Linen, adorned with great Tassels of Gold; he that leads the Elephant, holds a
Golden Hook, beset with Precious Stones; The King Apparel'd in White, has a
great Hat on his Head, made fast under his Chin, the end of Which hangs over
his Shoulders: Behind the King sits a prime Lord, with his Head and Body bent
forward, which reaches him a Hanger of an Inestimable value: And lastly, When
the Corpse with all the Riches is thrown into the Flame, after some time, the
Ashes of the Queen, and the melted Gold are gathered out of the Fire; the Ashes
preserved in a great square Tower, Plated without with Gilt Tin; but the melted
Gold serves to make an Image, representing the deceased Queen, which when made,
is put into the Temple, and Religiously Worshipped; When the Siammers must be
Shaved.
And after the Queen is Burnt, the Siammers may let the Hair of their Heads
grow, for as long as she was yet standing on the Earth, they were necessitated
to Shave their Heads every Fortnight.

An exceeding strange adventure that happened at the Funeral of the King of
Siam's Daughter.
WIth such a Siam Idol the Temple in Saccai is adorned; but to give you a
somewhat nearer Relation concerning the Original of this Inestimable Image; it
will be necessary to add hereunto the strange adventure that happend on the
three and twentieth of February, and the following days, Anno 1649. which the
Governor John Van Muiden, at that time residing in Judia, the Metropolis of
Siam, as Agent for the Netherland East India Company, being an Eyewitness,
relates thus:

I was, says he, with the rest of the Netherlanders, by the Interpreters called
to Court, to see the Splendid Funeral of the King's Daughter, Born by his Royal
Queen: But because the Messengers came somewhat too late, the Corpse was already
carried to the Funeral Pire; but going thither, we got upon a Scaffold, which
by the King's Order was built for us, not far from the Fire. In the middle of
the Marketplace in Judia, in sight of the Royal Palace, stood five Turrets
raised of high Masts, hung round about with Gilded Mats; four Towers more of
the same height and shape, made an exact Quadrangle: In the middle of the four
was another Erected much larger and higher; for whereas the four were but
twenty Fathom high, the middlemost was thirty, all Plated with Gold, and
Embossed with Precious Stones, Dazelling the Eyes of the Beholder. Within the
biggest Tower stood an exceeding costly Altar, raised six Foot from the Ground,
on which the Corpse of the King's Daughter was to be Burnt, and was now brought
thither, after it had been Embalmed, and stood six Months in State in her
Fathers Court. The Corpse its self was Apparel'd in Majestic Robes, with Gold
Chains, Arm-lets, Neck-Laces of Pearl, and other Precious Jems; on her Head she
wore a Crown of Gold; the Body sat up-right in a Praying posture, in a Chest of
Massy Gold an Inch thick; her Hands folded together, and her Face up toward
Heaven. Then the greatest Mandarines or Siam Lords, with their Ladies stepped to
the Corpse, and every one showing a very mournful Countenance, were all Clothed
in fine white Linen, without any Gaiety, Very rematkable Funeral.
and Strewn an Handful of Flowers or Perfumes on the Deceased; after which,
the Golden Chest with the Corpse was set on a high Throne, Erected on a stately
Chariot, and Presented before the chief Peers and Ladies of the Land; whereupon
the Princesses make first a doleful cry, then wringing their Hands, and
Shreeking aloud, calling also several times together on the Name of the
Deceased, show all the Postures of a hearty sorrow. Mean while, the Chariot
which was drawn by the Prime Nobility, began to approach the foresaid five
Towers: Before the Corpse, the King's eldest Son, the Deceased's eldest Brother
Rode on an Elephant: On both sides his two second Brothers, whose Elephants
were Caparison'd in White, every one having a long Scarf in their Hand, whereof
one end was made fast to the Coffin, so seeming as if they drew the Body along:
On both sides of the Chariot, also walked fourteen of the King's Children on
Foot, Clothed in fine White Linen, and a green Bough in their Hand: Just behind
the Chariot followed all the Princes and their Princesses in great State: On
both sides of the Way, through which the Chariot passed stood stately
Scaffolds, each standing twenty Fathom from the other, on which the meaner sort
of Mandarins, or Lords sat, who when the Corpse came before them, threw several
Suits of Clothes amongst the throng of People, and also Oranges stuck full
Ticols and Masees, which is a sort of Siam Silver Coin, the first valued at
about two Shillings, and the last at six Pence. The concourse of People was so
exceeding great, that many were thronged to death: But so soon as the Chariot
stopped before the middlemost of the five Towers, the Corpse was taken down by
the primest Lords, and not without great Ceremony (whilst the Musicians Sung
and Played all manner of doleful Tunes) was placed on the Altar in the fifth
Tower, and surrounded with Sandal and Agor-Wood, sprinkled with the sweetest
Perfumes, and best of Essenses.

Princesses that must either cry or be beat^n, where that Custom is used.
Then the whole Train of the King's Children and prime Lords returned to Court;
but the Princesses stayed two days and two nights with the Corpse: where sitting
round about the Altar, they may not during that time stir a foot from thence,
but must cry continually without ceasing; to which every one uses her utmost
endeavor, thereby to express her exceeding forrow; for if otherwise they forget
this Ceremony, they are immediately, without regard of their Quality, miserably
beaten with short thick Cords by Women ordered by the King for that purpose. On
one side, at some distance from the five Towers stood a brave Scaffold, covered
with thick gilded and oiled Paper; on which the chief Priests of Siam sat
Praying for the Deceased; sometimes ceasing, they gave Alms amongst the common
People, as abundance of Clothes, Pots, Pans, Beds, and other Housholdstuff; and
also Carpenters Tools, Axes, Saws, Augers, and the like. But besides this prime
Scaffold, there were several less for the ordinary Priests, whose numbers
amounted to above a thousand; which were also employed either in Praying, or
distributing of Alms amongst the People. In a spacious Place round about the
five Towers stood twenty more, out of which after Sunset, for fourteen days
together, rare and artificial Fireworks were shown.

The King burns his Daughters Corpse.
The five and twentieth of February the whole Train that attended the Funeral
two days before, appeared again in a far more splendid manner. The King himself
being present Rode on a young Elephant to the Altar on which the Corpse stood;
where dismounting he set fire on it with a lighted To^ch; which suddenly grew
to that height, that the Flame took hold of all the five Towers, and burnt not
only his Royal Daughters dead Body, but all those Riches with which she sat in
the Gold Chest, when after some hours the heat gone, and the Place grown cool,
he caused a search to be made amongst the Coals for the Bones, Strange wonder
of a piece of Bloody Flesh.
Ashes, and melted Gold, himself holding a Golden Urn in his Hand, and
receiving the gathered Bones into it, when a piece of raw Flesh all bloody,
which the Fire had not consumed, was found; at which the King being exceedingly
amazed, asked his Council Oja Sabartiban, which stood next to him, and helped
him to gather the Relics that were left, what he thought concerning it?
Sabartiban answered, Most mighty Lord, your great understanding easily
apprehends the meaning, the business being so very apparent. The King struck
with a consternation, ran immediately like a distracted Person to his Palace,
saying, Now I see it plainly what I so long doubted, namely that my Daughter
was poisoned. Wherefore he suddenly seized on all the Women, not excepting any
that ever Served the Princess in her Lifetime, and committed them all to safe
Custody; nay, he took all those in his whole Dominions, that at any time
conversed with her.

The eight and twentieth of February he began his scrutiny: three hundred
Ladies of Honor, and other great Persons of Quality which had ever been in
Company with the King's Daughter whilst she was living, were driven through a
huge Fire, that (according to the Siam Law) they might be tried, if they were
guilty or not, which they knew by the Flames hurting or preserving them.

This Trial was performed not without great Charms and Incantations; yet all of
them passing safe through the Fire without receiving the least hurt, were again
set at liberty. Mean while there was great suspicion, that the youngest
Daughter to the former King (for the present King had in a Rebellion bereaved
his Predecessor both of his Life and Crown) might have committed the Fact;
because being this King's Concubine, she had sometime showed her self very much
dissatisfied, because he showed such exceeding kindness and great respects to
his eldest Daughter, and regarded not hers, who also acknowledged him for her
Father: and indeed the suspicion grew the greater when the King was informed,
that this his Concubine was observed to laugh, whilst every one present at the
Funeral bewailed the death of the Deceased: For this jealousy the Princess,
with a great Train of her Ladies of Honor, was forced also to go through the
Fire, all of them passing through without being hurt, except the Princess, who
was very much burnt on both her Feet: therefore she was immediately laden with
Silver Fetters, and committed to a Prison where none were suffered to speak
with her. On the second of March she had public Audience before all the
Mandarins, or Lords; where, whether out of fear of exquisite tortures, or
terrified with the King's anger, she freely said, If the King will promise upon
Oath, that he will immediately Execute me, and keep me no longer alive, to be a
scorn and derision to the World, there will need but little trouble to find out
the mystery of his Daughters death. The Mandarins which remembered the former
Condition and State of this Princess, when her Father was King of Siam, were no
less amazed at her noble courage, than inwardly pricked with compassion to find
out a means for her Deliverance; but the fear they had of the present King
quenched all such motions: They reported that which she had said to his
Majesty; who immediately promised upon Oath, that the Princess after real
confession should not live an hour to be despised by the World. Upon which she
confessed, That not without help of her Nurse she had prepared a Poison, which
was so Charmed, that one piece of his or her Flesh that took it should not be
consumed by Fire, whene're the so poisoned should be burnt. This Compound by a
mistake the King's Daughter greedily swallowed, which thus prepared was
intended for her Father, that the death of so bloody a Tyrant, (who like a
Villain treacherously took the Scepter out of my Fathers Hand, that was lawful
King of Siam, and oppressed the true Royal Family) might satisfy my Revenge
for my Fathers Death, and to deliver those of Royal Blood from insupportable
slavery. No sooner was this Relation of hers carried to the King, but he caused
a great piece of Flesh to be cut out of the Princesses Side, which he forced
her with great threatenings to eat up; and whilst she was swallowing the last
Bit, some of his Executioners, appointed for that purpose, fell upon her with
drawn Swords, and left not off till they had chopp'd her into a thousand
pieces, which they afterward threw into the River Judia.

Not long after the Princesses Brother, Son to the deposed King of Siam, was
also Executed, he being in the former Insurrection spared alive, because he was
supposed to be frantic; but at his Death appeared the contrary, he also
subtily contriving with his Sisters to destroy the King, and make himself
Master of the Crown; and had not the Business been untimely betrayed, he had no
small hopes to repossess his Fathers lost Kingdoms.

Strange Image in Siam.
When the forementioned Funeral Ceremonies were ended, the King caused an Image
to be made, on which he bestowed not only all the melted Gold in the middle
Tower, but also all the Presents (amounting to several Tun of Gold) which the
King's Daughter had received from the Mandarins.

This Image, representing the Deceased, was placed in the chiefest Temple to be
worshipped; and such a kind of Image stands in the great Temple in Saccai.

Wagenaer's farther Journey to Jedo.
WAgenaer having Sailed past Saccai, came on the seventeenth of March to
Osacca, where he found Provision exceeding dear and scarce, occasioned by a
great Storm which had spoiled all the Corn about the Courttrey; so that the
Carriage of Goods on Pack-horses, amounted to much more than at other times.

Wagenaer presented the Governor Faitosamona and Tambesamma, who furnished him
with thirty Men to carry the two Bengael Oxen and their Carrs.

Whilst Wagenaer spent five days in Osacca, preparing all things necessary for
his Journey by Land, news came from Meaco, that forty Streets were burnt down
in that City, and not a few of the Inhabitants destroyed by the Flame.

Description of the City Jonda.
From Osacca, Wagenaer took his Journey through Firaskatta to Jonda, which is a
small Town lying in the Territory Jamaisiro, at the River which runs through
Osacca, and lies eight Leagues distant from thence. There is scarce any Place
in Japan, that for pleasantness surpasses Jonda: for if you look for curious
Buildings, here are stately Turrets, large Churches, and very neat Houses: the
Windows are closed with bright glittering Shutters: their Chambers are bigger
or less, according to their several Partitions, the Walls painted with all
manner of Imagery on gilded Paper, and edged above, below, and on all sides,
with black waxed Ledges: the Doors of the standing Partitions are also adorned
like the Walls: at the upper end of the Chamber hangs generally a Picture;
before which stands a Flower-pot; which kind of Furniture is used in all Japan.

Near Jonda lies an Imperial Castle, surrounded with a Stone Wall, raised out
of deep Moat, within it a stately Palace, whose Turret may be seen at a great
distance. The Country about it is Woody on one side, and abounds with Deer and
wild Boars: on the other side appear pleasant Meadows, which produce store of
Rice, and all manner of Plants. No Place affords more Swans, Geese, Ducks,
Pheasants, Pigeons, Partridges, Woodcocks, Quails, and all manner of Fowls than
this. The River yields Breams, Place, and exceeding good Salmon, all which Fish
come up the River out of the Sea: but those that are taken at Jonda are much
better than those which are taken at Osacca. It is to be admired, that their
Salmon here, though the Heart be cut out, will live several hours afterward,
and that the Heart cut out dies not till a night and a day after. But though
this Salmon be acceptable, and of a pleasing taste, yet the Head thereof is
very unwholsom, for those that eat much of it are subject to get a Fever.

Wagenaer arrives at Jedo.
Wagenaer got on the one and twentieth of March toward the Evening to Meaco,
and presented there the Grand Judge Mackino Sandosamma; from whom he got a free
Pass to Jedo, where hearriv'd in safety thirteen days after he left Meaco, the
foul and rainy Weather making the Journey longer than at other times; so that
the usual time on which the Emperor used to give Audience being past, the
Ambassador was forced to stay a considerable time before he could be admitted
to the Emperor's Presence. Mean while he understood, that Sicungodonne had the
year before, because of his great age, given over following all public
Employments; and that the Emperor had given his Place to a prime Courtier
called Hootye Auwanno, Cammisamma: Yet nevertheless Wagenaer sent an Inventory
of all the Presents to Sicungodonne, that he might order the dividing of them;
but the Interpreters went not to Sicungodonne, but to Joffiesamma, Governor of
Nangesaque, who Read the Inventory over several times, and approved at last of
the dividing of them, only he would have the Ambassador to add two Pieces of
black Cloth to the Emperor's Presents; and since Joffiesamma would have it so,
Wagenaer was forced to let the two Pieces of black Cloth go. Moreover he judged
it unhandsom to leave out Sicungodonne, notwithstanding he was retired from
Courtly Employments, considering he had been so great a help to the Hollanders
on all occasions heretofore. Whereupon Wagenaer commanded the Interpreters a
second time to give the forementioned Inventory to Sicungodonne; but he sent
it back without Reading of it, and modestly excused himself, that hence-forward
he could not serve them in their Business; yet he was satisfied that they still
acknowledged him. Sicungodonne's new Successor Hootye Auwanno would not concern
himself with the Hollanders this first time; therefore they were forced to
Govern themselves according to Joffiesamma's humors, who was a stern and
churlish Person.

Wagenaer found no small trouble about the securing of his Presents; for the
Inn wherein he Lodged being nothing else but a Hut covered with Straw, having
not been rebuilt since the Fire; and indeed all the Houses in Jedo were made
after such a manner, that it seemed rather a large Village than a City. The
Storehouse behind the Hollanders Inn lay still buried in Rubbish. But
Joffiesamma proffered Wagenaer his Goddon, and a Chamber in the Palace to
divide the Presents in, when they should be given to the Emperor; and although
Wagenaer considered the removing, yet he durst not deny the Proffer, but
Packing up their Goods sent them thither.

Mean while there came Orders, that the Counselors and Japan Princes were to
appear before the Emperor on the eight and twentieth of the new Moon, by them
called Ninguats; which time agrees with our ninth and tenth of April:
Joffiesamma acquainted Wagenaer with it two days before, ordering him, that he
and his Retinue should be in handsome Apparel, and come to Court on the
appointed day by nine of the Clock in the Morning: The day being come, Wagenaer
rose very early, and fetching the Presents from Joffiesamma's House, carried
them to Court, where he set them in public view. Appears before the Emperor.
But that which most troubled him were the Bengael Oxen, many hundreds of the
Japanners having waited all the day before to see them; and indeed they made so
great a Crowd, that it would have been impossible for him to have gotten
through them: to prevent which trouble, the Oxen that stood in the Hollanders
Inn were covered with red Flannel with silk Tassels, Roses, gilded Bells, and
all manner of Ribbons. Before daybreak they were led to the Court by the
Interpreters; where Wagenaer met them at the appointed time: he stayed two
hours in the Emperor's little Palace, which stands Westward from the greater,
in which the Emperor resided since he was burnt out of the biggest two years
before.

What they did with them before the Emperor.
In the interim Joffiesamma came into the usual Waiting-Hall, and taking
Wagenaer by the Hand, led him through a stately Gallery to the Throne, where he
found the Emperor standing upright, and looking more earnestly on the Presents,
and chiefly on the Bengael Oxen, than on Wagenaer, who lay with his Face flat
on the Ground; but he lay not long before he was commanded to rise, and return
to the Hall from whence he came; where staying with his Retinue, a Person of
Quality came to them, and asked in the name of the Council, that two Hollanders
would come into the open Court, that there they might show to the Council
(amongst which the Emperor was also present) how they might Harness the Oxen,
put them into the Care, and drive them, for the Emperor taking great delight in
them, would see them Draw every day: and also besides the other Presents, the
rich Alcatiff, wove of Gold and Silver was very acceptable to him; so that the
Emperor spent two hours time in viewing the Presents and the Bengael Oxen:
after which Wagenaer had leave to depart; which word being brought by
Joffiesamma, Wagenaer thanked him for his quick dispatch with the Emperor. The
next day he delivered the remaining Presents to the Council and Magistrates of
Jedo, and to the other Persons of Quality, to whom the East India Company are
used yearly to present: all of them received whatever was brought to their
Houses by their Servants, none of their Masters ever appearing.

Joffiesamma gave the Ambassador timely notice, that the Emperor had chosen two
new Counselors that Year, Inoube Cattwatsisamma, and Itacera Auwanna
Cammisamma, therefore they ought no ways to be forgotten, whereupon they also
had Presents given them.

What the Journey to Jedo cost the Hellanders.
This Journey cost very dear, being occasioned by many inconveniences, for not
only did their Voyages by Water last longer than ordinary, by reason of
contrary Winds, but also their Journey by Land, because of the flabby and rainy
Weather: Moreover, they were forced to stay in Jedo thirty days where all
manner of Provisions ever since the Fire were very scarce, and sold at an
exceeding dear Rate; and were necessitated to Present the new Counselors,
which was more than they expected. Those that remained, Joffiesamma advised
them to carry back to Nangesaque, judging it not convenient to sell them it
Jedo, because it would occasion discontent and envy amongst the Japan Nobility,
and chiefly if one should be more kindly used than the other. The Hollanders
(said he) should make the Inventory of their Presents at Nangesaque, and bring
no more to Jedo than what they intended to give away. But Wagenaer informed
Joffiesamma, that some years ago the Hollanders received express Orders, that
besides the usual Presents, they should bring also some Merchandise to sell,
partly to give to new elected Lords, and partly to accommodate other Persons of
Quality asking for them for Money; which Answer satisfying Joffiesamma, he
permitted that Wagenaer should sell the remaining Goods; who made use of this
liberty, and sold the Goods for 550 l. Moreover he judged it fit for the future
to make the Inventory of the Presents at Nangesaque, according to Joffiesamma's
advice; and the rather, because that for the time to come they could be no more
instructed by Sicungodonne, to whom till then the Hollanders left the dividing
of the Presents.

Mean while this ancient Interceder for the Hollanders seemed to have a great
respect for them, he being exceedingly pleased that they had brought him his
desired Commodities, as Pitch, the best Dutch Sail cloth, and Garden-Seeds, for
which he paid according to what they demanded. He requested, that as soon as
possible some European Medicines might be sent him: which Wagenaer promised
faithfully to perform. And Sicungodonne told them, that he would promote all
things that might be advantageous to the Hollanders in their East India Trade:
in Which he could do much, he being a great Favorite at Court, and very
intimate with the Councellor Enimosamma, through whose hands the greatest
Concerns of the Japan Empire passed.

Japan Nobles are bad Pay-masters.
But as for the Money which the Japan Nobility were in arrears since the Fire,
which was then two years, the Hollanders had no news of it, notwithstanding a
Japan Secretary, called Nimon, employed by Wagenaer several times demanded it,
for it availed not: The Debtors being most of them Persons of great Quality, it
was dangerous to Dun them; also a Servant scarce durst bring such a Message to
his Master, except he be in a very good humor indeed. But amongst other Nobles
Oenemidonne denied that he had bought any Goods, neither could the Interpreters
be persuaded, or hired by Wagenaer to demand Payment of him: they pretended to
be indisposed, and not in a capacity to ask for Debts: Yet Wagenaer sent him a
Letter to put him in mind; which he received, and promised to pay: but when
sent to according to his promise, he denied himself, his Servants telling those
that came that he was gone up into the Country.

Wagenaer receives order to fetch the Emperors Presents, in return for his,
from the Court.
Till this time the Emperors Presents, which he returned the Hollanders, used to
be sent them to their Inn, but now they receive Order, that they should come to
Court to fetch them; and there likewise have leave for their departure.
Whereupon Wagenaer went to the Court on the nine and twentieth of April, and
stayed an hour in the Waiting-Hall, when by Hootye Auwanno, Sicungodonne's
Successor, he was led to an exceeding costly Chamber, and within twenty Paces
before four of the Council: behind which sat several Persons of great Quality.
Auwanno gave order to an Interpreter to ask in the Emperor's and Councels Names
these following Questions: What is proposed to him there.
In case the Hollanders ever heard that the Spaniards in the Manilla's, or the
Portuguese in Goa, had any treacherous Design upon Japan, if they should come
to have timely notioe of it, whether or no they would make it known to the
Governor of Nangesaque, that they might prepare for Resistance? with which they
would exceedingly get into the Emperor's favor, who would requite such a
Courtesy, by granting them a free Trade, without any molestation in Japan.
Moreover, Auwanno added hereto, That the Hollanders for the future should be
very careful, that they Boarded no Chinese Jonks, that Traded to Japan, so by
Robbing them to make the Seas dangerous: the Emperor as yet knew nothing of the
Jonks that not long since had been taken by them; but if they did not give over
Pyrating, the Hollanders would be sure to repent it; for his Imperial Majesty
would no ways suffer that the Chinese, who were peaceable Neighbors, should be
disturbed in their Trade.

Wagenaer's Answer.
Wagenaer replied, The Hollanders do account themselves highly obliged to the
Japan Empire, therefore they would do all things that might be advantageous to
Japan; and whenever they had the least knowledge, that the Spaniards and
Portuguese should Plot against it, they would certainly make it known at
Nangesaque. Concerning the Chinese Jonks which were robbed, the Fact was done
by rude Seamen, and without the least knowledge of the Council at Batavia;
wherefore the Criminals should be severely punished for an example to others.

Emperors Presents.
This Answer pleasing the Council exceeding well, they caused thirty of the
Emperors richest Coats to be brought on three long Boards: Auwanno said, Your
Presents, O Holland Ambassador, are most acceptable to the Emperor; wherefore
he has given you these in return, and also gives you free leave to go to
Nangesaque. Which said, Wagenaer was by Joffiesamma conducted to the
Guard-Hall, where he wished him much joy of his quick Dispatch, and the
Emperors Favor; and also proffered to do him all the Service he could, if he
required any thing to his Journey.

Hollanders Presents are not accepted, and why.
Moreover, the Kings of Ouwarri, Cunocuni, and Mito, the Emperor's Uncle, and
also the Councellor Minosamma, asked for some Strings of Blood-Coral, and six
Cast of Loopen, the form of which was drawn on a piece of Paper, and given to
Wagenaer. Minosamma required also a Perspective-Glass, which being accordingly
sent, was returned again, the same being, as he pretended, too dark; but indeed
the fault was in the bad Informations of his Servants, who knew not how to use
it. And just so it was with the costly Book of Plants of Rembert Dodoneus; for
although the Flowers, Trees, and Herbs were extraordinary handsome to the Life,
yet Minosamma sent it back again, because he looked upon the Prints to be too
small, and not well drawn; so desiring a bigger Book, and one that was
handsomer painted. And as little was the Globe esteemed, which with all the Art
imaginable was made for the Emperor of Japan in Amsterdam, because they knew
not the meaning thereof; yet some of them could find the chiefest Kingdoms in
Europe upon it, and pointing to them with their Fingers, name them: But as for
the representation of the Planets, they have many strange thoughts; for most of
them think, that certainly such Men and Beasts do invisibly stick to the
Clouds; others, that they inhabit the Heavens.

Wagenaer's Journey from Jedo to Nangesaque.
THirty days Wagenaer spent at Jedo; and going out of this Imperial City on the
fourth of May, he came in fourteen days time safe to Osacca, out of whose Haven
he set sail the twentieth of the same Month, the Wind and Weather favoring him,
and got to Simonificci, where he dropped Anchor eight days after he left Osacca.

The Interpreter and Bonjoises forbad their Pilot to sail into the Straights
between Bungo and the Main Coast of Japan, toward the Corean Sea, layings That
the time of the Trade-Wind was gone, therefore they should lie longer on the
Sea; and that they could not possibly get forward, the Winds blowing
continually against them: The Hollanders might, according to the Advice of the
Council, travel over-land to Nangesaque, and so choose a certainty for an
uncertainty; and they were sure to be safer on Shore, than at Sea.

Yet Wagenaer was doubtful, because new Inventions bring new Inconveniences
and Charge; wherefore he thought it best to go the usual way by Water, and not
through Bungo, which would increase their Charge, that was great enough
otherwise: Yet it availed not that Wagenaer seemed to dislike the Proposal of
the Bonjoises and Interpreters; but they went against his will their own way,
Ferrying over from Simonisicci to the City Cokero, lying on Bungo, in an Inlet
opposite to Simonisicci; and landing at Cokero, whether Wagenaer would or not,
he was forced to follow them.

His dangerous Journey though Bungo.
The Journey was dangerous, because of the Rivers which run between the Rocks,
through which they were forced to wade: The steep Banks and doubtful Depths
made it the more troublesome. With these Dangers also came Inconveniences; for
the Island Bungo, otherwise called Cikoko, is but poorly stocked from Cokero to
Nangesaque; so that scarce any thing of the meanest Provisions were to be had
there.

Wagenaer traveled in that manner five days, leaving Jammanganomisacci and
Assia on the right hand, and passing through the Kingdoms of Facata and Fisen,
along a dirty way, made so by the continual Showrs of Rain that fall there.

In the City Fisen he refreshed himself, where he got abundance of all manner
of Provisions, and chiefly was entertained with a dainty Fish, not unlike a
Salmon, being taken in the River Day, which washes the Castle Daymats.

Description of the city Fisen, and the stately Castle Daymats.
This Castle is very beautiful to behold: The Governor thereof has a
Banqueting House, built in the middle of the River, on thick Pillars, between
which the Stream sets very swift; in it are several delightful and spacious
Rooms; the lowermost jutting Roofs are all adorned with Golden Balls;
underneath them lie several Pleasure-Boats, to shelter them from the Weather.

The Borough of the Castle Daymats affords a Habitation for the Customers
which receive the Custom from the Ships which pass up and down the River, and
the Revenues of the adjacent Countries; so that there is a continual Concourse
of People in this Place, not an Hour passing but one or other is carried in a
Sedan to the Watergate; others ride thither on Horses; some rouling of Packs
and Barrels, others loading them on Carts drawn by Oxen.

Between this Borough and the River Day, lies a Plain very convenient for
Landing or Shipping of Goods which are to pay Custom, The Borough it self has
three Gates; the chiefest lies on the Shore, where the Entrance begins under a
Roof, with two Trap-doors, between two Walls that rise higher and higher to the
second Gate, made fast in the Wall on each side; the top of it appears a little
above the Bulwarks: These Bulwarks have many Redoubts; on some of the outmost
of them are square Watch-houses, two Stories high; within are several fair
Houses, inhabited by the Customers.

From the Borough a way leads up the Hill to the Castle, enclosed between
thick and high Walls, above which appear the Roofs of very stately Buildings.
The fair Portals are four in number; but six Turrets exceed all the rest ill
Splendour, five whereof rise aloft each with five Stories; the sixth surpasses
Lordship and Castle DA^MATS
the other, being one Story higher; and the Costliness of it, dazzling the Eyes
of the Beholders, can scarce be described.

Midway between the Borough and the Castle, stands a handsome Temple, in which
the Bonzies daily perform their Service.

The City Fisen lies for the most part hid in a Valley behind the Castle, and
appears with several high Temples and Turrets, with above twenty thousand
lesser Buildings.

WAgenaer traveling through the Province Omura, left Auwo, Tabra, Aynoro,
Oysinucobi, Omodakey, Nantsjamma, Zetta, and Focunda on the right hand, and
came on the second of June, five days after he Landed on Cokero, to Nangesaque,
where he had News from Formosa, News from Formosa.
That the Tartars and Coxengans were upon concluding a Peace; wherefore he lay
before the Nankin Coast, to hasten the Confirmation of it. There was also News
from Tayovan, concerning the Chinese Interpreter Cabessa Pingua, that privately
he demanded the Custom in Coxenga's Name, from the Jonks which Traded to
Formosa; which being known, he was committed to Custody, and after having
received some small Punishment, released; but yet was since fled, with his Wife
and Children, to China, where he serves Coxenga for Toll-gatherer in Annay, and
without doubt will plot no great good for the East India Company. The said
Pingua is run above seventy thousand Ryals in debt in Formosa.

Moreover, Wagenaer staid till the first of November for the Ship the Black
Bull, which was very richly laden; but because she did not come, he was fain to
make a Market with Tonquean Silk, European Piece-Goods, as Cloth, Serges,
Perpetuanaes, and Siam Furs, and promise upon an Obligation, That the Cargo in
the Bull, when she came to an Anchor before Disma, should be laid up for the
next Year. The staying away of this Ship, was occasioned because at that time
less Profit was made in Japan by eight Tun of Gold, than at other times.

The manner of the Hollanders selling their Goods in Japan is remarkable.
THeir Sale is after this manner: In November the East India Company have free
leave to Trade. On Monday they show their Goods; for then the Storehouse on
Disma, before Nangesaque, is opened: A great long Bench stands in the middle of
the Gallery, which below has three hundred Rooms for the stowing of Goods.
Above live the Servants to the East India Company. On the Bench stand Silver
Chargers, in which lie all manner of Merchandises, viz. Drugs, Pepper, Cloves,
Nutmegs, Mace, Cinnamon, Buckskins, Buff, and other Skins; also Tonkian
Peeleng, Musk, Europeans Clothes, Serges, Looking-glasses, Speckled Wood,
Quicksilver, Brimstone, and Hats which are worn by the Nobility of Japan.
Toward Evening all the Store-Chambers are sealed with the Emperors Arms, in
the presence of one of the Magistrates of Nangesaque, who sits with the Holland
Merchant during the time of Trade, at the chief Table. The Service here is
attended by three hundred Japanners, daily employed by the East India Company.

The forementioned Gallery is square, and rests on Pillars of Speckled Wood,
twelve Foot high; a winding pair of Stairs leads up to it, the Floor thereof
being covered with rich Tapestry: Round about stand Stools, on whose Silk
Cushions the Arms of the East India Company are embroidered. When the Japanners
enter the Gallery, they pull off their Shoes. On Tuesdays they contract about
the Price, the next day they deliver; then the Watergate of the Holland
Storehouse is opened, where all November they lade and unlade their Goods,
into above a hundred Barques. Upon Sundays they rest, because the Hollanders
following their Devotion, permit no Work to be done.

The manner used by the Japanners in selling their Goods.
Mean while, in the same Month also, is kept an Annual Fair, where the Japanners
erect Booths of Sail-Cloth, in which they sell Copper, Silver, China Roots,
Camphire and Camphire-wood, curious Porcelan Plates and Dishes, Silk, Japan
Coats, on the outsides embroidered with Gold and Silver, and quilted with
Cotton, wrought Plate, Rice, Tobacco, waxed Cabinets and Chests. Whilst thus
they set their Commodities to sale, they make themselves merry with Sakje, a
Drink made of the best Wheat, having a strange smell, but as strong as Spanish
Wine. The forementioned Magistrate is Security for all that is sold. The Silver
and Copper weighed in a Scale, and marked with the Emperors Stamp, is delivered
in Chests. Generally the East India Company take at one time of Sale, for their
Commodities, six hundred Chests of Silver, and two thousand of Copper; yet
sometimes they take a great deal more or less: Every Chest of Silver amounts to
a thousand Crowns.

Remarkable Passage of Martin Remei.
IN the interim Wagenaer prepared the Ship the Singing Bird to go for Batavia,
but was hindered one day by Accident: Martin Remei, a Native of Formosa, coming
as Chyrurgeon from Tayovan, with the Ship Nieuport, to Nangesaque, had leave to
inhabit ashore, in the hinder part of the Hollanders Storehouse on the Island
Disma, with three Factors; but was missed in the Morning, on the thirteenth of
November; yet they found at last a Letter in his Bed, that he rose to bereave
himself of Life, because a Japan Whore, with whom he had lain three days, was
gone away, by which means she had bereaved him of his Pleasures. Wagenaer sent
in vain to search all corners, either to find him living or dead: whereupon he
made the Business known to the Magistrates, who gave immediate order,
impowering some Bonjoises and Interpreters, and also their own Servants, to
search all Houses and Skulking-places: Whereupon they searched the Ships,
Jonks, and Japan Vessels; and indeed all Nangesaque was in an Uproar about it.
Wagenaer caused his Men to Fish round about Disma, and was not a little
troubled that he could not find Remei: For the Governors reported, That it was
a Portugttese Priest, brought from China thither, that kept himself private
with some yet undiscovered Christians. But this Opinion soon vanished, when
Remei the fifteenth of November, about the Evening, was brought bound on the
Island Disma, to the great joy of those that kept the Watch when he made his
escape; for they would all of them have lost their Lives for their Negligence.

This Remei was gotten over the Walls in the Night, and at low Water to the
East side of the Haven before Nangesaque, where he hid himself under a long
Chinese Straw Sail, till such time Hunger forced him to come out: But being
instantly taken, was carried Prisoner to the Governor, who sent him to
Wagenaer, and he kept him in safe custody, and sent him afterward to Tayovan,
there to suffer punishment according to his desert.

It happened that at that time the Governor was in an exceeding good humor, who
otherwise deals very severely with those that get ashore out of the Hollanders
Ships: Wherefore the Japanners take a List of the Names, Ages, and Offices of
the Seamen, to the smallest Youth, so soon as any Ship approaches the Harbor
of Nangesaque; and if any one of them should be found wanting when they are
going away, both Ship and Men would thereby happen into a great inconveniency,
unless they could prove, that the Person which was wanting died a natural
death, or with the Magistrates leave of Nangesaque, staid behind on the Island
Disma.

Another Exploit of a Dutch Surgeon.
Two Years after, happened almost the like Accident. The Chyrurgeon belonging to
the Admiral Vollenhoven leaped overboard in the night, to swim aboard of a
Jonk, that so out of Curiosity he might make a Voyage to China; which the Pilot
made known to the Commander Indiik, who acquainted the Magistrates with it,
which immediately sent Soldiers and Servants to make search for him; and if he
should not be found, they threatened the Hollanders to let their Ships drive
ashore, where with Goods and Men they would set them on Fire. On the third day
he that fled Was fetched out of a Chinese Jonk, bound Hand and Foot, and thrown
into the Emperors Prison, whence he escaped not without great trouble, and Sums
of Money; and was also for ever banished from Japan, upon pain of Death.

Sad Accident of a drunken Seaman.
BUt it fell not out so well with a drunken Seaman belonging to the Graveland,
who took often the Emperors Straw Seal with which the Hatches were sealed; when
on the Morning the Interpreters coming aboard, with the Workmen that brought
the Balast, which consists of little Chests full of Copper, weighing a hundred
and fifty pound weight, observed that the Emperors Arms were torn from one of
the Hatches: They immediately made it known to the Bonjoises, which continually
sit on the Prow of the Ship, upon a costly Carpet: The Bonjoises sealed the
Hatch again, and immediately informed the Governors, who instantly sent twenty
of the Emperors Soldiers aboard, to demand the Man which had so presumptuously
spoiled the Emperors Arms, or else they would carry all the whole Ships Crew to
Prison: Whereupon he that was guilty discovering himself, was carried ashore
before the Magistrates, who cutting him in at the left Shoulder, made their
Sword come out under his right Arm.

How the Japanners cut their Servants in the middle.
In this bloody Office they use no Executioners; but every one that buys a new
Hanger, tries it either by cutting a Man, Woman, or Child through with both his
Hands.

This kind of Exercise happens often, and chiefly when any Christians stand
condemned; for they take them, and hang them up by the Feet on a Gibbet, with
their Heads downwards into a Well, in which they cut several Holes, that the
Blood may so drop out by degrees. Near the Gibbet on one side burns a continual
Fire; on the other side waves a white Pennon, taken in every Evening, and put
forth in the daytime, till the Malefactor be dead and burnt. But the nearest
Relation to the so tormented Christian, as also three of his Neighbors, die,
without sparing either Wives or Children, by the forementioned way of cutting
them in at the left Shoulder, so bringing their Sword out under the right Arm.

Chinese Merchant, cannot sell their Goods.
AFter this, the Chinese in Coxenga's Name complained again, about the taken
Jonk which was call away before Tayovan; but were ordered to go to Batavia, to
seek for redress there: Upon which, they gave out, That if they should come in
Batavia, they should be murdered; which Report of theirs was but little
regarded. And they had not much better Success with their raw white Silk, of
which they sold not one pound at Nangesaque; whereas, on the contrary, the
East India Company exchanged al their Tonquean and Bengala Silk, for good
Silver; the Japan Merchants having agreed to bestow all their Moneys on the
Hollanders, before they bought any thing of the Chinese. Mean while they
finding nothing to do, were necessitated to depart from thence with their
Merchandise, not without great damage: and should they but one or two Years
more meet with such a bad Market, it would without all peradventure weaken and
dishearten their great Navigation, and hinder them from sending yearly fifty
laden Jonks to Japan, to the great prejudice of the East India Company, who in
many things are forced to give way to the Chinese.

WHilst Wagenaer was preparing for his Voyage to Batavia, he received twenty
one thousand seven hundred and sixty pieces of the best white Porcelan. A Month
before the delivery of them, another Person had brought a considerable Parcel
of Porcelan to sell on the Island Disma; but because they were too full of
Flowers, most of them stuck on his Hands.

The Japanners have some few years been more eager in making of Porcelan than
heretofore; Japanners make great store of Porcelan.
so that not only the Hollanders, but also the Chinese vend a great deal
thereof. The best place for this Commodity is the Lordship Fesen, of the Earth
of which place they make it, being finer and whiter than elsewhere. The
Japanners grow every Year more and more experienced in this Art; so that they
make their Porcelan better and better. Wagenaer contrived a small Flower to be
made on a blue Ground; but was exceedingly amazed, when not long after he saw
all the Shops full of them.

But whereas Fesen produces the best Porcelan in Japan; so in China, the
Village Sinktesimo. It is worthy our observation, That the Earth, which is not
unlike fine Sand, of which they bake their Porcelan, is dug up near the
Metropolis Hoeicheu, lying in the Territory of Nankin, where they only knead
it into Balls or Pellets, How it is made.
which sealed with the Emperors Arms, are sold at a certain price, and sent to
Sinktesimo; for this Village only, by a hidden Power or Operation in the
Waters there, makes the best Porcelan. Those that bake, are Rustical Clowns,
brought up to that Trade from their Infancy. They prepare the Earth two several
ways: Sometimes they work it so soon as it comes from Hoeichen, after the same
manner as our European Potters prepare their Clay for their Pots and Pans. At
other times they let it lie so long, till it is grown as hard as a Stone, which
they afterward stamp to Powder, sift it through a very fine Sieve, then mixing
it with Water, knead it into Balls, and at last press it into a Wooden Frame,
according to what fashion they please: Then they are first dried in the Wind,
and put into an Oven, which fifteen days together is continually hot, and
afterward kept close as many days more, that so they may cool by degrees, or
else they would: break all to pieces. After thirty days the Oven is opened, in
the presence of one of the Emperors Officers, who narrowly looks on every Piece
thereof, and, according to the Laws of the Country, takes away every fifth
Piece of Porcelan to the Emperors use. The rest the Potters at Sinktesimo sell
to the Inhabitants of Uciengen, a Village lying at the Lake Poyang, on the left
hand Shore of the River Can. The Place is above two Miles long, rich for
Traffic, and replenished with handsome Buildings; every Year so full with those
that Trade in Porcelan, that one can scarce pass the Throng. The River lies
generally full of Barques, wherein they load, and so transport it over all the
World: From hence appears the old mistake of their Opinion in Europe,
believing, Great mistake.
That the Stuff of which they made the Porcelan was the Powder of Sea-Cockles,
or Egg-shells, or else of Earth which their Forefathers prepared, and kept it
a hundred Years after under Ground; so their Succeffors valued it according to
its Age.

How the Japanners carry the Dutch Ships out of their Haven.
WAgenaer setting sail in the Ship Hilversom for Batavia, so soon as ever his
Guns were brought aboard, and the Rudder hung, was forced to be gone,
notwithstanding a great part of his Goods lay upon the Deck.

The Japanners hold it for an ancient Law, That as soon as ever the Hollanders
Ammunition is brought aboard, whether in the Night or Day, contrary or fair
Winds, they must go to Sea; but if by reason of contrary Winds they cannot get
beyond the Priest-Mountain, they have above a hundred Watches about their Ship,
which cutting their Cables, tow them out of the Haven of Nangesaque. In the
Corean Ocean, generally, from September to April, a Northerly Trade-wind blows
so fresh, that they can scarce carry out their Topsails.

The Bank Pracellis, formerly a Kingdom.
But this Ship Hilversom ran once in this Voyage no small danger, falling by
Night on the Tail of Pracellis, which is a Riff or Bank lying about twenty
Leagues from the main Coast of Cambodia, being above a hundred Leagues long,
and forty broad. The Indians relate, That it was a Kingdom in former Ages, but
sunk by Earthquakes. On both sides of Pracellis lie two Shoals, called Bruers
Sand, and Alkmaers; wherefore it is very dangerous here for Shipping: and this
is the place where in Anno 1660. the rich laden Ship Tergoes was split all to
pieces.

Wagenaer would fain have put for the Piscadore Islands, to find out the
longmiss'd Ship, the Bull; but durst not go too near the Shore because of the
Hazie Weather: Yet Anchoring at Pool Timon, Miserable condition of the Ship
called the Sea-Knight.
he found there the Ship called The Sea-Knight, miserably torn and shattered by
foul Weather, most part of her Masts being gone, and the Fore-castle and Cabins
well-nigh washed away by the Sea: The Merchant Henry Baron, and a great many of
the Seamen, seemed more like Skeletons, than Living Creatures: Baron was
struck with a lameness in his Hands, and the Palsy in his Feet; so seeming to
hasten to death, while he was yet living; which made Wagenaer earnestly to ask
him concerning the State and Condition of Tonkin, that after his Decease he
might relate the same to the Council at Batavia. Strange Sickness in Tonkin.
The Seamen related, That there happened that Year a great Sickness in Tonkin,
which suddenly took away abundance of People, and seized upon the healthfullest
Persons in a Minutes Time, first a Giddiness taking them in the Head, of which
they fell on the Ground, and died both senseless and speechless in few Hours;
after which manner, the Netherland Agent in Tonkin, Nicholas de Voog, died also.

This Tonkin Sickness was not unlike the Plague in England, first known in King
Henry the Sevenths Reign, Anno 1486. which after forty three Years spreading
over Germany, swept away an innumerable company of People in a short time.:
Plague.
After which, the Plague began again in England, and chiefly in London, where
Anno 1550. died a very great number in a few Months. It is said, That a Master
of a Family having twelve Children, besides his Wife and Servants, was well and
hearty at Dinner, yet all of them dead before Night. Those that got the
Sickness, died in few Hours; but if suddenly they sweated out the Poison, they
recovered by Degrees.

Wagenaer arrives at Batavia.
WAgenaer furnishing the Sea-Knight with some Provisions, went on his Voyage;
but missing the Straights of Banka, he happened to come amongst several unknown
Islands, where he drove up and down three Hours, before he got on his right
Course again. This, and the other trouble of getting over the Tail of
Pracellis, arose from the difference amongst the Officers of the Ship, every
one willing to Steer a several Course, notwithstanding the strong Currents
deceived many; yet in December, Anno 1659. Wagenaer arrived safe at Batavia,
and went ashore with Henry Indiik and Ernest of Hoogenhoek.

Indiik made Governor of Disma.
But Indiik staid but a small time in Batavia, bein sent back to Japan, to take
the Place of John Bouchelyon; and accordingly he set Sail in the Calf Frigate,
accomnied with the Hearn and Sparrow, on the six and twentieth of November,
Anno 1660. The Charge and Command of the East India Companies Treasure in Japan
was committed to Indiik, whom the Secretaries Sannemondonne and
Mootefnostrydonne complemented (according to the Custom, being established in
his new Employ) in the Governor of Nangesaque's Name, desiring him to take
special care of his Fire and Candles, to prevent all dangers that might accrue
thereby; and took also a List of the Netherlanders Names that remained on the
Island Disma, the number whereof were nineteen, amongst which were reckoned
Indiik's Son and Daughter, besides the Blacks which were in the Service of the
East India Company.

Apparel of the prime Japanners.
THe Apparel of the Secretaries, as also of all other Japanners of any Quality,
is very costly: Their Heads are shaved bare on the top, and round about hangs
short Hair like a Circle, having behind a Lock tied with a Ribbon: The
Upper-Coat or Tunick, by the Japanners called Korekorre, is of diverse Colors,
adorned with Silken Flowers, and being very wide, hangs open before, and
reaches down to their Knees: About their Middle they wear a Girdle, embroidered
with Silk and Gold, in which stick two Hangers, the one bigger than the other;
the Scabbards of them embroidered, and the long Handles covered with Gold Wyre:
Their Tunick they clasp up behind on the top of their Girdles, that every Man's
Coat of Arms, which hangs at the bottom of his Wast-band, may be seen: These
Scutcheons are made square, and richly embroidered; and their Under-Coat, being
quilted with Cotton, is tied with the aforesaid Girdle: Their Breeches very
wide and long, trailing above a Foot after them, and they tread on them before
as they go. No Japanner of any Quality comes ever abroad without an Attendance
of three or four Servants at least, whereof one carries a round Umbrello after
his Master, who walks before in an exceeding proud posture, with a Cane in his
Hand; another carries before on his Shoulders a Stick, at each end whereof
hangs a square Waxed Box, in one of which is his Lords Slippers, and in the
other his Inkhorn. The Servants are Clothed in short Coats, tied about their
Middles with a Cotton Girdle; walk on Clogs, made fast with a Button between
their first and second Toes, and go bare-headed; their Heads also shaven, and a
tuft of Hair tied up behind with a piece of Fillet.

But the Secretaries that came to Complement the new-elected Governor, after
some Entertainment, returned home.

The Hollanders Burying-place in Japan.
NOt long after, Indiik had leave to Interre the Body of the Deceased Merchant
Francis Reynerson: The Corpse put in a Coffin, was carried under a Black Cloth
through Nangesaque, by the Book-keepers, Interpreters, and other Servants of
the East India Company, to a Barque, in which they carried it over to the other
side of the Haven before Nangesaque, and there buried it on a Hill, being the
Place for that purpose, given by the Japanners to the Netherlanders.

News of Coxenga's Design upon Formesa.
Mean while the Ottena (for so they call the Japan Governor of Disma, whereon
the Hollanders Storehouse stands) brought Information from a Chinese Jonk,
that was come with a rich Cargo from Zaetsin to Nangesaque, That Coxenga not
long after their departure had a considerable number of Soldiers, ready to send
under the Conduct of a valiant Chinese General, and two Mandarins, of which one
was his Uncle Sauja, to Formosa, there to take Tayovan and the Fort Zealande
from the East India Company, or at least to pillage the Country. The Jonk also
brought news, That the Chinese Admiral Itchien coming with a great many rich
Merchandises to Japan, had by a mighty Storm lost all his Upper-works, and with
much ado saved his Life: And that in Tonkin, since the last great Sickness
there, which swept away many thousand People, after the manner aforementioned,
a second Plague had happened, which did no less mischief; for the Waters breaking
up in all parts of the Country, Strange poisonous Water.
had poisoned all the Soil, and sent forth malignant Vapors, which destroyed
both Men and Beasts.

FUrthermore, Indiik engaged the Servants of the East India Company not only
to come and hear the usual Evening and Morning Service; but also to be present
at the hearing of the Sermons, and singing of Psalms on the Sunday. And whilst
they followed their Religion thus undisturbed, Tsoemangy Ficojemon came to
Nangesaque, to Officiate as Governor in the deceased Kaynussio's Place:
Wherefore Indiik was not negligent to wish Ficojemon Joy, by the Interpreters
and Ottena, of his new Office; desiring that himself might have the Honor to
Complement and tender him some Presents; which being granted, Indiik went
thither, proffered his Presents, and desired Ficojemon's Favor, who modestly
received the Presents, promised his Assistance to the promoting of the
Netherland Trade, Ficojemon visits Indiik.
and not long after came with great Attendance to visit Indiik on the Island
Disma, where he took great delight in the Garden before the Storehouse,
Planted after the Dutch manner, and chiefly in the strange European
Commodities, and also in the Presents which were to be sent to the Emperor.
Indiik thought to entertain him with Preserved Persian Fruits, Brandy, and
Tent; but he neither tasting the one nor the other, took his leave and departed.

A sad accident at Nangesaque.
SOon after, Ficojemon met with some trouble, by means of a Citizens Daughter,
who hanged her self in the Night in Nangesaque: He made strict Inquiry after
the Reason that provoked her thereto, which at last he discovered to this
effect. A Chinese Commander of a Ship being enamored of the Maid, had upon
great Promises, and by the assistance of a Japanner, crop'd her Virgin-Flower;
which she afterward seriously considering with her self, and fearing that if
she should be with Child, then her Crime would be publicly known, and bring
her into utter disgrace; to prevent the same, she laid violent Hands on her
self: But the Criminals being taken, and put in Prison, ran great danger of
their Lives; yet at last, by many Entreaties, a milder Sentence passed on both;
the Chinese being for ever banished from Japan; and the Japanner, to the
Islands Goto; and his Goods seized upon by the Law, were most part of them
given to the Parents of the forementioned Maid.

Jeffiesamma's cruelty.
NOt long after this Accident, Joffiesamma showed the People a Pattern of his
Cruelty, by cutting asunder two of his Servants, for a small Offense; the one
thirteen, and the other fifteen years old.

A Fire in Nangesaque.
The Night after happened a Fire Nangesaque, which in four of the eminent'st
Streets consumed a hundred Houses, which undid many great Merchants; for they
putting all their Goods in the Stone Storehouses, judging them to be very
safe, they were all burnt.

THe nine and twentieth of November, Nangesaque was also shaken by an
Earthquake, which sometimes seeming to abate, soon after made the whole Town
tremble, which was chiefly on the third of January, in the following year; when
this Trepidation threatened no small danger in the night. The Joints of the
houses beginning to gape, the Timber and Walls tumbling down, which occasioned
a general outcry in the City; yet with the daybreak, the noise and Earthquake
ceased; but the whole City was in a hurry, occasioned by five and twenty Roman
Christians, Cruelty used to Roman Christians.
that after intolerable Tortures, yet remained constant in their Religions, and
were now going to be led out of Nangesaque, there to be hung with their Feet
upwards, and their Heads flayed downwards, so to die a lingering death; when
they had hung a day and a night in that miserable manner, two of them desired,
that they might appear before the Magistrates of the City of Nangesaque; who
thereupon, coming to the place of Audience, heard that they were not able any
longer to endure the unsupportable torture, but were ready to renounce their
Christianity, and embrace the Japanners Doctrine; on which promise, How the
Japanners deny Christianity.
being let loose, they spat at a Wooden Cross, then stamped upon the Picture
of our Savior Christ and the Virgin Mary, to the great grief of their Brother
Sufferers, which refused to be released on these terms, but pitifully crying,
said, Surely we shall soon depart out of this Wretched World, and go to
Paradise, where we shall be out of the Power of the Japan Tyrants, and enjoy
Everlasting Beatitude.

Seventy four Christians beheaded.
And when these forementioned had hung seven days in that manner, with their
Heads downwards, there were seventy four more new discovered Christians brought
thither, which were all to be Beheaded; these cried as loud as their faintness
would permit them, Remain steadfast in the Christian Faith, we shall e're long
meet in Heaven.

The seventy four, amongst which were not only Women and Children, but also
sucking Babes were altogether Beheaded, their Heads set on Iron Pins, and their
Bodies thrown in a deep pit; Indiik being an Eyewitness, admired at their
Constancy, and the more, because the Martyred Japanners had so little knowledge
of the Christian Religion; but the Netherland Interpreters informed him, that
several of them gave themselves out to be Christians, Why they suffer
themselves to be Executed.
that with their Wives and Children, which for want of Provisions and chiefly
Rice, they were not able to maintain, they might die together, and so be rid of
the Miseries of this World.

Freezes hard in Japan.
THe fourth, fifth, and sixth of February it Froze so hard, that the Ice would
bear the weight of three Men. Moreover, Fire at Miaco.
News came to Nangesaque, that the fourteenth and fifteenth day of the same
Month, a Fire happened in Miaco, which consumed not only seventy Streets to
Ashes, but also the Dayro's stately Palace.

Indiik's Journey through Bung^.
THe second of March, Indiik Traveled to Cokero, where the Lord of Omura sent
him Vessels to Ferry over from Tokits to Smongy. In both these Towns the
Streets were Swept very clean, and the Citizens all abroad to receive and fetch
in the Dutch Ambassador. Upon one side of Smongy appears the Famous and
Magnificent Palace Onnays, the entrance into it is by broad Steps, Description
of the Palace Onnays.
cut out of the middle of the two bordering Rocks; on the sixteenth Step, the
Stairs are divided, and ascend on each side of the Gate, behind which, they
again Nrlyckhydt The Lordship ONNAYS.
join together; the Gate it self is built on a Square, supported by a Rock,
before it runs a Rail, below strengthened by several Crosses, above the Square
is a double Rail; the Portal has two large Entrances, built Arch-wise, parted
in the middle by two double Pillars; above the Arch, under which you pass into
the Palace, is the out Court, wherein appears a stately Hall, adorned with a
Gilded Roof that jets over the Walls; at each end of which, are two Gilded
Balls; through the entrance of this first Portal, is to be seen the inner
Portal, whose Gilded Roof also rises above the other, and has ten broad Steps
leading up to it. This Gate has three large Entrances; on the four corners of
the Roof, lie Couchant Dragons all Gilt; this inner Gate opens in the middle of
a long Gallery, which has eight square Windows toward the Front, and as many
within: The lowermost Edges of the jetting Roof are adorned with Gilded Balls:
The Gallery on the right and left side look upon two stately Turrets, which
rise aloft with three Stories, one lesser than the other, in which are kept the
Treasures of the Palace; on one side is a no less curious than pleasant Garden,
full of variety of Trees and Flowers; behind the Treasuries are two other
Towers of the same make, in which his Wives and Concubines live.

The Town Coyo.
In this part of Japan, the Town Coyo, Consecrated to a Bonzi called Conbodaxi
is very famous, being held for the Burying-place of the Prince of Bungo; or if
they chance to be Interred elsewhere, there must at least a Tooth of theirs be
found at Coyo.

Indiik's Voyage.
BUt Indiik Sailing from Cokero to Simonisicci, he found the Barque there which
he had sent before through the Corean Ocean with his Goods: So going Aboard on
the seventh of March, in the Haven of Simonisicci, in seven days he arrived in
Osacca. The Hollanders Landlord Icubia Serojemon and the Interpreters, made
Indiik's arrival known to the two Governors, before which he appeared, and
brought Presents the next day, which by both were kindly accepted: And Indiik
provided with Horses, His Journey by Land to Jedo.
came through Firaskatta, Jonda, and Fissima to Miaco, where the old Host Koffe
Sabrojemon carried immediate News thereof to the Grand Judge Mackino
Sandosamma, which that Evening permitted him Audience, kindly accepted the
Presents, and gave him a new Letter of Conduct; wherefore he neglected no time,
but went on his Journey, and Lodged afterward in Cusatz, and next in Sacca;
and forcing over from Quano, he got late at night to Mia, where he rested.

Moreover, he found the House for the Hollanders Entertainment in Occosacci
Locked and Guarded, because the Master thereof being fallen out with his
Neighbors, was in danger to be slain by them. Leaving this Town, he Lodged in
the Village Accosacci, Ferry'd over the Bay between Arei and the Village
Meisacca, and was forced by reason of the great Showers of Rain to stay in
Fannama, he designed to Lodge the next night in Caneia, but finding the usual
Inn there Guarded, notwithstanding it was almost dark, and Rained hard, he went
on, and Ferrying over the River Oyengauwa, refreshed in Simanda. At Merico he
was again forced to pass by the old Inn, no body being at home, the Master
thereof being gone to Surunga, there to release his Son, who was committed to
Prison for fighting with one of the Villagers.

Arrives at Jedo.
The eight and twentieth of March, Anno 1661. Indiik, after he had left Simanda,
and Lodging at Jesare, Missima, Odauro, and Toska, came to Jedo, in which City
were yet many empty Streets, though they went on very vigorously in Building;
and in regard the Bridges were not yet repaired, Indiik was forced to Ride a
great way about, before he could come to the usual House of Entertainment.

Which no sooner being entered, but he sent the Interpreter Fatsiseymon and his
Landlord Ginnemon to the Lords Joffiesamma, and Hootie Auwanno Camisamma, who
was chosen in Sicungodonne's place to Negotiate the Hollanders Affairs at
Court, to acquaint them of his arrival: Fatsiseymon and Ginnemon brought
answer, that the forementioned Lords were joyful for the safe and speedy
Journey of the Hollanders, and that on the morrow, they would acquaint the
Council of their coming; and Ordered moreover, that Indiik should get the
Presents ready with all speed, for they knew not how soon he might be admitted
to the Emperors presence.

Sicungodonne's Secretary demanded in his Masters Name, Who died two days
before Indiik's entrance into Jedo, for the Goods which Sicungodonne had
desired and given Order for the year before; Joffiesamma goes to meet Indiik.
but Fatsiseymon going again to Joffiesamma, desired in Indiik's Name, some
private Conference, which was permitted. Mean while, Joffiesamma told him, That
he understood of the Council, that the Emperor not long ago, out of his own
accord should ask, Will not the Hollanders come shortly, for it grows late in
the Year? Upon which the Council replied, They are expected suddenly. This
enquiry of the Emperors, Joffiesamma judged to be an exceeding great favor,
that the Hollanders should find place in the Emperor's Memory; but soon after
he changed these kind Speeches, for when the List of the Presents for the
Emperor, and other Persons of Quality was shown him, that according to Indiik's
Request, he might either order them to be added to, or else diminished; he
began to reckon up the Price of them, and what every Piece amounted to; which
done, he flew out in a Rage, saying, What do the Hollanders lessen their
Presents yearly; at this rate it will in a short time come to nothing? what is
this else but a parcel of course Cloth?

This answer Fatsiseymon carried home, which would have seemed very strange to
Indiik, could he have credited the Interpreter; but because he was known to be
a great Lier and a Cheat, whose whole business was only to get all what he
could, therefore he knew not how to order his Affair, and the more, because the
Presents, besides diverse Rarities amounted to full as much as the last years
Presents. Indiik nobly entertained in Joffiesamma's house.
Yet Indiik was advised to add three Pieces of Scarlet more to the List, which
pleased Joffiesamma, who permitted Indiik to speak with him; whereupon going
thither, he found Gekdonne Joffiesamma's Son, who courteously Saluted him in a
stately Hall; which Duty, all the rest of the Family performed. At last
Joffiesamma came forth himself, and bade Indiik kindly welcome, telling him
that he was just going to Court about his Business, that he might procure him a
quick dispatch from the Emperor: So taking his leave, Commanded his Secretary
Sannemon to entertain the Ambassador and his Retinue, he being a good
Companion, let them not want Wine and variety of Meats. Joffiesamma's Lady also
caused several Flasks of her own Liquors to be brought to them, being the Juice
of Plums and other relishing Fruits: They took great delight in the Ambassador
Indiik's Son, to whom they gave some Presents for himself, and his Sister, and
desired him to come and visit them every day.

Description of the stately apparel of a Japan Woman.
EXceeding costly is the Apparel of the Japan Gentlewomen; for as Joffiesamma's
Wife came forth to see the Hollanders, so most Ladies of that quality go after
the same manner. It deserves our admiration, that the Japan Women exceed all
other Females that are known in the World, for broad Faces, and great Heads;
their Hair Washed everyday with the Whites of Eggs, shines like Jet: The Maids
are distinguished from the Married Women, by a Coyfe which they wear on their
Foreheads; whereas the Married Women wear a loose Lock before, and another
tied behind; they all go bare Headed in what Weather soever; but yet the
primest Ladies wear an Embroidered Cap on their Heads, which is Peeked on the
top; their Hair from under it, on both sides covers their Shoulders, behind
hangs a Lock Brayded with Silk Ribbon: A large upper Gown, folded on their
Breasts, is not only rich for the Silken Images thereon, but also the broad
Selvedges Embroidered with Gold: This Coat or Gown which hangs loose about the
upper part of the Body, and their Arms, is Girt about their Waste with a broad
Tabby-Girdle, on which they bestow great Charges; from the Girdle downward it
hangs close about them, but under this Coat Trail after them sometimes eight or
twelve Coats more, most of them Party-colored, and full of Embroidered
Flowers: Sometimes they wear Clogs, which they make fast with a Button and Loop
betwixt their great and second Toes; and at other times, the Ladies of Honor
use curious white Buskins, (by the Japanners called Taepis) but the Noblemen
wear them also white and red. Moreover, all Gentlewomen of great Quality,
whether Widows, Maids, or Married Women never walk abroad without some
Servant-Maids to attend them, of which every one knows her particular Office. A
Married Lady never comes forth into the Street, but is carried in a Sedan, or
else in a covered Boat, in which she takes her pleasure upon the Water; in the
Evening only she goes to walk, but not without her Husband.

How the Japanners make merry.
But Indiik being Nobly entertained in Joffiesamma's House, took his leave:
Cambedonne Chief Commander of the Palace Ficojemon, being newly erected to be
Deputy Governor of Nangesaque, bore Indiik Company in the Street, and forced
him to follow, and go a second time to be merry with him; Indiik not daring to
deny the Japanners Civility, went thither, and entering the Palace, was
courteously welcomed, according to the Japan Custom, and desired to fit and
Smoke Tobacco, Drink Tee, and Wine, out of Dishes with one Foot. Moreover,
there was no Cost or Charges spared in preparing variety of Meat, and at Meals
their Ears were delighted, not only with Vocal, but Instrumental Music.
Toward night, Indiik got home, though most of his Men were overcome with the
strong Liquors. The Japanners know no Drinking-Houses, yet they have convenient
Inns for Travelers, whilst the Nobility and other People entertain one another
in their own Houses, and never quarrel, but when they are Fuddled; but those
that are soberest, take care to see those that are inebriated asleep.

Fire in Jedo.
The next day Indiik returned the Governor Joffiesamma thanks for his kind
Entertainment by two Interpreters, and desired to know what was done in the
Hollanders Business at Court. Joffiesamma not giving the Interpreters any
particular answer, sent one of his Gentlemen to Indiik, telling him, that two
days after, being the second of April, he should appear before the Emperor;
whereupon Indiik unpack'd all his Goods, laying every Parcel by it self; and
whilst they were all busy in the night about this Business, a sudden Fire
broke out not above a Musket Shot from the Hollanders Inn. The Master thereof
made great lamentation, his House and all his Goods having been burnt thrice in
four years time; but Indiik suddenly severed all the Goods in the
Stone-Ware-house, stopping up all the Windows and Doors of it with Clay, every
one looking to save himself, when the Fire, after having destroyed twelve
Houses, the Weather being very Calm, was quenched.

The Holland Ambas^ador Indiik appears before the Emperor.
The day being come to appear before the Emperor, Indiik sent his Presents
yearly to the Court, following them himself with a Bonjois, and coming before
the Gate of the Emperor's Palace, went into a Watch-house, where he found
Joffiesamma and diverse other Persons of Quality; here they stayed an hour:
Joffiesamma, at last going from thence, soon returned, and conducted Indiik
over some fine Mats into the Palace, and passing through a Gallery into the
Guard Chamber he met Hoetie Auwanno, who courteously saluted Indiik, and told
him by Joffiesamma, what honor he must show to the Emperor: But whilst they
were busy about this Injunction, Orders came, that the Ambassador should come
in, Auwanno and Joffiesamma, A remarkable passage happened to Indiik
with an unknown Courtier, went before, brought Indiik to the Presents, which
were laid in good order over against the Emperor; Indiik kneeling down, the
three which brought him in fell down behind him: Then Matsendeiro Biesecusamma
the Councellor Insiens Brother, said the usual Word, Hollanda Capitein; at
which saying, which is their Complement, Indiik lifted his Head from the
Ground, but before he could raise himself to see the Emperor sitting on a high
Cushion, Joffiesamma hit him on the Back with his Hand, as a sign, that he had
not yet leave to lift his Face from the Ground.

Indiik's Son entertained in the Japan Court.
But soon after; Indiik was ordered to rise, and go to the Guard-Chamber, where
several Courtiers wished him Joy for the Honor which he had received by
appearing before the Emperor. They were scarce turned about to be gone, but a
Gentleman came, that taking the Ambassadors Son by the Hand, led him, with the
Interpretor Fatsiseymon and the Merchant Nicholas de Roy to the place where
Indiik had shown honor to the Emperor, where the Council stood yet altogether,
and asked the Child's Age, where Born, and his Name, on which they were
answered, that he was six year and a half old, born in Siam, and was called
Garret. The Youth seeing the rich Cushion, asked the Interpreter, If the
Emperor did not sit there sometimes? Which the Council observing, asked what he
said, which Fatsiseymon Interpreting, they admired at it: They also saw him
very earnestly looking on the Gilded House, and rich Sieling over the Emperors
Throne; first one, and then the other, taking the Child by the Hand, led him
through the Emperors Chambers, and at last sent him again to his Father, who
then had leave to depart.

Indiik's other business in Jedo
After that Indiik spent two days in dividing of Presents to the four
Counselors of State, and other Persons of Quality, and was visited by many, so
that he found enough to do for a whole day, to speak and Complement all those
that came to see him, and Entertain them with Tent and Brandy: Amongst others
came Ficojemon's Son, with a Commander of two hundred Soldiers, on whose Knee,
being hurt, the Hollanders Chyrurgeon laid a great Plaster, and poured some
Oil into his Sons Ear, to cure him of a pain which he had been long troubled
with: Sicungodonne's Secretary also fetched the two Globes which his deceased
Lord had desired.

Appears a second time in the Emperor's Court before the Council.
The tenth of April, Indiik came again to Court, to receive the Emperors
Presents of Return; and staying about an hour in the Guard-Chamber, Auwanno and
Joffiesamma conducted the Ambassador to a very stately Chamber, in which the
four Counselors of State fate against Gilded Partitions. Sacaja Outusamma. fat
on the right hand of them, all next Isen; then Bonge and Monisamma: The
chiefest Councellor being Outasamma, His discourse with them.
spoke, saying: Holland Ambassador, it is not unknown to you, how acceptable it
will be to the Emperor to hear of you, if the Portuguese have any Design upon
this Empire; as on the contrary, the Emperor is not pleased that the Trade of
the Chynese Jonks should be molested by your People. Indiik answered, That the
Council need not to doubt of the Hollanders Fidelity, who would do all things
to preserve the Japanners Favor; wherefore they every where employed Persons to
observe the Affairs of the Portuguese, that if they should have the least
knowledge that they had a Design upon Japan, to acquaint the Governor of
Nangesaque with it. Moreover, the Governor of the East India Trade had given
strict Orders, upon Pain of great Punishment, That none should any way molest
the Chinese Jonks; Indiik commanded to withdraw, was soon after fetched in
again. Outusamma asked him again, If he would promise to tell the Governor of
Nangesaque, when at any time he should meet with any Portuguese between
Batavia, Formosa, and Japan, whether at Sea or on any Islands or main Land,
before the Chyneses brought advice thereof? Indiik promised to perform it to
the utmost of his Power. Then being ordered a second time to withdraw, and
called in again, he saw thirty Imperial Coats lying on curious Waxed Boards,
before which he lay down on the ground: When Joffiesamma said, Your Presents, 0
Holland Ambassador, are very acceptable to the Emperor, wherefore he Presents
you with these Coats, as a return for yours, and gives you leave to go for
Nangesaque.

How Indiik received the Japan Presents of return.
Which said, Indiik being instructed by Auwanno, crept toward the Coats, and
laying a Skirt of one of them on his Head, so returning thanks for them, went
away. The Coats packed into three Chests, were sent to the Hollanders Inn:
Moreover, Indiik returned all the Japan Nobility thanks for their several
favors in their own Palaces; but not finding Auwanno at home, he delivered his
Message to the Secretary, that in Indiik's Name he would be pleased to return
his Lord hearty thanks for his speedy dispatch, which his Secretary telling him
so soon as he came home, sent Indiik three Silk Coats, and proffers to do him
all the service he could.

After this, several other Coats were brought by Noblemens Servants, as returns
for their Presents, which they had received from the Hollanders; all which the
Merchant Nicholas de Roy modestly received, whilst the Ambassador Indiik took
his leave in several places; his Son going twice to Outusamma's Palace, who
took the Youth, and set him in his Lap, feeding him in the presence of diverse
Persons of great Quality.

Is entertained by a Japan Priest.
Indiik was now ready for his Journey, having only the chief Priest at
Asaxen's Temple to take his leave of, whose favor was very requisite to obtain,
he being brother to Otta Bietchonsamma, chief Councellor of State: This Person
was exceedingly pleased, when Indiik, besides several other European
Commodities, Presented him with a curious Wooden Ship, which he afterward
hung in the Church, in memory of the Hollanders. Moreover, he entertained the
Ambassadors after a very stately manner, carried him through the Temple, where
he showed him the Mysteries of the Japan Religion, and gave him in return some
Silk Coats, and four Boats of Silver.

Lastly, Indiik sent to Auwanno, the Hollanders Solicitor, several curious
Glasses, and desired that he might take his leave: Auwanno accepted of them,
but as for the taking of his leave, he had not time for the present, for he
expected every hour, several Persons of Quality to visit him, so that he could
scarce in one word wish him a prosperous Journey; whereas at other times he
would not let the Holland Ambassador ever have gone without Treating him at his
Palace; so parting, and going home, Indiik reckoned with his Landlord, paid the
usual Prizes for Diet and Lodging, and Warehouse room; but he desired that he
would please to lend him a thousand Tail upon Interest, to build and furnish
his House again, his Habitation being thrice Burnt down in four Year. But
Indiik denied his Request, pretending that his Journey (because of the scarcity
of Provisions) would amount to a great deal of Money, so that he knew not
whether he should have enough for himself; but yet to obliege him, he presented
him with three Pieces of Perpetuanaes, which were spoiled in the Dye.

Departs from Jods.
Indiik after having been Nobly Entertained, left Jedo on the fifteenth of
April, accompanied by his Landlord to Cawasacca; after which, he Lodged at
Toska, Odauro, Missima, Kaneya, and Fannama, where he Ferry'd over a Bay of the
Southern Ocean to Arei, then Lodged in the Village Accosacci, and Miaco, in
which City the Hollanders were very nobly Entertained in a new Inn; Comes to
Miaco.
here he staid till midnight, the Water being so low, that he could not Ferry
over. Mean while; the Goods and Horses were Shipped Aboard; two hours before
day, Indiik came to Quana, and the five and twentieth of April to Miaco.

Description of the Fiery Mountain Siurpurama.
HE left, eight Leagues beyond this City, near the great Lake, the famous
Burning Mountain Siurpurama, afterward Inspected by the Holland Ambassador
Seldere. This Mountain is of an excessive height, Vomits forth Smoke and
Flames: The Smoke alters its course according as the Wind blows, and beats down
sometimes in such a manner, that it not only makes the adjacent Countries at
Noonday seemed Clouded with Night, but also Smothers Men and Beasts.

Next this Mountain is another, but not so high; three Sulphurous Streams come
flowing from them, which sometimes overflowing, rushes into the Valleys,
making a great Smother and noise, which also filling, seek their course another
way, often warning down great Pieces of Rocks and Stones: All these three
Streams running down on the Champain spreads it self a Mile and a half in
length, but much more in breath: The Country round about the Mountains is so
excessive hot, that none can stand long there, but it will burn their Feet.

Description of the Sulphur, of which Gold, Silver, and other Metals are made.
THis Sulphur, taken for a fat, yet fine Matter, made in the under Grounds,
producing with mixed Quicksilver, Copper, Silver, Gold, and other Metals: The
chiefest Philosophers affirm, That there are two sorts of these Vapors that lie
hid under ground; the one being dry and more Earthy than Watery; the Earthy
Vapors afford Materials for Freestone, and the other of Sulphur and
Quicksilver, being mixed both together, make Silver, Gold, and all manner of
Metals. Moreover, let it not seem strange to any, that those Vomitings of the
Mountains often send forth firm Bodies, as Stones, and pieces of Rocks; because
those kind of Vapors are very thick and often Smother the Miners, or if they
escape with Life, are afterward troubled with extreme Sickness. These Vapors
also are sometimes Waterish, and mixed with Earth, for if they were all Water,
they could not melt, and if all Earth, they could not cleave and stick so hard
together. This Sulphur is the Food of that Fire, which burns on the top of
Siurpurama; and it Represents an undeniable testimony of Fire under the Ground,
by which the Earth is warmed as much underneath, as the Sun by its Beams heats
it on the top.

Blefken's Voyage to Island.
But besides Siurpurama, are reckoned amongst the Burning Mountains Hecla in
Island, Burning Mountain Hecla.
an Eyewitness, Dithmar Blefken, describes Hecla thus: On the North of Island
lies Hecla by the Seashore, and Vomits up sometimes besides terrible Flames,
blackish Water and Flint-Stones. Anno 1568. the twenty ninth of October, this
Mountain gave such a terrible blow, that it made the whole Country of Island
shake; at which every one expected utter Ruin, the noise rattling in the Air,
as if a thousand Pieces of Canon had gone off; the Flames seemed to Fire the
Sky; the Ground trembled, and the Smoke so darkened the Island, that sometimes
they were not able to distinguish one thing from another; sometimes the Flames
changed the darkness into light: The boiling Sulphurous Waters flowing above
six Leagues space over the Country.



Burning Mountain on Ternata.
No less terrible was the breaking forth of a Mountain on Ternata: A Fleet
under the Command of Paul van Caerden, coming to an Anchor there, saw the Fire
as it were burning above the Clouds, after which followed a great Smoke, that
turned it self round in the Air.

The first Ships that Sailed from Holland, Near Panarucan.
under the Command of John Johnson Miller, and Cornelius Houtman, were not a
little afraid, when they came near the City Panarucan, because of a Mountain
that sent forth dreadful Flames, and made great Claps, like Thunder.

America, according to Joseph de Acosta, has several Burning Mountains;
Arequipa.
particularly, one called Arequipa, very Sandy, and two days Journey high.

In Mexico, near the Village de Los Angelos, lies another, Los Angelis.
whose Foot carries thirty Leagues in Circumference, and from an unmeasurable
high top, both at Sunrising and setting, casts out abundance of Ashes and
Smoke; which last rising upright, spreads it self in the Air like a Plume of
Feathers, till at last it vanishes, after which appears a thick black Cloud.

Some Leagues distant lies another called Tlaxcala, Tlaxcala. Hist. Not. b. 3.
l. 24.
on which are continually Lightnings seen, and Thunders heard.

But the Mountain Guatimala exceeds them all, Guatimala.
whose spiring top shooting up to the Clouds, is seen a great distance off in
the South Sea. The three and twentieth of December, Anno 1586. it vomited forth
whole Rivers of Fire and burning Matter, which afterward descending, was found
to be nothing but Ashes and burning Stones; and thus it continued six Months.
Mean while the Earth also was so shaken, that it turned the City Guatimala
topsie-turvey, and buried in its Ruins thousands of People.

About the same time, De Los R^yes.
the Mountain near de Los Reyes threw up so much Ashes, that flying about the
Country, it turned the Day into Night, insomuch that for several Miles none
could go out of their Houses.

Acosta relates, Ignorance of a Spanish Priest.
That a Spanish Priest thought to get Gold out of one of the Burning Mountains
in America; for which purpose, he caused Iron Pots and Kettles to be made, to
catch the several Matters that came flowing from it; but they no sooner touched
the Flame, but they melted.

In Sicily the Mountain Aetna, now called Mongibelle, has been famous, Aetna.
lying on a Promontory near the Mid-land Sea: An Eyewitness, Thomas Fazellus,
describes it thus: AEtna (says he) has on the South and West sides of it great
inhabited Villages, planted with extraordinary good Grapes, and all manner of
other Fruit Trees: The Ground paved with Pebble-stones, falling from the Hill
in abundance: In some places Fountains spring up, in others flow delightful
Rivers, which the Fire often swallows, or stops up with heaps of burnt Stone.
There are also great Millstones found in the hanging of the Mountain, which
were cast up Anno 1537. in a terrible Fire. The uppermost part of this Mountain
smokes continually, and sometimes Flames break through it, seen above a League
in compass; the inner parts are consumed by the Fire; a little below the top
lies Snow continually, which melts not in the hottest Summer; but when the
Flames strike downwards, it flows over, and pours down into the Valleys like
a boiling Stream. In the forementioned year, the highest part of Aetna fell
into the Hole; so that at present it gapes wider, but is not so high as
formerly. The Hole from whence issue the Smoke and Flames, emits a continual
thundering noise from its fathomless Bottom; and the other little Vent-holes
always roar. Philippus Cluverius says, That he saw Stones ejected thence above
sixty thousand Paces off; and that it also spoiled a Way with its burning
Sulphurous Streams, of four Leagues long, destroying all things before it.

Moreover, Vesuvius.
Vesuvius in Italy is also very well known, which sometimes boyls over in that
manner, that it fires Campania.

Amongst other times, this Mountain burnt very terribly the sixth of October,
Anno 473. the Ashes thereof flying as far as Constantinople, The Roman Empire
for several years together, according to Joseph Scaliger, kept a Fast Day in
remembrance of that dreadful Conflagration.

IT is very well worth bur Labor, to make an Inquiry, Why those Countries in
which Burning Mountains are found, are generally very fruitful? as appears by
Campania, in which Vesuvius vomits continual Smoke and Fire; Sicily, famous (as
we said before) for Mount Aetna; and Siurpurama, in the Japan Kingdom Voari.

The nature of the Earthy Fire.
It seems without contradiction, that there is Fire under Ground, which spreads
it self through the Bowels of the Earth, no otherwise than the natural warmth
of a Man's Heart diffuses it self through all his Body. This Truth appears
plainly, because the Earth commonly smokes in the Winter time, and the Snow
which falls on the Ground that is newly Plowed, melts instantly: From the Water
and Earth Vapors or Mists are drawn up by the Sun and Moon into the Air, where
being cleansed, they fall down again in Hail, Rain, or Snow, which never sink
above ten Foot deep into the Ground. The Heat of the Sun, warming the moist
Earth, makes the Soil fruitful; but the Fire in its Bowels yields no small
help, thereby as it were thrusting up the Seed and Plants.

The warm Fountains that spring out of the tops of the Mountains, Warm
Fountains.
are no despicable Testimonies; for the Water being driven upwards by the Heat,
forcing its way, spouts out; not unlike a Still, in which the purer Spirits or
Moisture goes upwards, and through a Pipe come dropping from it; or like the
Fumes which rise from the Stomach up into the Brain, where gathering Substance,
Nature discharges them through the Mouth or Nose.

Warm Baths in Japan and other places.
Also the warm Lakes or Baths do greatly testify, that they are heated by a
Fire enclosed in the Earth; for if it were otherwise, how could the Japan Water
at Singok be of such force, that being poured on the Body, it should scorch the
Flesh to the Bone? How could the Italian Pool near Parma, as Fallopius relates,
draw Flames to it, so that the Water being set on Fire, cannot be put out but
by throwing Cloth over it, or else by a stiff Gale of Wind?

Sulphur Mountain in Japan.
It deserves peculiar observation, That Siurpurama, without ever ceasing, should
for so many Ages together pour down Sulphurous Streams, between decayed Stones,
that all the Ground thereabouts is changed into a kind of Sulphur.

Italy, about Mutina, gives us a sufficient Testimony hereof: If the Pits out
of which they dig Sulphur are filled up with Earth, it will in the space of
four years be converted into Sulphur.

Necessity of the Earthy Fire.
Lastly, This Earthly Fire is necessary for the making of Minerals, which being
boiled by the Heat thereof, are molted and cleansed. The same Fire occasions
also Earthquakes; wherefore sometimes upon the sinking of the Ground, which
consumed underneath falls in, terrible Flames break forth.

To conclude: By the abundance of Earthquakes, and richness of the Soil, may
easily be conjectured, That Japan hides great store of Sulphur in the Bowels of
the Earth, which there serves for the Food of that Subterranean Fire.

Indiik's further Journey.
BUt Indiik leaving Siurpurama on his Larboard, came the fifth of April to
Meaco, where by his Landlord he immediately made his Return known to the
Governor Mackino Sandosamma, which presented Indiik with some Silk Coats, and
gave him leave to depart: After which, he was carried by the Master of the
House where he lodged to see a Comedy, wherein the Japanners are very neat and
exact: The Players richly attired, represent on the Stage all the Transactions
of Mankind so well, that they are no ways inferior to any of our European
Comedians; and indeed Indiik would have judged better of them, could he have
understood the Japan Tongue.

But Indiik having delivered a hundred Japan Silk Coats to his Landlord, to
keep for the East India Company, and seen the great Temple of Dayboth, and also
several other Temples, left Meaco, and lodged in Fissima, where taking
Shipping, he came to Osacca.

From the City, his Landlord, with a great Train of Friends and Servants, His
Voyage.
conducted him in two Pleasure-Boats to the Mouth of the River Osacca, where
the Barque which had the Hollanders Goods aboard lay at Anchor: The Wind
blowing fresh from the West, they could not make Sail. Mean while the
Pleasure-Boats lying on each side of the Barque, the People went aboard her,
and made merry with the Japan Wine which they had brought with them to drink at
the Ambassadors departure.

His Journey through Bungo.
The third of May weighing Anchor, on the eleventh with Rowing and Sailing they
passed by Simonisicci, and came to Cokero, where Indiik staying a Night, hired
Horses and Men to travel through Bungo by Land to Nangesaque.

Description of the Bath at Orismo.
After he left Cokero, he came on the fourteenth day to Orismo, where he took
great delight in a Stove or Bath, which was covered with a very handsome Roof:
The Water came running through Copper Cocks into the Bath, from a Brook so hot
on one side, that none can put in their Fingers without scalding: But that
which is no less strange, and a remarkable Privacy in Nature, is, that the same
Brook on the other side flows extreme cold, in one Channel with the hot Water.

When they prepare a Bath, the Master thereof first lets the hot Water run in,
which he afterward tempers with the cold, as those that bathe require.

This Mystery of Nature is grounded on the Earthy Fire, by which the Waters
being heated in deep Pits, spring upwards like a Fountain: But some Rivers have
several Avenues and narrow Passages under the Earth, and so often lose their
heat before they come to the top; when as others detain their warmth, because
they flow through wide Channels, nearer the Subterranean Fire, from whence they
rise up directly: It therefore happens (though very seldom) that two Fountains,
of which one produces warm, the other cold Water, occasioned by the
forementioned Reason, flow in one Channel, because each by its swift Course
detains its own Property: And so it is with the Brook that in Orismo affords
Water for the Bath.

Baths very ancient, and several.
It appears that the Japanners make use of the Profit which Nature bestows on
these Waters, according to the Custom of several other People, after diverse
ways: For though Bathing was customary in former Ages, yet every Country
observed a several way therein.

The ancient Biscayners took not Water, but stinking Piss, with which they
washed their Gums and naked Body.

The Scythians used Women, which poured Water on Men's Bodies, and after painted
them with red Stones.

The Dardanians and Illyrians permitted a Man to Bathe but thrice in his
Lifetime, viz. at his Birth, Marriage, and Death.

The ancient Germans made use of a River, in which they swam every day; though
sometimes they went before Meals into a Bath, which was formerly observed by
the Romans, as at this day by the Turks.

Two remarkable Wonders in the Bath at Orismo.
It will not be amiss to make some inquiry, why any one that before he bathes
himself makes warm but having bathed, it comes cold from him; which happens
because the Body before bathing is cold, but warmed by bathing, makes the Urine
cold.

It is also a strange Mystery, that those that when they go to bathe are no
ways thirsty, by bathing become exceeding dry; and on the contrary, those that
are desirous to drink when they go in, shall have no mind at all to it when
they come out: The Reasons whereof may proceed hence, viz. Thirst is occasioned
by Drought; wherefore those that begin to bathe when adry, the Body draws
through the Pores, by the inward force of the Vital Spirits, the thinnest
Moisture, by which the Drought is quenched: But those that do not go thirsty
into the Bath, force out their Drink by sweating, so that the Body within
becomes dry, and occasions Thirst.

The Romans at first had dark and pitiful Baths; but when by their Power they
had made great Conquests, they became Teachers of all Magnificence; which
amongst other things they expressed in their Baths, the erecting and ordering
of which, Riches of the Baths.
amazed the Eyes of the Beholders. A Roman (says Seneca) thought himself very
poor, if the Walls of his Bath were not made of Alexandrian Marble, and adorned
with Numidian Ledges; a Thesian Stone enclosed the Water; the Floor consisted
of pure Silver, imboss'd with Pearls and Diamonds; and the Edifice rested on
stately Pillars, being hung round with Pictures, drawn by the Hand of the most
excellent Masters. Moreover, they were attended by Barbers, Chyrurgeons, Men to
rub them and help them out and in, some to keep their Clothes, and other
Servants.

GReat delight the Holland Ambassador took in this strange Bath at Orismo: But
at length going forward in his Journey, he was nobly entertained in the
Provinces of Facata and Figen, the Lords of which Countries provided Horses and
Men for him, causing all the Streets of the Cities through which he passed, to
be clean swept against his coming. The Governor of Oenewarimet rode out of the
City to meet and fetch in the Ambassador, in this order: In the first Rank
marched five Japan Soldiers, which the Governor followed on Horseback, holding
a Standard in his Hand; behind him came the Emperors Overseer and Warden, one
after the other, under two Umbrelloes, made fast on long Sticks, each carried
by three Men: These were followed by three Chariots, guarded on both sides with
Japan Horse and Foot, in the middlemost whereof the Holland Ambassador was
carried.

Description of the City and Lordship Oenewarimet.
OEnewarimet is a small City, lying upon the River Dony, abounding with Fish,
situate on the hanging of a pleasant Hill, all over shaded with Trees. The
River washes most part of the City Walls, which are full of Redouts, De Stadt
OUNEWARI CASTEEL. The City Ounewari with the Castle
and planted with high Trees, that appearing above the Wall, glister in the
Water. The River runs in a Bay before the City, and flows very swift under a
Stone Bridge to the Corean Sea: The Bridge very broad, built of Freestone, and
rising in the middle, has eight curious Arches, and Stone Rails on both sides:
On one side stands the Custom-house, on the Shore opposite against the City,
where the Ships must come to an Anchor, and pay Custom; and for denying of any
Goods in the Ship, it is present Death. The Bridge ends on a Promontory, on both
sides washed by the River Dony, which leads to the City. The Gate and Wall,
built betwixt the Houses of a broad Street, has in the middle a large Hatch,
through which you pass into the Town. Not far from thence stands a fair Temple,
inhabited by the Bonzi. But besides this Street, are several others, that lead
along by the Foot of a Rock, which is exceeding steep: The Stairs which lead to
the top of it, are cut out of the Rock, on which stands an invincible Castle,
the Walls and Towers whereof may be seen at a great distance, the highest of
which is five Stories, one smaller than the other; the second, much bigger,
has two stately Halls, the uppermost of which is as big as the lowermost: From
one side of this Castle you may behold the pleasant Valleys, planted with Rice;
and on the other side, delightful Hills, overgrown with Trees, which in
several Places shade little Villages.

Indiik arrives at Nangesaque.
THe sixteenth of May, Indiik came safe to Nangesaque, and found the Servants
of the East India Company, on the Island Disma, in good health. Soon after the
Watch on the Nomoan Hills, told the Governor of Nangesaque, that they descried
two Sails not far from the Shore: Whereupon Indiik having leave to send some
small Vessels to discover the Ships, sent Ernest Hoogenhoek, with three Sloops,
who saw that it was the Frigate Graveland, and the Fly boat called the Vinke,
which were Steering for Nangesaque: They brought a Letter with them, written
the eighteenth of May, 1661, in the Fort Zelandia, signed by Frederick Cojet,
John Oetjens of Waveren, Thomas of Ypre, and David Harthouwen: The Contents
these.

A Letter from Cojet, concerning Coxenga's On^et upon Formosa.
Coxenga coming with three hundred Sail, extraordinarily Manned, through the
Lakjemonian Straights, Landed in Formosa the thirteenth of April, and instantly
made himself Master of the whole Island. The Fort Provincia yielded upon the
first Assault of the Chinese: The Hollanders that lived up and down Formosa,
are all cruelly murdered: The City near the Castle Zealandia lies in Ashes in
several places, but plundered in all: The Fort Zelandia was closely besieged:
From the Hector Frigate, which engaged with several Jonks, and was blown up by
her own Powder, none were saved: The Ships Graveland and Mary found themselves
unable to engage with Coxenga's Fleet; wherefore they fled from them: The Ships
de Vink and Immenhorne come hither from Kelang, if they should want Provisions,
or by their Enemies be forced to put to Sea again, they shall come to Japan, to
fetch all things that you can send to our Assistance, with Provisions, as Rice,
Meal, and Japan Wine; for our Store in the Castle begins to grow very scarce.

Indiik immediately made this sorrowful News known by an Interpreter to the
Governor of Nangesaque, whilst the Ships Graveland and the Vink came to an
Anchor before Disma. The Governor desired to have the whole Business of Formosa
in Writing: And that he might have a true Account thereof, Indiik ordered, that
the Merchant Nicholas Loenius, the Minister Mark Massius, and the Captain of
the Graveland should come ashore, and relate the whole Circumstance.

Chinese Storm the Fort Zelandia.
Indiik understood moreover, That Coxenga fired day and night, from a Platform
with twelve Demiculverins, against the Fort Zelandia; and that already
Waveren's House was shot down, and a great Breach made in the Wall: yet the
Besieged remained not in his debt; for Cojet sallying out with a Select Party,
made himself Master of the Platform and the twelve Guns, two of which he
carried into the Castle, and the rest he made useless; and that they had
Cruised to and again before Tayovan till the tenth of June; but because they
could do no good to the Fort Zelandia, and their Provisions also growing very
scarce, they judged it convenient to Sail to Japan, and in their way to touch
at Quelang, not only to refresh themselves, but fetch all the East India
Companies Concerns from thence, they lying bare to Coxenga, whose Forces were
daily expected there; for which reason, Graveland Anchoring there the
thirteenth of June, loaded all whatever he could in seven days time: Moreover,
he took in a hundred and seventy Men, The Inhabitants of Quelang remove.
with three married Dutch Women, eleven Quelangois Children, and eight and
twenty Slaves of both Sexes. The Women and Children were Landed on Disma,
because of the disorder in the Ship Graveland.

The Relation of the Condition of Formosa, translated into Japan, and sent to
Jedo.
Furthermore, Indiik delivered this Relation, translated into the Japan Tongue,
to the Governor or Nangesaque, That Coxenga had above nine years ago designed
with the Tayovans and Chinese that inhabited Formosa, to betray and take the
Fort Zelandia from the Hollanders; but the Plot being discovered, the Traitors
were all executed: And the Chinese also, sent under the Conduct of one Fayet
to Storm Zelandia, had little better Success; for the Besieged sallied out so
fortunately, that few of them were left to carry the News of their Adventure to
Coxenga: Fayet himself was also found slain amongst the rest: Other meaner
Soldiers being taken and carried Prisoners into the Castle, consess'd that they
were employed in Coxenga's Service, who notwithstanding this Repulse, gave not
over from prosecuting his Design; of which Coyet being informed, was very
vigilant, and the more, because a great Chinese Trader called Pinequa, being
not only much in the East India Companies Debt, but also several Merchants in
Tayovan, ran away privately, which was not only prejudicial, but dangerous,
because they knew the whole Estate and Condition of Formosa; so that it very
much troubled Coyet, who well knew that he would relate the whole Condition of
the Fort Zelandia to Coxenga: Also he might easily guess, that Coxenga, who had
for several years had a Design upon Formosa, would take hold of such an
opportunity to accomplish his desire. The Jealousy grew the greater, when News
came from all Parts, that Coxenga Listed great numbers of Men, and prepared a
great Fleet to Conquer Formosa. Coyet observed all things very narrowly, and
sent a Letter with a Chinese Jonk to Coxenga, in which he desired, That he
would please to send him word to what end he made such mighty Preparations for
War, and against whom he designed them: To which Coxenga, acting the
Politician, cunningly answered, That Coyet ought not only not to believe those
that brought him such News, but to keep them Prisoners, and make them confess
the Truth by Tortures. And the better to cloak his Intentions, he now and then
sent twenty or thirty Chinese Jonks with Merchandise to Tayovan: Yet
notwithstanding all this, Coyet still suspected him, writing all things
particularly to the Council at Batavia, who with all speed sent twelve Men of
War to his assistance, which about the middle of September Anchored before
Zelandia; three of which Coyet sent to Coxenga, to observe all his
Transactions, and have an answer of every Particular. These Coxenga entertained
exceeding courteously, protesting to them, That he had a very great kindness
for the East India Company, of which Coyet might certainly assure himself. By
these fair Carriages deluded, he now believing all things which had been
reported false, sent the Fleet to another Place, only two great Ships, and as
many small ones, which he sent to fetch in the Lading for the great ones, staid
behind. Coxenga had no sooner received the News of the Men of Wars departure
from Zelandia, but he sent with all speed three hundred Jonks, Manned with four
thousand Men, to Formosa; and Sailing in the Night through the Lakjemonian
Straights, Landed many of his Men in the Morning on Formosa, which immediately
stopped up the Inland Channel, and lay between the Fort Zelandia and Formosa:
Whereupon Coyet sent three hundred Soldiers to prevent their Landing; but they
quickly found themselves surrounded, so that they were forced to fight to the
last Man, and purchase their Deaths dearly from the Chinese. But they having
fresh Supplies, Stormed the Castle Provincia, standing on Secam, opposite to
Formosa, which being but weak, was not able to resist long against such a
Powerful Enemy. The fifth of May they robbed and burnt the Town before
Zelandia, which being guarded by eleven hundred Men, some of them fired upon
them from two Platforms, on each were Planted twelve Demiculverins. Of the four
Ships that remained before Tayovan, the greatest, called the Hector, was with a
hundred Men blown up: The Ketch Mary hoised all her Sails, and went directly
for Batavia: The other two, being the Graveland the Vink, Sailed to Quelang, to
carry the News of the War thither; from whence returning to Zelandia, they
Cruis'd up and down along that Coast, but at last stood for Nangesaque.
Moreover, Loenius related, That Coxenga had not conquered the Fort Zelandia
when he came from thence, and also that Cojet had sent the Vessel called
Immenhorn, under the Command of Jacob Sas, to Torrissima, to fetch the
remaining Goods of the Ship called the Harp, which had suffered Shipwreck on
that Coast; but Sas found them not, the Goods being sent before in small
Vessels to Satsuma, where the Lord of the Country keeps his Court.

The Governor of Nangesaque immediately sent this Relation, written in the
Japan Language, to the Emperor at Jedo; but whilst it was on its way thither, a
Jonk richly laden, from whose Yards and Masts waved several blue Pennons and
Flags, came to an Anchor before Disma: The Captain thereof, a Chinese, being
commanded to appear before the Governor, related, That Coxenga was in Tayovan,
and was Master of all Formosa, and that a hundred and forty of the Besieged
sallying out of Zelandia were so beaten by him, that only seven of them
escaped with lise; and that he had also burnt three Holland Ships, and drove
two from the Coast; likewise, how eleven days after his departure from Anhay,
new Forces would be sent to Tayovan, to supply Coxenga's Army there.

Indiik desires leave to take the Chinese Jonks.
Hereupon, Indiik entreated of the Governor Ficojemondonne, in a Letter, That
since Coxenga had dealt so treacherously with the East India Company, and set
upon them unawares, that he would please to grant him leave to seize upon all
the Jonks he could meet with at Sea, or elsewhere, belonging to Coxenga: Upon
which, But is aeny'd.
Ficojemondonne sent this Answer, That he durst not take upon him to grant so
weighty a Concern; but that he must write about it to Jedo, and expect an
Answer from the Emperors Court; but he could not think that the Emperor would
any ways grant that the Chinese Trade to Japan should be at all molested; the
more, because Japan should not lose the rich Commodities, and chiefly the Drugs
which China furnished them withal: But if the Hollanders would take revenge on
Coxenga, they might do it at Formosa, and not interrupt his Jonks at Sea, which
Traded to Japan.

His resolute Answer.
Upon which Indiik sent Ficojemondonne this Reply: How could the Court in Jedo
take it ill from them, to do all the hurt they could to their Public Enemy,
which the Laws of all Nations permitted? Shall the East India Company be every
where ruined by Coxenga, and not take revenge? The taking of Coxenga's Jonks,
must be performed according to the Councils Order Batavia; and the Japanners
would not in the least be prejudiced by it: for the Jonks from Canton and
Nanquin brought over abundance of Chinese Merchandise and Goods, so that Japan
might easily dispense with Coxenga's Jonks; and they would also without doubt
forsake Coxenga and submit to the Tartar, when they observed, that they were
debarred from the Trade of Japan by the Hollanders Private Men of War.

Thus it remained for a time, Ficojemondonne sending in Writing a true Relation
of all the Transactions in Formosa, and Indiik's Request for the taking of
Coxenga's Vessels to Jedo.

Mean while, News was brought that the Watch on the Nomoan Mountain had
descried two Ships: Indiik had leave to order Camphador Rjfje to prepare three
Vessels, with which the Merchant Hoogenhoek should put to Sea; who found that
the discovered Ships were the Goree and Diemermeer, richly laden from Batavia.
Hoogenhoek was also informed by them, That a third Ship, being the Buyentkerk,
aboard which was Derick van Liar, Indiik's Successor, would shortly follow,
though yet out of sight. All of them soon after came to an Anchor before Disma.

Indiik also agreed with the Copper-Merchants for the Price of the Copper, who
had raised it higher than formerly, because the Miners Provisions and
Maintenance was dearer this Year than heretofore, by reason that now Rice was
very scarce.

Hollanders give the Chinese Letters of Conduct.
The Chinese Jonks which were not under the Command of Coxenga, came now and
then to Nangesaque, but not without a free Pass from the Holland Governors that
resided in China, Siam, and other Places. On the fourth of August a Jonk that
came from the Haven Faisoos showed a free Pass, granted by the Ambassador Jacob
Kaysar; and another from Siam, that had the like Letter signed in the
Netherlanders Treasury in India, by John van Rich: The Contents these; Since
Anachoda Mamet Mousoen is ready to set Sail with the Jonk Opta, belonging to
Sinorat Governor of the Moors in India, and desires our Letter for his
Security, that he may not be taken for one of Coxenga's Ships; therefore we
could not refuse him so reasonable a Request: The Jonk freighted with Speckl'd
Wood, Seraean Rice, several Packs of Linen, Brown Sugar, Clap-Oyl, Namrak,
Cambodia Nuts, Manned with three and twenty Moors, and four and fifty Chinese,
bound to Japan, all Netherland Vessels are desired not to molest.

Adventure of Harmas Klenk to the new Governor of Tapoan.
After which the Advice-Boat brought news, that there was a Ship about the Point
making toward Disma, which approaching the City Nangesaque, struck its Flag,
which afterward pulled up again, blew from the Main-top, with a pendant waving
under it. Indiik judged by these signs, that there was some Person of Quality
in the said Ship; wherefore going into a Barge, he Rowed aboard, where coming
he was no ways deceived of his expectation; for the Frigate carried the Lord
Herman Klenk of Odesse, sent Governor to Tayoan, in stead of Frederick Cojet.
Moreover Klenk informed him, that he weighed Anchor from Batavia the two and
twentieth of June 1661. accompanied with the Ship Lornen, in which was Jacob
Casenbroad, chosen by the Indian Council for Deputy Governor of Tayoan, but had
lost sight of one another the first day of their coming out. After that he
chased a Portuguese Vessel, her bigness about an hundred and twenty Tun, coming
from Cambodia to Macau, the Commander of her called Lewis Baretto Lenel, being
overtaken near Siampa, delivered, both Ship and Goods without firing a Gun; out
of which Klenk took the best Goods, and seventeen Portuguese, and put seven
Chinese and eleven Blacks aboard of it; then anchoring before the Golden Lions
Island, he took in Provisions and fresh Water. He had news by the Inhabitants
of the miserable condition of Formosa; but reaching Tayoan on the thirtieth of
July, Cojet immediately sent the Pilot Sick Peterson in a Chinese Boat to him,
to advise him, that it was no ways convenient for him to stay near Tayoan,
because he might easily be taken by Coxenga, who had three hundred Sail ready
upon any occasion, but to steer directly to Japan; whereupon Klenk delivered
the Pilot the Papers sent by the Indian Council, to carry them, though not
without great danger, into Zelandia, and sent with him the seventeen
Portuguese, then stood for Quelang, where he sent a Letter by some Chinese to
the Governor of the Country; but receiving no Answer, proceeded in his Voyage
to Japan; where by a great Storm in a dark Night being driven too near the
Shore he ran great danger, being out of all hopes to get off, which God
mercifully preventing, came safe with his Ship on the twentieth of August to
Nangesaque. The Governor Ficojemondonne granted the new Tayoan Governor to come
ashore that Night, the Frigate having Shipped so much Water, that a great many
Goods were damnifi'd by it.

Klenk is nobly entertained.
Indiik being informed by the Interpreters, that Ficojemondonne had observed
the Honor and Respects which were shown to the chief Governor of Tayoan, he to
make his Reception the more splendid, sent for several Servants from aboard to
increase the number of their Train, which the Japanners saw with great
curiosity.

Chinese Relation concerning Coxenga's Onset on Formosa, and how he murdered
his Uncle.
After this the Netherland Interpreters were informed by the Chinese Traders at
Nangesaque, that Savja Coxenga's Uncle had a long time had a private Design
upon Formosa; and at one time he told some of his bosom Friends of it, who
related it to Coxenga; he approving the Plot, resolved to put it in execution:
Soon after the Business began, but Savja found himself deceived: for he made no
other account than to make himself Master of all on a sudden, when Storming the
Fort Zelandia he lost abundance of Men, scarcity of Provisions, and sickness
began also daily to increase in the Chinese Army, of which many died. From
these Inconveniences arose private Contentions, insomuch that Savja designed to
go privately with some Jonks from Formosa, and leave the farther management
thereof to Coxenga: but this also being discovered, brought Savja to a
miserable end; for Coxenga being exceedingly enraged thereat, notwithstanding
his Uncles good Service done, caused him in spite of a great part of his Army,
to be chopp'd to pieces.

The Lord of Facata visits Indiik.
Soon after these tidings came the Lord of Facata with a great Train of
Courtiers and meaner Servants to see the Ships Graveland and Hogland; where he
was much delighted in seeing the Seamen Dance and Leap overboard into the
Water to swim: And coming on Disma in the Netherlanders Storehouse, Indiik
showed him several European Rarities, and thanked him for the honor which he
did him in his Journey from Jedo through his Lordship to gesaque. Then
conducted him to Klenk, the new Governor of Tayoan's Residence, where the
Organs and other Instruments were played upon; and according to his Request,
the two Ladies Loenius and Boer were brought into the Chamber. And at the Lord
Ficata's going away, the Ships Vallon hooren and Newport from Batavia fired
several Guns. The next day Indiik received from the Lord of Facata's Servants
four Casks of Sekje, or Japan-Wine, and two great Boxes, in one of which lay a
Sea-Cat, the other was full of dried Cockle-shells. With the Bones of the
Sea-Cat stamped to Powder, Strange operations of the Bones of a Sea-Cat.
and mixed with Spittle, the Japan Goldsmiths make Quicksilver malleable. It is
remarkable to see how Iron, Lead, Steel, Tin, Copper and Silver swim on
Quicksilver, whereas Gold only sinks, and becomes of a Silver color, which
can only be taken away by Fire; but not without a great Slink and smell to the
bystanders. When the Japanners gild their Silver, they wash it over with
Quicksilver, tempered with the Bones of a Sea-Cat.

Hollanders take Chinese Jonks.
Indiik was informed that a Chinese Jonk, was taken about Poclo Cantacon, where
she was declared free Prize, and thirty Hollanders put aboard of her by order
of the Admiral Jacob Caeuw, whom they were to follow: but because the Water
went very hollow in a Storm, the Fleet was forced to leave Caeuw, and steer to
the Islands Piscadores: the Jonk endeavored to follow the same Course; but
being driven to Leeward by South-west Winds, was necessitated to stand directly
for Nangesaque; before which Road the Dutch Commander of her threw ten of the
imprisoned Chinese overboard. Throw the Men overboard.
The arrival of this Jonk occasioned no small fear amongst the Chinese Traders
at Nangesaque: but Ficojemondonne took but little notice thereof, because he
was certainly informed of the treacherous dealings of Coxenga in Formosa: The
conquered Jonk carried four hundred Tun of excellent Rice. The Chinese in the
Town stuck not to report, that they would have satisfaction for the Jonk, and
also prevent the Hollanders from using the Rice, that so for want of Provisions
their Vessels might leave the Japan Coast, and so secure the Chinese Trade from
future danger. But Indiik little regarded this their Discourse, because he was
assured, that the Governor of Nangesaque would not concern himself in the
Business, but refer it all to the Court Jedo, where the Hollanders were full as
well beloved as the Chinese.

The Lords of Firando and Arima visit the Hollanders.
After this the Lords of Firando and Arima, with a great Train visited the Dutch
Governors Indiik and Klenk, by whom being kindly entertained, they sent them
several Presents for their noble Treatment. Ficojemondonne also gave order to
unlade the taken Jonk, in which was found, besides the Rice, a hundred sixty
four Sacks of Saltpeter, and a considerable Parcel of Tin and Lead; by which
the Japanners trepanned the Chinese in a Lie, who desired that the Jonk might
be restored to them, because it was Freighted for Japan; of which the contrary
appeared: for the Rice being for Coxenga's hungry Army, the Saltpeter to make
Powder, and the Lead for Bullets, were no Commodities ever brought by them to
Japan.

Another rich Chinese Jonk taken.
Not long after came also a Ship called The Red Heart from Ton^quin, laden with
the Goods of a Chinese Jonk, taken about Aynam, being richly laden with Pepper,
Lead, Tin, Rice, Elephants Teeth, Alcatiffs, Linen, and Rice, carried one and
twenty Portuguese, fourteen Moors, and ten Chinese, which were left in the
empty Ship to go whither they pleased.

Mean while Sacquemondonne, one of the chief Magistrates in Nangesaque, visited
Indiik in the Netherlanders Storehouse in Disma, bringing a Saddle and Bridle
with him, which had been lent by Harman Klenk to the Lord of Facata: the
Magistrate desired in the forementioned Lords behalf to have one made by it,
that he might keep the same; for he could not find a Japanner that was able to
match it.

Indiik looked upon this as a feigned Message, and only a Business to search
into the Hollanders intentions in taking the Chinese Jonks. But Sacquemondonne
coming to Indiik said thus to him: A Discourse between Sacquemondonne and Indiik
That he had long sought an opportunity to have some private Conference with
him in the Island Disma, but till then he could never find a time to do it in,
yet now both happened: for the Lord of Facata had given him occasion, and the
Governor leave: the honor of the Visit shown by the Lords of Firando, Arima,
and Facata, was grounded on real affection which they had for the Hollanders;
and that it was to no other end, but to bewail their misfortunes which they had
suffered by Coxenga 's means: this honor was a certain testimony, that the
East India Company was exceedingly beloved at the Emperors Court; for if his
Imperial Majesty did not esteem the Hollanders, no Japan Lord would so much
debase himself as to visit them, much less to send them Presents: and also
Indiik could no ways be ignorant of the great Interest the Nangesaquean
Governors had at Court, and their Fatherly inclination every where, expressed
in the promoting of the Hollanders Trade, who being now at variance with
Coxenga, had leave to do what mischief they could every where: But since he was
the last time commanded in Jedo, in the Emperors Name by the Council, not to
pillage any Chinese Jonks, or molest that Trade, he could not but be suspected
for disobeying their Orders: and feared that there would some inconvenience
arise from plundering the Chinese Jonks; and if there could be no other way
found by which the Differences between Coxenga and the Hollanders could be
decided?

Indiiks's Discourse with the Nangesaquean Magistrate.
Indiik replied in the presence of Klenk and Lier, saying, The Visits and
Presents of the Lord of Facata, Firando, and Arima, are sufficient to make the
East India Company think themselves obliged for the honor and bounty showed to
them: The Governor of Nangesaque's Favor, by whose means all things happen at
Court according to the Hollanders desires, they esteemed and prized
exceedingly; and there could be no greater piece of ingratitude, than not to
acknowledge it; wherefore they made it their whole study to respect, honor, and
oblige the Governor of Nangesaque. Moreover they could not deny, but that they
had promised the Council in Jedo, not to take any Chinese Jonks; but those
Promises were grounded upon the Peace then between the Hollanders and Coxenga;
but since they had understood from the Itziban and Nibanfue (which in the Japan
Tongue signifies the first and second Ship) that Coxenga without proclaiming a
War, and without the least cause, had treacherously fallen upon Formosa with
forty thousand Men, that has quite altered the case. All Peoples Laws granted
free leave to resist force with force; so that a man does not do mischief
enough, though he uses his whole endeavors to spoil; and this is grounded on
the Law of equal revenge. The whole Estate of Tayoan had been twice delivered
in Writing to the Governor of Nangesaque, who had sent them to their Emperors
Court; by which the Court was informed of the Hollanders Design to do all the
mischief they could to Coxenga, which cannot be ill resented, because it is not
contrary to the forementioned Promise. Moreover, there is also another way to
make Coxenga change his bloody War into Peace, which has already been made
known to Ficojemondonne: for if by order of the Japan Emperor, the present, and
hereafter the following Goods and Moneys taken out of the Chinese Jonks, should
be kept by the Governor of Nangesaque, till Coxenga had satisfied the damage
which he had done to the Hollanders, he would then soon come to an Agreement:
Yet if this Proposal should be disliked by the Emperor, another way might still
be found; for the Holland Men of War to spoil his Trade to the Manilla's,
Nanquien, Japan, and other Places, so by that means impoverishing, force him to
an Agreement; for what will that treacherous Robber do, when the Havens to
which he Trades are blocked up by the Hollanders?

Father Discourse with Sacquemondonne
The Magistrate Sacquemondonne observing Indiik's Answer, said, That the
Hollanders had right in the taking of Chinese Jonks, but no Answer being come
yet from the Emperor, they must forbear a while, that they might not incur the
displeasure of the Court at Jedo.

Indiik answered again, The East India Company join all their Forces together
to please and serve the Japan Empire, but if they should suffer such wrongs as
Coxenga's, they would soon be ruined by not seeking to subdue their Enemies,
who like a small Fire, at first is easily quenched, but let alone destroys
whole Cities. It is too late to seek revenge when an Enemy, by neglecting of
time, grows still more and more powerful, and sometimes grows to that height,
that he no ways values his Antagonist. How is it possible to subdue Coxenga, if
his rich laden Jonks come home safe and unmolested from all Places? is he not
thereby enabled to do more mischief? who will give a mad Man his Sword to be
slain by it himself?

Sacquemondonne acknowledge, that all Indiiks Discourse was grounded on Reason,
but was suspicious of the Chinese Jonks which lay richly laden in the Bay of
Nangesaque: for if the Hollanders did not observe the Emperor's Commands, what
could then be expected, but that they would be all made Prize by the Holland
Ships, of which there then lay a considerable number there? Indiik soon
resolved him of this doubt; The Holland Ships (said he) are to put to Sea on a
set-day, their going away is certain, before the Chinese Jonks weigh Anchor.
The Hollanders went on directly to the Place where they were sent, without
looking after any. It might be true, several of their Frigates Cruised to and
again before Tayoan, and several Havens of China, waiting for the Jonks, and
that which was done by those Ships he could not answer for, having no Command
over them, as over those that lay at Nangesaque.

Sacquemondonne taking great delight in this his Relation, promised to give an
account thereof to the Governor of Nangesaque; and taking his leave, thanked
Indiik for his kind Entertainment.

Discourse with the Hangesaquean Governor.
Not long after Joffiesamma came home from Jedo, whom Indiik bad welcome by the
Interpreters; which he kindly accepting, told the Interpreters, That he had
received the news of Coxenga's treacherous Design on Formosa, which made him
think that he should not have found any of the Hollanders Ships at Nangesaque;
but before he came from thence he was informed to the contrary, and now was
very glad to see them himself.

Moreover, he gave them leave to begin and make Sale of their Goods on the
twenty eighth of September.

And it seemed to be no ill sign, that seven of the Japan Watch-Barques Rowed
ashore, only leaving three amongst nine Holland Ships, and one Jonk taken from
the Chinese, whereas at other times a Barque full of Soldiers was always tied
behind every Ship.

Indiik visits the Governor.
The twenty seventh of September, Indiik went with Klenk and Van Lier to visit
the Governor Joffiedonne, and to congratulate his Return from Jedo. He also
told him that Klenk was sent to be Governor of Formosa by the Indian Council at
Batavia; but finding all the Ways toward the Fort Zelandia blocked up by
Coxenga's Vessels, that it was impossible for him to get in, came thither.

Joffiedonne said, That he had seen the Relation at Jedo, written by Indiik
concerning Coxenga's treacherous Design, and that he longed to see the event of
the War in Formosa.

Lastly Indiik told him, That Van Lier there present was sent to succeed him,
hoping that he would be pleased to acknowledge him so: which Joffiedonne not
only accepted, but also promised to do all what he could to promote the
Hollanders Trade.

Strange adventure of the Sperwer Frigate, cast away on Quelpaerds-Isle.
SInce Indiik's departure, Anno 1661. from Nangesaque to Batavia, came thither
in a small Vessel eight Hollanders, that had suffered Shipwreck in the Ship
Sperwer; the remarkableness of the Accident merits our Relation.

The Sperwer Frigate Sailing from Batavia the tenth of June 1653. Landed
Cornelius Keysar on Taoyan, to succeed Nicholas Verburg in his Place of
Government: from thence the Frigate steered her Course for Japan; but overtaken
by a great Storm, happened in the nightime, to be driven near a small Island:
the Captain thereof looking out at the Window spied the danger; wherefore he
used all possible endeavors to come to an Anchor behind the Island, so to be
out of the way of the hollow Seas; the design fell out according to his desire,
but the Ship lying betwixt the Island and a great Riff (which breaking the Sea
made it very rough) were forced to Ride very short at Anchor: the Day
discovered the Chinese Coast, which was so near them, that they could see
People in Arms stand on the Shore, seeming to stay there longing to see a
miserable Shipwreck: two days the Storm continued, then growing calmer they
weighed Anchor to get out of sight of the Chinese, which like hungry Wolves
watched for a Prey, showing themselves in great numbers: afterward the Ship
was driven by the Current between China and Formosa; but soon after the Storm
blowing afresh, they were not able to carry out the least Sail till the Gusts
were more favorable: mean while the Ship being so miserably tossed sprung a
Leak, so that they could scarce keep her free with Pumping; sometimes a Sea
beat over her in such a manner, that the Water could scarce find ways to run
out again, seeming as if it would sink immediately. With these inconveniences
came far greater; for toward the Evening a Sea washed away one of the
Galleries, and soon after another the Head, so loosning the Boltsprit; yet they
had not been in such great danger, had not the Ship rolled so extremely, and
the Seas followed one another so suddenly: they judged it convenient to hale up
their Mizin, and Sail before the Wind; the second Watch they discovered Land,
but the Ship in the dark was got within Musket Shot of the Shore before they
could see it: the steep Shore suffered the Ship to run against a Rock, which
with three blows broke it into a thousand pieces, and of sixty four Men escaped
only thirty six, most of which were miserably wounded by the sharp Rocks;
those that lay in their Cabbins, being tired with watching, died all: amongst
those that were saved was the Captain, Reinier Egbertson of Amsterdam. From the
Wreck they saved one Barrel of Flower, one Barrel of Salt-Beef, some Pork, and
a Rundlet of Tent, which proved very happily for the wounded. Moreover, they
gathered up as many Pieces of the Ship as would make them a Booth to defend
them from the Weather; for they knew not in what Country they were, how
called, or whether inhabited or not, because the Sky being Clouded for several
days, they could take no observation.

On the second day after they suffered Shipwreck they saw a Man, whom they
beckning to come to them ran away; soon after came three other, of which one
carried a Musket, the other two Bows and Arrows, which also fled from them;
but one of the Seamen running after them unarmed, got some Fire, which they
wanted extremely. Against the Evening their Tent, or Booth, was surrounded with
above a hundred Men, wearing Hats made of Horse-hair. The next day came a small
Army, being about two thousand Foot and Horse, while the Hollanders were making
of a bigger Tent. The Commander of them fetched the Book-keeper Henry Haemel,
with the Pilot, Quartermaster, Strange usage by the Coreans of thirty six
Shi^wracked Hollanders.
and a Boy, out of the Booth, which were all four thrown down on the Earth
before the General, at which the whole Army made a kind of strange noise. The
Hollanders that remained in the Tent, believed certainly, that their Companions
were put to a miserable death; but they used them not so cruelly: for the
Coreans only put an Iron Chain about their Necks, to which a great Bell was
made fast under their Chin. Then some of the Officers went into the Booth, and
had a great deal of Discourse which the Hollanders understood not; but they
signified to them that they intended to go to Japan, but suffering Shipwreck
they were come ashore there to save themselves. The Chinese looked upon those
Goods which they had saved, and finding only a little Meal, Salt-Beef and
Pork, they brought some Rice boiled in Water, which was a great refreshment.
Not long continued their joy that they were not in a barren Country; for
whilst they were eating, a great many of the Soldiers came running toward
their Tent, every one holding a Rope in his hand, which made the Hollanders
think that they should be bound and killed: but this fear soon vanished, when
the Coreans ran with all speed toward the Wreck, every one laboring to hale
the Wood ashore, which burning they carried the Iron away. In the interim the
Pilot taking an observation, found that it was Quelpaerds-Island where they had
lost their Ship, and were in thirty three Degrees and thirty two Minutes
Latitude. Moreover, the Coreans still busied themselves in haling ashore the
Pieces of the Wreck, and burning it for the Iron; and lastly they set the whole
Wreck on Fire, which might have cost them dear: for two Brass-Guns deeply
laden went off, but it so happened, that the Muzzles of them lay toward the
Sea: this Blow struck such a fear amongst them, that every one fled, and coming
to the Hollanders, desired to know of them if it would do the like again; but
they informing that there were no more Guns that were Charged in the Ship, they
went on with their work.

Moreover, the Hollanders visited the Governor of Quelpaerds-Isle, and
presented him with a Bottle of Tent, which pleased him so well, that he became
very kind to them, sending them boiled Rice twice a day, and bid them come and
see the punishment which would be inflicted on those that had robbed the
wrecked Vessel. The Iron they had stole was tied to their Backs, and they
themselves laid upon the Ground, received several Drubbings on the Balls of
their Feet with a Stick about a Fathom long, and as thick as an ordinary Boy's
Arm, so beating them unmercifully.

Their Journey through Quelpaerds-Island.
After this was over, the Hollanders had order to be gone with all their things;
so traveling with a Guard of Foot and Horse, they went that day four Leagues,
and Lodged in a small Town called Tadjunch, in an old Storehouse: from thence
they went to the City Moggan, where the Governor of Quelpaerds keeps his Court;
here on a great Market place three thousand Armed Men were drawn up in Battle
array: The Governor caused Henry Hamell, with the Pilot and Quartermaster to
come to him, and asked them where they were going? at which Hamel cried several
times, Japan and Nangesaque; at which the Governor nodding his Head seemed to
understand it. The remaining Hollanders were also carried four and four to the
Governor, Examined, and Lodged in a House, in which, as they afterward
understood, the Kings Uncle had a long time been kept Prisoner, and at last
died there, because he endeavored to depose his Nephew. Every day they had
their allowance of boiled Rice, wheaten Flower, and another strange Food which
they could not eat, wherefore they lived most upon Rice. The Governor, a Man
aged about seventy years, and of a noble Aspect, signified to them, that he
would Write to the King, to know what should be done with them, but it would be
a considerable time before he could have an Answer; for the Place where the
King kept his Court was thirteen Leagues over-Sea, and above twenty Leagues
from Moggan: But whilst they waited for it, the Hollanders had fresh Meat
allowed them, and also leave for six at a time to walk abroad by turns. The
Governor oftentimes invited them to his Palace, bidding them write their Names;
and cured those that were wounded at their Landing; and also prepared several
noble Dinners for them: In which kind Hospitality-the Heathens far exceed very
many Christians.

Strange adventure of a Hollander.
But amongst several strange Adventures, that is most remarkable which happened to
the Book-keeper Hamel, Pilot, and Surgeon: These, as formerly, carried
before the Governor, found a Man sitting by him with a red Beard, and being
asked if they knew not such a Man? they answered, That he seemed to be a
Hollander; at which the Governor fell a laughing: at last the red-Bearded Man
discovering himself, asked them in the Dutch Tongue, what People they were? and
whether they were going? at which the Hollanders were allamaz'd, but Hamel
answering, said, That they Sailed from Amsterdam to Batavia, and from Batavia
to Japan; but since they left Formosa they were overtaken by a mighty Storm,
which drove the Sperwer Frigate, already torn and shattered, against the Rocks
of the Island Quelpaerds. Hamel also asked him what he was? and although he had
almost forgot his Native Tongue, yet he told him That he was born in a Village
called De Riip in Holland, and named John Johnson Welterre, and that Anno 1626.
he Sailed in a Ship from Amsterdam to the East Indies; afterward by order of
the Indian Council in Batavia Sailed in the Ouwerkerk Ketch to Japan, but by
contrary Winds forced upon the Coast of Corea, fresh Water began to grow very
scant; wherefore (said he) I was commanded, with my Countreyman Derick
Gerritson, and an Amsterdammer called John Peterson Verbaest, to go ashore, to
see if we could find any fresh Water: no sooner had we set foot ashore, but we
were all three surrounded and carried up into the Country to the King's Court,
where ever since we have had Meat, Drink, and Clothing, but could never obtain
leave to go with some Vessel or other to Japan: and though he had for several
years entreated leave of the Court to depart, yet they had always one Answer,
which was, That the King did not give leave to any Strangers to go out of his
Kingdom: which Sentence all Hollanders, or what else soever they be, are sure
to undergo. Moreover (said he) my two Companions died seventeen years ago, at
the time when the Tartars invaded Corea.

All which Discourse being Interpreted to the Governor, was written down and
sent to the Court.

Mean while the time came, in which the old Governor was to give place to the
new; for every three years they observe change of Government amongst the
Coreans. The old Lord had a very great inclination for the Hollanders; for
before he went away he provided them against the next Winter, giving every one
a Coat, a pair of Buskins and Stockings. He also returned them the Books which
he had taken from them; and gave them good store of Train-Oyl to burn in their
Lamps at Night, promising them also at last, that he would use all the means
possible at Court to obtain leave for their going to Japan. But the new
Governor proved quite another Man, for he carried himself very strange to the
Hollanders; and since the departure of the first Lord in the beginning of
January, Anno 1654. they wanted Provisions, being tied to very small allowance,
which made their imprisonment very insufferable: wherefore since they had yet
liberty to go out by sixes at a time, they searched daily if they could not
find any Vessels lying near the Shore, with which they might in the Night make
their Escape. Remarkable passage of five Hollanders.
The last of April six Prisoners endeavored in the Night to get over the Wall;
but discovered by the Barking of the Dogs, which wakened the Watchmen, their
Design took no effect. After which time the Pilot and five more resolved on the
like Escape: These going out upon a Day which fell to their turn, found some
distance from the City Moggan, hard by a small Village, a little Vessel with
all Necessaries thereto belonging, where going aboard they haled it over a Bank
in sight of the Villagers, which at first were amazed to see them; but
afterward observing that the Hollanders were in earnest they put off to Sea,
gave notice thereof to the Owner, who with a Gun charged came running after
them in the Water, whilst they were busy setting up the Mast and Sail; but not
being acquainted with the Corean Vessels, both Mast and Sail fell overboard;
yet they got it up again, and put all things in their right place; when placing
the Mast it broke out, so that it fell all again into the Sea, by which means
they lost all hopes of escaping, driving more and more to the Shore, and
exactly toward a Barque full of Armed Coreans, which they boarding, the five
Hollanders leaped over into the same, for the sixth could not get in; by this
their leaping the Armed Barque shipped so much Water, that they had enough to
do to keep her from sinking: but when Landed, they carried the five Hollanders
to the Governor, who caused them all to be laden with Fetters, hung a Board
about their Necks, on which he nailed one of their Hands, and stripping them
laid them on the Ground upon their Bellies, so tying them fast to four Posts,
sent for the remaining Hollanders thither to see them: thus laid, the Governor
caused the Interpreter Weltevree to ask them, If they had agreed upon their
Escape without the knowledge of their Companions? or if they knew of their
Design? How they durst venture to go in so small a Vessel without Water, Bread,
or any other sustenance, through so vast an Ocean to Japan? The fettered
Hollanders answered, That their Companions had not the least knowledge of their
Design. Moreover, they would rather run all hazards whatsoever for their
liberty, nay rather die, than undergo so many miseries, and at last be starved
to death: which they had no sooner said, when an Executioner, standing in the
middle of them, with a Stick a Fathom long, a Finger thick, and round on the
top, gave every one twenty five blows on their bare Buttocks, that none of them
in five Weeks were able to stir out of their Cabbins.

Hollanders carried to Corea, and their chief Adventures.
But whilst they lay in that misery, Orders came from the Corean Court, that the
Hollanders divided into four Jonks should be sent fettered from
Quelpaerds-Island to Corea: upon which the Governor began his Cruelties afresh,
linking both their Feet and one hand together, fearing else they might conquer
and carry away one of the Jonks, which indeed would have been hazardous if they
had gone aboard unbound; and the more, because the Coreans are generally
Sea-sick. Two days they were tossed up and down at Sea, and not getting the
least Ground because of contrary Winds, they returned to Moggan, where the
Hollanders were put into their old Prison.

THis Quelpaerds-Island reckons fifteen Leagues in its Circumference; has on
the North-side a convenient Harbor for Ships, and lies opposite from the South
Promontory of Corea thirteen Leagues; the Passage to which is very dangerous,
because the Water is full of blind Rocks, and no anchorage to be found betwixt
that and Quelpaerds Haven; so that those Ships that are by a Storm, either out
of the East or South-east driven from the Coast of Japan thither, are easily
lost.

This Island affords store of Provisions, is full of People, Horses and Cattle;
in the middle a high Mountain, crowned with Trees, seems to touch the Clouds:
the lesser Hills have barren tops, yet the Valleys abound in Rice, Wheat, and
Barley.

Their remarkable Journey there.
AFter five days time, the Wind changing, the Hollanders as before, were again
Shipped aboard of four Jonks, and getting to Corea at Sunset, were carried
ashore at the Sunrising; where being furnished with Horses, they all met
together in the City Heinan, whither they came in four several Companies; for
the four Jonks Landed them all in several Places. Whilst they Lodged in Heinan,
the Governor Paul Johnson Kool died, having never enjoyed his health since he
suffered Shipwreck. The Commander of their Guard gave order to bury the Corpse:
after which the Hollanders traveled through the Cities Sansiang and Tiongop,
and also by the great Castle Jypansangians, built upon a Rock: then they past
the Town Tunge, and the great City Sendy, where some years ago the King of
Corea kept his Court, but was now only the Residence of a Viceroy. Going from
hence they Lodged in Jesorn, the last City in the Territory Thielado. Lastly,
after they had traveled seventy Leagues, and besides the forementioned
Villages, passed through Lynjin, Jesaen and Consio, they came into the Royal
City Sioor; where not long after they were Examined at Court by the Interpreter
Weltevree; whereupon the Prisoners declaring their whole Adventure, at last
begged that they might have leave to go for Japan, that they might once more
see their Wives and Children: which their Request was denied, receiving this
Answer, That the King never suffered any Stranger to go out of his Country,
therefore they must not think of any thing, but to die in Corea.

Soon after every Hollander received a small Board, with the King's Arms burnt
on it, and every ones Name, Extract, and Office which he was to perform, Carved
on the same in Corean Letters. Weltevree bore the Command as Sergeant over them
all. An expert Soldier taught them to handle the Corean Arms, and whilst they
were busy in learning this Martial Discipline, the Tartars, according to their
custom, came to fetch in his Revenues from Corea: whereupon the King sent the
Hollanders to the strong Castle Nanna Sansiang, built on a Rock seven Leagues
beyond Sioor, to which in time of need the King takes his flight.

A strange undertaking of two Seamen.
When the Tartars went the second time out of Sioor, the chief Pilot Henry
Johnson an Amsterdammer, and the Gunner Henry vander Boss also went out with
them, under a pretense to cut some Wood for Fuel, but their Design was to
intermeddle themselves with the Tartarian Horse, that if so they might find a
Way home through Tartary: they stayed therefore till the said Horsemen with the
Corean Money were half passed by, then running amongst them, but were known by
some Coreans that followed after, and re-taken, put close Prisoners, where not
long after they died. Their Companions could never be certainly informed if
they died a natural death, or whether they were Executed.

During this time, news was brought to the King's Court, that another Ship was
lost on Quelpaerds Island, wherefore three Hollanders that best understood the
Corean Tongue were sent thither, because Weltevree being overgrown with Age,
was not able to Travel. Lastly, The King grown weary of the Hollanders,
resolved to make them away by Murder, but the King's Brother begging their
Lives, (as Weltevree informed them) they were sent to the strong Castle
Thiellapeing, where they found the three Hollanders sent to Quelpaerds Island,
here being a House provided, in which the thirty three Hollanders were Lodged.
The Governor seemed to have some small inclination for the Hollanders, but his
Successor a hatred, forcing them to fetch Fuel three Leagues off, over the
Hills, and kept those Clothes from them, which they were promised at the Corean
Court, so that they endured extreme cold, and were also very much plagued with
Lice, which almost killed them; yet it happened at last, that half of the
Prisoners had leave by turns to go a begging, whilst the other half staid at
home, for the Coreans seldom deny any required Alms, and chiefly the Priests,
which being there in great abundance, are very charitable. These kind of People
entertained them very courteously, the more, because they began to speak the
Corean Tongue, and related to them the Affairs of Europe and India, in which
they took great pleasure.

ANno 1660. A new Governor succeeded the old one of Thiellapeing, he being of a
quiet and mild disposition, Protested oftentimes, that if it were in his Power,
he would release the Hollanders instantly. Famine in Corea.
In the second Year arose a great Famine in Corea, the over-dry Seasons having
so scorched the Ground, that thousands of People died of Hunger, some eating
Wild Herbs, others Barks of Trees; and had not the Valleys afforded them some
Corn, most of the People had been Starved. The Hollanders bore no small share
in this general Calamity. Their allowance which was given them by the King's
Order, being exceedingly pinched.

In the interim, Order came from Court, that the two and twenty Hollanders,
(for the rest died of hardship) were to be divided into three Towns, twelve
should go and live in Saysing, five at Sutsen, and as many more at Wammon, and
whilst they suffered either more or less inconveniences, according to the
Dispositions of the Governors, which changed every three year, who either used
them kind or cruelly, there appeared two Blazing Stars, or Comets, Blazing
Stars.
about the latter end of 1664. The first appeared in the South-East, the second
in the South-West. These Signs struck the Coreans into a great Consternation,
because the same were seen just before the Tartars Invaded them, and also when
the Japanners sent over their Forces thither. The Coreans therefore inquired of
the Hollanders, What those Planets Prognosticated? What the Europeans thought
of them? They answered, That experience had sufficiently taught, that those
Stars were always very Prodigious Signs, generally threatening War, Famine, or
Sickness. The King exceedingly amazed, Fortified all his Towns, Castles, and
Bulwarks, with double Watches; and forbad strictly, that none living near the
Seaside should burn Lights at Night.

Remarkable passage of eight Holland Prisoners.
BUt the Hollanders at last found a way to make their escape, they having a
long time before gathered some Moneys together, for which they intended to buy
an old Fishermans Barque; it being subtly contrived, to make their Landlord
believe, that they would now and then go to the small Islands before Corea, to
fetch Cotton from thence, of which he should have his share. This Proposal was
very well approved of by the Coreans, so buying a small Vessel, he gave it to
the Hollanders, who, what e're they could catch, whether Sails, Anchors, or
Provisions, in the Night carried them Aboard, and whilst they were thus busy,
preparing for their departure, the Chyrurgeon Matthew Bokken, Cornelius
Derickson, and John Pieterson de Uries, came from the City Sutsen to visit
their Countrymen in Saysing. These being made acquainted with the Design,
forwarded it with all diligence, and indeed it fell out very fortunately, for
De Uries was exceeding well experienced in the Art of Navigation. The fourth of
September, Anno 1666. they began their Voyage eight of them, being Henry Hamel,
Goverard Dionys, John Pieterson de Uries, Garret Johnson, Matthew Bokken,
Cornelius Derickson, Benedict Clark, and Dionys Govertson, first clambering
over the Walls of Saysings, and getting Aboard, Weighed Anchor about Ebbing
Water, and setting of the Moon, they furnished themselves with Water at a small
Island near Corea, and in the dark, Sailed through all the Jonks of War: In this
passage they struck Sail, that so they might not be discovered, and fell to
Work with their Oars, till they lost sight of Corea; so Steering South-East,
they went right before the Wind, and in a short time got to the Westward of
Goto, where the Wind blowing very fierce, they came to an Anchor; here whilst
they Rode fast, a small Vessel with six Men, every one Armed with two Swords,
came Sailing by them, and put one of her Men a Shore, which causing some
suspicion in them, made them Weigh Anchor, and endeavor to put off again to
Sea; but the foresaid Vessel prevented them, by making signs, that they must
strike their Sail, and come farther up into the Haven; at which the Hollanders
cried, Hollande, Nangesaque, whilst they were Towed to the Shore, and
surrounded with a great many Boats.

The Japanners took two Men out of the Corean Barque, which went a Shore where
all things were in an uprore; and about Midnight, a great Barque came Rowing
close by their sides, which informed them of the Arrival of the Holland Ships
at Nangesaque, which made them take fresh courage, as well as the Japanners,
furnishing them with Provisions for nothing; who also covered the Corean
Barque, which had no shelter with Mats against the continual Rain. The
fourteenth of September, after thirteen years Imprisonment, they came to their
Countrymen on the Island Disma, to their great admiration.

Zelderen's Journey.
BUt the Journey which Van Zelderen made from Nangesaque to the Emperor, is
better worthy of our Observation; who having kept his day of Sale in November,
with all manner of Drugs, Scarlets, Hats, Looking-Glasses, Elants or
Buff-Skins, Musk, Cotton, and other Commodities in Silver Dishes, placed on the
long Table, standing in the middle of the Gallery in the Hollanders
Storehouse, which is (as we said) divided into three hundred Rooms, and four
Streets, standing on the Island Disma, by a narrow Channel, separated from the
City Nangesaque; above Stairs live the Servants belonging to the East India
Company, below lie the Merchandises in several Apartments, the Locks of which
are Sealed up with the Emperors Arms, in the presence of a Nangesaque
Magistrate, who daily Dines in the Storehouse, at the first Table, where he is
served all with Plate.

Mountains about Nangesaque.
Moreover, Nangesaque lies between exceeding high Mountains, which are cut
through very artificially with Walls, so that the Water in the Enclosed Parks is
at that command, that every one lets in what he pleases, because they can
either stop, or let in the Water which comes running down the Hills. But though
Nangesaque in this Point is much Indebted to Art, much more she ought to thank
Nature, that the Soil about it abounds with Rice, Wheat, and all manner of
Plants. Their Citizens Martial-Discipline.
About October, the Nangesaquean Citizens are always up in Arms, and March
through the City, every Precinct makes a particular Company, before which, the
Arms of every ones Employment are carried, not without great State: None dare
Discharge a Gun for fear of Fire; a Soldier is held in very great esteem
amongst the Japanners, for he may visit a Merchant in his Shirt, and if he
should not be Saluted by him with bowing his Head and Hands to the Ground, he
is sure to be soundly beaten. But much more abominable and horrid is the Custom
of Murdering Children, especially Girls, for the Parents that think their
Children troublesome to them, throw the Females (tied to a bundle of Straw) in
the Water, and drown them. The Boys are delivered to the Emperors Officers,
which Train them up in Martial Discipline.

view of Cangoxuma (Kagoshima) CANGOXUMA


BUt the Holland Ambassador prosecuting his Voyage to Jedo, was overtaken by a
stiff Gale out of the North-East in the Corean Ocean, Description of the mighty
City Congoxuma.
that running right before it with her Fore-Sail, he soon arrived in the Haven
of Congoxuma, and dropped Anchor before the Beacon-Hill, which was first, with
the Approbation of the Japanners, built by the Portuguese, at the time when
they drove a free Trade there.

Congoxuma is the first City, where the Portuguese Landed, and got footing in
Japan, by the means of a Japan Youth, called Angier, who fearing the cruelty of
his Persecutors, secured himself in a Japan Cloister, where he made his escape
to Malacca, whither he Sailed in a Merchant-Man, Commanded by the Portugal
George Alvares, Anno 1547. The Jesuit Francis Xaverius coming acquainted with
him there, he not long after went with him to Congoxuma, where being kindly
Entertained by Angier's Friends, he had an opportunity to Plant the Roman
Religion.

After this, the Portuguese made this City Congoxuma their Staple, for which it
lay very convenient in the Kingdom of Saxuma; the foresaid Beacon square on the
top, with a Turned Ball, stands on a thick Cedar Pole, supported with two great
pieces of Timber, which on the top are fastened to the Pole with great Iron
Hooks; a high Ladder, of which the Rounds jet out beyond the sides, stands
against, and leads up to it; below is a Watch-house, and on the other side
several Houses built on the hanging of the Mountain; only in some places the
tops of the Houses appear above the Hills. This Beacon, Seamen can discover
about seven Leagues off at Sea, because the Rock on which it stands is of an
excessive height; at the Foot thereof, a little toward one side is a Fishers
Village, and before that, good Ground to Anchor in, close under the Shore.

Reception of the Holland Ambassador.
THe Holland Ambassador Sailed in a stately Jonk toward the City against a
swift flowing River, which comes along through the middle of Congoxuma, from a
Harboring Mountain, and runs into the Corean Ocean. The speedy Current of the
Rhone in France, or the Donaw in Hungary, flow but slowly in comparison of
this, which passes through Coxenga. The Jonk in which the Ambassador was, had
two Masts, between which stood a Tent, or rather a Cabin on six Pillars, the
edges adorned with Gilded Imagery; before on her Bow, hung two Anchors. Thus he
Sailed in, between steep and high Rocks, of which, some terrified the Beholders
as they were passing by them.

Within the Harbor appears a strong and Artificial Water-Castle, built by
Ongoschio, the Emperor Chongon's Grandfather, when he designed to take the
Crown from Fideri Taicosama's Son; because Congoxuma was a place of great
concern to him; for this City is not only the Key of the Province Saxuma, but
of all Bungo. This Water-Castle raised out of the Sea with Free-Stones, is
square, with many Redouts, like the European Bulwarks. Here is kept a strong
Garrison, where the Ships pay Custom. Moreover, the Stone-Causey made up out of
the Sea, and along the Rails on both sides Plated with Copper, deserves no
small admiration. This Causey leads from the Water-Castle, to two great
Watch-houses, the Out-walls of which rest on the said Causey, and have an
excellent Prospect of all the Haven, each of them Garrisoned with five hundred
of the Emperors Soldiers, which have a continual eye with those in the
Water-Castle on all Transactions, because the King of Saxuma has oftentimes
boldly taken up Arms against the Emperor, refusing to pay him the usual
Tribute, but still been brought to reason; yet notwithstanding his bad Fortune,
he would now and then take fresh Courage, and receive more Losses: between the
Watch-houses and the Mountain, on the North-side of the City is a convenient
Harbor, in which the Jonks and other Vessels in great numbers come to an
Anchor, or are moored to the Shore: Close by are the City Storehouses, built
on a Stone-Wall, raised out of the Water, in the middle whereof is a large
square Gate, with the Stairs of Freestone, that descend into the Haven, at
which all the Goods and Merchandises that are brought to Coxenga, are Landed
and carried into the City. The Storehouses on the North-side of the Gate;
consists of four spacious Halls; but that which is on the other side has a
double Roof, and fourteen large Rooms, besides Garrets. Between the North
Storehouse, and the Watch-houses, the River flows out of the City into the
Haven, and is adorned on one side with brave large Custom-houses, in which, Art
shows its Masterpiece, no Charge having been spared in the building of them;
here the Ships must pay a second Custom, which brings in a great Revenue yearly
to the Emperor.

Japan Temple, in which ley wash their dead.
BUt opposite to these Toll-houses, appears a stately Temple, in which the
Bodies of Dead Persons are placed, for some days before they are burnt, after
the Japan manner. The Bonzies belonging thereto, get vast Sums of Money,
especially from the rich People, for cleansing of the dead Bodies, that they
may appear the more acceptable to their Gods, Amida, Canon, or any other whom
they chiefly served in their Life time. This kind of Custom of keeping the Dead
Bodies Unbury'd for some time, to cleanse and then to burn them, has been in
use a long time in the World; for the Ancient Romans and Greeks observed such a
Custom with their Dead, In Phenissis.
before the Birth of our Savior. The Greek Tragedy written by Euripides brings
in King Creon, saying:

I will withdraw, that so Jocasta may
From her Sons body, cleanse the filth away.
I understand that the Dardanian Illyrians (says Aelian) are washed three
times, Aeliani var. Hist. l. 4. c. 1.
once when born, a second time when Married, and lastly, when they are dead.
The Jews also observed this Washing of Dead Bodies, St. Luke says of Tabytha,
And it came to pass in those days, Act 9.37.
that she was sick and died; whom when they had washed, they laid in an upper
Chamber. The Embalming of Dead Bodies is full as Ancient. Tacitus, Herodotus,
Diodorus Siculus, Pomponius Mela, Cicero, Sextus Philosophus, Lucian, and other
Ancient Greek and Latin Writers ascribe the first Embalming of the Dead to the
Egyptians; with which Opinion the Gospel agrees; for Moses relates, that the
Patriarchs Jacob and Joseph were Embalmed by the Egyptians: And Joseph
commanded his Servants the Physicians to Embalm his Father: Genesis 50.2, 3, 26.
and the Physicians Embalmed Ifrael. And forty days were fulfilled for him (for
so are fulfilled the days of those that are Embalmed) and the Egyptians mourned
for him threescore and ten days. And Joseph died being a hundred and ten years
old, and they Embalmed him, and he was put in a Coffin.

Sextus Philosophus tells us, Pyrrb^n. Hypothes. 6.24.
That the Egyptians took out the Bowels of the deceased Bodies, and filled them
with Balsom, and other Perfumes, to preserve them from stinking and rotting,
and kept them in their Houses, letting them at the Table with them: Syl. Ital.
l. 12.
Of which the Latin Poet Sylvius Italicus says thus:

Egypt Embalms her Dead with rich Perfumes,
And then at Feasts gives them the chiefest Rooms.
Nay, they oftentimes gave the dead Bodies of their Parents or near Relations
as a Security to their Creditors, which if they did not release whilst they
lived, might not (says Lucian) be buried.

Moreover they used for their Embalming Salt, Cedar-Oyl Honey, Wax, Myrrh,
Chalk, Lime, Asphalt, and Nitre.

The Washing of Bodies was performed by the Roman and Greek Women. Plato brings
in Socrates saying, In Phadono.
It is convenient before I drink the Poison that I wash my self, that I may not
leave any thing to do for the Women, to wash me after I am dead.

The Japanners seem also to have learnt from the Romans, That the preparations
for the Burial are to be performed in the Temples, for all things necessary for
Funerals were to be had for Money in the Temple of Libitina, Goddess of the
Dead. And according to the establishment of the Roman King Numa Pompilius,
every one was bound to throw certain Sums of Money into the Treasury of Juno
Lucina, when ever they had a Child born, and also when any one died, into a
Pot, Consecrated to Venus Libitina: But the Embalming of Dead Bodies was
performed by Men.

Moreover, not far from this Temple, toward the City, are several Stone
Storehouses against Fire, in which the Treasures of all the Province of Saxuma
are kept, and are once a year, by the Emperors Forces fetched to Osacca;
between these Buildings and the Water-Castle stands a fair Temple, to which the
Country People come daily in great numbers, there to Pray for a Blessing on
their Plants, Trees, and Cattle, to which they show Reverence, almost like the
Romans and Greeks, who in former times used to honor their Idol Pan with a
Goats Face and Bucks Feet, as a Deity placed over all Herdsmen and Hunters; and
also to the Fauni, they attributed Horns, and Horses Feet, to whom they
sacrificed a Goat; as likewise Milk to Sylvanus, God of their Forests; And in
like manner, to Bacchus, the God of Wine; the Deformed Priapus of the Gardens;
Ceres, the Corn Deity, and Oreades, of the Mountains.

Further description of Congoxuma.
But on the South side of the River, which flows through Congoxuma, the City
spreads it self, running up against a high Mountain, and is hid, for the most
part, behind the Rock, on which the Beacon stands. Then again, on the hanging
of a Hill, about the middle, in the South part of the City, stands a large
Temple, whose Roof appears above all the Houses, exceeding costly within. The
King of Saxuma going thither, was made, and received into the Orders of the
Bonzi, so to save his Life, which he had forfeited, because he refused to pay
Presents, and rebelled against the Emperor. Moreover, in the East part of
Congoxuma, near the foot of a Mountain, is the place of Execution, Enclosed
within a Stone Wall.

Whilst the Holland Ambassador staid to refresh himself here, being every where
kindly entertained, he saw eleven Japanners, and three Portuguese, being
Christians, Nailed on Crosses, and Roasted by a gentle Fire.

Four Leagues from Coxenga, toward the North-West, appears a Mountain, whose
top reaches above the Clouds, and is taken for the highest in the World, except
the Mountain Tereyra, on the Island Tenariff, for it is a general Opinion, that
that is nearest to the Heavens, and Vomits forth Fire and Brimstone above the
Clouds.

THe Holland Ambassador finding the Weather fairer, and the Wind grown calmer,
proceeded on his Voyage, and past at last by the Village Umbra, and in the like
still Weather, reached Mongy, where he came to an Anchor: When soon after the
Inhabitants came to him with all manner of Provision; from thence, Sailing
between several small Isles, which in great abundance lie scattered before
Dungo, he got so much ground, that against the. Evening he Sailed into the Bay
of Nanatzjamma: Zeldron's further Journey.
But now, his Voyage going on more slowly, the Ambassador Anchored on the
eleventh day in the Haven of Cammenosacci; over against which lies an Island
inhabited by a considerable number of Fishermen: Here the Seamen exchanged Silk
Peelings for Silver Flower-Pots of Wyer-Work, made so artificially, that no
Country in the World can make the like; here they also got all manner of fresh
Provisions.

Not long staid the Holland Ambassador at Cammenosacci, but Weighing Anchor in
the Night, Sailed between the small Islands Camro, Jore, and Szuwa, and
Anchored near the Village Caroto, lying to the South of the main Coast of
Japan. The Inhabitants of this place furnished them with exceeding good
Locusts, which kind of Food was used above two thousand years ago amongst the
Indians and other Eastern People, and held in great esteem.

Aelian relates, l. 14. de Animal c. 13.
That the Indian King had always a certain Dish of Worms, that grew in a Plant,
and were Roasted.

John Manardus relates, That in India he saw the like Stuff, mixed with Rice,
which Food the Inhabitants love extremely.

Sir John Mandevil saw three hundred years ago, the Princes on the Island
Talache, making good Cheer with Wood Worms.

This kind of Food also was accounted a great Dainty amongst the Romans, l. 17.
c. 19.
and chiefly those Worms that grew in Oaken-Trees, which being taken, and
brought up with Meal, were accounted a very choice Dish.

Moreover, The Soldiers which went with the Emperor, Charles the Fifth, from
Ferrara to Tunis, (as Brasavolus relates) observed, that the Africans lived on
raw Locusts.

Besides the Locusts, the Holland Ambassador got for his Retinue, a Cow, which
was killed in the Village Caroto, and some Goats, which thereabouts are taken
in abundance. Thus refreshed, he Sailed about the Islands Caminagari, and
Jocosima, to Tantonomi, a Village full of fair Buildings, and Populous, lying
on a Promontory of the Main Coast of Japan; where they Ferry over to Tonsa, and
where one of the Emperors Custom-Houses stands, which brings in above forty
thousand Rials of Silver yearly.

Description of the City Mewarry.
THe Ambassador hasting his Voyage, reached the high Point of Mewarry, where he
was quite becalmed; four Seamen and a Japan Interpreter had leave to go a
Shore here, where they found a City built on Hilly Ground, round about which
lay many pleasant Meadows that abound with Corn and Rice, but chiefly with
Plum-Trees, the Fruit whereof Preserved, were sent all over Japan, to use in
their Drink, Tee, and Tzia. The Citizens of Mewarry looked very strange upon
the Hollanders, having seldom or never seen any of them before.

The Japanners Opinion of the deceased Souls.
Some of his Retinue desired of the Japan Interpreter to see some of the Temples
in Mewarry, which were sixteen in number, but it was not a convenient time,
because the Inhabitants there that day kept a Festival, for the departed Souls.
The whole City was in a Hurry, every one was in his best Apparel, carrying his
Idol out of the City, to the Graves of their nearest Relations; where the Idol
being set down, both young and old fell on their Faces to Worship it, and
Prayed very earnestly, that Amida, Xaca, Canon, or any other god (for every one
serves whom he list) would be pleased to show Mercy to the Souls of their
Deceased Friends, that they might not be tortured with those that died
wickedly, in the boiling Waters of Singok, but that they might be carried, and
remain in the place of Everlasting Happiness. Moreover, they believe, that the
Souls of the Deceased, for some years, wander up and down about their Graves.

This Office of Sacrificing and Praying for the Dead, is generally performed by
the young Men out of the City; and when they have done, every one takes up his
Idol, and go one after another into the City, after the manner of a Procession:
But in their return, they talk to themselves, as if they had a Soul that walked
with them, with which they hold a very serious Discourse. And thus they
continue till they come to their Houses, where they prepare all manner of
Dainties for the Soul; some place the Dishes with Meat under their Pent-Houses,
others upon the Roof, where they let it stand about half an hour, then fetching
it in, and setting it up very safe, the young Men run Hooting and Hollowing out
of the City, striking in the Air with Boughs of Trees, so (as they say) to
drive the Souls of the Deceased back again to their Graves: Then taking Breath,
they return home, where they spend the whole Night in all manner of
Lasciviousness: But this Ceremony which they use to the Souls, are observed
several ways in Japan, for in other places (as we have at large described
before) they throw Stones against, and on the top of the Houses, so to drive
the Souls back to their Graves.

Furthermore, The King of the Province Mewarry keeps a brave Court in this
City: Next to which is a Seraglio, wherein, a considerable number of Ladies are
kept for his Concubines. Against the Evening, the four Hollanders and the
Interpreter being Aboard again, they made Sail, and Steered between several
Isles to Binga, a fair City, which appears with several Turrets and high
Temples: Against the Evening, they Stem'd with the Island Sinoja, and in the
Morning had sight of Fibi, when a stiff Gale out of the North drove them more
to the Southward; so that soon after they came near Margan Rocks, which rise
very high out of the Sea; on the highest of them lies a curious neat Town;
below which the Rock is very artificially hewn out, for a convenient Haven
against all Winds whatsoever: Here the Ambassador dropped Anchor, and when grown
somewhat calmer, stood out again, but could not reach beyond Fibi, however, at
Night he got to Dasacci; and although the Storm began to blow afresh, yet next
day he got to Ousimata, from whence he Sailed over to Wota, where he lay at an
Anchor all Night, and in the Morning Weighing, got to the Banks before Muro,
where he ran a ground, the Barque giving a great blow, and had without doubt
burst asunder, had not the Wind blown off from the Shore, so that haling out
all their Sails, they at last got off, and afterward judged it convenient to
fall down to the Island Jesima, so to get into a deeper Water. On Jesima, as
also on all the other little Islands, stood a Beacon, Beacons.
built four and twenty years before, upon an occasion (which the Japan
Interpreter related) being at the time when the Islands of Bungo and Saykok
rebelled against the Emperor, and made the Water between Japan and Tonsa very
dangerous by their Piracy; wherefore the Islanders, so soon as ever they
descried any Ships from their Beacons, gave notice thereof to the Main-Land, by
fireing them in the Night, or making a great Smoke in the day time; whereupon
they immediately Guarded the Seashore, and sent off several Vessels well
Manned; since which time they observed the same Custom with their Beacons,
either in bad Weather, or when any one endeavors to make his escape, that has
by some means or other incurred the Emperors displeasure. On which occasions a
certain sign is given, so that he who thought to save himself by flight, seldom
escapes, notwithstanding he suddenly gets into some Haven or other; for the
Water between Bungo, Tonsa, and the Main-Coast of Japan, from Simonisacci to
Osacca, is full of little Islands, on every one of which stands a Beacon,
Guarded and continually Watched by two Men, that have three Shillings a day.

Pleasant Situation of Swoja,
The Holland Ambassador, after he left Jesima, Steered his Course Easterly, and
dropped Anchor in the Haven which washes Swoja; where going Ashore, he found the
Country thereabouts so exceeding pleasant, that the whole Earth cannot show a
finer spot of Ground. How much have the Romans cried up the Country about
Capua, which yields Fruit twice a year, where there is a disputable difference,
whether the Ground be Fruitfuller that produces Corn or Vines? The Greeks also
spent much time in describing the famous Tempe in Thessalie: But certainly both
Tempe and Campania, may not be compared to the pleasantness of Swoja, which is
on the South Washed by the Ocean, that makes a convenient Harbor, having
against Northern Storms a high Shore; against Eastern, the Promontory of
Saccai; and against Western, the mighty Island Tonsa; and the high Rocks on the
South-Shore break the violence of the Waves, when at any time a South Wind
blows the Billows against the Shore. Moreover, round about the City, the
Country is exceeding delightful, because of the several Growths with which it
is adorned. In some places the Ground being Hilly, is Crowned with shady Trees;
in others the Valleys abound with all manner of Plants; there are Plowed
Fields; here pleasant Meadows full of Oxen and Sheep. The City Swoja it self,
very curiously built, has many great Storehouses, in which the Merchandise
from all places are laid, to be transported thence to Osacca, Saccai, Miaco,
and other places of Trade. The Ambassador Zelderen unladed some Heart and Buck
Skins here, whilst the Seamen went to see the Neighboring Town Akas, because
the Citizens of Swoja related a strange Story of an accident, which for the
most part ruined that Town. And indeed, when they came thither, Ruin of the
Town Akas.
they found above half of Akas lying desolate, some Houses being fallen in,
others sunk into the Ground, yet others appeared with some part of them lying
on the Earth, but the other part stood in a pretty good condition. The
Inhabitants whereof told them, That not long since, a terrible Earthquake shook
the Earth two days together, then the Flames broke forth betwixt the cracked
Earth, as if it would have devoured all things; and lastly, there arose such a
Fog, that choked many.

Not far from this, lies a Sulphurous burning Mountain, whose Subterranean Fire
having consumed the Earth, at last broke forth. The Emperor Toxogunsama allowed
them some of his Revenues, to Re-build that part of the Town which was so
harras'd.

THe Holland Ambassador leaving the Haven of Swoja, Sailed within a Musket
Shot of Fiungo, then plied up to reach Sacca, but the Wind blowing hard out of
the North-East, he was driven back to Avans, where he Auszug des Stathalters zu
miako Vyt Rydinge vande Gouverneur van MIAKO. Governor of Miaco 's Proyres.
run great danger, having much to do to save himself from running against a
high Rock, which they could not have escaped, had not the Wind come about to the
North-West; wherefore Haling in all their Sails, they Steered toward Saccai,
where they came to an Anchor. This is not only a handsome, but an ancient
City, surrounded with a strong Wall.

The Japan Emperor has in all his Fortifications placed Overseers, whose
Offices are to look after the repairing of the Walls, and putting in new Stones
so soon as they see any one begin to decay: Whilst they Rode here at Anchor,
the Ambassador Zelderen saw a Japanner, Japanner drowns himself.
who having great Stones tied about his Neck, Legs, and Middle, leaping into
the Water, drowned himself for the honor of Canon. The Vessel in which he was
brought from the Shore, was immediately burnt, being too Holy to be used
thereafter for any Worldly Affairs.

Description of the Ambassadors Reception in Meaco.
THe Holland Ambassador hasting on his Voyage, and passing by Osacca, came to
an Anchor close under Miaco, whereinto he was conducted in great State: The
foremost that came were eight hundred Horsemen on well-train'd Steeds, every
one Armed with a Bow and Quiver full of Arrows, a long Pike, two Swords, a
large Cutting-Knife, a Helmet, and Waxt Buskins, by the Japanners called
Taepjes; Behind them, came two Japan Officers Riding one by another; the
Emperors Standard Bearer followed, holding a long Staff, at the end whereof
Waved a great Flag, representing on Embroidered Gold and Silver round O's, and
five pointed Stars, and below the O's a half Moon, a Snails Horn, three Stars,
and the Flower Toxangpenung: Then came seven Men playing on Pipes, and six with
Trumpets; behind these followed five on Horseback, beating on Kettle-Drums;
then a great square Canopy was brought by four Supporters, under which Rode one
who held the Emperors and the City Meaco's Arms, before his Breast, on the
Horses Neck; next followed several Musicians, Playing on all manner of
Instruments: Lastly, came the Governor, sitting in a very costly Coach, the
Wheels Waxt and Gilt, Great State of the Governor of Meaco.
went slowly about, between which were two great Oval Openings, and two other,
but much lesser; the Curtains very handsome, being of Flowered Silk, on the top
were two Gilded Dragons, who with their fore Feet hold a Coat of Arms; the four
Corners were adorned with Turned Cups, the Coachman holding a Pike with a
Gilded Star at the end of it, in his left Hand, and in his right, four Reins,
which came through as many Holes of the Axel-Tree; he sat with his Legs under
him on a square Seat, covered with Flowered Silk; behind the Coach also sat
three Musicians, on each side went several Servants with Fans; The four Horses
which drew the Coach, were led by four Persons of Quality; the Governor looking
out sometimes between the Curtains, all those that saw him fell down with their
Faces flat on the Ground, just behind the Coach came a Guard of Soldiers, half
of them carrying Pikes, and the other half Muskets, which were followed by a
Merchant, richly Clothed, his Horses Head whereon he Was Mounted, adorned with
a stately Plume of Feathers; some distance after him, a Sedan, or rather a
Throne was carried by fourteen Gentlemen, seven going on each side, carried a
long Pole, to which the Sedan was made fast on their Shoulders; this Throne
having an ascent of five steps, on a Square, each corner supported by a curious
Turned Post, about every one of which Silk Curtains were tied, the Covering
also of Silk, was adorned with Fringe. In this Sedan, two of the Magistrates of
Meaco were carried, then followed several other ordinary Sedans with Noblemen;
and last of all, Rode diverse Troops of Horse: The Holland Ambassador received
in this State, Rode toward the City.

Description of Meaco.
The first Gate of the City Meaco, has three Entrances, whereof the middlemost
is the biggest, built between a Free-Stone-Wall; the inner Gate is one Story
high, from whose Roof Streamed a Flag with the Citie-Arms. Miaco, by the
Japanners also called Cabucoma, and Cocquay, contained formerly in its
Circumference one and twenty Miles, but is since, by the Civil Wars, become
above a third part less, yet at this day it reckons above eighty thousand
Families, divided into the upper and lower City; the lower spreads it self to
Fissima, and is so costly built, that one Edifice seems to be above a Mile
long. In the upper Miaco, the Dayro with his Cungies (that is, Counselors)
keeps a stately Court; himself looks like a Savage, being never Shaved, nor his
Nails pared; besides, five Eminent Colleges in the City, there are five
Free-Schools more about Miaco, viz. Coja, Wegru, Franzon, Homi, and Bandu,
every one of which has above three thousand five hundred Scholars, which are
there taught the Arts of Rhetoric, Oratory, Histonography, Astronomy, Poetry,
and Arithmetic.

Strange Tree.
Here grow Palm Trees, of whose Juice the Japanners make an excellent Drink; the
Root dug up and dried in the Sun, then Planted again, in a short time will
grow to be another Tree.

Not far from Miaco, the Mountain Frenojamma rises with its spiring top
toward the Clouds.

Peter Davity tells us of a very strange Mountain, seen in the Kingdom Jetchu,
which Flames continually.

In the Meacomean Lake is a Fish not unlike a Poor-Jack, which the Japanners
dry and send to all parts of the Country: Pet. Davity in his Description of
Asia.
The foresaid Davity relates also, That the French King, Lewis the thirteenth,
had tasted of them.

Strange Graves in Japan.
Moreover, here as in most places of Japan are several Tombs or Graves, raised
of Freestone, about two Foot high, in which being hollow, the Friends to the
Deceased often times lay Water and raw Rice, which the poor People or Birds
fetch from thence. They also strew the Graves with Flowers, and Boughs of Trees.

Taicosama's Court.
VEry admirable is the Palace which Taicosama built in Miaco, in which hang a
thousand Pieces of Tapistry, Embroidered with Gold; just before the Palace is a
spacious open Court, in the middle of which stands a Theater, where they Act
both Tragedies and Comedies; on every side thereof stand four Turrets, each
four Stories high: The Houses and Apartments are for the most part built of
Wood, yet handsome to behold. They seldom Build of Stone, because the
Earthquakes are so frequent in Japan, and though often times whole Villages,
nay, Cities are burnt down, yet they all Build again of Timber, Wood in Japan.
wherewith the Woods furnish them plentifully; for they not only produce
ordinary Timber, but also White Wood, not unlike that, of which in Europe we
make Virginals; besides all manner of Fruit Trees, and tall Cedars, whose lofty
Crowns seem to salute the Skies: The Cedars are used most for Pillars, and
Masts.

The Japanners have strange Orders when a Fire happens in the Night, for the
Street in which the Fire is, must help themselves, for none else will come near
to assist them; by which means, many times the Fire gets such a head, that the
Flame consumes all before it.

IN Meaco, as in most other places of Japan, they drive a great Trade, in far
better order than in any part of Europe; for it is no small help or benefit,
that all the Japan Lordships, Dukedoms, and Provinces have one Measure, both
for wet and dry Goods. Their Measure, called Ichin, Japan Measure.
is six Rhyneland Feet long, divided into six greater, and sixty lesser parts,
of else every Foot into ten Inches: From this Ichin they make their Ell called
Issiack, which is exactly the sixth part of the Ichin; but the Issiack has
also ten great, and sixty lesser parts; the tenths are called Isson; ten Issons
make an Itsiebou, and six Itsiebous one Ichin; which Measure all Shopkeepers
use, and is so exact, that it differs not a Hairs breadth.

Their Streets and Miles.
All the Streets in Japan, as well in the Cities as in the Country Villages,
are of an equal length, viz. sixty Jekjens, or Ichins, that is, thirty
Rhyneland Rods; sixty Streets make a Japan Mile, or a thousand eight hundred
Rods. In the Highways, at every Miles end, are little round Hillocks, thrown
up by Men employed for that purpose, on which they plant four high Trees, which
are great Guides and Helps to Travelers.

Japan Weight.
Moreover, the Japan Weight is full as exact as their Measure, which consist of
Fiaekin, being a hundred and twenty five Dutch Pounds; one Fiaekin makes a
hundred Cattys; one Catty, sixteen Tail; one Tail, ten Maes; one Maes, ten
Coudryn; one Coudryn, ten Rinnen.

Japan Coin very strange.
The same order they observe with their Coin. The Mint-Master coyns no Money,
either of Copper, Silver, or Gold, but every Merchant goes to the Farmers of
the Metal-Mines, of whom he buys the gross Silver and Gold as cheap as he can,
then makes it of an exact weight, according to the Emperors Order; then he
delivers the Pieces to the Emperors Officers of the Mint, which meet on certain
days, to weigh the Money which is brought in to them; whether it be full
weight; and if it wants but half a Grain, they cut it in the middle, and so
return it to the Owner: Those that are weight, the Officers mark with their
Stamp; which done, it must be tried and weighed twice more; for although they
show the Stamp, that the Money wants nothing in weight, yet it is not passable:
Wherefore the Merchant delivers it to Officers appointed for that purpose, to
try whether it be not mixed, but true Metal, who when they find but the lead
mixture in it, they also cut it to pieces, and give it again to the Owners; but
if it endures the proof, it is carried to the Masters of the Mint, who then
weighing it again, Coin it; which done, it may be paid away; for if any way it
should chance to be too light, it may neither be received nor paid by any, on
forfeiture of all their Estates.

Strange way of Trading in Japan.
Moreover, their paying of Money is very strange; for the Japanners having great
store of Gold and Silver, observe a Custom to receive their Money without
telling or seeing it. The Mint-Master puts the Gold in Papers, which contain
the value of two hundred Pound Sterling; these sealed up, pass from one to
another without being questioned. They also use little Wooden Boxes, in which
they put twenty sealed Papers of Gold, which is as much as a Man can handsomely
carry; every Box amounts to four thousand pound Sterling: And the like Boxes,
but of another fashion, they use for their Silver, in every one of which lies
twelve hundred Crowns, and is sealed with the Coyners Seal: But does it not
seem strange, that never any deceit is found in that blind Way of paying of
Money?

Japan Gold and Silver Coin.
Furthermore, the Japanners have but three sorts of Gold Coin; the biggest Piece
whereof is worth sixty Crowns; the second, eight; the third, two. The Silver,
though weighed and coined, is of no certain value; for the Coyners put it
together into little Packs worth sixty Crowns. Their Copper Coin has a square
Hole in the middle, through which a String being put, and several of them tied
together, pass for ordinary things amongst the Common People.

In the uppermost Eastern Parts of Japan, no Coin passes for Merchandise but
Gold; yet at Nangesaque, amongst the Foreign Traders, they tender their
Payments for the most part in Silver, because they may not carry any Gold out
of the Country, being contrary to the Emperors Order: Wherefore the Emperor,
amongst other Reasons, took a great dislike against the Portuguese, because
they transported several Tun of Gold out of his Dominions.

THe Holland Ambassador leaving Meaco, traveled along the Foot of the Mountain
Frenojama, through Oets, to Jesi, lying at a Lake about eighteen Leagues long,
out of which the River that flows through Meaco and Osacca into the Sea, has
its Original. Zelderen being desired in Jesi to see the pleasant Mountain
Pauromama, lying near the said Lake, East-North-East from Jesi, durst not deny
the Invitation; but was carried thither in a stately Barge, with two Masts,
Japan Barque.
each with a square Sail: When the Wind failed them, the Japanners rowed with
broad-leav'd Oars: On her Bow hung two Anchors: In the middle of the Barque
was a square Seat, resting on four Posts, through which the Mainmast went. the
sides of the Seat were adorned with gilded Imagery; on the top of it the Japan
Seamen handed their Main-Sail; under it sat the Holland Ambassador,
bare-headed, attended on each side by Japanners, holding a Fan in their Hands.
Before the Barque rowed a Japan Boat, in which the Ambassadors Men played on
their Trumpets. In few Hours they got together to the Mountain Pauromama, where
they found several Barques, with long Pennons streaming from their Masts,
riding at Anchor. At the Foot of the Mountain, on the Shore, stands a fair
Portal, on both sides supported with square Pillars; the Gates thereof open in
the middle: A Wall of great Freestone runs near the Waterside, for a Defense
to the Governors House, a very stately Building, though it is not seen afar
off, because hid behind some part of the Mountain. Near this House are several
others, inhabited by Gentlemen, and other meaner People, all enclosed in the
forementioned Wall.

Description of the Mountain Pauromama.
The Mountain it self is very steep, and of a great height; but has many
Juttings out, along which, winding Stairs lead to the top, where stands a
Temple inhabited by the Bonzi, which having three Roofs, seems to be but small,
because it stands an exceeding height, from whence several Japan Towns and
Cities may be seen, as namely, Itzibe, Minacutz, Zintzsamma, Cusatz, Tamonizu,
Jesi, Oets, Meaco, Fissima, Jonda, Firaskatta; Uchats, Vinari, Micava, and many
other Places. Half way between this Temple and the Governors House, stands the
Residence for the Emperors Soldiers, built on a Promontory, being several
Houses. On the right side, in the hanging of the Mountain, the Governor has a
curious Garden, the Trees whereof being planted one above another, seem to see
themselves in the Lake. In the middle of the Garden stands a stately
Banqueting House: On the left side, where the Mountain runs sloaping into the
Lake, stood four Huts, inhabited by Rusticks. Moreover, Pauromama or Mount of
Pleasure. Pauromama VRIUGDENBERG
over, the Mountain is so well stored with Trees and other Plants, that the
World can scarce show a pleasanter place. The Greeks boast much of Thessaly,
surrounded with Hills and Mountains; for to the North lies Olympus, to the
South Othrys, to the West Pindus, and to the East Ossa and Pelion. Strabo tells
us, That the Mountains Olympus and Ossa were separated by an Earthquake; and
that the space between made a Bay for the Stream Peneus, into which several
Rivers flow, that from thence run through the Valleys of Tempe, made pleasant
by the rising Hills. It is scarce to be credited how the Roman and Greek Poets
tired themselves in describing this Tempe: Yet notwithstanding all, it falls
much short of the Pleasantness of the Mountain Pauromama.

The Ambassador Zelderen's Gentleman Usher took an exact Draught of the
Mountain, from the Barge which was made fast to the Governors Watergate; and
having just finished it, the Lord Basuro Micondono, which came with Zelderen
from Jesi to Pauromama, came walking toward him, and spent a considerable time
in viewing of the Draught.

Generousness of the Japanners.
The Holland Ambassador was most sumptuously entertained, after the Japan
manner; for the People in this part of the Country are exceeding generous, the
Children themselves being ambitious of nothing so much as getting a good Name,
and striving to outdo one another in Courtesies. No Japanner fears any danger
where he is beloved. It is very seldom that a Man of any Repute will curse his
Enemies, because he rather chooses to revenge his Cause with the Sword than
Tongue. When any one desires another to be his Second in an unequal Match, they
never refuse it, though it cost both Life and Fortune.

SOon after Zelderen proceeded in his Journey to Jedo, which was very pleasant,
and seemed the shorter for the remarkable Stories which the Japan Interpreter
now and then related concerning it: Amongst others, he told them, That some
years since he saw the Temple of the Idol Topan, Strange Idol Topan.
whose Image stood on a Copper Altar cast like Clouds; himself Armed like a
Warrier, a Coronet Helmet on his Head, his Hand grasping a mighty Club, so
seeming to fly through the Sky, and moving his Club to occasion Thunder. When
it thundered, a Bonzi whose Head was adorned with Consecrated Leaves, which no
Thunder could harm, offered several Fishes.

To this Relation, the Interpreter added a second, not without many
Circumstances: Strange Relation of the Idol Fotoques.
Not many Years ago (said he) the Island Bungo lay joined to the Main Coast of
Japan, so that the People could go afoot from Cokero to Simonisicci; when it
chanced, that some Thieves had stolen the Golden Image in the Night from the
Temple of Fotoques, at which Fotoques was exceedingly enraged. The Thieves
living about Cokero, hid the Image in their Caves, so that the Malefactors were
not known: But Fotoques taking it as a great disgrace, and very hainously, rent
Bungo from the main Coast of Japan, and swallowed up a whole Tract of Land, so
that the Sea between Japan and Tonsa ever since was united with the Corean
Ocean. In the interim, he took great care of his Image; for he caused it,
though of pure Gold, to swim like Wood, and carried it through the Sea to the
Island Mettogamona, where driving ashore, it was taken up and put in a Temple,
and is there to this day Religiously worshipped.

Not far from Mettogamma (said the Interpreter) lies an exceeding high
Mountain, opposite to the Island Moeko, on the top of which stand several
Temples, Wonderful Opinion of the Japanners concerning the Creation.
which may be seen a great distance off at Sea: In these Temples the Bonzies
worshipped that great God, which formerly not only Created the Sun, Moon, and
Stars, but also the fifteen lesser Deities which some Ages since conversed upon
the Earth. The Prime God commanded the Substitute Gods that they should make a
Brazen Egg, in which they were to enclose the four Elements, Water, Earth, Air,
and Fire, and also the four principal Colors, Red, Yellow, Blue, and Green.
Out of this Egg the four Elements and Colors being tempred ran together, in
such a nature, that the visible World appeared. The World thus created, Man was
wanting: Not long after, a Woman growing in the Shell of a Callabash, had no
Soul, which the Chief God pitying, made a Stier come to the Callabash, who
through his Nostrils blew Breath into the Callabash, which came to be a Soul in
the growing Woman; who then coming forth, was familiar with the inferior
Deities, by which means Mankind not only increased in number, but also in
wickedness, differing more and more from their Heavenly Extract, growing still
worse and worse, mocking at Thunder, Rainbowes, and Fire; nay, they blasphemed
the great God himself (whom when the Interpreter named, he bowed his Head to
the Ground) whereupon he called his inferior Deities about him, telling them,
That he resolved to destroy and ruin all things, kick the Sun, Moon, and Stars
out of the Firmament, mix the Air and Water together, and make a round Globe,
in which the four Elements should be all resolved into their former Mass: And
chiefly he commanded the Idol Topan to make Thunderballs to shoot through the
Air, and fire all the Kingdoms with Lightning; which was no sooner said, but it
was done, the whole World on a sudden lying together like a heap of Rubbish, so
that none were saved, except one Man and his Family, that had entertained and
duly worshipped the Gods. The Chief and Supreme Deity. took care in this
general Ruin for the innocent Man, locking him in a deep Cave, before which he
put a great Shell, that the Water might not run into the Pit or Cave.

Japanners acknowledge the Fall of Adam, and the Hood.
Who does not observe by this Discourse, that the remotest Heathens acknowledge,
though darkly, the fall of Adam and the Flood, in which Noah and his nearest.
Relations were saved? The Romans and Greeks also represented the same in their
Golden, Silver, Copper, and Iron Ages; and also with Deucalion and Pyrrha,
strangely preserved from a Deluge. The forementioned Japan Interpreter judged
that the Portuguese, Castilians, English, and Hollanders, had also their
Original from the Man that was secured in the Cave against the Flood; the
Reasons of which his Discourse, were grounded on these Arguments: When (said
he) the Supreme God destroyed all things, yet Nipon, that is, Japan; Mangy, so
they call China; and the Kingdom Lechy, bordering on China, were preserved;
therefore the Inhabitants differ much from those of Europe, because they have
not such great Heads, nor such Camosie Noses, hollow Eyes, broad Eyebrows, and
well compact Bodies as the Japanners.

Strange Relation of the Japan Interpreter.
Moreover, the virtuous Man got out of his Cave, when the Idol Canon called
back the Seas to their respective Bounds, and Topan gathered the scattered
Thunderbolts together; and settled himself in the Province Koejelang, where he
got several Children, which intermarrying grew to a considerable number. But
when these Generations increased so fast, the Gods which were commanded up to
Heaven, asked leave of the Supreme Deity that they might return again to the
Earth, and there be familiar with Men; Einholung der gesanten zu mia t Inhalen
vand AMBASSADEURS. The Reception of the AMBASSADORS.
which being granted them, they descended into a pleasant Wood, where whilst
they were consulting how they should best take the Venison, the Inhabitants of
Koejelang joining their Heads together, said, These are the Gods which drowned
our Forefathers; let its take Revenge for so heinous a Crime: And considering
which way it might best be done, they judged that the readiest would be to set
Fire on all parts of the Wood, which in few Hours consumed all the Trees: Some
of the Gods that went to escape from the Flame, were cut to pieces by the
People that had encompassed the Wood; others were burnt; yet seven of them
getting up to Heaven, complained of that execrable Plot to the Chief God, who
being exceedingly enraged at so great a piece of Villainy, immediately commanded
an Angel, whom he empowered, to punish them for their Crime. The Angel no
sooner descended, but he drove the Offenders out of the Province Koejelang, to
the Boiling Waters at Singock, in which they are continually tortured, without
the least respite or cessation.

Holland Ambassadors reception at Mia.
MEan while the Holland Ambassador proceeded forward on his Jourhey, and
Ferried over from Quano to Mia; where he had no sooner landed the Emperors
Presents, but the Governor of Mia, with a considerable Train of People, came
out of the City to receive and conduct him. Just without the Gate several
Copper Basins were hung on cross Poles, on which the Japanners tabering, made a
great noise. Moreover, several Norimons or Sedans were carried toward the
Waterside, every one guarded with a considerable number of Soldiers. At the
foot of a high Rock stood the Ambassadors four Trumpets, each of them sounding
a Levit. The Governor Obirham Giantodono had no sooner gotten sight of the
Ambassador, but stepping out of his Sedan, he went to meet him, and bowed
himfelf after the Japan manner to the Ground. Behind stood some of the Guard
with Muskets, others with Pikes and Halberds.

Lastly, the Ambassador going from hence, soon after arrived at Jedo, where
having staid some time, and dispatched his Business, he had leave to go for
Nangesaque again.

Description of a Whale.
NEar Firando he found the Whale-Fishers, which go yearly to Corea to catch
Whales. The bigness of these Sea Monsters is to be most admired; their Pizzles
being generally fourteen Foot long, which they hide in their Bellies: When they
couple, they rage with Lust, holding their Bellies together, and embracing one
another with their Fins, above an Hour at a time; after which, according to
Julius Caesar Scaliger, Did. c. 13. sect. 150
they bear their Young ten Months.

The ordinary Whales are commonly a hundred and twenty Foot long, and their
Heads are the third part of their Body: On their Noses are two round Holes, at
which they suck in abundance of Water, and spout it out again an exceeding
height: Their Eyes are three Yards long, and a Foot and a half broad: Their
Ears, with which they hear any small noise, are less without than within; they
open their Mouths five Fathom wide; their Tongue, eighteen Foot long, and ten
broad, rests on eight hundred Supporters full of downy Hair. The Whale-catchers
seldom find any thing in their ripp'd-up Bowels, more than some handfuls of
Sea-Spiders and Weeds, though it is known that they feed on Fish; for a Whale
has been taken that has had forty Cods in his Belly. It may with reason be
believed, that since the Passage of their Throats is but narrow, they chew all
that they eat. The Females bear their Youg till grown to the bigness of a Cow,
which continually keeps under its Dams Fins, and forsakes her not till she
Spawns. Although they give Suck, they have no outward Teats or Dugs; for they
are placed near the Womb, and so full of Milk, that (as Francis Rondeletius
relates to have seen on the Coast of Acquitain) great Wine-Vessels were filled
with it, sucked from a stranded Female Whale.

Moreover, it is very strange to observe the great Inclination between a Whale,
and a little Fish called a Trusch, which swims continually before it, whose
Eyes, by reason of his great Eyelids, often dazel, and gives him notice when
he is too near a Shelf or Rock: Lib. 2. in Eutropium.
Of which Claudian the Latin Poet says thus;

Thus would the Whale run against Rocks and Sands,
But that his Guide such Prejudice withstands,
Leading the Monster through the Surging Sea,
And with his Tail showing a ready Way.
But whereas the Fish called Trusch bears a great Inclination toward the
Whale; so on the contrary, the Tonny, and Dolphin, but especially the
Swordfish, have a general Animosity against him; for the Sword-fish getting
under him, rents up his Belly, and creeping in, eats out his Tongue; from
whence it comes, that dead Whales are oftentimes found floating without a
Tongue. Pliny tells us, Lib. 3. cap. 34.
That these Monsters do not only sleep in the Night, but seem as if they were
dead, lying with their Heads out of the Water to breathe. It is very remarkable
to observe the Natural Affection which the Males have for the Females, which
was generally taken notice of, when Anno 1577. fourteen of them came before the
Village Terheide in Holland, of which one being a Female, happening to get fast
on the Shore, the Male with great force threw abundance of Water to her, so if
possible to get her afloat; but all being in vain, she sticking too fast in the
Sands, he also swam toward her, where they were both killed and taken by the
Fishermen. No less is the Inclination which the Dam has for her Young; for
when it is in danger of running against Rocks or Shelves, she catches it up in
her Mouth.

Manner of Whale-fishing at Na^gesaque.
The Japanners that inhabit Firando, catch the Whales near Corea, same manner as
the Hollanders take them before Greenland, and Spitsbergen: So soon as they
discover them, they go thither in small Boats, carrying Harping-Irons with
them; which being full of retorted Hooks, they strike the Whale in the sides of
the Head: At the end of the Harping-Iron is a Line two hundred Fathom long. The
Fish thus wounded, immediately bounces toward the Ground; whereupon they give
him still more and more Line. If the Line should chance to be foul of any
thing, it would certainly over-set the Boat. At the end of the Rope hangs a
Barrel, which driving on the top they follow; but it oftentimes happens, that
the Whale sinking too deep, hides both Line and Barrel. At other times he lies
rolling on the Ground, or comes driving dead up again: If he chances to be yet
living, they pierce his Sides with Lances, which the Whale feeling, makes so
great a bustle, that the Seamen run no small hazard of losing their Lives. The
dead Fish is either towed to the Ship, or toward the Shore, where the Feet
being cut off with great Knives, freights their Vessels, which afterward being
boiled at Firando, is sent to all parts of Japan.

BUt Holland Ambassador passing by Meaco, soon after arrived at Nangesaque,
where he kept the usual Day of Sale, which was published by setting up of
Bills, that all the Merchandise was to be sold on the Island Disma in
Nangesaque; which they proclaimed by tabering on large Copper Basins: Whereupon
the Merchants consulting together, every one wrote in rolled up Papers at what
Prices he would have the Hollanders Commodities; the one not knowing what Rate
the other has set down, the Bonjoises, to which the Notes are delivered, open
them; and those that they find to bid most, receive the Goods; after which the
Payment immediately follows, either in Boats of Silver, or sealed Papers of
Coined Silver; which Payments are so just, that there is not the least fraud in
any of them; for if it should be found out, the Trader would not only lose his
Life, but also his whole Family, and twenty of his Neighbors, five on each side
of his House, and ten of those that lived opposite against him.

For the Landing and Shipping of the Goods, a considerable Number of Laborers
are constantly employed, which all come before the Hollanders Storehouse on
Disma, where the Bonjois throws as many Pieces of Wood, marked with the
East India Companies Arms, out of the Window, as there are occasion for
Laborers. It is pleasant to behold how the Multitude scrambles, every one
endeavoring to get a piece of Wood; Boxing, Wrestling, and all other Robustious
Exercises, being free at that time. He that gets one of these Pieces, sticks it
at his Girdle, which being showed to the Bonjoises, he has order to work at a
set Price.

Departure of Ships from Nangesaque.
In October the Ships that go for Batavia, and so from thence for Holland, weigh
Anchor from Nangesaque: Soon after follow the Ships that are sent to Malacca,
Surrat, Cormandel, and other Indian Coasts. So soon as the Rudder is hung, and
their Ammunition aboard, the Ships must be gone, although the Goods lie above
Decks in the Rain, and the Wind and Weather be contrary. If the Hollanders stay
but ever so little time, they are immediately encompassed with a hundred
well-mann'd Boats, which cut their Cable, and tow their Ship beyond the
Priest-Mountain, where from September to April blows a stiff Northerly Wind, so
that the Ships in a very short time lose sight of Japan.

Description of Tonkin.
TWo Ships, or at least one, goes yearly from Nangesaque to Tonquin, before
which City lies a dangerous Shelf, running thirty Leagues into the Sea. The
City it self is about the bigness of Amsterdam; the Gates and Bridges built of
Alabaster, are comely to behold. In this Place is much Silk and Musk, which
they truck for Scarlets, Linen, and Ambergreece: The Alabaster they load for
Ballast. The Kings Palace, before which the Holland Ships ride at Anchor, is
very costly: The King himself served by three hundred Concubines. No Prince in
the World has better Troops of Horse than he; the Horses so curiously shaped,
that they may well compare with those of Turkey or Hungary. The Men sit bowing
forward, holding a round Shield in their Hand, with a Box or Flask full of
Bullets and Powder tied on the right side: Their Arms are naked up to the
Elbows; on their Helmets they wear Plumes of Feathers: Whilst the King eats,
they beat on Kettle-drums before his Hall. The Inhabitants freely proffer their
Daughters to the Hollanders to vitiate them.

Description of Malacca.
SOme Ships that sail from Nangesaque, go for Malacca; which City lies on an
even Shore, being about three Miles in length, well seated for Convenience of
Trade, and cut through with a River, made passable by a fair Bridge, over which
the Citizens come to one another.

At the time when Alphonsus Albuquerque re-took the famous City Goa for Emanuel
King of Portugal, the Arabian Mamud King of Malacca had contrary to his Oath
set upon some Portuguese, and kept them close Prisoners: But Albuquerque
hasting to Malacca to release them, met in his way with a Malacca General
called Naodabeguca, who setting upon them, bought his Death dearly, falling
down at last with a hundred gaping Wounds on the Ground: It occasioned no small
wonder, Strange Wonder of a wounded Malaccan.
that not one of them bled a drop; but so soon as a Golden Armlet was taken
from him, the Blood gushed forth from all parts in great abundance, so that
Naodabeguca instantly gave up the Ghost. The Prisoners informed, that a Bone of
the Beast called Cabim was enclosed in the Armlet, by whose Power the Blood was
stopped.

Strange Wedding-house.
MAmud's Daughter marrying to the Prince of the Panenses, kept her Wedding in
Malacca: The Nuptial Ceremonies were performed in great State: A great House,
or moving Castle, built on thirty Wheels, and hung with rich Tapestry, was by
Elephants drawn through the City; within stood the Tables covered, and the
Guests, sung, danced, and acted all manner of pleasant Pastime.

Whilst thus Malacca was in the height of its pleasure, Albuquerque brought his
Fleet into the Harbor, and demanded the delivery of the Portuguese Prisoners,
which Mamud out of fear delivered him; yet the Portuguese set the City on Fire,
Malacca on Fire.
and not thus satisfied, Albuquerque would have a place in the City to build a
Castle, that they might drive their Trade without fear: Moreover, he demanded
the Damage and Charges which the Fleet had cost preparing, because it was done
purposely for this Expedition. The Kings Son, and Son-in-Law, cried out, They
would venture the utmost of it, which though the Event proved never so bad,
could not be worse than the insufferable high Ambition of the Portuguese. Thus
the two young Princes persuaded Mamud to take up Arms, who otherwise would have
bought Peace, though on unequal Terms. Whereupon with speed raising some
Fortifications, but chiefly guarding the Bridge that went over the River with
Men and Arms, he carried out his Elephants with Towers full of Soldiers, to
hinder the Landing of the Portuguese; Valiant Fight.
yet they, notwithstanding all his resistance, Landed, John Lima marching
directly on toward the smallest part of the City, where the Kings Palace
stood, and also a Mahumetan Temple, but happened to fall in amongst Mamud's Son
Alodyn's Soldiers, which occasioned a fierce Battle for a considerable time,
when Mamud himself came with his Elephants on the Backs of the Portuguese;
wherefore Lima facing about with a part of his Men, broke their Ranks, and
wounded their Elephants, who returning amongst their own Army, made such a
Rout, that they tumbled one over another, every one then seeking which way to
fly. Mamud being cruelly wounded, saved himself by flight: Alodyn also began to
give ground.

But Albuquerque found so great Resistance at the Bridge, that he sounded a
Retreat; yet a few days after he renewed the Fight, when it fortuned much
better; for although Mamud had undermined the Streets, so to blow up the
Portuguese with Powder, yet they being informed of it, went along another way
into the City, led by Albuquerque, whilst Anthony Abreus made himself Master of
the Bridge.

But Albuquerque ran great danger; for the Malaccans keeping close together in
their narrow Streets, made fierce resistance; the Women and Children throwing
Stones, and other combustible things, out of their Windows; yet at last he
forced them to fly, raising a Bulwark at each end of the conquered Bridge, and
covered the same over on the top with Sails, to keep off the Heat of the Sun.

Mamud running into the Woods, there died of Grief.

Great Booty in Malacca.
The City it self was given to the Soldiers for Booty, of which the fifth part
should be preserved for Emanuel King of Portugal, whose part amounted to two
hundred thousand Golden Crowns.

Albuquerque building a strong Castle here, gave the Command of it to Rhoderick
Palatyn.

Treachery in the Fort.
But not long after, Alodyn had like to have made himself Master of the new Fort
by Treachery; for one Maxelys, extracted from Bengala, made particular
acquaintance with Alphonsus Persona Treasurer of the Castle, Alodyn giving
Maxelys a good Sum of Money, that he should admit Soldiers, in Merchants
Apparel, to murder and kill all the Garrison; which he had done, had not
Persona, though mortally wounded behind by Maxelys, retained so much strength,
that he got open his Door, and cried out, Treason.

Matelief's Voyage.
AFter this, the Portuguese lived here undisturbed, till Cornelius Matelief,
sailing from the Texel, Anno 1605. with eleven Ships, Manned with thirteen
hundred fifty seven Men, fetched four great Ships out of the Haven of Malacca,
raised a Platform on Pulo Malacca, and landed seven hundred Men, which made the
Portuguese retreat to their Suburbs, fortified with a strong Wall; and out of
their Suburbs, which were set on fire, into the City.

Malacca it self the Portuguese had so fortified with wide Trenches, strong
Forts, Gates, and Towers, that it would easily endure a great Siege: John de
Patuan King of Jor, brought some Assistance to them; but those Country People
were neither fit to work, for laziness; nor to fight, for faintheartedness.

Malacca besieged.
In the interim Matelief raised another Platform, against the corner of the
City-Trench, from which he fired continually. In the City died daily above
forty People, of Hunger and noysom Smells: But the Besiegers also suffered
almost as great Inconveniences, not only a great Sickness happening among them,
but being lodged under the open Canopy of Heaven, were miserably stung by the
Wasps, so that continual waking had quite tired them; yet they took fresh
Courage, when two Ships came from Holland, with two hundred forty five Men, to
their Assistance: But soon after the little Sung Frigate discovered the
Portuguese Fleet sent to relieve Malacca.

The Fight between the Hollanders and Portuguese.
Matelief being informed thereof, fetched his Guns from the Platforms aboard,
brake up the Siege, and prepared himself for an Engagement. The next Morning
the Fight began, near the Promontory Rachabo: Both Parties lost each of them
two Ships; but Matelief's Gunpowder growing short, he resolved to clap them
aboard, and enter. Calm Weather twice hindered their valiant Design, and the
third time the Portuguese taking advantage of the dark Night, fled to Malacca,
where they came to an Anchor close under the Shore. The Hollanders Fleet
wanting all Necessaries, steered for the Kingdom of Jor, there to get such
Provision as was to be had: but the chiefest which they wanted, being
Gunpowder, Jor could no ways furnish them withal: Yet the Hollanders not
willing to leave their Business half undone, resolved (come of it what would)
to fall upon the Portuguese Fleet that Rode at an Anchor under Malacca. In the
first Engagement Matelief conquered four of the greatest Gallions; in the
second, three. The Hollanders also burnt no small number of their little
Vessels; so that the great Fleet, which consisted of sixteen Gallions, four
Galleys, fourteen Foysts, and one Carvil, Manned with three thousand seven
hundred Portuguese, and above twice as many more Indians (at which the Kingdoms
Achien, Jor, Pahan, and Patama trembled,) had nothing remaining but a few
ruined Ships, by a small Fleet.

Hollanders Trade to Bengala,
Moreover, the Hollanders also drive a vast Trade to Bengala. Anno 1659. the
King's Brother marched with a mighty Army against the King to the great
prejudice of this mighty Kingdom. Great Broyls there.
The Rebel had such great assistance, that it wanted little but the King had
lost both Life and Crown, had not the East India Company furnished him
privately with all manner of Ammunition from Batavia: But whilst the King's
Party was a long time threatened with ruin, the Hollanders secured all their
rich Commodities in the Ship Avenhorn.

The Hollanders Staple is in Ongli, where the English also keep a Storehouse.
But the King of Bengala, in return for the Aid he received from Batavia, has
given the Hollanders so great Privileges, that the English effect but little
there. Their Residence is up in the Country near the famous River Ganges.

The Hollanders Storehouse, built of Stone, is fortified by a strong Fort with
twelve Guns, and very deep and broad Trenches, upon one side of it are a
hundred Huts made of Straw and Leaves, by the Natives called Gabbegalbes. These
Leaves are three Foot and a half long, three Fingers broad, sharp at the ends,
and prove convenient shelters against the Weather.

Bengala Merchants go very handsome in Apparel.
THe Bengala Merchants go very richly Clothed; their Hair cut very short they
cover with a Ribbon of white Cotton, commonly fifty Yards long: they wear short
Whiskers, but their Beards hang down to their Breast; their upper Garment is a
Coat of fine white Linen, Laced before with white Silk Ribbon, and about their
Waste a Silk Girdle, hanging down under their right Arm; their Breeches are not
unlike the Chinese, and their red Shoes agree with the Moors. The ordinary Man
goes bare-headed, with a Cloth thrown about his middle, and a pair of narrow
Breeches; Shoes and Stockings they use none. Their Women go with their Breasts
bare, and their Hair hangs over their Shoulders, tied up in Locks.

Trade in Bengala.
THe East India Company barter in Bengala, Japan Silver, Copper, waxed Chests,
and Tin, which Malacca produces, and also Quicksilver, Scarlet, and all sorts
of Netherland Stuffs; likewise Nutmegs, Pepper, Mace, Cloves, and chiefly
Elephants, which they bring from Ceylon; of which they make four hundred Crowns
a piece: for all which Merchandise they receive in Truck, brown Bengala Sugar,
which by the Hollanders is for the most part transported to Persia. Here also
is a great Trade driven with Saltpeter, of which the seven Powder-Mills at
Batavia make Gunpowder. The raw Silk and Cotton to be had at Bengala, is
commonly carried to Japan.

TO the West of Bengala lies Negopatam, a great Town, inhabited by Moors, which
drive a vast Trade at Sea, Negopatam.
but oftentimes use Dutch Pilots. The Ropes of their Ships are made of Shells,
or Barks of Trees.

Women's Habit there.
The Apparel of the Negopatam Women is very strange: for those that are of any
Quality wear a fine Shift, through which the upper part of their Body is seen,
then a Cloth wrapped about them six times, covers them from the middle
downwards; their Elbows are adorned with Golden Armlets two Fingers broad. But
that which is most foolish, the Female Moors wear two Gold Rings through their
Noses.

The Town Negopatam, lying on an even Shore between two Rivers, has neither
Gates, nor Walls.

In the Rivers are always store of Barques and Fisher-mens Boats. Before the
City are several Wharfs on which they build their little Vessels.

Six Leagues from Negopatam lies Pulo Pille, provided with large Docks for
great Ships.

Strange way of Marrying.
THe Negopatam Parents Marry their Children in the eighth and ninth year of
their age; at which Solemnities the Bride and Bridegroom sit in a Sedan one
over against another, whilst the Guests drink themselves dead drunk, and Dance,
Hollow, and clap their Hands like frantic Persons.

THe Hollanders Storehouse is built with cross Timber-work, mixed with Stone.
When the Governor of the East India Company comes abroad, either on Horseback,
or carried in a Palankin, or Sedan, he has a great Guard of Moors with him,
all Armed with round Shields, and long Swords.

The Hollanders barter here a sort of Japan Wood, used at the burning of dead
Corpses; and also the China Root, Japan Chests, Porcelan, and Camphire, against
all sorts of Cottons. Formerly they used to freight their Vessels with
Negopatam Rice; but since Japan abounds in that Grain, they gave over that
Trade.

Lastly, the East India Company drive a great Trade in Elephants, of which
Ceylon affords the best.

How they transport Elephants.
The transporting of them is somewhat strange, being in large Barques, covered
over on the top with Palmito-Trees, cut off close by the Ground: the Leaves
whereof are the most acceptable Food for the Elephants. When the Barque carries
the Elephant aboard of a great Ship, they blind and hoise him over with strong
Cables; under his Belly they put pieces of four-doubled Canvase, so broad, that
it reaches from his fore to his hind-Legs; and when thus hoised over, they put
them under Deck, and place them one over against another, putting only a
Manger with Fodder between them.

The Hollanders meddle not with the looking after these Monsters, but the
Ceylonians creep under their Bellies, and rake away the Dung.

THe Elephant is the chief pattern of the wonderful Works of God. Job 40. Verse.
15, 16. Behemoth.
God calls him Behemoth: Behold now Behemoth which I made with thee, he eats
grass as an Ox, Lo now his strength is in his loins, and his force is on the
navel of his belly.

Thomas Aquinas and Nicholas Lyra, following the Opinion of most of the
Rabbis, understand that Behemoth is an Elephant, and created on the same day
that Man was; and though it be a fearful Monster, yet it is afraid of Mankind:
for he satisfies himself like an Ox with what the Earth produces, and trembles
at the smell of a Man's footsteps.

The Indian Elephants far exceed those of Africa. The strength of those in
India may be judged by the great Towers which they carry on their backs.

In the Wars by Antiochus Eupator against the Jews, every Elephant carried a
small Tower with thirty six Soldiers, besides the Indian which guided him. That
these Monsters live three hundred years Aristotle, Pliny, Ambrose, and Nonnus
witness.

Policy of the Elephants.
Moreover, Philostratus the Greek Writer says, That the Elephant is likest to
Man of any Beast in Policy and Prudence: his Sense the Elephant expresses two
ways, either by his natural Apprehension, or by good Instruction: to the first
must be reckoned, that the Elephant rowls himself in the Mudd against the heat
of the Sun; and when he goes to drink, he first stirs the Water with his Snout,
that he may not swallow any hurtful Creature; which is more credible than what
Theophilactus Simocatus says, That the Beast stirs the Water because he is
afraid of his own Shadow. When they go to wade through any River, the youngest
walk before, for otherwise the old ones would sink and make the Ground deeper
by their weight, so that the young ones could not possibly get over.

But concerning the Apprehensions of this Beast, several credible Witnesses
give us many remarkable Examples. Seneca, Pliny, and Suetonius relate, That the
Elephants in the Theater at Rome, not only Fenced with Swords, but Danced on
the Ropes.

Hieronimus Osorius relates, That Anno 1514. an Indian Elephant bowed himself
three times to Pope Leo the tenth.

Augerus Busbequius relates in his Embassy to the Turkish Emperor, That he saw
a young Elephant, who observed the steps, and Danced exactly after the Time of
a string'd Instrument, and cast a Ball backwards.

It deserves peculiar observation, Epist. Lyps. ad Janum. Hautanum.
what Peter Bellon, an eyewitness, related to Carolus Clusius, who told it
again to Justus Lipsius, That his Elephant coming weary and hungry into the
Stable, where he found an Ass eating of Corn, he drove him from the Manger, and
eat up what he found: but soon after the Master of the Elephant coming into the
Stable, gave him his fill of Corn; the Beast considering the wrong which hunger
had made him do the Ass, he divided the Corn, and gave the Ass as much as he
had taken from him.

This vast Monster, Lib. 8. c. 9.
as we said, is very fearful of Mankind. Pliny says, So soon as the Elephant
spies the footsteps of a Man, though he never saw one before, he is afraid of
private Ambuscades, and looking about him, goes not a step forwarder, but makes
it known to his followers, so from one to the very last; whereupon they all
return.

The same Pliny relates, Lib. 8. c. 5.
That Bacchus set thirty Elephants against several Prisoners which he had
condemned; but they, less bestial than their Master, would not observe or obey
his cruel Commands: Wherefore Ptolomy Physcon made the Elephants drunk when he
would have the naked Jews, with their Wives to be put to death. And full as
fearful they are of Stags.

When Alexander the Great had past beyond the utmost bounds of the Herculean
Pillars and Bacchus Encamped his Army, those that were sent into the Forests
for Wood, came amazedly running back upon the sight of a great number of
Elephants coming toward their Army: at which Porus, an Indian King encouraged
Alexander, telling him, That he need not fear the least danger, if his Troopers
took but some Hogs on their Horses, and with beating compel them to make a
noise, at which the Elephants all returned back again into the Woods.

BUt to return again to Malacca: This City is inhabited by Hollanders,
Chinese, and Malacquers. Half a Mile off at Sea lies the Red Island, from
whence the Hollanders took Malacca from the Portuguese.

The Malacquers of Queda some years since maintained a War against the
East India Company, but were subdued by force of Arms.

Queda belongs to the Queen of Achien on Sumatra; who not long since would have
Married with a Hollander, but that the Council in Batavia, for several weighty
Reasons, judged it no way convenient.

Dingding an Island.
BEtween Queda and Peru, thirty Leagues from Meaco, lies the uninhabited Isle
Dingding, close by the Marine Coast.

Here is that famous red Wood, of which the East India Company, Anno 1663. made
a trial.

The Haven before Dingding full of Fish, and very safe, which they enter
Eastward, and go out Westward.

The Water which flows from the Mountains along the Valleys into the Sea, is as
good as any fresh Water in India.

A League Westward from Dingding appear the three Islands, which the Hollanders
for a certain accident called The Man-eaters Isles, because the Weesop and
Schelling Frigates were cast away there, and the People which were saved, going
ashore were all slain by the Inhabitants.

Anno 1661. five Ships going from Malacca to fetch their Contrymen, found
them unbury'd; whereupon they brought their Guns ashore, to take revenge on the
Cannibals, and built a Ship of the Pieces of the Wreck that were remaining,
which was afterward used at Malacca.

THe East India Company traffic at Mesopatam, with Japan waxed Chests, Copper
and Silver, besides other European Commodities.

This Mesopatam is a great City, inhabited by Moors that drive a vast Trade
with large Ships; the Tackle whereof is made of Trees, as we mentioned before.

IN Peleacato is also no small Trade driven, the Hollanders having a Fort there
close under the City, fortified with sixty Guns, which was assaulted by the
Natives; but being beaten off by Laurence Pitman, left a considerable number of
their Party dead behind them: after which Peleacato came wholly under the
subjection of the East India Company.

The Vessels which they have there are very remarkable, and by them called
Catamarous, being four round pieces of Wood tied together: he that steers it
sits with his backside in the Water, Dabbles with his Feet, and Rows with an
Oar, small in the middle, and broad at the end, which he moves to and again, so
making his way very fast through the Water.

The King, who keeps his Residence up in the Country, is a Tributary to the
great Mogull.

On the same Fort stands an exceeding high Mast, upon whose top is placed a
Flag five hundred Yards long, which is seen eight Leagues off at Sea.

SInce the Governor of Goa Conquered the City Cochin, on the Coast of Malabar,
the third of February Anno 1653. the Netherlanders have driven a great Trade
there. Through the City runs a Rivulet sixteen Foot deep; and an Island lying
before Cochin makes a convenient Harbor there.

The Malabar Coast produces good store of Ambergreece, which in stormy Weather
thrown upon the Shore, the Malabars, a strong People, struggling with the Waves,
take up in great quantities, and preserve in their Stores.

THus we have given you a large account of the present Estate, prodigious
Wealth and wonderful Magnificence of the Empire of Japan, taken out of the
Journals of several Embassies from the Council of the Netherland East India
Company, settled in New Batavia; being the latest and fullest Observations that
ever were taken concerning that Isle, reaching within three years of this our
present Publication, presuming the Discourse, though long, will not be tedious,
the variety of Argument being such, and so strange, that hitherto, we presume,
has scarce reached any English Ear. If this by Volume meet with a kind
acceptance, we shall be encouraged to give you betwixt our great Atlantic
Work, for your divertisement, a Continuation of China, as full of Novelty, and
as much, or rather more illustrated with Sculptures than the former.

FINIS.

