TARTUFFE: OR THE French Puritan. A COMEDY, Lately Acted at the Theater Royal.

Written in French by MOLIERE; and rendered into English with much Addition and
Advantage, By M. MEDBOURNE, Servant to His Royal Highness.

Invidia est odium alienae felicitatis:
Respectu superiorum, quia eis non aequatur;
Respectu inferi rum, ne sibi aequentur;
Respectu parium, quia sibi aequantur.
LONDON: Printed by H. L. and R. B for James Magnus at the Posthouse in
Russel Street near the Piazza in Covent Garden. M.DC.LXX.

To the Right Honorable, HENRY Lord HOWARD. OF NORFOLK, BARON of CASTLE-RISING.
MY LORD,
I Here Present your Honor with the Masterpiece of MOLIERE's Productions, or
rather that of all French Comedy.

What considerable Additionals I have made thereto, in order to its more
plausible Appearance on the English Theater, I leave to be observed by those
who shall give themselves the trouble of comparing the several Editions of this
Comedy. How successful it has proved in the Action, the advantages made by the
Actors, and the satisfaction received by so many Audiences have sufficiently
proclaimed --

(...) All talk at once, your house is Dover-Court.

Dor. If --


Per. Friend you're a waiting woman, hold your peace;
Good Mystress nimble chaps; you're very sauey
To be thus peremptory amongst your betters.

Dam. But --


Per. But you're a sot, take that from me in short;
It Is I that say it who am your Grandmother,
And I have told your father a hundred times,
That I foresaw your wicked inclinations;
And that you^d prove at last his real Torment.

Marian. I believe --


Per. You are his Sister, and would seem discreet,
I touched not you, whilst that I found you silent;
But now I see you verify the Proverb,
The silent waters are most dangerous,
Still Sows cate all the draught, I hate your manners.

Elm. Pray Mother hear --


Per. Daughter be not offended;
I find your conduct in each action bad;
You ought to have been the example to 'em all,
Such as their good deceased Mother was.
Come y' are a Spendthrift, your gaudy dress afflicts me,
Those who intend to please their husbands only,
Will find they have no need of half those Gugaws.

Cleanthes. But Madam, after all. --


Pern. Good Sir, her brother,
I much esteem you, love you, and respect you, spoken in derifi^^^*
But truly Sir, were I as my Son's wife,
I would entreat you to come here no more.
You preach such rules and maxims to their life,
Since they are such, as honest men abhor.
Sir, I am plain with you, and speak my mind,

Dam. Mr. Tar-tuffe is happy without doubt.


Pern. He is an honest man, would you were like him;
And I can scarce contain my passion, when
I hear him censur d by such fools as you.

Dam. Shall such an Ignis atuus as he
Domineer over us in my Father's house,
So that we cannot take any diversion,
But what his canting worship first approves?

Dorin. If we should hear his Maxims and believe 'em,
This zealous Critic would in all control us.

Pern, What he controuls I Am sure is well designed;
It Is the true way to Heaven that he would lead you:
Therefore you ought to reverence and observe him.

Dam. All that my Father, or your self can urge,
Can never oblige me, but to think well of him;
I should belly my heart should I say otherwise:
After his Mode I could behave my self,
And I foresee the event, that with this Zealot
I should obtain a reverend esteem.

Dorin. Yes, yes, no doubt; but yet to us it is scandalous,
For one unknown to make himself our Patron:
A beggar, who at first came without shoes,
And all his Clothes were hardly worth a groat,
To contradict us and to play the Master.

Per. Ah mercy; O my life, it would be better
If all were governed by his pious rules.

Dorin. He passes for a Saint in your esteem,
But you will find he is all Hypocrite.

Per. Why, there is a tongue.


Dorin. I would not trust my self but on good warrant,
Further with him then with his servant Lawrence:
And he I me sure is flesh and blood. aside.

Per. I Am ignorant what heart the servant has;
But I dare justify the Master's truth:
You would not wish him ill, nor yet revile him,
But that he tells you of your faults so plainly:
It Is against sin his heart is so provoked,
And the interest of Heaven that prompts him to it.

Dorin. But what is the cause that over-nice of late,
He will not suffer any to frequent us?
In what do harmless visits offend Heaven?
Shall I expound this riddle freely to you?
Faith, Madam, I believe he is jealous of you. to Elmirat

Per. Let not your tongue outrun your wit, take heed;
It is not only he that blames these visits:
But it is the train of those that haunt your house,
The many Coaches planted at your Gate,
The rude Rencountre of so many Lacqueys,
These, these make such a noise among your Neighbors,
That I believe at last nothing shall pass
They will not talk of: thus you pawn your credit.

Cleanthes. Ah Madam, would you hinder a man from talking?
That would be burdensome to humane life.
If we should shun those you think idle toys,
We must renounce our dearest friends sometimes*
And though we should make full resolve to do it,
Think you, you could impose a general silence?
There is no Bulwark, Madam, against detraction.
The best way is to slight all sottish talkers;
And while we strive to live in Innocence,
Let Libertines their humors entertain.

^lmir. Our Cousin Daphne, and her little husband,
Perhaps may take a liberty of speech;
And it is too often seen, whose actions merit
The most severe reproof, soonest detract:
They lie upon the catch, ready to seize,
And lay fast hold on every little error,
That by misprision others guilty make,
And spread the news abroad with an odd joy
At their miscarriage; painted with false colors,
They think to put a cheat upon the world;
And under the feigned mask of a resemblance
To some Intrigues of virtue, start a zeal
Fit to disguise that envy which has forged.
A charge of slander against the fair repute
Of some they make a fair pretense unto;
Only to make 'em partners in their crimes.

Pern. All this discourse is little to our business:
It Is known Oranta leads an holy life,
Her care is all for heaven; and I have heard
How much she has condemned the Train frequents you

Dorina. The example's wonderful, the Lady good:
But yet her life's a little too severe:
Thank Heaven for that, it is Age has given her soul
This ardent zeal; for in her youthful days
She was expert in keeping of her body.
Attracting the homages of many hearts,
She knew to show her skill in several shapes;
And did enjoy her fair advantages:
But finding that the sparkles of her eyes.
Now downward fall, she would renounce the world,
Envying any should enjoy those pleasures
Which Age denies 'em, through their weak performance.

Per. It Is well: these idle stories please your ears,
And that is the reason I desert your house;
My son did never yet a wiser thing,
Then when he entertained this pious man,
Whom for your benefit you ought to imitate. the old woman coughs.

Dor. Would you two Saints were bound to live together;


Per. 'Twould be no little comfort to our family. aside
Your balls, your masks, your complemental visits,
Are all the inventions of some evil spirit,
Where one can never hear a pious word;
They are foolish, idle, sinful Songs and Tales,
At which our Neighbor often is scandalized,
As a good Brother said the other day,
Truly it is the Tower of Babylon,
Where giddy-brain'd phantasticks waste their time.
But to the point. Flipote laughs at Pernelle. She sees
Look, I beseech you, there is one snears already.
Oh how my spirit boils! I say no more,
For now I Am hindered to declare my thoughts.
O! Impudence. laughs again.
Take that bold Gossip, and learn to mend your manners.
Go on you baggage, go.

Exeunt all but pushes her before her. SCEN. II.
Cleanthes. Dorina. Clean. I will not follow,
For fear she should begin another quarrel;
Alas! good woman.

Dorin. Truly it is great pity
She does not hear the Character you give her,
Such an expression to her face had pleased her.
She thinks she is now at Age to wear that name.

Cleanth. How hot she was upon us? strangely concerned,
Wrapped up to the third Region for her Tartuffe.

Dorin. All this is nothing in comparison
Of her dear son, he was a gallant man:
And showed his courage in his Prince's service;
But e're since Tartuffe came to live among us,
He is so changed his friends can hardly know him;
He calls him brother, loves him as himself;
Prefers him 'bove his Mother, Son, Wife, Daughter;
The only Confident of all his secrets:
Whom he does cherish and embrace 'bove measure;
No man can be more tender of a Mystress:
He is always placed at the upper end of the Table,
Where he devours more meat then half a dozen.

Cleant. Is It possible he should be thus besotted?
His every sentence passes for an Oracle.
Nor does this Fox want skill to act his part,
And though we are many keeps us all in awe,
Cries down our patches, visors, pendants, curle^

SCEN. III.
Elmira, Mariana, Dami^^ Elmir. It Is well you did not go along with us,
To hear the strange discourse we had at door;
I spied my husband though he saw not me;
But I Will go up, and there attend his coming.

Cleanth. I Will wait him here below, but not to stay him,
For all my business is but a Good Morrow.

Exit Elmira. Dam. My Sisters wedding does employ his thoughts,
And I suspect that Tartuffe does oppose it,
And that he has prevailed another way
To stop this Marriage against my Interest:
But if my Sister's Flame equals Valere's,
The Sister of my friend shall be my wife,
And if --

Exit Damis. Dorin. He comes.


SCEN. IV.
Orgon. Cleanthes. Dorina. Org. Oh Brother! a good morrow.


Clean. I was just going, brother; y' are welcome home:
What, looks the Country pleasant yet or no?

Org. Dorina -- [brother, set me entreat your stay:
Permit me a little to take off my care,
In being satisfied how we all do]
Have all things happened well these two days past?
How have you spent your time? are you all well?

Dorin. My Mystress the other day was very sick
Of The fever, and the head-ake; Cruel pains.

Org. But how fares Tartuffe?


Dorin. Tartuffe; wondrous well.
He Is fresh and fair, always a good stomach.

Org. Alas! poor man.


Dor. At night she was indisposed,
And did not ^^^ch one bit at Supper Sir,
Alas! you know the head-ake's a sad pain,

Org. But how did Tartuffe?


Dorin. He supped, Sir, by himself,
And most devoutly eat up two Partridges,
After a hash of half a leg of mutton.

Org. Alas! poor man!


Dor. But my poor Mystris, Sir, was so afflicted,
She could not take a moments rest all night:
The violent heat of the fever kept her waking.
We sat up with her till 'twas almost day.

Org. And how did my poor Tartuffe then all night?


Dor. As soon as he had supped he fell asleep,
And from the Table he went strait to bed,
Where without trouble on a good feather-bed,
He took the pains to sleep till the next day.

Org. Ah! poor man!


Dor. At last, Sir, when our reasons had prevailed,
She did resolve she would venture to be blooded,
And upon that she presently found ease.

Orgon. And what became of Tartuffe all this while?


Dor. Alas Sir! he, like a courageous man,
To fortify his soul against all danger,
And to repair the blood my Mystress lost,
Drank to his breakfast four great boules of wine.

Orgon. Alas! poor man!


Dor: Sir, to be short they both are very well,
And I am going now to tell my Mystress,
The Joy that you express for his good health.

Enter Laurence, meets her. Lau. One word, sweet Mystress, with you, ben't
afraid;
What I shall say shall be for your advantage.

Dor. If you have any thing to tell me Laurence;
Meet me an hour hence I Will hear your Errand.

Exeunt severally. SCEN. V.
Orgon. Cleanthes. Clean. Brother, she flouts you to your very teeth;
And yet [without design to make you angry]
I tell you freely that it is but justice.
Is It possible this man should so inchaunt you,
That you forget every concern but him?
And having in your house repaired his Misery
To come to such a height --

Org. Hold brother, hold!
You do not know the man you talk of thoroughly.

Clean. Not know him? be it so, ^cause you will have it.
Yet to be short I Will tell you what he may be --

Org. Brother, you would be charmed with his Acquaintan^
And your astonishments would find no end.
He is a man that hates -- a man -- a man --
Who lives like him will feel a profound peace,
And as a Dunghill estimate this world:
I Am wholly changed my self, by's conversation:
It Is he has taught me to disclaim my affections;
To disingage my self from the world's friendship.
I could see Mother, Children, Brother and Wife die,
And with as little care as that comes to. Fillips

Clean. But such resentments are not humane, brother.


Org. Had you but seen him as I found him first,
His humble posture would have won your love:
Once at's devotion, he did plant himself,
With such a pious Aspect right against me,
Darting his prayers to heaven with such a zeal,
As did attract the eyes of all the Church,
And lowly prostrate on the ground did kiss it:
What else he did was suitable to that:
And at my coming forth he got before me,
On purpose to present me holy water:
Informed by his Man who did him imitate,
I found that he was much necessitated,
I made him presents, still he modestly
Would make a retribution of some part,
Telling me 'twas too much, too much by half!
And that he did no way deserve my pity:
But when I did refuse the part returned,
Before my face he gave it to the poor;
A Charity prodigious in my eyes.
Heaven surely made me take him to my house,
And since that time methinks all things have prosper'd,
I see the diligent care he takes of me;
Nay, of my wife, and therein of my honor;
He gives me notice of the designs of all,
And is six times more vigilant then my self,
You cannot imagine how his zeal aspires:
Each frivolous action he accounts a sin,
And 's scandalized at the least accident:
As once at 's prayers he chanced to catch a Flea,
And grieved because his passion made him kill it.

Clean. Confound him, Brother; sure you are bewitched
That thus you mock your self in your discourse:
To what will all this folly now pretend?

Org. Brother, you talk just like a Libertine.
I know you are ingenious enough:
But I much fear the freedom that you take
Will draw you into inconvenience.

Clean. This still is like your ordinary discourse;
You would have others be as blind as you.
The good and upright men we ought to trace,
Whose Zele lies not in supercilious looks.
There Is a vast difference, Brother; though you seem
Between devotion and hypocrifie
To give 'em both one character.
You equal cunning with sincerity,
And rank with sober truth a false appearance.
Esteem a shadow as you would the substance,
And prize false money as you do the good.
Most part of men are very strangely made,
You scarce can find them in their natural dress:
The bounds of reason are too narrow for 'em.
In every model they exceed their limit;
And commonly they spoil the noblest things
In over-doing by fond affectation.
Thus, Brother, I have freely spoke my mind.

Org. Sir, without doubt you are a Reverend Doctor:
Your head contains the knowledge of the world;
You are the only wise and learned man;
An Oracle, the Cato of our age.
And all men else are Sots compared with you.

Clean. Sir, I pretend no Doctorship nor Reverence.
Nor does my head contain such heaps of knowledge.
But in a word, thus much I understand,
How to discover real truth from falsehood.
And as I prize no sort of Hero's more
Than those I find are really devout;
Nothing in the world more noble nor more fair,
Than the holy fervor of a sincere Zele.
So, on the contrary, nothing is more odious,
Than are the plastered out sides of a false one.
Mere Mountabanks of piety, devout in public*
Whose seeming holy and deceitful faces
Do take the freedom boldly to abuse
What amongst Mortals is most sacred held;
Who sacrifice their souls to Interest,
Making Religion a mere merchandise;
Thinking to gain a credit and esteem
By casting up seducing eyes to Heaven.
Such people make their fortunes here below,
By that false ardour they to Heaven show:
Who in their raptures and strong counterfeits
Even to the Courtiers preach retirement
They can conform their Zele unto their Vice,
Revengeful, faithless, full of artifice.
And to disguise themselves cover their pride
With the pretended Interest of Heaven;
Being more dangerous in their vehement fits,
Appearing in those garbs we reverence:
And in their passion [to whom all submit.]
Assassinate us with an holy sword.

Org. Your judgment, Brother, 's bi^ss'd by your passion.
You do not love professors of the truth.

Clean. We see too many bearing this false stamp.
But honest hearts desire honest things.
This age does offer many to our eyes,
Whose glorious paterns we may safely follow.
Who are no boasters of their virtuous lives.
Such loathed pride in them cannot be seen:
But their devotion's tractable and plain.
They will not censure any others errors;
Knowing that such corrections smell of folly,
Leaving that verbal folly unto others.
It Is by their actions they reprove our faults.
What but resembles sin harbors not there;
Their souls incline to judge the best of others,
They follow no Intrigues, hold no Caball;
And their chief care is only to live well.
They never ^re incensed against a sinner:
It Is against sin that they apply their hate.
They never espouse Heavens quarrel with a Zele
To aggravate both crime and punishment.
Such merit love that thus demean themselves,
And are the examples I propose to you.
To say the truth, your Man's not of their fashion:
But your strong faith does idolize his Zele.
It Is a false light that dazles thus your eyes.

Org. O Providence! how does my patience reel?
Well, have you done? have you said all, or no?

Clean. Yes.


Org. Your servant, Sir.


Offers to go. Clean. Stay, Brother; by your favor one word more.
Let Us lay aside this talk. You know Valere
Has had your word to be your Son in law.

Org. Yes.


Clean. You have appointed too the Wedding day.


Org. It Is ver^ true.


Clean. Why do you thus defer it?


Org. I do not know.


Clean. Is your mind altered, Brother?


Org. Perhaps it is.


Clean. Will you break your word?


Org. I do not tell you that.


Clean. No obstacle (I hope) can so prevail
To make you break your plighted promise sure.

Org. According as it happens.


Clean. Does one word, Sir, require so much cunning?
I came from Valere, Brother, now on purpose.

Org. Heaven be praised!


Clean. What answer shall I make him?


Org. Even what you please, Sir.


Clean. It Is very fit, Sir, he should know your mind*
Pray speak your resolution.

Org. Sir, to do
What Heaven would have.

Clean. But pray, Sir, speak;
He has your promise, will you keep't or no*

Org. Farewell.


Exit. Clean. The love I hear him makes me fear his fate,
And binds me too to tell him what I hate.

Exit. Laurence and Dorina meet. Laur. I Am here within the hour she said she would
meet me.
Oh! how I long to engage -- but see, she is here
Sweet Mistress Dorina, and how do you? you see that
How I Am from my Master; I am not so demure,
But that I can lay aside my borrowed shape,
And show my p^^^^r self.

Dorin. What Is this Preamble to that you desired to speak
With me about?

Laur. What, are you so hot upon the scent that you
Will not hear me out; have but a little patience,
I Will be as good as my word.

Dorin. I never questioned your honesty, good Laurence,
I know a man of your great zeal, that serves
So pious a Master, cannot tread awry.

Laur. Nay, Mrs. Dorina don't flout me; I can
Put on my visor again if that please you better.

Dorin. No Laurence, I protest I Am serious;
I take thee for an honest fellow, and believe
You are true-hearted.

Laur. Faith so I am; and if you will hearken to me,
I Will open all my secrets to you.

Dorin. Hold me no longer in
Suspense, good Lawrence; tell me what you have to say in earnest.

Laur. Why this: during that most happy time wherein my
Master and my self received our entertainment first
In Orgon's house. I have observed a modesty in your looks,
And such a pleasant raillery in your speech, as have
Attracted all my Faculties to become your Votaries.
Nor have my senses enjoyed their usual repose;
Where're I am at Church, or with my Master,
Dorina still appears to all my thoughts: neither
Can penance or discipline force her from me.

Dor. Nay, Laurence, if this be all your Errand,
Fare you well. Dorina offers to go; Laurence stays her.

Lau. Nay, sweet Dorina stay. Think you I am
Not flesh and blood as well as you, since I first
Knew what 'twas to write man, I had an
Inclination, at Itch at --

Dor. At what?


Lau. Nay, you're so hasty,
But to the point, as Tartuffe says.

Dor. How now Laurence; what plain Tartuffe?


Lau. Plain Tartuffe! why what would you have me
Call him? it is true he is my Master, but --

Dor. But what? Nay Laurence prithee speak.


Lau. No, no, Mrs. Dorina, soft and fair;
If I should tell you all at once you would slight me.

Dor. No, seriously I will not.


Lau. How should I dare believe you in that,
When upon my very first speech, you we^e
So ready to fly away.

Dorin. aside. Here Is something more may be drawn from this
Fellow then yet I am aware of, therefore I must
Humor him a little. No truly, Laurence, I only made
A pretense of going, led by Modesty,
You being the first that e're made love to me,
But since I hope you will prove real I Am content
To hear you further.

Lau. Now art thou far more beautiful and glorious
Then are those Saints and Angels my Master so much
Talks of, and thou shall be the Load-star of all my Actions,
And the Saint to whom my best of Services shall
Be devoted: Now, now methinks the spirit grows
Too weak: yea, and the flesh grows strong:
My sweet Dorina.

offers to kiss her, she puts him by. Dor. Nay fie, Laurence. He offers again.
Nay then, stand off: who would have
Thought a man of your humble profession,
Had been so metalsome? and seriously
Unless you give me satisfaction for this affront,
I Will put you to a penance you will not like of.

Within: Tartuffe, Laurence! Laurence! Laur. Pardon me, sweet Dorina. Tartuffe
calls within Laurence! Laurence!
Alas, my Master calls, I must go in
And practice all demureness, farewell till
Next we meet.

Exit Laurence. Enters with Tartuffe as to Church. Enter Tartuffe, and passes
over the stage in a demure posture With b oks as going to Church. Tar. Come
Laurence, you neglect your prayers too much.


Dorin. Thus far it is well:
And from hence happily I may extract. Dorina smiles at them.
Somewhat for my young Mystriss's advantage.
Her father's grown so extravigantly fond
Of this same Tartuffe, that I much fear the iss^e
His Intentions.
But by this means I Will find out his design,
And his fond humors strive to out wit by mine.

Exit. ACT. II.
SCEN. I.
Orgon. Mariana. Org. MAriana.


Mar. Sir. Orgon looks in the Apartment.


Org. Come hither, Child, I have a secret for you.


Mar. Pray what d' you look for, Sir?


Org. My Child, I Am searching
If any may be there that can o'r-hear us. Looks in again.
So now we are well: Mariana, I Have observed,
That from thine Infancy thou have been meek,
And an obedient child, for which I love thee;

Mar. I stand indebted for your great affection.


Org. It Is well said, Child, and more to merit it.
You ought to have a care still to content me.

Mar. In that I place my highest glory, Sir.


Org. Well said, my Chick; what think thou then of Tartuffe?


Mar. Who, I Sir?


Org. You? take heed. Child, how you answer.


Mar. Alas, Sir! I Will say any thing you would have me.


Org. It Is wisely said; tell me then, my dear Child,
If any signal merit in his person
Has won upon thy heart; and, if it please thee,
To see him by my choice preferred thy Husband.

Mar. Ah me! She retires surpised.


Org. What Is the matter?


Mar. Please you, Sir.


Org. What?


Mar. Am I surpised?


Org. How?


Mar. Who would you have me say has won my heart?
What prodigy is that you would have to please me?
Whom would your choice offer me as an Husband?

Org. Tartuffe.


Mar. I Will swear he has no influence here. Points to her breast.
Why would you have me speak such an imposture?

Org. But I will have it prove a verity;
It is enough for you that he is my choice.

Mar. Pray father, what --


Org. Yes Daughter, I pretend
To unite him to our family, by Marriage;
I am resolv d that He shall be your Husband,
And as I have a power. -- Spies Dorina at the Entry.

SCEN. II.
Dorina. Orgon. Mariana. What do you there? to Dorina.
Your Curiosity is very strong,
How durst you thus invade my privacy?
Dor. I know not whether it is a false report,
Or some conjecture, or a hit of chance,
But of this Marriage I have heard some inkling,
And I concluded it was but a mere fiction.

Org. Then 't seems to you a thing incredible?


Dor. So much incredible it seems indeed,
That though you swear it Sir, I le not believe you.

Org. I know the way to make you change your faith,


Dor. Yes, yes, you tell us, Sir, a pleasant story.


Org. I tell you justly what you will quickly find.


Dor. You're merry Sir.


Org. Daughter, I do not jest.


Dor. All this is raillery, Madam, do'nt believe him.


Org. I tell you --


Dor. Nay Sir, you will have enough to do.
We do'nt believe you.

Org. Do not provoke me hussy.


Dor. The worst is yours, Sir, if it should be true,
The world will say, Can a wise man that has
A comely beard in the middle of his face
Like him, be such a fool for to --

Org. I prithee do not tempt me thus to anger;
You Have taken diverse privileges here,
Which do not please me, friend, I tell you so.

Dor. Let Us talk without offense, Sir, I beseech you.
What was your promise to Valere? a false one?
Your Daughter Sir's not fit for such a Saint,
He has Employments proper for his thoughts;
Did Providence thus amply bless you Sir;
And make you Master of such large Revenues,
To choose a beggar for your son-in-law?

Org. That does not any way concern you.
Know for that cause we owe him reverence;
No doubt his Misery comes not from desert,
Fortune and virtue always are at odds.
And that is the cause he should be prized bove greatness,
Since that he suffered loss of his estate
By the small care he took of temp'ral things,
And strong appliance made to those eternal,
But with my succor I may be a means,
To settle him in his estate again,
His Titles in the Country are firm,
And he s a Gentleman I can assure you.

Dorin. Yes Sir, we know he tells you so, this boast
Does not at all become his piety,
Whoever pretends an innocent holy life,
Ought not to vaunt his name, nor his Extraction,
The humble process of Devotion,
Can ill. digest Ambition's haughty phrase,
But this discourse offends you;
Could you without remorse possess this fellow,
With such a precious Jewel as your Daughter?
You ought Sir to consider decencies,
And to prevent the sequels of this union.
You run the hazard of your Daughter's virtue,
The only way to keep her name from spot,
Depends upon the Harmony that should
Attend the freedom of united Lovers,
Who only by their Parents will do wed,
Think it no crime to graft their husbands head.
It Is a great difficulty to live faithful,
But especially with one of such a humor,
Who gives his daughter to a man she loathes,
Stands bound to Heaven for any fault she acts,
Think to what perils your designs will bring you.

Or^. What yet no end? my patience is quite tired;
It seems that I must come to learn of you.

Dor. You will not do amiss to take my counsel. To his Daughter.


Org. Do not reflect on any of these stories,
I am your father, and I know your wants.
I gave my word to Valere he should have you,
But besides play, I Am told he is inclined,
[And I suspect't] to be a Libertine:
I have observed, he does not go to Church.

Dor. Would you oblige him be preeise at hours,
Like such who go a purpose to be seen.

Org. I need not your advice about this business. To Dorina.
The other Match is pleasing too to Heaven. -- To Mar.
Which is true riches beyond all comparison.
Hymen will here all your desires complete,
Your life will be all sweetness and all pleasure;
Together you will live in innocence,
Like little children, or as Turtle Doves.
Debate will find no harbor, 'twixt you two,
And you may do with him even as you please.

Dor. You Will make him but an Oph, as Nature made him.


Org. How now? what is this discourse?


Dor. He looks like one.


Dor. I speak Sir, only for your interest. Still as he speaks she interrupts.


Org. You are too careful Mrs. Pert, be gone.


Dor. Sir, if I did not love you. --


Org. I would not have you --


Dor. Sir, I will love you whether you will or no.


Org. Ah --


Dor. Your Honor's dear to me, I suffer in it,
To see you sacrific't to every trifle,

Org. I prithee peace.


Dor. My Conscience will not permit,
That I should let you make such an Alliance.

Org. Be silent Serpent, thy affrontive tongue --

Dor. Let not your passion thus transport you, Sir.


Org. Your idleness has so enraged my choler,
That now I am resolved to silence you.

Dor. Well: though I say nothing, I Will not think the less.


Org. Think if thou will, but make it not thy business. Dorina seems to stand
silently.
To speak to me, when -- so; Turning to Mar.
like a wise man
I have deliberately weighed every thing.

Dor. What a vexation s this I must not speak? He turns to Dorina, stands
upright and silent, and then turns to Mariana.


Org. Though Tartuffe, Daughter, be no great Gallant,
Yet he is Master of those excellent parts --

Dor. A goodly picture, Sir, indeed to look on.


Org. If you can harbor any sympathy
For all his other Gifts. He turns before her, and looks upon her with his arms
across.

Dor. She Is well holp up.
If I were in her place, I Would show you quickly,
I Would not be forced to marry any body;
And he should find after the (...) days,
A woman always has her vengeance ready,

Org. You take no notice then of what I say? To Dorina steruly.

Dor. Why do you fret Sir, I say nothing to you.


Org. Who do you talk to then?

Dor. Even to my self, Sir.

Org. It Is well: now to reward her Insolence. aside.
I will surprise her with a cuff. of the ear. He puts himself into a posture to
give her a blow of the face. And Dorina at each glance of his eye stands
demurely silent.
Daughter, you ought for to approve my Intention,
And to believe the Husband -- I Have elected --
Why don't you speak?


Dor. I can say nothing to you.


Org. One little word. To Mariana.


Dor. It does not please me, Sir.


Org. I shall box you Hussy. To Dorina at a distance.


Dor. A fool would take it faith. --


Org. Come child, you ought to be obedient to me;
Refer your self entirely to my choice.

Dor. I scorn to marry such a Boobey, Sir. Runs away till he is gone off, Org.
strikes at her and misses her.


Org. Oh that is a plague wench that waits upon you;
She urges me to passion and to sin; In rage.
I cannot live with her, nor can I utter
What I intended, I am so enraged.
Her insolent discourse has fired my thoughts
That I must take the Air to cool my self.
Exit.
SCEN. III.
Dorina, Mariana. Dor. Pray tell me truly, have you lost your tongue,
And in this business must I act your part?
That you could hear proposed you such a project
Without one word of answer or resentment.

Mar. What should I do against a f there is power?


Dor. What you are bound to do against such Proposals


Mar. What Is that?


Dor. Why freely to declare your inward thoughts,
As that your heart cannot love by others liking:
How that you marry for your self, not him,
And since in this affair it is your concern,
It Is you, not him, the Husband ought to please,
Since Tartuffe is so charming in his eyes,
Let his own heart become his sacrifice.

Mar. All this and more I justly might aver;
But knowing a father's pow's so absolute,
My courage fails me, I can answer nothing.

Dor. Let us dispute it; Valere has made love to you;
Pray tell me do you love him, I or no?

Mar. Toward's my love thy injustice is too great;
You should not ask that question, my Dorina!
Have I not told thee one hundred times my heart?
Thou know how strong my passion for him is.

Dor. How should I know your tongue and heart agree?
Or that those flames are real you pretend?

Mar. You injure me Dorina, thus to doubt me;
And my resentments have bin made too public.

Dor. In short, you love him then?


Mar. Dorina, strangely.


Dor. And in appearance he loves you so too.


Mar. I do beneve he does.


Dor. And both desire to be joined in Marriage; ha?


Mar. I think it seriously, my dear Dorina.


Dor. And what do you resolve about this Union?


Mar. To die Dorina, rather then be forced


Dor. It Is well; I did not dream of such a course:
Death is a certain way to disingage you;
The remedy is wonderful! I Am man
To hear you use such paltry ^^lly language.

Mar. What spirit, my Dorina, does possess thee,
That thou have no compassion of my grief?

Dor. I cannot pity those that tell sad tales,
Whom I have found so meek on such occasions.

Mar. What would thon have me do if I am timorous?


Dor. Love in the heart requires constancy.


Mar. Do not I keep it for my dear Valere?
And ought not he t'obtain me from my father?

Dor. But if your father be such a blind Buzzard,
To be thus strangely taken with Tartuffe;
And to break off that Union first designed,
The fault c ^'t be imputed to your Lover.

Mar. Do think it would consist with Modesly,
To own my Flames, and show my heart's concern
For my Valere? and on the contrary,
T'express the real hate I have for Tartuffe?
Will it not wrong the virtue of our Sex,
Nor prejudice a Daughter'^ duty neither?
If I thought not, I Would tell it all the world.
Give me thy counsel, would thou have me do this?

Dor. No, no, I would have nothing; I see you have
An inclination to be Tartuff's wife;
And I should do you injury to dissuade you;
It Is no small happiness to be his bedfellow.
He is a man famous in's Reputation,
Of a good person, Noble Parentage:
You Will live too happily with such a husband.

Mar. Oh Heaven!


Dor. What Joy will then possess your soul,
To see your self the wife of such a Saint?

Mar. Prithee leave off this strange discourse of thin^.
And open me a way to avoid this Marriage.
Speak, I am silent, ready to obey.

Dor. No, no, a Daughter must obey her father,
Though he should choose a Monkey for her Husband?
Your Fortune's very good, why do you complain?
You shall ride down and see his Mannor-house,
Which you shall find replete with goods and servants,
And all his Kindred waiting t'entertain you;
And shall be visited at your first coming,
By Mrs. Mayor, and Mrs. Constable;
Nay more, be-honour'd with a groaning Chair,
And in the Holy Days be nobly treated
With charming Bag-Pipes, and the Morris dancers;
And at the Countrey-Faits with Puppet-shows;
And all this while your Husband --

Mar. Ah! you kill me!
Give me some succor rather by thy counsel.

Dor. Your servant Madam --. offers to go away.


Mar. Ah Dorina! stay.! --


Dor. All this must happen for your punishment.


Mar. Nay, prithee Girl.


Dor. No.


Mar. If I declare my vows --


Dor. No, Tartuffe's your man, you must be silent.


Mar. You know that I have always trusted thee,
Do me --

Dor. No, no; you shall be Tar-tuf-fy-fi'd.


Mar. Well: since my evil fortune cannot move thee,
I prithee leave me now to my despair;
From that my heart shall borrow its assistance;
I know th'infallible Cure of misery. offers to go in haste.

Dor. Stay, stay, Madam, I Will lay aside my Anger,
And spite of it will take some pity on you.

Mar. Rather then to this Torture be exposed,
I Will choose, Dorina, a most sudden death.

Dor. Do not torment your self, for what we can
Hinder with ease, and if I Am not mistaken,
I have a plot will break the whole design --
But hold, here comes Valere, your Lover Madam.

SCEN. IV.
Valere, Mariana, Dorina. Val. Madam, just now strange news attaqu'd my ear,
Before to me unknown, and which I doubt
May be too pleasing to you.

Mar. Pray what is it?


Val. That you must have Tartuffe to be your husband.


Mar, It Is very true, such a design my father has in's head.


Val. Your father, Madam!


Mar. Yes Sir, my Father has quite changed his mind,
And came a purpose to propose it to me.

Val. But are you serious?


Mar. Yes in good truth I am;
And for this Marriage highly he declares.

Val. And what would you in this affair design?
Speak Madam.

Mar. I cannot tell.


Val. The Answer's modest,
You cannot tell?

Mar. No.


Val. No?


Mar. What would you counsel me?


Val. I counsel you to take him for a husband.


Mar. Is that your Counsel Sir?


Val. Yes.


Mar. But do you mean so?


Val. Yes.

The Choice is noble, you ought to listen to it.

Mar. It Is well; I shall receive your Counsel Sir.


Val. 'Twill not pain you much to follow it.


Mar. Not quite so much as you have felt to give it.


Val. I gave't a purpose, Madam, for to please you.


Mar. And to please you I shall accept it, Sir.


Dor. It Is pleasant to observe how they are entangl'd.


Val. Madam, is this your love! oh fickle sex!
Can you forget --

Mar. Nay, do not speak often, Sir,
You frankly said, I ought to listen to it.
And since he is presented by my father,
I do declare that I pretend to accept him,
Since you have given me this wholesome Counsel.

Val. Do not excuse your self with my Advice;
Your resolutions were already made,
You catch at every frivolous pretension,
For an authority to break you word.

Mar. It Is true, and you say well.


Val. And I do think,
You never had a rea I passion for me.

Mar. Be It so; y' have permission Sir to think.


Val. Yes, I Have permission; but

I Will prevent the like design.


Mar. I do not doubt it; those ardours that excite
True merit --

Val. Mariana, do not talk on it;
I have but little, and you have proved it now;
But it is some comfort to me,
Tha without shame they can repair my loss.

Mar. The loss is little since by this one change,
You can so easily find a reparation.

Val. I will do what I can you may believe it;
Our glory is engaged to make it our business,
Which though we cannot compass, we should feign it.

Mar. Sir, this resentment's generous and noble.


Val. It Is well, and every one ought to approve it.
How between love and passion am I split?
Must I then see you closed in others arms?
Not caring for that heart you have enslaved

Mar. All my designs require the contrary,
For I could wish the Marriage-knot were tied,
So to unite our pre-engaged hearts.

Val. But could you wish it?


Mar. Yes.


Val These your insulting trials are too much;
Madam farewell.
He makes a step forward, and returns.
Mar. It Is well done, Sir.


Val. At least remember Madam, that it is you
Constrain my heart to this extremity.

Mar. Yes.


Val. And that design my heart has now conceived.
Is but to follow your example.

Mar. To my example be it.


Val. Enough,
From this time forward, I Am no more your servant.
Offers to go.
Mar. So much the better.


Val. Look Madam; it is for ever.

Comes back.
Mar. In good time Sir.


Val. Ah me!

[Goes away, and at the door looks back and returns.
Mar. Returned so soon, pray what is the matter Sir?


Val. Did you call me Madam?


Mar. I call you, sure you dream.


Val. Then I pursue my Journey.
Farewell for ever Madam.

Mar. Sir, farewell.


Dor. Now do I think
By this extravigance you both have lost your wits;
I let you all this while pickeer on purpose,
To see to what effect 'twou'd come at last,
And here is a fair event, hold, hold, Valere.
She takes him by the arms, he seems to make a great resistan^e.
Val. What would thou have, Dorina?


Dor. Sir, come back.


Val. No, no, despite o'rewhelms me.
Pray do not hinder what she would have me do.

Dor. Stay. -- I request you.


Val. No: thou see it is resolved.


Dor. What is?


Mar My fight offends him, my presence drives him hence;
I should do well to leave the place to him.
She goes; Dor. leaves Valere, and follows Mariana.
Dor. Whither d' you run?


Mar. Prithee Dorina leave me.


Dor. Madam, you must come back,


Mar. No, no, Dorina, in vain thou do detain me,


Val. I see my face is but a torment to her,
And therefore I resolve to give her freedom.
Dorina holds Mariana by the hand and runs after Valere.
Dor. Again, sure O my conscience you are
Both bewitched.
Leave off this folly, and come hither both.
Draws 'em both together
Val. What Is thy design, Dorina?


Mar. What do thou mean to do?


Dor. Even put you both together, and make you friends.
Are you both mad to be thus whimsical?

Val. Did you not hear her what she said Dorina?


Dor. As sure as can be, you are both distracted.


Mar. Did not you see how ill he treated me?


Dor. Forbear, good Madam, Sir, her chiefest care
Is to preserve you hers: I am her witness. To Valere
And he love^ only you; upon my life, To Mariana.
His envy, Mad^m, tends to be your Husband.

Mar. Why did he give me then such wicked counsel?


Val. Why did she ask it then on such a subject?


Dor. More folly yet? come lend me each a hand;
Nay, dally not, dispatch. Valere gives his hand.

Val. Well, to what end?


Dor. Come, now for yours. Mariana gives hers after some seeming unw llingness
O fain I would but loath I am.


Mar. What will all this come to?


Dor. Advance, advance; come quickly,
You love much better then you think for both.

Val. Nay, Mariana, what you do, do cheerfully.


Dor. To say the truth, Lovers are full of frolicks. Mariana smiles at Valere
who spies her.


Val. Madam, have I not reason to complain?
And not to flatter, you were much unkind
In taking pleasure to afflict me thus.

Mar. But are not you the most ungrateful man --


Dor. No more of this at present, let us contrive
And think of putting by this horrid match.

Mar. Think on some project we may put in practice.


Dor. Come let us cast our plots in several forms;
Your father's fond resolves shall never daunt you:
If you think fit to follow my advice:
For you 'twere better, to's extravigance,
To lend the sweet appearance of consent,
In case of an Alarm; that with more ease
You may propose a longer day of marriage.
By time we purchase remedy for all,
Sometimes you may pretend you are not well;
A sudden Sickness will procure delays.
Another while may apprehend bad Omens;
As that you met by chance with a dead man;
Threw down the Salt, or dreamt of muddy waters;
But if all these together will not do,
One comfort yet remains, that all the world
Can never oblige you, if you say not yes.
But above other things I think if fitting
That now you part, lest you be seen together.
Go, and delay not, Master, all your friends. To Valere.
To make him keep the promise that he made you:
While we procure his brother to our side,
And to our party join the Mother-in-law.
So fare you well.

Val. What force soever we can now prepare;
In you is all my hope, for you my care. To Mariana

Mar. I cannot answer for a father's will;
But be assured I am my Valere's still. To Valere.

Val. How I Am overwhelmed with joy? and now I dare --


Dor. Lovers are never weary of discourse:
Go, get you gone, I say. Valere goes a step and returns.

Val. Well, to conclude --


Dor. No more of this discourse.
Here part, dear friends, and banish all your fears;
Go, go, divide: courage till our next meeting. Separates 'em, and pushes them
off at severnl doors. Exeunt.
Lord, what a coil is here! and now they are gone.
Unless I play my part 'twill come to nothing.
I have a crochet in my head that may,
If it hit right, prevent much future trouble:
Laurence, this Tartuffe's Man, pretends to me
A kindness more then ordinary: I by him,
Under pretense of yielding to his amors,
Must dive into the secrets of his master;
And if I can but find what I suspect,
It Is not his Zealous port shall bear him out.
I hug my self in the fancy; and see here
(As if the Fates, propitious to my care
To Effect my honest projects, did decree't)
Laurence appears. I Will feign not to have seen him. She offers to go.

SCEN. V.
Enter Laurence. Laur. Nay, sweet Dorina, what makes you haste away so fast?
Did my approach affright you?

Dor. No indeed, Laurence; but I was seriously going
About a little business, and did not see you.

Laur. Have you considered of what I imparted to you
At our last meeting?

Dor. I have.


Laur. And will your fancy prompt you to hearken to my suit?


Dor. Laurence, I thought
You had seen no difference of Sex; and this has made
Me sparing in receiving your addresses: and, I confess,
My jocose humor would not agree with your austere
Retirements. But if you will promise --

Laur. Hold, dear Dorina; if this be all you scruple at,
I Will sati^fie you quickly: for by this light I am no
More what I appear, then i^ --

Dor. Who? prithee, Loll, tell me.


Laur. My master.


Dor. Why does thy master counterfeit?


Laur. Nay, Dorina, too much of onething 's good for nothing.
You desire too fast, that shall be the work of another time:
I Will only now give you an account of my self. Know then,
Though I am Tartuff's Man, and receive wages of him,
His agreement with my friends was otherwise; but since he
Has got me fast, he uses me at his pleasure. I perceiving
This, and to creep into his favor, pretended by his sanctity
To be a Convert, and took upon me the humor you have
Seen: and by this means have won so much upon him,
That I am his Secretary, the Repository of his privacies, and
What not? and ( I must tell you) among all his acquaintance
Have an Interest.

Dor. But, Laurence, all this concerns me nothing; this Interest
That you boast of, is the main thing I fear: the austerity
Of your life, I doubt, will never bear with my merry disposition.

Laur. For that, Dorina, trouble not your self;
I see you know me not; for if you did,
You Would say that your temper and mine were both
Modeled alike; for I can be as blithe.
And frolicksom as the most wanton Courtier.
[Sings with A ^tick postures, and after danc^s a J^g. SONG. Spend not thy time
in vain, my Love,
But answer my desires:
Be bucksom, blithe, my pretty Dove,
Meet me with ^qual fires.
For if thou longer do delay;
Thy beauties soon will fade thee:
In honor thou art bound to pay
Those dibis which Nature made thee.
Since my designs are fuir and just,
How can thou well deny me?
In faithful Laurence thou may trust,
Then come and lie down by me.
This is a touch to show you that I can --


Dor. Yea marry, this is somewhat like; I perceive there
May be some hopes in the matter: but, Laurence, prithee
Laurence, tell me one thing; does your master intend to marry
With my mistress?

Laur. It Is so believed: nay Orgon himself gives credit to it;
But my master --

Dor. What does thy master, sweet Laurence?


Laur. Why, Faith he has a further reach then marriage,
Though perhaps he may seem to drive that nail too:
He finds Orgon inclined to him, and he is resolved to
Work upon his good nature: besides, Elmira 's fair,
And of an affable deportment: but that is not all;
When next we meet I may perchance give you further
Intelligence: but (good Dorina) don't betray me; let
Not my good will to thee be repaid with treachery. I
Know such courteous sweetness can carry no deceit. Let
Me before I go kiss thy fair hand; stich favor
Will encourage me to undertake the greatest hazards.
Farewell, Dorina. He goes a little away, turning back says,
Once again farewell. Exit.

Dor. So he is gone, and I Will no longer stay,
But with this news fly, fly, to avoid delay.

Exit. ACT. III.
SCEN. I.
Damis, Dorina. Dam. LEt horror and despair attend my destiny,
Let me be ever branded for a Coward,
If the respect or power of any hinder
The execution of my resolved design.

Dor. Pray moderate the extravagance of your p ssion:
Your father has but simply said, not done.
Things are proposed before they are executed:
The project is a great way off the action.

Dam. I must contrive to stop their base complot
By whispering a word in the Zealot's ear.

Dor. No, leave't to me; Softly and fair goes far.
With him and with your f^ther in their fits
Your mother is best able to prevail.
She has some influence upon Tartuffe,
And he will accomplish what she shall request,
For I have observed him very sweet upon her.

Dam. If that be true, it falls out luckily.


Dor. Make your advantage of it to her Honor.
Your Interest does oblige you to entreat her,
To study all she can to break this marriage:
And let her understand by your resentments
The inevitable ruin of the family,
If this design of theirs be e're accomplished.
I have prepared already, --

Dam. Would I could come to speak with him, his man
But even now denied me entrance to him;
Told me he was at prayers.

Dor. But I saw him since you, and then I Am sure
He told me was just a coming down.
Pray go your ways, and I Will attend him here;
But hide you in the Closet by the Parlour.

Dam. Why may not I be present at your meeting?


Dor. No, we must be alone; go you where I direct you.


Dam. I prithee let me stay; I will say nothing.


Dor. No, no; I am acquainted with your humor;
And it is the ready way to speak our business:
Pray let me prosecute my own design.

Dam. I Will promise you that I will show no passion.


Dor. What yet? you're very troublesome, he comes.


Exit Damis. SCEN. II.
Tartuffe, Laurence, Dorina. Tartuffe perceiving Dorina. Tart. Lay up my
Hair-cloth and my discipline,
And always pray to Heaven t'enlighten you:
If any come to visit me, say I Am gone
To dissipate my Alms among the prisoners.

Exit Laurence. Dor. What affectation and blind zeal is this?


Tart. What would thou?


Dor. -- I come --


Tart Ah! the sweet Heavens! I pray you
Before you speak to take this handkerchief.
Pulls one out of his pocket.
Dor. What for?


Tart. To hide that tempting breast I cannot behold;
By such like Objects our poor souls are wounded;
And many sinful though ts they breed in us.

Dor. It seems you are very tender to temptation;
Can flesh make such impression on your senses?
I Am ignorant what heat has so inflamed you,
And feel not in my self such inclinations:
Sir, I dare swear that I could see you naked,
Yet not be tempted for the matter neither.

Tart. Pray mingle your discourse with modesty;
Or else you will make me quickly fly the place.

Dor. No Sir, you shall not need, I must be gone,
I have but two or three words to say to you;
My Lady's coming strait into this Parlour,
Where she desires your virtuous conversation.

Tart. Alas! most willingly.


Dor. How sweet he is on it?
aside. I dare be bold that all I said is true.

Tart. Will she come presently?


Dor. I think I hear her Sir.
Yes, it is her self in person, I must leave you.

SCEN. III.
Elmira, Tartuffe. Tart. May bounteous Heaven always contribute health
Both to your soul and body, virtuous Madam.
And may the humble prayers of pious men
Prevail to pull down blessings on you here.
They seat themselves.
Elm. I am indebted for your holy prayers.
Come, let us set down, that we may talk a little.

Tart. And how do you feel your self since your late sickness?


Elm. Well, I thank Heaven since my Fever left me.


Tart. I do confess my prayers were much too weak
So suddenly to get this blessing for you;
But I Will assure you I did never omit
The object of your health in my devotions.

Elm. Sir, I do fear, I did disturb your zeal.


Tart. I cannot set too high esteem upon you,
I would have given my health to have purchased yours.

Elm. Your charity methinks extends too far;


Tart. I have done much less then you have merited.


Elm. I have done much less then you have merited.

Elm. I have some secret business with you, Sir.
And I am very glad we are alone.

Tart. I Am almost ravish d, Madam, with the joy
To find my self singly alone with you,
It is a blessing I have begged of Heaven,
Without being ever granted till this hour.

Elm. Sir, in this business that I shall request,
You must be open-hearted, and hide nothing.

Tart. I will not, Madam since I have the occasion
To open here before you my whole soul;
And I do swear that all that I have said
With so much passion against your Visitors,
Did not proceed from hate, but love to you:
Transported by a zeal that did constrain me
By a pure motion --

Elm. Sir, I take it well.
And know you are careful of my future good.
He presses her hand.
Tart. Madam, it is truth my fervor too is such. --


Elm. Oh Sir! you hurt my hand.

She cries out.
Tart. It Is through excess of zeal.
I have no design to do you any harm,
I had rather be --
Puts his hand upon her knees.
Elm. What does your hand do here?

Draws back her Chair, and he approaches his.
Tart. I feel the softness of your garment, Madam.


Elm. Pray, Sir, forbear, I me very ticklish.


Tart. Good Heavens! with how much skill this point is wrought!
This Age produces miracles in Art:
In every thing th're become excellent.

Elm. It Is true, but let us speak now to our business.
They say my husband, Sir, has perbroke his promise,
And would give you his Daughter; is it so?

Tart. Such words have past, but Madam to speak truth,
That Is not the happiness that I sigh after:
The glorious object of my felicity,
Is elsewhere placed, which chiefly I desire.

Elm. No earthly, beauty can deserve your love.


Tart. Madam, I Am humane, made of flesh and blood,
My breast does not enclose a heart of stone.

Elm. Sir, I believe your sighs do tend to Heaven;
And nothing here below attracts your fancy.

Tart. That love we fix upon eternal Be uty
Does not command us to hate temp'ral things.
Our senses very easily are charmed
With those Perfections which the Heavens have formed.
And do you think that I who have discerned,
That Heaven has grav d on you all those rare wonders,
And in your Countenance has placed those beauties
Which do inflame the heart, surprise the eyes,
Should see and not admire them. --
Most perfect Beauty, I cannot behold you longer,
Without in you admiring Nature's Author;
I feel my heart touched with an ardent love,
Of his best Image where himself is painted.
But stay, I am afraid this secret flame
Is but the subtle work of some black spirit;
I know my heart should fly your piercing eyes,
As from the obstacle of my Soul's happiness;
But yet I find, oh amiable Beauty!
That this my passion ma'nt be criminal;
may assuage it by my wariness.
Oh for this action I approve my heart,
Though It be presumption, I confess, in me,
Daring to make my heart your offering;
I trust my Vows mixed with your goodness, Madam,
May soon blot out the effects of my infirmity;
In you is all my hope, my wealth, my quiet,
On you depends my Torment, or Beatitude:
My fate's included in your sentence, Madam,
I Am happy or unhappy as you make me.

Elm. This frank discovery is very gallant:
But to say truth it does surprise me much.
You should methinks have been prepared much better,
With stronger Arguments on this occasion;
A devout man, and every where renowned --

Tart. Ah! though devout, yet I am still but m^
And when I see your heavenly person by me,
My heart is captived, and I cannot argue.
I know that this discourse looks strange from me;
But Madam after all, I Am not an Angel.
And if you do condemn what I have done,
You ought to blame your charming beauty too.
At the first glance of your admired splendor
You won the sovereignty of my Interiours.
Th'ineffable sweetness of your divine aspect
Forced the resistance of my stubborn heart.
And conquered all my fastings, prayers and tears.
My eyes and sighs spoke this 100 times.
And now I employ my voice t express it better.

Elm. How little does my husband think of this.


aside. Tart. Do but contemplate, most beauteous soul,
The Tribulations of a flave unworthy;
It Is only you, you Madam, can support me,
Or ravel me back again to my first nothing.
I shall retain for you, O sweetest wonder!
Such a devotion that is unmatehable.
With me you run no hazard in your honor;
And on my part you need fear no disgrace.
Those Courtly Gallants, whose foolish prating wives
Are vain in words, and babbling of their deeds,
Still in their progress betray themselves:
Receive no favors which they don't divulge;
And he who trusts to their tongues indiscretion,
Dishonours the alt^r where his heart is sacrificed.
But who (like us) burn with a love discreet,
With those our secrets are for ever sure.
That care we take still to preserve our fame,
Is a sufficient surety for our love.
In us is found (the heart once being accepted)
Love without scandal, pleasure without fear.

Elm. Sir, I have heard you; and your Rhetoric
In good strong terms has full expressed your soul:
But don't you apprehend I Am of the humor
To tell my husband all this Gallantry?
And that the prompt advice of such a love
May Not change the amity that now be bears you?

Tart. I know you are too full of goodness, Madam;
And that you will seal my pardon for this rashness:
At least that you'^ excuse through humane frailty
The violent motion of that love offends you:
And when you turn your eyes upon your self,
And see your own perfections, you will consider,
That men have eyes, and that they are made of flesh.

Elm. Yet people would expound it otherwise:
But my discretion shall appear in this,
I Will not disclose this business to my husband,
But take my vengeance in another manner.
Then hear my doom: First, without least regret,
You must disclaim all right to Mariana;
And next renounce your self that unjust power,
Which does enrich your hope with others treasure.
And --

SCEN. IV.
Damis, Elmira, Tartuffe. [Damis comes out of the Closet where be was retired.
Dam. No, no, Madam, t^i story must be known;
I was in such a place where I ^eard all:
Methinks by providence I was ^^ought thither,
To punish this proud Vi^lain that ^as wronged me.
'T has opened me a way to be re^eng'd
Upon's hypoc^i^ie and in o^ence
To undeceive my father, and to show him
That Villains soul that would corrupt his bed.

Elm. No Damis, it is sufficien^ he is grown wiser,
And will endeavor to deserve my favor,
Since I have promised him not to ^i c^o^e it.
It Is not my humor for to make dissentions;
Wise women do but ^augh at such like so ^ies;
Their husbands ears they will not trouble with 'em.

Dam. You have your ^easons for your resolution,
And I have ^ine to use him otherwise.
To p^^e him were too high a rai lery;
The insolent pride of his pretended Zele
Has t iumph'd over my passion now too much,
And m de a strange confu on (...) ou^ family.
He ^a too long a time gove^n'd my father,
And ^^nd^ed m^ ust flames and Valere's too:
'Ti^ fi^ m^ father know his treachery,
And Heaven has offered me just means to do it,
F r this (...) ^^portunity I stand
Greatly inde^ted to propitious Heaven;
And should de^e^v to have it taken from me,
If (^av ng', in (...) b^n^) I did not use it.

El^. D^mis --

D^m. N, M^^ m, no; I must enlarge my joy;
My soul is (...) high pitch of comfort,
And yo r discou^^^ p etends t'ob^ige in vain
To q it the plea^u^e of (...) king venge nce.
And without (...) words ^^^e pre ently --
Here comes my father, which ^as all I wan^ed.

SCEN. V.
Orgon, Damis, Tartuffe, Elmira, Sir, we are ready now to entertain you
With a fresh accident that will surprise you;
Whereby you are well rewarded for your kindness:
This high-priz'd Saint here has acknowledged it:
His Zele for you he has just now declared;
But in my mind 'twas much to your dishonor.
As I was there retired just now by chance,
I did surprise him making to my mother
A villainous address of lustful love;
But her meek spirit joined with high discretion,
Would by all means have kept this secret from you.
I never yet could flatter impudence,
And feared my silence now might prove offense.
Elm. Yes, I still hold that with such idle stories
I ought not to disturb my husbands ^est;
Our honor don't depend on trifling questions:
It satisfies when we defend our selves.
These are my thoughts, and you should not have told it
If Damis, I could have prevailed with you.

Exit Elmira. SCEN. VI.
Orgon, Damis, Tartuffe. Org. O Heaven! can this be credible I hear?


Tart. Yes, brother, I am wicked, and a criminal;
An unhappy sinner, full of impiety;
The lewdest Villain that was ever bred:
Each instant of my life is full of stains;
It Is nothing but an heap of filth and sin.
I see the Heavens by this objected crime
Would mortify me for my spiritual pride.
I will not vindicate my self at all,
Nor say I Am free from what I am reproved for.
Believe what is told you, and thence armed with anger.
Drive me a guilty wretch out of your doors.
I know I cannot suffer so much shame,
As I am sensible I have deserved.

Org. O Villain, do thou by thy sl^nd'rous tongue
Attempt to blast his virtuous purity?
To his Son.
Dam. Does the feigned meekness of this hypocrite
Trapan your soul with lies?

Org. Peace, cursed Rogue.


Tart. O let him speak; you wrongfully accuse him,
You will do better, Sir, if you believe him.
Why after such a fact are you so favorable?
What am I good for when I Am thus ung^ateful?
Ah brother, you confide in my exterior;
And though they know me wicked, think me good.
You let your self be che^ted by false show;
I Am really the same they represent me:
The world believes me a very honest man,
But in sincerity I Am good for nothing.
Addressing himself to Dami^. Speak, my good Child, say that I am perfidious,
A Reprobate, a Thief, a Murderer:
Heap on me names yet more detestable,
I will not contradict; I deserve all.
This ignominy on my knees I Will suffer
He kneels, Orgon presently raises him. As a just shame due to my crimes of
life.

Org. Brother, this is too much: does not thy heart
Tremble to --

Dam. What, shall his words seduce you in this case?


Org. Silence you Rogue! ah, my dear brother rise.
To Tartuffe. Infamous Varlet!
To Damis.
Dam. He may --


Org. Pe^ce, Sirrah.


Dam. Oh, I am mad! what do I pass --


Org. Not a word more, Sirrah, I Will break your pate.


Ta^t. Brother, in the name of Heaven be not in choler:
I Would rather endure for him the greatest pain,
Than he for me should suffer the least harm.

Org. Ingrate --


Tart. Let him alone, Sir, upon my knees
Kneels. I beg his pardon.

Org. Fie, Brother! rise --
You see his goodness, Sirrah.

Dam. Then --


Org. Peace


Dam. What shall I --


Org. Peace, I say.
I know the motive makes you thus abuse him;
You hate him all, and I Am convinced on it now.
Wife, Children, Servants, all combine against him.
You impudently put all plots in practic,
To rob me of this good man's couver ation.
The more designs you have to put him from me,
The faster I will strive to keep him here.
And now I Will presently give him my daughter,
For to confound the pride of all my family.

Dam. Do you think t'oblige her, Sir, to take him too?


Org. Yes, villain; and to night, the more to vex you.
I brave you all, and I will m ke you know
You ought to obey me, and that I m Master.
Come, Sir ^ecant; and at this instant, Rascal,
Throw your se f at his feet, and beg his pardon.

Dam. What? I? to such a Slave, who by's impostures --


Org Ha! do you refuse you Rogue, and call him names?
Lend me a stick -- pray do not hinder me.
Tartuffe holds him. Go, Sir^ah, get yo^ gone out of my house,
And never come again within these ^oors.

Dam I will be you Sir.


Org. Quickly be gone;
Taken notice, Sirrah I disinherit you.
And curse the time of thy Nativity.
Exit Damis.
SCEN. VII.
Orgon, Tartuffe. To Offend in such a sort so holy a man.

Tart. O Heaven! pardon him the wrong he did me.
If you could know with what displeasure, Brother,
I live to find they ^^rive to sender me
Odious to you --

Org. Alas, be comforted.


Tart. The thought alone of this ingratitude
Does wreck my soul with a str nge punishment --
The horror I conceive -- ah m^ heart b^e^k --
I cannot utter't, I be^ieve 'twill kill ^e.

^^^o^ ^^uns weeping to the door where Damis went our. O g. O Rogu^! now I
repent I showed thee mercy,
And that I did not ki^l thee on the pl^ce!
Co pose your self, dear Brother; do not grieve.

Tart. Let us remove the cause of all this strife:
I plainly se^ the troubles that I b^ing you,
And find it, Brother requisite to leave you.

Org. How do you mean?


Tart. They hate me, and I know
They strive to make my faith suspicious to you.

Org. No matter bro^her, you see how well I heed 'em,


Tart They will not cease to prosecute their ends.
And with the same reports you now reject;
Perhaps another time you will li^ten to em.

Org. No brother, never.


Tart. Ah but a wife dear Brother,
May easily surprise a husband's mind.

Org. No, no.


Tart. Oh let me brother quickly by removal
Take from 'em all occasion of design.

Org. No, you shall live Sir here while I have life.


Tart. Well then: for this I Will mortify my self;
But if you will. --

Org. Ah, no! ^e^'s talk no more. --


Tart. But I shall know to rule my self hereafter;
Honor is tender, and friendship does engage me
To stop reports of the least circumstance,
Wherefore I Will shun your wife, and you shall see me. --

Org. No, in despite of them you shall frequent her.
My greatest pleasure is to vex the world,
And I would have you seen with her at all times.
This is not all, for now the more to brave 'em,
My 'state shall have no other Heir but you;
And I will go to Counsel and Advice,
By what Conveyance I may settle it.
As I think fit to choose you for my Son-in-law:
I prize you 'bove my Son, or Wife, or Kindred.
I hope you will accept what I propose?

Ta t. The will of Heaven be done in every thing.


Org. Alas! poor m^n! I Will go and get the settlement,
That I may make them burst their hearts with envy.

Exit Orgon. SCEN. VIII.
Tartuffe, Laurence Tart. The storm is past, what now will more remain,
But that I keep my vi^or on, until
The intended settlement is made: I Will have it by Fine,
And streng^hen't b Recovery; then the best
Among them all that dares resist my will,
I Will make him bow or break under the weight.
What I have aimed at long, now in effect
Is brought to pass; we'll slave it now no more,
We'll Lord it Laurence.

Laur. Truly Sir, Providence is very kind
To give such fair occasions to your hands,
And not to use 'em were to slight them, Sir.

Tart. You say the truth, but yet the plot's not ripe.
I still must be subservient. Mariana
Must in pretense be chief, although Elmira
Be really the mark I aim at, and for that
If she be stubborn, threats against her husband
[Which must bring ruins to her self] shall make her stoop;
But if with all I nothing can prevail.
And she [as once before her son] complain,
I Will turn 'em out of doors, ransack the house,
And either have my will or ruin all.

Laur. Yes verily Sir, this is a brave resolve;
I Have often heard you say that the whole Earth
Was by the Saints to be possessed entire;
And if you take the course you here project,
You will become Proprietor of part.
Surely, dear Sir, for these so full blown hopes
You are obliged to Heaven.

Tart. Pish, tell not me of Heaven or thankfulness,
Those are but words of course in company;
It Is time to arm since they begin to doubt,
If I get in, let who can get me out.

Exeunt. SCEN. IX.
Flypote, Pernelle. Fly. Madam, it is real truth what I have told you.


Per. O wicked Age! what dismal plots are these!
Religious men are scoffed at and abused;
But prais^d be Heaven my son h^d so much grace,
To cherish Tartuffe's poor afflicted soul.
How did this humble Saint behave himself?

Fly. With his submissive eyes fixed on the earth,
Took on him all the filthy crimes objected;
Fell on his knees, and said he did deserve
The worst of punishments could be imagined.

Per. Alas poor man! I guess his pious drift:
'Twas done to mortify his holy pride,
And to express the suffrance of the spirit;
Ah! when shall we attain to such perfection!

Fly. For these foul slanders Damis is expelled
His fathers house; and disinherited;
And Orgon marries Tartuffe to his daughter,
On whom he settles all his whole estate.

Per. This is a just reward for piety!
Oh Flipote, now my heart does leap with joy;
For I perceive the blessings of this life
Begin to be entailed upon our family.
Never was Mother happier in a son!
I have a great desire to see poor Tartuffe,
But would avoid the sight of any else;
Go, and enquire if he be at leisure.

Fly. Yes Madam, I Will go knock at's Chamber Door.


Per. Alas poor man! how I do pity thee
That art constrained to live among such people!
Who are not worthy of thy conversation:
But that the Providence above preserves thee,
They would not matter't much to poison thee:
I partly know the malice of their hearts.

FLYPOTE, Fly. Madam, he is just gone forth, and Laurance tells me
The family are all in tears for Damis;
He wishes you would go and comfort 'em.

Per. No, no; I m glad I came the back-way hither:
Let us avoid these wicked Libertines:
Were It no for Tartuffe I should hate the house;
Come let us home again: if things hit right,
The Brethren shall rejoice in Hymns this night.

ACT. IV.
SCEN. I.
Cleanthes, Tartuffe. Cleant. ALl people talk on it, and you may believe me,
That their resentments tend not to your credit:
And I have light upon you opportunely,
To tell you in few words my judgment of it.
I will not examine the bottom of the quarrel,
I Will p^ss that over, and begin but here:
Suppose that Dami^ misbehav'd himself,
And that he has most wrongfully accused you.
It Is Christian-like to pardon his offense,
And blot out of your heart all thoughts of vengeance*
Ought you to suffer for a trivial quarrel,
A son be banished from his father's house?
I Will tell you f^rther, and with freedom too,
That you have scandalized both young and old;
And if you will take my Council pacify 'em;
And make no farther progress in this business;
'Twere better sacrifice your wrath to Heaven,
And reconcile the Father to his son.

Tart. Alas! Sir, I Would consent with all my heart;
There hangs no bitterness upon my spirit:
I pardon all and blame him Sir in nothing;
I Am ready, Sir, to serve him with my soul:
But Heavens interest, Sir, will not consent,
And if he enters here, I must turn out.
After his fact which never yet was equaled,
Commerce between us two would bring a scandal;
Heaven knows what presently the world would think:
They would impute it to my policy,
And every body strait conclude me guilty,
Imagining out of remorse of Conscience,
That I had seign'd this charitable zeal for him:
And that my timorous heart now strove to gain him,
That underhand I might engage his silence.

Clean. Your reasons, Sir, are drawn a great way off,
And your excuses too are falsely colored,
Where you pretend the Interest of Heaven.
Why do you charge your self with such a care?
Is it our work to punish Criminals?
Fie, suffer Heaven to revenge it self.
Say what you will, it is Interest of this world
Impedes the glory of so brave an action
Beyond pretense: let us be what Heav n ordains,
And let no other care afflict our spirits.

Tart. I have already told you that I pardoned him,
And in that action done what Heaven ordained;
But since the affront and scandal given me to day,
Heaven has not ordered I should live with him.

Clean. Did Heaven order you to lend an ear
To what one mere Caprice counseled his father?
Think you in quiet ever to enjoy
That right belongs by nature to another?

Tart. I spoke not for it, nor did ever seek it;
Who thoroughly knows me never will have a thought
That this effect springs from my avarice.
I don't respect the treasure of this world,
Nor am I dazel'd with its glittering follies.
It Is true, I from his father have accepted
That settlement he proffered me to make;
Why was it, pray? only because I feared
That the estate might fall in wicked hands,
Who would employ it vainly, or at best
Make a bad employ often --
But I, good Sir, have totally designed it
For Heavens glory and my Neighbors edification.

Clean. 'Twere fit you threw aside these curious fears
Of things which may but happen; he is the heir:
Permit him then, as by his birth is due,
That he enjoy his own at his own peril;
'Twill not concern you if he misuse it;
Or if it did, were it not better he
Should bear that blame, then you be thought a Cheat?
I strangely wonder that without confusion
You could endure so foul a proposition.
Pray, is there such a Maxim in Religion,
That teaches you to wrong a lawful heir?
If you and Damis cannot dwell together,
Were it not better (like a discreet person)
You took a civil Farewell of the family,
Then thus to suffer (Sir) against all reason
The son be driven from his fathers house?
Believe me now, your wisdom's called in question --
For I --

Tart. It Is half an hour (Sir) past three,
And certain pious duties call me up:
Excuse me that I leave you (Sir) so soon.

Exit Tartuffe. Clean. Then is this all you will say? intruding Slave --


SCEN. II.
Cleanthes, Dorina. Dor. By your favor, Sir, how have you sped with him?
This act of yours was quite against my mind.
You see in what a posture affairs stand:
And Mariana's soul 's even dead with grief;
The contract by her father newly made
At every moment makes her desperate.
But now I have no leisure to discourse it,
Because I look to meet with Tartuffe's Man;
Whose heart I Will search: in the interim, if you please,
To find out Mariana and Elmira,
We will contrive something that is fit to do
Or say to Orgon when we meet him next.

Clean. Dorina, thou have jumpt with my design;
I have prepared instructions for my Sister.
Go, here comes Laurence --
Mind what you are about.

Exit Cleanthes. Enter Laurence. O Laurence! welcome; I doubt not but you have
Heard the news, and certainly in regard
Of my concerns with you it highly pleases me.
Laur. What news is this?


Dor. Why, that Damis is disinherited, my young Mistress
Contracted to your Master by her father:
And as a confirmation of that marriage,
He has enfeoffed his intended Son-in-law
In all his lands; and to make the same sure
He has levied a Fine, and suffered a Recovery;
And by another Deed, upon the same consideration,
Has transferred upon him his house and goods --

Laur. No more -- then he is undone; for now let
Him be assured, if after this ought be denied
To his unbounded will, he will use but the
Greatest extremity toward this fond man that
Has thus fooled himself, and his whole f^mily.
He no more intends to marry your Mistress then
I do; he intends, if he can [and be sure he will
Lay hold on all opportunities] to debauch Elmira:
And if she will not yield to his desires, or make it
Known he tempted her agrn, whereby Orgon
Should come to be incensed; then nothing
Serves his turn but Utter ruin.

Dor. O Heaven defend us! now I am clearly lost:
I know not what to do or what to advise,
Dear Laurence, counsel me.

Laur. Dorina, You see I trust you with my secrets;
Be thou but true to me, and I Will direct
A way shall yet, I hope, produce our happiness.

Dor. What is it, dear Laurence, and I will protest
To give thee all in modesty thou can ask,
My love, my heart, whetever I can get
I Will make thee master of, together with my self.

Laur. You must procure a meeting 'twixt Elmira
And my Master, to which by some means you
Must make Orgon privy, that his own ears may
Witness to him what from the mouth of truth
He Would not believe. This must be done, though
For a time it breed a strange confusion, then let Cleanthes*
Damis, and Valere inform the King and Council
Before hand of Orgons former services; lay before
Them his fidelity, and pray their aid in the behalf of
Damis: for they must not mention any thing further;
Only be sure they strengthen themselves with friends,
That being prepossest may at all times be ready, as --

Dor. O my dear Laurence! if by this thy means
(As this advice is rational) we thrive,
Know thy reward shall satisfy thy merit.

Laur. Fear not: remember what I have said: I doubt
I'hve staid too long; I would not have my Master
Miss me: therefore, my dear Dorina, fare you well.
I Will see you suddenly again. Adieu.

Exit. Dor. O Heavens, what a toil is Orgon in!
This is no time for idleness: I Will go
And find the persons out I long to speak with:
They come.

SCEN. III.
Elmira, Mariana, Cleanthes, Dorina. O Madam, here is news indeed: you must lay
your hand
To help us out of the mire. You must use
Some means to make your husband see this Cheat
In's colors: I Will take a care to help the rest.
But here comes Orgon; imagine, Madam, what you had best
To do.
Enter Orgon to them with a Deed, the Contract, and Transcript of the Fine and
Recovery, and Laurence following him. Org. O, I rejoice to see you all together:
I Have that here in my hand will make you laugh;
You know already the contents of 'em:
Laurence, secure these papers to thy Master.
Aside.
Mar. Dear Sir, in Heavens name that knows my grief, Kneels.
By every thing may move you to compassion,
Use not that power you from my birth may claim,
Dispense with my obedience and my vows.
Do not reduce me by this cruel act,
To wish to Heaven you would never been my father.
This wretched life, alas! which you have given me,
Strive not to make it thus unfortunate.
If against that sweet hope I formed my self,
You do forbid me him I Have dared to love.
At least upon my knees I do implore you,
Spare me that torment to be his I 'bhorre,
And do not make me (Sir) grow desperate.

Dor. This happens well to bring on the design. Aside.


Org. Forbear, fond heart, and do not show thy frailty. To himself.


Dor. I think it penetrates; alas, poor man!


Mar. Your tenderness to him's no pain to me:
Make it more signal; let him have your wealth:
If that suffice not, add what ever is mine;
For ever I consent, and will forsake it:
But do not give so far, Sir, as my person.
Suffer the austerities of a Nunnery,
To pass away those hours which Heaven has lent me.

Org. Yes, you are very fit to be religious,
Now when you feel your amorous flames depressed.
Stand up; the more your heart denies to have him,
'Twill offer you the occasion of more merit.
Come, mortify your senses by thi^ marriage,
And do not vex me any more about it.

Dor. What, Sir --


Org. Be silent, Hussie; speak when you are sp^ak to.


Clean. If by advice you will suffer me to answer --.


Org. Brother, your Councels are the best in the world,
They Are full of reason, and I prize them much.
But you must pardon me, if I refuse 'em.

Elm. Seeing what I have seen, I can say nothing,
But silent stand in admiration at you.
Your love has blinded you to that degree,
T'affirm us liars in what you will find too true.

Org. Your servant, Madam, I perceive your drift,
And know your correspondence with my son;
You are afraid he should disown that plot,
Which you designed against that virtuous man.
You were too patient to persuade belief;
Had it been true, you would have changed your humor,
And showed your self moved in another manner.

Dor. O rare! he brings it on himself! aside.


Elm. Against the Prospect of an amorous Motion,
Must we draw all the force our Honors have?
May we not answer those who do attempt us,
But with injurious mouths, eyes full of fire?
For my part I but laugh at such Proposals,
And do not care to make a noise about 'em.
I love in mildness we should show our wisdom;
Nor did I e're esteem a savage prudence
In them whose Honors, armed with teeth and nails,
For every little word scratch people's Faces.
From all such rudeness Heaven preserve me,
I do not love such divel-natur'd virtue.
The discreet coolness of a chaste denial,
Is far more powerful to rebuke a Villain.

Org. In short, I Am satisfied; I know the truth.


Elm Again, I Am astonished at your weakness.
What will your incredulity answer me,
If you should see what we have said is true.

Dor. O incomparably done! aside.


O g. See? what I wonder? see?


Elm. Yes, so I say, see:


Org. You're very pleasant.


Elm. How if I find a way
To make you see all this in the open light?

Org. Castles in the Air!


Elm. Strange man! give me your answer;
I don't persuade you to believe it neither;
But suppose now I should find out a place
To let you clearly see, and hear each passage,
What would you say then to your virtuous man;

Org. I Would say in such a case -- I would say nothing.
For it cannot be.

Elm. The error holds too long;
It does condemn my tongue too of imposture.
Let me for pastime without stirring further
To all that I have told you make you witness.

Org. Be It so; I Will take your word, and see your cunnin^
Which way you're able to fulfill your promise.

Elm. Go, fetch him hither.


Dor. Madam, he is very subtle,
And I believe it difficult to surprise him.

Elm. No, no, we are easily caught by what we love.
Bid him come down, and (pray) do you retire.

SCEN. IV.
Elmira, Orgon. Elm. Draw near the Table, and creep you under it,


Org. How?


Elm. Be sure you be not seen.


Org. Why under the Table?


Elm. Nay, nay, ask no questions.
My design's here, and you shall judge on it presently.
Go, get you under't* and when you're there
Take heed that you be neither heard nor seen.

Org. My condescension must be great in this:
I long to see the project at an end.

Elm. You will be puzzled strait to play your part;
To him under the Table. I^m going now about a ticklish business,
At which you may be scandalized, but I
Will give no cause, although I take the freedom,
By your permission, to say all I Am able,
That so I may convince you, as I Have promised.
I am constrained against the rules of honor,
To wear a mask to catch the hypocrite:
And if I seem to flatter his desires,
Or yield a freedom to his rash attempts,
It Is for your sake, the better to confound him.
My soul designs all this --
I shall retire as soon as you appear,
And things shall go no further then you would have 'em*
It Is you must stop his course, and cool the heat
Of his inflamed Zele, when you perceive
Your Honor is concerned; and then, I hope,
Your eyes will disabuse that credulous humor,
That made you slight both interest and friends.
You shall be Master here -- No more, he comes;
Take heed he don't discover you.

SCEN. V.
Tartuffe, Elmira, Orgon. Tart. They told me, Madam, you would speak with me.


Elm. Yes, I have a secret to reveal to you;
But shut the door, and search about the chamber;
I am unwilling we should be surpised.
He goes back and bolts the door. An accident like that last happened to us,
Would now be more unwelcome then before.
Damis did fright me strangely for your sake;
But you perceived, I hope, there was no want
Of will in me to change the Scene, and turn
His rage against you into a quiet calm.
I must confess, I was so much amazed,
That I had no invention to disguise it.
But, Heaven be praised! it proved all for the best,
And things are now in more security:
Your estimation has allayed the storm,
And Orgon (to out-brave the peoples vogue)
Allows us freer converse at all times.
Hence it proceeds, that without fear of blame
I see my self locked up with you alone.
This has emboldened me to open an heart
Unable longer to resist your love.

Tart. It Is difficult to comprehend this language;
You lately, Madam, talked another style.

Elm. If that denial, Sir, did anger you,
You have small knowledge of a woman's heart.
Our Modesties pretend to give you battle:
Even in that instant we intend surrender,
With the same reasons we disown our loves.
We do proclaim 'em, and that very moment
Our tongues in honor do oppose our wishes:
The weakness of refusal is a promise.
In thee my freedom without doubt I Have made,
But very little use of modesty --
And since the word is out e'ne let it go.
Do You think I would have stayed with so muce mildness,
To listen to the proffer of your love,
Or would have taken things with such a calm,
If the offer of your heart had not been pleasing?

Tart. It Is Madam, without doubt* a mighty happiness
To hear such language from a Mouth of love;
The honey of your words drop on my senses,
Such a suavity was never tasted.
My chiefest study still has been to please you;
And all my wishes seem to be accomplish^d;
But yet my heart demands the liberty,
To doubt a little its beatitude
If I may liberally expound my self;
Such soft Proposals I can scarce mistrust:
Might I but taste those favou^s that I sigh for
It would assure me much of all you say;
And in my bosom plant a constant faith,
Of all those charming bounties you have for me.
Drashs near to Elmira.
Elm. What in such haste; Nay Mr Tartuffe, Fie;
She coughs to advertise her husband. These greatest favors are not gained at
once:
I almost died to unfold my thoughts to you,
And yet you seem not to be satisfied:
You have not showed such courage as would merit
Those highest favors to be granted by us.

Tart. The less I merit, the less I dare to hope for;
And this discourse does not confirm my wish:
We are suspicious of a hasty fortune:
Yet would enjoy before we can believe it.
I have so little merited this bounty,
That I suspect the happy consequence;
Th^s Madam makes me slow in my belief,
Ti^l you convince me by reality.

Elm. Your love does act like a fierce Tyrant, Sir;
Taking a furious sovereignty over hearts,
And presses to its end with too much violence.
What will you not allow me time to breathe?
Do You think this rigor does become you, Sir?
To press so hard upon my feeble weakness?

Tart. But since you have respect for my addresses,
Why do you refuse to give me pledges of it?

Elm. Pray how can I consent to what you would have,
Without offending Heaven?

Tart. If that be all
A little thing removes that obst^cle.

Elm. But I do dread what is by Heaven forbid.


Tart. Such fe^rs are vain, I can remove these scruples.
It Is true, Heaven does forbid us cert^in pleasures,
But there remains a means for composition:
We may abate the evil of our actions,
By the sincerity of our intentio^s,
I can instruct you in the e^secrets, Madam;
Dispose your self to me for your safe conduct:
Content but my desire, and fear nothing;
I Will answer all, and take the sin on me.
She coughs again. You cough extremely, Madam.

Elm. Yes, I have caught cold.

Aside; Transcendent Villain! this language proves thee so*
Tart. Please you to take some juice of Liquorish.


Elm. This rheum is obstinate without, I see;
That all the juice in the world will do no good!
[She continues]
Tart. It Is very troub^esom.


Elm. Ye, beyond expression.


Tart In short, your scruple's easily destroyed;
I will assure y^u this great secret,
The sin is when we make it public, Madam;
The Offense is i^ lodged in the sc^^dal of the world:
We do not sin when we do act in secret.
After she has done coughing
Elm. Well, Sir; I see, I must resolve to yield,
And find my self consenting to your will.
Speaks subtly, addressing her self to both. I ought not to pretend to less
then this,
That I Am content, and willing now to render;
But yet it grieves me too to come thus far;
And it is against my will I am thus free:
Yet since the obstinate will not now deliver me,
And wo'not yet believe what I have said,
But does desire more pregnant testimonies,
I must resolve immediate satisfaction.
If this consent of mine be an offense,
The worst is theirs who force this violence.

Tart. Yes, Madam, I Will discharge your care in this --


Elm. Open the^d or a little, I entreat you;
See if my husband be'nt in the Gallery.

Tart. What need you, Madam, take such care of him?
He is a man that we can ^ead by the nose.
He glories, Madam, in our entertainments,
And will not believe it though he see it done.

Elm. I wo'not trust to that, go out, I pray,
Tartuffe goes out awhile, and comes in again. And look about exactly every
where.

SCEN. VI.
Orgon, Elmira. Orgon under the Table. Org. What an abominable Villain's this!
I Am almost ready to sink down to hear it*
Orgon comes out.
Elm. What do you mock me, you come out so quickly?
Go under again, it is not yet full time;
Stay to the end that you see all things sure,
Speaks in derision. And do not trust to simple poor conjectures.

Org. Nothing so wicked ever sprung from Hell.


Elm. You should not be so light in your belief;
Be sure you are convinced before you appear:
Don't haste too much lest you mistake your self.
Tartuffe comes in, and she puts her husband behind her.
SCEN. VII.
Tartuffe, Elmira, Orgon. Tart. All things conspire to make our pleasures full:
I have ^ook'd every where in your Appartment,
And find no person; Oh! my soul is ravished --

Org. Hold; Sir;
You prosecute your love too fast.
Orgon steps to him. Your amorous passion is too violent.
Ah, honest man! have you not proved it now?
How does your soul resist all foul temptations?
Marry my daughter, and debauch my wife?
I doubted a long time this was not so;
And did believe that they were base aspersions:
But now these testimonies are so paipable.
That I have done, and will desire no more.
To Tartuffe.
Elm. Against my humor I have done all this;
But I was forced to it to retrive my honor.

Tart. What do you think --


Org. Be gone, no noise, I pray --
No ceremony, but avoid your nest.

Tart. My design --


Org. Sir, it is no time to talk:
You must march off, quickly depart my house.

Tart. Nay then farewell dissembling; I Will not stir.
It Is you must march you Sir, you that Lord it so:
I Will make you know the house belongs to me;
And quickly show you it is a vain attempt
By such weak stratagems to evade my right:
You are not where you think by this base injury;
I will confound and punish your imposture,
Revenge the Heavens you have wronged, and make you all
Repent the motion of my going hence.

Exit. Elm. What means this language? what is'c he would say?

Laughs*
Org. I am confused, this is no time for raillery.


Elm. How?


Org. I see my fault by what he now has uttered.


E^^unt* SCEN. VIII.
Tartuffe, Laurence. Tart. Laurence, look you to the chamber, and be sure
You're careful of the cabinet stands there.
Orgon himself delivered it to me,
And I will give't the King to ruin him.
If any offer to intrude, be quick,
And pocket up the writings with the seals;
While I immediately find out the Sheriff.

Exit Tartuffe. Laur. Yes, I Will look to them sure, and keep them safe
From you for ever, Sir. O horrid traitor!
Admitted into Orgons house on courtesy,
And now would rudely turn him out of doors*

Enter Dorina. Dor. O Laurence, Laurence, we are all undone!
Orgon, I think, 's distracted: I believe
You can unfold the riddle: you promised me --

Laur. No more then; I Will perform, stay but here,
I Will return presently.
Laurence goes out, and shortly returns with cabinet and writing in his hand.
Dor. This man, I see, will merit my esteem.
He told me the experiment that must f
Unblind fond Orgon would breed conl^usion;
But he would find a means to settle all.
And here he comes already in the name of goodness:
What has he there? what loaded, Laurence?

Laur. You see what love will do, Dorinna; this
And this I here deliver to your hands.
Gives the deed and cabinet. It is of value, I assure you Girl.
Keep these till I give further notice to you
Of what is to be done: these will do more
Then what I promised.
And if you weet with gratitude, then say,
Laurence has clearly won me by fair play.

Exeunt. ACT. V.
SCEN. I.
Dorina, Cleanthes. At several doors. Dor. Well met, Cleanthes; what have you
done at Court?
The storm is raised; have you done
What I advised you? whe^e's Damis and Valere?
I Would have you bring home Damis instantly;
His presence now will be convenient.

Clean. Why, faith Dorina, I perceived 'twas time;
There Is need enough of all the help of friends:
And sure, I think, we have don't. We have obtained
A Warrant Dormant to bring Tartuffe in,
To show the Council cause why he pretends
T'intrude on Damis heritage: and more,
The King and Council will by Order have
The father reconciled to his son;
But this is all so private, no one knows
Ought of it, only those peculiar Lords
That did engage, and opened Orgons merit.

Dor. Well then, Cleanthes, we shall see some sport;
And when it comes to the issue 'twill appear,
I have been active in another sphere.

Exit. SCEN. II.
Orgen in haste to Cleanthes. Clean. Whither do you run?


Org. Alas I know not, Brother.


Clean. Methinks we rather should consult together,
What we had best to do in this ext e^^ity.

Org. Oh! had I but the Cabinet out of's hands,
I would not fear his malice: but alas!
I drives me almost to despair the thought often.

Clean. Pray what important mystery was in it?


Org. I was a pawn my dear friend Argas left me
Of his great love: no witness being by;
And at his flight amongst all his friends chose me
To be the faithful Guardian of his fortune;
But now he has just reason to upbraid me:
They Are papers that contain his life and treasure.

Clean. Why did you trust them then in other hands?


Org. 'Twas by a motive from a Case of Conscience.
I in this Traitor put my confidence,
Whose Arguments did soon prevail upon me,
To give the Cabinet into his Custody.
That if a strict Enquiry should be made
After the fugitive I might be ready,
Without the prejudicing of my soul,
To take my Oath against a real truth.

Clean. In all appearance you're in a bad condition,
What with your feoffment, fine, and other deed.
If I may freely give my judgment of it,
You Have taken a certain way to find out Ruin.
Oh Sir! this man has strange advantages,
Being possessed of such strong pledges from you,
It were imprudence to provoke him, Sir;
You ought to search out now some milder way.

Org. What! under the shadow of a fervent zeal,
Shroud such a double heart and haughty mind!
I took him up a beggar, having nothing --
It Is done; now I renounce all honest men;
Henceforward I shall hate the sight of them,
And be more envious to them then the devil.

Clean. Fie brother! this is just your choleric humor;
Do not forsake the pleasant rode of temperance,
But let fair moderation be your conduct:
From one excess you will fall into another;
You see your error, and you have acknowledged it,
How through a feigned pure zeal you have been cheated,
What reason is there to correct this fault.
That you should run into a greater Trespass:
What cause this Rascal's confidence has trapan'd you,
With an austere pretense of pure devotion;
Do you believe that every one's like him,
And that one true religious cannot be found?
Leave this bad consequence to Libertines,
But do not hazard your esteem too much,
But still preserve it in the golden mean.

Org. I am raging mad to find my self thus cheated.


SCEN. III.
Enter Pernelle, Mariana, Elmira, Dorina, to them. Pern. What Is here to do, I Am
told most terrible mysteries.


Org. They Are Novelties, mine eyes have witness't Mother.
You see how all my love is recompensed.
With zeal I plucked this man from misery,
Lodged him and entertained him like a brother,
I heaped my favors on him every day,
Settled my Lands upon him with intent
To marry him to my Daughter; assigned to him
My house, my goods, my Jewels with all in it;
Yet the same time this base perfidious slave
Made it his business to debauch my wife;
And not contented with this horrid act,
Dares now to menace me with my own benefits.
And take advantage by 'em to my ruin.
Armed with my foolish bounty comes against me,
To drive me from my estate transferred to him,
And so reduce me to his native beggary.

Dor. Alas poor man!


Pern. I cannot believe this son,
That he would e re conceive so black an action.

Org. How? not believed?


Pern. Honest people still are envied son.


Org. What would you say if you could speak good Mother?


Pern. I say your family is strangely governed;
And it is well known the malice they all bear him.

Org. What signifies all this to that I Have told you?


Pern. I Have told you a hundred times when you were little,
That virtue always suffers persecution;
The envious must die, but envy never.

Org. What Is this discourse to that is done to day?


Pern. They Have forged a hundred foolish tales against him.


Org. I told you I had seen all this my self.


Pern. The malice is extreme of lying people.


Org. O! you confound me! I tell you once age^
My eyes have seen this impudent bold crime.

Pern. Their tongues are always full of horrid venom,
There Is no defense against it here on earth.

Org. You talk as if you were bereft of sense,
I have seen't I tell you, seen't; my own eyes see it.
Whate they call seeing: I Will not bate you an ace,
I Will bawle't a hundred times into your ears.

Pern. O Heaven! how often is the sight deceived!
You should not always judge of what you see.

Org. You make me mad, stark mad! O cursed folly!


Pern. Nature is much inclined to false suspicions,
And often does interpret good for evil.

Org. I ought to think it charitable care
For him to kiss my wife!

Pern. It Is necessary,
That you take heed how you accuse good people:
You should have stay^d till you had seen things sure.

Org. Ah Curse! the means how to be more assured?
Would you have had me stayed to have seen my wife. --
-- You Will force me to extravigant discourse.

Pern. In fine, too pure a zeal had chaam'd his soul:
I cannot make it enter my belief,
He should attempt to do these things you talk of.

Dorin. Alas! poor man!


Org. Go; were you not my Mother, I cannot tell
What I should say to ye. I Am so much confused.

Dor. It Is a just vengeance, for you heretofore
Had no belief; and now none believe you.

Clean. We trifle out that time in vain discourse,
Should be employed for to prevent this cheat.

Elm. I cannot apprehend he dares attempt it;
His base ingratitude is too manifest.

Clean. Yes trust him still; think you he has not confederates,
That will add all their cunning to his force;
And more then that the weight of a Cabal
Will bring us into some confused Labyrinth..

Org. It Is true, what is my best course? this Villain's pride
Makes me I cannot master my resentments.

Clean. Come, cheer up, brother; my self, your son Valere,
With all our friends will meet this monstrous Villain,
And see what we can do to avoid this Precipice.

Elm. If I had known he had bin so strongly armed,
I never would have caused half these alarmes.
And for -- Loyal peeps in.

Org. What would that man? quickly go know his business;
I Am very ill disposed for conversation.

SCEN. IV. To them Loyal.
Loy. Pray will you inform the Gentleman of the house.
I have some business with him.

Dor. He is with Company.
And for the present Sir, will speak with no body.

Loy. I will not be importunote at this time,
Though sure my coming, as I think, will please him.
And it is about a business he will be glad of.

Dor. Your Name?


Loy. Pray tell him only that I come
From Mr. Tartuffe, and desire a word with him.

Dor. Sir, here is a modest Gentleman that comes
In the behalf of Mr. Tartuffe to you.
He says about a business you will be glad of.

Clean. You had best discourse with him, and know his business.
Perhaps he comes to make a Composition.

Org. With what resentments shall I entertain him?


Clean. I would not have you, Sir, be passionate.


Loy. Save you Sir, may Heaven prosper you,
And scatter all those enemies would hurt you.

Org. Methinks this Complement does seem to tell me,
His business is for an accommodation.

Loy. Your family was always dear to me;
I had the honor, Sir, to serve your father.

Org. Sir, I am ashamed, I humbly beg your pardon;
I have forgot you, let me crave your Name.

Loy. My name is Loyal, a North-Countrey man;
And now, Sir, with your leave, know I am come
To give you this declaration, it is in an Action
Of ejectment, Sir, at Mr. Tartuffe's suit.

Org. At Tartuffe's suit; oh Villain!


Offers to strike. Loy. Sir, be not rash;
Although it be to turn out you and yours;
It is not presently; if you have ought to plead
Against a Deed made on good Consideration,
You may, else must turn out.

Org. Must I turn out?


Loy. Yes Sir;
Unless you can prevent it, as I told you.
But much I Am afraid you're in the Mire.
The form is good, it cannot be denied.
But I Will for bear you till tomorrow Morning.

Clean. I stand amazed at this strange impudence. Cleanthes gives Loyal money.


Loy. Sir, I have done my errand, arm your self.


Org. Arm my self? what, without weapons?


Loy. Sir, I can say no more, you must be quick
And circumspect in your defense; farewell.

Exit Loyal. Dor. Loyal do you call him? he has a Traitors face.


Org. Well, now he is gone, what course is to be taken?
Our time is short, but till tomorrow morning.

Clean. Be patient, Brother, my fancy bodes you good.


Org. Now look you, Mother, see if I have not reason;
And you may judge the rest by this exploit.
What, are his Villainies manifest to you now?

Pern. I Am almost dead with my astonishment.


Dor. You falsely grieve, and blame him wrongfully:
This but confirms his spiritual design.
His love to's neighbor does complete his virtue; In raillery to Orgon.
He knows that riches do corrupt the soul;
And in pure charity has taken from you
The chiefest hindrance of your felicity. Dorina pulls Cleanthes and goes off.

Org. What must I always bid you hold your tongue?


Clean. Come, let us see what we had best to do.


Exit Cleanthes. Elm. Go and declare his base ungrateful soul;
It may enervate this your Deed of Gift,
When his disloyalty shall appear so black,
And hinder that success he hopes t'obtain.

Exeunt. SCEN. V.
Cleanthes, Dorinae. Clean. The matter's ripe, it must no further run;
I Will go and find out Damis and Valere,
And give an Information against this Villain,
That he may be secured; in th'interim you
Go find out Laurence, that his zele to us
At th'upshot may receive a due reward.

Exit Cleanthes his folly had Dor. What would this man have done?
Ruined the hopes and glory of his family.
Laurence, thou have deserved well at his hands:
Thy faith to me has saved his whole estate.

Enter Laurence. Laur. Dorina, how go squares? I hear strange news,
But it is so much at random, I can make
Nor head nor tail on it.

Dor. Stay but awhile, and you shall see the event.


Laur. No; we'll go walk awhile abroad, and then
In half an hour return to know the effect.

Exeunt. SCEN. VI.
Enter Valere, Cleanthes, Damis. Val. The work is done, the Villain is secured,
And does not know it yet, but thinks he is Victor.
We have the Deed and Cabinet; by these means
The Traitors malice ceases, and all is safe --
But we must fright Orgon. You shall, Cleanthes,
Go to the Messenger, in whose custody
Tartuffe remains at present, and bring with him
His prisoner, as if he came to put
Him in possession. I will go before,
Feigning to tell the news, and make him fly;
Then Damis shall appe^r, whom I Will present
As ruined by his folly; and after that
Laurence shall bring Dorina t'act her part.

Clean. How shall we make the Messenger to serve us,
And act his part?

Dam. Let that alone to me;
I with a little money
Will buy him over to do what I please.

Val. Come let us away, and put't in agitation.


Exeunt. SCEN. VII.
Enter Orgo^, Elmira, Mariana, Pernelle. Org. I wonder that my brother comes
not at me.


Elm. He Is like the world flies from a falling house.


Mar. I think not so, I rather must believe,
He Is acting for your Interest what he can.

To them Valere. Val. With a regret I come t'afflict you, Sir:
But I Am constrained to it by a pressing danger.
A friend of mine, whose amity is strong,
And knew the Interest I ought to have in you,
Has violated out of curiosity
The secrecy due to th'affairs of State.
And even now he sent me this advice,
Which must reduce you to a sudden flight:
That Slave to whom you did commit your trust,
Within this hou^ accused you to the King,
And has delivered Cabinet of importance,
Which makes your friend and you both Malefactors;
And by misprision of a Subjects duty,
You Have private kept the secrets of a Traitor.
I Am ignorant of the title of your crime:
But Order's given, Sir, to arrest your person;
And for the better execution on it,
Tartuffe is sent with those that are to take you.

Org. He has proved himself a monstrous wicked Rogue.


Val. the least delay may prove, Sir, fatal to you.
My Coach does now attend you at your Gate;
Let Us lose no time to avoid this thunder clap,
For these are blows only put by, by flight.
To a sure place I proffer you my conduct,
And will accompany you to your journeys end.

Org. What don't I owe for these obliging cares?
And now, Sir, I want time to give you thanks:
But I beg Heaven to be propitious to me,
That I may live to pay your generous service.
Farewell -- pray take a care.

Val. Make haste.


SCEN. ULT.
Enter Cleanthes running, and followed by the Messenger. Orgon runs, and the
Messenger stays him. Mess. Softly, Sir, softly; do not run so fast;
You have not far to go to find your lodging:
Know, Sir, that you are prisoner to the King.

Enter Tartuffe with two or three Officers. Orgon spies him. Org. Judas, Thou
have kept this treachery till the last.
Monster! by this vile blow thou have undone me;
And by it thou have crowned thy Villainy.

Mess. You must not give such terms they will not avail you.


Tart. I can dispense with these injurious words.
For I am taught by Heaven to suffer all.

Clean. I do aver thy moderation great,
Impudent Rogue! that thus dares play with Heaven.

Org. O Brother, where is my son?


Clean. How can you ask for him you have undone?


Org. Pray, Sir, hold off your hand, I will not stir.


Elm. Do but reflect how good he was to you.


Tart. All you can say shall have no power to move me;
I dream of nothing but to do my duty.

Mar. You pretend much glory from this action.


Elm. And this employment too becomes you well.


Mess. The employment cannot but be honorable,
Derived from that high power which sent me hither.

Org. Have thou forgot that charitable hand,
Ungrateful man, that plucked thee out of misery?

Tart. Sir, I am sensible of all your favors;
But my Kings service is my highest duty;
And the remembrance of that sacred tie
Stifles the thought of any restitution.

Mess. Good Mr. Tartuffe, if you please, withdraw;
You know your business, Sir, is sure enough.

Tart. I will retire to avoid contention, Sir;
But pray dispatch and rid my house of 'em.

Org. O impudence unmatchable! thy house?


Mess. Come, what a noise is here? I Will stay no longer.
I charge you come with me immedi^tely
Into the prison, where you must remain.

Clean. Have patience, Sir, a little; I Will engage for him.


M^ss. Upon your word I Will stay a little longer.


Clean. Orgon, what do you mean? I am afraid
You are to seek: but, pray, resolve me, this;
Suppose your friends should move the King and Council
In your behalf, would you not run anew
Into fresh errors?

Org. No, Cleanthes, never.


Clean. We'll try what can be done, pray stay a while.

Clean. Val. Exeunt.
Mess. I wish they may prevail, but I much doubt it
Unless they work it strongly.

Org. I know not what to say, Heaven speed 'em well,
But see despair has stopped his journey. Brother, what ails thee?

Clean. Val. Clean. I met Dorina at the door, who stopped me,
And said she had some welcome news to tell you.

Org. Where is she:


Clean. I left her talking to a friend, she comes.


DORINA. Dor. Sir, I am sorry to see you
In such affliction as you are, but patience.

Enter a Servant, and Whispers Clean. Clean. Damis is without, and desires to
speak with you.


Org. Bid him come in.


DAMIS. Dam. Alas! dear Sir. What Is the matter here?


Val. Your father here is seized, I cannot say
His cr me, but think the punishment is just
For his abusing you.

Dam. I Have no resentment of that hard usage, Sir,
But wish in this affair my power could
Support my will.

Org. Oh son! this pious duty in you makes me seem
Odious unto my self, and therefore friend
Carry me where you will.
To the Mess.
Clean. See brother, here is Dorina, who has often
Told you to what your follies would reduce you:
But as I said, she now has other news.

Org. I have enough, lay no more weights of grief
Upon my heart: Heaven send it may be good.

Dor. Sir, hearing of the troubles which were fallen
Upon you, through your own indiscretion;
And knowing, in adversity a friend
Is worth acceptance; I have brought one hither.
That with that Gentleman's leave; will dare to bail you,
He has from me received an information,
Your crime is neither Felony nor Treason:
And the worst prison you deserve for this
Is Bedlam: if you will accept the offer,
And these Gentlemen be pleased with it,
I Will call him in.

Clean. Do so, with all our hearts, I speak for all.


Enter Laurence with a Cabinet and Writings. Dorina with the Assignment. Dor.
Sir, here is the man!


Clean. What Laurence! Tartuffe's man!


Val. Prithee let us see it done.


Laur. Sir, how far my quondam Master has trangerst
I don't examine, for I hear already
He Is called to account; I at D^r^na's instance, come
To tender the best services I can;
And though my fortune place me in the crowd,
But few degrees from beggary, yet I have
A heart as generous as the noblest of you.
See Gentlemen, I freely this bestow.
Gives Orgon the Cabinet: On Orgon as a Present of my Love;
And my Dorina is the sole reward.
I ask for all.

Dor. Sir if the love and care of this man here
Had not been great to me, I had not had
This opportunity to do you service;
But by his means, Sir, I am able now
To quiet your possession in this house.
Here Sir --

Delivers the Assignment. Org. O Heaven what do I see, Cleanthes, this
Is that same very deed I made to Tartuffe.
Damis, Valere, Elmira, Mariana*
See, there is your Guardian Angel; O Dorina
Thou shall no more be servile, we will all
Submit to our Protectress, our Defender. --

Mar. Dorina, my Dorina, thou have mastered me.
Embraces Dor. If I should study all my life to serve thee,
I could not make a suitable return.

Elm. Dearest Dorina, thou have once more made,
Embraces Dorina. Me Mystriss of this place; my self and Orgon
Are bound to bless that moment brought thee hither.

Clean. My Sister is transported with her joy.
Intruth Dorina thou have surpised us all,
What Damis, Valere, and my self could not
Imagine how to compass, thou did do.

Per. We will not ask the means, but render thanks
To blessed Heaven for this delivery: I am convinced and hate the Hypocrite.

Dor. There stands the means --
Points to Laurence. Thank him: neither my policy or strength
Could e're have reached it, it was his design.
He brought the things to me; not sought or courted,
But truly of himself, and when he saw
All things were even beyond remedy.

Val. Laurence, I here perceive we are all bound
To your fidelity, for which in the behalf
Enter Tartuffe with Officers. Of all I promise a reward --
And now, Cleanthes, let us clear the mist.

Tart. What is the reason of this long demurre?


Clean. Sir, you have done your duty, and wi hou^ fear,
May let your prisoner [ Orgon I mean] go free.

Mess. Sir, you're as free as Air; my task is here.
Goes to Tartuffe. This is indeed my prisoner.

Tart. How I your prisoner!


Mess. Yes Sir! behold my warrant.


Tart. How various are the blessings of this life!


Org. Where am I? in a dream; are my eyes open?
Is this my house, and these in truth my friends?
This is a change so unexpected that
It was beyond my hopes. --

Clean. Sir, here is your son. and son-in-law; to both
You're equally obliged, though both cast off
Yet left not still to intercede at Court,
And so at last prevailed [upon the hearing
The former service you had done repeated]
That both the King and Council did declare
The acts you did invalid;
To Tartuffe. And pardoned your connivance with that Traitor,
But how to unravel this was all the work --

Val. Let me tell that, Cleanthes, 'twas your Genius
^rought it to thi^ perfection. He, Sir, perceiving*
How strongly you had noos'd your self by Law,
Accuses Tartuffe of prodigious crimes:
Crimes that entrencht on Royal Majesty,
Which he confirmed by noble Witnesses;
Then did he get a Grant of all the estate
Tartuffe had got from you: by which secured
The Villain could not harm you; we designed
To try your patience; as you see we have done.

Dam. Sir, if any former faults I did commit;
I humbly here implore your pardon for 'em.

Org. Talk not of faults, this is a time of joy,
Let us return our duty in our thanks
To his Most Gracious Majesty, that did
So nobly lend his Princely ear to you.

Clean. But let not Laurence be forgotten here;
And let Dorina's merits be rewarded.

Org. What they desire I Will give.


Laur. With your favor, my reward shall be,
Dorina, if your Daughter will consent.

Mar. With all my soul!


Org. Are you agreed Dorina.


Dor. Else had your Deed and Cabinet be gone.


Org. Laurence, how deep m'engagements to you are,
Though yet I know not fully to let you see
Before my friends here present, that I mean
To gratify your honesty; here take Dorina. Gives Dorina to him.
And with her a hundred pounds a year in portion
During your lives, and the Survivor of you.

Laur We both will pray for your eternal happiness.


Org. And for you, Valere, whose true affection
Unto the Daughter, made you the Father's Advocate,
Take this as Pledge. Takes Mariana by the hand, and gives her to Valere.
Valere, be happy in her.

Dor. Oh Laurence! I am ravished with my joy.


Pern. Truly, la! I am conforted again.


Elm. O most propitious stars! most blessed success!


Mar. Who could have dared to have hoped this happiness?


Dam. Sister, you have a Jewel, prize him high.


Val. I thank you brother; and to crown our joys
I promise here to give my Sister to you,
So soon as I can send for her to Town.

Dam. I Am blessed in such a Brother, and a friend.
How happy is that Kingdom, where the Prince
Himself does steer the Royal Helm of State;
That ruled by reason, gives to honest men
The praise they merit, and decrees for such
As are fair virtues enemies, a pain
Or punishment proportioned to their crime.

Org. What, Brother, in a rapture? Let us go
And show our grateful duty in our deeds.

Clean. As for this Tartuffe, miserable wretch,
Leave him to's fate, and let his sins o'rewhelm him.

Tart. Ah Laurence, Laurence, thou art a wicked fellow;
But Heaven, I trust, will vindicate my cause.

Excunt Messenger and Tartuffe; the Officers hale him off the Stage. Laur.
Forbear your canting, Sir, I know your inside.


Val. Nay, Gentlemen, we must not part thus dully:
It Is fit our hearts express our happiness;
And joining in a dance begin those sports,
Which after marriage shall be more enlarged.

Here a Dance of eight.
Cleanthes Valere Damis Laurence Elmira Mariana Flypote Dorina
[ The Dance ended, Orgon rises and speaks*] Org. Let Us now with joy unto His
Majesty,
And at his Royal Feet prostrate our selves,
Acknowledging his generous favors to us*
Then in pursuance of our great devoir,
Let us complete this happy Lovers bliss.
Proceeding for their Nuptials, as we are tied
In gratitude to Laurence and Dorina,
Whose services deserve a large requital:
And by sweet Hymen's help crown in Valere
A Lovers flame both generous and sincere.

FINIS.
EPILOGUE.
MAny have been the vain Attempts of Wit,
Against the still-prevailing Hypocrite.
Once (and but once) a Poet got the day,
And vanquished Busy in a Puppet-Play.
But Busy rallying, Armed with Zeal and Rage,
Possessed the Pulpit and pulled down the Stage.
To laugh at English Knaves is dangerous then,
Whilst English Fools will think 'em honest Men.
But sure no zealous Rabby will deny us
Free leave to act our Monsieur Ananias.
A man may say (without being thought an Atheist)
There are damned Regues amongst the French and Papist,
That fix Salvation to short Bands and Hair,
That belch and snuffle to prolong a Prayer.
That use (enjoy the Creature) to express
Plain Whoring, Gluttony, and Drunkenness;
And in a decent way Perform 'em too,
As well, nay better far alas then you:
Whose fleshly failings are but Fornication,
We Godly phrase it, Gospel Propagation;
Just as Rebellion was called Reformation.
Though Zeal stand, Centry at the Gate of Sin,
Yet all that have the Word pass freely in;
Silent and in the dark for fear of Spies
We march, and take damnation by surprise:
There Is not a Roaring Blade about the Town
Can go so far toward Hell for half a Crown,
As I for s^x pence; 'cause I know the way:
For want of Guides men are too apt to stray.
Therefore Give car to what I shall Advise,
Let every married man that is Rich and Wise;
Take a Tartuffe of known Ability,
To Teach, and to Increase his Family,
Who may to settle lasting R^formation,
First Get his Son, then Give him Education,
FINIS.

