The Distressed Oppressed Condition of the Inhabitants of SOUTH WALES, for many
years (...) briefly and impartially stated. 1. In reference to their Spiritual
Concernments, 2. In relation to their Civil Rights and Freedoms.

With several Proposals tending to the Discovery of (...) 150000 l. unaccompted
for the Commonwealth. 1. Out of the Sequestered Estate of Papists and
Delinquents. 2. Out of the Sequestered Tithes, Church Livings, (...)siastical
Revenues in South Wales and County of Monmouth.

Humbly tendered to the consideration of the Parliament.
IN the years 1647. and 1648. a considerable number of the Ministers of those
Parts were Ejected by the respective Committees, who by themselves and Agents
received the Profits of their Livings, as yet unaccounted for.

The 22 of February 1649. by an Act of Parliament then made, Colonel Thomas
Harrison, Col. Philip Jones, Henry Herbert, William Herbert, William P^o^er,
William Blethin, Christopher Catchmay, Rees Williams, John Nicholas, Edward
Herbert, Robert Jones, (...), Edward Prichard, John Price, Rowland Dawkins,
William Boteler, Edward Stradlinge, John Herbert, Richard Jones, Jenkin
Francklin, John James, Wroth Rogers, John Herringe, Stephen VVinthrop, Sir
Erasmus Phillips, Sampson Lot, Henry Williams, Silvanus Tailor, Richard King,
John Williams, John Dancy, Thomas Watkins, James Phillips, John Lewis,
William Barbar, John Daniell, and John Bowen Esquires, were empowered and
entrusted,

1. To evict and amove all Delinquent and Scandalous Ministers and
Schoolmasters in the 6 Counties of South Wales, and County of Monmouth.

2. To put in able Ministers and School (...) qualified for that purpose.

3. To dispose of the Revenue of the Ti(...) Livings, and other Ecclesiastic
Revenues there, (...) their maintenance.

Those Commissioners acted so vigorously and severely, that most of the
Ministers in those Counties were suddenly Ejected; and amongst them, some that
were worthy persons, that by their Life's and Doctrines were useful in that high
Calling, and in Christian prudence and moderation, might have been reserved
until (at least) others better qualified could have been found to supply their
Places: But at that time their Calling and Orders were accounted crimes; and
for small faults done many years before were freshly arraigned, in order to
their conviction.

The Commissioners by themselves and their Agents had the managing and
disposing of the Tithes and Ecclesiastic Revenue there for three years by that
Act, which were privately let to many of their relations at under-values; for
they posted none of their Bargains, nor used any means to improve the same for
public benefit: And for one other year, viz. 1653. they continned the
receiving and disposing thereof, by virtue of his late Highness Letter.

And it was observed, that many employed in this Work did suddenly and highly
improve their Estates.

And one man before the Wars not worth 500 l. has since acquired above 5000 l.
per Ann.

The 10th. Mar. 1651. Complaint of the premises was made to the then
Parliament by Petition, attested by many hands of those 7 Counties, who prayed,

1. A supply of their Churches with such godly able Ministers as the Parliament
should approve of.

2. That an exact account might be made of that Revenue, which was moderately
estimated by the Petitioners at 20000 l. per Ann. and so much offered the
Parliament for the same, and good security for the payment thereof.

The Parliament referred the Examination thereof to a Committee, with power to
grant Commissions to the Country for the better discovery of the truth of the
premises.

The Petitioners could never obtain any Commissions, or real Examination
thereof; at that time eminent persons entrusted with the receiving and
disposing of that Revenue, being members of Parliament: But in stead thereof,
all means were used to suppress the same; and in order thereto

1. Col. Freeman the Petitioners Counsel (being then Attorney General of
South Wales, by Order of Parliament, and Patent under the Great Seal of
England, Habend. donec Parliament. Angliae aliter ordinaverit, who had done
eminent Service for the Commonwealth, and continued to this day faithful to
the public Cause of the Nation) was for prosecuting that Petition imprisoned,
and after the dissolution of the long Parliament, by an Order of a few of the
then Council amoved out of his place.

And to add to his aff^iction, one Edmund Jones, a Compounded Delinquent of
Record, who had violently acted during all the late Wars against the
Parliament, and a grand Instrument of the Popish Party at Ragland, was by the
means of the said Col. Philip Jones appointed Attorney General of South Wales
in the place of Col. Freeman.

This Jones did procure good Bargains from his young Mr. the Lord Herbert for
Col. Philip Jones, who bought several Lordships from him, and was the main
Agent and Instrument of the said Colonel in all his affairs and concernments in
Wales.

Whereas the said Jones did give no other signal testimony of his good
affection to the Parliament, then the most inveterate Cavaliers in all Eng. and
Wales would do, viz.

To bear Offices of honor, power, and profit, and to be in a better capacity to
serve the Malignant Party: And it is observed, that since the said Jones came
to Authority there, the most notorious Delinquents and Cavaliers in
South Wales have also been vested with power; as Sheriffs, Justices of the
Peace, Commissioners of the monthly Assessements, etc. Insomuch that all were
fitted to observe the Arbitrary will and pleasure of him that recommended them
to those places.

2. John Gunter the Petitioners Solicitor (a person well affected) was for
that cause several times imprisoned, turned out of many several offices and
employments, and his very life as well as his estate and good name by horrid
perjury endeavored to be taken from him.

3. Diverse of the Petitioners being Justices of the Peace, and Commissioners,
etc. were displaced, and the self-ended complying Delinquents put in their
steads.

4. And last the Parliament it self was dissolved, whereby there was no inquiry
or account given of this great Revenue: And many are of opinion that their
dissolution was hastened by the means of persons liable to account.

That the cry of this business ringing loud in the Ears of most persons,
(though the poor people still were left remediless) it was so ordered, that a
very formal Commission by an Ordinance from his late Highness and Council,
dated 30 Augusti 1654. was procured to Commissioners to take the Accounts of
the said Commissioners for propagation, and to give them discharges. And
afterward the same Ordinance was confirmed in the last Parliament.

What account was taken, or discharges given, have not been thought fit to be
made publicly known: however the accomptants conceive themselves secure with
their discharges. Against which it is objected;

1. That Philip Lord Jones, being chiefly entrusted with the disposing of the
said Revenue, and being at the passing of the said Ordinance one of his
Highness Council, and thereby in a capacity as well to nominate as ^pprove the
said Commissioners; It is conceived unreasonable he should have the nomination
of persons to call himself and his associates to account.

2. Though the Welsh Judges, (who were also placed with his consent, if not
appointment) and some other Gentlemen of quality were named in this Ordinance
to give it the greater Countenance, yet not any of them were called in to the
taking of this grand account, nor was it probable in their Circuits they should
have leisure to attend the same.

3. This account was taken at one time at Swanzey by four or five persons that
were either subject to an account, as Farmers of and Agents concerning
Sequestered Estates, or of near relation and subordination to the said Colonel,
and very unlike to procure his displeasure by a true examination of those
accounts.

4. This account was also taken on the bare Credit of the accomptants, without
any surcharge or examination of witnesses, and in one day; which being
effectually done would require some months.

Obj. If it be objected, this ordinance was confirmed by Parliament, and their
discharges bar a reexamination.

Ans. Nullum tempus occurrit regi. And this Parliament may review the frauds,
falsities, and deceipts, in the passing of those accounts, if it shall so
appear unto them; And the rather, for that in the last Parliament, none sat as
Members for such parts, but such as were accomptants, or Elected by the
recommendation, approbation, or interest of the accomptants.

The 29th of August 1654. those Commissioners named for South Wales in the
Ordinance then passed by his Highness and Council for Ejecting of Scandalous
Ministers and Schoolmasters, were also named by Philip Lord Jones, whereof
seventeen are those formerly instrusted with the disposing of the Tithes and
Church-revenue.

By color whereof they and their former Agents continued the letting and
disposing of the said revenue to this day, being full nine years since they
were first instrusted therewith, which for that time is conceived to amount to
above 150000 l. And to this time the respective Parishes mustlye unsupplied
with Ministers and Schoolmasters, many of the Shire Towns, and many Market
Towns having no Ministers settled to preach the Gospel amongst them.

As to the Estates of Papists and Delinq. in South Wales;

That for the time the same was managed by the Committees, there has been no
true account yet given the Commonwealth for the same, amounting to a great
value; those very estates of Delinquents in arms sold by Act of Parliament,
being surveyed and returned on oath to be anually worth 3654 l. 11 s. 3 d. ob.
q. And the improvement thereof to 895 l. 13 s. 1 d. which during the war, and
until the same was sold lay under Sequestration.

That Complaint to the Commissioners at Haberdashers-Hall being made against
Colonel Jones, and the Sub-Commissioners for Sequestration in South Wales (of
his recommendation) that no due account was given the Commonwealth of this
revenue; The Commissioners amoved those they formerly Commissionated there, yet
nevertheless afterward gave way for Colonel Jones to name new Commissoners,
and put out three sub-Commissioners for Breconshire, that in a short time
whilst they acted had doubly advanced the revenue there; And to this day there
is no true account given the Commonwealth of this revenue, which as is
conceived will amount to a vast Sum of money if duly inquired into.

Forasmuch as these matters were transacted in seven Counties, consisting of
seven hundred Parishes, very remote; and it is impossible that a true and exact
account can be had of all these revenues, without the Ministers, and three or
four of the most knowing Freeholders in every Parish be examined on oath
touching the same, which a Committee of Parliament cannot have leisure to
attend, nor the people brought hither without Excessive charge and trouble:

In order to the taking of all these Accounts, it is therefore humbly proposed,

1. That none of the Commissioners of Propagation, or their near friends and
relations that are now members of Parliament, may fit in any Committee to vote
or judge of their own accounts or concernments, or to obstruct the effectual
carrying on of this work.

2. That a convenient number of discreet able Persons of no relation or
dependence on the said accomptants, may be appointed Commissioners for
South Wales and County of Monmouth by Act of Parliament, or by Commission under
the great Seal of England, or his Highness Court of Exchequer, with sufficient
power, To send for Persons, papers and witnesses, and to examine witnesses on
oath touching the particulars following, viz.

1. The real valuations of the Tithes and Church Livings and other
Ecclesiastical Benefices, and promotions in every individual Parish there.

2. When every Minister and Schoolmaster was Ejected.

3. Who received and disposed of the Tithes, etc. And how long, and what is
become of the moneys thereby raised.

4. What willful miscarriages and indirect proceedings were used in the letting
and disposing of that revenue at undervalues to friends and relations, and what
rewards were given for such Bargains.

5. When every Minister and Schoolmaster was put in the rooms of those
Ejected.

6. What such Ministers and Schoolmasters, and all others the Commissioners
agents were allowed and paid; And at the foot of this account it will appear
what Surplusage is justly due to the Commonwealth.

3. And that the same Commissioners may receive the accounts of the Committees
and Commissioners of Sequestration, with the like power given them for that
purpose.

4. And for the better and more effectual carrying on of this good work, that
Council and Solicitors may be assigned, and a fitting incouragment and
protection given them therein.

Which being granted and effectually put in execution, there will undoubtedly
appear to be due to the Commonwealth over and above all just and necessary
payments and allowance; above 100000 l.

As to the Peoples civil Rights and Freedoms in those Parts;

It would be almost incredible to relate, and too voluminous herein to insert
the many false imprisonments, forcible Entries, part^king in Causes and Suites,
protecting and countenancing of heinous Offenders, and taking away of men's
Rights and Estates in those Parts, and many other injuries, misdemeanors, and
oppressions done, being very grievous and intolerable; the particulars whereof
are ready to be exhibited to Parliament when they have leisure to examine
matters of that nature, which for the present are herein omitted.

And in truth how can it be otherwise expected, when all these Powers for many
years have centred in one Person? viz.

The recommendation and nomination of all members of Parliament, Judges,
Justices, Sheriffs, Commissioners of the monthly Assessement, Commissioners of
Decimation, Sequestration, Treasurers, Collectors, Excisemen, and all other
Officers, Miliary, Civil and Ecclesiastic, who on the least displeasure given,
are subject to be as easily removed, as they were first empowered, which has
been frequently practiced in those Parts; Especially those Malignants and
Cavaliers in authority, who being conscious of their own guilt and incapacity,
are the more slavish and apt to act any thing arbitrarily at the will and
pleasure of their Patron.

It is therefore humbly left to consideration,

1. Whether any one man in the beginning of these Wars, being not worth in all
the World 500 l. could since by lawful honest means acquire an estate of above
5000 l. per Annum.

2. Whether it be not fit to enquire how he came by this great Estate, the
Commonwealth being in great want of money.

3. Whether it be safe for the people, or consistent with the policy and
prudence of a well governed State, to continue such a person in such an
absolute authority over six Counties, which he has exercised in manner
aforesaid, for above seven years last past.

Published by G. M. ready to prove and justify the same.


