THE CITIZEN TURNED Gentleman: A COMEDY.

Acted at the DUKE'S THEATER.

By Edw. Ravenscroft. Gent.

Licensed Angust 9th.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring, at the White-Lyon next ChanceryLane end in
Fleetstreet, 1672.

The Actors Names.
Men.
MR. Jorden Formerly a Citizen, but now sets up for a Gentleman. Mr. Nokes.
Young Jorden His son, in love with Marina. Mr. Cademan. Mr. Cleverwit In love
with Lucia. Mr. Crosby. Sir Simon Softhead A Country Knight. Mr. Underhil.
Trickmore Cureal Two men of Intrigue. Mr. Harris. Mr. Sandford.
Vallet de Chamber.
Maistre Jacques French Master to the Citizen. Mr. Angel.
Women.
LUcia Daughter to Mr. Jorden. Mrs. Bittertun. Marina A young Lady. Mrs.
Buroughs. Betty Trickmore Trickmores Sister, her woman. Mrs. Leigh.
Music and Dancing Master. Two Chemists. Four Operators. Two Boys and a Woman.
Turks, Singers, Dancers, Pages, Attendants, etc.
SCENE London.

TO HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS Prince Rupert.
MY ambition of dedicating this to your Royal Highness, proceeds not from the
more than ordinary encouragement it received from you, when it appeared on the
Stage: though of thirty times it has been acted, you seldom failed to honor it
with your presence. 'Twould be presumption in me to examine why you did it that
Grace; and vainglory to attribute it to the merits of the Play, since the best
have not received the like honor.

Nor does the envy of Critics force me to invoke your Princely Patronage; it
were as vain to think the name of a Patron should shield it from their
censures, as it would hinder the rude rabble (if engraved on the front of a
house) from breaking the windows. The malice of these, and the rudeness of the
others may lead 'em to do either, without convincing them they are guilty of
any disrespect. And Critics stand up as zealously for the liberty of their
Tongues, as Fanatics for liberty of Conscience; and rail as spitefully against
Plays, as that perverse Generation does against Magistrates and Governors.

The third common pretense of Authors I likewise disown: I boast not of any
particular favors received; blessings flow from Princes, as light does from
the Sun, which shines on all at once. They oblige not Persons, but Nations: Of
that great Virtue, SIR, you stand a glorious Example. You engaged your self in
our intestine dissentions: You was the thunderbolt of War; the enemies
wherever you came, or fled or fell before you: You threw your self into the
storm to save us; and when it had shipwrack'd the best of Monarchs, your Piety
led you to exile with the Son: when his Country and Subjects forsook him, you
did not; but with him shared the dangers and hardships of banishment, till
Heaven (which laid the yoke of tyranny for punishment on our rebellious necks)
was pleased to restore him to us, or rather us to our King. The Sun had it been
so long absent, could not be more welcome; with him like a train of glorious
Lights, returned the Royal Family, and not long after your Royal Self; after
you you drew a chain of Blessings, Freedom, Peace, Religion, Unity, which ever
since we have enjoyed: What foes we have abroad, we need not fear, whilst we
have your Counsel for Conduct, and your Sword for Execution. You still like
Englands Angel Guardian stand ready to defend it; and so long as we have either
Memory or Gratitude, every tongue must speak your fame, and every heart
dedicate it self to you as a Trophee, owing to your gallantry. What a noble
stock of Virtue must you have so entirely to captivate the hearts of a Nation,
to which you was born a stranger! Who, when they hear your name, or see it here
prefixed, will not repeat it, and say, You are the Hero of the world; then in a
transport run over your mighty Deeds and Actions, which make you famous above
mankind in our present Annals, and will with excess of Glory bear your name to
after Ages? How just an occasion have I here, to say all that can be said of
man without danger of being thought a flatterer? But, Sir, were you less than
what you are, I could say more: Now all is truth, nor can that truth be
contained in an Epistle. And I know the perfect Hero blushes as much at the
narration of his Virtues, as the Lady exactly Beautiful at the relation of her
Perfections: Praise seems to lessen both, for it is thought we rather speak what
they should be, than what they are. Virtue ought to find Imitators, and Beauty
more admirers than commenders: Nor would I give the most malicious any ground
to think you can be flattered; or that I hope by flattery and insinuation to
make atonement for this presumption: Your Virtues drew it on you; those
Virtues which have so much obliged our Nation, engage all hearts to pay our
thanks as tribute to you: Involved in the common fate, I take this occasion to
attest my acknowledgements, and to beg your Royal Highness to look upon this,
not so much the Dedication of a Play, as of a Heart. That other Poets stand at
an awful distance, argues not my rudeness, but the greatness of my zeal which
prompts me to believe that the boldness of performing so great a Duty, is not a
crime equal to the forbearance; And I shall account it my glory to have led the
way, where others made a stand.

Your Royal Highness's Most humble and Most obedient Servant, Edward
Ravenscroft.

PROLOGUE.
GAllants you're so unconstant grown of late,
That Plays and Mistrisses have the same fate;
For both with you grow quickly out of date.
Each with variety so taken is,
You Will see but once or the same Play or Miss.
Go on, we will not your liberty retrench,
Like this for change* as you would do a wench:
But know, when the translating vein is past,
That you must not expect new Plays so fast.
Then Wit and sense will come into request,
And something more than a vain Fopp well dressed.
The Tailor now in Plays makes the best jest.
And 'twill be time to check this full carreer
Of Plays, and Act but two or three a year.
With plenty you are cloyed, but when grown scarce
You will esteem 'em more; and then a Farce
Will entertain you for a Month at least;
Not what is good, but scarce does make a feast.
Then shall the Knight that had a knock in's Cradle,
Such as Sir Martin, or Sir Arthu^ Addle,
Be flocked unto, as the great Heroes now
In Plays of Rhyme and Noise with wondrous show.
Then shall the House (to see these Hectors kill and slay,
That bravely fight out the whole plot of the Play,)
Be for at least six months full every day.
If beauty grows so scarce, your Misses too
Will find that you will to them more constant grow.
Now the enjoyed you slight; if you're inclined
To visit them, it is not to be kind.
You play the critics, you find fault and jeer,
And against your Miss are wittily severe;
As fain you would be on Plays when you come here.
You like prejudicated Judges sit;
There Beauties faults you find, here those of Wit.
Against both I Have heard Women and Poets say,
No Critic is like him that every day
Sees a fresh Girl, and each Week a new Play.
EPILOGUE.
FRom the Court party we hope no success,
Our Author is not one of the Nobless,
That bravely does maintain his Miss in Town,
Whilst my great Lady is with speed sent down,
And forced in Country Mansion house to fix,
That Miss may rattle here in Coach and six.
If one of these the Author was, perchance
You Would join your interest, and the Play advance:
For though you great ones and you Courtiers be
Not over good natured, you have civilitie.
Nor is he one you call a Town-Gallant,
Who for fine clothes does seldom money want:
But drives at cheaper rates the sinful trade,
Seduces Wives, sometimes a Chambermaid:
That at Jero's or Satt'lins goes to dinner;
And thence repairs to the Play to meet a sinner:
And here with Burgundy and brisk sablee
Inspired, with vizard-Masque holds repartee.
After the Play in joulting Hack he goes,
Where his companions have their Rendevouz.
In pairs they meet; and Ala mode of France
They sup, they have the fiddles too and dance:
Toward morning, when they think of going home,
Each Gallant on a Couch in the next room,
In's turn, takes gentle solace with his Punk;
Drops her a Guinney, and sends her home half drunk.
All of that Gang by this confession too
Are lost. Ladies, our Author trusts in you.
He is a man as modest for his age,
As most you have seen, who know him dare engage
That he has kept 'till now his pusillage.
But alas! the world to that pass is grown,
The modish women are ashamed to own
A sober man: to like his Play will be,
As great a scandal as his company.
For he observes, and it is very true,
That modesty's not much approved in you.
And is of late so out of fashion grown,
She that is honest scarcely dares it own.
But does, however her mind affected is,
Put on the brisk gay carriage of a Miss.
But Ladies, hope the Poet one day may
Converted be; for he that writes a Play,
If not debauched, yet is in a fair way.
To gain your favors he resolves to be
In all the Town the greatest debauchee:
And in a very little time may grow
Debauched enough to be ashamed of you.
ERRATA.
PAge 3. line 10. for does, read you. p. 11. l. 26. f. Ah I Lucia, r. Ah Lucia.
p. 17. l. 3. f. purrey, r. parry. p. 17. l. 10. f. capritius's r. capricioes.
p. 18. l. 16. f. wants which whet, r. want which whets. p. 33. l. 4. f. on, r.
in. p. 33. l. 29. f. exclude, r. seclude. p. 34. l. 14. f. How, Sir? a, r. How,
Sir? Jord. A. p. 39. l. 9. f. so many, r. so much. p. 47. l. 9. f. what, r.
why. p. 48. l. 1. f. clear, r. cheer. p. 56. l. 22. f. you interest, r. your
interest, p. 72. l. 27. f. swoon'd, r. swoonded. In the Prologue at the
Middletemple, l. 14. in some f. do moere, r. do no more.

THE CITIZEN TURNED Gentleman, etc.
ACT I. SCENE I.
The Curtain draws up and discovers the Music Master siting at a Table
surrounded by Musicians Composing, the Dancing Master and Dancers practicing
steps on each side of the Stage. Enter Mr Jorden in a Morning-Gown, Jaques,
Footboy. Iord. SO, so, Gentlemen, I see you are at it, come let us have a sight
of your little Droll.


Mus. Mast. How, Sir, our Droll?


Iord. Eh, your what do you called, your Prologue of Song and Dance.


Danc. Mast. Ah, ah, ah.


Mus. Mast. Our Dialogue you mean, well it is ready.


Iord. I have made you stay a little too long, but as I am a Gentleman, and as
I hope to be a Knight, (mark that, for so I mean to be once in my life) my
Tailor was in fault.


Danc. Mast. We wait your leisure with a great deal of willingness.


Iord. He brought home this Indian Gown, Cap and Slippers, -- how do you like
'em?


Mus. Mast. Extremely well.


Danc. Mast. You appear very graceful.


Iord. So, so, Jack -- Boy.


Boy. Here, Sir; what would you please to have?


Iord. Nothing, I called to see if you be diligent in your attendance: how do
you like my livery?


Mus. Mast. Very fine and noble.


Iord. Jack?


Iaq. Who do he speak to?


Boy. To you.


Iaq. Begar den let him call me be me name, me be no shauck.


Iord. Jack, come hither Jack.


Iaq. Shauck, me be no shauck, call your Englishman shauck, me be called Maitre
Jacques.


Iord. Master Jack come hither.


Iaq. Ho, ho, dat be ver well, here be your tres humble, and tres obeisant
vallet.


Iord. Hold back my Gown, and you Sarrah hold back the other side, -- so, see
Gentlemen, here is a little loose morning garb, does it please you?


Mus. Mast. Wonderfully.


Danc. Mast. Neat and Gentile.


Iord. Stay, pull it off, that they may view me round -- How do you like me
from top to toe?


Mus. Mast. Your habit is worthy admiration.


Danc. Mast. Gallant from head to foot.


Iord. My Suit will come home by and by, that will be fine indeed.


Danc. Mast. The ceremony requires it.


Iord. Ha, you mean my Daughter's wedding, but know there is more in the wind
than so: this day I am to begin to court a Mistress, a Knights Daughter, I Will
assure you.


Mus. Mast. And all our preparations are for her entertainment.


Iord. And to render my self more acceptable, I have required your helps to
make me an accomplished Gentleman; if singing and dancing will not win her, the
Devil's in her. -- Well, I Will see your Dance rehearsed; but first let me hear
the Song.


SONG.
I sigh all the night, and I languish all day,
And much to be pitty'd I am:
Ever since your bright eyes, my heart did surprise
I could not extinguish the flame:
But you, since you have known my heart was your own,
Though before you was kind, now scornful are grown:
If so cruel you prove
To the man that does love;
Ah Phyllis! Ah! Phyllis, what fate
Have you in reserve for the wretch that you hate?
Danc. Mast. Mus. Mast. Very well.


Iord. But me thinks this Song is a little too doleful, and enough to put a
woman into the dumps, if she have any kindness for me.


Mus. Mast. It Is a delicate Air, and the words are not amiss.


Iord. I learnt a very pretty one the other day of a friend; stay, how begins it?


Mus. Mast. Nay, I know not:


Iord. There is something of Mutton in it.


Danc. Mast. Mutton?


Iord. Yes, -- oh, no, no, no, 'twas Lamb -- ah -- I have it.

He sings. SONG.
My Mistress is as kind as fair,
My Mistress is as kind as fair,
And as gentle as Lambs are;
And yet alas, alas, ah lass,
Sometimes to me
She Will as cruel be,
As in the woodfierce Wolves and Tigers are.
Is it not very sprightly?


Mus. Mast. As can be.


Danc. Mast. And you humor it well.


Iord. Well, now for my dancing, and because the Morning is far spent, I will
only practice over the Minuets: Ah, of all Dances that pleases me most.


Danc. Mast. Come, Sir, begin; your hat, Sir, so now your honor: La, la, fa,
la, la, fa, la, la, (bis) Dances aukerdly. not too fast, la, la, la, la, keep
you leg* straight, la, la, la, don't hunch up your shoulders so; la, la, fa,
la, la, la, la, you carry your arms as if they were broken, la, la, la, la, la,
hold up your head, keep your toes out, la, la, la, don't loll out your tongue,
la, la, la, and make such faces, la, la, la, la, as if you were on the
close-stool, la, la, la, etc. so, so.


Iord. Euh!


Mus. Mast. very well.


Danc. Mast. I hope to get credit by him.


Mus. Mast. Money you mean: Well Mr. Jordan, it is not enough to proceed thus
alone, but you would do well once a week to have a Music Club at your house,
and play and sing in consort, it will much benefit you.


Iord. And so I will, now you put me in mind on it.


Danc. Mast. And once a fortnight a Ball, you will have the whole Court with
you, and all the fine Ladies of the Town.


Mus. Mast. 'Twill make you known at Court.


Danc. Mast. And familiar with Noblemen: a Gentleman is known by what company
he keeps.


Iord. You advise well, sweet-hearts; but are you perfect at your Dialogue and
Dance?


Mus. Mast. We intend you shall see it performed.


Iord. No, it is too late now: look they be perfect against dinner, and I am
satisfied.


Danc. Mast. I Will warrant the Dancers.


Mus. Mast. And I Will engage for the Music.


Iord. Well, your servant; stay, show me with what reverence I ought to accost
my Mistress, 'twill be the next thing I shall have need off.


Danc. Mast. To do it with respect, you must first draw your leg behind you and
bow, then march up toward her with three Congees forward, and at the last you
bow so low as to kiss her hand; try it once over: -- Very well; your servant.


Mus. Mast. Danc. Mast. Exeunt. Iord. Your servant. -- Come now to my french
lesson.


Mr. Iaq. Vell, Sir, have you got te Catalogue of te French words me give you
in your memoire.


Iord. Yes, and I find I can bring 'em all in, in discourse with my Mistress;
tho I cannot talk French to her, 'twill be next to it, she will think I can.


Iaq. It Is be me invention, and judge Maitre Jorden, if it be no ver rational,
bevore me teash you te rules, you be inure to our langage, by making it as it
vere your own.


Iord. Nay, I think to make it our own is a very ready way to learn it.


Iaq. And it is course vill ver much refine te English Landguage: If you observe
all travelers give te ver many littil graces to their discourse vith te tange
of te French, you shall no hear speak, one sentence vithout Bon mein, jaunte
devoir, efsort, etc.


Iord. I have observed it. But to our Lesson, I am in haste.


Iaq. Now proceed we to teash you te right pronunciation of te Vowels, because
of Letters tey be te sheif, and no word is or can be vithout one or more of tem.


Iord. Vowels, why are there any vowels in our Alphabet?


Iaq. Yes, Sir, te number be fife, and te same vith yours, these be they, A, E,
I, O, U. A be pronounce like a, u, au; As for Example in some English vords,
all, fall, and no as in ale, stale.


Iord. A, au.


Iaq. Right, A opening strongly your moush, and drawing your jaws vide asunder.


Iord. Au, right.


Iaq. E, is pronunce by heaving te nether jaw to te upper, A, E.


Iord. E, A, E, E, directly.


Iaq. I be pronounce not as your English man do Latin, Qui mihi, but more like
to te second vowel E; and is form by drawing your jaws yet more near den
bevore, and drawing the two corners of your moush to te ears, A, E, I.


Iord. A, E, I, I, I; Dad, it is true, may Learning flourish.


Iaq. O is form by opening te jaws, closing te lips at the two corner, and
opening tem in te middile, O.


Iord. Let me see that again.


Iaq. O, O,


Iord. Right, O, O, O, nothing more true, A, E, I, O, O, I, O; ah, it is
admirable.


Iaq. Te opening of te moush is a little round representing one O.


Iord. What a fine thing is knowledge!


Iaq. U be form by approashing te teet vithout quite joining them; trusting
your lips at full length from your face, approashing also one te oder vithout
closing, and it is vowel requires te strongest and te freest expiration of your
breat of any Letter vhatsoere.


Iord. U, U.


Iaq. Not as you pronounce it, like You, more like Eu, u, vith a long breating
out of our breat.


Iord. Like Eu, u.


Iaq. Right, u, as if you made a moush to mock somebody. To morrow, Sir, we will
proceed to te Dipthongs which be eleven, and te next day ve'l manage te
consonants.


Iord. Consonants?


Iaq. Tey are te oter Letters.


Iord. I shall make a shift to learn 'em all at once, I am pretty apt because I
bend my mind to it.


Iaq. Noting is hard to a villing mind.


Iord. But how many did you say the five vowels were?


Iaq. You named te number, fife, Sir, fife.


Iord. Right, the five vowels are five, I Will note that down in my Table Book:
numbers are the worst things can be trusted to my memory. A Lady at Court
yesterday morning asked me how many the ten Commandments were, and I protest I
had forgot: I have noted this next to that.


Iaq. Tings ve no often tink off soon run out of te brain.


Iord. Well, what is a good expression to break ones mind to a Lady, and to let
her know I love her?


Iaq. Be you in love den Maitre?


Iord. Yes.


Iaq. Vith whom?


Iord. Truly I have never yet seen her, but I shall anon.


Iaq. Vell, Sir, vou'd you have te expression in Prose or in te Verse?


Iord. Not in Verse.


Iaq. In prose den?


Iord. No, nor in Prose: I would have it neither in Prose nor Verse.


Iaq. Jerne, it must be in one or te oder.


Iord. Why so, if I will not have it so?


Iaq. Because, Sir, all expression be in te one or te oter.


Iord. What have we nothing but Prose and Verse? what a mad language is ours?
I Will learn French so much the sooner for it.


Iaq. Dat be te same in all languages, dat vich is no Prose is Verse, and dat
vich is no Verse is Prose.


Iord. What is it we talk now?


Iaq. Prose.


Iord. Well, if I say to my Mistress, Fair Lady, the luster of your fair eyes
do wound my heart.


Iaq. Dat be te Prose: you may add, and their bright flame has burnt it to a
Cinder.


Iord. Well, I Will study a speech, I warrant you.


Enter Boy. Boy. The Tailor, Sir, has sent your suit home again.


Iord. Ah, the shoulder-knot stands right now: go fetch my Sword and Belt, my
Hat and Periwig, that I may dress me presently.


Exit Boy. Enter Lucia. Luc. Sir, Here Is a servant sent to you from the next
house, to inform you that there are some persons sick, and to desire they may
not be disturbed with your Music.


Iord. The Music has been gone a good while.


Luc. The Neighbors say it is fitter for you to exercise your Music, Dancing
and Fencing in the Schools.


Iord. A company of fools, they will teach a Gentleman what to do, will they?


Luc. Your gentility is troublesome to the whole Neighborhood: they have often
complained of the disturbance you make with Music, Dancing and Fencing.


Iord. Pish, a man shall not learn good breeding for them I warrant you, it is a
sign they want it, they are so rude to talk so: What Is a Gentleman but his
liberty?


Luc. Every body much wonders what you mean by learning to dance at these years.


Iord. It Is a greater wonder they are not so wise as to know, it is never too
late to learn.


Luc. And to speak French.


Iord. It is altogether spoke at Court.


Luc. The Court, Sir, is no fit place for you, nor you no fit man for it.


Iord. I not fit for the Court! I was born a Courtier, only I was spoiled in
the bringing up.


Luc. My Grandfather, Sir, brought you up in his own way.


Iord. Your Grandfather! alas poor old silly Citt, I cannot but laugh to think
what an Aufe he was to imagine that I would stand sneaking in my Shop all my
life with my Cap in my hand, crying, What do you lack, Gentlemen, choice of
good Silks: I Would have you to know Lucia, I have no such Mechanic Spirit in me.
Now he is dead, I defy Paternoster Row, and all within my Lord Mayor's
jurisdiction.


Luc. My Grandfather, Sir, was held a wise man.


Iord. A wise man, and an Alderman, ha, ha, ha. A rich man you mean.


Luc. No, Sir, I mean a wise man.


Iord. Alas, Luce, you are a fool, you know not what you say.


Luc. Very well.


Iord. Very well! ha, ha, ha, why, what is it you say?


Luc. That the Court --


Iord. I speak not now of the Court, I ask, if you know, what it is you say?


Luc. And I tell you, Sir, I say that the Court --


Iord. Pish, the Girl's a fool; I say again I talk not now of the Court, but
ask you if you know what this is you speak to me and I to you?


Luc. What is it? it is English.


Iord. True, but what else?


Luc. Nothing else, it is every word English.


Iord. Was there ever such a dunce? what are these words?


Luc. What are these words?


Iord. Yes: What?


Luc. Letters make Syllables, syllables words, words sentences, and sentences a
discourse.


Iord. And is this all you know?


Luc. Yes.


Iord. God help your head, what a fine fellow should I be, were I as ignorant
as your self.


Luc. Where lies my ignorance? what was it I said, say you?


Iord. 'Twas Prose you fool.


Luc. Prose!


Iord. Yes Prose, all that is prose is not verse, and all that is not verse is
not prose: La you there now: Do you know what it is you do, when you say U?


Luc. I say U.


Iord. Pish -- but what do you do then? Come, say U.


Luc. Well Sir, U.


Iord. Well; what did you do then?


Luc. I did as you bid me.


Iord. Invincible stupidity, you opened your mouth, thrust your lips out at
length forward, let your under jaw fall almost to meet the upper, and strongly
sent out your breath -- U -- see there -- U -- as it were make a mouth at one
-- U -- I could puzle you too, with asking you how many the five vowels are,
and tell you as much of every one of them -- this it is to be a Vertoso. -- Hah
-- this fencing-master comes not yet -- Boy, run toth' door, and when you see
him coming, bring me word.


Boy Exit. Luc. These exercises of fencing and dancing in my opinion were
fitter for my brother, he is not above twenty years old.


Iord. Your Brother -- puh -- he can never be a Gentleman. I was born a Citizen
my self, and his Mother was a Citizen born, he was not allied to gentility on
either side, forty or fifty pounds a year will maintain him in his native
quality -- but for you daughter, because you are a gentlewoman by your Mothers
side, I have provided better; you shall be married to the Suffolk Knight that
will be here anon; the Articles of Marriage are agreed upon by your Uncle who
is his townsman. The writings are already drawn and sent up with the settlement
of your Jointure, and provision for younger Children; if he comes time enough
you shall be married to day.


Luc. To day?


Iord. Yes, to day, for I long to have a Gentleman, and a Knight for my
Son-in-Law.


Luc. I have no ambition to be a Lady.


Iord. I have.


Luc. Marry him your self then.


Iord. If you anger me, I Will make you a Duchess, a Countess at least.


Luc. Truly I have no mind.


Iord. Truly I have a mind.


Luc. I would not marry yet.


Iord. Yet you shall marry.


Luc. Not Sir Simon.


Iord. Yes Sir Simon.


Luc. He is a fool, Father.


Iord. Therefore you are a worse fool if you refuse him.


Luc. If I marry I Will have none but Master Cleverwit.


Iord. But Master Cleverwit will have none of you.


Luc. Will you stand to that? shall I have him if he will have me?


Iord. Yes, if you will marry Sir Simon, if he refuses you.


Luc. Agreed.


Enter Cleverwit. Iord. Oh! here he comes to our purpose. Master Cleverwit, do
you love my Daughter?


Clev. I did once Sir.


Iord. Would you have her still?


Clev. You discharged me, and I would not do her that wrong, (since you have
provided a Knight, and a richer man for her Husband) to be her hindrance.


Iord. La you there; I told you so.


Luc. False man!


Clev. Besides, Sir, you know I told you I have engaged my self elsewhere.


Luc. Oh heavens! am I then forsaken?


Iord. Yes indeed, Sir Simon will down with you anon as much a fool as he is.


Clev. Besides, I have so entire a friendship for you, that did I love her
still as once I did, I would refuse her though you would double her portion, and
say take her, if you did not judge it convenient.


Iord. I know you are a worthy person, and my good friend; and truly Sir, had
you not told me your Father was not a Gentleman, but a Citizen, you should have
had her before any man.


Clev. I thank you Sir.


Iord. Now Master Cleverwit pray be you Judge; ought not my Daughter to marry
Sir Simon?


Clev. Without doubt: he is a Knight?


Iord. Yes Sir.


Clev. He is a fool too?


Iord. A little shallow my Brother writes me word, but that is a blot in many a
Knights Escutcheon.


Clev. So much the better for her.


Iord. Aye Sir, as how?


Clev. She that wedds a Fool, marries her self to his Estate -- she will have all,
do all, dispose of all, and rule the roast as long as she lives.


Enter a Boy. Boy. Sir, there is one without would speak with you.


Iord. I will be with you again presently; in the mean time pray take some
pains with the baggage; you have powerful reasons, and can persuade.


Clev. I Will labor to serve you -- but my self first --


aside. Iord. and Boy Exeunt. Luc. Perfidious man! is it thus you use a Maid
that loved you? was it not crime enough to be unconstant to deprive me of your
self, but to condemn me with your own mouth to marry one I never can love?


Clev. Ah I, Lucia!


Luc. Nothing but this proof of your hatred can dispossess my heart of Love.
But I will dye rather than let it return though you would be constant.


Clev. Now is the time to tell you --


Luc. No, to make the wound mortal, I will hear no cause of your infidelity,
nor can you have a just pretense: farewell, farewell.


Clev. Lucia stay.


Luc. Why do you hold me?


Clev. Hear me, speak, or if you needs will go, go undeceived.


Luc. Speak then what you would say in as few words as you can.


Clev. My inconstancy, dearest Lucia, was but feigned, and a disguise to carry
on a plot laid to divert your expected Lover, and preserve you mine.


Luc. You maintained your Rivals cause, and soothed my father in his injustice.


Clev. I have, ere since I heard the news of your new Lover, prepared him for
this revolt: long since I declared to him I was engaged to another, and showed
this compliance, that he might not suspect fire hid under the ashes.


Luc. If this be true, make use of these few minutes to inform me what
inventions you have framed to divert this unlucky marriage?


Clev. Be not inquisitive to know what tricks we mean to play; you shall as in
Comedies have the divertisement of the surprise; let it suffice to tell you,
Trickmore is the main engine. I sent him last night to stay at the Inn where
the Coach lies, to take a strict view of him and his Retinue, and to make as
great a discovery of our Knight Errant as he can, that we may the better know
how to manage him.


Luc. My Father returns. --


Enter Jorden. Clev. A Daughters reputation is safe no longer than her
obedience continues, and a Daughter ought not to regard whether her Husband be
handsome or wise, when a Parent commands: Riches, and Gentility are above Youth
and Beauty* they fade in the marriage bed, the other accompany you to the
grave, and descend to posterity.


Iord. Oh Sir, you are a good man, you speak admirable things.


Clev. Sir, I have almost prevailed, and she will be brought with a little more
counsel to obey you.


Iord. How happy is our Family in such a friend, how pleased I am you give me
hopes I shall see my Daughter a Lady to night and that I shall have a Knight
for my Son-in-Law.


Clev. But can it be to night?


Enter a Boy and T. Trickmore in disguise. Iord. Yes, Sir Simon arrived late
last night, and sent me word just now, that he will be here within this hour,
or a little more, but I Will immediately take Coach and go to him, for I am
impatient to see my Son-in-Law.


Clev. Sir Simon arrived, and no news from Trickmore yet?


Aside. Boy. Sir, here is one come from your Fencing-master to speak with you.


Trick. Sir, are you Master Jorden?


Iord. Yes Sir, I am Master Jorden.


Trick. Your Fencing-master is sick, very sick, and cannot come to day, but has
sent me in's place to give you Lesson.


Iord. Well, now I don't know whether it is best to go or stay.


Clev. Oh stay Sir by all means, now the man is come.


Trick. Sir, if you please to stay, you shall learn more in one half quarter of
an hour, than e're you yet learnt in your whole life.


Clev. There Is encouragement.


Trick. I Will show you a trick to undo all you fence with.


Iord. Say you so, come then -- Boy take my gown.


Clev. Sir, we will take a walk in the Garden; with a little more pains, I shall
perfect her obedience.


Iord. Your servant Sir, -- Lucie, you will remember to go to Mistress Manira at
the time appointed, and wait on her hither.


Luc. Yes Sir.


Iord. And when you go, present her with this ring as a token of my love.


Clev. Luc. Exeunt. Trickmore throws off his Cloak and appears accouter'd like
a Fencing-Master, with Foiles under his Arm. Trick. Come Sir, your reverence --
Your body straight, let your body lay a little more stress on your left thigh,
your legs not so stradling, your feet in a direct line, your wrist joint
opposite to your hip, the point of your Sword over against your shoulder, your
arm not so much extended, your left hand in level with your eye, your left
shoulder more turned, your head upright, your eye fixed, -- Advance. Your body
steady; one, two, as you were, redouble, your foot fixed, a leap back -- When
you make a thrust you must let your sword move before your body: One, two; come
Sir, take me in tierce, home, home, advance, your body steady, advance, thrust:
one, two, as you were, redouble, a leap back, to your guard Sir, to your guard.


Iord. Euh, euh -- well now for the trick --


Tr. hits him 2 or 3 pushes with his foil, as he cries to your guard. Trick.
Sir, it is too rare to show to every one, if you please let the Boy depart the
room, your man may stay, but he must swear secrecy.


Iord. Do you hear? --


Iaq. Begar me be no Englishman, to tell all dat me see or know.


Trick. Here, take you my Foil -- come, suppose I was to fight against you
two, I would kill you both.


Iord. Both!


Trick. Both.


Iaq. Oh dat be te brag -- Alloon -- mort bleu.


Trick. To your postures -- now --


Trick. draws his sword, Jaq. throws down his Foil. Iaq. Begar and so me tink,
we two foiles against your sword -- no -- no -- pardonne moy --


Trick. Well, now -- it is in the scabbard.


Iaq. Kill me now and you can.


Trick. To your postures then -- so -- look to your hits.


Iaq. Come --


Trick. Ah, ah, what art -- avaunt a Ghost -- there --


Trick. Looks as affrighted, they both look behind them, he gives each a good
push with his sword. Iord. Euh --


Iaq. Euh --


Trick. Now had you bin both killed or no? -- there is a trick for you.


Iord. I, but I warrant you I would not be killed so a second time.


Trick. Come to your postures again, each fix his eye on the point of his
sword; now suppose your enemy was before you, you a first, and he your second.


Iord. Nay, we will look to our selves, now we know your tricks.


Trick. Suppose I was placed by your enemies in a hedge behind to make a noise,
that might cause you to look back.


Iaq. No, no, we no look back.


Trick. I wager a crown with you Master Jorden, you look back, though you are
forewarned.


Iord. Done.


Iaq. Done with me too.


Trick. Done: well, prepare -- so, ho, ho, ho, not yet -- lo, ho -- lo, ho --
not yet -- well, I shall have you anon.


Trick. Hallows, and takes Jord. clothes. T. Exit. They stand still in their
postures. Enter Cleverwit. Clev. Your Daughter Master Jorden --


Iord. Aye, aye, I hear you Sir.


Clev. Is so well convinced.


Iord. No, no, this wont do.


Clev. Yes Sir, she will do any thing, I have so convinced her of Sir Simon's good
qualities, and your fatherly care, --


Iord. Well Sir, I care not, I care not.


Clev. That she is now extremely rejoiced, and will be glad to see him come.


Iord. O this trick will not do.


Iaq. No, no, we no lose te crown, I Will lay one more.


Clev. There Is some trick in it, they not so much as stir. What mean you, are ye
both betwitcht?


aside. Iord. Oh, is he so cunning, to set you on to make us look back.


Clev. He! what he? here is neither he nor she besides my self, and you two.


Iord. Ha, no body!


Clev. Yes, here comes Mistress Lucia*


Enter Lucia. Iaq. Oh ho Maitre Jordan you look back, you lose your money --
ha, no body here?


Jorden leaves his posture. Clev. Who do you look for?


Jaques leaves his posture. Iord. The Fencing-Master.


Cle. He is not here --


Iord. Gone!


Luc. I saw him go out in great have.


Clev. Sir Simon will be here before you are dressed.


Iord. Give me my clothes and dress me.


Iaq. Clothes! here be no clothes; oh dam English trick, te Rogue steal all
your clothes.


Iord. Ha! my Suit gone? --


Iaq. Gone, Mounsieur, gone --


Clev. Did he take 'em? --


Iaq. Me say* nothing, me swear no to tell te secret.


Iord. Sir, I am undone.


Luc. He told you indeed, he would teach you a trick to undo all you fenced with.


Iaq. Ha, ha, dear be te jest of te trick!


Iord. I had not cared a straw had but my Mistress seen't before it went.


Clev. Well Sir, let not this put you out of humor.


Iord. No Sir, I am more a Gentleman.


Clev. I Will after the thief, and see if I can recover your Suit.


Clev. Exit. Iord. If it is gone, farewell it, I have learnt a good trick by the
bargain, I Will e'n put on some of my other Suits, and stay till my Son-in-Law
comes. Master Jack get the Suit ready I wore yesterday.


Iaq. Exit. Luc. You see Sir what comes of your Fencing.


Iord. My fencing I see sticks in your stomach: but I Will convince you presently.
Take this Foil: now for demonstration;

Jord. Takes the Foiles, puts one into Lucias hand. When you make a thrust in
Quart, it is but to do so, when in Tierce, so: see there a sure way never to be
killed; and is not this something think you, to know what a man has to trust to
when he goes to fight his enemy? Come make a thrust now, that you may see the
manner on it.

Lucia thrusts at Jorden, and pushes him five or six times; he gives back. Euh,
euh, euh -- houh -- hold, what is the Devil in the Wench?


Luc. Did not you bid me thrust? now Sir what think you of your skill?


Iord. Yes, but you made a thrust in tierce, when you should have made a thrust
in quart, and was so hasty, you would not give a man time to purrey.


Luc. You see what your fencing signifies.


Iord. Go get you to Mrs. Marina's -- I see what my pains signify in
endeavoring to make you wiser. It has been well observed,

To conquer Armies is not so hard to man,
As to overcome the ignorance in Woman.

Exeunt* ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Young Jorden and Lucia. Y. Iord. HOw these visions of gallantry, and
capritives of gentility still dance in my fathers fancy!


Luc. His madness will undo us; me he will marry to one I never shall love; you he
will disinherit, and marry again to get a Son that shall be a gentleman to
succeed him in what will be your right.


Y. Iord. I lament not so much he should marry, as that Marina should be his
wife; nor that he should deprive me of his estate, as of her.


Luc. Do you then love Marina?


Y. Iord. I do, and ever shall. She did admit my addresses till my Father's
pretensions interrupted the course of my love; her father, poor Knight, is old
and decrepid, has but a very slender fortune, and is glad of this occasion to
dispose of his daughter to a man of estate.


Luc. Does Marina approve of my Fathers suit?


Y. Iord. She is yet scarce well acquainted with it; but when she shall, I fear
her obedience may dispose her will, for her father will be very urgent, being
he can give her but little while he lives.


Luc. I pity your condition: without her you will be unhappy, and with her you will
be miserable, unless my father would settle some part of his estate on you.


Y. Iord. Two thousand pounds a year his folly throws away, and yet his hand is
shut to me.


Luc. Yet I observe you have always plenty of money.


Y. Iord. I have a revenue coming in you know not of: I keep a Journey-man at
work continually. The profits of the last half year came to five hundred
pounds, which by gaming at the Groom-porters I have doubled.


Luc. How found you out the secret?


Y. Iord. Necessity is the Mother of Invention. Love made me sensible of my
wants, and wants which whet men wits to do ill, taught me the means.


Luc. Is it then an unlawful course?


Y. Iord. Strangers when they hear of it may blame me, but all that know my
condition, and my fathers humor, will excuse my dealing. But here comes your
Lover.


Enter Cleverwit and Trickmore. Clev. Madam, you have seen the first part of
our intreague: this is that Fencer who gave your father so home a thrust this
Morning.


Luc. What, Mr. Trickmore!


Trick. Yes, Madam, out of pity I have sent him his Suit again, for now the
hour of Sir Simons absence being exspired, Mr. Jorden will expect to see him at
his own house, and you shall see another trial of Skill by way of prevention.


Y. Iord. Where did you leave him?


Trick. At the Inn in bed. I had notice this morning he was sending to
advertise your father of his arrival; I dogged the Messenger to know the result
of his message, resolving to act as occasion required. At the door I o'ertook
his FencingMaster: And he being my old acquaintance, I made known to him my
design, and obtained his consent to go in's place, and pass for his Usher: And
this I did to prevent his journey to Sir Simon.


Clev. But should Sir Simon get abroad before you return to the Inn.


Trick. There is one at his heels will do his work: My fellow Mounteback alias
Doctor Cureal.


Luc. Pray what manner of man is this Knight for a Lover?


Trick. For his Figure it is beyond expression, ridicule enough.


Clev. What brains has he?


Trick. No more than our purpose requires. I Will tell you in what a pleasant
posture I found him when I got to the Inn, last night. A servant chanced to
leave open the door of the Room where he was at supper; looking in, I saw him
sit at table with his Hostess, who was a notable fat burley Dame; he not being
well after his journey, bespoak a Sack-posset, and invited her to the eating of
it.


Clev. So, but as to his posture,


Trick. It Was thus. One leg with a slipper at the end of it (and that no very
cleanly one) was laid upon one corner of the Table, the other in her lap, his
left arm about her neck, embracing: in this manner he sat for some time,
telling her the occasion of his coming to Town; that it was love* that his
Mistress was such a one (naming you, Madam). His hostess to gratify the
relation he had made her, drank your health to him in the posset, he went to
pledge it, but was taken in the middle of his draught with a coughing and
sneezing, which broak out with such a violence, that all he had drank flew out
at his nose and mouth into his Land-ladies face; she making a start from her
chair threw him backward, he keeps his hold, draws her after him; down comes
she, the posset between 'em, and her coats over 'em. A terrible outcry there
was, and I ran in amongst the rest to help: when with much ado we had found the
way to take her off the right end upward, there we saw Sir Simon lying half
drowned in posset, and half smothered with Petty coats.


Clev. A very pleasant Relation.


Trick. At last we got him up, but you would have laughed to have seen how like
Rogue and Whore they looked, that had stood in the Pillory and been pelted with
all the rotten eggs in the Parish.


Luc. Alas poor Lover.


Trick. You must think the bed was the next place after this. But yonder comes
my setter, our game is not far off.


Enter Cureal. Cur. So ho, put your selves into a posture to receive the enemy,
he is marching toward us.


Y. Iord. Where have you left him?


Cur. Coming along that street with a clutter of people about him, as if he was
some monster newly come from the Deserts of Arabia.


Luc. Is he so remarkable to be taken notice off?


Cur. You Will see anon with what an air Nature has designed him.


Trick. See, yonder he comes.


Enter Sir Simon with people and boys about him. Luc. Goodness, how he is hung
together!


Trick. These that haunt him, are some unlucky Prentices, whom I advised of his
coming this way, on purpose that their rudeness should give me an occasion to
do him some piece of service which might endear me to him.


Clev. Madam, I must not yet be seen by him, let us retire, and I Will give you
instructions how to demean your self to your father, if in spite of all our
endeavors he should come to the sight of him.


Exeunt. Sir* Sim. Very pretty, as I live; what is the matter? what would you
have? in my conscience the Devil's in the Town, and has possessed all the
people: Why, what a Devil ails ye all? cannot a man go along the streets
without a Regiment of fools at his heels? What do you laugh at now? ye had more
need go look after your wives at home, lest they make ye Monsters to be stared
at; I believe I shall laugh at some of you before I leave the Town; and hau,
hau, hau, too, the devil take me if I do not give the next I see laugh a douce
of the chops.


Trick. How now, what is the matter here gentlemen? what mean ye? who have ye
got here? have ye nothing else to do but run staring and gaping after a
gentleman, as if ye were all out of your wits?


Sir Sim. Here is a man has some reason in him.


Aside. Trick. What is your business? what do ye snear at?


Sir Sim. Aye, aye; at what, at what?


Trick. Do ye see any thing about him that is ridiculous?


Sir Sim. Aye, have I?


Trick. Is he not like other people?


Sir Sim. Aye, have I horns upon my head as some of you? or am I cloven footed?


Trick. Go, go home, and learn better breeding.


Sir Sim. That Is good counsel, and take it y'ad best.


Trick. The Gentleman is a Knight.


Sir Sim. Aye.


Trick. The heir of an honorable Family:


Sir Sim. Aye.


Trick. His Ancesters deserved well of his Country.


Sir Sim. Aye.


Trick. And he no less.


Sir Sim. Aye.


Trick. His behavior challenges respect.


Sir Sim. Aye.


Trick. He is one of singular, parts.


Sir Sim. Aye.


Trick. He has been a Traveller.


Sir Sim. Aye, marry have I.


Trick. He honors the Town with his presence.


Sir Sim. An understanding fellow this, I believe he is well bred.


Trick. He is not a person to be affronted and laughed at.


Sir Sim. No, they are mistaken in their man if they think so.


Trick. If ye go not about your business, I will handle some of ye without
mittens: go, be gone.


Trickmore drives the people out. Sir Sim. Sir, I am most hugeously obliged to
you.


Trick. I am troubled, Sir, to see such a person as you treated so rudely, and
I ask your pardon for the whole Town.


Sir Sim. Your servant, Sir.


Trick. Sir, I had the honor to lodge in the same Inn with you last night,
when I understood by your servant who you was, I had a great presumption to do
you some piece of service --


Sir Sim. What does this fellow expect now? Money?


Aside. Trick. And it was my good fortune to pass by the door of your Room
where you was at supper, just as the outcry was, and these hands had the
honor to disengage you from being smothered by the gentlewoman of the house,
when you was overthrown by that unlucky accident, and your Hostess whelmed over
you.


Sir Sim. Was you there then?


Trick. I was, Sir.


Sir Sim. I was so blinded with Sack-posset I could not see my deliverers.


Trick. I am glad I am again so happy to do you another piece of service.


Sir Sim. Aside I must give him something. Sir, pray let me requite your
services with a piece of gold.


Trick. By no means, Sir, I am not covetous of any thing but to do you service;
pray put it up again. I have conceived a great inclination to serve you, and
the honor shall be the only reward.


Sir Sim. An honest fellow this. Well Sir, I remain behindhand with you in
courtesies.


Aside. Trick. Pray let me kiss your hand.


Trickmore kisses Sir Simon's hand. Sir Sim. In my life I never met with such a
civil fellow.


Trick. Your physiognomy takes me extremely.


Sir Sim. Ah, ha.


Trick. I see much gallantry in it.


Sir Sim. Ah, ha.


Trick. Something very taking.


Sir Sim. Ah, ha.


Trick. Manly and brave.


Sir Sim. Ah ha.


Trick. Frank and generous.


Sir Sim. Ah, ha.


Trick. I swear to you I am wholly engaged to serve you.


Sir Sim. I find it.


Trick. If I had the honor to be known to you, you would say I was a man very
sincere.


Sir Sim. I doubt not.


Trick. An utter enemy to knavery.


Sir Sim. I believe it.


Trick. And one that is not capable to disguise his thoughts.


Sir Sim. Plain dealing is a Jewel.


Trick. And I use it; yet in spite of the fag end of the Proverb am no beggar.


Enter to them Cleverwit. Clev. Ha! who is this I see? Sir Simon Softhead! I am
ravished to see you; Oh what a joy I feel at sight of you! What it seems you
scarce know me.


Sir Sim. Sir Simon is your servant, Sir.


Clev. Out of sight out of mind I see: but is it possible six or seven years
should blot me out of your memory? It Is strange that in so short a time you
should forget one that professes himself the greatest friend and servant to the
family of the Softheads of any man breathing.


Sir Sim. Oh pray pardon me there -- Faith I know him not.


To Trickmore aside. Clev. There is scarce one of that Family that I do not
know as well as I know you, when I lived at Berry, there was no doing without
me, I was always amongst 'em, I had the honor to see you there almost every
day.


Sir Sim. You shall excuse me, Sir, 'twas I received the honor -- I never saw
his face before.


To Trickmore* Clev. You cannot call me to mind yet.


Sir Sim. Pray excuse me for that. -- I know not who it is, not I.


To Trickmore. Clev. Don't you remember we went often together to drink?


Sir Sim. O Yes. -- But let me be hanged if I remember any thing like it.


To Trickmore. Clev. How do you call the little witty Knave that used to make
us so welcome at his house?


Sir Sim. Oh, little John.


Clev. Right, we went often thither to be merry: but what is become of his
pretty daughter?


Sir Sim. He had never a daughter.


Clev. He never a daughter! What not a witty little baggage you used to run
after to kiss from one room to another?


Sir Sim. Oh, I know where abouts you are now, you mean, I warrant you, little
Peggy.


Clev. Aye, Peggy, by the same token was her name.


Sir Sim. She was George Goodale's Daughter at the Rose. Why, she is married.


Clev. Is She? Pray how do you call the place at Berry, where they used to walk?


Sir Sim. Oh, the Green.


Clev. Directly, 'twas there I passed so many hours of delight in your good
company: You do not remember this?


Sir Sim. I not remember't? Not in the least: if I do, I wish the Devil fetch
me.


To Trickmore. Trick. There are a hundred of these things a man forgets.


Clev. Let us embrace then, and renew our ancient amity.


Trick. See now there is a man that loves you cordially.


Clev. Pray tell me some news of your family, Sir Simon: how does that
Gentleman -- your -- he that is such an honest good man?


Sir Sim. My Brother-in-Law, the Justice of Peace?


Clev. The same, the same.


Sir Sim. Why, he is very well.


Clev. I am very glad, I assure you; and he that is of so good an humor, the
Gentleman, -- your --


Sir Sim. What my cousin Small-brain?


Clev. Aye, Mr. Small-brain, -- that I should forget his name! to see how
quickly things run out of a man's head. But pray how does he do?


Sir Sim. He keeps his old humor, always merry and jocund.


Clev. Troth you tell me good news. And pray Sir Simon how does your Uncle, the
--


Sir Sim. My Uncle? I have no Uncle.


Clev. No? but you had at that time perhaps.


Sir Sim. No, only an Aunt.


Clev. Oh, it is her I mean: The Lady your Aunt, pray how does she?


Sir Sim. She has been dead these six years.


Clev. Indeed, I heard so, now I think on it, presently after I left the
Country: Well, rest her soul, she was as good a Gentlewoman as lived.


Sir Sim. We had also a Nephew that dyed of the small Pox.


Clev. Oh what pity it was, he was a hopeful young man.


Sir Sim. Did you know him?


Clev. Know him? he was a comely proper young Youth.


Sir Sim. Not very proper.


Clev. Yes, for his age.


Sir Sim. Oh yes, for his age.


Clev. If he was your Nephew, that I mean, he was the Son of your Sister and
Brother.


Sir Sim. Right, he was so.


Clev. 'Twas the same.


Sir Sim. He knows all my Relations.


Trick. He knows you better than you are aware of.


Clev. I hope I shall oblige you to make my house your home while you stay in
Town.


Sir Sim. I am obliged to be at my Father-in-Laws.


Clev. Are you married then, Sir Simon?


Sir Sim. No, but all is agreed on.


Clev. But however you shall dine with me to day.


Sir Sim. I have sent* Mr. Jorden word I was coming, and he will expect me I know
at dinner.


Clev. Mr. Jorden then is your Father-in-Law: Well, well, that shall not hinder
my design, he is my Neighbor and intimate friend, we are as it were brothers*


Sir Sim. Indeed!


Clev. You shall stay, and I Will send for him to dinner too.


Sir Sim. 'Twill be a trouble, and --


Clev. No excuse Sir Simon, for by my soul you shall; I have sworn it.


Trick. Since he so importunes you, accept it; he has sworn it, and 'twill not
be courteous to refuse him now.


Clev. Where are your Servants, and Portmanteau?


Sir Sim. Truly my coming was in great haste*, and for expedition, I left all
but one man behind, and he is at the Inn where the Coach lies.


Trick. Sir Simon, I will, if you please, wait on you to the Inn where your man
stays, and then help you to find this Gentleman's house. Pray where abouts is
it, Sir?


Clev. This is the house.


Trick. We Will be with you in a trice.


Clev. I will in, and give orders for your reception; you shall find me here at
your return.


Sir Sim. I Will not fail to trouble you.


Clev. I Will wait your coming with impatience.


Cleverwit Exit. Trick. He has the carriage of a fine Gentleman.


Sir Sim. Ah, ha, he, a good jest, a good jest i*faith.


Trick. What occcasions your mirth?


Sir Sim. Ha, ha, he, why I don't know that I ever saw any such man before in
my life.


Trick. No?


Sir Sim. No, as I live, not I.


Trick. Come, Sir, no matter, he knows you.


Exeunt. Enter Young Jorden and Cureal, as from over-hearing. Cur. So, he has
trussed his Quarrey: how do you like Sir Simon for a woman's man?


Y. Iord. Sure there is no woman in the world so necessitated to venture on him.


Cur. O many.


Y. Iord. Not she that wears a stiff Busk to keep down a great belly, and is to
pass for a Maid still; or she that is forced to come to a Play in a Vizard-Mask
to pick up a gallant to give her a Supper.


Cur. Ha, ha, ha.


Y. Iord. Nay, not she that has lived to be a stale Maid, and is convinced by
her own imperfections that she shall never know any pleasure, but what her own
art and industry can create, but would think her self cast away on him.


Cur. O, Sir, a Country Knight will down with many Court and City Ladies, it is
a great convenience to have a husband that is blind in his reason, and is not
clear enough sighted in's understanding to see the shadow his horns cast.


Enter Jorden on one side, a Footboy on the other, and gives Cureal a Letter,
who reads it. Y. Iord. Here is the Court Doctor come, I believe for some more
of your money.


Iord. Speak of him with respect, he is a person of great importance, he talks
to the King and Nobles at Court as familiarly as I to you.


Y. Iord. Yes, he wants neither confidence nor impudence.


Iord. He does me the honor to come often to me; is it not an honor* think
you, to be visited by one of the Kings Physicians, and a Favorite too as he is?


Y. Iord. He is the best paid for his visits to you of any Doctor in Town, let
him visit Lord, Duke, or King.


Iord. He does me the honor to let me lend him a sum of money now and then:
Can I do less than lend it to a man that is in favor at Court, and calls me
his friend?


Y. Iord. What courtesies does he do you?


Iord. More than you are aware of.


Y. Iord. Yes, he does you the favor to borrow money of you rather than of any
body else.


Iord. Aye, and more than so, he had rather borrow ten times of me than once of
any other man living; and does it so Courtly and Gentleman like.


Y. Iord. And pays it so frankly, and with so good a grace.


Iord. When I please he will.


Y. Iord. What security does he give you?


Iord. His word* as he is a Gentleman.


Y. Iord. You Will have it again without doubt, that is security enough.


Iord. He shall command what he will.


Y. Iord. No doubt.


Cur. Tell your Lady I Will wait on her immediately.

Exit Boy. My dear friend Mr. Jorden how do you, Sir?


Y. Jorden retires. Iord. Well, to do you service.


Cur. You Are very modish and fine in this habit, you exceed all the young
Gallants at Court.


Iord. Hay, hay.


Cur. Turn you -- Gallant all over.


Iord. Pretty well: even as the Tailor pleased.


Cur. I know not what is the matter Mr. Jorden, I am never so well as when I am
with you, you are the man of all the world I most esteem and love, I was
speaking of you this morning to the King as I stood by his bedside.


Iord. To the King! You did me a great honor I vow.


Cur. What mean you, Sir? pray put on --


Iord. I know my respect to you.


Cur. Fie Mr. Jorden, no ceremony among friends.


Iord. Nay, Mr. Doctor.


Cur. You must, Sir, by all means: you are my friend.


Iord. I am your servant, Sir.


Cur. I protest I will not, till you are covered.


Iord. I had rather be uncivil than troublesome.


Cur. Well, Sir, as I was saying, I spoke of you to the King* and he has given
order the Patent be made, and commands me to bring you to him, and he will confer
on you the honor of Knighthood; he showed much joy and willingness when I told
him, and was much pleased when I mentioned you to him.


Iord. I am extremely beholden to him.


Cur. Name what day I shall wait on you to kiss his Majesty's hand, and I Will
advise you if he will be at leisure.


Iord. Your servant, Sir; as soon as you please: to day I cannot, but to morrow
--


Cur. To morrow I cannot neither* Well* let it alone a day or two till the
Patent is ready for the Seal.


Iord. I would have it so soon as I could.


Cur. I might get it done to day peradventure, if I had the money ready to give
in fees, and something a little extraordinary, and so forth as you know.


Iord. What will do?


Cur. Let me have two hundred pounds, and for what is over I Will be accountable.


Iord. I have that sum here in gold.


Cur. It may be, less may do.


Iord. Well, Sir, pray take purse and all.


Cur. So, leave it to my management, this will hasten the dispatch. But now Mr.
Jorden, Sir Jonathan Jorden that shortly will be: As to my affairs, you know I
stand indebted to you.


Iord. A few dribbling sums, Sir.


Cur. And you lent 'em me very frankly, and with a great deal of generosity,
and much like a Gentleman.


Iord. You Are pleased to say so, Mr. Doctor.


Cur. But I know how to receive kindnesses, and to make returns according to
the merits of the person that obliges me.


Iord. No man better.


Cur. Therefore pray let us see how our accounts stand.


Iord. They are down here in my Table Book.


Cur. I am a man that love to acquit my self of all obligations as soon --


Iord. See the Memorandum.


Cur. You have set it all down?


Iord. All.


Cur. Pray read.


Iord. Lent the second time I saw you one hundred Guinneys.


Cur. Right.


Iord. Another time fifty.


Cur. Yes.


Iord. Lent for a certain occasion which you did not tell me, one hundred and
fifty.


Cur. Did I not? that I should conceal any thing from my friend.


Iord. No matter, Mr. Doctor.


Cur. It looks like mistrust which is a wrong to friendship.


Iord. O Lord, Mr. Doctor.


Cur. I am so ashamed, for I dare trust my soul with you. I borrowed it, Mr.
Jorden, to lend a person of Quality, whom I employed to introduce me to the
King, and recommend me to his particular favor, that I might be able to do you
service in your affairs.


Iord. O was it so, then that debt is as it were paid, I Will cross it out.


Cur. By no means, Mr. Jorden, you shall have it* or I vow --


Iord. Well, Sir, as you please.


Cur. I vow, I would never have borrowed any of you again as long as I had
lived. But proceed.


Iord. Another time, one hundred.


Cur. O that was to send into France to my wife to bring her over; but the
Queen would not part with her then, and since she is fallen sick.


Iord. Alas.


Cur. But pretty well recovered.


Iord. These four sums make up four hundred Guinneys.


Cur. Just as can be.


Cur. A very good account; put down two hundred Guinneys more, which I will
borrow of you now, and then it will be just six hundred; that is, if it will be
no inconvenience to you.


Iord. Euh, not in the least.


Cur. It is to make up a sum of two thousand pounds which I am about to lay out
in houses I have bought: but if it will incommode you, I can have it elsewhere.


Iord. O by no means.


Cur. You need but tell me if it will be any trouble.


Iord. Lord, Sir, that you will think so!


Cur. I know some will be glad of the occasion to serve me; but these are
favors only to be asked of special friends: And I thought you being my most
esteemed friend, would take it ill if you should come to hear of it, that I did
not ask you first.


Iord. It is a great honor, and you much oblige me in so freely giving me
occasion to serve you. I Will go fetch it instantly.


Exit Jorden. Enter Young Jorden. Y. Iord. Is he gone for the money?


Cur. You Will be two hundred pieces richer if he live but to come out again.


Y. Iord. Did you find him easy?


Cur. As a single-soaled-Shooe, he did not want much drawing on, the hopes of
Knighthood make him as loving.


Y. Iord. You baited your hook well.


Cur. We Will still keep him in play, that we may have the other pluck at his
purse-strings.


Y. Iord. I wish you could as successfully wheedle him out of Marina for me.


Cur* If your Mistress had but half so good an opinion of you as he has of me.


Y. Iord. She has often admitted my courtship, and by that I guess she does not
wish me ill. But could you not invent a way to break off my Fathers
correspondence with the old Knight her Father, and especially prevent his
treating her to day? his courtship is now but beginning to her*


Cur. By no means* to put him by, were to make you lose many opportunities of
seeing and discoursing with her: Conceal your love, and you will find, not to
discourage his hopes will be to your advantage; Love, in time, will teach her
to transgress that blind obedience which keeps her in subjection.


Y. Iord. I hear him returning, I Will march off.


Cur. When we have got the money, we will consult of your Love.


Exit Young Jorden. Enter to Cureal, Jorden. Iord. Look you Mr. Doctor, there
are three hundred Guinneys.


Cur. Three hundred?


Iord. True, you asked but for two, but I count the two no courtesy; the other
hundred you shall give me leave to lend you without being asked, that I may be
satisfied, I have done something may express my kindness to you.


Cur Well, Mr. Jorden, you are the most a Gentleman for your time I ever saw in
my life; this is the most heroical Act! Indeed I did not think it possible to
have found out a way to oblige a friend at such a high rate.


Iord. O, Sir, I am behind hand with you as to that.


Cur. I am so ashamed, I know not how to imitate your generosity, and I have
such a zeal to do you some piece of service. When will you and your daughter
Mrs. Lucia come to a Ball at Court, and I Will carry you in, and place you among
persons of Quality?


Iord. The next time there is one, we will both come.


Cur. There will be one very suddenly.


Enter a Boy. Boy. Sir, Mrs. Lucia bid me acquaint you she is returned.


Iord. Has she brought Mrs. Marina?


Boy. There is a Lady with her, Sir.


Iord. Tell her I am coming; bid her have her into the dining Room, and let all
things be in readiness.


Exit Boy. Cur. Sir, I will take my leave.


Iord. You shall walk in and take part of a Collation.


Cur. I am sent for to a Lady of great Quality, who writes me word, I must not
fall to visit her.


Iord. But Mrs. Marina is come, you must needs go in and see my Mistress first.


Cur. I have so natural a kindness for you, I can refuse you nothing.


Iord. You oblige me.


Exeunt Jorden and Cureal. Enter Young Jorden, Marina, Lucia. Luc. Madam,
regard my Brothers youth, and sorrow, it is for you he sighs, and languishes;
and tho* you cannot cure, yet ease his pain.


Mar. Were I permitted, dearest Lucia, to pursue my own inclinations, he should
not unregarded grieve; but I am not at my one dispose: imagine your self in my
condition, and tell me how you would act on this occasion.


Luc. Alas! I am subject to the same misfortune, and therefore already
qualified to be your Counselor, and be assured I give no advice but what I
take my self.


Mar. Do you then encourage your Lover?


Luc. To the utmost of my power.


Mar. It will be too difficult for me on the sudden, for I have not yet passed
my first blushes, though I received from him proofs of his love, I gave him not
any acknowledgements of mine.


Y. Iord. Nor would I now put you to the trouble of inventing such nice and
wary words as Virgins use, when first they give encouragements to their Lover:
let me interpret it from your actions, receive this trifle.


Luc. Start not, Madam, he but presents you with a Ring of a small value, if
you will not receive it from his hands, take it from mine: but wear it for his
sake.


Y. Iord. And with it take my heart.


Mar. If I do more than I ought, yours, Madam, be the blame.


Y. Iord. But fair Marina, if your Father will not give consent I marry you --


Mar. I will declare to him my real inclinations.


Y. Iord. But if he prove averse, and unalterable?


Mar. I Will threaten to fly beyond Sea to a Nunnery, and for ever to exclude my
self from the world.


Y. Iord. But if in spite of all, he will force you to a Marriage?


Mar. What would you have me say?


Y. Iord. That, which I fain would hear you say.


Mar. What?


Y. Iord. That which one would say, who loves well.


Mar. What is that?


Y. Iord. That nothing should compel you, and that against all endeavors of
your Father to the contrary you would promise to be mine.


Mar. Content your self with what I have already said and done, and attempt not
to know the future resolutions of my heart, nor trouble your self with
apprehensions of extremities which may never happen, or if they do, suffer me
to govern my self at all times according to the present state of affairs.


Enter Jorden, Cureal. Iord. Madam, a little further I pray.


Jorden having made two reverences, finds himself too near to make the third,
he shoves her back from him. Mar. Sir, I?


Iord. One step back, and please you.


Mar. How Sir? a little retreit to make room for the third.


Cur. Mr. Jorden, Madam, understands behavior, and with what respect to
approach a Lady.


Iord. Mademoiselle, I beg pardon for my son.


Mar. For what, Sir?


Iord. I saw him give you a buss les maines.


Mar. I confess 'twas a civility too humble.


Iord. I beg your pardon, he is not a Gentleman.


Mar. In all things.


Iord. Excuse moy; his Mother was but a Citizen.


Mar. He Is well behaved.


Iord. His deport is but so, so, his guard is pretty jauntee, and his garniture
not much amiss, but he wants a bon mein; and, Madam, I will make it my devoir
to retreive what has been amiss.


Mar. Nothing passed, but what was extreme well.


Iord. I am ravished to hear you say so.


Y. Iord. Sir, the Lady will be weary with standing.


Iord. Pray repose you at the Table, here is a small Collation to divert you.
Mr. Doctor, will you please to sit? Madam, you see how poorly I regaul you,

They all sit down at Table. I ought to make an harrangue to excuse it, but I
hope you will pardon my unpreparedness.


Mar. Your treat is noble.


Luc. Madam, pray choose where most you like.


Iord. Boy, bid the Music give us a touch of their Harmony. Is here any
thing, Madam, appears agreeable to you.


Mar. Every thing, Sir?


Iord. Fall too then: Sa, sa.


Mar. I do, Sir.


Iord. Without sans complement.


Mar. I use not any.


Iord. Pray taste that Ragoust. Ah, what a pretty bells mains has this Lady,
Mr. Doctor.


Cur. Admirable white, and well shaped.


Iord. Fill me a glass of wine: so the same to this Lady, and to every one
round.


Enter two men, and one woman in the midst who sing. SONG I.
1.
Come Phyllis thy singer to begin the go round:
How the glass in thy hand with charms does abound!
You and the wine to each other lend arms,
And I find that my love
Does for either improve,
For that does redouble as you double your charms.
'Twixt him, you and me, 'twixt him, you and me,
To love let us vow, and vow constancy.
2.
Your lips to the wine do give a new relish,
And that when you drink your mouth does embellish;
Whilst this I behold, my desires get strength,
Both with that and with you
More enamored I grow.
With love and with wine, I am tipsie at length.
'Twixt him, you and me, 'twixt him, you and me,
To love let us vow, and vow constancy.
Iord. Hai, allons: The Hat, chappeaux bas: this Ladies health to you, Mr.
Doctor.


Cur. Look you, Sir: I do you reason.


Iord. So, it is gone round; it is with you, Lady.


Mar. Sir, my service to you.


Iord. How do you approve of the frolic, Mr. Doctor?


Cur. Very pretty, and apt to the purpose; Love and Wine, Mr. Jorden, should go
hand in hand.


Iord. Ah, Mr. Doctor, if Mrs. Marina would be as favorable to pledge in one
as the other.


Cur. She is so charming, she can do nothing but oblige, Mr. Jorden, pray give
me leave to begin a health.


Iord. With all my heart: Fill round.


Cur. And let us have the other Song to encourage us.


SONG II.
1.
Let Us drink, dear friends, let us drink,
The time flies fast away,
And we no leisure have to think,
Then let us make use on it whilst we may.
When the black Lake we have passed,
Adieu to Wine, to Love and Pleasure;
To drink, to drink, let us make haste;
To drink we always shall not have leisure.
Let Us love, let us drink whilst we have breath;
Nor love, nor drink is after death.
2.
Disputing leave to Sotts
That are more grave than wise:
What Is life's true bliss our learning lies
In the bottom of the pots.
Great riches, knowledge, and great fame,
Ease not the troubled mind of care;
But rather more increase the same;
But we by drinking eur'd are.
It Is only wine can do the feat:
Wine makes our happiness complete.
All. Drink, drink, drink off your wine, turn, turn, turn up your glass,
Turn it up, turn it up; till we cry, let it pass, let it pass.

Cur. Very fine in faith: Now, Mr. Jorden, to this Lady's best inclinations,
and long may they live in favor of whom this Lady wears this fine Ring.


Drinks. Iord. Courage: so, and long may he live.


Drinks. Y. Iord. Not a word more of the Ring, you will make a discovery.


Whispers Cureal. Cur. Mum.


Y. Iord. Luc. Long may he live, Madam.


Iord. How, Madam, do you approve their singing?


Mar. It was not amiss, Sir.


Iord. In my opinion it is admirable.


Mar. It was indeed most ravishing.


Iord. Ah, Madam, could we but as easy ravish your heart.


Mar. Sir, my service to you.


Iord. Sarrah, give me that Glass as it is.


Cur. Observe, Madam; Mr. Jorden drinks just where your lip has been, and all
this while eats nothing but what your fingers have touched. Oh the little Arts
of Lovers.


Mar. Sir, I am ignorant of your meaning.


Iord. I Will take the other glass, and then Mr. Doctor --


Cur. What, Sir?


Iord. I Will tell her my mind more plainly.


Cur. But have a care what you do, you must not blurt all out at once, Maids
are shie.


Iord. But I intend to show my self a man of courage, and boldly to declare my
Amor.


Cur. Aye, Sir, that is City-courtship; but now you are to make love Ala mode,
to act like a Gentleman, Ala negligence, with a certain kind of gallantry that
obliges more than words: Entertainments, Songs, Dances and Music are
preparatives.


Iord. Must I not speak to her?


Cur. Your treat this time speaks enough; this lays an obligation; obligations
beget respect, respect begets love, love begets marrying, and marrying begets
children.


Iord. Well, Sir, I have a damnable itching to tell her my mind; but since
obligations beget so to the end of the Chapter, I Will let her know how much she
is beholden to me. That Ring Madam --


Mar. Sir?


Y. Iord. I shall be disgraced.


Aside. Luc. My Father says, becomes your hand.


Iord. Cost a good sum of money.


Y. Iord. Pray, Sir, how much do you think it cost?


Iord. It cost fifty pounds.


Y. Iord. I believe it might.


Luc. My Father, Madam, has skill in Jewels.


Iord. It Is well worth your wearing.


Mar. I am not much affected with Jewels, but I have a particular reason to
wear this.


Iord. to Cur. You shall see how prettily I Will wheedle her to tell me she loves
me.] Why, Madam? because it was given you?


Mar. Yes Sir, for the sake of the Giver.


Iord. Ha, ha, Madam, this small present deserves not so great an honor.


Mar. Excuse me, Sir.


Iord. You set too great a value on it.


Mar. I rate it according to the merit of the person that presented it.


Iord. to Cur. Lo you there.] That person is very much your humble servant, and
wishes it was much better for your sake.


Mar. I think, Sir, he does not wish me ill.


Iord. to Cur. Look you again.] When you know him better you will say so; he
loves you extremely.


Mar. It Is likely he may, but men know how to dissemble.


Iord. But he, Madam, the least of any one in the world.


Mar. I am glad you confirm me in my good opinion; but I wonder to hear this
from you.


Cur. The Lady wonders to hear you commend your self so.


Iord. I beg your pardon, Madam, if my over-forwardness offends you.


Mar. On the contrary it pleases me extremely to hear you speak well of him.


Iord. It is my near concern gives me the occasion; but truly I never knew any
of the Iordens not Gentlemen in the point of Love, though I speak it that should
not.


Mar. Truly, Sir, I did not think you had known so many as I perceive you do.


Y. Iord. Now Sister all comes out.


To Lucia. Iord. If I did not, Madam, who should?


Mar. Since our Love is no longer a secret as I thought it had been, and you
approv't, I hope by your means my Father may be inclined.


Iord. O, I had got his consent before: and this design of my daughters
bringing you hither was a plot laid to gain a good opportunity to court you.


Mar. Alas, Sir, I was so well inclined before, I could not long forbear the
acknowledgement, though I cannot but blush to own I am so soon o'er-come.


Iord. to Cur. Is not this a rare wheedle Mr. Doctor?] How glad am I to hear
this, for in truth I think courtship the most troublesome thing in the world.


Mar. Yet, Sir, you must use it with my Father.


Iord. Let me alone to deal with him, we will send for a Parson, and the marriage
shall be concluded to night.


Mar. Alas, I know my Father will obstruct our proceedings.


Iord. Madam, take my word for it.


Mar. Well, Sir, if he can be won to consent to it.


Iord. Lord! you are so hard of belief.


Mar. Nay, Sir, he guessed once at our love, and did not then seem displeased;
but I believe he has since designed me for some other; for of late he has
strictly charged me to the contrary; he told me himself he had provided one
would be a sitter match for me.


Iord. Well, Madam, to clear all doubts, I Will e'ne wait on you home, and you
shall soon hear what he says. Mr. Jack, give me my Sword and belt.


Luc! Madam, pray let me set this curle right for you.


Mar. I beg your pardon.


Luc. A little this way. Ah, Madam, you are unhappily run into a mistake: my
Father knows not of my brothers love for you, and himself is the man your
Father has found out to be your husband.


Mar. I am amazed.


Iord. What good luck have I to dispatch so great an affair in so short a time:
I was wooing my first wife at least a year; But to see how obliging a
Gentlewoman is over a Citizen.


Luc. You must resolve to stand to the brunt of 't, but conceal my Brothers
being your Lover.


Mar. I Will indeavour't, and frame some excuse for what I said.


Luc. Any thing.


Iord. Come, Madam. How your hand trembles?


Mar. My heart misgives me.


Iord. Allons courage, your Father will consent, I warrant you. Lucy, stay you
at home to receive Sir Simon: I much wonder he comes not yet; but when he does
send me word.


Luc. Yes, Sir.


Iord. Let the Music stay till night; and bid them practice their Dialogue; we
cannot stay to have it now, but it will serve rarely well at supper, and will
be as good for a wedding as an Epithilamium. Mr. Doctor, your servant, Sir.


Cur. Sir, I Will wait on you out, for I must be going too. Madam, I am going to
meet your Lover. Mr. Jorden take heart, things may yet go well.


Exeunt Jorden Singing, How happy a lover am I, Marina, Cureal. While I sigh
not for Phyllis in vain, Y. Iord. And I how unhappy!


Luc. All may go well yet, ever hope the best.


Y. Iord. I cannot hope my love should not be discovered.


Luc. Brother, think on Marinas Love, you will find
Sufficent ground for hope whilst she proves kind.

Exeunt. ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Mr. Cleverwit and Cureal. Clev. BEsure you look well to him; keep all
the doors shut and locked.


Cur. When he is once in Lobs-pound, he shall not easily escape.


Enter Sir Simon and Servant. Clev. Here he comes. -- Sir Simon, you are
welcome.


Sir Sim. You see I make bold.


Clev. You honor my house. But where is the Gentleman that was to show you the
way?


Sir Sim. He left me but just now, he showed me the house, and begged leave for
an hour.


Clev. I should have been glad he had been here to bear you company till my
return: I Will step cross the street and fetch Mr. Jorden to you. But see here a
person into whose hands I commend you, he will treat you with all courtesy
possible.


Cur. My profession obliges me, and it is enough you command my care.


Sir Sim. This is the Steward of's house: He must be a person of quality.


Aside. Cur. Yes, I assure you, I Will treat Sir Simon according to the method and
rules of Art.


Sir Sim. Oh pray make no ceremony, I beseech you, treat me as a friend, let me
be no trouble.


Cur. Such an employ is not my trouble but delight.


Clev. Here, Sir, is ten pounds advance of what I promised you.


Sir Sim. I beseech you, Sir, I understand not wherefore you should put your
self to charge for me: Pray, Sir, let him not buy any thing extraordinary, but
let me partake of the usual entertainment of your Family.


Clev. Pray, Sir, give me leave: it is not for what you imagine.


Cur. Not for provision, Sir; a spare diet is wholesome; much meat sends up
fumes from the stomach to the head, and that is very hurtful for the brain,
especially to one that is a little disordered.


Sir Sim. He talks learnedly. But I befeech you, Sir, let me fare like a
friend, and not a stranger.


Clev. It Is that I intend: I pray, Sir, excuse the incivility I commit in
leaving you.


Sir Sim. Oh, Sir, you leave me in good company.


Exit Cleverwit. Cur. It is a great honor to me, Sir, to be chosen one to do
you service.


Sir Sim. I am your servant.


Enter Trickmore in a Physicians habit. Cur. See there an able man, my great
friend, with whom I will consult the manner how to treat you.


Sir Sim. Once more I request you to make no such ceremony, I am a man content
with ordinary usage.


Cur. Come, set chairs here. Sir, please you take that place.


Sir Simon sits down in the middle chair which is biggest, and with arms, which
locks him in that he cannot stir. Sir Sim. Ha, what is the meaning of this? I am
fast.


Trick. An Italian device, we meant to surprise you with a rarity.


Sir Sim. I cannot get up.


Cur. We can soon set you at liberty, it may be you don't sit easy.


Sir Sim. Oh, very well, I thank you: I should be loath, were it not among
friends, to be so engaged.


Cur. Come friend, pray draw your chair nearer. Now to our business. Give me
your hand, Sir.


Trick. Your hand, Sir, I beseech you.


Sir Simon gives his hands as in courtesy to friends: they feel his pulse. Sir
Sim. Oh, your servant, Gentlemen, your servant.


Cur. Oh, Sir, I beseech you hold still a little.


Sir Sim. What means this?


Cur. Have you a good stomach? do you eat well, Sir?


Sir Sim. Ay, and drink well too.


Cur. So much the worse, this great appetition of cold and humidity is an
indication of the heat and dryness within. Do you sleep sound*


Sir Sim. Yes, when I have eat a good Supper.


Trick. Do you dream, Sir?


Sir Sim. Sometimes.


Cur. Of what nature are your dreams?


Sir Sim. Why, of the nature of dreams. A Devil, what kind of entertainment is
this?


Cur. How do you go to stool, Sir?


Sir Sim. As others do. A plague on it, I know not what they mean by these
Questions: pray let me be so bold to call for a glass of wine.


Cur. Have patience, Sir: I doubt whether it be good for you; we will begin and
discourse of the thing it self, and that you may the better understand we will
dispute in English, and resolve upon your food, what meats and drinks are
properest for you, and will do you the least harm.


Sir Sim. What needs so much discourse about my eating and drinking?


Trick. Patience, Sir, you must be patient.


Sir Sim. What a devil would they be at?


Cur. I say with your permission, Sir, that our patient here present is very
much assaulted, affected, afflicted, possessed, and overcome with this sort of
folly, which is very well called Hypochondriack melancholy.


Sir Sim. These are Doctors, now shall I have a lecture read over me.


Trick. I beseech you, Sir, sit still.


Cur. This Hypochondriack Melancholy proceeds from the depraved constitution of
some part of the nether belly, and inferior region: but particularly from the
spleen. To be assured that this is his disease, you need but observe this great
dullness which you see, this heaviness accompanied with fear and diffidence,
signs, pathognomiques and individuals of this disease so well observed by the
divine Hippocrates; this Physiognomy, these eyes, red, heavy and dull; this
grisly beard, and grumness; this swarthy, tawney complexion; this constitution
of body, lean, spare and haggord, rough, black and hairy; all which signs
denote him to be very much overcome with this disease proceeding from the
depravedness of the Hypochondria.


Trick. Sir, you must sit still.


Cur. Now I mean to touch the Therapeia, and remedies which ought to be
prescribed to effect a perfect cure. First, then to remedy this Plethora, and
this Cacochymia, or general depravation of humors throughout all the body; my
advice is for Phlebotomy; that he bleed freely; that is to say, plentifully;
first of the Basilick, then of the Cephalic vein; and if the disease prove
obstinate and refractory, that a vein be opened in his forehead, and that the
orifice be very large, that the thick corrupted blood may have passage; and at
the same time that he purge, deopitulate and evacuate by proper and convenient
purgations; that is to say, by Cholagogues, Melanogogues, etc. But before all
these, I find it meet to exhilarate his spirits with harmony resulting from
Music instrumental and vocal, with which it will not be amiss to join some
Dancers; to the end that their motions, postures, and agility of bodies, may
excite, stir up, and quicken his spirits stupefied with idleness, which
occasions the thickness of his blood, from whence proceeds the Malady: these
are the Remedies I prescribe, which may be much advantaged by some others of
yours much better and more efficacious, having by your daily practice gained
great experience, judgment and knowledge in our Art. Dixi.


Sir Sim. Amen.


Cur. Nay, now, Sir, you must have a little longer patience to hear my Brother
Doctor.


Trick. There remains nothing for me to say to the Gentleman, but that he was a
luckie man to fall into your hands, and that he is even too happy in being a
fool, in that he shall experiment the efficacy and admirable virtues of these
Remedies you have propounded with so much judgment: I approve of all, Manibus
and pedibus descendo in tuam sententiam: All that I say is, let the number of
his bleedings and purgations be odd, Numero Deus impare gaudet: To drink often
clarified Whey, to bathe often, to have a strait band made with salt in it to
bind upon his forehead, for salt is the emblem of wisdom; and to new whiten the
walls of his chamber, to dissipate the darkness of his spirits, Album est
disgregativum visus: A gentle glister to serve for the introduction to these
judicious Remedies, with which he is to be cured, and he ought to receive
consolation. Heaven grant that these Remedies you mentioned may according to
our intention work their effects upon your patient.


Sir Sim. Gentlemen, I have listened to ye all this while, and I have no more
patience left. What, do you sport with me?


Cur. Oh, Sir, we don't sport with you.


Sir Sim. What means all this? what would you with your mountebanck canting?


Cur. Good, see a Diagnostick which we wanted for the confirmation of his
disease, and this may well turn to madness.


Sir Sim. A pox on it, who am I left here with?


He spits three or four times. Trick. Another Diagnostick, his frequent
spitting.


Sir Sim. Let me out here, let me be gone.


Cur. Yet another, his unquietness, and desire to change, and shift places.


Sir Sim. What Is the matter? what a devil ayl ye? what would you do with me?


Trick. Cure you, according to order given.


Sir Sim. Cure me?


Cur. Yes.


Sir Sim. What a devil, I am not sick.


Cur. A very ill sign, when a sick man perceives not his own disease.


Sir Sim. I tell you I am very well.


Cur. Oh, we know better than you how you do; we can see into your constitution.


Sir Sim. I tell you I was never better since I was born.


Trick. Worse and worse, he has been a fool from his Cradle.


Cur. Let him be ruled by us, we will cure him, I Will warrant you.


Sir Sim. I Will be ruled by none of ye, ye are a couple of knaves.


Trick. We are your Physicians, Sir.


Sir Sim. Worse and worse, ye are the greater knaves for that. Physicians! what
have I to do with Physicians? a fart for you, and your Physic too: a Caudle,
Ale-berry, or a good Posset is worth all your damned drugs.


Cur. A hone, a hone, the man is a greater fool than we thought him.


Sir Sim. My Father and Mother never took Physic in their lives, and they are
both dead without the help of Physicians.


Cur. I wonder no longer then, that they had a son no wiser; come, let us
proceed to the cure, and by the sweet exhilarating of harmony, sweeten, allay,
and abate the acrimony of the spirits, which I see ready to inflame him. O here
comes my Operators.


Sir Sim. What in the Devils name is all this? are all the people in this Town
mad? I never saw the like in my days, what should it mean?


Enter two Chemists dressed in antic habits with broad black caps on their
heads, that flap down about their ears, no hair seen; Ruffs about their necks,
strait bodyed doublets with long close sleeves; Spanish scant breeches, and
pumps; followed by four Operators in antic dresses, singing the symphony
sustained with a medly of strange instruments. Two Chemists Sing. 1 Chym. What
ailest thee thou musing man?


2 Chym. What art thou melancholy?


1 Chym. Come let us cure him if we can.


2 Chym. Sadness is the greatest folly.


Four Operators sing. 1 Operat. Let Us cure this wight.


2 Operat. He Is a gallant Knight.


3 Operat. It Is great pit-ty,


4 Operat. That he should die


All. Of folly,
Or of melancholy.

Two Chemists sing. 1 Chym. We to cure thy sadness come.


2 Chym. Mirth with us we bring along.


1 Chym. Throats let us clear with crying hum.


2 Chym. Then treat this gallant with a Song.


Four Operators sing. 1 Operat. With Song we will advance,


2 Operat. With Music and dance;


3 Operat. With these we will clear him.


4 Operat. Then give him glisters half a dozen.


1 Operat. To purge away melancholy and clear him.


2 Operat. Then rinse his body with Canary and Sherrey.


3 Operat. If this will not make him merry,


4 Operat. It Is we


1 Operat. That be


2 and 3 Operat. More fools than he,


1 and 4 Operat. And our art will us cousen.


All. And our art will us cousen.


SONG 1.
Let him that is melancholy,
Each morning when he gets up
Take of Sack a good cup:
Sing a catch, and again sup:
Sip and sing, sing and sip again and again,
Till he find the Canary does work in his brain.
2.
Then to dinner go, and after
Let him sit and hatch a laughter:
Sing the other catch, take the other cup,
Till each has drunk his bottle up.
Thus laugh, thus quaff, thus quaff, thus laugh again and again,
Till he find the Canary does work in his brain.
3.
At supper let him eat
But light and little meat;
Yet trowl the cup roundly away;
But avoid foggy Ale,
And Beer new or stale:
For Wine is the liquor,
Makes the wits to grow quicker,
And each over his glass to tell a merry tale.
4.
This melancholy evil
Is a sort of a Devil,
Which wine and not holy water will drive away:
Nothing is so sure,
And perfect a cure,
As wine, as mirth, and good company:
And if ought does lack
It Is a pipe of Tobac -- coco -- coco -- coco --
Which taken may be
When to bed he does go, gogo, gogo, gogo,
Cur. Come let us have him up to his Chamber, and there give him the remedies
perforce, which he refuses to take here.

The Dance ended, Cureal and Trickmore rise from their seats.
Trick. Help to let him out of his stool of repentance.


Sir Sim. Stay, let me take out my handkerchief to blow my nose. The Devil take
ye all for Rogues.


They let Sir Simon out of the chair, he puts his hand into his pocket, and
takes out a Pistol; they start back, he runs out, they discharge their
glisters, and run out after him. Enter again Trickmore and Cureal. Trick. He is
gone, gone beyond recovery, all my designs are ruined.


Cur. A pox o'that Pistol.


Trick. A pox on you for leaving the Key in the door.


Cur. Who'd have thought --


Trick. That you should have played the Mountebank so long, and have no more
brains in your scull.


Cur. I have a device to recover all.


Trick. He Will find out Mr. Jorden, and then --


Cur. I Will to him first, and doubt not but I Will forestal his reception for a
while: And here comes Mr. Jorden as I could wish.


Trick. Hold him in discourse till I come and second you in a new design.


Exit Trickmore. Enter to Cureal Mr. Jorden, Cleverwit, and Lucie. Iord. There
was juggling in the case, Lucia, for I find it was your brother presented the
Ring to her, he was the man for whose sake she wore it, therefore tell me true
how he came by it?


Clev. It may be she lost it, or laid it down somewhere, and he took it up.


Luc. No, Sir.


Iord. How was it then? let me know.


Luc. My Brother, Sir, desired that he might present it, and I, ignorant of his
pretensions to Marina, gave it him.


Iord. But that thou art to be a Lady to night I would beat thee for it.


Luc. Alas, Sir, I thought no harm, and judged it more fit for him to give it,
than for me.


Iord. Let me heat a reason for that, and I Will forgive thee both this and the
next fault.


Luc. I imagined, Sir, Mrs. Marina would think my brother would be displeased
at the match, as most sons are when their Fathers marry again, it being against
their interest to have a new brood in the Family, and might from thence have
some scruple to match with you, having children so well grown: therefore I gave
him the Ring to present, that it might appear by this Act, my Brother did well
approve of having her for a Mother-in-Law.


Clev. This is very rational.


Iord. Well, get you in again; and tell your Brother he has no way to come off
with me, but utterly to renounce her, and resign her to me.


Luc. Yes, Sir, I hope he will.


Exit Lucia. Clev. I thought Sir Simon would have visited your house with
Lovers speed.


Iord. Something is the matter he comes not yet, and I am going to see what it
is detains him.


Enter Cureal. Cur. Mr. Jorden, have you seen Sir Simon?


Iord. No, is he come?


Cur. Come! yes, Sir, and gone.


Clev. Gone!


Iord. He has not been at my house.


Cur. He has shown me a light pair of heels.


Iord. Is he come for certain to this end of the Town?


Clev. And gone for certain?


Cur. Both for certain; and if he comes to you, let him not conclude the
marriage with your daughter till he be duly prepared for it, and reduced to an
estate of begetting children, well conditioned both in body and mind.


Iord. I understand you not.


Clev. Nor do I know what he means.


Cur. Your Son-in-Law that is to be, was this morning put into my hands by a
near relation of his that endeavors his good, to be my patient, and I must
tell my friend, I do not think fit he should marry your daughter till he has
taken the remedies I am to prepare for his disease.


Iord. Has he any disease?


Cur. A most notorious one, and hard to be cured, it is gotten into his brain.


Clev. What is his disease?


Cur. Folly.


Iord. Ha, ha, he, that is one Reason why I make him my Son-in-Law; for what
better husband can I provide for my daughter, than one that has much honor, a
great estate, and but little wit.


Cur. How, Sir?


Clev. I Will assure you, Mr. Doctor, you may spare your drugs and labor too, for
his disease is as hereditary to his Family, as his estate, and you may sooner
cure him of that than of the other.


Cur. But he has another disease I have not told you off.


Iord. Another?


Cur. One that debilitates his body as much as this his mind.


Iord. What is that?


Cur. Doctors are bound to secrecy.


Clev. You may tell Mr. Jorden:


Cur. For his Daughters sake, and because he is my friend, I will. But you must
both promise to keep it secret.


Iord. Doubt not, that Gentleman is my great friend.


Clev. Pray out with it.


Cur. I Will trust ye for once.


Clev. You may.


Cur. You know, Mr. Jorden, Sir Simon has been in France.


Iord. I have heard so.


Cur. There he fell extremely in love with a Lady. He gave her his Gold, and
she as a token of her kindness gave him the Pox.


Iord. The Pox!


Clev. The Pox said you?


Cur. No such great wonder, for most young English Gallants that go thither
have the like misfortune.


Iord. The Pox his disease!


Clev. It is indeed the fate of most young Travelers.


Cur. Like most of 'em too he fell into the hands of an unskilful Surgeon,
who made no perfect cure; and should he marry as he is, he either would have no
children; or if he has, they will be peuling, whining, sickly things, scab'd as
young Cuckows, and look like Chickens that have got the pipp.


Clev. We see the example of it daily.


Iord. But that he is both Knight, and Baronet, he should not have my Daughter.


Cur. I doubt not, but by the course I intend for him, within forty days to put
his body in a good condition for procreation.


Iord. Well then, I Will have him inquired out, he shall marry my daughter
presently, lest she should hear on it* and be averse to the Marriage: And then
Mr. Doctor and friend, I will deliver him again into your hands.


Cur. How! let him marry your daughter before he is eured?


Iord. Yes, Il make sure of him first; for he may dye under your hands, and
then she misses the title of Lady, and the honor of having been wife to a
Knight Baronet; besides, he makes her a very great jointure.


Clev. How his folly frustrates our designs!


Aside. Enter Trickmore. Trick. Now is the time I must show my self a man of
intrigue* or for ever lose the reputation I have gotten.

Aside. Gentlemen, can any of you inform me which is Doctor Cureal's house?


Clev. That is his house, and this Gentleman is the Doctor.


Cur. Yes, Sir, I am Doctor Cureal.


Trick. I have a little private business, and beg these Gentlemen's leave to
speak with you.


Clev. Mr. Jorden, you have not yet told me how you like your Mistress?


Trickmore and Cureal whisper at one end of the Stage. Iord. Oh, Sir, it is the
prettiest charmingst Rogue --


Clev. Her eyes are but little.


Iord. Oh, but Mr. Cleverwit, so sparkling, so black and so piercing, they
strike a man to the heart at first sight.


Clev. She has a wide mouth.


Iord. She has so, but so many graces about it, such pretty dimples at each
corner when she smiles, and such a pair of smacking lips too.


Clev. Her stature is but low.


Iord. But yet she is well shaped: Oh, it is a pretty snug Rogue, she will lie as
round --


Clev. She speaks very little.


Iord. Oh, a prattling woman is worse than a Flock of Geese.


Clev. And some conclude, a woman that wants tongue wants wit.


Iord. And she that has too much, wants Grace.


Clev. Well, Sir, I see plain, by your excusing her, that you love her, and
will have her from your son.


Iord. If her Father order her, as I Will order my son, we shall meet in a pair of
sheets.


Cureal as from whispering. Cur. Well, Sir, I Will acquaint my friends here with
the business; and if you will engage your word before them I Will do it.


Trick. Business of this nature should not be communicated.


Cur. They are my special friends.


Trick. Well, Sir, if you think good to trust 'em.


Cur. Mr. Jorden, whatever you hear, say nothing, till you have made a full
discovery; here is villainy plotting against you.


Aside to Jorden. Iord. Ha, knavery, knavery.


Cur. Ye must know friends, one Sir Simon Softhead is my Patient, whom I have
to cure of a certain distemper, which will require some considerable time.
Well, go you on, Sir.


Trick. The said Sir Simon is come to Town to marry the Daughter of one Mr.
Jorden, a rich man.


Iord. So.


Trick. Now this Sir Simon owing much money to me, and five other Merchants of
Norwich, we have all his land in mortage; but we being all his Fathers Friends,
and having a respect for the Son, are willing to do him all the good we can;
and therefore do underhand manage the business so, combining with the said Sir
Simon, that the Mortgages and Engagements shall not appear to endamage his
Marriage.


Clev. Well, Sir.


Cur. Now comes the design.


Trick. So that Sir Simon may, besides the portion he is to have with his wife,
take up of his Father-in-Law (who we hear is a mony'd man) as much money as
will pay all his debts, and engage to him his land before engaged to us.


Iord. O dainty Rascals!


Cur. And then shall your Mortgage start up and take it from him.


Clev. So shall the Son cheat the Father-in-Law, and the Father have no remedy
for it.


Trick. Yes, Sir, and this may easily be done, for Mr. Jorden is but a
half-witted fellow.


Iord. Oh, is he so, Rascal?


Trick. The said Land passes already current for the jointure, though managed by
his Brother in the Country, who is not much wiser than himself.


Iord. Very good.


Trick. Now, Gentlemen, this Sir Simon being also a man of a thick scull, and
not so sensible of his own good, as he ought to be; I, and the other five
Merchants do desire of Mr. Doctor, to persuade Sir Simon to strike up the
Match, and be married before he enter into his course of Physic, that the
design so well laid may not take wind, and miscarry by his folly and want of
discretion.


Cur. And for this piece of service, your self and those other five Merchants
do reward me with an hundred pounds, to be demanded the day after the marriage.


Trick. I do here before these Gentlemen promise and engage my self for the
true and just payment of it, and will moreover treat these Gentlemen with a
Dinner of five pound.


Cur. How are you called?


Trick. My name is William Webster, Merchant of Stuffs in Norwich.


Iord. Then, I say, William Webster of Norwich, and the rest of his Merchant
Combiners are knaves, ha, ha, he, bear witness Gentlemen -- ha, ha, he, --


Trick. Gentlemen, you will not discover, I hope.


Clev. No, no friend, you have made discovery enough.


Iord. Pray tell Sir* Simon, my Daughter shall not be a beggar to be a Lady;
there are more Knights Baronets in the World.


Trick. Mr. Doctor, is this Mr. Jorden?


Cur. The very man, now, I think on it.


Trick. Oh dire mischance!


Iord. Come, Sir, pay your hundred pound, Mr. Doctor has done your business for
you -- ha, ha, he.


Trick. Well, Sir Simon is an undone man, and so I Will go tell him.


Iord. And when you find him, tell him too he may even go like a fool as he
came -- ha, ha, he..


Trick. This after-game was well played.


Aside. Exit Trickmore. Iord. A half-witted fellow! ha, ha, he.


Cur. How blank will Sir Simon and the rest look when they hear this news.


Clev. I fear he is more knave than fool.


Cur. Mr. Jorden, I am glad I have served you in so important an affair; I must
leave my friend to visit a Lady of great Quality that has sent for me.


Clev. And I am heartily sorry, I cannot stay till Sir Simon comes, to see the
upshot of the business, for come he will if he misses this fellow.


Cur. Your servant, Mr. Jorden.


Clev. Your servant, Sir.


Iord. Your servant, Mr. Doctor: Your servant, Mr. Cleverwit.


Cleverwit and Cureal exeunt severally. Enter to Old Jorden, Young Jorden.
Iord. Oh, Sir, are you here? I have found out all your intrigue with Mrs.
Marina, you are the man in her books, are you?


Y. Iord. Only in that one thing I am happy.


Iord. But you must think no more of her.


Y. Iord. Not think of her!


Iord. No, Sir.


Y. Iord. It is impossible.


Iord. You must resign you interest.


Y. Iord. To no man living.


Iord. To me.


Y. Iord. Not, while I have life.


Iord. She is to be my wife.


Y. Iord. Not with my consent.


Iord. I have her Fathers good liking.


Y. Iord. And I have the Daughters.


Iord. She must submit to her Father's will, and you to mine.


Y. Iord. Love is subject to no Laws but its own; when that is in dispute, all
respect to power and authority is laid aside.


Iord. I shall make you know me.


Y. Iord. He that loves well, dares all threats desie.


Iord. You will then be meddling in my concerns.


Y. Iord. No, Sir, it is you meddle with mine, I loved her first.


Iord. And you shall quit her first.


Y. Iord. Quit her? -- never --


Iord. I Will force you, saucy Jack.


Y. Iord. You cannot.


Iord. I Will try that.


Jorden offers to strike Y. Jorden. Enter to them Jaques. Iaq. Oh Maitre,
Maitre Jorden, vat do you mean?


Y. Iord. I laugh at your anger.


Iord. You shall cry at my anger.


Jorden offers to strike. Iaq. O maitre, maitre Jorden?


Iord. Let me come to him.


Iaq. O fee, fee, fader beat te great son, vat, vat be te difference? make me
te judge, me pass me parol to make te reconcilement.


Iord. You shall hear Mr. Jack.


Iaq. But stand you two at more great distance: So now me am to be te judge:
so, hum, hum, speak te fader now: Be no dat ver just to bid te fader speak
before te son.


Iord. I love Mrs. Marina, and have intentions to marry her, and my son here in
spite of my teeth says he will love her.


Iaq. Spit in your teet, no good fashione: he be to blame ver much.


Iord. Is It not an insolence in a son to contend with his father?


Iaq. A ver great injure.


Iord. Ought he not to forbear his pretensions to show me respect?


Iaq. You have te grand reason: let me go speak to him, and stand you dear.


Y. Iord. Well, since he has made you judge, I am content to refer the matter
to you.


Jaques goes to Y. Jorden at the other end of the stage. Iaq. You do me te ver
great honor.


Y. Iord. I was first in league with Mrs. Marina, she makes kind returns to my
affection; and with tenderness receives the offers of my love; and my father
comes to disturb our peace with his pretensions.


Iaq. A ver great injure.


Y. Iord. Is it not very unreasonable to desire she should love him against her
inclination, ought he not rather to quit his design?


Iaq. You have te reason, let me now speak to your fader. Have you no more to
say, but dat you love te Gentlewoman?


To Jorden. Iord. Yes, I have her Father's consent, and he is utterly against
my sons marrying his daughter.


Iaq. Ver good.


Iord. Ought she not to be obedient to her father?


Iaq. Oh vithout doubt. Let me speak to your son. Your fader do say he has te
consent of her fader.


To Y. Jorden. Y. Iord. But I have the consent of the Daughter.


Iaq. Auh dat be 'gen te ver good reazon.


Y. Iord. Is it not a great injustice in him to cause her father to force her
to marry one she does not love?


Iaq. Oh vithout doubt, dat be ver injuste. Now let me have te consideration
how te do justice, to cause be ver difficult.

He studies Auh, you love te Gentlewoman?


Y. Iord. Yes.


Iaq. And she do you love?


Y. Iord. Yes.


Iaq. And she vill mar you?


Y. Iord. Yes.


Iaq. O vat remedy? vel, stay you dear --

Vell, Sir, your Zon be no so obstinate as you do tink, he do submit to you,
and say vat he did tell you, vas in his great indignation, and dat he vill give
you te Maitress, provide dat you vill treat him ver vell for te future; and let
him have some little part of your Estate, dat he may live like te Zon of
Monsieur Iordane, and mar some Gentilwoman dat be young, handsome, and rish.


Iord. Well, tell him he may have any thing hereafter, and except Marina, he is
at liberty to choose whom he will


Iaq. O, let me manage te affair --

Goesto Y. Jorden Your fader have te more discretion den you imagine, he say
dat te fashione of your discourse, and your action put him in te grand color,
and dat he vill give te consent to vat you desire, provide dat you give te
promise for te future to be te ver good Zon, and render to his person te
respect and submission tat one Zon ow to te fader.


Y. Iord. You may assure him, that granting Marina, he obliges me for ever to
submit my self entirely to him, and henceforward his will shall be a law to all
my actions.


Iaq. Oh so it is affair be dispatch.


To Jorden. Iord. As I could wish.


Iaq. Te league be conclude:

To Y. Jorden. He be content vith vat you do promise.


Y. Iord. Oh my kind Stars be thanked.


Iaq. Now, ye may make discourse togeader again; ye se how soon te man of
discretion make te accommodation.


Y. Iord. I am much obliged to you.


Iaq. Not at all vor vat me do, me be your humble serviteur.


Iord. You have done well Master Jacques: there is a reward for you.


Gives him money. Ioq. Me kiss your hand Maitre Iordane.


Jorden, Jaques exeunt. Enter Trickmore and Cureal to Young Jorden. Trick. I am
now Trickmore again, and ready to receive Sir Simon if he come this way: I will
proceed to sow such jealousies between the Father and the Son-in-Law, that
shall make 'em both draw contrary ways. Yonder he comes, be gone.


Y. Jorden and Cureal exeunt. Enter Sir Simon singing. Sir Sim. Of folly or of
melancholy,
Of folly or of melancholy. -- coco -- coco -- coco.

Trick. What mean you by this Sir Simon?


Sir Sim. All I see seems Glisters to me.


Trick. How!


Sir Sim. You know not what has happened since I parted from you.


Trick. No, what is it?


Sir Sim. I thought I should have been treated according to my Quality.


Trick. And well. --


Sir Sim. And I was left by that Gentleman in the hands of two fellows clothed
in black, Physicians I suppose they were, who set me in a trap-chair, felt my
pulse, shak'd their noddles, cried ah! is it so? he is a fool, he is a fool: then
did these two buffle-headed talkative fellows in broad-brim'd hats speak
nonsense for an hour, till my patience was wearied; then entered such a consort
of Music, as if they had played a flourish for the entry of Devils; but were
followed by half a dozen Anticks singing, and dancing with Syringes and
Glisters in their hands, that they made me almost out of my wits; when with
much ado by the help of a Pocket Pistol, I got from 'em, they all discharged at
me: see, am I not all beglisterfied?


Trick. Indeed you have an odd smell about you.


Sir Sim. Oh my imagination is filled with 'em, every thing I see methinks is a
Glister.


Trick. How deceitful is the outside! I thought that Gentleman the sincerest
of your friends.


Sir Sim. A very Rascal.


Trick. This is one of my wonderments, is it possible there should be such
knavery in the world?


Sir Sim. I think that is the house.


Trick. According to my promise I came, thinking to have found you there, but I
have knocked this half hour, and the Devil of any body can I make answer, the
doors and windows are all shut close, as if no body was in the house.


Sir. Sim. The Rogues thought it time to be gone. Ever since I made my escape,
I have been enquiring to find out Mr. Jorden; I am told he lives in this
street, and I am glad I have met with you, that you may help me to find his
house.


Trick. So, so, I smell you out, Sir Simon.


Sir Sim. Smell me? aye so may any body: a pox on these Rogues and their
Glisters.


Trick. I mean I know your design of enquiring out Mr. Jorden, you have a
months mind to his Daughter, I warrant.


Sir Sim. Yes, I come to Town on design to marry her.


Trick. To marry her?


Sir Sim. Yes.


Trick. Indeed to marrry her?


Sir Sim. Aye, for what else do you think?


Trick. Nay, then it is another matter, and I crave your pardon.


Sir Sim. What mean you by this?


Trick. Nothing, Sir.


Sir Sim. Pray tell.


Trick. Nothing, not I, I spoak a little too hastily.


Sir Sim. Pray let me know what was in your mind.


Trick. It is not at all convenient.


Sir Sim. Nay, pray out with it.


Trick. By no means, indeed you must excuse me.


Sir Sim. Then I see you are not the man I took you for, I thought you had been
my friend.


Trick. No man more.


Sir Sim. You ought not then to conceal any thing from me.


Trick. It is a matter in which is concerned the interest of a Neighbor.


Sir Sim. To oblige you to open your heart, take this Ring and wear it for my
sake.


Trick. Let me think a little whether I may do it in conscience. It Is a man who
seeks his own good, who endeavors to provide for his Daughter, as
advantagiously as he can. I ought to injure no man. These things are known
truths: And then I go about to discover to a man that is ignorant of them. It Is
forbidden to speak ill of our Neighbor.


Sir Sim. Not to interrupt you, there is Gold, by my soul you shall keep it: Now
pray go on.


Trick. But on the other side, here is a stranger he would surprise, and one
who comes with a good intent to marry his Daughter, whom he knows not, nor ever
saw; a Gentleman free and courteous, for whom I have a kindness, who does me the
honor to esteem me his friend; reposes confidence in me, who gives me a Ring
to wear for his sake, and Gold. Well, I find I can tell you all without scruple
of conscience. But I Will take care to tell you as blamelesly as I can, and to
spare the person as much as may be. To tell you then, this daughter of his
lives dishonestly would be too harsh; I Will find some milder term to express my
meaning; to say she is gallanted is not enough, but I think it will suit well
with my meaning, to say she is a naughty pack; and may serve to let you know
truly what she is.


Sir Sim. Oh, oh, they take me then for a Coaks.


Trick. It may be she is not so bad as the talk goes, and since there are some
young women that expose themselves to censure by taking too much liberty, not
thinking their honor and reputation depends --


Sir Sim. I thank you, Sir, I will not be in the Turkish fashion, and go with a
crescent above my brows, I love to walk without being pointed at.


Trick. Well, Sir, but you are resolved to give 'em a visit.


Sir Sim. On purpose to let 'em see how they are deceived.


Trick. Well, Sir, I Will wait on you to the door, have a care, she is very
handsome, and beauty is a sort of witchcraft.


Sir Sim. Let me alone, I warrant you.


Trick. At your return you shall find me here about.


Trickmore, Sir Simon exeunt. ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter a Boy and Sir Simon followed by Jorden. Boy. BE pleased to walk in
there, Sir, my Master will come presently.


Iord. Where, where is the Gentleman would speak with: me?


Sir Sim. Your servant, Sir, are you Mr. Jorden?


Iord. So am I called, Sir.


Sir Sim. And I am Sir Simon Softhead.


Iord. In good time.


Sir Sim. Do you think, Mr. Jorden, we Suffolk men are fools?


Iord. And do you think, Sir Knight, that we Londoners are gulls?


Sir Sim. Do you imagine that such a man as I am, is so put to it for a wife?


Iord. And do you believe that such a woman as my Daughter is so in want of a
Husband?


Enter to them Lucia. Luc. I am informed Father, Sir Simon is come: this is he
without doubt, my heart tells me so; what a comely person! how well shaped!
what a bone mien, and gentile carriage he has! Oh how content I am you have
made choice of such a man to be my husband.


Iord. Soft and fair, daughter.


Sir Sim. How coming she is.


Iord. I would fain know, Sir Simon, what wind brings you hither?


Luc. Indeed Father I am so pleased with Sir Simon, he is one of the comeliest
and most courtly persons!


Sir Sim. She Is on fire already: Ha it is a pretty little loving fool.


Aside. Luc. You know what interest you have here, Sir Simon, you need not make
your self so much a stranger.


Iord. Daughter stand off, keep from him I bid you.


Sir Sim. What a liquorish baggage it is, she would have me salute her.


Iord. I would fain know for what reason, and please you, you --


Luc. Ah my dear, Sir Simon.


Iord. Again! the wench is mad.


Luc. Will you not permit me to express a kindness to the man you have
determined to be my husband?


Iord. No, get you up into your chamber.


Luc. Let me but stay and look at him.


Sir Sim. Ah pure wheedle.


Iord. Get you in, I say.


Luc. I Would stay here, if you please.


Sir Sim. A cunning slut, how she gleggs at me.


Iord. Get you in once more, or --


Luc. Well, I go then.


Iord. Are you not gone yet?


Luc. When is it, Sir, we are to be married?


Iord Never: let that serve your turn.


Sir Sim. How her chops water at me!


Luc. But you have promised I should be his Wife.


Iord. If I promised you, I unpromise you.


Sir Sim. She Is agog for me: She sings loath to depart.


Luc. But if we will, who can hinder it?


Iod. Why I Will hinder it, and take notice I forbid the bains. My Daughter's
bewitched, I think.


Sir Sim. Well, our good Father-in-Law that was to have been, don't trouble
your self, I have no such maw to your Daughter. This will not do: ha, ha, he, who
put it into your head that Sir Simon Softhead was a man to buy a pigg in a
poke, and wants wit enough to inform himself how squares go, and one that would
so soon be drawn into the noose of matrimony without being well assured it
would be safe for his reputation, ha, ha, he, he is no such fool as you take him
for, I Will assure you.


Iord. I know not what you mean by this; but how came you to have such a
conceit in your head, that Mr. Jorden had no more brains in's scull, and
considered his daughters good no more, than to marry her to a man who has you
know what, and was put you know where, and to you know who, to be cured against
you know when?


Sir Sim. Come, come, Sir, I know what you mean, but that is a lie, I am as
sound and as well as you, or any man living.


Iord. Well, well, somebody that knows somebody, told somebody, though that
somebody must tell nobody.


Sir Sim. That somebody is a lying Rogue; I am a Gentleman every half inch of
me, and I Will make it appear with sword in hand, I Will justify my reputation,
here, or on any ground in England.


Iord. Well, Sir, I have a sword too in my house, am a Gentleman, and may in
time too be a Knight; and will tell you here, or on any ground in England,
that, what I know, I know; nor am I to be couzened with Land mortgaged already
to Norwich Merchants to pay debts, not I, Sir.


Sir Sim. What mortgage, what land, what debts, what Norwich Merchants, ha, ha,
he.


Iord. Come, come, dissembling will not do, all is out, I am not to be choused out
of my money, nor wheedled to pay Creditors, no, Sir.


Sir Sim. What Creditors, ha Sir? do you know, Sir?


Enter Young Jorden. Y. Iord. Who Is this with a drawn Sword against my Father,
and he unarmed? Come, Sir, make me your adversary.


Sir Sim. Your are his Hector, are you?


Y. Iord. I am his son, Sir.


Sir Sim. That is more than I will be, I assure you.


T. Iord. And will vindicate his cause with the last drop of my blood.


Sir Sim. Oh, Sir, your servant; fare you well Bully* Ruffian.


Y. Iord. I Will be so civil to wait on you to the door.


Exit Sir Simon, Young Jorden, after him with his drawn sword, clash without.
Enter Cureal. Cur. Oh, Mr. Jorden, Mr. Jorden!


Iord. What, Mr. Doctor, what is the matter?


Cur. Such news, such joyful news!


Iord. What, what is it?


Cur. I made such haste hither, I scarce have breath left to tell it you.


Iord. Oh dear Mr. Doctor!


Cur. The Lady I went to, when I parted from you, entreats the favor of me to
recommend some Lodgings to her: now it presently came into my mind, that you
have a house spacious and well furnished, fit to receive a Lady of great
Quality.


Iord. What, I let Lodgings?


Cur, O no, dear friend, you mistake me: whereupon, that you might have an
occasion to court and be acquainted with this Lady, said I to her, I have a
friend, a very good friend, called Mr. Jorden, at which word she started, who
will do me the honor to give you, or any friend of mine an appartment in his
house, and there, Madam, you will be treated very honorably, and received with
much respect and gallantry.


Iord. I am obliged to you. But what I pray was the reason she started when she
heard my name?


Cur. At that time, Madam (said I) you seem surprised: and then she blushed,
and her color went and came, and came and went. Then I proceeded: Madam does
the name offend you? I must confess (said she) I know some reason to wish I had
never heard the name, nor seen the man; yet have I not so much power not to see
him again, and it was my desire the Lodging you were to provide me should be
near that persons house; but pray make no more words on it, said she; then
blushed again, and turned away and sighed.


Iord. What meant all this?


Cur. Nay, Sir, it is no riddle: what think you?


Iord. I vow to you I cannot guess unless it be love.


Cur: You Will never be counted a Conjurer for telling this, though it is a most
undoubted truth.


Iord. Well, Sir; and will she come?


Cur. Come, Sir? she cannot help it, there is no resisting the influence of our
stars. Lord! Mr. Jorden, that you should have such prodigious luck.


Iord. Is she very rich?


Cur. Rich? what is she think you?


Iord. A Lady.


Cur. A Lady?


Iord. A Countess.


Cur. More.


Iord. A Marquess.


Cur. A Marchioness you meam, more, Sir, more.


Iord. A Duchess.


Cur. More than all that.


Iord. More than a Duchess? what is she then?


Cur. A Princess, Sir.


Iord. A Princess, Mr. Doctor?


Cur. Mum, Mr. Jorden: ha, is nobody near? let me see: have we no listners.
Aye, Mr. Jorden, a Princess, I say to you she is a Princess.


Iord. I Will lay my life now at last the jest of it is that her name is Princess.


Cur. No, Sir, she is a Princess by birth, her Quality is Princess.


Iord. Indeed!


Cur. I knew her in hanging-sleeves, I was Physician to her Father while I was
in Germany.


Iord. She is then Daughter to one of the Princes in Germany.


Cur. Right, she is a German Princess; I taught her English when I was there,
and she has since marvellously improved her self in our Language.


Iord. I am glad she understands English.


Cur. Admirably well.


Iord. Will she come to night?


Cur. Immediately; her Coach was at her door when I came. But be sure you give
her no ground to apprehend you know her Quality, for she is here incognito, and
will not be known till all her train and attendants come over, which will be
very suddenly; therefore what you do, you must do quickly, for then she will be
for Court.


Iord. I Will make good use of the opportunity.


Cur. Besides should you not declare your love till after you know her Quality,
she may think it is but ambition, and that you are more enamored of her
quality than person.


Iord. I Will assure you, most dear friend, and divine Doctor, I will lose no time.


Cur. Well, Sir, but pray let me not lose the title of Doctor of Physic for
that of Divinty.


Enter Jaques. Iaq. Oh, Maitre Jorden, here be te ver fine Lady in te great
glass Caroach, enquire for Dr. Cureal.


Cur. It Is she: Prepare, Sir.


Iord. I dare be bold, now you Mr. Doctor have felt her pulse for me.


Cur. Be not too ceremonious, but*behave yourself as if she was but what she
seems, a Gentlewoman.


Enter Betty Trick more. Cur. Madam, this is Mr. Jorden, Master of the house,
and my worthy friend.


Iord. Oh, I had like to have forgot. Madam, a little nearer, I pray.


B. Trick. Sir?


Jorden runs to salute her; turns his back and goes a good way, and advances,
making three congies, finds himself too far off, and beckons her to come
nearer. Iord. One step nearer, and please you: So, you are welcome, Madam, as I
may say. Oh she kisses like a Queen!


Aside. B. Trick. I presume upon Mr. Doctore* score of friendship to give you
the trouble of being your guest some few days.


Iord. Madam, it is to me a great glory to see my self so fortunate, as to be
so happy to have the good luck, that you should have the bounty to do me such a
grace, as to afford me the honor, to honor me with the favor of your good
company. And that --


Cur. Mr. Jorden, you have done well, this Lady loves not much ceremony, she
knows you are a man of wit and parts*

low to Betty Trickmore It Is as good a ridiculous Cit as ever was seen.


B. Trick. He is a very farce, nothing but ridicule.


Cur. Believe me, Madam, this Gentleman is one of the best friends.


Iord. You do me too great an honor.


Cur. As gallant a man as lives.


B. Trick. I have no small esteem for him.


Iord. I have not yet done any thing, Madam, to merit this Grace, but if your
Ladyship please to command me any service, your Grace shall find I have such an
inclination* to serve your* Highness, that it should be impossible for any man,
were you a Princess ten times over.


Cur. Hold.


B. Trick. What means Mr. Jorden?


Cur. Have a care what you say.


Iord. I vow, Madam, I forgot, and I beg your Princely pardon.


B. Trick. I understand not Mr. Iordens discourse.


Cur. You will spoil all.


Iord. Ha: O Lord, Madam, if I have offended you, I cry your Highness mercy.


Cur. Again, fie, fie, Mr. Jorden.


Iord. I vow it was out before I was aware.


B. Trick. Mr. Jorden is too great a Courtier.


Cur. I hope, Madam, you will not be offended, it is a custom he has got to give
the title of Princess and Queen to all Ladies that are extraordinary sair and
beautiful, because like Princesses and Queens they rule, command, and are
adored.


Iord. Had I not been interrupted, you are so very beautiful, I should have run
on till I had called you Emperor and great Turk.


Cur. How, Mr. Jorden? Empress and Sultaness you mean.


Iord. Pauh, a man in love minds not what, -- I should have called you Cherubin
and Archangel, ere I had done.


B. Trick. Are you then in love, Mr. Jorden?


Iord. There I am caught again. Who I? no, Madam, not I.


Cur. What do you mean to deny it now?


B. Trick. I am not well.


Cur. Do you see what you have done?


Iord. Yes, yes, Madam, I am in love, I am in love.


B. Trick. Indeed? ah me.


She swoons. Cur. She swoons, run for some spirits.


Iord. Help, help.


Cur. Stay, she revives.


Revives. Iord. I am in love, Madam, I assure you.


Faints again. B. Trick. Ah.


Iord. Help, help.


Enter Lucia, a Gentlewoman, and a Page with a little Cabinet. Luc. What
outcry is this?


Iord. Oh Daughter, help, the Lady swoons.


Woman. O my dear Prin --, my dear Mistress.


Iord. Dear Prin -- O have I caught you tripping too.


B. Trick. Hy ho.


Cur. how do you, Madam?


B. Trick. Pretty well, Mr. Doctor, I thank you.


Iord. Madam, here is my Daughter come to wait on you.


B. Trick. Her company perfects my recovery.

Betty Trickmore and Lucia salute How wondrous pretty she is, she is so like
you, Mr. Jorden, I must needs salute her once more.


Cur. Observe that; like you, and kisses her again.


Lue. Madam, you are all obliging, and I merit nothing of this favor.


Woman. Madam, here is the Cabinet you committed to my care.


B. Trick. Mr. Jorden, in this trunck is all my present concern, will you
pardon me, if I request the trouble of you to see it safe locked up.


Iord. I Will take care of it my self, and put it into my Iron chest, where I keep
my own little treasure.


B. Trick. You shall see what it contains; look you, Sir, here is a small
parcel of gold, some six thousand pounds, with some trifling Jewels, to the
value of about two thousand pounds more, not worth your seeing.


Cur. Mr. Jorden will see 'em carefully disposed of.


Iord. They shall be forthcoming when you please.


B. Trick. I have twelve thousand pound more to receive of the Banquers next
week, for some friends of mine, alas I am not worth near so much.


Iord. That is because I should not think her a person of great Quality, I
understand her wheedle.


B. Trick. Mr. Doctor, I find my self very drowsy.


Cur. Your spirits, Madam, are faint, and weak; retire a while to your Chamber,
one half hours repose will much refresh and enliven you.


B. Trick. Woman, where are you?


Iord. Madam, my Daughter shall wait on you too.


B. Trick. It were a disease to part with her, nothing I Will assure you can
delight me more than her company.


Luc. You are pleased to esteem it.


B. Trick. Page, wait on Mr. Jorden with my Cabinet.


Iord. Mr. Doctor, I Will wait on you immediately.


Betty Trickmore, Lucia and Woman exeunt. Enter to Cureal Young Jorden and
Jaques. Y. Iord. It Is well you give me timely notice of the deceit. I wondered
indeed at my Fathers sudden change.


Iaq. Te reconcilement was good for te present, you give me your pardon.


Y. Iord. You did very well.


Iaq. Your servant.


Exit Jaques. Cur. All things succeed wonderfully.


Y. Iord. The grand Masque is ready, the Playhouse has furnished us rarely
with habits; the Masquerade seems a little burlesque, but 'twill pass upon him,
it hits his humor so right.


Cur. What with his love for Marina, and his ambition for our German Princess,
his brain is so unsettled, he cannot frame a judgment so much as whether a
thing be possible, or not; much less discern 'twixt probabilities, and
improbabilities.


Enter Jorden. Y. Iord. Sir, I have had remorse of conscience for contending
with you for Marina, but to make a perfect amends, and to gain your pardon
entirely, I have used all my endeavors to persuade her to love you: and, Sir,
I have so prevailed that she has promised her Father, she will be your Wife, if
you demand it of her to night.


Iord. Ha, to night? I am busle.


Y. Iord. I am sorry for it, for her father has given her leave to make a vow
never to be your wife unless you consummate the marriage this very night.


Iord. Doctor, what do you advise me to?


Cur. To think of the Princess.


Iord. But does she love me think you?


Cur. She swoon'd when you said you did not love.


Iord. Yes, and when I said I did, too.


Cur. She was then possessed with jealousy, that you loved some other Lady:
you may, Mr. Jorden, let a Princess dye for you; but it will not be done like a
Gentleman.


Iord. No, will not it be like a Gentleman? Well, Son, let 'em know if they are in
such haste, they may do as they please.


Y. Iord. Will you not go to her, Sir?


Iord. I have other fish to catch. You may tell Mrs. Marina, they that will not
when they may, and so forth.


Y. Iord. After this night you will have no hopes.


Iord. There, or in another place. What, marriage is a matter of moment, and I
will first consult with my pillow.


Y. Iord. I am sorry you are so much disgusted.


Iord. It may be, anon I may send my man to 'em, and it may be not.


Exit Young Jorden. Cur. I have business that way, if you please I Will serve you
in that occasion, and tell 'em your mind.


Iord. Pray do.


Cur. Your servant.


Exit Cureal. Enter Trickmore and Jaques. Iaq. There be Maitre Jorden.


Trick. Sir, I have not the honor to be known to you.


Iord. Nor I the like to you, Sir.


Trick. I remember I have seen you at my Fathers, when we were Children, your
Father used to bring you sometimes to our house; you was the prettiest sweet
babe, the women did love to get you upon their knees, and kiss you.


Iord. Kiss me!


Trick. Your father and mine were great Cronies.


Iord. Indeed!


Trick. I am sorry to hear he is dead, he was a very honest Gentleman.


Iord. How say you, Sir?


Trick. I say he was a very honest Gentleman.


Iord. What, my Father?


Trick. Yes, as lived.


Iord. And you knew him very well?


Trick. I did, Sir.


Iord. And you knew him to be a Gentleman?


Trick. Yes.


Iord. Then I know not how the World goes.


Trick. Why, Sir?


Iord. All the World knew him to be but a Shopkeeper.


Trick. He a Shopkeeper?


Iord. Yes, a Mercer, was he not?


Trick. He a Mercer? what because he was very obliging, and officious, and
because he had great skill in silks, went up and down and bought 'em, and had
'em sent home to his house, and gave 'em to his friends and acquaintance for
their money; therefore he was a Shopkeeper, was he?


Iord. I always thought him a Shopkeeper: but I am glad to understand from you
that my Father was a Gentleman.


Trick. He was, and I Will maintain it.


Iord. I am obliged to you for it.


Trick. Since I saw him (good Gentleman) which is now about twenty years, I
have traveled almost over all the World.


Iord. Over all the World?


Trick. Yes, Sir, over all the World.


Iord. It Is a great way thither.


Trick. It is but four days since I have been in Town after my long travels,
and to morrow or next day I am to depart again.


Iord. Your own Country after so long an absence, should methinks be too dear
to you to part again so soon.


Trick. A man's Country is where he can make his fortune, I am lately got into a
great employ.


Iord. What, I pray?


Trick. I am the now great Turks English Interpreter, and have been so this
fortnight.


Iord. Are you come so far as from Turkey in a fortnight?


Trick. Oh, Sir, the great Turk is here.


Iord. What, in England?


Trick. Aye, Sir, he is here.


Iord. Here? what in London?


Trick. Aye, Sir, and in this house.


Iord. The great Turk in my house?


Trick. Yes, and a great train with him.


Iord. In my house? in this house?


Trick. In this very house; he is come to visit a Lady that is newly come
hither, and to take his leave of her.


Iord. How came he to know her, and that she was here?


Trick. He grew acquainted with her in Germany; and at her old lodgings they
informed us of her remove, which I was glad to hear; for by this means I have
an opportunity to pay my respects to you, Sir, whom I honor for your fathers
sake.


Iord. But pray, Sir, how came the great Turk to be in Christendom?


Trick. Do not you remember you had the news some while since that the great
Turks brother was taken by a Squadron of the French-fleet, as he was sailing to
Mecha, to pay his devotions at Mahomet's Shrine?


Iord. I heard that indeed.


Trick. The King of France generously restored him to liberty, and he since
that time has traveled over most part of Christendom, and is now come to
England; but since his arrival at London, which is now but two days, news is
come that his Brother who was the Sultan, is dead, and he is to succeed him in
his Empire, which occasions his sudden departure, for to morrow, or next day,
he is to set sail for Turkey, attended with a Squadron of the Kings Frigates,
which his Majesty sends to be his Convoy.


Enter a Turk. Turk. Ehhim, acha halif ulabalechi.


Trick. Alman bochin. Mr. Jorden, I am commanded to go about some affairs, but
I Will wait on you again before my great Lord the Sultan turns his posteriors to
the front of your Palace.


Exeunt Turk and Trickmore. Iord. Your servant, Mr. Interpreter. Mr. Jack,
where is this great Turk?


Iaq. Above vid te Lade.


Iord. Who showed him up?


Iaq. Her Shentilewoman.


Iord. Ha! he smells her out to be a Princess, he is my Rival: go fetch me my
long Sword and Pumps.


Iaq. Ha, vat do you mean?


Iord. Never a great Turk in Christendom shall rob me of my Princess.


Iaq. Ho Princess! my Maitre be troubled in te esprete.


Iord. He is my Rival, and I Will fight him.


Iaq. You fight te great Turk?


Iord. I Will challenge him, and kill him by the trick I learnt to day.


Iaq. Oh he have te grand train vit te Cemiter dat vil sa, sa, sa, cut off te
head, and te arm at one blow.


Iord. Well then, I will play the Politician: the Dialogue we omitted at
dinner, in hopes this would have proved mine or my Daughters wedding-night,
shall be performed by way of Cerenade, and I will plant my self below over
against the Balcony; and if I epsy his Turkship making any courtship to her, I
will put my self into a posture of terror, and look so grum upon the matter,
that he shall think me a Devil or a Rival.


Exeunt Jorden and Jaques. Enter Trickmore and Young Jorden. Y. Iord. Does Sir
Simon then believe he has killed me?


Trick. I put him into a fear that he has done you some mischief so soon as I
disengaged him from you at the door; for I got his sword out of his hand, and
cut my finger with it, and bloodied the point, which much surpised him; then I
hurryed him away in great haste to that house, where I caused some persons to
come and report the news of your death, which has put him into such fear, that
he is resolved to leave the Town in disguise to avoid being apprehended.


Y. Iord. By that means we shall get quit of him.


Trick. The posture our affairs are in at present, do not much seem to require
his absence, therefore I have contrived a defeat, and will keep him yet in
play. I have set another Spring, which if it catch the Woodcock, 'twill hold
him fast. Look here comes forth our Knight in Petty-coats: mussle your self up
in your Cloak, and be gone.


Y. Iord. A stately dame on my word.


Exit Young Jorden. Enter Sir Simon Softhead, in the habit of a Gentlewoman.
Trick. Come, Sir, I am in a bodily fear for you, but I think you cannot be
known in this disguise, I would not for the World see you hanged.


Sir Sim. Nor I for the world you should see so sad a sight: but I don't flee
so much for the fear of death, as that it would be a dishonorable thing to be
hanged; it would be a blur to our Family, and much below the dignity of
Knighthood; were I of a mean descent, or a poor Devil, it were another matter.


Trick. Right, hanging then would not be so much, it were more suitable to ones
condition. Come, Sir, I Will lead you off, think to demean your self like a woman
of Quality, and carry your self with some state.


Sir Sim. Shaw waugh: let me alone for that, I know how to carry my self like a
Lady of honor. I warrant you; but have I not a little too much beard?


Trick. Some women have as much: but put your Mask on, that will hide it.


Sir Sim. I have never a Mask.


Trick. I laid a Vizard Mask with the rest of your things, I Will step in and
fetch it: Do you practice a good carriage in the mean time.


Exit Trickmore. Enter two men with Clubs. 1 Man. A pox on this Sir Simon
Softhead, that he should get away already.


2 Man. O that we could find him, that we might get the twenty pounds, Mr.
Jorden offers them that can bring him before a Justice.


Sir Sim. Ha, these are hounds upon the scent for me.


1 Man. I am as weary as a dog with running about, but hanged he is gone, we got
crowns a piece to encourage us to begin the search, even let us go and be merry
now.


Sir Sim. I would ye were gone, that I might be a little merry too.


2 Man. In Faith Comrade, we will have a Wench if we can get one, I Will try if I can
pick up that Gentlewoman, she looks like a good brazon'd faced Queen.


Sir Sim. How shall I behave my self now? these fellows understand no breeding.


2 Man. What, Mistress, are you here all alone?


Sir Sim. No, now you are here I am not alone.


Sir Simon counterfeiting a woman's voice. 2 Man. Mistress, if you please.


Sir Sim. Keep your hands off, they don't please.


2 Man. Here is excellent liquor hard by, pray let us wait on you to take a pot.


Sir Sim. I am not such a one as you take me for.


1 Man. Faith she is a good bonny Lass: Pray give me your hand, Lady.


Sir Sim. Over your ears, and you will ye saucy Rascals, I am a person of
Quality.


2 Man. Oh we know how to be civil.


1 Man. Oh Rogue, what a breast is there, I warrant you?


Sir Sim. Ye are the rudest insolent fellows I ever saw in my life.


2 Man. Aye he is a rude Rogue, go with me Mistress.


1 Man. Go with you Comrade?


Sir Sim. Let go my hand.


1 Man. Aye, let go her hand; come, Madam, you and I.


Sir Sim. Let me go both of you: is this usage to be offered to a person of
Quality? let go my hands, or I Will spit in your faces.


2 Man. Come, Madam, come this way.


They tug him about from one to another. 1 Man. No this way; I know where there
is the best drink


2 Man. You lie, I know best: this way, Madam.


1 Man. No, come this way.


Sir Sim. You uncivil, unmannerly fellows, how ye haul and pull me, I Will kick
your arses for you soundly.


Sir Simon kicks and boxes 'em. 1 Man. O Lord, Madam. O, O.


2 Man. Nay, nay, nay, good Madam.


Enter Cureal in the habit of a Constable. Cur. Ha! what is here to do? I
charge you in the Kings name to keep the peace.


Sir Sim. You unmannerly Rogues pick me up? I Will make ye know I am a man -- a
woman of Quality.


Cur. I Will have 'em before a Justice, if you please, Madam.


Sir Sim. I pray do Mr. Constable, they have pulled me almost limb from limb,
the Rogues would have ravished me.


1 Man. O good, Mr. Constable, we were but in quest of the Knight that killed
the Gentleman, we thought this might be he in disguise, and went to search.


Sir Sim. O what a mischievous lie has the Rogue told for an excuse.


Cur. Go, be gone about your business.


Exeunt two men. Sir Sim. I thank you, Mr. Constable, I know not how to make
you an amends for my deliverance.


Cur. 'Twill be an amends sufficient, if you prove to be the person they took
you for, 'twill be twenty pound in my way.


Sir Sim. Oh, I find by the constitution of my body here will be foul work.


Aside. Cur. By all circumstances you must be Sir Simon, you have a masculine
spirit, I saw you boxing, and kicking a little too heroically for a Woman.


Sir Sim. Oh I can hold no longer.


Cur. And a word slipped from you unawares even now, I heard you say, as I am a
man of Quality: Let me observe you well; faugh, I smell you out; oh there are
the stumps of a beard and all.


Sir Sim. I am undone: Good Mr. Constable, I am not he you look for.


Cur. Well, well, come before Mr. Jorden, we shall soon know who you are.


Sir Sim. Nay, good Mr. Constable.


Enter Trickmore. Trick. Heavens! Sir Simon, what is here to do?


Cur. O, lo you there, you are Sir Simon.


Sir Sim. Oh discovered: undone.


Cur. Yes, yes, come; come a-long.


Trick. Nay Mr. Constable, you and I have been old friends, pray, for my sake
let him go, and say you saw him not.


Cur. Never talk on it.


Trick. You were will not to esteem my friendship; come, pray let us adjust the
business; Sir Simon, pull out your gold.


Sir Sim. Oh cursed London!


Cur. Pray Mr. Trickmore, think not of any such thing, I dare not do it, I
protest.


Trick. Hold, hold your hand, there is gold, there are twenty Guinneys, Mr.
Constable.


Cur. The reward is so much to take him.


Trick. And there it is, not to take; him a thing sooner done by half.


Cur. Aye, Sir, but the breach of my duty, it is my office.


Trick. Come, there are twenty more.


Cur. Not for a thousand, I protest.


Sir Sim. Not for a thousand? then it is a thousand pound to a penny, but I
shall be hanged.


Trick. Sir Simon, how much was in the purse?


Sir Sim. A hundred Guinneys.


Trick. Shall I give him all if he will take 'em?


Sir Sim. All, all: I would not be hanged for a hundred thousand.


Trick. Here, Mr. Constable, take all in the purse: a hundred I assure you.


Cur. Well, Sir, I would not take it, but that I have a device in my head may
secure me: look you, Sir, I have hold of Sir Simon: do you now pull him away by
force: so, now if his escape be found out, you will be called in question for
it.


Trick. Well, I Will venture more than that to serve Sir Simon.


Sir Sim. Now he can do it with security, he might afford to give me half my
money back again.


Trick. Have a care of marring the matter. But pray tell me Mr. Constable is
young Mr. Jorden dead?


Cur. I have some reason to think he is not at all hurt, but that this is a
design of theirs to bring Sir Simon into trouble* and that the son conceals
himself in his Fathers house to this purpose: But for fear it should be
otherwise, get you gone so soon as you can, to prevent danger.


Sir Sim. Aye, let us be on the safer side. A^ my shirt sticks to me like a
Cerecloath.


Cur. Away, I hear a noise, more are coming this way, I Will go and delay 'em till
you get clear.


Sir Sim. Well, excepting your self, this is the only man of honesty I have met
with here in Town, but I perceive it is scarce with him, he sells it so dear.


Exit Cureal. Trick. Virtue, Sir Simon must be encouraged; come, Sir, while you
go in and dress you, I Will pretend business to Mr. Iorden's house, and find out
whether his son has received any hurt or not; and bring you word.


Exeunt Sir Simon, Trickmore. Enter Mr. Jorden, Music, two Shepherds, and a
Shepherdess. Iord. Music, plant your selves under that Window, away with it
smartly and briskly: so, this has alarmed 'em to the Balcony. Now you to your
Dialogue, and I to my posture.


Cleverwit in Turks habit with Betty Trickmore and Lucia appear in the Balcony,
Jorden stands making grimaces all the while the Song is sung. Two Shepherds,
and a Shepherdess betwixt 'em, sing. 1 Man. A heart in loves Empire, though
jocund, and blyth
From cares, and from fears can never he free:
It Is said that with pleasure we languish and sigh;
But for all can be urged, there is nothing can be
So pleasant, so pleasant as our liberty.

2 Man. None are more happy, nor none are more blessed
Than whom Love does inspire, with a gentle, soft fire;
When both of them sigh, and neither can rest,
How pleasant their pantings, how sweet their desire!
Love is a blessing, though counted a Pain;
For take away Love, no pleasures remain.

2 Man. To submit to Loves Law, ah sweet it would be,
If in Love we (...) any fidelity see:
But O Rigor extreme! O fate too unkind!
A Shepherdess faithful, no man can find:
And this faithless Sex so unworthy does prove,
They ought not to live, or ought not to love.

Woman. Ah passion most sweet!


1 Man. Ah blessed liberty!


2 Man. Sex full of deceit!


1 Man. How dear unto me!


Woman. How my heart you do ease!


2 Man. And how mine you displease!


1 Man. Ah quit thou for love this hatred so great*


Woman. A Shepherdess you,
May find that is true.

2 Man. But alas! where can she be met?


Woman. Our credits to save, my heart*
I do offer --

1 Man. -- O subtle Art!


2 Man. But Shepherdess may I believe,
That it wonnot it wonnot deceive?

Woman. By experience let us try,
Who can love best you or I.

1 Man. To them that constancy want,
May the Gods ne*er their wishes grant.

All three. Let Us permit the soft fire,
To inflame our desire.
Ah! how pleasant, how pleasant is love,
When two hearts faithful do prove!

Young Jorden and Marina in the Balcony are against 'em* Mar. He treats his new
Mistress with a great deal of gallantry.


Y. Iord* Now dearest Marina, let us ascend to your Father, he is by this time
from his Window convine'd of the slight is put on you; hang about his neck, use
all your little arts and pretty blandishments to gain his consent: you have
powerful charms in your persuasions, such as will mollify the most rigid
natures.


Mar. He does not at all dislike your person.


Y. Iord. And I will induce him to consider the hopes I have of an estate,
notwithstanding my fathers extravagant humor, I Will show him what I have in
present, and what more I hope from the event of this night.


Mar. I am called.


Y. Iord. Come it is your Fathers voice.


They retire from the Balcony. Jorden stands all this while in a posture, with
his eyes fixed on the Balcony. Enter Mr. Jorden and Trickmore. Trick. Sir, Mr.
Jorden, Mr. Jorden, I have most advantageous news for you: My Lord and Master
the Grand Seignior is mightily in love with your Daughter.


Iord. Ha, with my Daughter!


Trick. Yes.


Iord. With my Daughter, said you?


Trick. He has a mind to be your Son in-Law.


Iord. The great Turk be my Son-in-Law?


Trick. Yes, Sir, he called me to him just now, and speaking in his own
Language, said, Acciam croc soler ouch alla Moustaphi gidelum amanahem vorahini
oussere carbulath, (That is to say) This is that fair person I yesterday saw
pass along the street: This is she I languish'd for, and knew not where to find.


Iord. The Great Turk say this of my Lucie!


Trick. I told him she was wondrous beautiful: Then, said he, Marababa sahem,
Ah how much in love am I!


Iord. Marababa sahem, mean, ah how much in love am I!


Trick. Yes.


Iord. I am beholden to you for telling me, for I could never have thought that
Marababa sahem, should signify, Ah how much in love am I! Ah this Turkish is a
most admirable Language.


Trick. Much better than one could imagine; do you know what means
cacaracamouchen?


Iord. Cacaracamouchen? no.


Trick. That is to say, my pretty Pigsnie.


Iord. Cacaracamouchen, signify my pretty Pigsnie?


Trick. Yes.


Iord. It is a most excellent Language: cacaracamouchen, my pretty Pigsnie: ah
that a Turk should say so!


Trick. In fine, to tell you my whole embassey, he is coming down to demand
your Daughter in marriage, and to make you worthy to be his Father-in-Law, he
will make you a Mamamouchi, which is the greatest honor and dignity among the
Turks.


Iord. A Mamamouchi?


Trick. Yes, a Mamamouchi; that is to say, a Paladin, and a Paladin is a sort
of the most ancient. In fine, a Paladin is a Paladin, and a Paladin and a
Mamamouchi are all one and the same thing: nothing is more noble in the world,
and you may walk cheek by Jowl with the greatest Seigniors upon Earth.


Iord. The Grand Seignior honors me very much, and I beseech you conduct me to
him, to kiss his hand and give him thanks.


Trick. Oh, Sir, he is coming down to you.


Iord. He come down to me?


Trick. Yes, and will instal you in the dignity; it is his custom where ever he
goes to visit, to present the Master of the house with a Turkish habit, and you
will instantly have one brought to you to put on.


Iord. That will be noble.


Trick. He will consummate the marriage to night.


Iord. That will be quick dispatch.


Trick. His love cannot brook delay, within a day he departs hence, he will
take you and your Daughter a* long with him to Turkey, if you will go.


Iord. But all that I fear, is my Daughter should be averse to the marriage;
she is a little untoward sometimes in cases of this nature.


Trick. O, but to be the Grand Seigniors wife, she to be the Sultaness, and you
a Mamamouchi! O she cannot refuse this. See, Sir, there comes the greatest man
that walks upon the earth.


Enter Cleverwit in Turkish habit, his train carried up by three Blacks,
Turkish attendants, and three Turks with Vest, Turbant, Cemiter and Shoes.
Clev. Ambousahim, oqui boraf, Iordina, sala ma lecqui.


Trick. That is to say, Mr. Jorden, may your heart be all the year round like a
Rose Tree, full of buds. This is the manner of speaking obligingly in that
Country.


Iord. I am his highness the great Turks most humble servant.


Trick. Carigar, cambito oustin moraf.


Clev. Oustin yoc catamalequi basum, base alla moran.


Trick. He wishes Heaven may give you the strength of Lions, and the prudence
of Serpents.


Iord. His High and mighty Highness the great Turk does me too great an honor,
and I wish him all the happiness in the World.


Trick. Ossa binamen sadoc babally oracaf ouram.


Clev. Bell men.


Cleverwit and attendants exeunt. Trick. He says, these shall wait on you to
cloth you in that habit, in order to the ceremony of making you a Mamamouchi,
and for the celebrating the Rites of your Daughters Marriage.


Iord. All that in two words?


Trick. O, Sir, the Turkish Language is very significant, much may be said in
few words. But to be a Mamamouchi, you must be a Mohammedan.


Iord. I do not much scruple to change my religion, for any will serve my turn;
but methinks it is not a Gentlemanlike quality to change, though a man be sure of
a better.


Trick. But to be a Mamamouchi you must be a Mohammedan.


Iord. Then long live Mahomet.
Who stops when honor calls is but a Lourdane,
Honor need but to beckon Master Jorden.

ACT V. SCENE I.
The Scene draws open, and discovers Cleverwit sitting in state, Lucia on his
right hand, and Betty Trickmore on his left, Attendants of Turks on each side
the Throne. The Mufti with a Turbant stuck full of Lights, sitting at his feet.
Enter To solemn Music on each side of the Stage, many Turks bowing their
bodies to Cleverwit. After them Enter Two Dervises leading in Mr. Jorden
dressed in a Turkish Vest: But without Turbant, Sash or Cemiter; followed by
Trickmore, dancing Turks and others bearing in the Turbant, Sash and Cemiter.
The Mufti rises and takes Mr. Jorden to the Bottom of the Stage and Sings.
Mufti. Seti sabir
Ti respondir
Se non Sabir
Tazir, Tazir
Mi star Mufti
Tiqui star ti
Non Intendir
Tazir, Tazir.

Trick. He bids you hold your peace.


The Mufti runs Jorden backward, sits down by him on the foot of the Throne;
the Turks dance; then the Mufti rises, and the Dervises hurry Jorden down to
the bottom of the Stage again. Trick. Now the Mufti will demand what Religion
you are of.


Trickmore to Jorden. Mufti. Anabaptista, Anabaptista.


Derv. and Turks. No, no, no.


Mufti. Brunista, Brunista.


Derv. and Turks. No, no, no.


Mufti. Calvanista, Calvanista.


Derv. and Turks. No, no, no.


Mufti. Papista, Papista.


Derv. and Turks. No, no, no.


Mufti. Mohometana, Mahometana.


Derv. and Turks. Hivalla, Hivalla, Hivalla.

Mufti stamps. Chou, Chou, Chou.


At this the dancing Turks which stood round him, shrink up their shoulders,
and jump backward till they come to each side of the Stage, and stand in Antic
postures; the Mufti makes signs of invocating Mahomet. Mufti. Mahametta,
Mahametta, Mahametta.


2 Derv. Mahametta, etc.


Mufti. Mahametta per Giourdina
Mi pregar, sera e Mattina
Voler far un Paladina
De Giourdina, de Giourdina
Dar Turbanta e dar scarcinae
Con Galera e Brigantina
Per defender Palastina
Mahometta, etc.

The Dervises set the Turbant on Mr. Jordens head, and gird him with the Sash.
Mufti. Star Bon Turca Giourdina.


Trick. He tells you, you are now made a Turk.


Derv. and Turks. Hivalla, Hivalla, Hivalla.


Iord. Hivalla, Hivalla, etc.


Mufti. Chou, chou, chou.

The Mufti stamps to quiet them. Jorden falls back in imitation of the Turks
before. Mufti singing and dancing. Hula baba la chou, ba la haba la da.


2 Derv. and Turk ala baba, etc.


Iord. imitates. Hula ba, etc.


Mufti. Chou, chou, chou.


The Dervises bring Jorden forward again. Trick. Now you must answer for your
self.


Mufti. Ti non star Furba.


Trick. He asks you if you are a Knave?


Iord. No, no, no.


Mufti. Ti non star Furfanta.


Trick. He asks if you are a Paltroon.


Iord. No, no, no.


Mufti. Donar Turbanta, Donar Turbanta.


Derv. and Turks. Donar Turbanta, etc.


Mufti. Ti star Nobile e non star fabbola
Pigilar Schiabbola.

Trick. He tells you, you are ennobled, and bids you take the Cemiter.


2 Derv. and Turks. Tistar Nobile, etc.


Mufti. Dara Dara
Bastonnara Bastonnara.

2 Derv. and Turks. Dara Dara.


Here the Dervises run him back to's seat again, and the dancing Turks brandish
their Cemiters about him. The Mufti sits down, the Dervises stand on each hand
of him. The Turks dance, and at the end of the Dance make a lane; holding their
Cemiters in threatening postures: the Mufti and Dervises run Jorden into the
middle of them. Mufti. Non tener Honta.
Questa star ultima affront.

2 Derv. and the Turks. Non tener, etc.


Here the Mufti and Turks turn round a good while as fast as they can, and the
Dervises makes Jorden turn round as fast: They stop on a sudden, and stand all
bowing to Mr. Jorden: Then solemn Music plays, and Cleverwit discends to
Jorden, and lays both his hands on his head. Clev. Mamamouchi, Paladin, Paladin.


Exit leading off Betty Trickmore and Lucia. The Stage clears in order: solemn
Music plays all the while. Manent Trickmore, Jorden. Trick. The Sultan saluted
you as he went off by the Title of Mamamouchi and Paladin.


Iord. O there is a great grace in the sound of Mamamouchi.


Trick. The next thing you are to do, may it so please the illustrious
Mamamouchi, is to give your Daughter in Marriage to the Sultan, and to set your
hand and seal to those writings are drawing within to convey your Land away.


Iord. But why must not a Mamamouchi have Land?


Trick. A Mamamouchi is the greatest honor a subject can be raised to, and to
have Lands is not consistent with so great a Dignity, because it implies a kind
of slavery and servitude.


Iord. Humh.


Trick. Another reason is, they are men in great Power; and if they might be
Possessors of Land, they might in time purchase whole Countries, and raise
Armies of their Tenants, and become Rebels.


Iord. Humh.


Trick. And for this cause no subject of the mighty Sultans is permitted to
have any inheritance of Land. You my great Master and Illustrious Mamamouchi,
will have yearly coming in no less than fourscore or a hundred thousand pound a
year.


Iord. Well, my Daughter will be provided for by her Marriage, I am going a
Mamamouchi into Turkey: My Son shall have my Land, and stay in England to
continue the name, that after ages may know, from whence came Jonathan Jorden
the great Mamamouchi.


Trick. I Will leave you to the congratulation of your friends, that will be
flocking to you to salute you by your new title.


Exit Trickmore. Iord. Jack, approach:

Jaques laughs. It is now below me to give you the title of Master, I must now
call thee Jack; for thou see I am created a Mamamouchi.


Iaq. A Mam -- hi, hi, hi?


Iord. How now?


Iaq. Vat be you, Sir, a Mama -- hi, hi, hi?


Iord. I am a Mamamouchi.


Iaq. A Mamamou -- hi, hi, hi?


Iord. How dares thee knave laugh before a Mamamouchi?


Iaq. A Mamamouchi -- hi, hi, hi?


Iord. What does the slave mean?


Iaq. Maitre Jorden be a Mamamouchi -- hi, hi, hi?


Iord. Grand insolence!


Iaq. O me demand pardon of te great Mamamouchi -- hi, hi, hi.


Iord. I will not endure this.


Iaq. Me be trouble very mush, but me can no hold to see, hi, hi, hi.


Iord. Slave, to see what?


Iaq. To see, hi, hi hi.


Iord. Hold, or Il run my fist down your throat.


Iaq. Me demand pardon on me two knee, hi, hi, hi, you are so pleasant, hi, hi,
hi, tat me never see te like, hi, hi, hi.


Iord. Thou French Rascal!


Iaq. You be so comical, tat -- hi, hi, hi.


Iord. Insufferable, intolerable, insupportable.


Iaq. Excuse me but a little, hi, hi, hi,


Iord. Take warning, or by Mahomet, and the great Turk, thy chastisement shall
be most bloody.


Iaq. O, me have done, hi, hi, hi.


Iord. Hear then.


Iaq. Hi, hi, hi.


Iord. You Jack shall go with me into Turkey, and be my French Interpreter.


Iaq. Ouy Monsieur, hi, hi, hi.


Iord. Are you snearing again?


Iaq. Hi, hi, hi, here, Sir, beat a me, box me, buffet me, kick me, give me to
bastonado; but no, hi, hi, hi, hinder me laugh, hi, hi, hi.


Iord. Then by the Turbant of a Mamamouchi my revenge shall cut the off.


Iaq. Hi, hi, hi. O, murder, murder.


Boy. Murder, murder.


Enter Young Jorden. Y. Iord. What outcry is this?


Boy. O my Master is huzzaing the Munfu.


Y. Iord. Hold, Sir, what do you mean to kill him?


Iord. I have sworn by Mahomet, and cannot in honor come off without his head.


Iaq. O pray make te agreement, me only laughed out my laugh, hi, hi, hi.


Iord. Laugh at a Mamomouchi?


Y. Iord. Did not duty restrain me, I could not forbear; this strange garb and
alteration will raise laughter where ever you go.


Iord. No, I am going where a Mamamouchi is adored.


Y. Iord. What mean you, Sir, by Mamamouchi?


Iord. I mean Paladin a certain kind, of Paladin, and Mamamouchi are all one.


Y. Iord. A certain kind of wild beast, is it not?


Iord. I tell you, I am a Mamamouchi, it is a certain kind of honor amongst
the Turks: In fine, had you come a little sooner, you might have seen the
ceremony.


Y. Iord. What Ceremony?


Iord. Mahometa par Iordina.


Y. Iord. What means this?


Iord. Iordina, that is to say Jorden.


Y. Iord. Well, Sir.


Iord. Volar far un Paladina de Iordina.


Y. Iord. How Is that?


Iord. Dar turbanta con gulera.


Y. Iord. What signifies this?


Iord. Per defender Palestina.


Y. Iord. What mean you by all this?


Iord. Dara, dara bastonnara.


Y. Iord. Strange kind of gibberish this!


Iord. Non tener honta questa star l'ultima affronta.


Y. Iord. I beseech you, Sir, let me but know what all this signifies.


Iord. Sings and dances Hou la baba la chou, ba la ba ba la da.


Y. Iord. Certainly, Sir, you are going distracted.


Iord. Peace, insolent, learn to behave your self with more respect to a
Mamamouchi.


Y. Iord. Well, Sir, I come not to offend you, but to acquaint you, that fair
Marina's Father is so incensed against her for provoking you to quit your
intentions, that he has turned her out of doors, and vowed in his anger never
to see her face, till she has reconciled you to her, and is become your Wife.


Iord. My Wife! the case is altered now, I am a Mamamouchi.


Y. Iord. Sir, I was in part the occasion of her misfortune, therefore give me
leave to entreat you to be kind to her.


Iord. No, she has not state nor grandeur enough in her person to be a
Mamamoucha, Paladina. Here comes my Princess, ha with what a swoop and haughty
mein she marches forward! Go you in and peruse the writings are drawing, and
you will see what you get by my being a Mamamouchi.


Enter Betty Trickmore. B. Trick. I come to pay the first tribute of homage to
your new dignity, and to wish you much joy of the Election of your Daughter to
the Grandeur of Sultanness.


Iord. Making reverences after the Turkish mode Madam, I wish you the strength
of Serpents, and the prudence of Lions.


B. Trick. I am proud of the honor I have to be the first that comes to salute
you by the title of Great and Illustrious.


Iord. Madam, I wish that you may be all the year round like a Rose-tree full
of buds, that I may have the gathering them, that with the breath of Mamamouchi
they may be full blown, that they may ever flourish in the Sunshine of
Paladines prosperity, and that --


B. Trick. That would be an honor, Sir, too great.


Iord. Say, will they kindly admit the influence of my love?


B. Trick. Ah, can the heart of a Mamamouchi descend from the high mountain top
of honor to perch upon a Rosetree that grows in the valley?


Iord. Marababa sahem, that is by way of being my own interpreter: Ah how in
love am I!


B. Trick. With me?


Iord. With thee Cacaracamouchen my pretty pigsnie.


B. Trick. But do you love me?


Iord. Thee, and only thee, by Mahomet.


B. Trick. After this assurance, I no longer will conceal the secret of my
Quality; then Prince Mamamouchi, I am not below your love: here, Sir, take my
hand, and know that by birth I am --


Enter Marina weeping. Iord. Little thinks she I know already -- what.


B. Trick. Prevented.


Iord. In what an unluky minute comes she here?


Mar. Ah, Mr. Jorden, is it thus you treat a harmless maid! can you be so cruel
after all your vows of love and proffered kindness to forsake me? Ah, did the
message of my love merit no better a return than scorn?


B. Trick. How! what do I hear!


Iord. Puh, Madam, mind not her idle story.


B. Trick. Is it possible you should be faithless and unconstant?


Iord. I unconstant? no, no, it is not in my nature.


B. Trick. Do you then love her still? ah me!


Iord. I love her? that is a good one: look you, Madam, does she seem fit to be
a Mamamoucha or a Paladina; no, no, it is you I love.


Mar. 'Twas me you did love.


Iord. Prithee hold thy prating.


Mar. You have forsaken and undone me.


Iord. I think the wench is mad; look you, to put you out of your pain, see
here I bestow my hand and heart.


B. Trick. Would you deceive me too?


Iord. I vow --


Enter Cureal. B. Trick. Hold dissembler, let me vow first.


Iord. Hear me.


B. Trick. I vow not to hear, nor see you this --


Iord. Hold, ah hold, hold.


B. Trick. This half-hour -- nor love you if I can help it.


Exit Betty Trickmore. Mar. Ah hapless Maid, what has fate in reserve for thee
but death, that art abandoned by a Father, and by a Lover forsaken? Unkind and
cruel man farewell, you soon shall hear that I am dead, laid in the cold grave,
covered over with earth, and then forgotten as now forsaken.


Exit Marina. Cur. What means my friend by this sad posture?


Iord. I vow to you,

Jorden blubbers all the while he speaks. Mr. Doctor, I cannot help it; I
cannot but grieve; I was always good natured; I ought to pity her; for the
truth on it is I, I, I, have wronged her poor thing!


Cur. Truly my heart melts too, and I have brine in my eyes, I cannot but mourn
to see a Mamamouchi weep. But the very sound of that word comforts and rejoices
me.


Iord. And so it does me.


Cur. I heard the news within, and came in haste to wish long life, continual
health, and all hearts ease to my friend the Illustrious Paladin. Come, Sir,
think no more of her, it was her own fault.


Iord. And so it was; but, Mr. Doctor, she came in the most unlucky minute.


Cur. As how?


Iord. Just as my Princess was about to give me her hand in earnest of her
heart, she bolts in, and interrupts us with her whining.


Cur. Strange accident!


Iord. Had she staid but one minute longer, we had struck up the bargain.


Cur. Indeed!


Iord. And she was just upon discovery to me who she was.


Cur. All will out, Love can keep no secrets.


Iord. She grew jealous presently, and banished me her presence.


Cur. But for half an hour, if she can be without your company so long.


Iord. She had no sooner heard love named, but she flew off.


Cur. You Will have her come about again, like a bird that is scared, which takes
a flight round, and lights just in the same place.


Iord. I long till the half hour is out, that I may be at her again.


Cur. In the mean time introduce me to the Sultan as a friend of yours, that I
may give him my respects as your Son-in-Law.


Iord. Come I Will recommend you to him as my special good friend.


Exeunt. Enter Sir Simon in a Cloak in his Shirt, and drawers underneath, and
Trickmore. Trick. Your clothes stole? which way?


Sir Sim. I left 'em on the chair under the window: when I went in I found the
window open.


Trick. Being a ground room it was an easy matter. Well, but I bring you good
news after all; Mr. Jorden is no more hurt than you or I.


Sir Sim. Nay then I care not.


Trick. I saw him go in and out at his Fathers house two or three times.


Sir Sim. Did you?


Trick. Come, now I Will carry you to your lodging, I have a friend lives at the
end of this street, will make you very welcome for my sake.


Sir Sim. I thank you, Sir; I am so infinitely beholden to you.


Enter Lucia and Betty Trickmore. B. Trick. Here they are.


Luc. I Will keep on my Mask, that Sir Simon may not know me.


B. Trick. Ah Gentlemen, Gentlemen!


Trick. Ha!


B. Trick. Ah, if ye are noble Gentlemen, give protection to a distressed
Virgin.


Trick. Sir Simon, it is the height of gallantry, and the glory of Knighthood
to succor beauty in distress. Madam, be your cause what it will, here are
those will stand your champions.


Sir Sim. This adventure makes me think I am a Knight errant.


Trick. Declare fair Damsel what your disasters are, that by the knowledge of
them, we may judge how capable we are to serve you.


B. Trick. My Father dying while I was an infant, delivered me to the care of
his-brother, and in his last Will commanded me to respect my uncle, as I would
have done him, had he lived; and there left me ten thousand pound in money, and
six hundred pounds a year in Land. But the moyty to be forfeited, if I married
without this Uncles consent; but he covetous wretch, is now grown so inhumanely
cruel, that he would sell me to one I never can love, for half my portion, and
force me to be his wife: This five thousand pound here in gold


Open the Cabinet. Trick. Ha, gold, see, Sir Simon.


Sir Sim. Gold indeed!


B. Trick. Was the price my Uncle sold me for, and this is the night I should
have been forced to marry against my will: but whilst my Uncle and intended
husband were consulting about my Jointure, my Damsel and I found an
opportunity, encouraged by this Gold and these Jewels to make an escape.


Sir Sim. A pretty adventure.


Trick. Aye, Sir Simon, 'twere pretty indeed, if the story would run on in
adventures, till at last it ended as Romances do with a Marriage.


Sir Sim. And I the man.


Trick. Oh, 'twould be a solecism in a Romance to make the Lady distressed
marry any other than the Knight had rescued her.


Sir Sim. Five thousand pounds in hand, and all these Jewels.


Trick. Besides you will recover the rest. Lady, this Knight vows he will protect
you not only this night, but as long as the fates permit him to draw vital
breath.


B. Trick. The deceased daughter of old Goodhope thanks you.


Trick. Goodhope! are you indeed his Daughter?


B. Trick. The same.


Trick. I knew him well, and was one of the witnesses to the Will you speak of.
Could you but get this Girl, Sir Simon, you would not lose your labor of
coming to Town. But, Madam, who was the man your Uncle would compel you to
marry?


B. Trick. One Mr. Jorden:


Trick. Jorden! 'twould be a rare revenge if you could get Iordens Mistress
from him.


B. Trick. But rather than be his wife, I have vowed to marry the first
Gentleman that asks me the question.


Sir Sim. If I can serve you, sweet Virgin, think of no other.


Trick. Madam, I hear a noise. It may be somebody coming in quest of you.


B. Trick. O courteous Knight conduct me to some place where I may find a
refuge.


Sir Sim. My Arms shall be your sanctuary.


Trick. Sir Simon, we will stay now at this house, here lodges a young Oxford
Parson of my acquaintance, and if the Lady please to let him pronounce the
spell of Matrimony, she will no longer be in danger of them that pursue her.


Sir Sim. Yonder is somebody coming.


Trick. Away, Sir, with sword in hand like a valiant Hero, and stout Champion,
lead off the Virgin in defiance of danger.


Sir Sim. Which thus I do.


Trick. I as your Squire, will follow with the Damsel, and guard the Gold.


Sir Simon, Betty Trickmore, Trickmore, Lucia, exeunt. Enter Mr. Jorden,
Cureal, Young Jorden. Iord. There: now you are Master of my whole estate, all
is your own.


Gives him a parchment. Y. Iord. This is a sad bounty, Sir, which gives me your
Estate, and deprives me of your self: but must I never see you more?


Iord. No.


Y. Iord. May I not once in ten years make a voyage to see you, Sir, at
Constantinople?


Iord. I thought what you would be at, but to confine you in England, I have settled
my Estate upon you conditionally, and you forfeit it to Mr. Doctor here, if
ever you travel out of the three Kingdoms.


Y. Iord. I should have been glad to have seen you in your grandeur in Turkey,
and to have had the honor of being owned by a Mamamouchi for his Son, but
since you will not have it so --


Iord. Look you friend, now you shall see my Sultan Sonin-Law, I know the first
word will be to ask for my Daughter, therefore, Son, go see if she is dressed,
and bid her come away.


Exit Young Jorden. Enter Cleverwit, two Dervises, Attendants. Cur. I am, may
it please you mighty Sultan, an intimate friend of your noble Father-in-Law
here, the new created Mamamouchi: I come to pay you my most profound respects
and services, and to do reverence to the hem of your Vest.


Iord. Where is this Interpreter now to tell him who you are, and what it is
you say? Ah you shall hear how obligingly he will answer you, where a-duce is
this man gone?

to Cleverwit Strouf, strif, strof, straf; this is a Doc-tore, a Doc-tore, a
grand man with the King, a Mamamouchi English: Euh, I cannot make him
understand me better.


Clev. Cacaracamouchen.


Iord. Aye, your Cacaracamouchen is dressing, dressing, I knew he would be
asking for my Daughter.


He makes signs of dressing. Clev. Marababasahem.


Iord. Aye, and she is Marababasahem.


Cur. What Is that?


Iord. He tells me, he is deeply in love.


Iaq. Within Teives, teives, teives, begar.


Iord. Hark, they cry Thieves.


Iord and Iaq. Euh.


Jorden is going out in haste, Jaques enters, runs against him, and almost
beats him backward. Iord. Villain, had thou a mind to be the death of a
Mamamouchi?


Iaq. O me beg te pardon. But me come to tell you of Teives, Rogues, you be
rob, rob of your gold, rob of your money.


Iord. and Cur. Robbed?


Iaq. Me had te occasion to go into your Shambre, and me find your shest, your
iron shest open, noting witin, all gone, gone.


Iord. No Cabinet? no gold.


Iaq. No, no Cabinet, no Gold, no Money, noting at all, all gone, all gone.


Iord. Find out the Thief, or you are he.


Iaq. Teif, teif, jerne Frenchman and Teif, begar find out te Teif your self,
ho, ho.


Iord. Ah good Jack, good Mr. Jack, find out the Thief has stole the Cabinet,
the Jewels, my Princess Jewels.


Iaq. O ho den Maitre Iacques be no Teif.


Iord. No, run, run, cry stop Thief, stop Thief.


Runs up and down the Stage. Clev. Cassa molou.


Cleverwit speaks to him. Iord. Oh robbed, robbed, robbed of my Princess Jewels:
Thieves, Thieves, Thieves.


Enter Young Jorden. Y. Iord. Oh, Sir, undone, undone.


Iord. Aye, undone, undone, the Cabinet, the Jewels.


Y. Iord. My Sister, Sir.


Iord. No, no, she has 'em not.


Y. Iord. Is stole, is gone.


Iord. Aye, aye, they are stole, and gone, quite gone.


Y. Iord. Aye, Sir, my Sister is stole, my Sister is gone.


Iord. Your Sister gone too!


Y. Iord. Aye, Sir, gone away, run away, stole away.


Iord. O unfortunate Mamamouchi! lose my gold, lose my daughter; and now the
Jewels are lost, I shall lose my Princess too. Oh undone, undone.


Cur. Alas, alas!


Y. Iord. She left this note on her Table to let you know she could not like
the great Turk so well as another, you once approved of for her husband, and to
avoid the marriage, is fled away into the arms of one will this night make her
his Wife.


Iord. Oh, undone, undone, undone.


Cur. Have patience, Sir.


Iord. Now shall not I be carried into Turkey, but remain a sneaking Mamamouchi
here in England.


Enter Trickmore. Trick. What is your daughter gone?


Iord. Aye, Sir, the baggage just as she was to have been the she great Turk,
is run away.


Trick. She is but at the next house, I saw her led in by a a man muffl'd in a
Cloak.


Y. Iord. I Will follow, and prevent the dishonor of our Family.


Exit Young Jorden. Iord. Bring the baggage home.


Cur. A fortunate discovery.


Iord. Pray tell his greatness, that this Gentleman is my special friend, and a
person of much worth, and one that is ambitious of his smiles. Now you shall
hear how he will answer you.


Trick. Alabala crociam, aceiboram alabamen.


Clev. Cutalequi tubal ourin soter amalouchen.


Iord. Lo you there.


Trick. He says, may the rain of prosperity always besprinkle the Garden of
your Family.


Iord. There Is for you.


Enter Young Jorden, Lucia, Jaques. Cur. Fine, indeed.


Y. Iord. Nay, I must deliver you into the hands of my Father: There, Sir, and
now I Will send the Thief after her to you. Come Jacques.


Exeunt Young Jorden and Jacques. Iord. Ah graceless Girl!


Cur. Why, Madam, do you so ill requite a Father that is so provident for your
good, and seeks to dispose of you with so much advantage: see what a glorious
husband here stands ready for you.


Luc. I pursued but mine own inclinations, he once approved of Sir Simon for
his Son-in-Law.


Iord. Ha! was he the man? he is a pockey beggarly Knight. Come give me your
hand, I will dispose of you to more advantage, the grand Seignior does me the
honor to demand you in marriage. Come, come near: immortal glory crown your
nuptials.


Luc. Ah, Sir.


Iord. Go too, give him your hand:


Luc. Marry a Turk?


Iord. Yes, the great Turk.


Luc. Not I.


Iord. I Will see it done.


Luc. No, Sir, you have no power to force me to take any man but Sir Simon for
my Husband.


Iord. Do It, or the breath of a Mamamouchi shall blast thee; do it, or may never
the Rain of prosperity besprinkle thy Grass-plat.


Cur. Be obedient to your Father.


Luc. In any thing but this.


Iord. In this, or I Will send you beyond Sea to a Nunnery.


Cur. Use no violence.


Luc. Rather let me dye than prove false to Sir Simon.


Iord. Take her hence, and let her be locked up all night in the Cellar, I Will
pack her beyond Sea tomorrow.


Luc. Ah, Sir, I Will do any thing rather than go to a Nunnery, that were to be
buried alive.


Iord. So then, down on your marrow-bones, ask him forgiveness for running
away. Sir, I beseech you to tell him.


To Trickmore. Trick. Not that she fled away from his love: I Will tell him* she
prostrates her self before him to know if he thinks her worthy to be his
Sultana.


Iord. Pray do.


Trick. Bolac allim oustin malaf afti.


Clev. Boloma tafti.


Trick. She shall be the Glove to his right hand.


Iord. Ah, ha.


Clev. Elcan allhoim.


Trick. The Rose-bud in his Nose-gay.


Iord. Ha, ha.


Clev. Malta haraban.


Trick. The plum in his broth.


Cur. Pretty.


Clev. Croustan meli.


Trick. The crust to his bread: (which the Turks love wonderfully.)


Clev. Tart of anachi.


Trick. A Jewel to wear at his heart.


Cur. Brave!


Iord. I, is it not?


Clev. Straca tafti.


Trick. The Joy of his soul.


Clev. Hulalli, hulalli.


2 Derv. Hulalli, hulalli, hulalli.


Cleverwit throws his handkercheif in Lucia's bosom. Trick. His bedfellow,
his bedfellow, his bedfellow. Madam; you must veil your face with that
handkerchief, and suffer your self to be led by these Dervises to the Mufti who
are prepared for the Ceremonies of the Marriage.


Iord. Is it not a pretty Language?


Cur. Full of very obliging Phrases.


The two Dervises lead out Lucia veiled with the handkercheif. Enter, Sir Simon
guarded, Jacques, Boy with the Cabinet. Iaq. All^nz Teif, come along and be
hanged.


Sir Sim. What a Devil do ye haul me, as if I had stole the money.


Iord. Stole it? pray how came your worship by it else?


Sir Sim. I came honorably by it*


Iord. And you shall as honorably be hanged for it.


Sir Sim. Be hanged for receiving money?


Iord. The Receiver is as bad as the Thief. Bear witness that will hang him.


Sir Sim. I received it as my wifes portion.


Cur. A cunning piece of policy, rob you of Gold and Jewels, run away with your
Daughter, and being taken, say he received it as her Portion.


Iord. That excuse will not do, he stole both it, and my Daughter too.


Sir Sim. Daughter! what daughter did I steal?


Iord. Nay, she is not far off.


Sir Sim. Aye, let me hear her say it.


Iord. It Is no matter whether she says it or no, she was found in the house
where you was.


Sir Sim. What Is that to me, she might follow me for ought I know.


Iord. That Is a cunning excuse, follow you?


Sir Sim. She Is not so modest a woman, but that she might -- Ask him there else.


Pointing to Trickmore. Iord. My Daughter not modest?


Trick. As any woman in Town for any thing that I can say.


Sir Sim. aside He Will not be known he told me. Well, if he will not say it, I know
others that will; and if all be true is said, I am not the first man she has
followed.


Cur. It Is ungenerous, Sir Simon, now you cannot have the Lady to defame her.


Iord. That is malice: if she followed you, did that Cabinet with the gold and
Jewels follow you too?


Sir Sim. But she that had 'em did.


Iord. Cunning knave, he thinks to escape by laying the Theft on my Daughter
still.


Sir Sim. What do you tell me of your Daughter still? ask that man if it did
not follow me, now you go to that.


Trick. Ask me?


Sir Sim. Did not a Lady come running after us?


Trick. After who?


Sir Sim. You and I.


Trick. When?


Sir Sim. A little while ago.


Trick. Where?


Sir Sim. In the street.


Trick. Not as I know.


Sir Sim. Why? was not you and I together when a Lady came and begged our
protection?


Trick. You amaze me! what Lady was it?


Sir Sim. She that told us the story of her Uncle that would have sold her, and
how she escaped.


Trick. What means he?


Iord. Lo you there.


Trick. I never saw you in my life till just now.


Sir Sim. Hye-day, hye-day.


Trick. Sure he is dreaming of Romances.


Iord. Or else he is mad.


Cur. He is indeed much troubled with melancholy fancies, and melancholy is a
sort of madness, that will be his best plea before a Judge.


Sir Sim. I thank you Mr. Quack, you will be sure to speak for your Patient, you
played fine Pranks with me to day.


Iord. Come, Sir Knight, speak to the purpose: what is this to the Gentlewoman
that followed you with the Cabinet?


Sir Sim. And what is the Gentlewoman to you?


Iord. Yes, she is something to me.


Sir Sim. What? because you bought her of her Uncle for half her portion?


Iord. What means he now?


Sir Sim. And this night he was to force her to marry you?


Iord. He grows mad, stark mad.


Sir Sim. You will be so ^on, when you know she is the Lady I have married, and
that it was she gave me this Cabinet.


Trick. Can you guess what he would be at?


Iord. Not in the least, I know nothing of any Marriage, Uncle, or any thing
like it.


Cur. Pray where is this Lady wife you talk of?


Sir Sim. She was too cunning for you, she slipped out at the back door, but if
you find her, you will be never the better, I assure you, ha, ha, he. We are
married, she is my wife now, and so pray set your hearts at rest.


Iord. This is all but fiction; but we have proof enough to hang him.


Enter Betty Trickmore. Sir Sim. Here she comes that will clear all.


Iord. My dear Princess!


Cur. See she is displeased with you.


Iord. There is much of Majesty in her frowns*


B. Trick. Ungrateful man, false and unconstant!


Iord. Ah Sovereign Lady of my soul!


B. Trick. Unworthy me, and my love.


Iord. On his knees, behold your Mamamouchi falls.


B. Trick. My dear Knight, my dear Sir Simon, have I found you?


Iord. Hau.


Sir Sim. My bosom shall be your sanctuary, and my arms magic Circles to keep
thee here for ever; love shall be the sweet enchantment of our souls.


Iord. My Princess is grown very loving, sure she mistakes her man.


Sir Sim. My dear bride, my dear wife, I Have been at such a loss for want of thy
presence.


Iord. How is that? his Wife!


Trick. It may be this is the Lady he has married.


Iord. That is my Princess: away with him, if he has married her I Will hang him,
because it is the speediest and surest Divorce can be had.


B. Trick. No, malicious man: this Cabinet is mine. I took it out of your
custody, as unworthy to keep any thing that belonged to a Princess: The Key
your servant gave me when you cast your skin.


Sir Sim. A Princess!


Trick. You see your fortune.


Exit Trickmore: Iord. Am I then deprived of my love, a Princess, and revenge
at once? Here comes Marina, I Will be content with my leavings, and marry her
presently.

Enter Young Jorden and Marina. You come opportunely, Mrs. Marina, for in
spite of that Princess there, I will make thee a Mamamoucha.


Mar. What is that, Sir?


Iord. Thou shall be my Wife.


Mar. I am your Daughter, Sir.


Y. Iord. I thought my self concerned to repair the injuries you had done her.
I wanted nothing before to gain her fathers consent, but an estate, and your
bounty supplied me with that.


Iord. Deprived of Marina too!


Y. Iord. Our business now was to ask you blessing.


Iord. A blessing without an estate is but a name, and you had that beforehand:
Well, my comfort is I am a Mamamouchi.


Enter Cleverwit, Trickmore, Lucia, Attendants. Trick. Sir, the Marriage is
concluded, the Sultan is your Son-in-Law.


Iord. They were very eager, married before I come.


Trick. They come now to ask your blessing, which the Turks do by bowing.


Iord. Princess, pine at my glory: behold me Father to the Grand Seignior, and
the Worlds greatest Emperor bows to me. Love and conquest crown your lives.


Clev. Your Son-in-Law but no Sultan, thanks you.


Cleverwit bowing low lets fall his Turbant, and beard; then stands up and is
discovered. Iord. How! Mr. Cleverwit?


Clev. The same, Sir, I am no Turk great or little.


Iord. Am I no Mamamouchi then?


Sir Sim. and B. Trick. Ha, ha, he.


Iord. Friend, Mr. Doctor, what shall I say? must I be content with a pitiful
Knighthood at last?


Y. Iord. You Will find your self defeated there too: for, him you take for a
favorite at Court, and a Doctor, is neither favorite nor Doctor; but one
instructed and employed by me to work upon your Capricio of setting up for a
Gentleman, thereby to supply my own necessities, and by the event to bring you
to see the vanity of your extravagancie.


Clev. This is certain truth, Sir.


Iord. No Doctor?


Cur. No, Sir.


Iord. Avoid Satan, thou art then the Devil.


Y. Iord. No, Sir, he is onward in his way, he is a Mountebanck, and may in
time take his degree, as most of them do.


Cur. I have an excellent cure for your corns, powders for the teeth, ointments
for the itch, plasters for byles, and so forth.


Sir Sim. Save you Mr. Doctor: save you Illustrious Mamamouchi, ha, ha, he.


Iord. Well, I am vexed at nothing so much, as his getting my Princess; and
could I be revenged of him for that, and his insolent insulting --


Trick. Well, Sir, now come I in with my discovery; and to gain your pardon for
taking on me to be a Fencer to prevent your going to Sir Simon: and also my
pretending to be a Norwich Merchant to forestal Sir Simons address to Mrs.
Lucia, I will change the Scene of Sir Simons mirth, and let him know, that his
Princess will not disdain to call me brother, and is by occupation a Sempstress.


Sir Sim. Another turn yet?


Iord. I give you joy, Sir, ha, ha, ha, joy of your Princess, ha, ha, ha; hula
baba la chou.


Sings and dances. Sir Sim. Where is the Cabinet, the gold and Jewels?


B. Trick. Lass, Sir, they are none of mine.


Clev. The Jewels, and part of the gold I seize on as mine.


Y. Iord. And the rest is mine, only lent to carry on the design of her
personating a Princess.


Sir Sim. No portion then?


B. Trick. My Dowry is my brain.


Trick. Wit without money has long been the inheritance of our Family, and
yours, Sir Simon, is a Family that has money without wit; it is a proper
Marriage for you, and both our houses will be much the better for it hereafter.


Iord. Lord! Sir Simon, what luck had you to get my Princess from me, ha, ha,
he, you will have God knows what with her, ha, ha, he; you will never be able to
count her portion, ha, ha, he.


Sir Sim. This Town produces nothing but wonders.


B. Trick. And one was, that I should be fond of you, Sir Simon.


Y. Iord. Bear it with fortitude, Sir Simon, such misfortunes sometimes befall
Knights errants.


Clev. I ride the hind horse, I married but your Ladies Damsel; this is the
handmaid that carried the luggage.


Sir Sim. I am sorry for nothing so much as the loss of that, for it spoils
half the conceit of a good subject for a Romance.


Y. Iord. But the turn of it makes it fitter for a Comedy in these days, and
that is much better, for the Knight and the Damsel still shake hands at the end
of the intrigue.


Iord. Save you, Sir Knight errant, much joy to you and the Lady of your
adventures, ha, ha, he.


Sir Sim. Laugh on, Sir, it is your turn now. Well, Lady Wife, and
Brother-in-Law I embrace you both: I Will down to morrow into Suffolk where you
shall be welcome: there people have either more honesty, or less wit: we have
no cheating there, but with Lords and Jockies at Horse-races, and Ladies at
Cards.


Iord. And you, Sir Simon, have got one will match the best, if she holds on as
she begins, ha, ha, he; Sir, I doubt not but she will improve upon your hand, ha,
ha, he.


Y. Iord. I am glad, Sir, you lay things no more to heart, if you please to
make up the money, Mr. Cleverwit has of mine in the Cabinet, a convenient
Portion for my Sister, I Will restore to you one half of your estate.


Iord. Well though now I affect not much to play the Gentleman, yet in this last
act to cross Fortune, I will show my self a Gentleman: Mr. Cleverwit I Will do it.


Clev. I thank you Sir:

To reclaim some men from their extravaganees,
We must appear indulgent to their humors,
And push them forward to undertakings
Yet more indiscreet, that raised high in hopes
They may from the unexpected events
Be convinced of their follies.
For fools are obstinate to good advice;
Experience, and not percept makes them wise.

FINIS.
Prologue spoak at the Midle-Temple.
OUr Author thinks it is not in vain to sue
For pardon here, for he is one of you;
And hopes he has some little interest here;
But yet his hope is not quite void of fear:
For by the grave it may objected be,
Who can at once mind Law and Poetry?
But this he bid me say in his excuse,
A fortnights sickness did this Play produce*
His sickness was the Bawd unto his Muse.
If after that he spent some idle time
In courting her, he hopes 'twas no great crime.
Fortune has punished him; for like a Whore
She lays the Brat even at his Chamber door;
The common'st Wench in the town could do no more.
The Father ow^s the child, which none of you
His fellow Students ever yet would do.
Though in hand-baskets the poor fools did ly,
And at your stare-case feet for succor cry:
For them --
He does his yearly contribution pay;
Therefore be kind to his but this one day:
For its relief you need not draw your purse,
Give it goodwords, and this shall back to Nurse.
FINIS.

