A Short ESSAY OF AFFLICTIONS.

OR, Balm to Comfort if not Cure those that Sink or Languish under present
misfortunes, and are not prepared in these unsettled times to meet all events,
with constant and equal tempers.

Written from one of His Majesty's Garrisons, as a private advise to his only
Son, and by him Printed to satisfy the importunity of some particular
friends.



Luke 21.19 In your patience possess ye your Souls.

1 Pet. 4.19. Let them that suffer according to the will of God commit the
keeping of their Souls to him in well doing as unto a faithful Creator.

London, Printed by E. G. 1647.

My dearest Son,
SInce I know that man is only truly happy, that the want of outward things
cannot make miserable, I cannot but advise you to wind up and raise your
thoughts to higher objects then sublunary triflles; And when you do look upon
the low transitories of this world, let it be through the wrong, or rather
Right end of the Christians Perspective, that they may appear but little, if
any thing, in your eyes, which are so weak and empty of all true comfort in
themselves, that as Saint Ambrose upon the devils vanishing prospect Matthew 4.
says, he showed all in a moment to our Savior, least looking a little he had
seen nothing; neither does our Jesu, who knew best the way to happiness in
that he was the way, set any other estimate upon them: for when he commands us
to seek a Kingdom, it is of heaven, not earth, omitting the very naming of
any thing here below, as of no value, all things temporal being with him but
as dust upon the balance, or overwaights cast only into the scale, as
appendices of grace, and so mean as not worthy the name of a gift from him.
And this the devil knew so well, that in his temptations of power, he
acknowledged Christ to be the Son of God. But, as Aquinas observes, in that
of weakness, wherein he bated his lure only with the perishing nothings (the
shadows, and semblances of glory) the sole Monarchy of the world, he
considered him only as a man, and durst not once call him the Son of God,
knowing it might prevail with fraylty, not Infinity. From whence let me
engage you to fortify your self against such allurements. And though you are
likely by Gods mercy yet to possess a competent measure of earthly comforts
(notwithstanding the straites and difficulties I have passed) let not them
possess you, but be in the world, not of it. And though some part of the
affections will touch upon it, while you are here, let it be but like a wheel,
in Puncto, in the least point, and that not fixed, but moving, considering all
below are but perishing vanities, good only (when virtue animates, and sends
them abroad) in their using, not enjoying, when you must be taken from them, if
not they from you; and the longest term of having them is but for life; which
ever diminishes by increasing, and is at most but a bubble, a smoke, or ayery
being, the only difference, as one says, between sleep, and death that soon
comes to nothing. Yet this short spanne or thread of life is most commonly
ravelled out, in trouble to get, care to keep, and fear to loose these
unsatisfying comforts, which at no time are permanent, but now, as it were
dying at the very root, when such an Inundation of misery is broken in upon us,
as has almost brought all things to another Chaos; so that nothing but an
almighty power can bring light out of our darkness; form, beauty, and order
out of such a heap, and mass of confusion. Nay, such is the violent tide, and
impetuousnesse of some men's passions, as they would do more then Noah's flood,
in making but one common grave for State, Church, and all, though God has in
his goodness yet bounded them, in saying, Hitherto you shall go, and no
further; and will still give us safety, salvation in the Arc, (the true and
Ancient Protestant faith, and Reverentiall worship as it was reformed, and
practiced in Queen Elizabeth's days) rise, and rage those waters never so
much; for God being Pilot, will steer, and keep it floating upon those
devouring waves, till he find it another Ararat to rest on; yet that you may
guide your course with the more comfort, and safety in this troubled Ocean, J
shall like a lantern in the haven, or so many Sea-markes for direction commend
unto you these few practical considerations following; which truly like the
ballast of the Ship, have kept me in an even and safe course, in the midst of
our greatest storms, and made me by Gods infinite goodness happy in misery,
rich in want, and contented in all conditions: nor will they prove unprofitable
to you, if you look up to God for a blessing, when you reflect upon them in
your meditations, but will make you in habit, and affections above misfortunes,
if not a Martyr, (when called to it upon Christian, and noble terms) and in
Calmes tackle, and tite your weak built Pinnace to endure all weathers upon
any change. And I fear, though our present clouds (the immediate messengers of
tempests) do somethtng scatter, they may gather again into a higher malignity
then ever, since I see they are still big with those foggy and fiery
exhalations, out of which the Thunderbolts of Gods wrath were lately formed,
and made; and I fear our new sins will again midwife, and bring them forth
to wrack us in the very haven, if we allay not the storm by a shower of
repentant tears, and by our more faithful sincere, and constant returns to
God, turn his wrath from us (which he of his mercy grant, if it be his blessed
will,) and how ever enable you, (and all his) to undergo with an equal
temper, and holy submission, what his wisdom has appointed for us.

Only I shall desire you to use these short Essays piously, (the Subject
whereof is chiefly the Christians comportment in afflictions) as a means to
fix your Quicksilver, and unconstant temper: And I shall not doubt but God of
his mercy will water this my planting which the heavenly dew of his grace, and
make it bring forth comfort here with joy in the holy Ghost; and (with the
Phoenix) Glory in your Resurrection, which is the Prayer of

Your affectionate Father.
April the 20. An. Do. 1646.
AN ESSAY OF AFFLICTIONS, AND The Christian's comportment in them.
IF the whole life of Christ was a continued crucifixion, in that he was borne
a Martyr, found a Golgatha in Bethlem, and made his birth, and his death, his
Christmas, and good Friday, both Morn, and Evening of one and the same day of
suffering; we that fight under the Banner of his Cross, must not think to
follow our General in his triumphs, if we leave him in the field, or carry no
marks of Honor (Prints of his wounds) about us, which how mortal soever,
never prove deadly; But as Romanus said, when Asclehiades made his tormentors
cut and crucify him, (Tot ecce laudant ora, quot sunt vulnera) must prove so
many mouths to praise, and glorify God with: and not with Jonas be angry
though he strike our Gourd, take all worldly comforts from us, and exchange
them for many positive evils, especially since a heathen Anaxarchus, when
Nicoreon a Tyrant would have brayed him in a mortar could say, (his cause being
good,) Thou can but beat the Bag, the Sachell, not the man. Nay such has
been the constancy, and courage of Heathens, as Julius Caesar said when in
expectation of Shipwreck, the man may perish, his fortitude cannot. And
therefore let us Christians much more contend with the Ax, grow by cutting, and
with Cummin, live by dying; for if they be more then men, shall not we be more
then they? and with the ball, percussa surgo, since with Plutarch in the Fable
between the Sun and the wind, the roughness of the tempest made the
travellor wrap his cloak about him (keep what he had) the faster, when the
silent Rhetoric of the suns beams overcame him, and made him divest
himself. Nay, if man that was God, was obscured, over-shadowed, and in so
inglorious an estate as to suffer all the degrees, and dimensions of Shame,
Pain, and Death for us; shall not we, worms, and no men, suffer our selves to
be trampled on for him? and think it no shame, but our security to retire into
the Caverns (our most abject, and secluse beings) against the malice of our
Persecutors, when they shall so invade us, as not to allow us a visible one;
Especially since God will be there both our Prison, Psalm. 32.7.
Keeper, hiding place, and Preserver, whether we consider the Church Dilated,
or contracted into one man: so that, though our life be a warfare, and the
weak built Pinnaces of our bodies are no sooner lanced out of their ports (our
Mothers wombes) into the Ocean of this world, Job. 7.1.
but they are torn, and tossed by the several warring billows of various
accidents, If a heavenly wind fill our sails (the spirit of God breath gently
in our Prayers) and that our maine mast hold out a white Flag of Innocence
inlayed with the red cross of Christ's blood, conscience being our Pilot, the
Scriptures our compass, his Promises our Anchor, and our Pole Star Christ, in
Shipwreck we shall have a Planke, in the sea a Whale to preserve us, and waft
us into a more safe, if not so calm a harbor, as we aimed at. For though God
submits his Children to be subject to, and sensible of troubles, as the common
condition of man, he will then preserve them from the venom, though not the
sting of those vipers; and if tossed with storms, will put a strong Ship under
them, and make the lowdest thunder, but as a lofty voice, or loud Music to
usher in their triumph, and Coronation; And if he suffer them to be trodden into
the earth with scorns, and contempts, it is but (as Seed is buried to make it
multiply the more) that they might rise the more glorious, which should
encourage us to endeavor to make all events equal to us, knowing that like
the best steel we may (by the grace of God) fashion them either into a shield
or sword to our selves Prosperity and Adversity being but the matter, the stamp
or form ours to give, either the Lions fierceness, and destructive nature, or
the Lambs Innocence. For the most rough, and hard afflictions are in
themselves, as all things of indifferency, neither Good, nor Bad, but in order
to their last end; So as Crosses (as they are Corrections for, and not simply
Punishments of our sins) may become mercies, and blessings unto us, and are a
part of divine providence both in respect of their Author, Amos 3. Es. 45. Lam.
3. Heb. 12.
Order and End, when it is his wisdom to advance our happiness by sufferings,
that no Person of the meanest condition might miss of a means to felicity.
And so to be not only patiently and cheerfully submitted to, Luke 6.28
but rejoiced in. If we suffer for righteousness sake, Jam. 1.2.
and look to God as the Creator, and Conductor of them. 1 Peter 2.
For when we see the Puppits move (the men of this world bite, and wound us) we
must consider an invisible hand moving the wiers, ordering the Events for his
own glory, and our salvation; And in this sense, though afflictions are the
only sure inheritance of Humanity, Job. 5.
(whose income is Tears, his rent for life, Cares, and Fears: his outgoings,
horror and trouble in the force of natures dissolution) they are more
peculiarly the Portion of the righteous, Lam. 3. Heb. 12. Amos. 3.
who like a square die will stand firm though cast upon any chance, (which
made Socrates say; an honest man was a square man, one that would be himself
in all conditions) and as a well built Arch will stand the faster, by addition
of wait, and burden, or with the Center in the circumference be fixed with Job,
though all worldly things move in their vicissitudes, and several changes to
evil about him: knowing he that wounds will heal, and not only in famine
redeem from death, in war from the power of the sword, but will set him above
misfortunes, and make them all subservient to his good, Job. 5.
turning the Serpent of afflictions with Aarons into a Rod budding new, and
fresh joys, and teach him Salamander like, to live in flames, and entertain
all events with evennesse, and patience, knowing that the strongest winds, if
he sail before them, will but convey him to Christ, who commands the winds
and Seas, and they obey. But the better to prop, and support our weak, and
tottering resolutions, I will raise some pillars of comfort to rest upon, if we
look after and follow the examples both of Christ, Es. 53. Psa. 18.
whose Cratch was a Crucifixion; his whole life one continued Passion; and all
the holy men of God, 1 Pet. 2. ^Chr. 21.^7. ^o. 1.21.2.20. ^ Sam. 3.18 ^ Sam.
18.^6. Esaias 39.8. Micha 7.9. To. 5.13.
who found no other way to heaven then that of thorns; and bare all the weight
of misery, that was laid upon them, as if they felt it no more, then those that
live in the circle of the Air, and yet find no ponderousness in it, because
nothing is heavy in its own element, and that crosses, and losses being the
matter, and Principle as it were out of which a Christian is formed, cannot
make him sink under the pressure of them; especially, if we consider the two
chief ends for which they are sent, Gods glory, man's salvation, and every way
Advantage.

First, afflictions are sent many Jo. 9.2.^
(and with Tobias recovered it by this gaul of afflictions) that we might see
the power, and mercy of God in his deliverance both from corporal and
spiritual blindness; for as contraries are the best Comments upon one
another; so Gods Goodness, and Greatness most appears in bringing health out
of Sickness, Light out of Darkness, and forming all the well ordered, and
various beauties of the world out of nothing, or a Chaos, and great Mass of
confusion; happiness out of misery, glory out of sufferings, giving victory in
thraldom, and triumph to his when conquered, as the true trophies of Christian
magnaminitie, and most legible Characters of his favor to his Church, which
with the bush is ever burning, Exodus 3.2
yet never to be consumed; and like the Arc however floating upon the proud
imperious high swelling waves, sinkes not, but when threatened to be involved in
the whole worlds general destruction, having but one common Winding Sheet (the
pleated waters) and as it were one common burial place, then is preserved, and
by those watery rising mountains but lifted up the nearer heaven, God as it
were like another Neptune imbarking himself in (and hazarding Shipwreck with)
his Church.

Secondly, they are sent (in that whosoever will live godly in Christ Jesus
must suffer afflictions) and happiness hereafter; 2 Timothy 3.12.
there being no way to ascend the mount of honor but by the steps of virtue
through a rough, and difficult path; no Haven to be gained unless we pass the
straits; no way to heaven but by the gates of hell; for unless we fill up the
sufferings of Christ in his body the Church, and bear his cross we cannot be
partakers of his Crown, enduring being the condition of Reigning with him. Act.
14.22. Colos. 1.^4. ^ Tim. 2.^2. ^ Ps. 73.4.
In that his first intention, when he destroys, is to Preserve us, which is
the Reason, as David says, the wicked have no bands in their death, receive
not their punishment here. And who would not upon these terms lose a life to
save it, who may by saving lose it? nay* what Merchant would not to recover his
wished haven with a wealthy lading be contented to have his vessel weather
beaten, and torn? and much more a Christian, that is a man of war; a Bark
built for all weathers, storms, and Calmes, knowing that the rough Sea proves
the Pilot, and makes him keep at the stern and helm, using all holy endeavors
to avoid every Rock, and Sand of Temptation, and ply the pumpe upon the least
leake, knowing that the smallest sin unrepented, neglected, or not with Jonas
thrown over-bord to appease the storm, will sink the tallest vessel, and
better unlade all then the man should perish. Nay, shall our Lord, Head, and
General be all wounded, torn, and exposed to all degrees of suffering for us,
and shall not we (his Church, and members) undergo some troubles, endure a
scratch, or wear a scarre for him? shall he drink up the full Cup, and
showers of his Fathers wrath, and shall not we taste of those few remaining
drops for him? shall innocence suffer, and guilt go free? nay, shall God dye
for man, and man undergo no pressure for God? nay, for himself, his own
advantage, where dissectings are recompactings; God forbid. No, away with such
pusillanimity, my soul, and leave not thy Savior in his sufferings for thee.
Though thou art called with Simon of Cyrene to take up his Cross (or rather
thine, Isay. 53.
which he bore for thee) and bear it for him, till thou come to Golgatha,
the place of Sculs, (thy grave) nay, further, if possible. For as a devoute man
said, if he could find or apprehend any defect of joy in heaven, it would be
only in that he could not there suffer for his Savior. Though what we
undergo here is not more for his glory, then our benefit. And therefore as
Music is sweetest, when expiring, let the last swanlike Act of our sufferings
be but harmoniously accordant to Christ in that sweet ditty of his, not mine,
but thy will be done. And a Ravishment of delight will so possess our souls,
as we shall only account our life from our Death, and that our birth day to
Eternity, Our eve or vigil to our great festival at the marriage of the Lamb;
for as God moved upon the waters in the Creation, before they brought forth the
first Creature, so afflictions are now those many waters, in which God moves to
make us conceive in our hearts by the holy Ghost, like the womb of the
virgin, till Christ be formed in us, and we bring forth holiness, which he
ever crowns with happiness. Now though these are the first, Primary, and
Principal ends, why Gods children are thus brought forth with labor, and
sorrow (a curse as ancient as sin it self) there are many other practical
uses, and pious considerations we should entertain them with; for as one
says, Schola crueis est schola lucis; and Oration, Lectio, temptatio, the
rough, but ready way to Heaven, and the troubled waters of Repentant tears the
cleerest Perspective in an Eclipse of Gods favor to see his face shine in our
devotions, which usually rise, and fall with the waves of afflictions, the
greatest misery ordinarily making us most importunate for mercy (as one depth
calling upon another) and most careful of our ways. Like the Horse that ever
goes surest, and best when he feels the spur, and bridle the mariner that
most uses his plummet, and compass in storms. And thus we will consider
afflictions.

First, as they are incentives all engaged to deliver them, that in afflictions
call upon him.

Ps. 30.34 107. Hos. 5 Esaias 49.3. Lam. 3.
For then we do their errand, and cannot miss of a Gracious Audience no more
then Abraham, where Dust and Ashes pleaded with his maker, and as it were so
charmed his ear with this Oratory, that importunity it self could not weary
him. Genesis 18.
Nay with this spiritual Ingine, Impotence and weakness overcomes Power and
Omnipotence, puts manacles upon the hands of God: and (with an humble reverence
be it spoken) worsts him in the conflict, making him cry out, Let me alone, or
till thou art gone, I can do nothing, Exodus 32. Numb. 14.
as to Moses. Thus a faithful Prayer works all kinds of miracles, makes the
Heavens, Earth, and Seas obey. For when the gasping Earth is dying for Thirst,
Elias can by Prayer quicken and enliven it. It can fix the Sun in the
firmament, as in a Center, give Ears to the Grave, and make them open, and
life to the dead; Jo. 12.
And ever nests a Christian, (like a Dove in the clifts of the Rock,) in the
wounds of his Savior, so as he cannot when assaulted, be sensible of any
Dangers, but rests secure in storms: whereas the wicked man's Prosperity is but
like the winter Sunshine, late up, and all ways setting in thick clouds, and
like the bird Cigelus Suidas speaks of, that always dies in the act of
feathering. And therefore with Moses, let us rather choose to suffer afflictions
with the Children of God then to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season:
knowing, that the most obscured, and benighted Christian can by the gentle
breath of a fervent Prayer, or the stronger and more contracted winds of
sighs, and Groans disperse those thick vapors that Eclipse his happiness,
inlighten that Darkness and ushers in a most bright, glorious, and cheerful
morning. So the Prophet David, Heaviness may endure for a night, but Joy
comes with the break of day, Psalm. 30.
when we are saluted with the beams of the rising Sun of Righteousness in
our souls; Is. 54.1.8.
Only let us observe this, that (though in some waters the least sail makes
most speed) in these Seas all sails must be hoysed, all the affections
stirring, though a Penitents loudest voice in his eye full of tears (not his
tongue full of words) if God blow upon those waters, and make them flow. And
therefore one says well, Tears in Prayer, or the Prayer of Tears are the
blotting out of the handwriting, that is against us, (as a gracious means, no
meritorious cause) and the usury by which the joys of heaven are multiplied to
us; Gods free preventing Grace in the application of the blood of Christ, being
our Stock, and Principle. Thus afflictions alarm Prayer, and Prayer routs and
vanquisheth afflictions. It is a Moses in the gap, an Elias, the Chariots and
Horsemen of Israel, by which we conquer.

Secondly, Afflictions are to be entertained with delight (so Saint James) as
they work every way for our good, James 1.2.
and make Gods anger his Love to us; which made David cry out, Psa. 119.71.
It is good for me that I have been afflicted, and taught thy Laws; and teach
us by many other expressions, what Lemnius says, nostrae salutis avidus, God
is most endeavoring to love us, when he most corrects us, and sends Crosses
like his messengers in the Gospel to compel those that neglect his
Invitation, and to draw them by force to the means of Salvation; his Love,
Patience, and long suffering brings not in to him, Ps. 6.126.6.
ever making the matter of a good man's sorrow the cause of his rejoicing; Jer.
31.16.
for Afflictions no sooner stir up to repentance (as in Ephraim) but
Repentance brings Reprive, and Pardon, Romans 8.
by a refined Alchimy turning all things into good for us, and extracting the
most Sovereign Cordials out of the rankest poisons, the best Mithridate from
the most venomous scorpions, ever making the Lilly amongst the Thorns (the
Emblem of the Church) retain its whiteness, her Purity and Innocence,
however scratched and torn, still gathering beauty from her skars, and with
the Rose sweetness, when it hangs amongst the Briars, but withering, and
abating of its Odours, if once pulled from them.

Thirdly, as they are a our way in Piety, like the Riders hand, and heel, they
many times restrain our wanderings, and quicken us in our pace and progress
toward heaven, and as the Teather of the soul, bounds, and confines us, when
our untamed dispositions would furiously break forth into many Extravagances,
God many times curing us by Contraries; Sodoms fulness of bread by Egypts
famine; hedging us in a narrow and strait path with Thorns to walk in, when
we would perhaps lay all waste before us that stands in opposition to our
proposed ends, destroy Propriety, and not only usurp upon others interests,
and ruin our own, but invade God in his (the too much I fear practiced sin
of these days) Only the Princes of Judah, will not, I hope, be like those that
would remove the bounds, Hos. 5.10, 11.
both Civil with reference to the State, the fence of common interest, moral
bounds, the square, and Standard of our obedience, and Characters of Pure
Nature, or Evangelicall (both Practical, and Contemplative) by which we are to
fashion, and order our selves in the worship of God, the inward, and outward
man, thoughts, actions, and devotions, not only acting, but enacting
mischief, as a Law; Psalm. 9 48
thus the brightest day, if the Sun set in a cloud, will loose its Garland;
our Ripest beginnings without suitable proceedings prove fruitles; our best
appearances but Ciphers, which how capacious soever in the figure, and taking
up the greatest rooms, with God signify nothing. But if when falling, God
lend us his hand, by Afflictions cause our Perseverance, Our Perseverance in
Goodness (in quick, and sharp trials) as one of the blood Royal, and
immediate heirs of Gods Kingdom, crowns our Afflictions, and draws that
oil of Gladness out of those flints, if we are not cowardly jealous, in
suspecting what we most desire, but by Faith rely upon Gods promise for it.

Heb. 12.
Rev. 3.19
Prove. 3.11.12.
with bowels and Compassion, more of Love then Anger, to Reform, not Punish
us. And if necessity, Luke 18
which is always an ill Companion (many times, a bad Counselor) does at any
time, with the Prodigal make us return to our Father with a modest
bashfulnesse, and humble confession of our sins, our Remembering them, will make
him forget them; Our shaming our selves will be his Justification of us:
neither will God expect our Return, but accepts the Resolution for the
Performance. For no sooner did this lost Son purpose to go back to his
Father, but He goes forth of himself to prevent him with kindness, forsaking
as it were his Greatness in a Gracious Condescent to meet and embrace him: and
like a careful nurse never suffers him to fall again, but to teach him the
better to stand, and look to his footing, never lays the Rod upon him, but
(as we do a whip upon a Top) to make him go the better for being well
scourged, Psalm. 34.50. Js. 21.54.
and lays his Corrasives to his dead flesh, not that he delights in his Pain,
but intends his Cure.

Es. 59.
and with what a gentle hand we are punished, Ez. 3.
Lam. 3.
Romans 6.
God ever rewarding beyond our merits, correcting much less then our
Iniquities challenge from his Justice; in that he delights to show mercy, and
is always unwilling to inflict Punishment, Jer. 46.27, 28.
(but calling it his strange work, as it were declines it,) nor strikes at
all, but in mercy (and that his greatest, in that he is then said to go out of
himself) ever with Jonathan shouting his Arrows to warn, not wound us, never
Purging, Lancing, nor Cutting, but for our health, and Recovery. Nay he is so
slow to punish, as that he calls Afflictions the vials of his wrath from their
shape, and straitnes; Lam. 3.
Psalm. 23
to show how hardly he pours them out upon us, and never but in measure, having
his staff to support, as well as his Rod to humble us, his Cork as well as his
lead, when he sinkes us to keep us floating, so as we cannot be drowned,
Christ our head being above water. And God to assure us the more of a happy
issue to every temptation 1 Cor. 10.13.
(if we wait upon him in the way of his judgments, and judge our selves to
prevent being further judged) will as he has promised, make the Elements loose
their natures, and be our Protectors, not Executioners. For when we walk
through the fire, it shall not burn us, and when we go through the waters,
they shall not overflow us; Is. 43.2.
Is. 26.8.
But the 1 Cor. 11.31.
fiued waters shall become a hard Pavement to our feet (as to Christ's upon the
Sea) and the fiery furnace a safe ^^^tiring place, against our Enemies; for God
is always tipping his spear with honey, like Ionathans, to refresh as well as
wound us.

David, that thought in his Prosperity he should never be removed, in
Adversity could acknowledge it was God that made his mountain so strong: which
was the Reason also that Saint Paul's Thorn in his flesh 2 Cor. 12
was not removed, to bring him to the knowledge of the Rock out of which he was
hewn, to remember what he was in nature, Psalm. 103
and in foundation but dust: that with the Peacock all his high crested
vanities, and richest plume of Graces inherent, looking to his feet, his icy,
slippery, and frail bottom, might not make him proud, but standing by Gods
Grace only he might still fear to fall, falling from that fear being the
undermining of the whole frame, In that the highest and firmest buildings are
always raised from the lowest foundations; And the most improved Christian
ever appearing like a Pyramid (the higher it is built) the less, and less in
his own eyes (though as one observes well, Pride is natures shirt, that sticks
closest to him, and he puts off last) ever saying with Saint Paul in his
visions, Revelations, and unexampled Piety, It is not I, but the Grace of God
in me. Thus with the heathen Pliny to Marius, we may say, Afflictions bring us
home to our selves; so that if we could but perform in Prosperity, what we
promise in Adversity, we should be living Saints, not Proud sinners Doing
Justly, loving mercy, and walking humbly with our God. Isa. 1. 1 King. 8. Mich
6.8.


Seventhly, we are to endure Afflictions, as they fit and prepare our soil for
better fruits, and make us abound in Piety, and Good works; 2 Timothy 3.12. Eccles.
God by an Egyptian midwife many times brings forth a true Isralite, and by
pruning his vine, 2 Hos. 5.15.
beating his spices, correcting his servants makes their fruits and Graces more
full, fragrant and diffusive. Psalm. 119 7 55.
Jo. 10.
Isa. 5.
For like the good husbandman, that plowes, and harrowes his ground, to make it
bring forth the fuller harvest, that cudgels, and thresheth his walnut tree to
make it Teeme and Laid its bows, God also studies all ways to improve our
Graces, and his own Glory, ever sending a winter before a spring, frosts and
snow to soften and mellow the mould of our Earthly hearts, Psalm. 32.34.
the better to prepare us for his good seed, and a Rich return, though indeed
we do in that but gather, and carry in for our selves, when in crowning us he
crowns but his own work in us: Is. 54. Math. 26.39.
first making us bear his Cross, and then wear his Garland, all afflictions
being but as the Cloud and Pillar of fire before the Israelites, to protect,
not destroy us, to defend us from our Enemies and lead us over Jordan to our
Promised land, Christ Jesus.

in the Ephemerides of divine Providence, Is. 55.
Psa. 31.34.
however tedious if we measure them by our measures of Time (Clocks, and
dialls;) nay not a minute or expense of the least grain of Sand, if computed
by the glass of Eternity, (which is ever running, but never wasting) or the
immense duration of the rewards, when Faith, Repentance, and all the
Constellations of other Graces in us, shall like the hand upon the Dial, Point
at, nay, show the Meridian, Declining and Period of our day of Affliction, and
that afternoon half Eternity of happiness we are going to be possessed of;
for with Saint Paul Our troubles here are for continuance nothing, 2 Cor 4.17.
or the least part of Time, but a Moment, for weight light, and the most
ponderous but a feather in the scales with more exceeding, nay Eternal, nay
Eternal weight nay Eternal weight of Glory, Glory for shame, weighty for
light, Eternity of enjoying for a momentary suffering; Rev. 7.14
and therefore though a perplexed fancy disturbing the Organs of Reason may
like a false glass multiply our troubles, and dangers, let us with a steady
faith behold them in their own Dimensions, finite in respect both of their
measure and continuance, And we shall soon be brought to say with Saint Paul,
I have fought a good fight, J have finished my course, and now there is laid up
for me a Crown of glory.

Ninthly, Afflictions are to be welcomed, as they are seals of our Adoption,
Badges of our Profession, Earnests of Grace, and beginnings of Glory. 2 Timothy
3.11.12. Job. 5. Math. 10.16.14. Heb. 12.
The Red Sea, through which we much pass to the Land of Canaan, the Crown of
Thorns we must wear here, if we will have one of Gold with Christ in heaven.
1 Pet. 4.13. Matthew. 5.20.
The only Thistles, from which we may gather Figgs, and Briers, that yield
grapes for wine to cheer the the heart, being once strengthened with all might,
according to his glorious Power, with all Patience, and long suffering with
joyfulnesse. Colos. 1.
For with the Roman Orators, as he lives not that has only the happiness of
this life in his thoughts, so he never dies, nor is ever sensible of temporary
troubles, that can cast them up rightly, and be willing to change a house of
clay, a Breath, or vapor of smoke, a Body of Death, and garment of corruption
for Immortality, and honor; a Region of Death for the land of the living; the
life of man for that of Angels; a valley of Tears for a mount of Joy.

Isay. 51. Ezekiel. 34 11.15.
Thus he weeds his Garden, dresseth, and fenceeth his Vineyard with Briars, and
Thorns, both to defend, and make it fruitful, shakes his Trees that the
Rotten fruit might fall off, and they take the better rooting, It being the
highest end, and chiefest fruit of Afflictions to take away sin, and preserve
the sinner, to destroy the worm and cancer, that would otherwise destroy the
Tree; many times to give it shade, least too much sun should dry and wither
it; or like that in the early spring produce many gay flowers and odoriferous
smells to court the senses, but withal engender millions of flies, and vermin,
to spoil them; for so the pleasures of this world are but a Jonas gourd, sumer
fruit, of short continuance, whereas the winter fruits, that endure most of cold
and nipping frosts, are for durance, and lasting. Thus though great mists do
ever midwife in Calmes; the Air is then most tainted, and dangerous, whereas
thunder brings forth a most wholesome, pure, serene and bright sky. Nay,
Afflictions makes us every way better in our spiritual condition, and fit to
be owned by the Father of spirits, who like a cunning I apidary tries his
Jewels before he gives them a Rich setting, that if true, not Counterfeit, he
might spare them, Malach. 3 17.
as a man spares his only Son; nay, they are Gods bullets shot against an
Armor of proof, to try, not pierce it; there being more strength in the
Innocence of his Saints, then in all Goliahs Brass and Irons, that he might
treasure it up in his Militia for the honor of his Saints, and beautifying of
his own habitation.

(in that we may usually read our sins, and faylings in the specification of
his judgments upon us) by them to make us consider the deformity of all other
objects, and unite our affections in him; the rather when we see all the
Darling delights of this world so soon overshadowed; and always tempered with
the bitterness of some temporary cross, to disrellish our taste, and abate
our Appetite to them; so as the rest of our bodies, many times proves our minds
exercise; and our empty hours, most fill us with vain and vexings thoughts;
at best affording us but less pain, no absolute freedom from troubles, in
our most retired retirements; for when the doors of our senses are locked up,
the Fantasy does many times affright us with visions and terrify us with
dreams, Job. 7.14. making our waking Consciences, often Alarm our sleepy
souls, by all this restlesnesse to bring us to an everlasting rest; and shall
we neglect his bounty, and receive with a wrinckled brow what he gives us with
a summer and gracious aspect? for to you it is given, not only to believe, but
to suffer for Christ. Ph. 1.29
And shall we refuse to wear his favors, livery, and Cognizance (though a
cross) that are thus effects of his affection to us and so not only in their
spring but stream; In that his providence so steers the action, and orders the
event in all things, as a sparrow falls not without his leave, nor can the
devil enter into a swine (so little is the largest empire here) without his
permission, Romans 8.28.
and makes all the variety of Accidents (how contrary soever the lines are
drawn) to center in our good; so communicative of himself is his goodness to
us. And therefore let not the clay dispute with the Potter, walking brickle
earth with the God of heaven. For his actions are always just, and good; nay
full of mercy to us, though harsh; his Physic wholesome, though unpleasant, in
that sometimes his greatest mercy, is not to show mercy, Hos. 4.13 14.
Isai. 1.5. Lam. 1. Wisd. 12.1.
not withold the lance, when it is to open an impostumation. And therefore,
correct me O Lord to amend me, wound me to heal me, kill me to make me live,
take away all to give me thy self. And do not hate me so much, Ps 81.11, ^2.
Rev. 22.11. Os. 15. Ez. 24.13.
as not to seem to hate me at all, when it is the greatest punishment not to be
punished, and the greatest improvement of our wealth to lose it, and our live:
too for Christ, Mar. 10.29.30.
where the interest he pays is so great, the Return so infinite we receive
here with persecutions; Matthew. 10. Act. 14.22.
and so immense and unexhaustible in the world to come; Job. 5.
1 Cor. 11 31.
for so the Apostle, Eye has not seen (yet the eye is a nimble sayler, and
has traveled far, and seen much) ear has not heard (yet the ear has
heard more then the eye has seen, being as it were the Portall, or gate of
the soul, by which knowledge enters, and so apprehends more of the beauties,
and Beatitudes of that place then can by all the other senses be discerned
here, in the dim and opake glass of the creatures, though God is here very
legible in many of his Attributes) nor has it entered into the thought of man,
the joys that shall be revealed (yet thought has a kind of infinity in it,
and graspes more at once, then either eye, or ear can commensurate with the
largest extended faculties, and most unbounded dimensions of their several
ways of comprehension, and discerning) having the wings, and motion of a
spirit, the capacity of an intelligence, yet still short of imagining, the vast
incomprehensiblenesse of that which passes Imagination; For such is Heaven, a
circle within a circle, many infolded mysterious joys, which will be best
conceived by thinking what we cannot conceive; and because it cannot enter into
us here, let us expect with patience, till we enter into it hereafter, and
hear with comfort that blessed voice of come ye blessed of my Father, and go
into the Joy that is prepared for you from the beginning of the world; And not
only so, but enter into thy Masters joy nor only that, that is prepared of
God for them that love him, but that which is God, the beatificall vision it
self. Yet here the Saints of God see the dawning of that day, a light
springing out of darkness, Psalm. 112.4.
and beams of comfort in the blackest night of Affliction, some love glances
in the most unkind divorce, which is never long, though it seems long to us.

Twelfthly, Afflictions are assurance of things hoped for, the evidence of
things 1 Peter. 1 Isai. 40.31.
not seen) which made Abraham rely upon the Promise, not disputing the means
of its performance, knowing that Phoenix like God could raise him up a seed
from the dead ashes of his Isaac; Genesis 22.
though in him he offered the comfort of his life, the staff of his age, the
sum and Recapitulation of all his numerous posterity: possessing as it were
future Joys, and by them was made unsensible of present troubles, or at least
not regarding them, but endured that Cross, despised the shame, looking unto
Jesus, the finisher as well as the author of his faith, Heb. 12.2.
the comfortable beams of the sun of righteousness still beating upon his
soul in their strongest reflex, in the darkest and most clouded night of
Temptation, which can never be hindered by the stormy winds, because
Celestial; for true Faith becomes the stronger by difficulties, ever
preferring the Cross of Christ to the Triumphs of Emperors, and all the
Crowns of Kings, and with certain fishes mentioned by Pliny, is ever swimming
against the stream, to recover the fountain Christ, knowing that all
Refreshments are originally and virtually there; and with the needle in the
mariners compass is fixed, and unmovable in the greatest tempests, because not
governed by the turbulent, and unconstant winds, but the unchangeable Heavens,
and never count it any victory to trample upon a worm (any small trial) or to
wade through a shallow River, but grapples with and overcomes the greatest
oppositions, knowing Crosses cannot be so large as to out-circle their Crowns.
Neither is this all, for faith can here make absent things present, and
conquer, when conquered: and though humane friendship is like Quicksilver
soon incorporating with the best mettles, but in difficulties and the fire
conveyes it self away: faith then knows divine help to be most present,
having the Angels for her Corpse de Guard, and God his Pavilion round about her.
Nay, in that fire, as with Moses in the bush (a strange palace for Divinity to
inthrone in) rather then his shall want a comforter; for if his people be in
Captivity, or that Ashur afflicts them without a cause, they trusting in him in
their distress, God will not be kept above in heaven without a Is. 52.4.5.
Genesis 46.6.
Ps. 46.1
what do I here? And I will go down, (O the exalted humility of our God) to
be their present help in trouble. Their help in, (not always their
deliverance from) trouble. Indurance their companion, making their prison their
heaven, the persecutors Chains, Genesis 39.21.
their Bracelets, and Ornaments the Lions, their Guardians, not destroyers, as
to Daniel. In that God, and a Christian are but one in their sufferings, Js.
63.9.
* for I am afflicted in their afflictions, says he; and they that persecute
us, persecute our Jesus in us, (as in Saint Paul) who will be sure to relieve
us in our necessities, (having engaged all his Attributes for it) and make our
almost emptied Curse a never to be exhausted spring, the Ravens our Caterers,
and fishes to bring money in their mouths to pay our ordinary, rather then we
should want to defray our charges, (as in the case of Tribute) nay, rather then
the faithful should suffer to destruction, (his Church which should appear
like an Army well ordered with banners both for beauty, and terror) God
himself will in their march to Canaan be both Harbinger, Quartermaster,
General, and Sutler to the Camp, making the wilderness a down bed, the
Rock a Seller, and the heavens a larder to afford them all necessaries; Nay,
he will beyond it feed them to delight, even with Quails, and Manna,
satisfying them as he did David in his most naked and abject condition: And as
a Banquet to his meat before the cloth be taken away, and these outward things
fail) he will give us Christ and in him; a full taste of his mercies, the only
storehouse, and true Magazine, nay, the abstract, and Epitome of all the
treasures both of heaven, and earth; and higher I cannot soar in this
meditation. For if he spare not his son, but deliver him up, not only for,
but to us, shall he not with him freely give us all things? Romans 8.32. Jo. 6
as the Apostle argues; all necessaries here, and lasting joys hereafter, but
taking down our earthen Cottages to rebuild them stately Palaces, making every
grain of dust spring innumerous fresh glories to us.

Thirteenthly, Afflictions

First, In suffering with others, compassion being Passion at at the rebound,
for who is afflicted, and I burn, or suffer not says Saint Paul? Nay this
fire softens our natures, makes them more pliable, malliable, and easy to take
impressions from others sufferings, and so compassionate as to make their
miseries our unhappiness, as if one soul did animate diverse bodies, and we
live, and dye in one another, as it was in the Apostles times, which is the
true box of Spicknard in the Canticles Christ powers out to comfort, and
refresh his spouse with, when nearest fainting under the cross, in that their
sufferings are his Crucifixions. Jsa. 63. Act. 9.5.
And if God thus became man, (took our Ignominy and infirmities upon him) for
us, shall women become beasts to one an other? divest our selves of this most
noble part of humanity, and be so far from Christians, as not to be
reasonable creatures? in our tender compassion to others, but like freebooters
Rifle and Rob them to enrich our selves, when they should be objects of our
pity and releife; for there ought to be that harmony and concord amongst us,
as we should endeavor like one Instrument of many strings to tune all our
faculties, and affections into a sweet agreement, that there might be no
jarring amongst our selves, nor disagreement in our service of God, that being
well set by one key, we may like two lutes (which by a holy sympathy will both
sound when one is but struck) the one feel the others motion, though most when
like Instruments whose Pegs are wound up, their strings scrued to the height,
by any outward violence they make the shrillest sounds, according to that of
the Apostle, Heb. 13.3
Remember them in bonds, as bound, being our selves of the body; especially
when I am sure, that if a Toe (the meanest and remotest member) be but trod
upon, Christ our head feels it.

Secondly, our charity must be exercised in censuring others Actions; for so
love hops all things, believes all things, 1 Cor. 3.
and ever takes them in the best sense, is never severe, nor positive in
judging them by their outward condition, in that the Corn is as much thrasht
as the straw, the Gold as much tried (though not wasted) in the fire as the
Dross. Nay many times much more; for there may be a Rich Dives, whose Cups
overflow with wine, when poor Lazarus is glad to refresh himself with the
common Element of water; Luke 16.
a good tree may appear withered, blasted, and dying with the violence of
outward storms, or recoyling of the sap of Grace to the Root in some strong
temptation; Eccles. 9.1, 2.
when the fruitless bay tree is green, and flourishing, so as with the wise
man we may say, none can judge of love, or hatred, by what is before him (of no
man's spiritual condition by his temporal) in that all things sublunary come
alike to all. For it is not Gods dispensation of outward blessings, but our use
of them, that makes the difference. And though the shadow of his wings be a
shelter, Ps. 63.7.
in the hot sunshine of Persecution; none but a David can then truly rejoice
in it, and there find comfort, and refreshment.

Thirdly, our charities are exercised by Afflictions, when we teach as well by
example as Precept, in our cheerful, innocent, and charitable undergoing
them. Thus Saint Paul propounds himself a pattern for us to transcribe, 1 Cor.
4.6.
that with those in the Revelations we might follow the Lamb wheresoever he
goes, though not in equal paces, yet in slow motions, Joh. 14.4
who thus suffered to leave us an example (and he that was the way sure best
knew how to guide it) that we might follow his pattern at least, Heb. 12.2.
Jo. 14.6.
if not commands; for Regis ad exemplum, the King is the great wheel in the
State, that carries the inferior ones with him; the examples of great men
usually having a compulsary power in them, even from a principle in nature.
Thus one Dear leads the whole heard, one bird the flock, one Gal. 2.14.
Peter a congregation. And therefore we ought to carry the lantern in the
Poope, to let the light of our Actions still show the way we steer in the
greatest storms to recover a happy haven, that other weather beaten Passengers
may by it know how to ride out a Tempest, and arrive the same port. Thus a dead
man sometimes makes a living Christian, and propagates by suffering, the blood
of the Martyrs being the generative seed of the Church, Phoenix like one
rising out of the urne, and ashes of the other, the effusion of one man's blood
being as it were the transfusion of the same spirits into many, or with
Pythagoras, one soul animating (in a succession) diverse bodies, ever gathering
strength under pressures, with the Camomile growing best when most trod on, and
with the Palm most spreading when oppressed with any weight. Thus God defects,
and anatomizes some, in them to read a Lecture to all: and so truly makes our
Crosses become a Crown of rejoicing to others, 2 These. 1.4.5.
as the Apostle says, and our Afflictions but like the shaking of a ripe
flower, which by it sheds seeds, from whence many more do spring, and grow,
till the hand of God do pluck them to adorn his own Garland with in heaven.

humility, and not with the worm turn again upon him that treads upon us,
but we must judge and afflict our selves, and be most forward in a holy revenge
to crucify those sins, that most crucify our Savior, and by their death to
give life to the contrary virtues, by our outward comportment showing our
inward affections, and not only bear when God lays it on, but take up the
Cross to Cross our selves, when our sins, or Gods threatened judgments calls
for it, not putting the evil day from us with joy and gladness, eating of
flesh, and drinking of wine, (which is to be possessed with a strange devil,
if taken in excess, someties casting us into the water, and sometimes into the
fire) when God calls us to weeping and mourning, Js. 22.12.13.
and baldness, the true Emblems of Repentance; not court our eyes with vain
objects, suffering them to be burning glasses of lust to inflame the heart,
when they should be fountains of tears to quench the inflamed wrath of God
against us for our sins, not feast to nourish, when we should fast to mortify
sin in us, not ravish our senses with harmonious Music, when our sad consort
should be made up of signs, and groans (the most melodious voices for Gods
quire, though harsh, and shrill in our ears) not gratify our Palates by
plundering all the Elements of their luxurious dainties, to furnish our Tables,
(and with the ewe tree root our selves in the graves, and ruins of others)
when we should come nearest the invitation of Angels in their abstinence, not
rock our selves into a sleep, and lethargy of sin in Beds of Ivery, but tame
our rebel lusts by watching, and holy vigilance. Amos. 6.
Joel. 2. Jsa. 1: Jam. 4.
1 Cor: 11.32.
For thus afflicting our selves with rods, we shall avoid Gods correcting us
with scorpions, and make our lowest descent here the ground of our Exaltation;
Like that of Christ, who was therefore raised because he humbled himself to
the greatest depth of Ignominy, scorn, and self abasement, even all degrees
of Punishment, Pain, shame, and Death. And the servant you know, should not be
above his Lord, but (as he was) be made perfect through sufferings, which made
Solomon say, Eccl. 7.
that the house of mourning is better then that of mirth; for by the sadness
of the countenance the heart is made better, whereas unseasonable or immoderate
pleasure like a surfeit, is ever the mother of some disease, some grievous
punishment. And if we once come not only to please but pride our selves in them
(nay in our best graces; even the correcting our selves in those excesses) like
a gangreene in a joint, it will corrupt the whole frame, and cannot but ruin
us, that cast the Angels out of Paradise it self. But if we cast our selves
down before God, and like stars the higher they rise, still lessen in our
own eyes, he will raise us; for like the best mines, a Christian the deeper
and lower he is in the earth, (in thoughts of mortality and mortification) the
richer; it being the valleys, not shelving hills that drink in (and so become
fair and fruitful with) the blessing from above. Nay it is the bruised reed,
and smoking flax, that God studies to preserve Mat. 12.20.
, when with Hugo, Presumption robs us of our God, and his protection, envy of
our neighbors, and anger of our selves, unless it be against our selves, for
then only it turns into self love.

Lastly, and most properly distresses; a Mount Sion, which is not to be
removed, Jsa. 26.20 21. Psa. 125.
but stands fast for ever (a). A piece of earth as the Spaniards say, however
trod upon, and exposed to injuries, that is the last thing that triumphs over
its enemies: A grace that ever shows best with the Diamond, upon a dark
foil; a well drawn picture, whose groundwork is ever laid in the saddest
colors, and like the spangled canopy of heaven ever shines brightest when the
curtains are drawn, and the chamber hung with blacks in the most sad and
darkest night of temptation. Thus this Grace did shine cleerest in the setting
of the Sun of Righteousness, Luke 21.10.
and his greatest eclips upon the cross, who did then possess his soul in
patience, (b) when torn from his body by his passions, for thither it retired
against the wrath of God, and malice of men, as to the heart sconce, or fort
Royal for security, which is never to be taken by famine, nor the assault of
any enemy: In that patience (if pious) is so fortified (having the strength of
all the other graces, and God himself to be its hiding place, strength,
shield, and deliverer Psalm. 23 35.37.119.114.
, the rock upon which it is built) as it can never be overcome, nor want a rich
harvest for supply of provisions, when most straitened; for it can bring forth
humble and penitent (though not repining) tears, which are ever a rich granary
to the godly, in that God will feed them with the bread of tears, and (though
it be but a thin and penitential diet,) will make them as the staff of food
to nourish and support them, when all other refreshments fail Ps. 42.13.80.5.
Matt. 5.4. Luke 6.21.
. And at last, when almost exhausted, they have a voice and cry loudest, Psalm.
6.
and have such a charming sound, such a powerful oratory in them, as God
himself cannot resist it, but presently approaches like a man of war, and
brings releife to streightened and besieged patience. And if the batteries of
the enemy shall not only have destroyed and demolished its towers, and turrets
of ornament, but thrown down all its upper rooms of state and convenience;
Patience can lodge more safely and as contentedly upon the lowest floor
amongst the rubbish and ruins of a decayed greatness; knowing that he cannot
want the convenience of any place, that has God with him that fills all places,
but chiefly makes his servants Prison his Mantion to abide in with them (be it
spoken in a pious sense) and needs no rich Tapestries for State, but humility;
no perfumes, but Prays; no Ornaments but the Graces, no Crown but the Cross,
though then he will turn our Crosses into Crowns, our pressures, into
Praises, ravishing us with Anthems of delight, composed of sighs, and groans.

From all which considerations, if the feet of the Messengers of Peace are
beautiful, what welcome entertainment ought we to give Afflictions, which are
the Heralds of it, and are sent but to force us to a Parley and accommodation
with our God, and by depressing, studdies our advancement. Luk 6 ^3. Jam. 1.^.
Nay let us be glad, and rejoice in them, when they are upon us; for when
oppressed with sin, they are our Purge, Christ's blood our Cordial; and then
though my Physician come with a bitter potion, with fire to burn, and
cauterize me, he is still but an Enemy to my disease, not me, whether he cure
by a long or short Diet.

Yet in regard of the sense of our weakness, which will sometimes say to us
(perhaps as the Angel did to Joseph) Arise, take up thy young, and tender
babe, Mat. 2.13.
(thy weak and newborn faith) and fly, we may seek our own preservation;
both pray, and endeavor to avoid an approaching persecution, or trial; For
better a holy flight, then a presumptuous stay, by which we tempt the Tempter.
And this we have from Christ, both by precept and example; in that he commands
us to Pray, Lead us not into Temptation, but when they persecute you in one
City, fly to another; And did many times with draw himself in the like case
from the malice of his Enemies. For though we may not leap over the wall, or
by any unjust means preserve our selves, we may go out of Prison (from our
troubles) when God open us a door, and gives us an honest and fair
opportunity, and not by a rash boldness provoke a danger (against all
circumcellious whatsoever) for so Christ walked no more openly, Joh. 11.54.
but saught sanctuary, and safe quarter in the wilderness, when he could not
injoye it in the City, like a wise Pilot not splitting his vessel on a Rock,
when he can with a fair wind put into a harbor; accounting it rather
murder, then Martyrdom to attempt a danger, where it may lawfully be avoided;
which made the God of all power fly from weak man, 1 Pet. 2.2.
and Saint Paul escape without sin, Act. 9.25.
when Peter sinned by his too much confidence Mat. 16.26.
for God Almighty is so wise a General, as to keep a reserve, and not hazard
all upon one battle, but made Zoar Lots retreat from Sodom, and his destroying
Angel. So as we must not with the Dolphin hunt the storm, yet with a well
poised zeal willingly, not wilfully bear it, when it comes, in a conformity to
Christ, as a pledge of our filiation for his Glory, our sanctification, and
profit Romans 8.29. Phil. 1.29. 1 Pet. 4.16. 1 Pet. 3.15
; for the best things here are but a dim vesper of a more glorious festival,
and the time of enjoying them but a poor half Holiday to Eternity. And
therefore let us, with the Apostles take joyfully the loss of all for God,
Act. 4.41.
who will then strik a noon days light into the saddest night-peece of
Afflictions; turn our Gibbets, and places of execution into Triumphall Arches,
and make us persecute our persecutors more with our patience, then they can us
with their torments. But that man, that will be his own God (delivering
himself by any unlawful means, or fly when Gods glory, or the Churches good
commands his stay) is not as one says, his own man. Therefore lets us still
enjoy our selves by patience, Psalm. 37.
our brethren by Charity, and our God by faith, making every submissive Act a
Confessor (as the babes before they could speak,) and our selves in habit,
and resolution Martyrs, every light Affliction but like a rub to an overthrown
bowl, to help, not hinder us toward our mark: And then undergoing all for a
good cause, it will save us, when we cannot save it (but must see the Arc
taken by the Philistines, and the glory departed from Israel) 1 Samuel 3.
if we suffer without murmuring, where we cannot act without sinning, and dye
when we cannot do against our own conscience, or Gods commands; since God by
it does but take us into safe Garrison from a bloody field Act. 21.13.
; yet his Grapes must be thus pressed before they yield the joy of gladness to
us; nor then, if we bear it not with Innocence, meekness, and contentedness
For it is not the outward Act, but the inward Affections, and intentions, that
makes a good and a happy man, and turns the stake into his Theater the only
place of his joy, and triumph.

Of Jnnocence.
1. O Blessed Innocence, the perfection of the triumphant Saints, the beauty of
Angels, the life of heaven, Image of God, nay God himself, how art thou
attainable here below, since thou only inhabitest above? Yes, God in his
humiliation, and becoming the Son of man, made it descend with him both for
our Imputation, and Imitation, that we the children of men, might become the
sons of God. Sons both by Adoption, and similitude, and represent him in
likeness, and Image; in perfection of parts, though not dimension, (as a
child a man in little) for we must be innocent, as he was innocent, in
quality, not equality of purity and holiness; for in Christ it was like water
in the fountain, clean, and pure; in us, as in the stream, terrene, and
muddy; only, we must draw our lines, and write as near the Original as we
can, even Christ's example, and transcribe that Primitive and true Copy of
Innocence in an active and legible Character, that as he, so we may not be
only Innocent in sufferings (Dovelike without all gall, and bitterness) but
suffer Innocently, as false, and yet true, as Dying, and behold we live, 1 Pet.
2. 2 Cor. 4.6.
blessing our enemies, and praying with Saint Steven for our persecutors, ever
overcoming evil with good turns Pro. 26.32.19.11.
and accounting it the greatest victory to overcome, and conquer one's self.
For thus suffering according to the will of God, and committing our selves to
him in well doing, as into the hands of a faithful Creator, 1 Pet. 4.19.
he will do well for us, and preserve us by his power unto salvation, 1 Pet.
1.5
and turn our white robe of Innocence here, (though full of unclean spots)
into an immaculate one of glory.

2. Meekness is a calm and quiet temper of the soul, and (as walls and
bulwarks to a City) Prove. 25.28.
defends the man against anger, and all such passions (which are but a kind of
short madness) that would conquer reason, and so turn the man out of doors,
out of himself; nay if this grace be wanting, it opens a breach for the enemy
to enter, and not only carri's us captive from our selves, but our God too, who
is not to be found in the storm, nor earthquake, but in the still calm, and
gentle voice, (as to Elias) whereas a meek man is like the bole or great
branches of a Tree, not to be shaken by the greatest tempests; thus a Heathen,
Architas could esteem it, when he would never revenge an injury (if angry) but
upon himself. So Socrates, when Xantippe threw water in his face, made no
answer, but that after a storm rain was seasonable, and that he saw the same
face upon all events. And shall they in this be more then men, and we
Christians less then some beasts? O no. Let us by this temper bear all things
without disturbance (afflictions from God, Injuries from men) for like milk it
will soonest quench wilde-fire, In that a soft answer, as Solomon says, ends
strife: and like Mouse are though it be silken in the handling, can with its
juice cut the hardest Iron, mollify and soften the most stony heart, and
overcome both God and man; when all passions if unbounded, like the evening
fogs in some Countries, prove deadly, discolor and taint the vessels they are
in, like the worst poisons; which made the Lion of the tribe of Juda suffer
like a Lamb (the Lamb of God.) And therefore as the print of that Seal at
least, let meekness and softness of spirit be stamped upon all our actions,
that we may not become our own tormentors. And

1. Toward God, for when he afflicts, silence is our best expostulation,
dumbness our best oratory. And thus David a man after Gods own heart framed
his Ps. 37.7.
; or if we say any thing, let not our disease (as in hot fevers) break out at
our lips in any impatience, but with good Ely in an humble submission, confess
it is the Lord, Let him do what seems him good 1 Samuel 3.28.
, for the recipe and medicine must be wholesome however sharp, if God be the
Physician.

2. Toward our Enemies, and persecutors, knowing it is the glory of a man to
overcome injuries, and because the wrath of man works not not the will of
God; Jam. 1.
it is the will of God to punish the fury and wrath of man, but contrarily to
reward him for sufferings: many times making our bitterest cup, even death it
self, but a mornings draught to Eternity, and often to draw our enemies from
admiration to the love and imitation of us, and makes the conqueror a captive
to the conquered, teaching them the way to happiness by our unhappiness;
rectifies the Crooked line by the straight, their cruelty in imposing by our
meekness in suffering; or else makes us take a godly, though unwilling
revenge, by heaping coals of fire on their heads, and inflaming the very
flames of hell against them; however meekness will be our ornament. 1 Pet.
3.4. James 1.20.
Prove. 25.28.
No Jewel being so precious in the eyes of God, nor any thing raising us so
much above the sphere of man, in that it makes us become a miracle of wonder to
others, and is to our selves an earnest of future blessedness, to which all
present felicity is but as a drop to the Ocean, a spark to the whole Element
of fire; yet, let us from hence learn not to destroy, but regulate our
passions. For as we may be angry, and not sin in it; so in some cases we may
sin in not being angry for God; Ephesians. 4 26
Anger, and many other passions being like some stars, P^. 22.1^9.29.
good or evil only in regard of their conjunction.

3. Contendednesse, is a virtue that makes a man Master of his own happiness,
the storehouse of his own wealth, which made cyneas wish Pyrrhus to enjoy his
present comforts, without staying for the conquest of the Romans, and
Affricans; and sets him above the mastery of Fortune, knowing it is from
within, not without that must make him rich; for with Plutarkes mule, the
contented man can be pleased to want his golden carriage, knowing that all
worldly things are but as a wait to slow us in our journey to heaven; the
greatest preferments but glorious servitudes, and rich fetters, which made
Pyrrhus say, his victories were enough to undo the Conqueror, in that what is
got by power is commonly kept with care and hazard; especially, if like flies
that most commonly suck their nutriment from wounds and sores, we live upon the
blood and tears of other men. And if a heathen could be master of such a pious
moderation, let us make it the center of our desires, as most diffusive of
equal Justice to all, and most uniting, and reconciling all extremes from a
middle symbolizing with both; and if like a still we thus keep our selves in a
moderate temper, we shall willingly want with submission, what we cannot get by
lawful means, knowing that all things in this world (even life it self) are
but the dress, and shadows of good, when virtue only, and a happy death
brings the refined part. But admit there were true happiness in enjoying the
best colored dirt, or any outward splendid greatness, yet he that desires no
more then he has, has in that more then any other can enjoy in having their
desires in all things else. For there, as in a dropsy, drinking does but
increase thirst, and desire being infinite (in respect of the bounded joys of
this world) has absent not present felicity for its object, and is so far
here from being satisfied, that the worldly man's happiness does but increase
his Trouble, like Alexanders, whose heart enlarged with his possessions (so as
one world could not fill it) but lost his felicity in that he had won, by
wishing for another that he might conquer, whereas contented poverty is a happy
Fortune (because it fixes our restless desires;) yet then we may invert it
with Seneca, and say, It is not poverty, if it be content; how much more
therefore should we Christians learn with Saint Paul, in what condition
soever we are, Phil. 4.
to center in a submissive satisfaction, taking no dividing, distracting
thoughts, and care for any thing, no not for food, and raiment, Matt. 6.
though of all things else they entitle themselves to our Assiduity, and
diligence in their obteyning. But let us cast our burden, and care upon God,
for he bears the one, and is ever mindful of the other. Ps. 37.55.22. 1 Pet.
5.7.
Nay he has promised, that if we first seek the kingdom of God, and the
righteousness thereof, all these things shall be added, Mat. 6.33.
as an over weight to us, added, not given, because of no great worth nor value
with a pious man, if we cast our selves upon him in a holy recumbency, and
fiduciall confidence for the rest. Ps. 34. Jsa. 26.
A most holy thirst or way to want nothing necessary for us, yet here we must
only leave the event to God, not omit any lawful and moderate endeavor on our
parts, as subservient to his providence, which ordinarily does not carry us
from one extreme to another but by middle ways; for though he provides our
daily bread, he gives it only to them, that ask, and labor for it; 1 Timothy
5.8.
but when our actions as well as our tongues, put forth their voice they cry
aloud in the ears of God, Mal. 3.
and never miss of a blessing; for as he that gives us life, cannot want
means to continue it (in that he can make the rich man's barn the poor man's
magazine) so by giving one, he becomes our debtor for the rest, Deus donando
debet, if we cancel not our title by distrust; Gods present benefits, being
engagements to future mercies, like Jacob, and Esau, one having a hand upon the
others heel, they come into the world as twins.

Nay, it were the greatest Atheism, and infidelity in the world to think (if
we be not wanting to our selves) that God either can or will let us want any
thing that is good, Romans ^.
when to convince us, he does not only send us to his promises, but to his
unexampled goodness, even toward his irrational creatures; to the lilie of
the field, which says he, neither spins, nor takes pains; to the fowls of
the air, which neither sow nor reap; and shall not we ask as Saint Paul in
another place says of Oxen, does God take this care of flowers, birds and
beasts, and shall he not much more provide for man, for whose use, service, and
delight, those creatures were made? Nay, should we want bread, yet we shall not
want life; for man of all creatures lives not by bread only, but by the
blessing of God upon him. For thus God can give forty days sustenance in one
small refreshment as to Elias, and put leanness into the souls of those that
are daily fed with quails, and manna; for his children usually fare best upon
a hard diet, (like many birds that grow fattest in sharpest and most biting
weather) and with poor Lazarus get more health, and strength from Dives his
crumbs, (the dogs ordinary) then the other from all his full dishes; and with
the Nightingale sings most sweetly, when the thorn is against her breast,
(most pricked, and stung by any misery,) like Paul, and Silas in their chains,
nay, such is Gods goodness to us, that if natural bowels fail, he will still
take care of us; as of those birds that expose their young ones as soon as
hatched, to a miracle for preservation, Luke 12.24.
and will fill our mouths with a sweet dew or something nutritive from heaven,
if we open them that way to call upon him in Prayer Job. 38.41. Ps. 147.9.
(so the naturalists) whereas the affluence of worldly blessings many times
(like the grovling sow to her young ones) kills us with abundance. And this, as
one observes, made the Raven (that was unnatural to her own Elias his caterer
in his distesse, as a return of gratitude to God, for nourishing up her young
one without her own breast: but I rather draw this conclusion from it, that
God who made the most unnatural creature in the world so serviceable, and
compassionate toward man in his distress, neither can, nor ever will want
ways and means to relieve us, if our eyes be upon him (with good Iehosophat
when surrounded with destruction) and with Job, by making our confidence in his
mercies out live death it self. For certainly, God can never cast them out of
his protection, that thus rely upon his providence, but will allow for
necessity, though not for outward bravery, and instead of the artificial
glittering beauties of the world, will cloth them with the Lilies whitenes
(Innocence here as an under garment) till they be clothed upon with glory
hereafter. And therefore since our heavenly Father knows better what is
needful for us, then we for our selves, and accordingly dispenses it to us
most seasonably, let us submit to every condition, and rather expect a blessing
upon our poverty, then desire his outward blesings with a curse; Psa. 78.
for God loves measure in all things, and gives to every living creature as
they have need, and would not have the heart of man more unreasonable then the
unreasonable sea (the most unquiet of all the Elements) but keep it self
within fit bounds, and limits; for as just proportion of humors in the body, an
equal poise of power in the state (between supreme power, and common
interest) an even mixture of the elements, preserves the whole universe, so
with Solomon, neither to desire poverty, nor riches, but to acquiesce in what
God pleases to show his love in to us, is the middle and happy temper of a
Christian, and that which makes him most enjoy himself in all conditions, and
most persevering in holiness. Therefore let us moderate our selves in our
desires toward the things of this life, Mat. 6. 1 Timothy 6. Prove. 30. Heb. 2.
ever looking beyond the present condition to the future event, and with Saint
Chrysostom, (seeing one going to execution with a crowd of attendants along
the most fair and beautiful streets, and another without the countenance or
company of a friend, passing the most narrow, troublesome and unpleasant lanes
to a happy marriage bed) cry out, Non qua, sed quo, non via, sed finis; and
think our selves safer in shipwreck (God being our Pilote) then the wicked can
be in the sunshine of their happiness, Ps. 37. Eccl. 9.
in that it cannot go ill with the righteous when the wicked must perish;
Eccles. 8. Job. 2^. Eccles. 2. Psalm. 34. 1 Pet. 3.4. 2 Cor. 1.4.6.
nay for our further comfort we shall not live altogether upon expectation,
depend upon reversions, and have our wages deferred, for Godliness is great
gain, having the Promises both of this lif, and that to come, even present
happiness in the most unhappy outward condition, in afflictions, wants,
necessities, and death it self; for though the man that is earthly, as well as
earth, looks upon them in a multiplying glass of sense, and Perspective of
Fancy, and by it apprehends them more greater, and fuller of horror, then they
are in themselves (and so becomes his own wrack, and tormenter) the good
Christian, considering the least benefit he injoyes, a mercy and blessing,
every evil he wants, a favor and indulgence; when many better then he, wants
what he possesses, and suffers under greater miseries, that he better merits;
finds in this vale of misery many such wels to refresh at, and can by Faith
(which easily works such miracles) unmask the satyr, unsting the viper, and
turn the seeming evils of this world into a real good; for their vizard being
once off, their venom out, there is nothing left to affright us, but many
times they work for our advantage, even in regard of present felicity, by want
making us become rich, and by an holy chemistry turning all those Irons that
enter into our souls into golden scepters (in token of our conquest over our
affections) emblemd by the woman in the wilderness, who then, and in that sad
and solitary condition, tramples upon the moon, all terrene things: for when
one depth calls upon another, our misery upon Gods mercy, Isa. 9. Dan. 9.
Job. 13.10 Jer. 9.28. Jsa. 1.26.43. Jam. 4.8.10. Exodus 34. Psalm. 103.
he is so delighted with himself in the exercise of that attribute, that he
makes it at it were his darling, and the child of his nature, 2 Cor. 1.3.
(as Christ is the son of his person) exalting it above all his works, (nay
and ours too, works of sin to conquer, and destroy them) and to turn our
Egyptian darkness and servitude into a Goshen, giving us for outward
afflictions inward joys; for earthly losses, true and lasting delights;
satisfaction in poverty, when many are poor, when richest; a heart not to
desire, which is more then we can desire besides: and drawing more relief from
this dry Cisterne, then Tantalus when in the River to the mouth, a holy riddle,
gaining by loss, and loosing by gain, an improving of our joy a hundred fold
with persecutions by losing our goods; Matthew. 10. Mark 10. Job. 31.
in regard of inward peace, and complacency; the issue; and crown that follows
it, if we can but learn with Saint Paul equally to want, and abound, in what
condition soever to be content, Ph. 4. Prove. 1.14.13.7.
and by it make afflictions become a real lie, and our selves a holy paradox
when in having nothing we enjoy all things. 2 Cor. 6.
For if God be Christ's, and Christ be ours, as the Apostle argues, we have in
him, as spring, and fountain all other joys, and comforts, that are but
derivative from him; and in their several streams communicated to us, and
need look no farther then to him for supply of all things fit for our
condition. And therefore it is good to trust, and wait with David for his
salvation, who can make our prison a Palace, our death a life, our hell here a
heaven in regard of inward comforts; if in the dampe of affliction, (when our
candle burns dim by our being too much undergrown in our affections) we make
haste to be drawn up, and set our conversations for heaven, and heavenly
objects.

But admit that with afflictions God gives not that blessing in this life, so
as in all the travel of our souls add sharpest throws we cannot be delivered
of this promised seed, and numerous issue of happy fruits, (the effects, and
productions of Gods grace, and goodness to us), but when the Children are come
to the birth, we want strength to bring forth, so that with Phineas his wife, 1 Samuel 4.
we miscarry in our Pangs, and loose our lives, before our weak, though true,
faith, and feeble midwife patience can deliver us of those expected joys: yet
then (and never till then) we begin to live: the Act of our conscientious
death, for Christ, and a good cause, being our crown of life (deferred only
because we sought it not as we should, not lost) our inthroneing, Rev. 2.
and inauguration in immortality, if we persevere in a patient, pious, and
humble comportment in our sufferings; for it is not our resisting (though to
some drops of blood, if we make a dishonorable retreat, but keeping the field
dead, if not alive, that inables, and intitles us to the Gardland, and Trophies
of victory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, who will swallow up the victory of
the grave, and make it become the grave of its own victory, by giving up all
its slain, and becoming a slave to its captives; for he that makes the green
Tree become dry, (he that thinks himself full of sap; and life to faide and
dye) will make the dead, and withered one to spring again, and flourish; Is.
17.24.
nay, with Gideons, Jug, 7.
till these earthen Pitchers of our bodies are dashed in pieces, the lamp of
our souls will never shine clear, but then God reassuming them from the ashes
of their cold urnes, will make them as sockets, in which their souls shall in
endless glory burn; And therefore, though God have his furnace, it is but to
melt and refine us, to new cast, and stamp us with his own Image, and make us,
current money for heaven, which is the true end of (as it puts an end to) all
the Afflictions of the godly, 2 Cor. 1.4, 6.
and for sowing in tears here, makes us reap joy, 1 Pet. 3.4
if we are not harder and more rebellious against Gods rod, Eccl. 7.
Mat. 5. Ps. 126.6.
then the flinty Rock was to Moses (where fire rather then water was to be
expected). Yet let us be Flints too in our inwards, ever keeping a virtuall
fire, and zeal to Gods glory, to purge us from all dross, and sin: for
without it none shall enter into Paradise, nor be made heirs of immortal
glory. 1 Cor. 6. Rev. 22.
So as you see our natures had need every way to be wrought upon; we are such a
masterpeece of perverseness, such mettle as will not take impression from soft
means, but must have the rough hammer and Axe of Afflictions to hew, and
fashion us, though like the sun beams they work according to their object,
melting wax, and hardening Clay, winning upon the Godly, but obdurating the
wicked, as the hammer the Anvill; and this makes God sometimes angry, that he
might not be angry with us, lightning before he thunders, warning before he
wounds, Ps. 7.
afflicting here to take away sin, Is. 27.2.^ Jer. 4, 5.
that by continuing in sin we might not be everlastingly afflicted. And
because prosperity makes us unprosperous (in that we are naturally prone to
turn Gods blessings into curses, Ps. 69.106. Mal. 1.2.9 Pro. 1.31
and never cry, Lord save us, we perish, but with the Disciples in a storm,
Mat. 8.24.27. Luke 8.
) God raises Tempests amongst us that (with Jonas, and the Mariners) may force
us to call upon our God; for then are we only saved, when we think our selves
nearest drowning, Mat. 10^
and may say with the Philosopher, Perijssem, nisi periissem, so as we ought
to be contented in all estates. Thus the dead womb of Sarah will conceive, and
bring forth an Isaac of comfort, our winter dying blasted condition will
spring, and revive in death, and make it better in the wise man's opinion, then
birth, Job. 5. Eccl. 7 ^ob. 14.19.
in that it changes our habitation, earth for heaven, and extinguisheth our
rent here (fears, and tears) giving garments of gladness for those of
heaviness, for finite sorrows, joys beyond Arithmetic to number; Is. 61.
Cor. 7.6.
and in our passage over this red Sea will be both our way, and support; never
laying any burden upon us but lending his own shoulder to it, with the
temptation ever giing the issue, 1 Cor. 10 3. Heb. 12.
and like a good Gardener never cuts his Rose bush, but to render its flowers
more sweet, and flourishing; like a good Physician never lets us blood, but to
cure our Tympany of Pride, dropsy of covetousness, or the like, and never
tempts but only for trial, not seduction, nor withdrawes himself, but to make
us the better value his presence, and favors (contraries being the best
comments upon one another) yet let us ever pray against this last as most
dangerous, but still rely upon him; never letting go our Anchor, which will in
the end, above, beyond, nay without means save us; Isa. 43. Psa. 91. Ph. 2.4.
for if the Potter will not let his vessel continue in the fire to destroy,
but lute and fix it, the carrier not overload his beast, God much more
remembering how weak we are built, and our foundations to be but dust, Psa. 103
will weigh out his pressures to our abilities, shortning our pains, or
enlarging our patience, making all things to work for our good; Romans 8.
the lines how contrary soever drawn to center in our happiness; and though
in misery we think our time stands still, like Ioshuahs sun; it then has
wings, upon which we soar toward heaven. Nay, God will not only work thus
for us, Ph. 2.13. Isa. 26.12. Heb. 8.10. Ephesians. 1. Gal. 2.20.
but in us, by us, and upon us what he commands from us, filing us to make and
form us vessels for his temple, hewing and squaring us, as timber for his
Sanctuary, hammering our stony hearts for his spiritual building, smoothing
and polishing us for beauty and Ornament, and to show his own resemblance, and
Image in us, when he in any of these ways reflects upon us. But to conclude,
God takes that care of us in all things as nothing can hurt us, no temptation
on the right nor left hand shall ever finally prevail against us, but God will
turn our deepest sorrows into our highest joys, so as if in the fire of
public miseries, (our homebred dissentions which like Samsons Foxes devour all
before them) the inward warmth of compassion, burnings of repentance, heat of
zeal to Gods house or glory, do as from a limbeck distill some heavenly drops
from our eyes, turn our laughter into mourning, and make us rain upwards, that
very trouble will improve to happiness, and those drops turn into the water
of life to us, and being kept in Gods bottle Psalm. 58.
will fall down again upon us in refreshing dewes to allay our greatest
inward storms; nay they are in Gods book to wash out our sins, that should
be there registered against us (yet only as a means of obtaining mercy, not
from any intrinsic worth) and out of our consciences the blackest Characters
of acted transgressions. Nay, these eye Jewels, or pearls in the eyes, falling
from them will so clear the sight, as we shall discern the glittering vanities
of this life to be but mere shadows, shining meteors, nothing but vanity and
vexation of spirit, Eccl. 1.^.
and not fall in love with that face that will not stay to be saluted, but
rather see beauty in the blackemore; love the wrinkles, and blemishes that the
truest picture of misery (man under the Torrid Zone of Gods Fatherly
displeasure) can present; Isay. 53.
for so we may espouse an abiding happiness, and have eternity for jointure
settled upon us. Act. 14.22.


And therefore let us with patience run the race (how rugged, and difficult
soever we find the way) looking to Jesus, the Author and finisher of our
faith, that with him, and for him, we may endure the Cross, despise the shame
for the joy set before us. Heb. 12.
For suffering with him, we shall assuredly be glorified together, Romans 8.17,
18.
he shining like the sune, and fountain of light, we like lesser stars
borrowing our luster from him, (being for ever fixed in the same Orb) without
either waine or Ecclips, enjoying perpetual day without night, joy without
sorrow, satisfaction without satiety, a happy eternity, an eternal felicity,
heaven being the only Olympus above the meteors, and storms of this world
which for its inconstancy is in the Revelation Emblemd by a Sea, and that of
glass, for its frailty, and brittlenesse; in its form circular, and moving to
show the inconstancy of all things in it; its matter fading, vanishing, and
dying; to teach us the perishablenesse, and certain mortality of all its
beauties: for as the Father is, such are the Children, all but empty glories;
nay man himself, the Master piece of nature, and comprehension of all other
beings, and perfections, close bound up in a little volume (if we look into
his materials, the weakness and short continuance of the building) we can
account but as a vapor, a shadow, a bubble, that soon vanishes; a walking
piece of earth, a well glazed pitcher, soon broken; a heap of ruin, rather
then a fair structure, and in his greatest perfections a cipher or nothing. In
that honor is but a blaze, or meteor, many times made up of the basest matter;
a treasure without lock or key, more in the power of another, then the owner;
riches but Gold; Gold, but a well colored piece of dirt, which against nature,
rather then stay to make us happy, will (though a dull, and heavy element) take
wings, and fly away; fame a hollow Echo, beauty a well glazed pitcher, or
fading flower, friendship a dying happiness, joy but folly, mirth a short
madness; all things in their longest continuance, but a sound or flash of
lightning, that dies as soon as borne; a dim glass, dark resemblance, or
apparition of future happiness: for in the making of this goodly frame, (this
outbuilding or suburbs of heaven) as in a little note-booke, God only writ in
short and illegible Characters (drew in model or little) those everlasting,
inutterable ravishing glories, that shall be revealed when the scene is to be
opened, the curtain drawn, the veil of our souls (our bodies) done away,
even such as our cripled fancy, our imped and pinnioned imaginations cannot
soar to, and therefore with a silent admiration, a blindness occasioned by
seeing the luster of many suns at once, let us expect to enter that immence,
infinite blessedness (by faith) that cannot now enter into us (into our finite
capacities) and begin our heaven in our holiness, the true way, approach, and
gate to happiness: and from inward principles be constant in our outward
sufferings for the name or cause of Jesus, Act. 20.
and so turn our enemies pity at our pressures into wonder at our patience,
and our patience into an everlasting fruition of blessedness, and seal (if
Gods honor require it, and our Countries good) to that truth by our deaths, we
have made profession of in lives Rev. 2.12.
suffering all evil or punishment, rather then commit any the least evil of
sin; for such a temper of the soul (when in the lowest center of misery)
will like fire to fuel turn all into it self, into satisfaction, if not
complacency, and with the wood in Exodus will convert these bitter waters into
sweet and refreshing springs. But if our weak faith does not work such
miracles, Exo. 15.25.
let not our souls be vexed, nor disquieted within us, but trust in God, (as
well for the resurrection of our joys here, as of our bodies hereafter) who is
the help of our countenance, and our God, Psa. 42.43.
and having received press money (past favors, which are always pledges of
future mercies) let us wait upon God, fight unto death, and not quit our
colors for want of pay here, but expect our triumphs hereafter; when the
enemy, sin, and death are totally vanquished; and in the mean time, (like
Cloth in the fullers hand which must be thoroughly whited, and dressed to make up
those robes of state, (the innocence of the Saints) we must be for ever adorned
with hereafter) let us yield our selves to be trampled on, and rinsed in
several waters (many troubles) still fearing that if the deluge of Affliction
once begin to fall, or abate, a worse slime of sin will cover the face of our
earthly hearts, and we for ever may stick fast in that mire, without water to
cleanse us, if the fountains opened to Judah, and Jerusalem for uncleanesse be
stopped against us, and then if the Baits of sin, delights of the world carry
us along in those soft and boggy ways, and sink us deeper; how ever their
entertainments are sweetened for the present with honey, we shall ever find the
Bees sting in their tail; their conclusion will be bitterness; and if our
tenderness shrinkes at the prickling of Afflictions here, how shall we endure
the wrack hereafter? if not the sparks of divine displeasure, how the flames
of hell fire for ever, and ever?

Now to prevent this misery, which is as immortal, as the body, the body as the
soul, the soul as God himself; let us take lawful pleasures here, (when God
allows them) but not suffer them to take us, yet sometimes please our selves
in the want of pleasure it self 1 Cor. 7.29.31.
; for what we sow in weakness, shall rise in power 1 Cor. 15.
nay to Glory -- nay in Glory; for as all Joys here flow into the joys of
Heaven (as rivers into the Sea) so the faithful Christian shall not loose his
in death. But his soul as soon as out of his body, shall only go from one
Heaven to an other; for the way to Heaven is Heaven, so that as the Angels did
not divest Heaven in coming to us, good souls do invest Heaven in going to
them, the true joy that a Zacheus, (a soul in union with God and Christ)
apprehends here, Joh 14.16
being that none can take from him. For as one says wittily, crowd Heaven into
a Map, its two Hemispheres are made up of joy and glory, joy ushering in glory,
so that in the anguish of death, agony of dissolution, vision of horror, nay
sight of hell it self, I shall see the face of God; and all these will be, but
as Glasses that collect, and reflect his ravishing rays upon me, adding joy to
joy, and glory to both, and exchange for a great bubble (blown out with an
easy breath; for that child, and darling of time, antiquity in blood, for an
empty aerie title, which is innobled only by action, and retains nothing but
the wax fit for any labell, (if wanting the stamp of true piety and worth.) for
the hollow sound of fame,) a crown that can never be lost for goodness, and
virtue will reflect a brave luster upon the memory of a dead, as well as upon
the person of a living Saint; a gallant echo of praise when dead, for his
praising of God, when living: and though, as one says, envy may sometimes mist
the glass of Reputation, so that it shall not report a clear light, yet at
the last judgment it will reverberate truly, and we shall shine in a sphere
all brightness, and be known by a transparent light on every side, what we
were here, what we are in heaven, to the glory of God, joy of the Saints, shame
and derision of of our enemies. So great is the convictive Majesty of goodness
in the beams of the setting sun, and though the highest perfection of the
soul, the most sublimed part of man here is full of imperfections, blemishes,
and dying beauties, which do rather hide, then show the glory of a sanctified
spirit, or the true Image of God drawn in little there; yet this way of taking
God into us is our only way of being taken into God, and to make him our
shield, and exceeding great reward, Genesis 5.
our defense here, and Crown hereafter, when our Candles shall be put out in
our earthen sockets, our lofty blown bladders empty themselves of breath, and
we sleep in death, a dark Gallery, or shady walk only leading between two
lives the period and Omega of the earthly man's happiness, the Alpha, and
beginning of the Christians blessedness, the highest step to honor, and birth
day to eternity, where we shall for ever enjoy day without night, satisfaction
without satiety, a tranquil happiness in a happy tranquillity, eternal
blessedness in a blessed eternity. So be it, Amen.

GEntle Reader, though naturally men love the issue of their brains more then
of their bodies (in that they are many times longer lived; more true and
lasting records of the innobled souls they derive their pedigree from; then
the other) yet the author of this little work chose rather to be forgotten,
then remembered by a piece; that (if examined by a clear and open light) will
represent him with so many errors and ill drawn features to the world, and
designed it only for himself and his; but truly a civility to the law of
friendship (where desires are commands) and the consideration of its
usefulness in regard of the unhappy Harmony between its subject and these
times made me first lend (and now send it) abroad, and give it line beyond its
authors intention, though not liberty to go but whether my hand directs; for
I have only Printed a few Coppies to satisfy some private importunities; and
therefore if thou be one of that number, its failings are now mine and thine,
and so entitle themselves to your forgiveness, which is the humble request of
thine in all affection.

FINIS.

