WHereas there is an accurate Account and Description of IRELAND designed to be
made Public in the English Atlas undertaken by Moses Pit of London, and in
Order thereto* some Gentlemen in Dublin have agreed to meet weekly for
reviewing such an Account, as shall from time to time come from under the Pen
of Mr. William Molyneux, as also to bring in some Materials to the said
Description; This is earnestly to entreat all Persons that they would be
pleased freely to communicate their Answers to these following Quaeries, or any
of them, Directing them to Mr. William Molyneux nigh Ormonds Gate in Dublin, or
to any other of their Acquaintance in Dublin that may Communicate to them the
said Mr. Molyneux, not forgetting to specify in their Letters the place of
their Habitation that they may be again written to if Occasion requires.

Quaeries to which Answers are Desired for the Illustration of that part of the
English Atlas relating to Ireland.
1 THe nature of the Soil of the County, or place, and the Chief Product
thereof.

2 What Plants, Animals, Fruits, Metals, or other Natural Productions there
are peculiar to the Place, and how Ordered?

3 What Springs, and Rivers, or Loughs, with the various Properties thereof, as
whether Medicinal, how replenished with Fish, whether Navigable, Rapid, or
Slow, etc.

4 What Curiosities of Art, or Nature, or Antiquity are or have bin found there?

5 What Ports for Shipping, and their Description, and what Moon causes High
Water?

6 What great Battles have been there fought, or any other Memorable Action, or
Accident?

7 What peculiar Customs, Manners, or Dispositions the Inhabitants of each
County, or Town have among them?

8 How each County is Inhabited, thickly or thinly?

9 What Places give, or formerly have given Title to any Nobleman; as also
what Ancient Seats of Noble Families are to be met with?

10 What Towns of Note in the County, and especially Towns Corporate?

11 The names of such Towns both Antique and Modern, English and Irish, and why
so called?

12 The Magistracy of Towns Corporate, and when Incorporated, and by whom
built, with their return of Parliament Men?

13 Trade of the Town, with the number of Houses, and Inhabitants, and manner
of Buildings.

14 What Public, or Antique Buildings?

15 What Synods have been held there, what Monasteries, Cathedral, or other
Churches are or have been there, and from what Saint named?

16 In what Bishopric each County or any part thereof is?

This Paper may be had Gratis at the Shop of Mr. Dudley Davis Bookseller over
against the Rose Tavern in Castle-street, Dublin; Where is to be sold The
Ancient Usage in bearing Ensigns of Honor as are called Arms, with a Catalogue
of the Present Nobility and Baronets of England, Scotland, and Ireland* By Sir
William Dugdale Knight, Garter Principle King at Arms. And by Moses Pit at the
Angel in St. Paul's Churchyard London.

It Is Desired that Answers to these Queries may be given as to any other
Country whatsoever.


