Cochlearia CURIOSA: OR THE Curiosities of Scurvygrass. Being an exact Scrutiny
and careful Description of the Nature and Medicinal Virtue of Scurvygrass. In
which is exhibited to public use the most and best Preparations of Medicines,
both Galenical and Chemical; either for Internal or External use, in which that
Plant, or any part thereof is employed. Written in Latin by Dr. Andreas
Valentinus Molimbrochius of Lipswick. Englished by Tho. Sherley, M. D. and
Physician in Ordinary to His present Majesty.

LONDON, Printed by S. and B. Griffin, for William Cademan, at the Popes Head
in the New Exchange, and Middle Exchange in the Strand, 1676.

To the Honorable Sir JOHN BENNET Knight and Baronet, Knight of the Bath, and
one of his Majesty's Justices for the Peace for the County of Middlesex.
SIR,
THere is two things I have always had a great abhorrance for, Idleness and
Ingratitude, the desire I had to avoid both which has been the occasion of
affixing your Name to this Book, which is a Treatise so useful, both as to its
Subject, and the method of the Diseourse upon it, that it gave me the
Confidence to think it worthy your acceptance, and the rather because it is not
only the first Tract that I have hitherto met with, writ purposely upon this
peculiar Plant, but also the Author has delivered what he had to say upon it
under such curious, and Excellent heads, That I cannot but give it this just
Character* That it is both a learned and accurate work, so that it may
deservedly be called Cochlearia Curiosa. And this I may do without the censure
of being partial, since I pretend no further Interest in the thing, than the
having put it into English, that those Country men of mine, which are
unacquainted with the Latin Tongue, might reap the benefit of it. This
advantage I received from the doing of it, that it diverted me from some
melancholy thoughts; and I employed those hours of vacancy from business, that
I could spare from the solicitation of my affairs of nearest concern, which
were lately incumbant upon me. Having thus redeemed some hours from the
imputation of being idly spent, I began to consider if there were not yet a
further improvement to be made upon this occasion, and reflecting upon the long
friendship you have honored me with, and the frequent favors you have
conferred upon me, my present state of Affairs, not permitting me to make any
suitable return, I resolved at least to show my self not insensible of your
favors, and therefore took this opportunity of making a public acknowledgment
of them desiring you would except of this as a testimony of my gratitude, till
I am so happy to give you further evidences of my desires to approve my self,

SIR, Your grateful and Affectionate Servant, Tho. Sherley.

THE EPISTLE TO THE READER.
READER,
OF what Classis soever you are, I must tell you, that in stead of your censure
I expect your thanks for the Present I now make you: It Is a Treatise of
Scurvygrass, a Plant that grows very plentifully in our Country, a sign, as the
Author assures us, that the Scurvy, in which disease it is peculiarly
advantageous, is but too frequent amongst us, which our own experience does
sadly confirm. The heads, under which the learned Author has discoursed, are
not only useful, but curious, and I conceive, he has handled this matter so
fully, that there is little more can be said by any other upon this Subject,
which his Industry and care has not taken notice of.

For this Treatise contains, not only a description of the several Spcies and
kinds of this Plant, with its several Names, Place, and time of growth,
temperature, general virtues and use; but also does innumerate the particular
uses. Medicinal virtues, and manner of applying each particular part of this
Plant, together with an exact description of all sorts of Medicines preparable
from the whole or any part of the said Subject, either by the Galenick, or
Chemical Art.

He has likewise fitted his Labor both to the capacity, and delight of all
sorts of Readers, for in the Proeme (concerning diverse curious Plants) he has
afforded matter of delight, and inquiry to the curious Virtuosi, and
inquisitive natural Philosopher, as well as Botanist: In the Body of the
Discourse, he has interwoven and solidly discussed several Medicinal points to
the satisfaction (I doubt not) of candid Philosophers.

To content and employ those that are Chymically addicted, here are plenty of
excellent Preparations to be made by that art from this Subject, and to ease
the young Galenical Student in Physic, here is a faithful and laborious
Collection of all sorts of Galenical Medicines, and that from the most
approved, and authentic Physicians Works now extant.

I question not, but the virtuous and Country Ladies will be highly delighted
with the Employment and diversion this Book will furnish them with, by
instructing them how to make Sauces, Wines, Syrups, and distilled Waters from
this Plant, all of them very efficacious toward the recovery of their Sick and
languishing Neighbors and Tenants.

The Industrious Apothecary may here find the way to make several Chemical
Medicines preparable from this Plant (and often prescribed by Physicians) which
otherwise he will be necessitated to buy from unfaithful hands.

And the honest Country Farmer, who may perchance live far from any Physician,
may be hereby capacitated to relieve himself or Family (afflicted with the
Scurvey, or any Symptom of it) upon an exigence, by applying safe, effectual,
easily preparable, and cheap Medicines, of which sort are the Wine, Water,
Syrup, and Decoction. One thing I think necessary to give you notice of (which
the Author has likewise done) which is that several of the Galenick Medicines
described (ever in this Tract) are so disgustful and to be taken in such large
proportions, that few pallats can readily comply with the use of them; and
therefore I do advise those that want judgment to make an Election, to make
use of the less compound, and easiest of preparation; till the next impression
of this Book: In which it is possible I may give my opinion, and animadversions
upon most of the Medicines in it, together with a description of the
preparation of those Chemical Medicines often prescribed to enter the
composition of the Galenick ones herein prescribed.

The Author of this ensuing Work is the learned Andreas Valentinus
Molimbrochius, a Member of that industrious and useful Society of Men, who
style themselves the Curious Inquisitors after Nature, he composed it in Latin
interlaced with much of his own native Language, the German Tongue, all which
for thy benefit I have put into English, together with a large Alphabetical
Table.

In the doing which I have not been so solicitous after the fine and modish way
of Expression, as to render the Work intelligible, and consequently useful to
all sorts of Readers.

Medicines from their usefulness to the Sick, are styled (...), the Hands of
God, and are so sacred a part of the Art of Physic, that the preparation of
them ought not slightly to be committed into unfaithful or ignorant hands, it
being too common for such persons to make gross and dangerous mistakes, to
prevent which it is the duty of all honest, able Physicians to make up and
dispense their own Medicines: And I am sure it was the laudable custom of all
the ancient Fathers of Physic to do so, even till this last Century; and I
find it not only voted honorable to do so, amongst the Acts of that prudent
and learned Society, the College of London Physicians; but it is likewise now
at this time practiced by many of the worthiest members of that Society, yet
some interessed Persons, endeavor to disparage this way, by alleging it is
the same which is used by those bold pretenders to Physic, illiterate Quacks,
and Bill-Men. But if this be a sufficient Argument, I doubt there will hardly
be found any Profession, which may not be disparaged.

It is certainly the interest of the Sick, that Physicians do reassume this
care of making Medicines for them. For now the Scurvy has spread it self so
generally over these Western parts of the World, it by complicating it self
with most other Diseases (such as Agues, Cholicks, Fevers, Convulsion, Mother,
and Hypocondriack Fits, the Gout, Drepsie, Pox, etc.) renders them all so
stubborn and rebellious, that they will not yield to any remedies, but such as
are highly graduated, of which kind are the more generous sort of Chemical
Medicines; which also ought to be adapted to the peculiar circumstances of the
Sick, as his Temper, Age, Sex, etc. by the Physicians care and skill. For my
part I think it so much my duty, that I declare I will be ready upon the
application of any Sick Persons to me, to afford them not only my advice, but
will also furnish them with safe and efficacious Medicines; being convinced
that it is both just and honorable to do so, this intention of Mine does
justify me to be what I here subscribe my self a Lover of my Country, and
Reader,

From my Study over against the Stocks-Market place near Cornhil, at the sign
of the Sugar loaf and Tobacco-role, London, Ap 3. 1676 Thy Friend, Tho.
Sherley.

A TABLE Of the Contents of the Chapters.
THE PROEM. Of diverse curious Plants, Page 1. Chapter I. Of the Name of
Scurvygrass, p. 17. II. Of the Description of Scurvygrass, 27. III. Of the
Differences of Scurvygrass, 34. IV. Of the Place and time of growth of
Scurvygrass, 36. V. Of the Qualities and Virtues of Scurvygrass, 40. VI. Of
Medicines prepared from Scurvygrass, 43. VII. Of Sauces made with Scurvygrass,
50. VIII. Of the Decoction of Scurvygrass, 52. IX. Of the Wine of Scurvygrass,
64. X. Of the Infusion of Scurvygrass, 72. XI. Of the Water of Scurvygrass, 82.
XII. Of the Spirit of Scurvygrass, 103. XIII. Of the Volatile Salt of
Scurvygrass, 112. Chapter XIV. Of Oil of Scurvygrass. Page 121. XV. Of Conserve
of Scurvygrass, 124. XVI. Of the Syrup of Scurvygrass, 128. XVII. Of the
Electuary and Mixtures of Scurvygrass, 135. XVIII. Of the Essence of
Scurvygrass, 146. XIX. Of the Juice of Scurvygrass, 153. XX. Of the Magistery
of Scurvygrass, 165. XXI. Of the outward use of Scurvyrass, 171.
ERRATA.
THe Reader is desired to pass by literal faults, and to correct the following
with his Pen, as they occur.

IN the Proem, page 4* line 15. read Bittersweet. p. 5. l. 2. r. well known for
not known. l. 14. r. Day Star for Dog Star. l. 24. r. moist. p. 6. margint r.
359 for 369. p. 12. mar. r. 495 for 405. lib. 7. for lib. 1. p. 13. mar. quest.
5. for 355. 235 for 250. Hist. 11 for Hist 4. 90 for 91.

In the Book, p. 20. l. 20. r. whose for those. in mar. lib. 13. for lib. 130.
p 22. l. 18. r Alliaria. p. 35. l. 10. r. Digitatis. l. 21. Equisitum. in mar.
p. 176 for 116. p. 27. l. 24. r. stalks. p. 32. l. 28. Dover for Bristol. p.
38. l. 20. r. Ptisan. p. 41. l. 15. r. Levamen. in mar. p. 148. p. 42 l. 27 r
warm. p 45. l. 6. r. Sheeps Pease. l 7. r one ounce. p. 46. l. 7. r.
Antiscorbuticae. p. 47. l. 27. r. prescribed. p. 52. l. 6. dele the. p. 55. l.
16. r. Melons p 61.26. r. Brunnerus. in mar. Brunnerus for Brown. p. 62. l. 17
r. Assarabecca. in mar: p. 17. p. 63. l. 3. that the. p. 68, l. 4. Phlegm. P.
72. l 1. Chap. X. p. 146. l. 15. r Chap. XVIII. l. 20. Elecchir. p. 145* in
mar. p 186. p. 149. l. 29 dilated. p. 150. l 13. dele are.

The leaves of young Winter SCURVYGRASSE
Small creeping SCURVYGRASSE


Great creeping SCURVYGRASSE


Britanica Bistort the English SCURVYGRASSE of Pena and Lobetius


True SCURVY GRASS Dutch SCURVYGRASSE


THE CURIOSITIES OF SCURVYGRASS, OR, An Exact Scrutiny and careful Description
of the Nature and Medicinal virtues of SCURVYGRASS.
THE PROEM.
BEfore I enter upon my Curiosities of Scurvygrasse, I think it convenient, in
the first place to give an Account of Certain Admirable Plants, amongst which
the Rosa Sinica, or China Rose, so called from the Place of its growth, is not
the least considerable. It grows upon Trees, which every day change. Color
twice, some times it is altogether purple, and then again it becomes totally
white; and is absolutely without smell. Cap. 4. part. 4. p. 176.
Athanasius Kircherus in his China Illustrata makes mention of this Rose: where
he also tells us, that at Rome, that Noble Botanist Franciscus Corvinus, in his
Garden furnished with all sorts of Plants, has a Plant called Viola Nocturna,
or the Night Violet, which according to the Suns rising, or Setting does
sensibly change its Colors. In the day time it has no smell, but in the Night
it breathes forth a most pleasant odor.

Of the Rosa Hierochuntina, or Jericho Rose, many relate that tho it be dry,
and an hundred year old, yet every Christmas day, in the precedent night,
betwixt the hours of eleven, and twelve, it begins to blow, or open it self of
its own accord, and at length its leaves are fully blown, and expanded, after
which it gathers in its branches, and shuts it self up in the form of a bud.
But this truly is a Fable; for every day if it be put in wine, or water, it
will open it self, and being taken out of the Liquor it will again contract it
self: the truth of which I can satisfy any person in for I have such a rose
which I procured for this intent, that I might administer to women afflicted,
with hard labor, called by the Grecians (...), a draught of wine, in which
this Rose has first expanded it self, for the water in which this has been
infused does greatly promote the delivery of women in Travel, as has been
observed hitherto by many; and amongst the rest it has been noted by Erasmus
Franciscus (in the Gardens of Pleasures in the East and West Indies P. 1. p.
357*
But I rather use wine than water, which seems more agreeable to reason,
because it is most apt to revive the spirits, which is necessary in difficult
Labor. This is called the Jericho Rose, because it is supposed to grow in the
Gardens, and Fields about the City of Jericho in Palestine (which place is
often mentioned in the Sacred Scripture) but this is a mistake, as appears by
Baronius 2. Observat. Cap 86.
and Munstero in Cosmograph: in descript, Civitatis Hiericho. writing thus: I
have bought them brought thither by strangers from the adjacent parts of
Arabia, where it grows on the Sea shore upon the sand, Rau Wolfiius says he
found a wild sort of them in Syria among their Cottages, and Ruined Buildings.
Caspar Bauhinus Lib. 12. Pinac. sect. 4. p. 484.
tells us he produced it several years together in his Garden, for it easily
grows and flourishes. It is also called Rosa Hierosolymitania and Rosa Sanctae
Mariae. The Rose of Jerusalem, and the Rose of Saint Mary. But whether it be a
Rose or Asphalthus, Rosewood or Convolvulus, Bindweed or Amomum Dioscondis, or
Bitterweed; or Erica, Heath, or else a Violet, or Dame-violets, I leave others
to judge, for there are Authors, who relate it to all these kinds, but I shall
proceed.

Matthiolus in Epistola nuncupatoria, writes of an Herb, which, touching any
place that is locked, causes it to open. He also asserts, in the same place,
that he saw a man at Venice, (who was condemned to be hanged) who by applying
only one herb, with certain ceremonies, made all doors fly open, and thrust
back their Locks,

The same Faculty also has another herb, not known in Italy, and growing in
the Mountains, upon which, if Horses tread, it loses their Iron shoes. Lib.
12. page 412:
Athanas, Kercher. de Mun. Subterran. They commonly call this herb from this
effect, Scoffocavallo, and suppose that it is a sort of Lunaria or Moonwort.

There grows in Judea a Root called from the place Baharas, which as Josephus
de Bello Iudaico tells us is of the color of Flame, and shines, and sparkles
like Lucifer, or the Dog Star; it also refuses to be plucked up by any that
desire it, until it be sprinkled with a Woman's Urine, or Menstruous blood.

There is a certain Herb called Asciomenes, which, as Apollidorus says, being
sprinkled with wine, does contract its leaves into its self. And another
growing in our Country about most places and Brooks, by Bauhinus supposed to be
a sort of Balsamina or Balm Apple: of many others it is called Persicaria
Siliquosa, or codded Arsemart, which* as soon as it is but slightly touched with
the hand, the seeds fly out of the husk into your face, and for that cause it
is called herba impatiens, or Noli me tangere, impatience, or touch me not. I
have often observed and gathered this Herb (when I studied the Knowledge of
Herbs) at Lipswick, where it grows not far from the Cabbage Gardens. ( Kohl
Garten.) Agreeable with this is Herba viva, or the living Herb, which is
mentioned by Simon Paulus Class. 3. quadripart, Botanic. p. 302.
, which altogether refuses to be touched, and which this Author saw contract
it self at the slight touch of a Toad. If this herb be laid hold of, it appears
to be absolutely withered, and dry; but if you take away your hand, it recovers
its color and freshness again. And Bauhinus Lib. 10. Pinac. sect. ^^ p. 369.
says, it withers or grows fresh again, as often as you lay hold of it, or
remove your hand from it.

The beforementioned Simon Paulus in the same place remembers another Plant,
which he calls Mimosa, which cannot endure to be touched, and perishes if it
be, but does not contract it self so soon, nor so soon expand its leaves, as
the other does, after touching. Bauhinus Bauh. lib. 1. page 360.
writes it is of the color and taste of Liquirise, and does agree in many
things with wild Foene-greek.

Of Indian Fern the same Simon Paulus Simon Paul. Cap. 1.
relates, that its true, it will suffer it self to be touched, but then
afterward its leaves do wither and die, as if they were corrupted with a
Gangrene.

In the Isle Cambabon there is a Tree, whose leaves are very like a Mulberry
Tree, but on both sides it has two sharp and short feet, which, when it is
touched, it goes away. Bauhinus Bauh. lib 12. Pinac. sect. 6. p. 51^.
and Theophrastus Theoph. lib. 4. hist. 3.
mention a certain Tree, growing near Memphis, which has nothing peculiar,
either in its leaves, boughs, or form, but in its event: for to look upon, it
is prickly, and its leaves are like Fern, but if any body touch its branches,
they say it does as it were dry, and languish, and contract themselves, but a
little while after they return to life again.

There grows (as we are told by Franciscus Lopaiz) a Plant in Peru, whose
leaves, being touched, grow very dry.

Borellus Borel. Cent. 1. histor. and Obser. canor. Medico. Phys. 100. p. 98:
writes thus of a Sensitive Plant found out by him; I can glory, says he, that
I first found motion in the flower of a Plant sufficiently known, which I will
name to you, least any body take from me my due praise, which many times has
happened to me, etc. And a little after: The Flowers Iateac Aromaticae Knapweed,
whilst they are in Vigor and and full strength, and whilst there is to be
perceived, as it were, a mealiness upon the Flowers, if the least part of the
herb be touched; its hairy strings will contract themselves, so that the left
part will gather it self up, the right side being touched; and so on the
contrary. But you must carefully take heed, that you do not repeat this action
in the same Flower. The same thing may be done with the wild Iacent and
Thistle, wherefore I do not doubt, but if curious search were made, but that
many such Plants may be found; nay, I affirm for a truth, that all plants have
an obscure sort of Sense, but some more obscure than others. Thus far Borellus.

There is also an Herb (which as Nicholas Monardus testifies) shows in
diseases whether the sick shall live or die.

The Spaniards relate that in a Province of the West Indies, there is a certain
Tree like a Pare Tree, whose fruit being eaten, does wonderfully provoke Venery
even to a miracle. Theophrastus mentions a Plant, of which he that eats is
enabled to lie with a Woman seventy times together.

Also the Herb called Ossifraga, is very wonderful by reason of its Power to
soften Bones; of which Tho. Bartholinus Tho. Barth. Obs. 38. in Anno 1.
Ephemer. Nature. Curios. p. 125, 126.
takes notice. They say if Oxen eat of it, it renders them unapt to go, and
makes their Bones so soft, that they may be twisted about like a switch, but
they do not die, but may be recovered, if they give them the Bones of some
other Beast destroyed by this Herb. V. B. Sachsii Scholion in dictam
Observationem Page 126.
, and Simon Paulus Sim. Paul. Quadripart. Botan. Clas. 4.
.

Jacob Bontius Iac Bon. lib. 5. Med. Ind. c. 33.
speaks of another Plant growing in Molucca, which produces a Seed like
Barley, but it is blacker, and more hairy. It also grow in other parts of the
Indies upon the Continent, and does so confirm, and strengthen the bones, that
if the Teeth be only moistened with the juice of it, they are enabled to grind
a Flint to powder.

There grows a fruit in a Province of China, which the Chinese call Peci, this
being put into the mouth with a piece of Copper, it does not only so soften
the Copper, that it may be broken with the Teeth, but does convert it into so
excellent a substance, that it may be eaten V. Ephemes Erud. 32. Tom. 2. p. 367.
.

In Tartary there grows an Herb like hemp, excepting that it has not so
strong, nor hard a stalk, which falls to pieces or dissolves, and as it were
becomes dirt, if it be put into water; but if it be cast into the Fire, it
will never be burned, or consumed. In the same place also, and it is worthy our
Admiration, it is related by Benzo Benzo in Descrip. Ins. Canar. Occid. part. 6.
of a Tree which sweats forth water from its leaves constantly. This is also
taken notice of by Franciscus Erasmus in his Garden of Pleasure. They write,
that in all that Island there is no other water to be found, but what comes
from that Tree; which is perpetually covered with a Thick Cloud, excepting when
the Sun shines very hot upon it. Some there are, that suspect this Place to be
the Rainy Island of Pliny and Solinus; for so Pliny lib. 6. cap. 32.

In an Island called Ombrion, there are Trees like to Ferula, Fennel Giant;
from which they press out Water, that which is got from the black sort is
bitter, but that which comes from the white is pleasant to drink, But Benzo and
Linscotus attributes this to a Tree, that has leaves like the Walnut, tho
somewhat bigger, and are perpetually green, it has its fruit in the bark of
it, hanging out like Acrons with a sweet Kernel and exceeding Aromatical Taste.
There are moreover other Trees admirable upon the account of their largeness,
upon which they build little houses.

There is a Tree called Licondo, so great that it can contain two hundred men
with their Arms, and Oars, of the Trunk of which they make Boats in the Kingdom
of Congo. He that desires to know more of this kind, let him read Linscotus de
Ind. Oriental.

Nay they say in China there are found leaves, which falling into a Lake, or
Pond, become Birds; and Roses, which twice a day change color, now being
purple, and then afterward appearing of a whitish color, as is related before
of a certain Tree; also whose leaves, if they fall on the Ground, become flying
Birds, if into the water, they are changed into Fishes.

Claudius Duratus relates there are Trees in Scotland, whose fruit wrapped in
their leaves, if they fall into the water, are transmuted into Birds.
Sebastianus Munsterus in sua Cosmographia speaks of these Birds, which, because
of their bigness are called Geese; but Authors that write of them do not agree
in the thing; for some hold they are produced from the leaves of the trees;
others from the Apples or fruit; others from the rotten plancks of a Ship. But
what is to be thought of these Birds appears from Sennertus Sen. Hypomnem Phys.
c. 8. p. 405.
, and Sperling Sperl. Instit. Ph^s. l. 1. c. 7.
. I affirm that nature observes her Laws in the generating both of Geese, of
wood, and of Apples. I therefore say, and affirm, that the seeds and eggs of
these Geese are contained in that Sea, and from them, not from the Apples, nor
from the wood, nor from the water these Geese are produced. So that whether the
Apples, or wood are put into the water, or not, yet these Geese shall be
generated there. Of this see more in the newly cited Sennertus and Sperling D.
L. and Kipping Kipp. Instit. Philos. nature. lib. 7. c. 12.
; and Caspar Bauhin. Casp. Bauh. Pinac. l. 12. sect. 6.
by whom almost all Authors that have writ of this subject are cited.

Nor can I omit in this Place the Planta Haemagoga, or herb, that causes
Bleeding, which is mentioned by Galen Gal. l. 4. purga^. Med. facult. c. 4.
; which only by touching at first draws the blood out of the veins and then
kills. But this is ranked among the fabulous reports of the Ancients by Ioh.
Baptista Sylvaticus, and Hen. Petreus Hen. Petr. l. 1. Dissertat. Harmonic. 12.
quaest. 355 page 25^.
: but Zacut. Lusit. Zac. Lus l. 2. de Med. Princ. Histo^. 4. p. 184.
does stoutly defend the thing, and accurately answers the Reasons brought
against it by Sylvaticus. Borellus Borell. Cen^. 4. Hist and observe. (...)
Medico Phys. 90. p. 34^.
tells us of D. Laugerius, an incomparable Herbalist and Physician which found
this Herb about the Latarran: and that he says also that Simon Cortand had
likewise found it, and saw its effects even to Amazement; for when it was
applied to the thigh of a sick person of a sanguine Complexion, the blood run
from thence every way in streams, so that they were forced to apply the
Loadstone to stop it. He describes it to be a mountain Plant, and that it is
found among the Pyrenaean Mountains as far as the Alps, and has leaves like
sage.

The same Borellus Borel. cent. 1. l. Hist. and obs. 30. p. 35*
mentions a certain Clandestine or hidden herb, which may be deservedly
reckoned among wonderful plants, He describes is thus; It is found in the
Spring time, it is hidden and lurks under the earth, as if it were of an
envious nature, it is called Clandestina Madronna Occulta, and by many other
names, it is hard to find, and has been known but a few ages since. It is
described by Dalacampius in his last book of Plants, but there is two sorts
found with us, which he knew not of, he only describing the purple sort. But I
can certainly aver, there is a sort to be found with a white flower, tho it be
rare its flowers lay a few days in heaps above the earth (like Adders tongue
and Moonwort,) but the leaves are hidden, white, thick and gathered up as it
were a pine nut, etc.

Also a certain sort of Orchidis, or Dogs stones, deserves admiration, for it
so represenrs the forms both of Bees, Spiders, Flies, Butterflies, Birds, and
Men, so that there is no member in these Insects, Birds, or Men, which nature
has not expressed in these Plants, insomuch that the complete humane
structure, under both sexes, is found formed in the flowers of this Plant. Vid.
Athanasius Kircherus Athan. Kirch. l. 12. de mun. subter. l. 1. c. 9. p. 348.
, and Dom. D. Martinus: Bernhardi a Bernite D. Mart. Bern. obs. quae. 41. est
Tom. 2. Miscel. Curios. p. 73.
.

I could produce more of such kind of Plants, did not my intended Design
prohibit it; for now it is fit I come to my Description of SCURVYGRASS, which
tho it be not so wonderful, as these before recited Plants, it is nevertheless
considerable in this, that it is one of the chief Curers of the Scurvy, and
therefore it grows in no other Places, but where this disease is common, as
shall be proved by and by.

THE CURIOSITIES OF SCURVYGRASS,
CHAP. I. Of the Name of Scurvygrass.
PLants were produced by the Great and Good God, for the health of Men, and
according to the diversity of circumstances, they are allotted different Names.
Some derive their Names from their Inventors, or Finders out; So Artemisia or
Mugwort was so called from Artemisia, wife to Mausolus, King of Caria, who
adopted this Herb to her self. Gentian from Gentius King of Illyricum, who
first found out its virtues in his Wars. Lysimachus, or Loose-strife from
Lysimachus, Son of Agathocles of Macedon, Telephium, Orpine, from Telephus King
of Mysia. Nymphaea Water Lillies, from the Nymphs, or Fairies, who first
discovered it, or because it loves to grow in watrish places. Teucrium,
Germander, from Teucrus (Son of Scamander, King of Troy, a Cretian) as Pliny
Plin. lib. 25. c. 5.
will have it. Nicotiana, Tobacco, from John Nicott, a Counselor to the King
of France, who discovered it in the year 1560. Mercurialis, Mercury or
Dog-nettles, from the god Mercury, whose invention according to Plin. lib. 25.
cap. 5.
Pliny it was.

2. Many derive their Names from their Virtues and Qualities, in which they
excel others: as Hepatica or Liverwort, because it heals the Liver. Herba
Paralysis, Cowslip or Primrose, because it prevails against the Palsy. Acorus,
Aromatical Reed, or sweet smelling Flag, because (...), i. e. pupillis medetur:
it is profitable against dimsightedness. Narcissus; Daffadil, (...), from its
power of stupifying; not, as the Poets fable from the youth Narcissus, who fell
in love with himself, Scrophularia, or Figwort, because it is believed to cure
the Scrophulas, swelling of the throat, or King's Evil. Polygala, Milkwort,
(...), because it can produce much Milk. Vrtica Nettles, ab urendo, from
burning, by reason it raises blisters in the skin, as fire does. Saponaria,
Sopewort, because it may be used instead of Soap to cleanse linen cloth.
Moly, (...), from its removing diseases. Gelatophylus, seu Apium Risus, or
Water Crow-foot, because it moves laughter. Centaurium, Century, from its
virtue in many diseases, was thought worthy to derive its name a centum aureis,
from an hundred Crowns. The Germans esteem this Plant so precious, that they
call it Tausandgulder Kraut, that is, thousand Gelder herb, although Plin. lib. 29
cap. 4.
Pliny writes, that it derives its name from Chiron the Gentaur. Potentilla,
wild Tansie, from its great Virtues, as if one said potens, or powerful; it is
also called Argentina, chiefly from the silvery shining of its leaves being
dried; it is called Anserina, Goosegrass, because Geese delight to eat it in
watery Meadows. Trachelium, Throatwort (...), from the throat in those diseases
it is commended and therefore also Cervicaria, Neckwort, and Vulvaria. Also from
its external form, Campanula, Bell-flower, or Canterbury Bells. Also Lepidium,
Dittander, because it does take off the spots and Scurse from the Face, (by
some called Lepidas.) Sinapi, Mustard, (...), from hurting or offending the
eyes. Nasturtium, Watercresses, as it were, wring by the Nose, provoking by
the Acrimonious sent of its seeds to Sneezing. Lactuca, Lettice, from
increasing Milk, and abounding with it. Lapathum, Dock, (...), from emptying,
because the Decoction of it emptieth the Belly.

III. Many Plants gain their Name from the place of their growth. So Nardus
from Naardo, a City of Syria, terminated by the River Euphrates, Colchicum, or
Medow-saffron, because it grows in plenty at Colchis, a City of Asia near
Pontus. Cyticus, a kind of shrub that generates much Milk, and grows in a place
called Cythinus, as Pliny Plin lib. 130. cap 24.
says. Thapsia, a sort of Ferula, great Spanish scorching Fennel, because it
is found in Thapsus, an Island of the same name, Dioscordius. Dioscor lib. 4 c.
151.
Helenium, Elecampane, because the best is in S. Hellens Island, Brittanica, a
sort of Bistort, a Snake-weed which grows on the Sea shore, opposite to
Brittany. Henricus Patraeus Dissertat. Harmnn 38. Sect. 24. p. 289
. Ligusticum, Lovage, because it grows plentifully in Liguria in Italy. So also
Ruta Muracia, Wall-Rue, because found on Walls. Caltha Palustris, Fenny
Marigolds, because they grow in marshy and wet places. Parietaria, Pellitory of
the wall, which springs forth of walls; from whence it is called by Celsus
Cells. lib. 2. cap. 33.
. Herba Muralis, the Herb of the Wall. Alsine, Chickweed, quod (...); that is,
it loves dark and shady places.

IV. Others are named from their taste: as Acetosa, Sorrel, Acetocella,
Wood Sorrel, from their having an acide or four taste. Centory the less, from
its too much bitterness is called Fel-Terrae, or Gall of the Earth. Pyrethrum,
Pellitory of Spain, (...), from fire, from the fiery heat of its Root, which is
felt upon the tongue. Eruca, Rocket, which by pricking bites the tongue.

V. They are named from their Sent: as Caryophyllata, Avens, or herb Bennet,
because its root being plucked up in the Spring time, does smell Aromatically
like Cloves, called Caryophillus-Geranium Moschatum, and Iva Moschata, Cranes
Bill, and Chamcepitis, smell like Musk. Camphorata, stinking Ground Pine rubbed
betwixt the fingers, gives a smell like Campher. Allium, Garlic, some derive
its name from exhaling a stinking smell, and therefore write it Alium: There
are also who will have it derived from (...), to leap forth, because it grows
suddenly. Alliacia, Jack by the hedge, by reason its leaves bruised small
betwixt the fingers, smell of Garlic. So also Scordium; water Germander,
(...), from Garlic whose sent it breaths. Liba notis, the herb Frankincense,
from its smell of Frankincense. Spondilium; so called from an Insect of that
name, of a stinking smell. Atriplex faetida, stinking Orach; it is called also
Vulvaria futuaria, stinking Wort, from its unpleasing and stinking smell.

VI. From their color: Ornithogalum, star of Bethlehem, from its milky color,
like that to be seen in the Wings and Eggs of Hens. Luteola; Dyers Weed, with
which they color Woollen Cloth yellow. Nigella, Fennel flower, from the black
color of its seeds. Iris, Flower de Luce, from the similitude it has to the
colors of the Rainbow. Chrysanthemum, Corn Marigold, because its flower shines
with a golden splendor. Tripolium, Sea starwort, as it were gray thrice, or
three aged, whose flowers change color thrice a day, according to Dioscorides
Diosc l. 4. cap. 135.
. In the morning it is white, at noon purple, and in the evening it is of a
light red color. Virga Aurea; Golden Rod, from its golden flowers. Cyanus,
blew bottle, because of its Sky-colored flowers.

VII. From some living Creatures, to whom they are either friendly or
disagreeable. Pulegium, Pennyroyal, because the flowers of it being burnt,
when they are fresh do kill Fleas. Tragoriganum; Goats Marjoram, which is
pleasing to Goats. Melissa; Balm, called also Apiastrum, because Bees are
delighted with it. Chelidonium; Celandine, because it was first found by the
Swallow, called in Greek (...), which recovers the sight of his blind young
ones with it, or as others will have it, because this herb flourishes when the
Swallows come, and withers when they depart. Psyllium; (...), Flea-wort, that
is, it hinders the generating of Fleas in those houses in which it is kept
green. Conyza; Fleabane, because it catches (...) Fleas by its glewish or slimy
substance. Apocynum, Dogs bane because it kills dogs. Anonis, Restharrow, (...)
and (...), because it helps Asses; for many suppose Asses do willingly tumble
upon it to rub their backs against its prickles.

VIII. From the Time: so Anemone, Anemony, a sort of Crows-foot is called
(...), from the wind, because it never opens its flower but when the wind
blows, from whence it is called Herba ventis, wind-herb. Also Primula veris,
Primrose. Crocus Vernus, Saffron of the Spring. Viola Martia, March Violets,
because they flourish at these times. Ocymum, Basil, by reason it grows slowly,
or by little and little.

IX. Many have their names from their outward shapes, or form; as Sagitta,
Arrow head, Sagittary, from a Dart. Nummularia, Money-wort. Digitatis,
Fox-glove, or Finger-wort. Auricula Vrsi, Bears Ear. Orchis sue Satyrion and
Cynoforchis; Dogs-stones. Pes Anserinus, Goose foot. Pes Leporis, Harcs foot.
Pes Leonis, Lions foot. Brancha Vrsina, Bears Breech. Buglossa, Bugloss, or Ox
Tongue. Cynoglossum, Hounds Tongue: and so Cyperus, Cyperus, or Galingal,
(...), or (...), so called from the shape of its Root, which resembles a small
Vessel, or little Box. Equisitium, Horsetail, because its leaves are like Horse
hair. Asphodelus, or Hastula Regia, Asphodil, Female Daffodil, or King Scepter*
because, when it is in its flower, it resembles the Scepter of a King. Kyris,
stinking Gladdon, from the likeness of its leaves to a Razor. Serratula, Little
Saw, from its leaves being small jagged. Tragopogon, Goats Beard, from the long
hair or wool branching out of the top of it; wherefore in Latin it is called
Barba Hirci, and Barba Capri, because in some measure it resembles the Beard of
a Goat. Pirola; Winter-green, from the similitude its leaves have with those of
a Pair-tree. Lunaria, Moonwort, from its Husk or Cod, representing the form of
the Moon. Dracontium, Dragons, by reason of its purple spots in its stalk,
which are like to a Dragons* Thlaspi, Treacle Mustard, from (...) to bruise,
because its fruit appears as if it were bruised. Beta, Beet, for that it is of
the figure of the Greek Letter b, whilst it is full of seed: And so also our
COCHLEARIA, Scurvygrass, because its leaves are turned up, and hollowed round,
nearly expressing the outward shape of a Spoon; so that its leaves resemble a
little Spoon, not very hollow: from the same reason the Germans name it
Loffelkraut, according to Schv. lib, 2. de stirp. siles. p. 262.
Schvenckfelt, who calls it Scharbockskraut, without doubt from its excellent
virtue against the Scurvy, from whence the Danes call it Skiorbugsurt, Steeurt.
Simon Paul. Sim. Paul. Quadri par^^ Clas. 3. p. 267.
The Hollanders and Frieslanders Lepelcrunt Tabernemont l. 2. Herb. p. 116
. the English Scurvygrafs, and Spoonwort, etc. it is called Herb aux escu
eillieces, as Casper Pilleter Synonym. Plant. p. 115.
.

CHAP. II. Of the Description of Scurvygrass.
THe Herb Scurvygrass is of no high growth, but rather low, its leaves at their
first springing out are longish, like those of Pyrola, or Winter-green, or the
leaves of Adders Tongue, having many small strings, or stakes, of a moderate
length, proceeding from its root; the leaves are shining, flat, thick, fat, a
little hollowed, it is generally but small: but if it light on a proper soil not
so small, but of a middle size, resembling a shallow Spoon. Sometimes its
leaves are Angular, and pointed, its stakes are nine inches long, and sometimes
they are a span and half high, all along which there grows white flowers; its
seeds are small, and of a dark red, or rusty brown color, enclosed in little
shells or husks, like the seeds of Watercresses. The roots are slender and
stringy, and of an acide or biting taste: this Herb is like the third sort of
water Pimpernel, according to Lobel Lob. icon. p. 467.
; but it chiefly resembles that water Pimpernel with the round leaf, not that
which is notched or jagged; wherefore Guilandinus, as Bauhinus Bauh. l. 7.. 1.
Pinac. theatr. Bot. 1. p. 252.
says, calls this kind of Pimpernel sometimes water Plantain, and sometimes he
says it appears to be a sort of Scurvygrass. There are some which will have
Scurvygrass to be a sort of Orpin, because they suppose it has leaves like
Purslain, which is justly disapproved of by Wierus, Wier de Scorbut. p. m. 340:
because Garlic, and Onions, Sampier, land Coltrops, Spurge. Helioscopius,
another sort of Spurge, which also has leaves like Purslain, that is, thick,
smooth, fleshy, or pulpy, are of the kinds of Orpine. He adds also many more
distinguishing marks: as 1. That Scurvygrass is of a full deep green color,
but Orpine has bluish leaves, that is obscurely blackish like Plumbago, or
the Arsmart of Pliny, Bears-breech, etc. 2. Because the leaves of Scurvygrass
are bent up like a Spoon, with very small Angles or points. 3. Scurvygrass has
only single leaves upon each small stalk, of which many spring from its root:
but the stalks of Orpin grow higher, and are furnished with more leaves. 4. The
stalks of Scurvygrass are sharp pointed, and outwardly round, but Orpin has
stalks that are fat, and round, like Purslain. 5. The Flowers of Scurvygrass
are always white; but Orpin sometimes white, and sometime yellow. 6. They
differ in the place of their growth, for Orpin grows not in watery places, but
chiefly amongst Vines; but Scurvygrass loves wet grounds, and Fields near the
Seashore: In Frisland and Holland it grows of its own accord; and although in
our Country we raise it in Gardens, yet it delights in moist ground where it
may shed its seed, otherwise it will not grow. 7. They differ in their temper;
for Scurvygrass is hot and dry to the second and third degree, and of an
eminent Acrimony, or biting taste, exceeding that of Watercresses: but Orpin is
not so hot, but only in the first degree; and moreover, it is endowed with a
cleansing and detersive faculty (witness Galen and Dioscorides) from which it
cures the Morphew. What Telephium or Orpin is, is commonly known, it is so
named (as is declared in the first Chapter) from Telephus K. of Mysia, who used
it to a malignant Ulcer (for which cause such Ulcers are called Telephia) with
which he was long afflicted, and in which he was wounded by Achilles: but in
these, and such like Ulcers, which are almost incurable, Orpin is outdone by
the decoction of the leaves, and sprouts of Bramble, or Dogs-berry Bush made
with Wine (which is also called Cynosbatus; which as Simon Paulus Sim. Paul* c.
l. p. 54.
proves, is the same with Cynorrhodon, or Eglantine) if the Ulcers be often
washed with it warm, which I have many times experienced in such like Patients;
and therefore heartily communicate it to the courteous Reader.

Many of the latter Writers do absolutely affirm our Scurvygrass to be the same
with Bistort, which was first discovered to the Roman Soldiers by the
Frislanders, Plin. l. 25. cap. 3.
or North-Hollanlanders. This is also mentioned by Dioscorides. Dios. lib. 4.
c. 2.


It is described by Dioscorides Gal. l. 6. simpl. Med. Paul. Aegin. l. 7. c. 3.
c. l. that it has leaves like wild Docks, but blacker and more hairy, and of
an Astringent taste: and has a little short Root, and shoots forth small
stalks.

But that Scurvygrass is quite different from Bistort, these Reasons following
prove. 1. Hitherto in these parts it has not been known, so that many will
have it to be Arsemart; others Bears Ear, and some Mountain Carnations; there
are which avouch it to agree in its faculties with Bistort: but Scurvygrass, in
these and other Western Countries, is known by every body. 2. Bistort, as
appears by Dioscorides, Dios. C. L:
has leaves like wild Dock, but blacker, and more hairy, of a binding or
astringent taste; but the leaves of Scurvygrass are round, and greener, like
Asserebacca, smooth, and not at all hairy, nor no way astringent. 3. Bistort
has a slender and short stalk and root; but Scurvygrass consists of many small
stalks, with only one leaf upon each of them; the root is not so short, but
sometimes of the length of a span. 4. Bistort is cold and dry, and therefore
endowed with a binding faculty, from whence it strengthens loose Gums, and
prevents the falling out of the Teeth; but Scurvygrass is of a hot nature, as
any may perceive by its biting the lips upon its first touching of them. That
it also fastens loose Teeth, is from another Reason, because it insensibly
corrects those thin and cold humors, whose substance is wholly vicious, and
offensive, which are lodged about the Teeth. Lob. in Advers. p. 122.
Lobelius says thus of this matter: They in Frisland account Scurvygrass the
Brittanica of the Ancients, they might better maintain this Opinion, if they
knew that in England by the pleasant River of Thames, (which flows by London,
and from thence to Bristol, a Port of the Western Ocean to which it moves, and
by degrees increases its Floods) there is another of the same kind, like it in
the flowers, seed, and taste, but with leaves not so hollow, or Spoon-like,
rather resembling Allseed, or little Dock, the length of the Leaf is of the
breadth of an Inch, to an inch and half, or two inches. It is thick, close, and
full of juice, of the taste and color of the other Scurvygrass, with a larger
Root, and so all other parts of it proportionable, but less astringent, but no
ways conveniently likened to the Bistort, or Britanica of Dioscorides, although
like the other sort ( viz. the Dutch Scurvygrass) it be praised for sore
mouths, and the Scurvy with which we have seen many people that were deeply
afflicted, cured the last Spring.

CHAP. III. Of the Differences of Scurvygrass.
THere is four sorts of Scurvygrass. 1. There is Scurvygrass with a very round
leaf, and is called Dutch Scurvygrass, the Dutch Scurvygrass of Pena and
Lobelius; the Britanica of Gesner. Lobelius and Bauhinus write it is a kin to
Treacle, Mustard, and Cress: this is the common sort. ( vid. Fig. 1.) The
second sort is that with the hollow or crooked leaves* called Britanica,
Bistort of Pena, English Scurvygrass, with leaves of wild Arach, or Allseed, of
which Vid. Observat. stirp. p. 1570.
Lobelius C. L. and his printed Figure of the same. This you may behold (Fig.
the 2. of this Book;) this sort is unusual with us. The third kind is the
Creeping Scurvygrass of Bauhinus, the least sort of creeping Sea Scurvygrass:
Of Tho. Bartholinus it is called, Coclearia Amagria Insula Supina, the greater,
and the less, Sim. Paul. quadripart Botanic.
Simon Paulus (Fig. the 3. and 4.) Ioh. Wier. Tract. de Scor p. m. 336.
Johannes Wierus makes another difference of Scurvygrass, by reason of its Age.
His words are these: At its first springing forth, it puts out leaves like
Ophioglossum, or Adders tongue, which arise together with its stalks from the
roots; after that, being grown somewhat elder, it becomes more fleshy, or
pulpy, and is very like Asserebecca, both in bigness and Figure, only it has
blunter points on the edges of its leaves, ( Vide Fig. 4. and Fig. 1.)
commonly 7 or 9, chiefly in the Winter time; the least part of the leaf is
plain, but most usually it appears hollowed like a Spoon; from which reason it
derives its name, both among the Germans and Latins: So that you may
deservedly call it Catyldon, or a hollow Dish. After another years growth its
leaves become like Ivy, and Asserebecca and they grow thinner by degrees, more
and more, as they grow higher from the root, and are nearer the knobby, and
bossy, or top part of the Plant; and so the leaves grow more manifestly
pointed, and that in the Months of March, April, and May, at which time their
Flower flourishes at the height. In the place of which, afterward in the
Month of June, there succeeds plenty of seed, which being ripe, it appears in
little Husks, and they are small and plain, and of an obscure red color: the
Root of this is slender, white, strait, and not long.

CHAP. IV. Of the Place and Time of the growth of Scurvygrass.
IT has been declared above, that Scurvygrass does not grow in all places, and
chiefly not in the Eastern parts of the world, in which it is never found, nor
will its seed sown in the Earth there produce it, for it will only grow in the
Western parts, in which the Disease which it cures, viz. the Scurvy is
frequent. And this therefore happens through the great Wisdom of the Creator,
that where any Diseases, through the nature of the place, are as it were
vernacular or peculiar, there also familiar and specific Remedies against the
same Diseases do grow plentifully. And Fab. Hild de Valetud. tuend. p. m. 646.
Fabr. Hildan writes: It is likely Nature is therefore backward in producing
Scurvygrass in Swisserland, because through Gods mercy this Country has
hitherto been free from this grievous Plague the Scurvy. In those places which
are not afflicted with the Scurvy, C^nt 5 Observe. Chirur. 5. p. 388.
Scurvygrass does seldom or rarely thrive, and that with difficulty, and
although he himself, and his Colleagues and Comrades, did with exact care sow it
in their Gardens, nevertheless they could not raise one Plant of it from its
seed. Again, in his Book de Valetud. tuend. p. d. he reports that in the year
1628. he made another trial, if perhaps it would be produced, and carefully
sowed the seed which he procured out of Holland in his Garden, which sprung up
in plenty; to which he adds his Prayer, that it might not prove an unlucky Omen
to the Swissers, and a Forerunner of this Disease, of which it is a Remedy. It
is related by Herm Nich. Obs Chir. rar. 97.
Hermann. Nicholai, that in Groenland (whose Inhabitants are infested with the
Scurvy with that violence, that the motion of all their limbs is taken from
them by it) and also in the Mountain of Bares of this Island, called Tafelberg,
Scurvygrass and Sorrel grow so plentifully, that it hinders men from walking,
and that these Plants always grow together, or near one another, because they
ought not to be used asunder, lest singly taken by themselves they do hurt; for
one abounds with a volatile salt, the other with a sour one, from the mixture
of which a middle quality results. He also describes the manner how the
Groenlanders use it, which is thus: They take the newly killed flesh of their
Rain Deer, or some Fowl, and boiling it with Oats or Barley, make a Plisan, and
this Broth they season with these Scorbutic Herbs, from whence arises a
highly Medicinal nourishment* by the use of which their Bellies are so
loosened, that the corrupt humors are evacuated, as if they had took a purging
Medicine, and presently they recover, as if they were new born.

It grows plentifully in England, chiefly about the River Thames: as Lobelius
C. L. reports in Friesland, Holland: also about Hamburgh, and in other Maritime
places of the Lower Germany, and grows freely about Fenny and Marshy places.
With us it is common and frequently raised from the seed in Gardens, loving
shady moist places, and to grow by Brooks sides. It grows sufficiently well in
the Gardens of Flanders, and elsewhere. It flourishes in April and May; the
next year after it is sown, the seed ripens by degrees in May and June:
Schwenckf. lib. 2. stirp. siles, p. 262.
Schwenckfelt says, that he had green Scurvygrass (which was raised from the
seed) in his Garden a whole year together, which he kept for the Juice. Hiebner
in his Agriculture, about the end of it writes* Loffelkrout Saamen strevet man
anss, etc. that is, the seed of Scurvygrass is to be sown in the Spring, and
afterward it is to be removed and replanted; by which means it will thrive
better and the Plant will be larger.

CHAP. V. Of the Qualities and Virtues of Scurvy grass.
SCurvy grass is of the Classis of those Plants, which are of a hot and dry
faculty Pilleter. Plant Synonym. p. 1152.
, in the same degree with the third sort of green Water Cresses, and is not
unlike it in quality and taste, Schrod. Pharm. Medic. Chym. lib. 4. Clas. 1. p.
50.
Schroderus. In Groenland, as it is noted by Simon Paulus Quadripart, Botanic.
p. 209. it is almost insipid or tasteless. It is endowed with an opening and
Diaphoretick power, rendering fixed and crude humors, volatile and spiritual,
and resists putrefaction; from whence it is useful in the obstructions of the
Mesentery, spleen, and diseases of the Hypocondryes. Therefore Brunnerus Brunn.
Corsil. 63. p. 337.
says, Scurvygrass does not only wonderfully mend the (...) or disorders of
the Spleen, but also powerfully opens obstructions, it liquefieth, cuts,
attenuates, and cleanses Melancholy mixed with Phlegmetick humors, and sends
them to the Kidneys, and therefore does happily cure the Cacochymy or vicious
juices of the Body, proceeding from swollen, or great spleens, and that
chiefly, if the decoction of it be made with whey of Goats Milk. Schwenkf. C.
L. p. 262. Maeb. Epitom. Instit. Med. l. 5. part. 2. 8. c. 29. p. 662.
It is profitable against the Dropsy. It procures Women's courses. The seed is
effectual in expelling by sweat the small Pox, and Measles, Frider. Hoffman
Frid. Hoff. Meth. Med. Wallejan. p. 14.
. But chiefly Scurvygrass does powerfully cure the Scurvy and its Symptoms;
wherefore it is called Scorbuticorum Levamon. the solace or comfort of the
Scorbutic, by Johannes Iohnston Ioh. John's. in Notit. regni vegetab p. 302.
(a Physician that will easily be allowed the chief of our Times). Upon what
account it does avail in the Scurvy is taught by Sennertus Senn. l. 3. Med.
prac^. part. 5.. 2. Cap 4. p. 613.
. It abounds with a volatile Salt of a certain bitterish Taste, for which cause
it opens and penetrates those crude, gross humors, and renders them volatile,
as the Chemist speaks; It discusseth and purges by Urine and Sweat; It
strengthens the Bowels. Almost all modern Physicians do agree, that in the
Scorbutic humor there abounds a gross and fixed salt, like that which is in
smoked and dried flesh, and this is proved by me in my Tract. de varis seu
Arthridite vaga Scorbutica. If this Salt therefore shall be made volatile, it
may be discussed and expelled with the more ease, but if the Scorbutic Salt be
volatile, as it is in the running Gout, it is further attenuated, and fitted
for discussion by the secret pores of the skin, by the volatile Salt of
Scurvygrass, or because this Salt ( viz. in the Scurvy) is most commonly acid,
and therefore apt to cause such intolerable pains by the volatile Salt of
Scurvygrass, it is drunk in and mortified. The chief Antiscorbutick power or
virtue of Scurvygrass is occult or secret, as almost all modern Physicians do
agree, as it also appears in my Tractate de varis. Johannes Ioachim Bechorus In
suo Parnas. Medicin. illustrato. p. 324.
describes the virtue of Scurvygrass in these following Verses.

Spoonwort does marm, and also does dry,
In the Scurvy it is a great Remedy,
It sends out all corrupt humors by sweat
With this your mouth gargel often, and wet.
This Plant which deserves so much of your praise
The Apothecaries use six several ways.
It Is Spirit, Syrup, Water procures health,
So does its Salt conserve, and th'Herb it self.
Scurvygrass is not only used inwardly, but outwardly also, as you may see
hereafter in the one and twentieth Chapter of this Book.

CHAP. VI. Of Medicines prepared from Scurvygrass in general, and in particular
from its seed,
SCurvygrass has (as other Plants likewise have) its Root, its Leaves, its
Flowers, and its Seed, yet there is no part of it in use, but only its Leaves
and Seed. The Leaves of Scurvygrass are used inwardly, and outwardly: If there
be any occasion to use them inwardly, they ought to be employed fresh and new
gathered, else the volatile salt, upon which its virtues chiefly depend, will
vanish away.

There are many different Forms of Medicines made from its leaves; as 1.
Sawces. 2. Decoctions. 3. Wine. 4. Infusions. 5. Waters. 6. Spirits. 7.
Volatile Salt. 8. Oil. 9. Conserve. 10. Syrups. 11. Electuaries, and Mixtures.
12. Essences. 13. Juice. 14. Magistery. Of all which, and of every one in
particular, I intend to write. The seed also does enter diverse compositions,
and is used both inwardly and outwardly, among which are these following; Aqua
Nephritica, or the Water for the Stone in the Kidneys, which is described by
Bald. Timaeus Bald. Tim. post Epistolas ejus p. 451.
a Guldenflee, Thus:

Of the Seeds of Broom, Parsley, Gromwel, Wild Carrots, Fennel, Anis, Chervil,
Saxifrage, Pimpernel, Water Cress, Scurvygrass, Red Ciches or Shoop Pease, of
each a noun.


Being mixed together steep them in a sufficient quantity of Sack, and let them
be distilled.

In the same place the same Author describes a Spleen water thus,

Of the Seeds of Butchers Broom, Ashtree Keys, Amee or Bishops weed Chervil,
Rue, Agnus Castus or chaste Tree. Cummin, Anis, Fennel, Citron, Scurvygrass,
Water Cress, Card. Mar. or our Ladies Thistle. Ana.. 1.


Being reduced to a gross powder, pour upon them of Wormwood wine a sufficient
quantity, let them steep for three days, and afterward let them be distiled.

Pillulae Antiscorbutae or Pills against the Scurvy of the same Author Page 461.
.

Of The Extract of Quercetainus his Pill. Malang.. 2. The Extract of Senna. 1.
Rosin of Iallap. 1. gr. 6. Vitriolat Tartar. gr. 13. The Volatile Salt of
Amber. 1. The Seeds of Scurvygrass. Water Cresses. Mustard Seed, of each. 1. ss.



Mix them, and with the juice of SCURVYGRASS make a Mass for Pills.

The Decoction of Guaiacum wood by the same Author Lib. 3. Cas. Med. 33 p. 165.
.

Of Guaiacum wood rasped. 2. ss. The Bark of the same wood. ss. Sarsaparilla 1.
ss. Sassafras wood rasp'd. 6. The Roots of Scorzonera, Enula Campain of each.
ss. The seeds of Scurvygrass. Water Cresses of each. ss. The inner Bark of a
Pine tree 1. Citron Pill,. ss. Cinnamon 1.


Being cut and bruised, steep them in the waters of Scurvygrass, of Water
Cress, of Fumatery, of each a sufficient quantity afterward let them be boiled
in a double Vessel.

The straining of this lb. 3.

The Syrup of the juice of Scurvygrass.

The Syrup of the juice of Water Cress. of the juice of Fumetary, of each. 2.

Mix them the Dose is from 4. to 6.

The Seed is chiefly described in Nodles or little Bags; as for example.

Of The seeds of Scurvygrass, of Rocket, of Water Cress, of each 1
The Leaves of Senna without stalks 1. ss. The Roots of Polypod. of Black
Hellebore. of Iallap, of each ss.
The Bark of Ash tree, of Tamarisk. of Cappers, of each. 2.



Being cut and bruised, make it into a Nodule with fine white linen. Title it
the purging Nodule for one Kan or quart of Wine.

It is also an Ingredient of the Spleenitick Essence of B. Dom. D. Michaelis
which is this:

Of The Herb of Spleenwort, M. 3. Mother of Time, Dodder. Hart's-tongue,
Milzadel, The Flowers of St. John's wort. of each M. 1. Brom Flowers P. 2. The
Bark of Cappers, of Tamarisk, of Ash-Tree, of each 4.
The Roots of Polypode, of the Oak, of Fern, of Grass, of each 3. of Herb
Bennet 1. ss.
The Seeds of Butchers Broom. of Ash-tree Keys seeds an. ss. of Scurvygrass,
of Water-Cress, of each 2.
With the Spirit of Dodder and Fumetery, Make an Essence according to Art.


CHAP. VII. Of Sawces made with Scurvygrass.
IT is declared in the former Chapter there may be made many different Forms
of Medicines from the Leaves of Scurvygrass, and among the rest Embemma or
Sawces. What is signified by Embemma may be gathered from (...), i. e.
immergere, intingere, to dip under, or dip into, and seems to be derived from
thence, from whence the Latins call Sawces Intinctus, the Germans name it,
ein Tuncte, ein Titsche. Sawces are made of diverse things; as for example, of
Cappers, of the Pulp of Apples, with Pulp, or rather the Juice, of Lemmons and
Wine, with the Roots of Horse Reddish grated, adding Vinegar unto it, with
Mustard Seed ground small, either with Vinegar, or Must, or the Juice of
Grapes, from whence it is called Mustardt by the Borderers. Sawces are also
prepared of Water Cresses, and Wine, and Sugar. Also Sawces may be made of
Scurvygrass, if, for example, its fresh gathered leaves be cut small, mixed with
Sugar, and a sufficient quantity of Wine poured upon it. You may mix
Scurvygrass and Water Cresses together, and prepare them the same way, or take
of Scurvygrass very small cut or minced, and add of juice of Lemmons or sour
Orenges, and so you will have a Sauce pleasant to the taste, and effectual
against the Scurvy, for these kind of Sawces are mighty advantageous in the
Scurvy, insomuch that the People of Norway are preserved from this Disease by
the use of them, as is asserted by Gr. Horse. lib. 1. de tuend. San. c. ^6. p.
72.
Gr. Horst.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Decoction of Scurvygrass.
EVgalonus does affirm, that he has cured many Scorbutic Persons, only with
the Decoction of Scurvygrass. The leaves of the new Scurvygrass are to be
boiled in Milk, or, if they be troubled also with a fever and heat, then boil
them in Butter-milk Vid. Sennert. l. 3. Med. Pract. p. 5. sect. 2. c. 6. p. 619.
, also in Whey, Wine, Ale, Beer, or Water, and let the Decoction thereof be
drank several days together, if the leaves of Scurvygrass be used by
themselves, they ought not to be boiled long, and if they are boiled with other
ingredients, they ought to be added toward the end of the boiling, lest the
volatile Salt do quite vanish away. There are many Decoctions described by
Authors in which among the rest, the fresh leaves of Scurvygrass do not enter
the decoction singly, and by themselves, but mixed with other things as well
purgative as sudorisick, of which sort is the Decoction of Sennert. l. 3. Med.
pract. p. 5. 2, c. 6* p. 617.
Sennertus.

Of The Roots of Cichory, of Fennel, of wild Redish, of each 1. of Wake Robin
prepared ss.
The Leaves of Scurvygrass, of Water Cress, of Brooklime, of each M. 2. of
Card. Bened. of Fumetery, of Centaury the less, of Wormwood, of each M. ss.
Let them be boiled in a close Vessel in whey of Goats Milk, or in Renish Wine
lb 4.


In the same place he has this Decoction.

SCVRVYGRASS.
Water Cresses of each part equal. Brook lime half a part.
Let them be bruised in a stone Mortar, and let them be boiled in Goats Milk or
Whey.

The Purging Potion of Mat. Mart. p. M 667.
Matthias Martinus in his Tract of the Scurvy.

Of The Leaves of Fumetery, of fresh Scurvygrass, of Brooklime, of Maidenhair,
of Spleenwort, of Agrimony, of each M. 2. of Scabiose, of Miltwast, of each M.
ss.
The Cordial Flowers of each, P. 1* Liquoris Root bruised 6. The Leaves of
Senna, 1. Choice Rubarb. The Bark of Indian Mirabalans prepared, of each, 4.
Raisins of the Sun stoned, 9. Clean picked Barley, P. 1. Schaenanth or Camels
hay 1.


Let them be boiled in Whey to the quantity of one pint, let them remain in
infusion for a night, to the straining add, Of the Syrup of Forestus against
the Scurvy, 2. Of the repeated infusion of Roses, Of Nicholas his Syrup of
Cichory with Rubarb, of each ss.


Mix them for three doses to be taken in the mornings, with which there use to
be voided much filthy melancholy.

The sweating Decoction of China, of the same Author, in the same Page 713.
Book.

Of The Roots of China 2. Sarsaparilla. Scorzonera or Vipers Grass, of each 1.
ss. of Liquoris 6.
The Seeds of Meloris of Cucumbers, of each 2.
The Leaves of Brooklime, M. 1. ss. of Scurvygrass, M. 1.
The Flowers of Bugloss, M. ss. Raisins of the Sun, 3. Hearts horn burned ss.
Rhodium wood rasped, 3. Cinnamon, 2.


With these being grossly bruised prepare a Decoction with Barley Water, or the
Broth of an Hen without Salt, it is extremely good to procure sweat with.

The Decoction against the Scorbutic Consumption of the same Page* 7 ^^.
Author.

Of The Bark of Cichory Roots, of Parsley Roots, an. ss.
The Leaves of Spleenwort, of Cichory, of Miltwaste, of Brooklime, of
Scurvygrass, of Fumetery, of Agrimony, of Roman Wormwood of each M. ss.
The Cordial Flowers, P. 1. The seeds of Anise 1. of Endive, of Agnus Castus,
or the Chaste Tree, of each, ss.
Raisins of the Sun skinned and stoned, 6. The Bark of Capper Roots, 3.


Make a Decoction for a pint and half, in Beer or else in common water, and add
to the straining Of Ferestus his Syrup against the Scurvy, 1. ss. Of Fumetery,
Of Cichory with Rubarb, Of Endive, of each ss.



The Broth of an old Cock by the same Mat. Mart* p 668.
Author is much commended.

Of Vipers Grass, Polypodium, of each 1. ss. Asparagus, Bugloss, of each ss.
White Wind Tartar, or else of the Cream of Tartar, The seeds of Carthamus or
bastard Saffron bruised, of each 10. of Anise, of Carrawayes, of each 2.
Gummy Turbith Roots 5. Salt Gem or Mountain Salt 2. The Leaves of Senna of
Alexandria, 2. The Roots of Galingale, of Ginger, of each 1. ss.
Cinnamon 1. The Flowers of Bugloss, of Violets,
The Leaves of Agrimony, of Miltwast, of Betony, of Germander, of Gout-ivy, of
SCURVYGRASS of each M. 1.



All being bruised, let them be stuffed into the belly of an old Cock, and let
them be boiled in three parts water, and one part Whitewine; let this Decoction
be used for diverse days together.

Barbet has this Apozema or Decoction. Barb. lib. 4. Prax. cap. 8.


Of The Roots of Raddishes 3. of Fern 1.
The Leaves of Brooklime, of Water Cress, of Scurvygrass, of each P. 1.
Tamarinds 1. The seeds of Smallage ss.


Boils it in Barley water, or Rhenish wine, and in 24. of the straining
dissolve, Of the Syrup of the five opening Roots 2.
adding Of Spirit of Vitriol 8. drops.


Mix them and make an Apozema.

Gregory Horstius his sweating Potion, which he describes Lib. 2. c. 4. p. m.
270.
Tract. de Tuend. San. The Roots of Devils bit, of Sarsaparilla, of true round
Aristoloch, or Birthworth, an. 3.
The Herbs SCURVYGRASS, M. 1. Sage, Bettony, Southernwood, Rue, Periwinckle, of
each, P. 1.
The seeds of Columbine 2.


Boil them in the water of Watercresses, of Brooklime, of SCVRVYGRASS, of each
a like quantity, to the consumption of half the liquor, strain through a sieve
or cloth with 6. of this decoction, 7 earth worms, which have circles about
their necks, then add of Treacle ss. of Cinnamon water 2. of Spirit of
SCVRVYGRASS 1. ss. of the mixture S. Vitriolate 8. dr. mix them of this 1. ss.
Add to it of Oriental Bezoar- stone gr. 5. of Spirit of Tarra sigill. 5.
mix them for one dose to procure sweat.

This Apozem* is commended by Dr. John Michael Fehr* Dr. Ioh Mich. Fehr in sua
Hiera, Picra. p. 132. he there describes it, vid. infra c. 19.
the Worthy President of the College of the Curiously inquisitive after Nature.

The Decoction of Forrestus, which is opening, discussing, strengthening, which
he describes, Lib. 20. Observe. H. p. M. 298.


Of The Bark of the Roots of Cichory, of Parsley, an. ss.
The Herb of Spleenwort, Of Cichory, of Miltwast, of Brooklime, of SCURVYGRASS,
of Fumetery, of Agrimony, of Roman Wormwood, of each M.B.
The Cordial Flowers, of each P. 1. The Seeds of Anise 1. of Endive, of Agnus
Castus, of each ss.
Raisins of the Sun stoned P. 1. The Bark of Capper Roots, 3.


Make a Decoction in Common water to a Pint and half, add to this being
strained, Of the Syrup against the Scurvy, Of Fumetory, Of Endive, Of Cichory
with Rubarb, of each ss.
mix them.

This before cited Author writes, that he has not found a more efficacious
experiment in the Scurvy, he Observe 12: p. M. 303.
reports that he had ordered some the Decoction of Scurvygrass and Brooklime in
common Beer. Hartm. Prax. Chym. p. M. 214.
Hartman commends for poor people in the Scurvy the Decoction of Guaiacum wood
with Scurvygrass. Brown in Consel, 30. p. 165.
Brannerus writes, that the Decoction of Milk or Goats Whey in which Scurvy
Grass has been boiled, is very profitable for those in diseases of
Melancholy, and in Tumors, and swellings, which fear a flux of melancholy
matter.

It is to be observed of many of the Decoctions before cited, that they are
unpleasant, and that there is too great a quantity allotted for one dose. If
Physicians of our Age should prescribe such, they would be deluded by their
Patients. Therefore it behooves every Physician, that he prescribes Medicine in
a less quantity, and more grateful to the Pallat. Care is to be taken also in
these kinds of Decoctions, lest that the Leaves of Assaracabacca be mistaken
for the leaves of Scurvygrass, as was done in Denmark by pretenders to Physic,
endeavoring to cure themselves and others, and to that purpose caused them to
be infused, being bruised in Antiscorbutick potions, from the use of which
Medicines, they fell into Vomitings, and so they suffered much pain and
punishment, as a justly merited reward for their foolish Physic, as is
testified by Simon Paulus Sim. Paul. Quadripart. Bot an. Clas. 2. p 529.
. But here in this place such a mistake is not to be feared, because our women
commonly know Scurvygrass, but it were to be wished if the Medicasters of both
Sexes, of which here are more than a few, that the Magistrate would lay some
heavier punishment upon them, that they might not without Punishment kill so
many as they do. Galen counts them to differ nothing from Thieves only in
this, that these get their Prey in Cities, and the other in Mountains and
Woods. Nay he rightly affirms that they are much worse than Robbers, for they
only take away the money of Travelers, and are subject to be punished, but
these are rewarded for taking away the money together with the Life of the Sick.

CHAP. IX. Of the Wine of Scurvygrass.
THis Wine made of the Leaves of Scurvygrass is prepared two several ways,
that is, either by Fermentation or without Fermentation; without Fermenting it
is done thus,

Take Must or New Wine, not trod out with feet, through a Sack, but clear and
squeezed forth by a Press, whilst it is yet new, and has not hitherto
fermented or worked; put it into a very clean Barrel, in which are great
quantities of fresh gathered Scurvygrass leaves made pure and cleansed from all
filth and dirt, and put into the Barrels, till they be filled to the middle, so
that the Leaves and the New Wine may be of like quantities, and that the
Vessels may be filled to the Top, the Barrel ought to be stopped up exactly, and
so you will have in short time (if you have done as you should) a Wine clear,
red, and almost sweet, almost equalling Sack in its relish, having sensibly
both the smell and taste of Scurvygrass, yet not ungrateful to the Pallat.

Scurvygrass Wine is made by Fermentation, if in an open Vessel in which the
Must does work, you put in the Leaves of Scurvygrass, but not in so large
quantities, whose taste it is true, will not be so pleasant to the Pallat, but
is of great force and virtue in the Scurvy, insomuch that it does exceed
wormwood Wine, which is so much commended in the Scurvy.

The Causes hindering the Fermentation of the first sort of Wine are three: The
first is the addition of the Leaves of Scurvygrass to the Must or New Wine,
which has not yet wrought, for it is otherways if it has already begun to
ferment, for then you can scarcely hinder it to proceed, wherefore Kirg. de
Ferm.. 2. c. 8. page 13*
Kirger is in the right, (who says) if the first degree of fermentation be
begun, or be upon its increasing, it moves toward it height or state, it is
not then any longer in the power of the chief Form to call back those parts
that are already separated, or to hinder those from separating themselves.
Secondly, the close stopping up the Vessel, and thereby denying a free space or
convenient room, by that means the Must cannot rarifie it self, nor expand its
parts, which rarification and expansion are absolutely necessary to cause
Fermentation. Such mute or stifled Wines the Germans call stumme Weine oder
verhaltene Most, that is, stum or unworked Must.

Thirdly, By taking away the Ferment (or particles which cause the workings in
the Must, by the addition of the great quantity of the Leaves of Scurvygrass.
For the Faeces or dregs of the Must (which is its Ferment, or that which
causes it to work) sticks to these Leaves, and so is hindered in its
operation, as it is done in the Wine called by the Germans spahe Wein, that is,
Stum. When for the same purpose they put into Barrels filled with Must, or
Juice of Grapes, the smooth and slender twigs of Ash, Birch, Tamarisk, or Hasel
wood. But if the Faeces be not impeded, than by reason of their acidity with
which they are endowed in a large proportion, upon the Score of their Salt, the
Must having space enough can easily ferment, after the same manner that acid
Ferments ferment the humors in our Bodies and are wont to excite and stir up
Fevers; for it is the general opinion of modern Physicians, that the chief
cause of Fevers is fermentation, which is more largely proved by Dr. Thomas
Willis and Kergerus, Kergerus.
by whose reasons being moved, I also embrace the same opinion, but after what
manner, and with what ferments the feverish fermentation is performed, which is
the cause of every fever (for in this Authors differ, and therefore) I think it
convenient in this place to delineate, or give as it were a (...), or short
account, as it were (...), or a discourse of Fevers, that so there may be an
occasion started for a further inquiry into the Nature of the thing, reserving
a Tract of this Subject to another time (...).

There are to be considered in this feverish fermentation; the ferments, the
humors fermenting; the place in which the fermentation is made, and the time of
the Fermentation.

The Ferments are Plagme, Collar, the Pancratick juice, the Salt residing in
our bodies (if they happen to be preternatural or unkindly constituted, and
have acquired to themselves either an acide, or some other fermenting faculty)
and poison.

The Humors fermenting in Fevers are the Chyle the Lymphatick juice, the Blood.

The place in which fermentation is made is threefold; the Vessels in which
these humors are contained, viz. The Venae Lacteae, or Milky Veins; the
Lymphatick Vessels, and the Veins and Arteries.

The time of the Fermentation is various upon the score of its duration; for
Fevers, by reason of the diversities of their Ferment, on the account of their
Qualities and quantities, and also the distance of the Vessels are either short
or long, some of them prove continual, some again are Intermitting, and these
happen either every day, or return upon the third or fourth day, and these have
their certain times of coming about and endings.

Intermitting Fevers or Agues are produced in the Milky Veins, from
praeternatural phlegm, from whence are phlegmatic and Quotidian Agues,
commonly called Crude (of the Germans Magan Fieber) because the phlegmatic
juice of the Crude nourishment in a weak stomach, being not rightly resolved
and volatized, by its Ferment, it becomes sour. From praeternatural choler,
Bilious and Tertian Agues are produced; and from the Pancratick juice,
Melancholy, and Quartan Agues.

If in the Lymphatick Vessels, its juice shall grow sour by reason of a strange
Salt, and shall ferment there, there will arise Fevers joined with Catarhs and
Defluxions.

If the Blood do ferment in the Veins and Arteries, either the venal or
arterial Blood (which is to be looked upon as one and the same liquor by reason
of its circulation, happily found out by Dr. Harvy) from thence will arise
Continual Fevers, as it happens the fermentation from diverse ferments is in the
Vessels near to, or remote from the Heart.

But if Poison be taken into or generated in the Body (which that such a thing
may be, experience teaches, and is sufficiently proved by Sennertus, Zacutus
Lusitanis, and others) then there breaks out malignant Fevers, as the
Measles, Small Pox, Spotted Fever, and the Plague it self.

That the Blood may be made to ferment with venomes, appears from hence, that
in such Cases there will come forth Bubo's and Parotides, that is angry
swellings in the Groin, under the Armpits, and behind the ears, also other
little swellings, and after Death the Body will be puffed up and swollen. This
saving every man's judgment, I thought fit to add (...), and by the by, and now
I return where I left.

Sennertus Sennert, l 3. Med. Pra^. 2. c. 8.
does direct this Physical Wine.

Of The Roots of Sarsaparilla, of China,
The Wood of Sassafras, an. 2. The Roots of Rhodium, of Avens, or Herb Bennet,
of Vipers grass, an. 1.
Hearts Tongue, Germander, SCURVYGRASS, Wormwood, an. M. 2. Of the best
Cinnamon, 6. Raisins bruised, lb. 1.


Pour Wine upon them, or which is more convenient Must, to the quantity of half
an Amphora, that is take three Gallons, and so make a Physical Wine.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Infusion of Scurvygrass.
WHat Infusions are, is commonly known, as to wit, let Physical things be
steeped in a convenient Liquor, that they may yield their Virtue to it, and put
them in a warm or hot place, in a stone or glass Vessel.

So you may also infuse the Leaves of SCURVYGRASS, sometimes by themselves, and
sometimes with Alteratives, Purgatives, Diuretics and Sudorificks, and mixed
together, and that in Wine, Ale, Milk, Whey, Butter-Milk, etc. as will appear
by these following examples:

The Infusion of Matthew. Martinius, Of The Leaves of Scurvygrass, M. 2.

Put them for a night into 5. of Goats Whey, or let them be boiled in MB,
moderately warm, and being strained hard out, mix with it Of Forestus his Syrup
against the Scurvy, Or of the Syrup of the juice of Sorrel, 2.


And let it be drank Cold.

The same Authors Alterative Wine,

Of The Leaves of Brooklime, of Water Cresses, of Scurvygrass, an. M. 1.



Bruise them and steep them in the distilled liquor of Radishes and a fourth
part of Wine, or in all White Wind, to the quantity of about a quart, and hang
in the straining of the Liquor this following Nodule, or little Bag,

Of Galengal 2. Spikenard ss. The best Cinnamon 1. ss. English Saffron 2.


And make a slight boiling, drink the straining Morning and Evening.

The Wine of SCURVYGRASS of Sennert. l. 5. Med. pract. p. 3.. 2. c. 9. p. 243.
Sennertus.

Of fresh gathered SCURVYGRASS some handfuls, beat them very small and pour
upon them Of Rhenish wine some pints, put it in a glass, let it stand in a
Cellar three days, afterward let it be strained for use.

The same Authors Senn. l. 3. Med. Prac. part. 5.. 2, c. 8. page 617.
Infusion.

Of The Roots of Wild Radish, 1. SCURVYGRASS, Water Cresses, Brooklime,
Fumatery, of each M. 1.
being bruised in a marble Mortar, pour upon them of Milk or Whey a pint and
half, let them stand 12 hours in a warm place, afterward let it be strained,
and add to the straining of Saffron 1. Cinnamon, 1. ss. Strong Cinnamon Water
ss.
Mix them.

OR

Of Water Cresses, SCURVYGRASS, ana. M. 2. Galangal, Cinnamon, ana. 2.
Wild-Radish Roots. ss.


Bruise them all in a Stone Mortar, and pour upon them a sufficient quantity of
Whey, let them stand in a warm place for a night, and strain them out in the
morning.

The Infusion of Dr. Bald. Timaeus of Guldenflee. Lib. 3. Cas. Med. 34. p. 165.


Of fresh wild Radish Roots, cut into round slices iv. pour upon them of
Rhenish wine, lb iv.

Let it stand in Infusion for 3. days and then strain it afterward.

Of fresh leaves of SCURVYGRASS, of Water Cresses, of Brooklime, ana. M ii.

Cut them and beat them in a marble Mortar, and pour upon them the former
straining, let them stand for a day and a night, then press them strongly out
with a Press, and filther it through a whited brown paper. for nice people you
may add a little Sugar.

OR

Of Fresh SCURVYGRASS, Water Cresses, an. M. ii. Fumatery, Wormwood, Pimpernel,
ana. M. 1. ss. Ash-tree Bark, i. Juniper Berries i. ss. Enula Campane Roots, i.
Cichory Roots, vi.
being cut and bruised grossly, put them in a little Barrel, and pour upon them
of new Wine or new Ale six gallons; after it has worked well, and is clear,
take of it twice or thrice in a day from vi. to x. or more, as you think fit.

You may order this following.

Of SCURVYGRASS, Water Cresses, Brooklime, ana. M. ii. Raddish Roots cut into
slices, No. i.
put them into a sufficient quantity of the best White Wind.

You may take a Wine Glass full of the straining of it when you please, or if
you will sweeten it with Sugar.

OR

Of SCURVYGRASS, Water Cresses, Fumatery, ana. M. i.


Pour upon them a sufficient quantity of Whey, let them stand in a glass close
stopped for a nights time, in the morning strain it out hard, the dose is iii.

The Physical Wine of Dr. Fredrick Deckers. Fred. Deck. in notis and Obs. in
Prax. Barb. p. 148.


Of SCURVYGRASS, Water Cresses, Wall Rue, ana. M. i. Wild Raddish Roots,
Polypod Roots, ana. ii. Black Hellebore Roots, Ialap, ana. 1. Choice Senna
Leaves i. The yellow Rind of an Oringe ii. Strong Cinnamon i. ss. Cruce Tartar,
iii.
being cut and grossly bruised, sow them in a bag, and put them in a stone pot,
and pour upon them of White or else Rhenish wine two quarts. Take a draught of
this in the morning.

Nodules belong to Infusions Sen^ lib. 3. Med. Pract. part. 5.. 2. cap. 6. p.
617.
Sennertus describes this Nodule.

Of Brooklime, SCURVYGRASS, Water Cresses, ana. M. 1.


Bruise them and infuse them in Rhenish Wine, afterward let it be pressed hard
out, and in the straining infuse this following Nodule.

The Seeds of Water Cresses, half an ounce. Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, of each i.
Give a draught of this every day.

Brun. Consil. 30. p. 167.
Brunnerus prescribes this:

Of The Roots of Fennel, Cichory, Asparagus, ana, ii. ss.
The Seeds of Anise ii. The Herb SCURVYGRASS, Agrimony, Dodder, Maidenhair, an.
M. ss.
The Leaves of Senna of Alexandria, i. The Roots of Polypod. of the Oak, ss.
The Best Rubarb, iii. of Mechoacan ii.
Choice Cinnamon, i. ss. Spikenard, i. Ginger, ii.


Of these being cut and bruised make according to Art, a Nodule.

These following Nodules are to be found in Tract. de varis, or Arthrite. vag.
Scorbut. Cap. 8, p. 106, 107.

Of The Herbs SCURVYGRASS, Water Cresses, Germander, Polypod, ana. M. i.
The Roots of wild Raddish, Fern, Polypod. ana..ii.
The Bark of Capers, Tamarisk, an. i. ss.
The Flowers of noble Liverwort, of Cichory, an. P. i.
Senna Leaves without Stalks, i. The Roots of Black Hellebore, of Rubarb, an.
i. ss.
The yellow of Oringe Peel, ii. Choice strong Cinnamon, i. Clean Crude Tartar,
ss.
being cut and bruised make a Nodule with fine white Linen, entitle it the
purging Bag for one Can of Wine, of which it is good to take every Morning and
Evening a wine Glass full.

Of The Herbs Betony, Germander, Rosemary, Fumatery, Dodder, Spleenwort,
Melt-wast, SCURVYGRASS, Brooklime, an. P. 2.
The Roots of Polypod. ss. Black Hellebore, vi.
The Flowers of Water Lillies, Arabian Lavander, Rosemary an. P. 1.
Senna Leaves without Stalks, i.ii. Of Anniseeds, Fennel Seeds, an. i. ss. The
purest crude Tartar, ss. Salt of Tartar, i.


Let them be cut and bruised, and make a Nodule with fine white linen
according to Art.

Title the purging Bag for one Kan of Wine.

OR

There may be prescribed this Nodule.

Of The Herb SCURVYGRASS, Brooklime, ana. M. i. Senna leaves without stalks, i.
ss. The Flowers of Cichory. P. ii. The Roots of Polypod, of Black Hellebore,
an. ss. of Ialap, vi.
The Seeds of SCURVYGRASS of Anise, an. i. ss.
The best Cinnamon, i. Pure white Tartar, ss.


Being cut and bruised make a Nodule with fine white Linen, Title it the
Purging Bag for one Kan of Wine.

CHAP. XI. Of the Water of Scurvygrass.
THis water is made of the fresh Leaves of Scurvygrass artificially distilled
in a Balneo Mariae, water being first poured upon them. For lib ^0. Observe. 1.
p. 300.
Forestus among distilled Liquors, highly commends the Water of Scurvygrass
distilled in Sand: insomuch that they report, by the constant use of it, it
will cause the black color both of the whole body and the Thighs to vanish
away. With this water, mixed with other things, variety of Potions may be made,
and Powders, and other Antiscorbutick Medicines may be given in it. Compound
Scurvygrass waters are described by several Authors, of which the Chief are
these which follow:

The Scorbutic water of Quere cap. 7. Pha. mac.
Quercetanus.

Of The Bark of Cappers, of Tamarisk, of an Ash-Tree,
Polypode Roots of the Oak an. ii. The Herb SCURVYGRASS, Watercresses,
The Tops of Balm, Agrimony, Meltwaste, Germander, Ground Pine, an. M. ii.
The Seeds of Fennel, Anise, Carduus benedict, an. 1. ss.
The Flowers of Broom, Centaury the less, S. Iohnswort, Elder, Wild Time, ana.
P. ii.



Let all be infused for three days in Fumatery Water, Whey, an. lb iii. Strong
White Wine, lb iv. Oxymel of Scylls, lb i.


Then strain it out hard, add to this Liquor Of the Trochises of Cappers, of
Diolace, an. vi.



Afterward distill it in Ashes to dryness: the dose is ii. in the morning
three hours before eating to be continued for several days together, according
to the greatness of the Disease.

The Scorbutic water of Tob. Done in Dispensatorio ipsius, cap. 17. d. m. 132.
Tobias Doncrelius.

Of Strong and biting wild Radish roots, lb iv. Polypode of the Oak, i. ss.
The Bark of Capper roots, ss. Fennel Seeds, i. Cardamons, ii. Saffron, i.


Cut the Radish roots into thin round slices, but let the other things be so
subtly powdered, and put them altogether into lb ss. of Rhenish Wine, let
them stand in infusion in a warm place for eight days, the Vessel being shaken
once or twice every day afterward add Of the Waters of SCVRVYGRASS, Brooklime,
Watercresses, an. lb i. ss. True Ground Pine, The Compound-Water of Fumatery,
an. lb i.
Whey of Goats milk, lb i. ss.


Mix them and distill them in a B. M. with a gentle Fire.

The Scorbutic Water of Senn. l. 3. Med. Prac. part. 5. 2, c. 6. page 621.
Sennertus described thus:

Of The Bark of Tamvrisk, of an Ash Tree,
Caper Roots, The Roots of Polypod. of the Oak, The Opening Roots, an. i.
Gentian, vi. Ellecampaine, Wake Robin, Citron Peel, an. ss. Ground Pine,
Germander, Carduus benedict. an. M. i. Trochies of Wormwood, of Cappers, an. i.
Rocket Seeds, ss.
being bruised add to them Of strong wild Raddish roots lb i. ss. Water
Cresses, SCVRVYGRASS. Brooklime, Fumatery, an. lb iii.


Mix them with the others, and when they are bruising, pour upon them, and let
them infuse in it.

Of Rhenish Wine, Of the Water of Dodder, Of Carduus Benedictus, an. q.s.
Distill them.

The Scorbutic Water of Dr. Michael Doringius described by Sennertus Sen. lib.
jam citat.
;

Of The Herb SCURVYGRASS, Watercresses, Brook-lime, Monywort, Celandine the
lesser, Hawkweed, ana. M. i.
The Cordial Flowers, an..i. Marigolds, ss.
The Roots of Gentian i. ss. Sweet smelling Garden Reed, vi. Elecampain,
Wake-Robin, an. ss. Dried Citron Peel, Dried Oringe Peel, an. iii. Trochise de
Eupator or Agrimony vi.
The Seeds of Dodder ss. of SCURVYGRASS, of Water Cresses, of Anise, of Fennel,
an. ii.



Infuse them for three days in the waters Of Fumatery, Dodder, Carduus
benedictus, an. lb iii. Strong White Wine lb i. Compound Balm Water, lb ss.


According to Art distill it in Glass Vessels in a MB putting into the nose of
the Alimbeck a Nodule, made with ii. spec. Diambrae.

Another Water of the same Authors in the aforesaid place p. 622.
.

Of The Herb SCURVYGRASS, Brooklime, Water Cresses, Fumatery, Vervain, Ground
Pine, an. M. i.
The Flowers of Broom, St. John's Wort, Borrage, Eugloss, ana. M. ss.
The Roots of Ellecampaine The great Celandine, an. vi. Citron Peel, ss.
Trochises of Rubarb v. Seeds of Dodder, Anise, Fennel, an, ss. Galingal, vi.



Infuse them three days in the waters Of Fumatery, Dodder, Carduus Benedictus,
Strong White Wine, Malaga Sack, an. lb i. ss.


Distill it according to Art in Glass Vessels, hanging in the Alimbeck a Nodule
of Species Diambrae, ii.

Another water of Sennertus Sen. p. 623.
in the same place.

Of The Roots of Vipers Grass, Sarsaparilla, an. ii.
The Bark of Tamarisk, of Ash tree, an. i. ss.
Fresh SCURVYGRASS, Water Cresses, Brooklime, Monywort, Maudlin, Ground Pine,
Miltwaste, Germander, Balm, an. M. ii.
The Seeds of our Lady Thistle, Columbine, Carduus benedict. an. ss. Fennel, ii.
The Flowers of Broom, St. Iohnswort, Elder, Centaury the less, an. M. i.



Infuse them in Whey, Fumatery water, (or the water of Water Cresses) or White
wine, ana. lb iv.

Distill the Liquor in Ashes, give of it in a morning ii.

Another of the same Author in the same place.

Of SCURVYGRASS, Water Cresses, Brooklime, an. M. iv. Monywort, Wormwood,
Fumatery, Scordium, Arsemart, Balm, Germander, Ground Pine, an. M. i.
Sarsaparilla, Guaiacum wood, an iii. The distilled water of Water Cress
Agrimony, White Wine, ana. q.s.


Distill them.

Another of the same Author in the same place.

Of Water Cresses, SCURVYGRASS, an. M. iii. Wormwood, Stonecrop the lesser, an.
M. ii. The Roots of Wild Radishes cut into round and thin slices, lb iv.
Scorzon. or Vipers grass roots, i. The Bark of Capper Roots, of Tamarisk, an.
iii.
Fennel Seeds, vi. Grains af Paradise, Cardamons, Saffron, ana. i.


Pour upon them Of Rhenish Wine, lb xvi. The Distilled Water of Scurvygrass, of
Fumatery, an. lb i.
Goats Whey lb ii.


Let them stand in a warm Bath for a day, afterward distill them, and give
every day iii. of this distilled Liquor.

Another of the same Author in the same place.

Of SCURVYGRASS, Brooklime, Water Cresses, Arsemart, Monywort, an. M. i.
Germander, Ground Pine, Scordium, ana. M. ss. Roots of Elecompaine, of Fern, of
Oris, of Assarabaca, of Vipers grass, of Sarsaparilla, an. i.
Bark of Tamarisk, Cappers, Ash Tree, an. ii.
Flowers of Elder, Borrage, an. M. ss.
Juniper Berries bruised, iii. Citron Peel, Cinnamon, an. iii. Indian Spikenard,
Saffron, an. ii. Seeds of Rochet, Nettles, Fennel, an. i. ss.



Pour upon them Of the Water of Bugloss, Balm, Water Cresses, an. iii. par.
Juice of Lemmons, Vinegar of Glove Gilly flower, of Elder, an. i. part.



Digest them some days in a close Vessel, afterward press out the juice,
distill this expressed liquor in Balneo to the consistance of Soap; pour upon
the Remaining part Of the distilled Water of Oxymel of Scyllles lb i. Of White
Wine, lb iii.


Digest them some days and distill it again.

Another of the same Author in the same place p. 649.
to mix with Wine, when you drink.

Of Fresh SCURVYGRASS, M. vi. Water Cresses, Hearts Tongue, an. M. ii.
Sarsaparilla, iii. Raisins of the Sun bruised lb ss. Juice of Brooklime lb ss.
of Sorrel, lb iii.



Distill them in Balneo.

Gregory Horstius Greg. Horst. Observe. 26. p. 253.
describes such kind of Waters, of which sort this is one.

Wild Radish Roots, lb i. The Roots of Polypody, Licorish, an. iii. Cappers, i.
ss.
The Herb Water Cresses, Banck or Winter Cresses, SCURVYGRASS, an. M. vi.
Fumatery, M. iv. Bettony, Fluelling, an. M. ii.
Fennel Seeds, i. ss.
The best Tartar well washed and purified ii. Put them into distilled Whey, let
them stand in a warm place for eight days, then distill it in MB, the Dose is
iv. every day, for eight days together.

Another of the same Author in the same place Observe. 35. p. 277.
.

Of The Roots of wild Radish, lb i. Cichory, lb ss. Polypody, Liquoris, an.
iii.
The Herb SCURVYGRASS, Water Cresses, Banck or WinterCresses, an. M. viii.
Betony. Fluelling, an. M. ii.
Fennel Seeds i. ss. The best Tartar several times washed and made clean, ii.


Let all these be fresh and green, if possible; Infuse them in distilled Whey,
for the space of eight days, then distill them in MB. Dose is iii with Syrup or
Juice of Fumatery, ss.

The Antiscorbutick Water of Hadrianus Hadrian. a Mine. in Armentorio Medico
Chymico. 19. p. 314.
a Mynscht.

Of The Roots of wild Radish cut in slices, lb i. Polypody, ii. Angelica,
Masterwort, Ledoary, an. i. ss.
The shavings of Guaiacum wood, of Sassafras,
Sweet smelling Reed, Galingal the less, an. i. Cardamons the less, Saffron,
Fennel Seed, The Bark of Cappers, of Tamarisk, an. vi.



Being cut and bruised, infuse them in lb i. of Malaga Sack, for eight days,
in a warm place, shaking the vessel once or twice every day, afterward add Of
the Waters of Water Cresses, SCURVYGRASS, The lesser Nettles, Stonecrop, The
lesser Celandine, Monywort, Fumatery, an. lb i.



Mix them,

And draw it off in MB by a Limbeck.

The Compound Water of Matthaeus Martinius Mat. Mart. in Tract. de Scorbuto. p.
681.
.

Of The Leaves of Water Cresses, Winter Cresses, an. M. iv. Gout-ivy or
Groundpine Arsmart, Balm, ana. Mi. Monywort, Wormwood, Scordium, Fumatery, an.
M. i. ss.
Fresh SCURVYGRASS, Mvi. Brooklime, M. iii.
Sarsaparilla roots, ii. ss. Shavings of Guaiacum Wood, iii. ss. The Seeds of
Anise, Fennel, an. ii.
The Waters of Winter Cresses, Agrimony, Wormwood,
The best white Wine, an. q.s.


Distill it according to Art.

Another of the same Author in the same place.

Of Strong wild Radish Roots, lb iv. The Roots of Polypody of the Oak. i. ss.
The Bark of Capper Roots, ss. Fennel Seeds, i. Cardamon, ii. Saffron, i. Winter
Cresses, M. iv. Wormwood, Scordium an. M. iii.


Cut the Radish Roots into thin slices, and let the rest be bruised, and put
them altogether in Rhenish Wine lb xvi. Let them stand in a warm Bath for 8
days, in a convenient Vessel;

After which add of The Water of SCURVYGRASS, Fumatery, an, lb i.
Goats Whey, lb i. ss.


Distill them all in MB.

The Water for the Spleen of Dr. Baldasser Timaeus p. 443.
of Guldenflee, which is to be found after his Medicinal Epistle.

Of Spleenwort, Tamarisk, Dodder, Fumatery, Maidenhair, Chervell, Wormwood,
Wall Rue, Germander, Water Cresses, Scurvygrass, Brooklime, Steeled Wine (i.
e.) in which Steel has been quenched. The Water of Balm, Fumatery, an. lb i.


Let them stand in digestion for a day and a night in MB, then distill them.

Another of the same Author Lib. 3. Cans. Medic. 33. page 164.
.

Of The fresh Herbs of Brooklime, M. iii SCURVYGRASS, Water Cresses, an. M. ii.
Fumatery, Sorrel, Cichory, an. M. i.
New Citrons, Numb. iii. or iv.


Cut them and beat them in a stone Mortar, pour upon them a sufficient quantity
of Goats VVhey. Distill them.

Aqua Polychresta Rolfincii against the Scurvey, and a sickly complexion, which
is described by John ^^dov. Hanneman, in Prodromo Le^ici Medic. Page 77, 78.


Of The Bark of Capper Roots, Tamarisk, Ash tree,
The Roots of Cichory, Briony, Polypody, Swallow wort, Asparagus, Parsley,
Vipers grass, an. iii. China Roots, Sarsaparilla, Wild Time, an. iii.
The Leaves of Agrimony, Pontich Wormwood, Cent (...) lesser, Germander,
SCURVYGRASS, Dodder, Fumatery, Hyssop, Balm, Water Cresses, Sage, an. M. ii.
The shavings of Guaiacum wood, i. of Sassafras, of Red Sanders, an. iii.
The seeds of Smallage, Parsley, Anise, Citron, Water Cresses, an. ii.
The Flowers of Elder, Broom, Water Lillies, Hops, an. M. iii.



All being dried and cut, steep them 3 days and nights in very good White
Wine, a sufficient quantity; distill them in a Copper with an Alimbeck and
Refrigeratory, save the first and second Spirit^ by themselves, or of all these
t^^ngs digested 6 days and nights, and then strained hard through a linen
cloth, and the straining put into an earthen Body. Distill a Spirit, which
keep by it self.

The distilled Liquor of Sarsaparilla of the same Author, which is described by
me in my Tract de varis Cap. 13. page 236.236.
.

The Roots of Sarsaparilla, ii. China sliced, i. Cichory, Scorzonera or Vipers
grass, an. ss. Bark of Cappers, Tamarisk, Rhodium wood, an. ss.
The fresh Leaves of the lesser Celandine, SCURVYGRASS, Brooklime, Fumatery,
Maidenhair, Ground Pine, an. M. i.



Cut and bruise them, then pour upon them The Water of Cichory, Fumatery,
Scurvygrass, an lb i.ss.



Let them stand in a Bath for three days, then press out the Liquor into a
glass Body, and distill it with a gentle fire of Ashes, till the ingredients
are become a rotten slime.

The distilled Liquors of Drawizius Tit. 5. Par. 217.
of the Scorbutic Head Ache.

Juice of Borrage, Bugloss, an. lb i.
The Herb SCURVYGRASS, Fumatery, Water Cresses, Housleek, an. M. i.
Spec. Diarrhodon Abbatis, ii.


Distill it in MB, and reserve the distilled Liquor in a glass, whose Dose for
one time is iii. or from three to viii. To every Dose you may add a Dram of
Cinnamon Water.

CHAP. XII. Of the Spirit of SCURVYGRASS.
OF all the Medicines which are made of SCURVYGRASS, there is none more
efficacious, nor none more in use, than its Spirit; which by reason of its
Volatile Salt, and Oil, with which it is impregnated, does conveniently contain
within it self the whole Scorbutic Power and Virtue, which is lodged in a
large quantity of the Plant; and you may draw a burning Spirit from it as well
as from wine. This Spirit is made either without Fermentation or with
Fermentation. That which is made by Fermentation is commended by Sennertus
Sennert, l 3. Med Prac. part. 3. 2. c. 6. p. 624. Lib 5. C. S. part. 3. 2. c.
9. p. 343
, who writes, that the Artifice of preparing it consists in Digestion and
Fermentation, and, says he obtained from Johan. Buttnerus, an Apothecary of
Gorlick, a Spirit of Scurvygrass (which he had prepared artificially by
Fermentation and Distillation) which retained the smell and taste of the Plant,
and was inflamable, like Spirit of Wine. Simon Paulus Si^m. Paul. Class. 3. p.
268.
in the Book often cited, proposes this following way to prepare this Spirit.

Of fresh Scurvygrass as much as you please, bruise it in a marble Mortar, and
being put into a convenient Vessel with water hardly warm, or which is better,
sprinkled or moistened with its own raw juice in which a little yest of Beer or
Ale is dissolved, and slightly sprinkled with Salt. When it is well mixed
together, set aside the Vessel, being exactly stopped with dow (which stopping
is absolutely necessary, because of the fugitive nature of its volatile salt)
into a Cellar; let it stand till it breath forth a smell in^o the Air, like
that which proceeds from fresh Scurvygrass bruised, which when you observe,
distill it in MB. and you will have the Spirit of Scurvygrass.

Rolfincius Rolf lib 3. Chym. in A^t. form. reda^. p. 133.
about Fermentation, persuades that it should be done with Spirit of Wine by
that means to save the Volatile Salt. But in his Second Corolary in lib. 1.
cit. loc. he says Fermentation does not altogether destroy it, but excites and
sends off a great part of it, insomuch that Spirit of Wine poured upon
Scurvygrass and forgotten was found to be plainly sour, from which the most
generous sulphurous Spirit was fled away. They which perform the distillation
of Spirit of Scurvygrass, with Spirit of Corn, poured upon the fresh Herb, do
get an excellent Spirit that way; of which sort is that which was conmunicated
to me by Dr. Fehr, and as you may find in another place, heretofore I was wont
to prepare it thus: viz. in Tract. de varis Cap. 13. p. 117.
I have described it after this manner.

Fresh Scurvygrass, full of juice, whole and not bruised, as much as you
please, pour upon it the Spirit of Wheat or Rye (not the rectified Spirit of
Wine, which for the Reasons I have given in my aforesaid Tract, is not so
convenient) to the one half of its quantity, and distill it in a Copper Body,
pour this Spirit upon fresh Herbs, and so distill it, which repeat several times
as before, then rectify it, and reserve it for use. Note, that the oft'ner the
Spirit is drawn off of fresh herbs, it will be the stronger, and so will not
need to be rectified. This Spirit is not only peculiarly advantageous against
the Scurvy, but also is commended by many, in the weakness of the stomach, and
in the Colic. One time I prescribed it to a certain Person of Quality, who was
too gross and corpulent, who extold it much, because by the use of it he became
more active and nimble. The Dose of it may be from 10. to 20. or 30 drops in a
convenient vehicle, viz. in Wine, Ale, Beer, Broth of Beef, or Chicken,
Buttermilk, Whey, or any distilled Water, as also in Wormwood Wine; but it is
best in Milk, for the Reasons which I have alleged in my Tract de varis Cap.
12. p. 192.
. You may also commodiously mix it with Tincture of Tartar, Spirit of Tartar,
or with the opening Spirit of Penotus, with the essence of Steel, essence of
Fumatery, the Bezoartick Tincture, Tincture of Treacle, the Anodine essence,
Elixir Proprietatis, and according to a circumstances. If any desire a Compound
Spirit of Scurvygrass, they may mix with it Sea Radish Roots, Brooklime,
Watercresses, etc. and distill it according to Art. Of which sort is the
simple Antiscorbutick Spirit of Dr. Michaelis.

The Herb Scurvygrass, Water Cresses, Brooklime, Dittander,
The roots of Sea Radishes, Wake Robin, an. q.v.



Being slightly cut and bruised pour upon them Spirit of Elder Berries made by
Fermentation to the height of three fingers, digest them for three days in MB,
with a gentle heat, the Vessel being well stopped, then distill them. If you
add to this Penotus his opening Spirits it will then become the Compound
Antiscorbutick Spirit of the said Author.

Drawitz. Tit. 3. Of the Scorbutic Lakmung p. 153. commends this Spirit.

Strong Spirit of Tartas, lb i. Spirit of Scurvygrass, iv.
With which being mixed, moisten lb ii. of Vitriol calcined to redness with a
moderate Fire, digest them in a Bath for eight days, than distill it by a
Retort, increasing the Fire by degrees, until with the other Spirits, the
Spirit of Vitriol distill also. It may be given from ss. to i.

Dr. Deckers Dr. Deck. in Barb. prac. l. 4. c. 3. p. 157.
in his Golden Notes upon Barbet commends this following Spirit.

The Bark of Ash Tree, Tamarisk,
The Roots of Fraxinell, Cappers, an. i. ss. Polypody of the Oak ii Wild
Radish, iii.
The Herb Scurvygrass, M, iv. Winter Cresses, Brooklime, Sorrel, Spleenwort,
an. M. iii,
Bay Berries, Juniper berries, an. vi. The Tops of the lesser Centaury, P. iv,
Goose dung, i. Seeds of Citron, Mustard, Cardnus Benedictus, an. ss.
Cloves, Ginger, Cinnamon, Nutmegs, an. iii.


Being cut and bruised, digest them in warm Sand with lb viii. of White Wine
and lb iii. of Brandy, for three days time, then let them be distilled in
Sand, by an Alimbeck.

I have declared above, that you may mix the Spirit of Scurvygrass, with diverse
Elixirs, Tinctures, Essences, and other Spirits, as for example thus: Elix,
Proprietat. iii. Spirit of Scurvigrass, i. Sal Armoniack, ss.


Mix it and put it in a Glass.

Title it the Elixir against the Scurvy, twenty drops of it may be given,

OR, The sweet Essence of Steel, iii. Spirit of Scurvygrass, i. Sal Armoniack,
ss.


Mix them, and keep it in a Glass.

Give of this Essence thirty drops.

OR, The Bezoartick Tincture, ii. Spirit of Scurvigrass* i.


Mix and keep it in a Glass.

Call it the sweating Tincture, of which 35 drops may be given.

OR, Essence of Wood, of Wormwood, an. i. ss.
Spirit of Scurvigrass i.


Mix it in a Glass.

Call it the Essence good for the Scurvy, to be given to 40 drops.

OR, Penotus his opening Spirit, Spirit of Scurvygrass, an. ii,


Mix them in a Glass.

Title it the Spirit good against the Scurvy, of which you may give 40 drops.
OR, Spirit of Tartar iii. of Scvrvygrass, i.



Mix them in a Glass.

Call it the Spirit good against the Scurvy, of which may be taken 30. drops.

Drawiz. Tit. 7. Of the Scorbutic pains in the side or Pluresie has
prescribed this Potion.

The Water of Corn Poppy, Dorncreilius his Antiscorbutick water, an. i. Spirit
of Nitre, i. Tartar, ss. Scurvygrass, viii. Drops
Syrup of Scabions, or else of wild Poppy, vi.
Mix them for a Potion:

CHAP. XIII. Of the Volatile Salt of Scurvygrass.
SInce the Salt is the chief part, by means of which, Scurvygrass is so
prevalent in the Scurvy, according to the Philosophers Axiom: Per quod quid est
tale, illud est magis tale: That by which a thing is what it is, that thing is
more such. There is therefore a necessity, that we treat of this Salt. And
because of its volatility, but little of it can be gotten, it is sufficient
that we use its Spirit, in which this Salt is hid and contained. This Salt is
made (after the same manner that many others are, viz.) Let the thick leaves of
Scurvygrass, and full of juice, be boiled a little while in water, and
afterward press out the juice, or which is better, if only the juice pressed
out of the fresh gathered leaves be purified, and a little evaporated till it
be somewhat thickened, and so set by, till of its own accord the Salt shoot in
the juice. The chief efficacy of Scurvygrass (as has been declared just now,
and also above in the fifth Chapter) is from the volatile Salt. For experience
teaches, that there is a great penetrative virtue in volatile Salts, and
therefore they are very effectual in many diseases; from whence many now a
days refer the causes of all internal Diseases to an Acide, and an Alkaly
Salt, and therefore they use almost no other Medicines, except such in which
there does abound a volatile Salt, which may drink up and mortify the other
Salts. But these are in an error, both upon the account of the Cause and upon
the account of the Cure, and seem to me to be like that Sect of Physicians
called Methodists, which also reduced all particular Diseases to two general
affections, that is, Astriction and Laxity, or being bound or loose, and
reduced all their Practice in general to stopping or binding those that are
loose, and to loosening or relaxing those that are shut up or bound. For to
refer the Causes of all internal Diseases to the aforesaid Salts, is a great
absurdity, as it may be made out by most sort of Diseases, if the intention of
this Book would permit it. Neither truly, tho some would have it so, can they
establish this Doctrine, from Hyppocrates in lib. de Prisca Medicina, for in
the same piace, besides hot, cold, moist, and dry; he describes more forcible
qualities of the humors, which he calls (...), Powers, Strength or Virtues; he
names (...), that is, bitter, salt, sour, rough, or harsh, with which
Faculties, that Salts are endowed no body doubts, but that also (...), that is,
sweet or insipid (or tasteless) and many others, which through their plenty and
strength have different Faculties, are of the nature of Salts, no man will
easily believe. Also their manner of cure offends against the rules of our
great Master, for (...): To warm much is dangerous, for all that is too much is
an enemy to Nature, but that which is done by little and little, is safe:
Especially, if any one pass from one extreme to another Hyppocr. Aphor. 51. 2.
: And the opinion of Mesues is, That then we are to make use of strong
Medicines, when weak ones will not prevail. But Medicines consisting of
Volatile Salts, are hot in the third and fourth degree, and smell and taste
strongly, which sort of Medicines do not only manifestly alter our bodies, but
do it vehemently and not without trouble and hurt, nay most vehemently, and not
without grievous hurt, and therefore are not to be often, and indifferently
used in every distemper, as every young Studient in Physic knows, and has
learned from the Institutions.

Moreover the matter from which such sort of Medicines are prepared, are Blood,
the Scull, Bones, and the Urine of Men, and the blood and horns of a Stag,
Vipers, Serpents, Amber, etc. From these they prepare Essence. and Spirits, and
sepaparate and collect their Volatile Salts from them according to Art, some of
which are many times very hurtful, as for example is that which is made of
Humane blood, which for the most part is taken indifferently from any man that
is let blood, and not only from young men, and exactly healthy, which those
that prepare Medicines out of Humane blood ought carefully to observe, for
otherwise by reason of Diseasie Ferments lurking in the blood, they do more
hurt than good. Nay Medicines of Humane blood, tho from healthy Persons, are
suspected by Physicians, by reason that Philters, which are made of it render
men sottish, and Mad, and many times kill them. Insomuch that the blood taken
from a red haired Man is poison, as it is commonly delivered by Authors. Vid.
Zachut. Lusitan. lib. 1. de Medic. Princ. Hist. 23. p. 41. and Dr. Garmaen.
lib. de Mirac. Mort. tit. 2. p* 24. Of which the example alleged* by the same
Zachut, Zachut lib. 3. Pra^. admir. Observe. 82.
of a Student, which, by drinking the blood of a red haired Man, became a
perpetual Fool, is a sufficient proof.

Moreover these Medicines are not only ungrateful to the taste, but stinking
sented too, yet for all that, they are not only given at the mouth to be
swallowed, but applied to the Nose to smell to, and yet by the mutual assent of
all authentic Physicians, they are hurtful to the Head, Womb, and Nerves;
unfriendly to the heart, and they cast down and weaken the Spirits, for as good
smells do strengthen these, so ill ones do overthrow and weaken them, N. 84. p.
334.
for Helmont in Tract tria prim. princip. eorum Essent. de Morb. exer esse,
jtstly asserts, Odores fortes and pertinaces superant Vires nostras and vix ab
Archeo superantur atque digeruntur, adeoque importune in nos agunt: i. e.
Strong and lasting Sents do overcome our strength (or Spirits) and are hardly
digested and mastered, by the Archeus or (vital Spirits) and therefore they act
in us detestably. Also we are instructed by many examples, that thinking to
recover those which were seized with the Falling Sickness, or with an Apoplexy
by very stinking things, they have caused sounding Fits and Abortions, and
Women subject to Fits of the Mother (to whom all other stinking things have
proved advantageous) have been by these means promoted to eternal Life.
Therefore Diseases arising from Choler and Fermentation, by exhibiting Volatile
Salt are exasperated, because they increase the Fermentation and Ebullition,
which another time shall be proved more at large. But this I cannot forbear to
mention, That not long since, I cured a man, who was sick of a Tertian Ague,
who immediately after having took of a certain Volatile Salt, felt an extreme
heat, and trouble in his stomach, and tongue, insomuch that his tongue was
inflamed and swelled with great danger of being choked, and also there issued
forth of his mouth, a thick hot matter, like melted Pitch, without doubt
stirred up by the volatile Salt working upon the Choler, and Salt in his
Stomaek, and increasing its Ebullition, which will easily appear from hence,
for that the Sick man, being near unto death, by my exhibiting to him a
precipitating Powder, he found great Relief, and God be praised was happily
recovered. From whence it clearly appears to all Men, that those Physicians
which give volatile Salt indifferently, and (...), or without Rule to their
Patients do not cure either cito, speedily, (unless by hastening death) neither
tuto, safely, much less jucunde pleasantly, which nevertheless in (...), or the
Curative part of Diseases is absolutely to be observed. But this I grant that
in stubborn Diseases, such as the Dropsy, Gout, Hypocondriack, Affection,
Scurvy, etc. in which a Wild Salt abounds, that by the benefit of those sort of
Medicines, prepared from innocent and gentle substances, regard being had to
circumstances, they may the sooner obtain their end, which I my self by such
sort of Medicines, but not dangerous nor so stinking, mixed with other
Balsamic things, in a proper dose and convenient Vehicle have experienced
often, in those sort of Diseases, other Remedies proving ineffectual. (For I
have besides many other a singular Medicine of a certain volatile Salt,
prepared for use, after a peculiar way, which is not so ungrateful, and yet is
of eminent virtue, and therefore worthily deserves to be named Sal Mirabilis,
or the Wonderful Salt, and then rightly according to Hyppocrates Aphorismum
sextum, Sect. 1. (...). Against extreme Diseases, extreme and exquisite
remedies are best. And it is convenient according to the advice of Celsus Cells
lib 2. cap 9 page 66.
Anceps auxilium experiri, quam nullum: that is, to try a dangerous Remedy
rather than none at all.

CHAP. XIV. Of Oil of Scurvygrass.
THere are commonly three kinds of Oils in the Shops: Those that are made by
Distilling, by Pressing, and by Infusion* to which also may be referred those
made by boiling. They prepare an Oil from Scurvygrass by Infusion and
Distillation, and that in a twofold manner. And first the Leaves of Scurvygrass
are employed either dry or green. The Oil cannot be made of dry Scurvygrass
because its volatile Salt is gone, therefore the green ought to be taken which
being cut and put into Oil of Olives, mixed with scurvygrass Water, may be
boiled till the watery moisture be exhaled. The other is gotten in the
Distillation of Spirit of Scurvygrass, chiefly if the Leaves be thick, and full
of juice, and it has the same virtues with the Spirit, but more eminently, and
therefore its Dose given in a convenient vehicle must not exceed four or five
Drops, For all distilled Oiles are very hot, and for that cause are to be used
with great caution, but if they be turned into a volatile salt, they are not so
hot, and are useful in great Diseases. So distilled Oil of Cinnamon as Helmont
Helm. N. 84. p. 334.
witnesses in the before cited place. When it shall be mixed with its Alkaly
or fixed Salt, without any water, by an Artificial and secret Circulation, in
the space of three months, the whole will be changed into a volatile Salt. Many
digest any kind of Distilled Oil with rectified Spirit of Wine, by which the
Oil is drank in and united, and appears under the form of a spirit. Those
distilled Oils (such for example that smell well, for stinking Odors are
enemies to our nature, as is declared in the Chapter before) thus prepared and
methodically exhibited, do become most efficacious Remedies in Diseases
proceeding from Cold, and want of Spirits, for they quickly by reason of the
exceeding subtilty of their (...), or Effluviums are diffused through all parts
of an humane Body, and refresh our Spirits with their fragrant sent, and do
recreate and restore lost strength, which Experiment we see daily in swoundings.

I am well acquainted with a Practitioner in Physic, which having given such a
prepared Oil, to the quantity of two drops in Spirit of Roses sented with
Amber, he did as it were Wonders, or Miracles with it. With this Distilled Oil
of Scurvygrass, the Magistery is made, or rather an Eleosaccharum, or Oily
sugar of Scurvygrass, of which shall be treated below in the Twentieth Chapter.
It is also sprinkled upon Powders, and added to Pills, thus Timaeus lib. 3 Cas.
med 33 p. 162.
: The Powder of Ialap colored with Essence of Saffron i. Magistery of Agarick,
Gr. vii. Distilled Oil of SCURVY GRASS, Gut. iii.
mix them and make a purging Powder.

Quercetans Melanagogick Pills, i. Extract of black Hellebore, Gr. vii.
Distilled Oil of SCURVYGRASS Gut. iii.
Mix them with Antiscorbutick water, and make 9 Pills.

This distilled Oil of Scurvygrass is also used outwardly, as is its Oil by
Infusion, as it will appear beneath in the one and twentieth Chapter.

CHAP. XV. Of Conserve of SCURVYGRASS.
COnserves are so called because by the mixing of Sugar with them they are
conserved from Corruption, for the most part those things that are made into
Conserves, are Flowers, seldom Herbs, seldomer Roots, but very rarely Fruits.

Conserves of Scurvy Grass are made of the Leaves chop't, and cut small, and
beaten in a stone mortar, with a wooden Pestle, by degrees mixing Sugar double
or trebble the proportion of the Herbs. This (according to the judgment of Dr.
Simon Paulus in his Book often mentioned before) is given with much advantage
to those, which are subject to the affliction of the Scurvy, and loath their
meat. It is commended (by Dr. Blumentrost Blumen. Pharmac d^met and partat. c.
27. p. 76, 77.
) in Obstructions of the Liver and Spleen, also in the Stone. He also commends
it to those, who are weak at the act of Venery, but because it moves the
Courses, it is to be used cautiously by those that are with Child, neither is
it convenient for choleric persons, because of the Sugar, except perhaps it be
taken with Whey of Goats Milk. The Dose is ss. or the quantity of a Walnut, by
it self, or mixed with other Conserves, Species, Powders, or Essences. If it be
dissolved in the water of Carduus Benedictus, Scorzonera, etc. mixed with other
Sudorificks, it procures sweat. Sennertus Senn. l. 5. Med. Prac. part. 2. ss.
2. c. 9. page 342.343.
prescribes this following Medicine made with Conserve of Scurvygrass mixed with
other things.

The Scorbutic Water described above in the 11 Chapter, iv. The Waters of
Scurvygrass, Brooklime. an. i.
Conserves of Scurvygrass, i. ss. Betony, ss.

Let them stand for a night, strain them in the morning, and add of

Of Vitriolated Tartar, or of Mistura simplex, ss. Mix them. The Liquor called
the simple Mixture,.i. ss. Robe (or the thickened juice) of Juniper, Berries,
ii. Extract of Calamus Aromaticus, that is sweet smelling Reed, i. Saffron, ss.
Conserves of Scurvygrass, iii. Fumatery, Sorrel, an. i. ss.
Fresh juice of Citrons, iv. The Scorbutic Water, vi. The water of
Scurvygrass, iv. Cinnamon ss.



Let them stand in digestion, afterward strain them. Also this,

Wormwood, P. iii. Conserve of Scurvygrass, iii. Fresh Water Cresses bruised,
M. i. Dried Citron Peel, vi.


Pour upon them of Rhenish Wine, lb4. Let it stand in a Glass some days,
afterward pour out what is clear.

Grembs Grembs l. 2. Arbor, integr. and Ruinos. homin. c. 1. ss, 4. p. 197.
has these following Morsules.

Conserves of Scurvygrass, i. ss. Borrage, Bugloss, Roses, an. ii.
Magistery (that is) Rosin of Ialap, ss. Preserved Citron Peel, iii. White
Sugar dissolved in Scorzonera Water, as much as is sufficient to make Morsules,
that is Tablets or Lozenges.


Bald, Timaeus Bald. Tim. lib. 3 Cas. Med. 33. p. 163.
a Guldenflee prescribes this Bolus.

Conserve of Scurvygrass, Fumatery, an. i.
Confectio Alkermes i. Resin of Ialap, gr. ix:
Mix them make a Bolus, sprinkle, or strew it over with Sugar.

CHAP. XVI. Of SCURVYGRASS Syrup.
SOme say that SYRUP is a Greek word, and appears to them to be so called, as
if it were (...), Syriae succus, Others derive it from (...), traho, and (...),
succus, that is, extracted juice: but many because Syrups were invented by the
Arabian Physicians, and the name of it not mentioned either by Hyppocrates nor
Galen, had rather derive the word Syrup from the Arabic word Schaereba (that
is) Sorbere, as if they should say a Liquor to be supped up, and suppose this
word is to be writ with an i, not with a y, which letter the Arabians have not.
The latter Grecians, as Actuarius, etc* call it Serapium.

A Syrup is the form of a fluid Medicine, made with Sugar, or Honey, with the
Decoction, Juice of, or Infusion of things, and boiled to that consistence or
substance, that a drop being put upon Marble will stand, and not flow abroad.

So Syrup of Scurvygrass is made of the purifyed juice, after the manner
prescribed by Sennertus Senn. l. 3. Med. Prac. part. 5 ss. 2. c. 6. page 625.
. If you boil one pound of its juice, with iii. of Sugar, and by the help of
the heat of a Bath, (or boiling water) bring it to the consistence of a liquid
Syrup. The Dose of which is from i. to ii. Almost after the same manner
Forestus his Syrupus scaeletyrbicus is made, described by Sennertus Senn p 619.
in the forecited place, and by Forestus For. lib. 20. Observe. 11.
.

Juice of Scurvigrass, Brooklime, an. lb iii.
The best Sugar, lb ii.


Boil them together, and according to Art make a Syrup.

Bald. Timaeus Bald. Tim. i. Ep. Med. 16. p 41.
a Guldenflee has this Syrup following.

Juice of Scurvygrass, lb i. ss. Citrons, iii. Sorrel, ii. Balm i.



After its dregs are settled filther it, through a spongy whited brown paper,
and add Water of Black Cherries, lb i. ss. Cinnamon water iii.
Iulep of Roses, i. ss. White Refined Sugar, as much as is sufficient to
procure a pleasant taste to it, keep it in a Glass, and Title it the Syrup of
Scurvygrass.


There are more compound Syrups of Scurvygrass, among which are these following.

The Compound Syrup of Scurvygrass much used at Wratislaw, and heretofore
prescribed by Dr. Casper Packischius Physician in ordinary to that
Commonwealth, which Sennertus Sen. l 3. Med. Pract. part. 5. ss. 2. c. 6. p.
619, 620.
describes thus, The Herbs Scurvygrass. Water Cresses, Agrimony, Water-Minth,
Spleenwort, Moon Fern, Sage, Maidenhair, Germander, Horehound, Fumatery,
Speedwell or Fluellin, Five leaved Grass, or Cinque foil,
The Leaves of Dwarf Elder, an. M. i. Seeds of Fennel, Water Cresses, Smallage,
Parsley, Aniseeds,
The Pulpe of the seeds of Butchers Broom Asparagus, an. i. Melons, ii.
The Roots of Fern, Oenanthe, Asparagus, Pimpernel, Borrage, Bugloss, Polypody,
Colts foot, Liquoris, Taraxicon, or Lions Tooth
The Bark of Capper Roots, an. i. ss. The Flowers of Liverwort, Borrage, an. M.
ss.



Make a Decoction of all these according to Art, in a sufficient quantity of
the water of Watercresses, till there remain forty ounces of it.

Let it stand in digestion till it be cold, press it out strongly to the
straining, add lb ii. of course Sugar, boil it with a gentle fire to the
thickness of a Syrup, clarify it, and aromatize it with this following Nodule,
Powder of Rhubarb, iii. Cinnamon, i. Cloves, Mace, an. ii.



The Antiscorbutick Syrup of Dr. Bald. Timaeus, which he has described after
Cases Medicinal, page 418.

The new pressed Juice of Scurvygrass, Water Cresses, Brooklime, Cichory,
Fumatery, Sorrel, an. lb i. ss.

Being mixed precipitate them, or clarify them with lb ii. of Juice of Citron.

Add to the straining The yellow part of Citron peel, i. ss. White refined
Sugar, lb ii.


Put them into a glass Body, with a blind head, and digest them for a day and a
night in a MB, and save the strained liquor in a Glass.

The Antiscorbutick Syrup of Mynsicht Myns. in Armament. Medico Ph* sico. 16.
p. 261.
.

Of the Juice of Knut-berries of Norway, lb iii. of Watercresses, Brooklime,
Sorrel, Scurvygrass, an. lb ss.

To these being mixed, add of Refined Sugar lb i. ss. and make a Syrup of due
thickness.

The Syrup of Matthias Martinius Matthew Mart. in Tract. de Scorbuto, p M. 673.


Corinthian Currants well moistened with Syrup of the juice of Sorrel, i. ss.
Roots of Polypody, Smallage, Scorzonera, Liquoris, Sour Sorrel, or Ditch Dock,
Eryngo, Enala Campain,
The Bark of Capper Roots, Tamarisk, an. ss.
The Seeds of Melon, iii. Nettle, Anise-seed, an. i. ss.
Juniper Berries, iii. The Leaves of Dodder, Maidenhair, Monywort, Spleenwort,
Scurvygrass, an. M. i. Wild Time, Time, an. M. ss.
The Flowers of Bugloss, Violets, an. P. i. ss.
Cinnamon, i.
Boil them in common Water, or Goats Whey, as much as is sufficient, in a
double vessel, or MB. Add to a lb i.ss. of the straining of these, as much
Sugar Candy, as is sufficient, and let them be boiled to the consistences of a
thin Syrup.

Wierus his Syrup for Children to be found in the same Author. Matthew. Mart. p.
683.


Rhubarb, Centaury the leesser, Pontus Rhubarb, an. ss. Anise-seeds, Liquoris,
an. ii.
Make a Powder and infuse it for a night in the thick broth of Pruens and
Scurvygrass, afterward being pressed out with as much Sugar as is needful,
make it into a Syrup.

CHAP. XVII. Of the Electuary and Mixture of Scurvygrass.
ELectuary is a word derived from the Greek, but corrupted, (...), i. e. to
waste with licking; for an Electuary is a Medicine of a Substance thicker than
a Syrup, hardly liquid or fluid, composed of several things, as first of
Conserves, Preserves, Powder, etc. Taken in and mixed with Honey or Sugar. Many
times they add distilled Waters, Spirits, Essences, Extracts, distilled Oils,
etc. and these are called Mixtures. Examples of which are these that follow,
Conserve of Scurvygrass, ii. Germander, Sorrel, Cichory,
Preserved Elecampane Roots, an. ss.


With the sharp Syrup of Citrons, and Endive, make an Electuary

OR, Jupit; Conserve of Fumatery, Scurvygrass, an. i. Wormwood, Borrage,
Preserved Roots of Pimpernel, Cichory, an. ss.
The Species called Diarrhodon Abbatis, Diapliris-arcontic, an. ss.



With the sour Syrup of Citron make an Electuary.

OR,

Conserve of Scurvygrass, iii. Fumatery,
Of the Flowers of Broom, Borrage, Balm, an. i. ss.
Candid Citron Peel, Preserved Nutmegs, an. i. Extract of Juniper Berries, ii.
Confectio Alkermes, i.


With Syrup of Scurvygrass, or the sceleterbick Syrup of Forestus, make an
Electuary.

These hitherto are taken out of Sennertus Sen. lib. 3. Med. Pract. part. 5 2
cap. 6. p. 628 etc. ^
where also this following Mixture is described.

The Compound Spirit of Tartar or Mixture Simplex ii. Extract of Juniper
Berries, Pimpernel. Calamus Aromaticus, an. ss.
Saffron ss. The Essence Spirit, or for want of that, the Juice or Syrup of
SCURVYGRASS, Water Cresses, an. ii.
Syrup of Cinnamon, ss. Fumatery. Sharp Citrons, an. i.



Mix them all exactly, digest them, and strain it out, the Dose is from i. to
ii.

Another.

Conserve of SCURVYGRASS. Fumatery, an. i.
The Rob, or thickened Juice of Elecampane. Juniper Berries. Fumatery, an. i.
Mixtura Simplex, ss. Spirit of Scurvygrass, i. Steeled Tartar, ii. Purified
Salt Armoniack, i. ss.
With Syrup of Scurvygrass make a Mixture.

Matthew. Martinius his Electuary, P. M. 674.

The Conserve of the Flowers and Buds of Scurvygrass, iii. The Flowers of
Bugloss, Clove Gilly-Flowers, Damisk Roses, an. i. ss.
Preserved Indian Nuts, Preserved Citron Peel, cut small, an. i. Extract of
Juniper Berries, iii. Confectio Alkermes, i. ss. Syrup of Cinnamon, vi. Juice of
Scurvygrass, or Forestus his sceleterbick Syrup, q.s.


Make an Electuary, and make it pleasantly sour by mixing with it* a
sufficient quantity of the sharp Spirit of Sulphur.

Another of the same Author.

Conserve of Scurvygrass leaves iii. Bugloss Flowers, Clove Gilly Flowers,
Pulpe of Preserved Citron, Preserved Indian Nuts, an. i. Extract of Juniper
Berries, ss. Rhodium Wood, Sarsaparilla, an. ss.
Calamus Aromaticus, Confectio Alkermes, an. i.


With the sceleterbick Syrup, bring them all into the consistance of a solid
Electuary.

The tincture of Johannes Wernerus, which the same Matthew. Martin. has
discovered, P. M. 685. which by reason of its thick consistance rather deserves
the name of an Electuary, and therefore is referred to this Classis, and is
this which follows.

Of the best Spirit of Wine, q.s.

In which steep, (being first put into a Glass body in a convenient place)
Guaiacum wood rasped, ix. Fern Roots, iii. The inner Bark of an Ash-tree, Dwarf
Elder, Cappers, an. i.
Anis-seeds, i. ss.


When the Spirit of Wine has filled it self with the Tincture of the
ingredients, after nine days strain it out strongly.

OR,

Whey of Goats Milk, The distilled waters of Borstast Apples. Oxymel of Scylls,
or Sea Onions, an. q.s. In which infuse, Of the Leaves or Tops of Pontick.
Wormwood Agrimony, Germander Ivy, Rue, Elder Flowers, an. M. ss.
The lesser Housleek, Water Cresses, Fumatery, Brooklime,
Hyssop, Scordium, an. M. i. Scurvygrass, M. ii.


When you have macerated these for two days, and pressed it out, let both the
tinctures be joined, being thickened by a gentle fire, add to them

Species Diacurcum: (that is, the compound powder of Turmarick Roots) ss.

The same Author has also these following,

The thickened juice of Scurvygrass, ii. Salt of Scurvygrass, ii. The
Hypocondriack Mixture, i. ss. The Extract of Sassafrass wood, iii. of Juniper
Berries, ss.
Essence of Bawm, i. Dissolved Corral, i.
Mix them.

OR,

Essence of Scurvygrass, Water Cresses, Orange Peel, an. iv.
The solution of Vitriol of Steel, ss. Pearls, Leaf Gold, an. i. Rectified
Spirit of Vitriol, of Hearts Horn, an. ii.
Spirit of Salt, i. Tincture of Steel, vi. Syrup of Cinnamon, Sharp Syrup of
Citron, an. ss.


Make a mixture.

OR,

The Camphorated Spirit, or Water of Theriacle, v. Rectified Spirit of Tartar,
iii. Rectified Spirit of Vitriol. i. ss. The Extract of Juniper Berries, Bawme,
Scurvygrass, Scordium, Yellow Sanders, Bugloss Flowers, an. ii.
Cinnamon, i. Syrup of the juice of Cherries with the Flowers of Clove Gilly
flowers, of Scurvygrass, of Spleenwort, an. iii.



Bald. Timaeus Bald. Tim. lib. 3 Cas. Med. 33. p. 164.
a Guldenflee prescribes these.

New Citrons together with their Peels cut small, number iii. The Leaves of
Fresh Scurvygrass, of Water Cresses, M. ii. Wood Sorrel, M. i.



Let them be beaten in a Stone Mortar with a little Sugar.

Make an Electuary.

OR,

The Steel Electuary, iii. Conserve of Scurvygrass, Water Cresses, an. ii.
Preserved Citron Peel, Roots of Scorzonera, Cichory* an. vi.
With Syrup of Scurvygrass, q.s.


Make an Electuary.

Drawiz. Tit. 5. of the Scorbutic Headache, p. 213. has this

Conserve of Scurvygrass, i. Water Cresses, Borrage, Roses, Violets, Fumatery,
Candid Citron Peel, an. ss. Spec. Diarrhoid. Abbatis, Laetificant. Almansor,
an. i. With the sharp syrup of Citrons, q.s.


Make a Condite or Electuary.

The Antiscorbutick Electuary of Dr. Hanneman in Prodomo Lexici med. p. 679.
.

The Conserve of SCURVYGRASS Sage, an. ii.
The Flowers of Broom. Elder. Cichory. Borrage, an. i. Germander Ground Pine
an. i. ss.
Candid Citron Peel, ii. ss. Species Diarrhod. Abbatis, pliris. Archontic. an.
v. Timaeus his Antiscorbutick Syrup. S. q.


Make an Electuary.

Or you may prescribe this,

Conserve of SCURVYGRASS ii. Fumatery, i.
Candid Citron, ss. My Digestive against the Scurvy, iii* Ivory calcined
without fire, i. With Forestus his Syrup against the Scurvy, q.s.


Make an Electuary

I do admonish you concerning these and the like Medicines made with Sugar
(which I have also done before in my Tract de varis cap 8. p. 93. c. 12, p. 189,
or of the wandering Scorbutic Gout.) That they ought to be seldom, or
sparingly used in the Scurvy, because by their glutinous nature they breed
Obstructions of the Bowels, and are easily converted into choler, and cause
Tumors of the the Spleen: and are therefore hurtful for Spleenitick Persons
according to that old saying: (...)* (i. e.) salt and bitter things are
profitable to spleenitick persons, but sweet things hurt them. Nay it appears
by Chemical Trials, that Sugar is made up of, or contains a sharp and corrosive
salt. For which cause the old Electuaries, of which sort there are many in the
Apothecaries Shops, now a days are seldom prescribed or used. I therefore
wonder that they are yet brought from Spain, and other places afar off, where
by the by, they are not so excellent Practical Physicians, as in Germany (and
England) to whom also Nature was never so unkind, that she did ever deny them
her Remedies, with which the Diseases of the Inhabitants might be overcome.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Essence of Scurvygrass.
ESsence and Elixir are one and the same, as the Reason of the name does show,
for Elixir is derived from the Arabic Elecshir or Elieschir, which signifies
an Essence extracted by Art. Also an Extract and a Tincture, differ little from
these, and an Extract only upon the account of its substance which is thicker
than an Essence, and Elixir, a Tincture has the same body, and consistance
with an Essence and Elixir, but is endowed with a better color. These four are
prepared after one and the same manner, when for example, by the help of some
convenient Menstruum or Liquor the Balsamic and best parts of a Medicine, are
separated from the gross and foul.

The Essence of Scurvygrass is made thus, The dried leaves being cut very small,
pour upon them Spirit of Wine, and let them stand in digestion, till it has
extracted the color and taste, after which filther it; or macerate or steep
the leaves of Scurvygrass in the best Spirit of Wine, till it has imbibed the
Tinctvre, than throw away the leaves and add new ones, repeat this infusion so
long, until the Spirit be filled with the Essence of Scurvygrass.

But certainly since the volatile Salt of Scurvygrass is lost in drying the
leaves, and in extracting it with Spirit of Wine, it joins it self thereto,
and is separated with it, and so flies away, there is there fore left a Body of
little efficacy. Sennertus Senn. l. 3. Med. Pract. part: 5.. 2. c 6. p 616. and
in Tract. de Cons and Diss. Chym. cum Aristot. and Galen. c. 19. p 401.
rightly admonishes, that it is not fit to make extracts of Scurvygrass, and
other Antiscorbuticks, and therefore it is sufficient to exhibit their Juices.
The same Sennertus in the same place, p. 625. and Matthew. Martinus, p. 682.
teach how to make the Essence of Scurvygrass, after this manner:

Let the juice of Scurvygrass pressed out be put in digestion in MB, till its
thick sediment fall to the bottom, and the remaining juice begin to grow clear
and reddish; then pour off that which is clear from the dregs, and digest it
again, till it let fall no more dregs. Simon Paulus in the place often
mentioned before, p. 265. in favor of nice Palates, which loath the crude
juice, or Infusion of green Scurvygrass leaves, or for fear lest the crude
juice should hurt the Stomach, and other Bowels designed for Nutrition, tells
us how to make a liquid Essence or Tincture of the Color of Chio, or Malago
Wine, it must be done in the Month of May, or before it be got into Flower,
heretofore he prepared it for the use of the Eminently Free and Imperial Town
and State of Lubeck, where he exercised the practice of Physic for four years,
the description of which he communicated to the same place, which is this:

Of the leaves of Scurvygrass, stamp them, and with a strong Press squeeze out
their juice; let it clarify it self in a Glass, or other Vessel well stopped,
by the help of the gentle heat of warm water, and then filther it through
spongy whited brown paper. Of this Juice thus artificially clarified, to three
parts of it, pour one part of the Spirit of Scurvygrass before described in the
twelfth Chapter of this Book; digest, or circulate them according to Art, to
which if you add a little Sugar, it is then the Essence of Scurvygrass, which (
as he declares in the same place) he found most excellent and efficacious in
Scorbutic Diseases, in which case an ounce or two of it is to be dilated with
some convenient distilled water, or else in Rhenish Wine, or the like Vehicle;
but especially if there be mixed with it a few drops, or the quantity of a
scruple for a dose of the mixture called, Mixtura Simplex, or Mixtura
Diaphoretica in peracutis. From this threefold Febrifick Essence mixed together
in equal parts, is made the liquid Essence, and Antiscorbutick Tincture of the
same Author described in the same place, p. 269.

Moreover, there are are other liquid Essences, Tinctures, and Mixtures
composed of Scurvygrass. As,

The Mixture of Dr. Glantius, Physician in Ordinary to the Emperor, which you
may find in my Tract de Varis, cap. 13. p. 235.

Fumatery, SCVRVYGRASS, Germander, Wormwood, an. M. iii. Orange Peel, Spec.
diapliris archonticon an..vi.


Digest them with Spirit of Elder and Scurvygrass, ana. q.s. to the of their
Tincture; let them be strongly pressed out, and put of the former Herbs and
Powders into the straining, and do this three or four times, and at last being
clarified by settling, add, Of Spirit of Fern, SCVRVYGRASS, an. iii. ss.
Tincture of Tartar, ix. Mix them. The Dose is from 12 drops to 20.


The Mixture of Dr. John Nichol. Finckius, which is extant in my forecited
Tract in the same place, p. 236. and is this:

Rectified Spirit of Tartar, ii. ss. Vitriol, i. ss. SCVRVYGRASS, ii.
Tincture of Steel, i. Red Sanders, q.s.


Digest them till it be a Tincture: The Dose is from 20 to 30 drops in a
convenient Vehicle.

The Mixture of Hannemannus, which he describes in Prodromo Lexici Medici, p.
677.

Spirit of SCVRVYGRASS, ii. Carduus Benedictus, i. Deers Blood, iii.
The Aromatic Tincture, i. ss. mix them.


The Dose is i.

The Antiscorbutick mixture of Reinesius, which he describes in his Epistles,
p. 4.

Rob, or the thick juice of Juniper, Berries vi Confection of Alkermes, i. ss.
Essence of Scurvygrass, Wormwood, an. vi. Baum, ii. Sassafras Wood, i.
Of Antiscorbutick Water, i. ss. Of Aqua Carbunculi, i. ss.


Digest them a little while, afterward strain them out, and mix with the
straining of the mixture of the three Spirits, iii. The Juice pressed out of
the Conserve of SCURVYGRASS, and Clarified ii. ss.

Syrup of Cinnamon, i. Calamus Aromaticus, ss. mix them.
The Mixture of Dr. Bald. Timaeus Bald. Tim. lib. 3. Cas. 34. p. 164.
of Guldenflee.

The simple Mixture, Spirit of SCVRVYGRASS, Water Cresses, Juniper Berries, an.
ss. mix them.
The Dose is from i. to ii.
The Essence of Scurvygrass described by Hartman in his Prax. Chymiatrica, p.
214. is much commended.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Juice of Scurvygrass.
THis Juice is to be squeezed forth with a Press, either by it self, or by
pouring Milk, Whey, or Wine upon the Herb; and that it may not be very
offensive to the stomach, you may add a little Sugar, Cinnamon, Anniseed,
Ginger, or Cinnamon Water. Simon Paulus in the often cited place, p. 268. Also
Henry Brucaeus would rather that this Juice should be used by it self, and
unmixt, or diluted with any thing; and does write, that he himself has
experimented, that the unmixed Juice given by it self to sick people, their
Bodies being first purged, it has proved exceeding beneficial to the poorer
sort of Scorbutic people: and that Scurvygrass, whose power is supposed
chiefly to consist in a volatile Salt, cannot be exhibited in a more convenient
form, than in that of its Juice, and that thereby the Scurvy will be the sooner
overcome. And Eugalenus testifies, that there is greater efficacy in the Juice,
than in the Decoction; and that it is very prevalent to preserve the Mouth and
Gums from putrefaction, even after the Small Pox Schnoder. l. 4. Pharmacop.
Med. Chym. p. 50.
. It is also administered to Hydropical persons; as also to such as have
outwardly spots and stains in their skin, proceeding from the disaffection of
their Spleen.

Schwenckfelt de stirp. silis. p. 262. Of many, it is supposed to be an
admirable Alexiterion, or Preservative against all Infection, or Poison; so
that even in the Wintertime they mix, and give to drink four ounces of Juice
of Scurvygrass, with every pint of French or Red Wine. Matthew. Martin. l. saepe
cit. page 677. and elsewhere. It Is prescribed several ways, and the Dose of the
Juice of Scurvygrass is from iv. to vi. Sonnertus Senn. l. 3. Med. Pract. part.
5.. 2. Cap. 6. p. 617. etc.
prescribes it thus:

SCVRVYGRASS, Bro^klime, Watercresses, an. M. i.


Bruise them, and put them in Rhenish Wine to infuse, afterward strain them
strongly out, and in the straining put this following Nodule.

The seeds of Watercresses, Cinnamon, Cloves, Mace, an. i.
Give every day a draught of it.


Or thus:

Wild Redish Roots, SCVRVYGRASS, Watercresses, Brooklime, Fumatery.


Being bruised in a Marble Mortar, pour upon them Milk, or Whey of Goats Milk,
lb i. ss.

Let it stand in a warm place twelve hours, afterward strain it: Add to the
straining Saffron, i. Cinnamon, i. ss. Or Cinnamon Water, ss. mix them.


OR,

Watercresses, SCVRVYGRASS, an. M. ii. Wild Redish, ss. Galingal, Cinnamon, an.
ii.


All being bruised in a stone Mortar, pour upon them a sufficient quantity of
Whey; let them stand in a warm place for a night, and strain them out in the
morning.

OR, The Juice of the Herbs Scurvygrass, Watercresses, an. two spoonfuls,
Celandine the lesser. Sorril, an. i. spoonful, Wormwood half a spoonful,
Cinnamon Water a small quantity.


Mix them with a draught of Whey.

OR, Of the juice of the middle sort of Housleek, Brooklime, Watercresses,
SCURVYGRASS, an. ss.
Goats Whey, ii. Saffron, Mace, Cardamon seeds, an. ss. Cinnamon Water, i.


Mix them for one draught.

OR,

SCURVYGRASS, Brooklime, Watercresses, an. M. i. Wild Redish Roots, i. ss.


Bruise them in a Marble Mortar, and pour upon them as much Goats Whey as is
sufficient; and being well mixed, let them stand in Infusion twelve hours:
After that, boil them half an hour in a double Vessel; then strain it, and give
it to drink.

The Dose is vi. in the morning, and two hours before Supper.

He has also these following in the same place Senn. l. 5. page 342.
.

The fresh pressed Juice of SCURVYGRASS, Brooklime, Watercresses, an. lb ii.
Preserved Cichory Roots, vi Salt of Tartar, ss.

Let it stand in digestion a few days in a close stopped Vessel, then strain
it, and add to the straining White Sugar, iv. Conserve of Borrage, Betony,
Fumatery, an. ii.



Let them stand in digestion again a day and a night, and afterward strain it.

OR,

The simple Mixture, ss. Rob or thick juice of Juniper, i. Juice of
SCURVYGRASS, Watercresses, Brooklime, an. vi.
Spec. Diarrhod. Abb. ii. Syrup of Borrage, Clove Gilly Flowers, Sour Citrons,
an. i. ss.
Cinnamon water, ss.


Let them stand in digestion, afterward, pour of that which is clear.

Horstius Fet. in Tract. de Absynth. p. 134
his Apozeme of which mention is made above cap. 8. and is described by Dr.
Fehr, is this.

Monywort, Water Cresses, Pimpernel, SCURVYGRASS, an. M. ii. The Tops of green
wormwood, Rue. the lesser Housleek, an. M. ss.

Cut them, and bruise them in a stone Mortar, press out their Juice, and pour
into it Goats whey, and strain out viii. For to take at twice,

The same Gregory Horstius Horst. l. 4. Observe. 36 p. 279.
has this.

of the aforesaid Juices, iv. Cinnamon water, i. ss.

Mix them for one draught.

Myns. in Armament. chy. mico. p. 360.
The Antiscorbutick Wine of Mynsich is prepared out of Juices thus.

Rhenish Wine, lb. iv. Juice of Scurvygrass, Water Cresses, Brooklime, Sorril
of each purified, iv
Of the Roots of Wild Reddish, Enula Compane, Fresh iris Roots, an. i. ss. cut
them all into thin slices.
Rocket seed bruised i.


Being all mixed put them in a cold place, and reserve them for use, adding to
them two Nutmegs tosted.

Quercetanus Querc. 2. c. 1 page m. 73.
his appropriate Medicine for the Scurvy, which you may find in his Diaetet.
Polyhistor Wild Reddish Roots cut small, ii. SCURVYGRASS, M iii.
Bruise them and pour upon them. Of the decoction of Barley, lb. i. White wine,
vi.
Press out the Juice and drink of it morning and evening.


Solomon Albertus de scorbuto, Sect. 261. has this following.

Water Cresses.

SCURVYGRASS, of each iii. full handfuls. While the Herbs are yet Fresh and
green, and full of Juice, beat them in a Stone Mortar, with a wooden Pestle,
and squeeze out the Juice strongly with a Press, letting it run through a
sieve, To this strained liquor add* Double refined white sugar, iv. Strong
biting Cinnamon, iv. Mix them, and make a drink.


With this agrees that which is to be found in Matthew. Martinus, l. c. p. 679.

Juice Bald. Tim. a. Guidenfle^ lib. 3 Cas. med 33 p. 163.
of Scurvygrass new pressed, lb ii. Water Cresses.
Brooklime, an. lb ss. Fumatery, Chichory, Sorril, an. v.


Being mixed clarify them with Juice of Citron.

Fresh SCURVYGRASS, Water Cresses, Brooklime, Sorril, an. M. i.

Beat them in a Stone Mortar and pour upon them lb iv. Of Rhenish Wine, in
which has been infused for three days fresh Wild Redish Roots cut into thin
slices, let it stand in infusion for a day, and a night, afterward press it
out strongly, and add to the straining.

Fresh Juice of Citron, iv. Sugar a small quantity. mix them. The Dose is from
iii. to vi.
I have prescribe this following in my Tract. de varis. cap. 8 p. 94.

The Juice pressed from Scurvygass, ii. Goats Whey, lb. Mix them.
Drawizius tit. 5. of the Scorbutic Headache, p. 216. his expressed Juice
against the Scurvy is this: Monywort, Watercresses, Water Pimpernel,
SCURVYGRASS, an. M. ii. Tops of green Wormwood, Fresh Rue, The lesser Housleek,
an. M. ss.


Cut them and beat them in a stone Mortar, and press out their juice through a
Linen Cloth, then the Herbs from whence you have pressed out the juice, and
boil them in lb ii. of Goats Whey a little while; press them out, and strain
them again, and add this to the former Juice; mix them and Aromatize them with
i. of Cinnamon Water, and of the distilled Oil of Mace and Nutmegs, ana five
drops: Mix them, and make a Potion, or Drink, the Dose of which for once is
from iii. to v. and at the most viii.

The same Author tit. 7. of the Scorbutic Plurisie or Stitch in the side, p.
251. has described this Potion.

Quercetanus his Antiscorbutick Water, Our Lady Thistle Water, an. i.
Diaphoretick Antimony, gr. x. Magestery of Crabs eyes, ss. Fresh Juice of
Scurvygrass, iii. Syrup Ambros. ss.


Mix them for a draught.

The thickened Juice of Scurvygrass may be used instead of its Extract, Vid.
Schroder. l. 4. Pharmac. Med. Chym. p. 50.
also Pills may be made of it; as for axample: The sweet Extract of Steel of
Dravviz, described by me in my Tract de Varis, cap. 13. page 215. Extract of
Fumatery, an. ss. Thickened Juice of Scurvygrass, ii.


Make Pills according to Art, of the bigness of little Pease; Title them the
Antiscorbutick Pills. The Dose is from i. to ss.

CHAP. XX. Of Magistery of Scurvygrass.
A MAGISTERY is a sort of subtle fine Medicine of the Chemists, which is made
by separating the best parts of any thing, from the impure and useless, by the
help of some convenient Menstruum, or Liquour; and then reducing it to the form
of an Impalpable Powder, sometimes it is to be reduced to the substance of
Butter, and therefore a Magistery is called by the Germans, Meister Stucklein,
Kunst-Stucklein, that is, a Masterpiece, or piece of Art. Of this kind is the
Magistery of Jalap, which does consist of its Rosiny parts, in which the
purging Faculty chiefly resideth, which is extracted with the best Spirit of
Wine, and precipitated with common water. The best way of making this Magistery
is taught by Zwilffer in his Animadversions in Pharmac. Augustan. p. 4^9. Also
for the Magistery of Cinnamon, vide Schroder Schrod. l. 4 Pharmac med. Chym p.
48 etc.
: But other Magisteries made with Corrosive Spirits, destroy the virtues of the
things they do dissolve, and are nothing but dead Earths, or as Paracelsus
calls them, Relollacea, that is absolutely (...), and of no virtue, but rather
prove hurtful, because the Acrimony of the dissolving Liquor, is hardly to be
washed off from them, from whence it is no wonder, says Laur. Hoffmann. Laur
Hoffm. Tract. de vero usu et fero abus medic. chym. page, 20.
that the Magistery of Pearls has killed many, by corroding the Bowels with
their Acrimony which is also attested by Libavius.

The Magistery of Scurvygrass is not properly a Magistery, but an Elosaccharum,
or Oily Sugar, and is made by exactly mixing together a scruple of the
distilled Oil of Scurvygrass, with an ounce of Sugar. Rolfincius Rolf. l. 4.
Ch^m. in Art form red act. 6. cap ^ p. 275.
teaches to prepare it after this following way, Of white Sugar bruised and
sifted as much as you will. Juice of Scurvygrass and Oil of Scurvygrass, of
each as much as is sufficient.


Let the Juice be Fresh, or if it be thick, moisten it with fair water,
sprinkle the Sugar with this, and rub it well with a Pestle in a Stone, or
Glass Mortar, till the Sugar has acquired an exact green Color, then pour
upon it the Oil of SCURVYGRASS by drops, again mixing them all together
exactly, with the help of the Pestle, that every Atome, or small grain of the
Sugar may have imbibed some part of the Oil. Keep it in a Glass well stopped
with a bladder It Is Virtues are against the Scurvy.

The Dose is from gr. vi. to ss. in a spoonful of Wine.

The same Author in the same place Sect. 2 cap. 3 page 320. Proposes another
way of making the magisteries of Vegetables, and so also of SCVRVYGRASS, which
in that place you may see.

The same Author in his short notes upon this Eleosaccharum of SCURVYGRASS
discourses thus: The Genuine and true Eleosaccharum of Scurvygrass is made
with the Juice of Scurvygrass, The Juice is instead of the body of it, the Oil
is the Soul, and the Spirit marrying the Soul to the Body, is the Sugar, Author
also of many benefits to it. They which in the place of the juice of
Scurvygrass, use the juice of Bucks-horn, or of the blades of Wheat, newly
sprung out of the ground, and moist with Dew do thereby counterfeit both the
Color, and dissolvableness, however for all that, it is not a medicine to be
slighted* for there is a Cleansing virtue in both of them and a purging one in
that made with the Bucks-horn, besides that they are pleasant, it will wholly
dissolve in any vehicle in which it is given, and it is taken into it, and
joined with it in all its parts.

The inventor of the Magistery of Scurvygrass Dr. Iohann. Dravviz, my good
Friend, heretofore the most happy Physician of Lipswick, communicated his way
of making it to me, which I here put down word for word. (Which because it is
long and written in the German tongue, which I think will not be much for the
Edification of the English Reader to transcribe, I will therefore put it in
English) thus:

Take Scurvygrass in Summer, when it is best squeeze out the Juice, expose it to
the Sun, that so it may come to some Consistance, and a greenness, yet must it
not stand so long exposed, nor too hot, least it be spoiled Let this Juice
imbibe some Sugar thinly strewed upon a smooth dish, let it dry up; this do so
often* until it be green and enough, keep this well enclosed for use.

Take for the perfecting of this Magistery, as much sugar as you will and pound
it small, and moisten the Color again, with a little of the water and spirit
of Scurvygrass; thereby to make it something thin, then pour it upon the beaten
Sugar, and stir it well together, that it may get a fine green Color: put it
into a Glass with a narrow neck, pour some of the rectified Spirit of
Scurvygrass upon it, stop the hole with the palm of your hand, and shake it
well, that it may be well imbibed, which when done, pour some fresh spirit upon
it, as much as it will imbibe, to impregnate it well; put it into a glass well
closed with a bladder for use.

Note 1. That the Juice of Scurvygrass must not be squeezed out too hard, for
else it will be too thick; Secondly, The Sugar where with it is to be
impregnated, is to be strewed thin, that if possible it may grow dry in half a
day, or else it will be too black. Thirdly, It Is better to put it into several
Glasses, when it is perfected, lest it lose its strength.

With this Magistery you may quickly make a Scurvygrass Wine, putting the
quantity of so much as will lie upon two Knives points into a Glass of Wine,
and it will receive the color, scent, and taste of the Herb; and it is an
excellent Medicine for the Scurvy.

The Dose is from a i. to ss. but this Operation is troublesome and uncertain,
I therefore prefer the Eleosaccharum before described, which is that which
enters the Composition of my Antiscorbutick Digestive, which you may find in my
Tract de Varis, cap. 8. p. 95.

Of the opening Crocus Martis, i.ii. Magistery of SCVRVYGRASS, Vitriolate
Tartar, Niter Antimoniac, an. i. The Roots of Wake Robin powdered, i. ss.


Mix them, and make a Powder.

The Dose is from i. to ss.

CHAP. XXI. Of the outward use of Scurvygrass.
IT is declared above in the fifth Chapter, that Scurvygrass is to be used, not
only inwardly, but outwardly also. We have hitherto discoursed of its Internal
use, now follows its External.

Scurvygrass is used externally in many disaffections of our Bodies, in diverse
forms. It is made use of many times in Baths, to cherish by its warmth the
aching Joints of scorbutic persons: An example of which this following
Fomentation may be which is commended by Brucaeus in one of his Disputations,
and described by Simon Paulus in the place often cited, page 269.

Juniper Berries slightly bruised, Water Mynth, Both sorts of Cardamin, or
Ladies, smocks, Winter Cresses, SCURVIGRASS, an, M. ii, Camomil Flowers, M.
iii. Mugwort, Balm, Rosemary, Marjoram, Time, Hysop, an, M. i.


Boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water, and foment the Legs with this
warm Decoction. He also reports that his Father used one like this, with very
happy success.

Mallows, Marsh Mallows, Brooklime, Fumatery, Green Scurvygrass, Fresh Water
Cresses, Camomil, an, M. ii. Mallow Roots, iii. Dwarf Elder Rooes, ii. Juniper
Berries M. i.


Cut, bruise, and mix them together, make a Decoction in common Water, for a
Fomentation. So that the Feet may be made hot with the vapors of it, they
being covered all over with Blankets, or with Woollen Cloth.

Forestus For l. 20. Observe. 11. p. 300.
mentions a certain vaporous Bath for the Legs, in which he puts Scurvygrass,
Brooklime, Watercresses, Bay leaves, etc. In the same. place he orders this
Fomentation, which also is to be found in Matthew.

Martinus. Page 740:

Of the Flowers of Melilot, M. ii. Camomil. M. i. Mallows Roots and All.
Mugwort, an, M. i. ss. Brooklime, SCURVYGRASS, Fumatery, an. M. i. Faenigreek
seeds, ss. Marsh mallow Roots, i. The seeds of Water Betony Parsley, an. ss,



Boil them in Common Water for a Fomentation.

In the hard swelling of the Legs of scorbutic persons, the same Matthew.
Martinus prescribes this Fomentation.

Marsh mallow Roots. iii. Mallow Leaves, M. iv. Flowers of Camomil, Melilot,
The Tops of Common Wormword, an. M. ii. Brooklime, M iv.


Boil them in a sufficient quantity of Common water, adding as much as you
please of Brooklime, and Scurvygrass water.

The same Author page 748. Advises the Decoction of Scurvygrass, and the like
against Scorbutic spots, and also this following.

The Leaves of Garden Cresses, Watercresses, Scurvygrass, an. M. ii.

Camomil, Melilot, an. M. ss. Time, Savory, Pennyroyal, an. M. i. Rosemary, P.
i. Wild Carrot Roots, ss. Bay Leaves, M. i. Juniper Berries slightly bruised,
i. ss.


Boil them in a Kettle full of common, or else Rain water, to the wasting of a
third part; with which being warm, wash the Thighs and Feet, or dip in Linen
Clothes, or a Sponge in it, and apply to those parts you would take away the
spots from, it also draws out the stains.

The same Author has this Fomentation against the Scorbutic pains of the
Joints, page 702.

The Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, an. M. iii.
Leaves of common Wormwood, Mallows, SCVRVYGRASS, Brook-lime, an M. ii.
Mugwort, M. i.
Marsh Mallow Roots, ii. Cummin Seed, ii.
Being chopped small and bruised, boil them in a sufficient quantity of common
Water, adding toward the end

Rhenish Wine, Vinegar, or Vinegar of Hellebore iv. apply it early in the
morning and in the Evening.

Sol. Alb de scorb. p. m. 530.
Solomon Albertus Tract de Scorbut. commends a Fomentation against Scurvy
spots, which is this, Ladies smock, or wild Cresses or Garden Cresses.
Cardamin, or the other sort of water Minth of Dioscordes, which is also called
Water Cresses, Scurvygrass, an. M. ii. Camomil, Melilot, an. M. ss. Time,
Savory, Penny royal, an. M. i. Rosemary, M. ss. Wild Carrot Roots, Bay leaves,
M. i. Juniper Berries lightly bruised, i. ss.


Boil them in a Kettle of common water to the consuming of a third part.
Moisten the member with the vapor of this decoction being hot, or wash the
Thighs and Legs with it being warm; or being imbibed in Linen Clothes, or a
Sponge, wrap it about the part that is spotted. The use of this is not only to
make the spots that lay hid to come forth, and appear, but also it is very
prevalent to take away those that fully appear, and flourish in the skin.

To take away the spots and stains in the Legs, Sennertus p. 636. commends
Fomentations and Baths of Juniper Berries, Cresses, SCURVYGRASS, etc. or to
wash the Legs with Scurvygrass Water. Also he prescribes this following:

Juniper Berries, bruised, Water Mynth, Water Cresses, SCVRVYGRASS, an. M. ii.
Camomil Flowers, M. iii. Mugwort, Betony, Wormwood, Rosemary, Marjoram, Time,
Hysop, an. M. i.


Boil them in a sufficient quantity of Water, fume the Legs with the Vapor of
the hot Decoction, or Foment the Legs with a Sponge dipped in the Decoction and
applied warm.

He has this following against the Contraction, and stiffeness of the Limbs,
p. 639.

Marsh Mallow Roots iii. Pellitory of the Wall, SCURVYGRASS, Brooklime, Water
Cresses, Wormwood, Flowers of Camomil, Melilot, an. M. ii.
Linseed. Faenigreek seed, an. vi.


Boil them in Water and let the Legs be fumed with the hot Vapor.

Solomon Albertus Sol. Alb. c. l. page 539.
and Matthew. Martinus Matt. Mart. p. 706, 707.
have ordained this following Fomentation in crucifying Scorbutic Pains, and
against Weakness and Inability to walk.

The Roots of Marsh Mallows, Mallows, an. i. Iris or Oris, ss.
Linseed, Foenigreek seed, an. i. Camomil, Melilot, Violet Leaves, an. M. i.
Wormwood. SCVVYGRASS, Brooklime, Water Cresses, an. M. ss.
Boil them all either in Cistern Water, or Neats Feet Broth, or in Oil and
Water, make a fomentation to be applied.

The same Author directs to wash Page 743.
the Tumors and little hard knobs in the skin with a Decoction of the leaves of
Scurvygrass and Tobacco made in Wine and Water Forrestus For. Obs. 12. Page 303.
writes that he applied for a Fomentation to the Legs of some Scorbutic
Persons, Scurvygrass, Brooklime, and the like herbs sewed in a Bag and boiled.
And Matthew. Martinus Matt. Mart. D. L. p 735.
wrapped about the legs double linen clothes dipped in the hot Decoction of
Scurvygrass and Brooklime. I my self in the year 1657 prepared a Cataplasme or
Poultice made with Scurvygrass, Brooklime, Water Cresses, and Mallows bruised
and boiled in water: this extemporary Medicine I devised being at a great
distance from any Town, where I could procure any other, this I applied to a
certain Gentleman afflicted with the wandering Scorbutic Gout, in so grievous a
manner, that when I was with him, his feet were so distorted and contracted,
that there appeared no hopes of restoring him, but this being used warm, by
Gods Assistance, did like an Enchantment, in a quarter of an hours time, take
away his almost insupportable pain, and restore his contracted and distorted
Limbs. See my Tract de varis, c. 15. p. 277. Where you will find this relation,
and also this following Cataplasm, which I prescribed for a Citizen of Halis in
Saxony, and did much good,

Mallows, Brooklime, Scurvygrass, an. M. i. Camomil Flowers, P. iii.


Boil them in common Water, and being gently pressed out, add Spirit of
Earthworms, vi. Venice soap, v. Camphor, i. Saffron, gr. viii.


Mix them, make a Poultice.

Sennertus in the place often cited p. 639 against the contraction and stifness
of the Limb^ of Scorbutic, people prescribes this Cataplasm.

Flowers of Camomil, Melilot,
Seeds of Fennel, Cummin, Anise, an. i.
ehT Meal of Lineseed* Faenigreek, an. ii.
With the Decoction of the Leaves of Dwarf Elder, Mugwort, Scurvygrass.

Make a Cataplasm to which you may add fresh Butter.

From Scurvygrass, with other things you may prepare Liniments, Ointments,
Oils, etc.

Matthew. Martinus commends this Ointment following, Mat. Mart. l. c. page 746.
in Ulcers of the Legs.

Of the clarfied juice of Smallage Balm, Wormwood, Scurvygrass, an. ss.
Celandine, vi.

All which being boiled to the consistance of a Liniment, you may add according
to the degree of the putrid nature of the Ulcer, powder of Frankincense,
Mastick, Aloes, Myrrh, as much as you will, or burnt Alum, or a little
precipitate.

The same Author, page 705. has this Liniment against Scorbutic contractions.

The Juice pressed from the Leaves of SCVRVYGRASS, i. The Oiles of St.
Iohnwort, Mullei^, Elder, an. ss

Boil them to the wasting of the Juice, and being pressed out Add.

Tacomahaca in powder, i. ss. Indian Balsome, iv.
Stir them very well upon a gentle fire, and at the latter end, Add a little
wax.

And p. 706. He has this which is more efficacious.

The Oil of Camomil, Castor, an. i.
The marrow of an Ox Thigh Bone, i. ss.
Juice of Redish. SCVRVYGRASS, Water Cresses, an. ss. With Sallet Oil and Wax.

Make a Liniment.

Solomon Albertus prescribes this un. guent against the foul scurf and
roughness of the Scurvy parts.

Briony Roots, Wild Cucumber Roots, an, i. Prepared earth Worms, iii.
Boil them in Oil, and Water, until they be wasted, the liquor being squeezed
out by a Press, add afterward, Oil of Lillies, ss. Lineseed, Camomil, an. i.
Turpentine washed in mallows Water, v. Ointment of Bdellium, iii. Juice of
Scurvygrass, i.


Being melten again, at a gentle fire, Add new wax, q.s. ad (...) mollioris
(...) that is to the consistance of the softer sort of Ointment, called a
Liniment.

Deckers l. c. p. 152. has these following with SCURVYGRASS, infused in Oil.
Oil of Earthworms, Roman Camomil, SCVRVYGRASS, an. iii. mix them for a Liniment
to anoint the Hypochondries with, warm, in the moveable pains of those parts.

And page 153 He has this in the Scorbutic Palsy.

Oil of Earth Worms, i. SCURVYGRASS, St. John's wort Flowers, an. ss. the
Distilled Oiles of Rosemary, Sage, Rue, an. gut. v.

Mix them, make a Liniment.

In my Tract de varis cap. 15. at the end, I have prescribed this Oil to be
used to those parts that are weak and unapt to move, in the wandering Scorbutic
Gout.

Oil of Earthwormes, i. The distilled Oil of Rue, Sage, Rorismary, Scurvygrass,
an. gut. vi.

Mix them and put them in a little Box says my Author, be sure to keep it in a
glass, and Title it to use outwardly to the joints.

Also Spirit of Scurvygrass is to be used outwardly in Scorbutic pains,
chiefly in the wandering Scorbutic Gout, as will appear by these following,
which are to be found in my often cited Tract de varis cap. 15. p. 269. and
page 272.

Spirit of Earth Worms, iv. Scurvygrass, ss. Treacle camphorated, i. Essence
of Castor, ii.
Mix them and keep them in a glass, Title it the Spirit for outward use.

OR Spirit of Earth worms, v. Sal Armoniack, ss. Scurvygrass, ii.



In which dissolve Venice Soap, ii. Campher, vi. Opium, i. Saffron, ss.


Digest them some days and nights, and afterward filther, and keep it in a
glass for use. Title it the outward Balsome for the Joints.

This outward Medicine of mine, I have often found so exceeding beneficial in
pains of the Joints; that for that cause it worthily deserved the name of a
Balsome. This I have described in the first Edition of my Tract de varis,
printed Anno 1663. cap. 14. page 149. And in the last Edition, p. 283. The
often praised Dr. Deckers in his Golden Notes upon Barbetts Praxis is pleased
to entitle it the Balsamic Tincture.

John Drawiz. Tit. 1. Of the Scorbutic. Reiffender Sicht. page 38. describes a
Spirit to be used externally in those kind of pains, in compounding of which
the seeds of Scurvygrass is made use of, and it is this, The Flowers of Lillies
of the Valley, M. ii. Rorismary, M. i.
Castor, The Seeds of Scurvygrass, an. vi. Rocket, ss.



Put them into well rectified Spirit of Wine, viii. let them stand in the Sun
for three days then press it strongly out, and Add, Spirit of Earth worms, ii.
ss. Camphor, i. ss.


Mix them exactly.

In such kind of Pains I have ordered this following Spirit, commonly with good
Success, Spirit of Earthworms, ii. Ants, i. ss. Scurvygrass, i. Sal Armoniack,
ii.
My Anodine Essence, i. ss.


Mix them, and put it in a glass, and title it the Spirit to use in outward
pains of the Joints.

Schroder, as is said above in the 19. Chapter, is of opinion, that if the
mouth, and gums be moistened with the Juice of Scurvygrass, it preserves them,
from putrefaction, and Forestus For c. l. page 299.
affirms the same Matthew. Martinus, p. 695. commends Scurvygrass and
Brooklime, dried and rubbed to powder, against the looseness of the Teeth, and
Bleeding of the Gums, to which he added a little Pumice Stone, and burnt Alome.
Also the same Forrestus advises to wash the Gums often with the Decoction of
Scurvygrass, and Brooklime made with Milk. In the same place he commends and
relates of a Patient of his that was cured by only often washing his Gums with
the Distilled Water of Scurvygrass and Brooklime. And observat. 12. page 363.
He directs this following Liniment against stinking, Putride, Slimy, Loose, and
Bleeding Gums Sage dried and Powdered, ii. Alome, ss. and with the Juice of
Scurvygrass, Brooklime and Honey, an. q.s. make a mixture.


The often cited Matthew. Martinus in the same pages prescribes this Water to
hinder Defluctions to the Teeth to preserve from the Scorbutic Toothache, and
to procure a sweet and pleasant breath, The Leaves of Sage, Besony, an. M. iv.
The Flowers of Wild Plums, Red Roses, an. Mii. Marjoram, Arabion Lavender, an.
Mi.
Burnt Alome, Calcined Tartar, an. i ss. The Roots of Sarsaper ii. Rhodium.
Wood, vi. Pellitory, iii. Oris of Florence, ss.
Nutmegs, Cinnamon, an. ii. Ginger, Myrrh, Mastick, Citron Peel, Pomgranate
Peel, an. i. Camphire, ss The best White Wine, lb iv. Juice of Scurvygass,
Winter or Water Cresses, an. lb i.



Let them stand ten days to infuse, shaking it every day, afterward distill
it.

Almost of the same nature is the water of Sennertus in the forecited place p.
632. Also Solomon Albertus, p. 517. To be used in the like disaffections of the
Teeth, and Gums, and is made with the Leaves of Scurvygrass, and other things
thus: Damask Roses, The leaves of an Olive Tree, green, or else of Privet, The
Tops of Bramble, The Leaves of Scurvygrass, Sage, an. M. i. Water Cresses, Rue,
an. M. ss.
Myrrh, ii.


Rose water, or some other proper Water, as much as is sufficient to infuse
them in, which being done Distill it in a Glass Vessel.

Sennertus Sen. l. c. page* 631 and 632.
in the like affections uses this following,

SCVRVYGRASS, Water Mynth, Water Cresses, Red Roses, an. Mi. Boil them in
Fountain Water,
take of the straining, x. Add to it,
Honey, vi. Alome, i.


Make a Gargal for the mouth.

OR, The Bark of a Wild Plum Tree, i. SCURVYGRASS, Watercresses, an. Mi. Red
Roses, M ss. Pomgranet Flowers, ii.


Boil them in a sufficient quantity of steeled Water.

Add to the straining a little Alom, Honey of Roses and Syrup of Mulberries,
Mix them.

Against the Contagion and Putrefaction of humors near the Jaws, The same
Author Sen. ^ l page 635.
advises to Gargal with the Waters of Scurvygrass, WaterCresses, Mugwort,
Tobacco. Also this.

The water of self Heal, Plantain, Scurvygrass, an. iii. Tobacco, ii.
Spirit of Vitriol, i. Honey of Roses, i ss. Mix them.
Deckers has noted this Tincture against Looseness of Teeth, and the
Scorbutic bleeding of the Gums.

Tincture of Gum Lacca, ss. Columbine Flowers, i.
Spirit of Scurvygrass, ii.
Mix them and wash the mouth, and Gums with this,

I make use of these following, Tincture of Sulphur of Vitriol, ii. Spirit of
Scurvygrass, i.
Mix them, keep them in a glass.

Of which drop a few drops into Brooklime water, in which a little burnt Alome
has been boiled, and wash the mouth and Gums with this water.

OR,

Ointment of Columbine, ss. Powder of burnt Alome, i. Distilled oil of
Scurvygrass gut. ii. Syrup of Scurvygrass, q.s.


Mix them and keep them in a little Box, Title it Salve for the Gums.

The Leaves of Scurvygrass, as also its Oil, both that made by Distillation,
and that made by infusion, are used in Glysters.

The often cited Dr. Deckers has these, Deck. D. L. page 15^.
The Leaves of Scurvygrass, Henbane,
The Flowers of Camomil, Roman Elder, an. M. ss.
Tops of Wormwood, M. i. Elecampain Roots, i. ss. Juniper Berries, Bay Berries,
an. v.


Boil them according to Art in q.s. of Whey, in a Vessel close stopped, take of
the straining viii. or x. add to it.

Oil of Scurvygrass, The Lenitive Electuary, The Electuary of Bay Berries, an.
v. The yolk (...) an Egg.
Mix them, and make a Glyster.

I have prescribed this in my Tract de varis, cap. 13. page 203.

Mallows, Pellitory, Water Cresses. Brooklime, Scurvygrass, an. M. i. Roots of
Fern, Polypody an. i.



Boil them in common water q.s. Take of the straining ix. Dissove in it of the
Electuaries, Hiera Picra, Diacatholicon, Lenitive, an. vi. Oil of Camomil,
Earthwormes, an. i. Sal Gemm. i. with one yolk of an Egg.


Make a Glyster according to Art.

You may also in Scorbutic pains of the Belly prepare this Glyster.

The Ingredients of the Carminative Decoction, M* iv. Tops of Wormwood,
Scurvygrass, an. M. i. Flowers of Roman Camomil, P. iii. Century the lesser, P.
ii.
Bay Berries, i.
Boil them in q.s. of Milk.

Take of the straining viii.

Add to it Of the Electuary lenitive, i. of Bay Berries, ss. Oils of Camomil,
Dill, an. vi. Distilled Oil of Scurvygrass, gut. v. One yolk of an Egg.


According to art make a Glyster.

FINIS.
GLORY TO GOD ONLY.
THE INDEX.
A.
ACetosa, Sorrel, it grows plentifully in Greenland, p. 38. Acetosella, Wood
sorrel, both derive their Names from their taste 21. Acid, and Alkali Salts are
falsely supposed by many to be the Causes of all Diseases, 113.114. That they
are so cannot be proved out of Hippocrates 114. Acid, Ferments are the Cause of
Fevers, 67. Acorus, Sweat smelling flag, or Read why so Called, 18. Allium,
Garlic the reason of its Name 22 Alliaria, Jack by the Hedge, its Name from
i^^ smell 22. Alsine, Chickweed, why so called 21. Anemone, Wind Herb, a sort
of Crow-foot, why named so 24. Anonis, Rest Harrow, why so called ibid.
Ansarinae, and Argentinae Wild Tansie, its derivation 19. Apiastrum, Bawm, why
so named, 24. Apium risus, Water Crow-foot, why so called, 19. Apocynum, Dogs
Bain, its derivation, 24. The Apozeme, or Decoction of Dr. Barbet. 58. of Dr.
Horstius 59.159. of Sol. Albertus 161. of Quercitanus peculiar in the Scurvy
160.
Agues their Cause 69. Artemisia, Mugwort, the derivation of its Name 17.
Asciomenes, a wonderful Herb 5. Asphodelus, Kings Scepter, why so named 25,
Atriplex faetida, Stinking Orach, why so styled 22. Arrow head, an Herb, why so
called 25. Auricula ursi, Bear ear, so named from its Outward form 25.
Antiscorbutick Pilus, by the Author, 164. by Timaeus, 46. Spirit Simple by Dr.
Michaelis 107. Compound by the same Author 107. Digestive, by the Author 170.
Electuary, by Hannemanus 144. Essence 148, 149. Syrup, by Timaeus 132. by
Minsichtus 133. Tincture, by John Wierus 140. by Deckers 192. Wine, by
Mynsichtus 160.
Assarabecca, Leaves used by mistake for SCURVYGRASS 62.
B.
BAharas, a wonderful root growing in the Indies 5. A Bag with SCURVYGASS for
the Legs of Scorbutic persons 180. Balsome, in Scorbutic pains of the Joints,
by the Author 186. The Bolus of Dr. Timaeus Composed with Conserve of
SCURVYGRASS 127. Barba Herci, Goats Beard, why so called 26. Branca ursina,
Bears Breach, the reason of its name 25. Bassil, why so called 25. Bath, with
SCURVYGRASS 173. Bawm, the reason of its name 24. Beta, Beat, why so called
26. Birds produced from the Leaves, and fruit of a tree in Scotland 12.
Blew-bottles, called so from their Color 23. Blood of a red hair'd man poison
116. The Blood of every man indifferently, not fit to make Medicines of 116.
Britanica, Bistort, or Snakeweed, why so called 21. Broth of an old Cock by
Martin 75. Buglosse, Ox Young, so called from its shape. 25. Bramble Bush,
called Dog Berry Bush, the Decoction of it Cures Ulcers. 30. Bleeding of the
Gums, a Gargale against it 192.
C.
CAltha palustris, Fenny Marigolds, why so called 21. The Cause of Fevers 67.
of Agnes 68, 69, of the Acid, or sour Ferment in Fevers 70. hindering
Fermentations in Wine 95, 66.
Campanula, Bellflower, so called from its shape 20. Camphorata, Stinking
ground pine, named so from its shape 22. Cariophyllata, Herb Bennet so called
from its sent 22. A Cataplasme, with Scurvygrass against Contraction of the
Limbs by the Author 180, 181. in Scorbutic pains of the joints, by the
Author 180. against stiffness, and Contraction of the Limbs in the Scurvy by
Sennertus 181.
Centaury, the reason of its Name 19. why called Fell Terrae 21.
Cervicaria, Neckweed, why so named 20. Chelidonium, Celandine, its derivation
24. Chrysanthemum, Corn Marigold, why so called 23. Citrons good in the Scurvy
51. Colchicum, Meadow Saffron, why so called 20. Compounds with Conserve of
Scurvygrass, by Sennertus 125, 126. another 126. another 127.
Conserve the reason of its name 124. of Scurvygrass ibid. its Virtues 125.
Conyra, Fleabain, why so named 24. Crocus Vernus, Saffron of the Spring, why
so called 25. Codded Arsmart, a sensikle Plant 5, 8. Continual Fevers their
Cause 67, 68. Condit, with Scurvygrass by Drawizius 144. Cochlearia,
Scurvygrass the reason of its name 26. Cyanus, Blew-bottles, so called from
their Color, 23. China Rose, a wonderful flower 1, 2. Cynosbatus, and
Cynorrhodon, Bramble, and Eglantine are the same 30. Cynoglossum, Hounds
Tongue, why named so 25. Cynosorchis, Dogs stones, why so called 25. Cytiscus,
Shrub Trifoil, the reason of its name 20. Cowslip why so called 18. Chickweed,
why so called, 21. Cyperus, why so called, 25.
D.
DRacontium, Draggons, the derivation of its name, 26. Decoction of
Scurvygrass, of Sennertus, 53. Another, 53. Outwardly against Scurvy spots,
174. against hard Knobs in the skin, 179. made with Ale or Beer, commended by
Forestus, 61. in Milk or Goats Whey commended in melancholy diseases, by
Brunnerus, 61. Sudorisick with China, by Matthew. Martin. 55. with Guaiacum wood,
by Timaeus, 47. another with Guaiacum and Scurvygrass, by Hartman, 47, 6.
against Scorbutic wastings, by Martin. 56. to open Obstructions, by Forestus,
60.
Digestive against the Scurvy, by the Author, 170. Digitalis, Finger wort,
wherefore so called, 25. Distilled Liquors of Sarsaparilla, by Rolfincius, 101.
against the Scurvy, by Drawiz. 102.
Distilled Oils to be used with caution, 122. Dittander, why sb called, 20.
Dock, the derivation of its Latin name, 20. Who was the Devisor of the
Magistery of Scurvygrass, 168. in difficult Labor, a remedy, 3.
Dogs stones, or Satyrion, certain admirable kinds of them, 15. Dog Berry Bush
its Leaves, and sprigs boiled in wine, is a sure remedy to cure Ulcers, 30.
Dyers weed, why so named, 23. Dog Nettles, the reason of its name, 18. Daffodil
the reason of its name, 18.
E.
ELectuary, the derivation of its name, 135. what it is, ibid. of Scurvygrass,
136, 137, 138, 139, 140, to 145. compound by Martinius, 138. Another, 139. by
Timaeus, 143. another, ibid. by the Author, 145. Antiscorbutick, by Hannemanus,
144.
Eleosaccharum of Scurvygrass, 166. Elixir, Essence, Extract, and Tincture,
differ little, 146, 147, Essence of Scurvygrass to, 149. Antiscorbutick
Essence, 148.
Elicampain, its name from whence? 21. Embemma, Sauces, why so called, 50. of
Scurvygrass* ibid. of other things 51.
Equiseti, Horse-tail, why so called, 25. Eruca, Rocket, the reason of its
name, 22. Essence of Scurvygrass, 147. the manner to prepare it, ibid. of the
Juice of Scurvygrass, 148. by Simon Paulus. ibid. for the Spleen, by Dr.
Michael. 48.
Extract of Scurvygrass of no Virtue, 148.
F.
FEvers their cause, 67, 68, 69. intermitting or Agues their cause, 69.
Quotidian their cause, ibid. Tertian their cause, ibid. Quartan their cause,
ibid. from Catharrs the cause, ibid. Malignant the cause, 70.
Feverish Ferment, what it is, 68. In Feveverish Fermentation what is to be
considered, 67. Fell Terrae, Centaury, why so called, 21. The Finder out of
Magistery of Scurvygrass, who, 168. A Fomentation with Scurvygrass, 172. in the
hard swelling of the Limbs from the Scurvy, 174. against the Scurvy spots, ib.
175, 176. by Sennertus, 177. against Scorbutic pains of the joints, 175.
against contraction, and stiffness of the Limbs, 181. by Sennertus, 178.
against weakness and imbecilities to go, by Martinius, 179. another by Sol.
Arbertus, ibid.
The Fruit Peci, very wonderful, 10. A Fruit very powerful to provoke Venery,
9. Futuaria, its derivation, 22. Figwort, why so called, 18. Ferula, why so
called, 20. Flower de Luce, 23. Foxglove, Fingerwort, 25.
G.
GAlens Opinion concerning Pretenders to Physic. 63. Girlotophylis, Water
Crowfoot, why so called? 19. Gentian, why so named? 17. Geranium Moschatum,
Crains bill, why so called? 22. Geese produced from a Tree in Scotland, 12.
Golden Rod, why so called? 23. Glysters with Scurvygrass, 193, 194, etc. A
Glyster in Scorbutic pains of the Belly, by the Author 194. Good smells
strengthen the spirits 117, 122, 123. The Groenlanders Extremely afflicted with
the Scurvy 38. the use of all their Limbs taken away by it, ib. their way of
Curing themselves, ibid.
Gums bleeding, a Gargale against it 189, 190, 191. Goats Marjoram, the reason
of its name 24. Goose foot, why so called 25. Galangal, the reason of its name
ibid.
H
HAstula Regia, Kings Scepter, why so called 25. Hard labor of women, a remedy
against it 3. Helenum, Elecampaine, its derivation 21. Hepatica, Liverwort, why
it is so called 18. Herbs, see also Plants Herb Frankencense why so called 22.
Herb Aux-escu-eilliers 27. Herba Paralysis, or Cowslip why so called 18. Hidden
Herba, called Claudestina Madrona Occulta, a wonderful Plant 14. An Herb which
opens any Lock by touching it with it 4. another that loosens horses shoes if
they tread on it 5. called Impatiens, Noli me tangere, or touch me not 6.
called Herba Viva, or the Living Plant ib. called Mimosa, all of them sensible
plants ib. called Ossifraga, which softens bones 9. another which strengthens
bones 9.
An Herb which dissolves to dirt in water, but if it be cast in the fire it
will not burn 10. An Herb Causing bleeding 13. Herba Muralis, why so called 21.
Herba Ventis, why 24. Hares foot, why so called 25.
I.
JAceae Aromaticae, Knapweed, a wonderful plant 8. Jerico Rose, a Wonderful
Plant 2. Jerusalem Rose a wonderful Plant 2. Indian Fern, a sensitive Plant, 7.
The infusion of Scurvygrass, 72. by Matthius Martinius, 72, 73, by Sennertus,
ibid. another, 74. by Timaeus, 75. an other, ibid. by the Author, 76. an other,
ibid.
Iris Oris, why so called 23. The Inventor of Magistery of Scurvygrass 168. Iva
Moschata, Crainsbill, why so called, 22. Juice of Scurvygrass 153. its virtues,
154. the manner how to prepare it, 153. if it be made thick it my be used
instead of its Extract, 164. the manner of prescribing, by Sennertus, 155. by
Timaeus, 161. by the Author 162. its Dose inwardly, 155. its externaluse. 188.
The Ezpressed Scorbutic Juice by Drawizius, 163. ill sents cast down the
Spirits, 117, 122. the causes of sounding and Abortion, 118.

K.
KIngs Scepter, why so called 25. Knapweed, sensative Plant 8.
L.
LActuca, Lettice the derivation of its name, 20. Lapathum, Dock whence its
name is derived ibid. Lepidium, Dittander, why so called, ibid. Lofletfraut,
26. Libonatis, herb frankincense, why so named, 22. Liconea, a great tree in
Congo, 11. Ligusticum, Lovage, why so called? 21. A Linement in Scorbutic
Contractions, by Martinius, 182. one more effectual, 183. in moveable
Scorbutic Pains of the Hypochondries in the Scurvy, by Deckers, 184. in the
Scorbutic Palsy, by the same Author, 185. against bleeding, and corrupt gums,
by Forestus, 189.
Lunaria, Moon-wort, why so called? 26. Luteola, Dyers weed, and Yellow weed,
why so called 23. Lysimachia, Loose strife, whence it has its name? 17. Lions
foot, why so called, 25.
M.
MAdronna occulta hidden Herb, why so called, a wonderful Plant, 14. Magistery,
what it is? 165. of Scurvygrss what? 166. the manner of preparing it, 169. of
Ialap, 165. of Cinnamon, 166. of Pearls, has killed many, 166.
Magisteries prepared with Corrosives Spirits of no Virtue, but are hurtful
ibid. Medicines ought to be prescribed in small quantities, and pleasant, 62.
hot in the third, and the fourth degree hurtful, 115. and to be used with
Caution, ibid. from humane blood suspected, 116. from volatile Salts, some of
them are stinking, 117. those that stink are hurtful, ibid.
Medicasters, are worse than Robbers, and Theives, 63. they ought to be
punished by the Magistrate, ibid.
Melissa, Bawm, the reason of its name, 24. Mercurialis, Dog Nettles, whence so
named? 18. Methodist, what they are? 113. March Violets, 25. Malignant Ulcers,
are certainly cured by the Decoction of Dog berry bush in wine, 30. Medicinal
Wines, by Deckers, 77. by Sennertus, 71.
a Medicine against difficult labor in women 3. Mixture what? 135. of
Scurvygrass by Sennertus, 137. by Reinesius, 152. by Martinius, 138. by
Glantzius, 150. by Finckius, 151. by Hannemanus, 152, 144. by Timaeus, 153.
Moly, why so named? 19. Morsules, Compounded with Conserve of Scurvygrass, by
Grembs. 127. Monyworth, why so called, 25. Mouth a Gargale for it, against
loose Teeth, and bleeding Gums, 191. Must, what it is? Mute Wine the same, 66.
its Fermentation caused by its dregs, 67.
Moveable Plant, 7. Milkwort why so called, 19. Mustard, why so called, 20.
Moonwort, why so called. 26.
N.
NArcissus, whence so called 18. Nardus, its derivation, 20. Narsturtium, Water
Cresses, why so named, ibid. Nicotiana, Tobacco, from whom it took its name,
18. Nigilla, why so named, 23. Nodule, what? 77, 78, 79, 80, 81, 47. A Purging
Nodule which the seeds of SCURVYGRASS, 47. a Compound one by Sennertus, 78.
A Nodule of the Authors, 79, 80, 81. Noli me tangere, a wonderful Plant, 6.
Night Violets, a wonderful Plant, 2. Nympheae, Water Lillies, its derivation,
18. Nettles, the reason of its name, 19.
O.
OGymum, Bassil, why so called? 25. Oil of Scurvygrass, 121. used in Powders
and Pills, 123. by infusion, 1^1. by distillation, ibid. by the Author, to be
used outwardly, 185. to strengthen in the running Gout, ibid. distilled from
Scurvygrass, for outward use. 124.
Oils distilled, are powerful Medicines, 122. to be used with Caution, 122.
they may be made into volatile Salt, ibid. they are not then so hot, ibid. they
may be changed into the form of Spirits, ibid.
Ombrion, supposed to be the rainy Island of Pliny, and Solinus, 11. Orchis,
Dogsstone so called from their outward Figure, 25. Ornithogalu^, Star of
Bethlem, whence so called 23. Orenges, good in the Scurvy, 51. Oris, the reason
of its name, 23. Orpine the reason of its name. 17.
PArietaria why so called? 21. Peci softens copper, 10. Primrose why so called?
24. Psylium, why so called? ibid. Pills, against the Scurvy by the Author 164.
by Timaeus, 46.
A Potion with Juice of Scurvygrass, by Drawizius, 163, 164. A Purging Potion,
by Martinus, 54. A Sudorifick Potion by Horstius, 59. Preparations from
Scurvygrass, 43. Powder of Scurvygrass against Looseness of Teeth, 188. Plants
of a wonderful nature, vide Proem. Physicians which give volatile Salts
indifferently to all people, do offend against the Method of physic, 119.
(...), or a short account of the true, causes of Fevers, 67, 68, 69. Polugala,
why so called, 19. Potentilla, why so called, ibid. Pulegium, why so called,
23. Pellitory, why so called, 21.
Q.
QUotidian Agues, and Fevers their cause 69. Quartian Agues, and Fevers their
cause ibid.
R.
ROsa Hierochuntina, what it is? 2. if it blow constantly of its own accord
every Christmas Eve at night. 2. from whence so named, 3. it grows in Arabia,
upon the sea shore, in the sand, 4. its virtue in difficult labor, 3.
Rosa St. Maria, our Ladies Rose, Rose of Jerusalem 4. Rosa Sinica, China Rose,
it is a wonderful Plant, 1. The Rainy Island of Pliny, and Solinus called
Ombrion, 11. Ruta Muraria, Wall Rue, why called so 11. Rocket its name, 22.
S.
SAgitta Herba, Arrow head why so called? 25. Sal Acidum, and Sal Alkali
supposed by many to be the Cause of all diseases, but falsely 113, 114. The Salt
in the Scurvy is mortified and drank in by the Salt of Scurvygrass 42. Sauces
of Scurvygrass 50. of other things joined with it 51.
Scordium, the derivation of its name 22. Scoffocavallo, is a sort of Moonwort,
a wonderful Plant 5. Scrophularia, Figwort, the reason of its name, 18, 19.
Seratula, Little Saw, so called from its outward shape 25. Scharbocfs-kraut,
26. SCURVYGRASS, its Names, 27. its different kinds 34, 35. four sorts of it
34. its qualities and Virtues 40. it is described, 27. its chief Virtue in the
Scurvy is occult, 42. it Cures the Scurvy 37. it is like to water Pimpernel 28.
it is not like Orpine 28, 29. nor Bistort, 31, 32, 33. why it fastens loose
Teeth, 32. its Leaves must be used fresh, 44. its outward use 171. it grows no
where but where the Scurvy is common 15, 16. its Juice 153. The way how to
prepare it ibid. its virtues 40. its outward use. 171. made thick it may be
used instead of an Extract 164. its Dose inwardly 155. the manner of
prescribing it by Sennertus ibid. by the Author, 154. by Timaeus, 161. its seed
is to be used both unwarely, and outwardly 44. it enters many compositions
ibid. it is chiefly used in Nodules 47.
SCURVYGRASS growth of its own accord and plentifully in Holland, Friesland,
Hamburge, England, 39. near the sea coasts, 29. in the Gardens of Flanders 39.
it grows in the western parts of the world 36. it grows not in the Eastern
parts, ibid. nor in Swizzerland 37. where the Scurvy rages, 36. in Greenland
it is without taste 40. it abound with volatile Salt, 41. it is hot, and dry
40. it is called Lavamen Scorbuticum, 41. it slourishes, in April, and May 35.
it moves the Courses in women 41. it is useful in the Dropsy. 41.
Hypochondriak passion, 40. in disaffections of the spleen ib.
Satyrion, why so called 25. Sorrel the reason of its name? 21. Sorrel and
Scurvygrass grow together in Gronland, 38. they are used together by the
Gronlanders in the Scurvy ibid.
Sfeeurt, 27. Sfiorbugs-urt ibid. Sinapi, Mustard the reason of its name 20.
Saponaria, Soapwort, why so called? 19. Sensible Plants, v. Proem. All Plants
have an obscure sense 8. Scurvygrass showed first to the Roman Soldier by the
Frislanders, or North Hollanders, 31. Spirit of Scurvygrass 103. made by
Fermentation ibid. without Fermentation 104. Simon Paulus his way ibid.
Compound for outward use 186. by the Author, 186. in Scorbutic pains in the
joints 187. by Drawizius, ibid. by the Author, 188. its virtues 106. good
against the Scurvy ibid. in the Cholick ibid. in weakness of the Stomach, ib.
good against being too fat. ibid. best to be taken in Milk ibid. simple by Dr.
Michaelis, 107. The Compound one of the same Author 107. another by Drawizius
108. another by Deckers ibid.
Spirit of Wine put upon Scurvygrass became sour, yet when it was distilled it
yielded a strong spirit, 105. Spondelium, why so called? 22. Spoonwort, why so
called? 26, 27. Suggar Contains a corrosive spirit 146. Sweet, and Suggery
things hurtful in the Scurvy, 145. Stifled Wine, or Stumm Wine how made? 66.
SYRUP the derivation of its name 128. what it is? ibid. of SCURVYGRASS 129. the
Compound by Timaeus 132. by Packischius 130. Antiscorbutick by Timaeus 132. by
Mynsichtus 133. by Wierus for Children, 135. celety bicus by Forestus, 129.

T.
TObacco from whom it had its name 18. Tausendgulden-kraut 19. Telephium,
Orpine from whom so called 17. it is described, 29, 30, 31. it heals Ulcers
30.
The Time of Feverish Fomentations 68. Thapsia, great spanish scortching
Fennel, why so called 20. Thlaspi, Treacle mustard, why so called? 26. Tincture
what? 146. Antiscorbutick 109. by John Wierus 140. against loose Teeth, and
bleeding gums, by Deckers 192.
Tragoriganum, why so called 24. Trachelium, Throatwort, why so called? 19.
Trogopogon, Goats Beard, why so named? 26. Tripolium, Sea Starwort why so
called? 23. it is the wild Thistle, and is a sensative Plant, vide Proem.
A Tree of a wonderful bigness 11 A Tree whose Leaves do turn into Birds and
Fishes 12. A Tree that drops Water, a wonderful Plant, 10. A Wonderful Tree
growing near Memphis, 7. another in the Isle of Cambabon ib. another in a
Province of the East Indies 9. in Peru 7.
Teucrium, Germander, why so called? 18.
V
A VAporous Bath made with Scurvygrass, 173. Venom is caused by Fermentation
in the blood 70. Viola Martia, why so called, 25. Viola Nocturna, a wonderful
Plant 2. Ulcers though malignant are certainly cured by the decoction of the
sprigs, and leaves of Dog-berry Bush 30. Unguent for Ulcers in the Legs* by
Martinius 182. against foulness and scurfe of the Nervy parts, by Solomon
Albertus 184. against looseness of the Teeth, and wasting of the Gums by the
Author 189.
Urtica, Nettles why so called? 19. Vularia, Neckweed why so named? 20.
Vulvara, stinking Orach the reason of its name 22. Volatile Salt of Scurvygrass
112. very effectual in the Scurvy 112. the way to make it ibid. by the Author
112.
Volatile Salts good in many Diseases 119. not fit to give in all Diseases 118,
119, 115 it may be allowed in stubborn Diseases 119. given to a man in a
Tertian Ague is proved very dangerous 118. they are hot in the third and fourth
degree 115. they are endowed with a very penetrative power 119. they increase
the Fermentation of the humors 118.
Volatile Salts, from what things they are prepared 115. Virga Aurea, why so
called? 23.
W
WIne in which a Jericho Rose has been infused is an efficacious remedy in
difficult labor 3. Wine of Scurvygrass 64. how is it to be prepared? 64. it is
made by Fermentation 65. or without Fermentation 64. Sennertus his way 64.
Wine Medicinal, by Deckers 77. by Sennertus 71, 73.
Wine Antiscorbutick, by Mynsichtus 160. Wall Rue, why so called? 21. Wine the
cause hindering their Fermentation, 65, 66 Water Lilly, the derivation of its
name 18. Water against the Stone in the Kidneys, by Timaeus 44. good for the
Spleen, by Timaeus 45, 97. of Scurvygrass its Virtues 82. against the Scurvy,
and green Sickness 99. by Rolfincius 99. by Quercetanus 81. by Doncrelius 82.
by Sennertus 83, 88, 90. Another 89.91, 92. by Doringius 86. Another 87. by Gr.
Horstius 93. Another 94. by Mynsichtus 95, 97.
A water hindering defluctions upon the Teeth, and preserving from the
Scorbutic Toothache, by Martinius 189. another Compound Water, by Martinius
ibid. Winter green, the reason of its name, 26. Deine Spahe 69. Weine Stumm
ibid. Wild Tansie 19. Water cresses, why so called, 20. Water Germander 22.
X.
XYris, Stinking Gladion, or Flag, why so called? 25.
FINIS.
An Explanation of the Physical Characters, or Marks used in this Book.
MB. Balneo Maria, A Bath of hot Water. M. Manipulus, a handful. P. Pugillus,
as much as can be took up betwixt two Fingers and a Thumb. L. A Pound weight..
An ounce, the sixteenth part of a Pound.. A Dragme, the Eighth part of an
Ounce.. A Scruple, the third part of a Dragme, it contains 20. grains. Gr. A
Grain, the weight of a Barley Corn. Gut. A Drope. q.s. quantum sufficit, as
much as is sufficient. q.v. quantum vis, as much as you please. f. fiat. Let it
be made. Ana. of each a like quantity. Misce. mix them. Cochlear. a spoonful.
Cong. A gallon.

