(...) By the FINGER of Gods Power AND His Visage Discovered by the Light of
CHRIST JESUS; and his Ministers, Members, Works (...) Lying Wonders,
Manifested by the Spirit of God, a Manifestation whereof is given to every Man
(and Woman) to profit withal.

With Friendly and Serious Invitations, Exhortations and Warnings to all
Professors of Christianity, to beware that Antichristian Spirit that leads to
Destruction; and those Teachers, who are Influenced by it.

Written in the Love of God by a Prisoner (at Lancaster Castle) for the
Testimony of Truth, and one of the People called (in Scorn) Quakers.

HENRY MOLLINEVX.

And Jesus answered and said unto them, Take heed that no man deceive you, for
many shall come in my Name, saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many; and
because Iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold,

Mat. 24.4, 5, 10, 11. As ye have beard that Antichrist shall come, even now
are there many Antichrists,

1 John 2.18. LONDON, Printed and Sold by T. S^^^^ near the Meeting House in
White-Hart-Court, in (...) street. 1695.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Friendly Reader,
IT has been a weighty Concern upon me, for several Years, to give forth in
Writing a Testimony against the Spirit of Antichrist, as I have (through the
Love and Mercy of God) been made sensible thereof, by the Manifestation of the
Spirit of Christ Jesus, the Son of the Living God; and so having cleared and
eased my Mind and Conscience of what has lain upon me, I commit to thee the
following Treatise; desiring that the fear and dread of the Lord God, may
constantly have a place in thy Heart in the Reading of it, as it had in mine in
the Writing of it, and that will preserve thee Meek and Low in Heart, in an
aptness to Learn of Christ, the Son of God's Love, that many Professors of
Christianity are but ignorantly talking of; and so thou will not be apt to take
offense, nor stumble at the Truth, as thou art made sensible of it in thy
Heart; but wilt be willing (for thine own Eternal Good) truly to examine thy
self before the Lord in Secret, how thou stand in thy Spiritual State and
Condition before his All-seeing Eye; for there was never more need for People
to be truly concerned for the Salvation of their Precious Souls than there is
now; but they who walk not in the fear of the Lord, slight it.

And if thou Reason, saying, Ah! But I am Unlearned, and how should I
understand, or know the Truth? For there are many great Scholars, and Men
Learned in Latin, Greek and Hebrew, and yet one sort of them preaches one
Doctrine, and others other Doctrines, and therefore how should I know which is
the Truth? I answer, that thou may be as capable to know the Truth, as if
thou understood Latin, and Greek, and Hebrew; for the Manifestation of the
Spirit of Truth in thy own Heart, that reproves for Sin, is sufficient to
teach thee to know the Truth, if thou believe in it, and be truly willing to
obey it; and in disobedience to it, none can know the Truth to their Comfort,
though they may perfectly understand Latin, Greek and Hebrew, the understanding
whereof in its place may be good and serviceable: Yet thou know not how
soon, thou must give an Account to the God of Truth, how thou have profited
with the Manifestation of his Spirit of Truth, which is given to thee to profit
withal.

As for the Times, and Manner, of the Inventions, setting up, and establishing
of the Popish Mass, Ceremonies, Tithes, and other Trumpery, I refer thee to a
Book put forth by Francis Howgill, in Two Parts, the first Entitled, The Glory
of the True Church discovered; and the latter Part, The Rock of Ages exalted
above Rome 's imagined Rock: And also to a little Book, called, Popery
Arraigned, set forth by G. F. and E. H. it not being my present Concern, so
much, to show the Times, and Persons, and Manner, how, by whom, and when the
Popish Inventions came up in the Apostasy, (that being upon Record, and
sufficiently done before) as to show how much they are contrary to the
Scriptures of Truth, and to the Spirit of Truth, by which those Scriptures were
given forth; and how many, professing Christianity and Reformation from Popery,
are yet found in them, and in an Antichristian Spirit, and how they may know
the evil thereof, and come out of them, that they may enjoy the pure Life of
Christianity, which is more than Profession thereof.

Herein several Popish Inventions and Practices are very little, or none
Treated of, yet comprehended; being contrary to the Scriptures of Truth; and
the Witness of God in every Heart, in them who truly take heed to it, will
Testify against them; such as their Worshipping of Images, and Pictures, and
Relics, and Bones of the Dead, and praying to the Dead, and for the Dead, and
counting their Prayers by Beads, as if they thought, like the Heathens, (of
which Chirst spoke) that they should be heard for their much speaking or
babbling; with their Mattens, and Letanies, and their Idle Complements, and
giving of Flattering Titles, etc. and also their being divided into many
distinct and different Orders and Sorts of Monks, Friars, and Jesuits, and yet
they plead, or cry up Unity; and also their Orders for Barbarian Praying
wilfully in an Unknown Tongue, and their not permitting to the People the
Scriptures of Truth in their own Language, which were public amongst the
Primitive Christians, who searched them daily, and found great Comfort by them;
and the Apostles, and Holy Men of God wrote in a Known Tongue, or Mother
Tongue, to whom they wrote, that all might understand them, and be edified by
them in the Spirit of Christ, by which only, the Scriptures of Truth may be
truly understood: And so I commit thee to the Word of God's Grace (which is the
Light or Manifestation of the Spirit of Christ) in thine own Heart; by which
only, thou may be made sensible to understand aright the Things that Concern
thy Everlasting Peace and Happiness; who am a Well-wisher to all Mankind.

H. M.

THE CONTENTS.
COncerning the Prevailings of Antichrist, and his being manifested in the
Primitive Times of Christianity, and the Prophesies of him, from Page 1, to 32.
Concerning the Power of Antichrist, and also concerning Freedom from Sin, and
concerning the Popes, and Babylon, from Page 32, to 105. Concerning Baptism,
and the Lord's Supper, and also concerning the Signs of Antichrist, and
Fighting, and Persecution, and Tithes, and the Spirit that denies Christ come
in the Flesh, from Page 105, to 233. Concerning Reformation from Popery, and
Constancy, and Inconstancy to Professions, from Page 233, to 251. Concerning
the Wonders of Antichrist, and concerning them that say, lo here, and lo there,
from Page 251, to 258. Concerning the Rock on which the Church of Christ is
Built, and the Popes pretended Headship and Infallibility, and Popish
Persecutions, from Page 258, to 270. Concerning the Popes pretended
Stewardship, from Page 270, to the end.
Antichrist Unvailed, etc.
THE large Love of God in his Son Christ Jesus being freely tendered unto all
Mankind, it has been, and is the endeavor of the Devil (the great Enemy of
Man's Happiness) by his Subtilty and Devilish Wisdom (and often by insinuating
into them hopes of better Seize) to draw out the Minds of Mankind from
the pure Obedience to what God has made known (in them) and unto them of his
Will and Mind, and their Duty toward him; and so by affecting their Minds with
outward things, to bring them into disobedience to the Will of God, thereby to
make them unworthy of the Goodness of God to their Souls, and of his Bounteous
Love, in which he gives to every Man and Woman a measure of his Divine Light in
their Hearts and Souls, which is the manifestation of the Spirit of Christ, 1
Cor. 12.7^
which is given to every man to profit withal, which Christ said should
comfort, and lead them that follow it into all truth; (or into truth in every
thing) but should reprove the World of sin, and of righteousness, and of
judgment, John 16.8, 13.

Now the God of Mercy, in the tender Bowels of his Love, having for the
Redemption of fallen Mankind, sent his Son into the World (in the Body that was
prepared him) who came a Light into the World (which is the true Light that
enlightens every Man (and Woman) that comes into the World) that whosoever
believes in him should not perish, John 1.9.
but have everlasting life; Joh. 3.15, 16
Man's grand Enemy at that time endeavored (as much as in him lay) to keep
Peoples Minds in a Love of the Ceremonies and Ordinances given to their
Forefathers, and in an outward show and form of Worship, (in which they that
were erred from, and rebelled against God's good Spirit, Neh. 9.20.
which he had given them to instruct them, Isa. 1.13.
were not accepted of him) thereby to keep People from coming to the light or
manifestation of the Spirit, whereby they might have come to have believed in
him, the Messiah, or Christ Prophesied of by the Prophets, (who spoke by his
Spirit) whose Writings they had, and believed them to be true, according to
which they expected him about that time.

Yet by erring from, and rebelling against his Light and Spirit (in their
Hearts, and Consciences) many of the Jews (who esteemed themselves the peculiar
People of God) were so darkened, that they did not believe in him, but they that
walked in Obedience to the Light of his Spirit, they believed in him, and they
received him as the only Messiah, the Christ, the Son of the Living God; as
Simeon did, who took him up in his Arms, and said, Lord, Luke 2.2 ^, to 35.
now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word, for mine
eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou have prepared before the face of all
people, a light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people Israel.

The great Enemy of Mankind had then so far prevailed upon the Learned Rabbis
and Doctors among the Jews, that (though they had the Scriptures which
testified of him in their own Language, yet being erred from the light of his
Spirit in themselves) they were so far from receiving Christ, and believing in
him, that they agreed, that if any man did confess that he was Christ, he
should be put out of the Synagogue, John 9.22. And although he did many
Miracles among them, yet they believed not, but contended with him, maliciously
and falsely accused him, and said, He cast out Devils through Beelzebub the
Prince of Devils; and said, that he brake the Sabbath (with much more of the
like kind of words, as may be read in the Scriptures of Truth;) and at length
were so desperately hardened in their wickedness, that (seeking opportunity to
kill him) when the Chief Priests had hired (the false pretender) Judas to
betray him, and deliver him unto them, they put him to the Death of the Cross,
yet some of them said, they found no fault in him: And yet still his Love was
toward them, even upon the Cross, and he prayed for them, saying, Father,
forgive them, Luke 23.34.
for they know not what they do.

So the Devil their great Enemy, by his deceit had drawn them so far into
darkness, and from the light of Christ in themselves, that they knew not what
they did: And indeed it may well be supposed, that they knew not what they did,
when (in the Service of the Enemy of their Souls) they Crucified, and put to
Death him that came to save them from their Sins, from Wrath, and from the
Devil their Enemy.

And so now all that oppose and contend against the Light, which is the
manifestation of the Spirit of Christ in the Heart, or envy them that profess
it, and walk according to it, (or any other People whosoever) upon the account
of Religion, are certainly deceived by their great Enemy Satan, whose Service
they are in, being erred from the Light and Spirit of Christ, which teaches
them who walk in it good will toward all Men, and love to their Neighbors,
though Enemies.

But when the Chief Priests, and Pharisees, and People of the Jews, had (with a
general consent) Crucified the Lord of Glory, after they had mocked him, and
scourged him; yet they (and their Enemy whom they served) missed of their
expectation and desire, for they were still in fear lest he should rise again,
(as he had told before) and therefore they watched him, sealing the stone, Mat.
27.62, to 66. Mat. 28.2, to 2.
and making (as they thought) the Sepulcher sure; but (in the Lord's appointed
time) there was a great Earthquake, for the Angel of the Lord descended from
Heaven, and came, and rolled back the stone from the door, and sat upon it;
his countenance was like Lightning, and his raiment white as snow, and for fear
of him the Keepers did shake, and became as dead men; but the Angel said to the
Women, (who were Friends of Jesus) Fear not ye, for I know that ye seek Jesus,
which was crucified, he is not here, he is risen: So the Grave could not
contain him, Death had not dominion over him, H^b. 2.^^.
but through death he destroyed (and will destroy) him that had the power of
death, that is, the Devil; So the Devil and his deceived Servants had not their
desire, nor the power to destroy Christ, but they came to destruction
themselves.

And so now, all that err from, and disobey the Light and Spirit of Christ, and
follow the leadings and movings of their deceitful Enemy, the Prince of
Darkness, if he shall prevail in them so far as to cause them to kill the
Bodies of the People of God (who walk in his Light, and answer the
manifestation of his Spirit of Love; and in it are kept in true good will
toward all Men) because of their Religion, on purpose thereby to root out and
destroy them who are in judgment contrary to themselves, yet they must never
have their desire, but as they destroy their Fellow Creatures, their Friends,
so Eternal Destruction will be to themselves; and the Light and Spirit of God
will be their Condemnation for ever: But blessed and happy are all they, and
shall be for evermore, who suffer for the Testimony of a good Conscience, and
are faithful unto Death, for God will give them a Crown of Eternal Life; and
such in the midst of Persecution, or at the laying down of their Lives for
their Testimony, (in obedience to the Light, and according to the Example of
Christ, the Captain of their Salvation) can pray for their Persecutors, who
(being blinded by their deceitful Leader, the Devil) know not what they do, but
think they do God service; but Eternal Torment shall seize upon the Murderers,
fear shall surprise them, and truth will rise up in Judgment against them, over
all Deceit, over all Error, and over the Devil, and all his deceived Followers;
and God will be magnified over all, who is worthy for evermore. Amen.

And after the Resurrection and Ascension of Christ, when his Apostles (who
according to his command waited at Jerusalem till they were endued with power
from on high) were commissionated to Preach in his Name and Power his
Everlasting Gospel; then the great Deceiver, and Enemy of Man's Felicity, was
very busy in his deceived Servants and Instruments to hinder the propagation
and publication of it; stirring them up by his Murdering, Persecuting Spirit,
to Murder and Persecute the Ministers and Apostles of Christ, as may at large
be read in the Book of the Acts of the Apostles.

But Christ (the power of God) by the living operation of his Light (which he
sent his Ministers to turn People unto, from Darkness) and by the word of his
Grace, (which is one with the Light) working effectually in the Hearts of many,
to the convincement of them of their evil deeds, thereby-bringing them to true
Repentance, and to the acknowledgment of the truth; and not only so, but also
teaching them to live godlily and righteously, and soberly, thereby, as well in
Life and Conversation as in Words, to Preach and Propagate the Doctrine of the
Gospel of Christ, in the demonstration of the Spirit and Power of God; So that
the number of Christians increased much, and that in several Nations, to the
glory of God, and the great comfort and cause of rejoicing of many Souls who
had received the Light of Christ, and believed in it, and walked in it, wherein
they had true Unity and Fellowship one with another, and knew by the Blood of
Christ Jesus, 1 John 1.7.
a cleansing from all sin (which their Soul's Enemy had wrought in them) and in
the Name and Power of Christ knew and witnessed a triumphing in his Eternal
Life over the power of Death, which is the Devil, 2 Cor. 2.14. Col. 2.13, to
17. Heb. 2.14.
who had formerly captivated them, and held them as in Chains of Darkness,
which they knew, and witnessed to be broken and dissolved by the Light and
Power of Christ, and so could say, The Darkness is past, 1 John 2.8.
and the true Light now shines.

So the great Deceiver, the Devil, was frustrated of his Will, for the Gospel
was Preached, and the Name of Christ gloriously magnified in his People over
the Earth; all the Endeavors of the Devil, and his deceived ones not being
able to suppress it.

But although many received the Gospel of Christ in uprightness of Heart, and
believed in his Light, unto which his Ministers were sent to turn their Minds
from darkness; and in faithful obedience from their very Hearts, gave up their
All to the service of God in his Light, the manifestation of his Spirit in
their Hearts, and Souls, and Consciences (out of which Light and Spirit no
service was ever acceptable to the Lord) and so became Children of the Light of
God (who is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all) and in his Light and
Spirit enjoyed precious Unity and Fellowship one with another, and knew Satan,
the Devil, the Old Serpent, who by his subtilty had formerly deceived them) to
be, by the power of God, as bruised under their Feet, no more able to prevail
upon them by his subtle deceit, but in the Light, Spirit, and Power of God they
could keep their standing over him, and all his deceivable Device, of
Unrighteousness; and in Christ (the Lord their Righteousness) had Peace and Joy
in his Holy Spirit, and so rejoiced together in their Heavenly Places in
Christ; and glorified God over all in their day, and time; and though many came
to these and the like Seize, as the Scriptures of Truth at large declare:

Yet the subtle Deceiver, the Devil (who was a Liar and a Murderer from the
beginning) by his deceitful Devices, and dark Power, prevailed upon many that
were convinced of the true Light (that enlightens every Man that comes into
the World) and that believed concerning Christ, that he laid down his Life for
Mankind, and rose again from the Dead, and ascended up on high, and so they
could make a Profession of Christianity, having a Notional Knowledge of Christ,
and of things relating to Eternity; and it was by drawing their Minds from the
Light of Christ in themselves, that the deceitful Enemy prevailed to keep them
only in a Profession of Christianity, and in a Form of Godliness, but out of
the obedience of the Light and Spirit of Christ, and so out of the Truth,
though professing it. And so being out of the Truth, and out of the Obedience
of the Light (which is the manifestation of the Spirit of God) they were not
(though they might profess to be) Children of the Light, nor Children of God,
(for it is they that are led by the Spirit of God that are Children of God, and
all the Children of God are taught of God by his Spirit) and consequently they
were out of the glorious Liberty of the Children of God, Romans 8.14. Isa. 54.13.
John 6.45. Heb. 8.11. 1 John 2.27.
and of the Gospel of Christ, (the beguiling Serpent keeping their Minds fast
in the love of outward things) and so they would still keep up the Ordinances,
Col. 2.14. Gal. 4.9, 10.
Ceremonies, and Customs of their Forefathers, though contrary to the Doctrine
of Christ and his Apostles, and were in Bondage to weak and beggarly Elements,
and observed Days, and Months, and Times, and Years.

And so they were held in Bondage to Corruption and Corruptible Things; and
though they then professed Christianity, and desired (no doubt) to be called
Christians, yet their Enemy beguiling them, and keeping them by his deceit in
disobedience to the Light of Christ in themselves, they acted and lived
contrary to true Christianity: And though they appeared as for Christ, they
were really against him and his Truth; and being themselves deceived, they
endeavored to deceive others, being Enemies to the Cross of Christ, to which
he had nailed the Handwriting of Ordinances, Phil. 3.18. Col. 2.14.
blotting it out, and taking it out of the way where the Redeemed were to walk.

And as the Ministers of Christ declared among the true Christians, that the
Spirit of Antichrist should come; so the Apostle John in his time restified, 1
John 4.3.
that it was then already in the World: And although it appeared (in them upon
whom it prevailed) as for Christ, or on his behalf; yet it was (and still is)
really against him, and the Truth of his Gospel; being the same deceitful
Spirit that draws into, and endeavors to keep the Minds of Mankind in the love
of outward things, and in a kind of satisfaction in outward Performances, old
Ceremonies, uncertain Traditions and beggarly Elements, and so keeps out of the
obedience of the Light and Spirit of God, and out of the Service of God which
they profess; but it keeps in the Service of him who is their Enemy, the Devil
who has deceived them, who is to be cast into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone,
to be tormented Day and Night for ever and ever, Rev. 20.10.

So when Man's grand Enemy could not hinder the glad-tydings of the Gospel of
God's Salvation from being Preached thorough the Nations of the World, then (by
his Spirit of Antichrist) he labored with all his subtle Devices to keep them
who were convinced of the Light of the Gospel of Christ, only in a Profession
of Christianity, without the Life and Power of Godliness, that so, though they
professed Christ in words, Titus 1.16.
yet in works they might deny him.

And at that time he thus prevailed upon many with his deceit, and made them
deceitful like himself, 2 Timothy 3.5. Philip. 1.15. Titus 1.11.
having a Form of Godliness, but denying the Power thereof; and so some
preached Christ even of Eavy, Strife, and Contention, and others being Men of
corrupt Minds, supposing Gain to be Godliness, and having Hearts exercised with
covetous Practices, taught for filthy Lucre^s sake things that they ought not.

And many (having itching Ears) followed such Teachers, and their pernicious
ways, erring from the way of Truth, the Light, and Manifestation of the Spirit
of Christ in themselves, to which if they had been faithful, and obedient, it
would have manifested inwardly unto them the subtle Devices, Snares, and
Stratagems wherewith the Devil their Enemy had beguiled them, and whereby he
acted them in his Service to deceive others, and to draw them away from the
true Faith of Christ, being themselves reprobate concerning the Faith,
resisting the Truth, as Jannes, and Jambres withstood Moses, 2 Timothy 3.8.

But their Folly was manifested by the Light and Spirit of Christ, and they
that walked in the Light saw their Folly.

And the Apostle called such Antichrists, saying, Little Children, it is the
last time: And as ye have heard that Antichrist shall come, even now are there
many Antichrists, 1 John 2.18, 19.
whereby we know that it is the last time. They went out from us, but they were
not of us; for if they had been of us, they would no doubt have continued with
us, but they went out, that they might be made manifest that they were not all
of us.

Thus it is manifest, that when the Enemy of Man's Happiness, the Devil, could
not keep People from believing in Christ, because the Testimony of the Light of
Christ in their Hearts, and Consciences confirmed, and was at one with the
Doctrine and Preaching of his Ministers; yet those that he could (with his
deceit) prevail upon by his Unclean, Envious, 2 Timothy 3.13.
Antichristian Spirit to keep them in disobedience to the Light, them he made
Antichrists, evil Men, and Seducers, waxing worse and worse, deceiving, and
being (by him) deceived.

And yet the Devil could allow such to make a Profession of the Knowledge of
God, and of Christ, and to speak great swelling words, 1 Pet. 2.1^, 19.
to allure through the Lusts of the Flesh, through much Wantonness those that
were clean escaped from them that live in Error, and to promise Liberty to
others, while they themselves were the Servants of Corruption.

And so, though such could style themselves Ministers of Christ, and of his
Gospel, and could use the words of the Scriptures, and of the true Ministers of
Christ, and of his Prophets, who spoke by his Holy Spirit, as they were moved
thereby, and could make a large flourishing show by their Preaching in their
enticing words of humane Wisdom (which is earthly, sensual, and devilish) and
in their large, comprehending Wit, Jam. 3.1^.
which they had as natural Men, thereby to draw many after them; yet all that
was in the Airy, Lustful, Wanton Spirit that proceeds from the Prince of the
Power of the Air, Ephesians. 2.2.
who works and rules in the Hearts of all the Children of Disobedience.

And therefore it was not like, that they should bring any into Obedience (they
themselves being in Disobedience) to the Light, Grace, and Spirit of Christ in
themselves, which teaches them that believe in it, and obey it, to live
soberly, godly, and righteously; and reproves for lightness, and vanity, and
lustfulness, and wantonness, and all the hidden works of darkness, and
dishonesty, and unrighteousness, and ungodliness, all which the Prince of the
Power of the Air teaches, and works, and leads into by his dark Power, and
deceitful Antichristian Spirit.

And it is not like that his Servants, and Followers should bring any out of
those things, for he leads them into them, and so do his Ministers too, let
them profess what they will, or can: And none can come out of them, but by
taking diligent heed to the Light of Christ in themselves, which is the Grace
of God, which brings Salvation, and has appeared to all Men.

And so Antichristian Ministers keep poor People from the Light and Spirit of
Christ in themselves (although many by it see them to be wrong) that they may
be ever learning of them, but never thereby be able to come to the knowledge of
the Truth as it is in Jesus; and such can never bring any to the knowledge of
the Truth, for they are out of it themselves; and all are such who Preach for
Hire, and for their own Carnal Ends, or for Strife, or Envy, and filthy Lucre's
sake, through Covetousness with feigned words, making Merchandise of People;
for such run, and God never sent them, therefore they shall not profit the
people at all, Jer. 23.21, 32.

But they who obey the Light of Christ in their Hearts, by it see their deceit,
who would keep People from it (for the Apostles were sent to turn their Minds
to it) and the Eye of the Lord is upon the ways of all, and he will render unto
all according to their ways, and according to the fruit of their doings, who
sees, and knows, and searches the Hearts, and tries the Reins of all. And
though those Antichristian Ministers could not only talk and preach of
Holiness, and Righteousness, and Redemption, and Justification by Christ Jesus,
but also though they might persuade, exhort, and advise People thereunto, (as
they without Commission from Christ took upon them) yet they were unlike to
bring any to the enjoyment of those good things which they exhorted and advised
to, being out of them themselves; and being in unrighteousness, and
disobedience themselves, they could not bring others unto those good things
which they wanted themselves.

But the true Christian Ministers, who lived in, and preached in obedience to
the Light, and Spirit of Christ, and directed, and turned peoples Minds to the
true Light, the Manifestation of the Spirit in their Hearts and Consciences; by
taking heed thereunto, and giving up freely with their Hearts to the obedience
of it, thereby many came to see not only the Snares, and subtle Devices of the
Devil, but also to know power to avoid them, and also to know Redemption.
Holiness, Righteousness, Justification, and Salvation by Christ, whose Light,
and Spirit in their Hearts they obeyed, and lived in, and walked in, according
to the advice and exhortation of the true Ministers of Christ.

But how could the Antichristian Ministers direct or turn Peoples Minds to the
Light, which they (doing evil) hated? John 3.2^.
For every are that does evil hates the Light, and brings not his deeds to
the Light, lest thereby they should be reproved: And how should such bring any
out of Sin and Unrighteousness by their Preaching who hate the Light, which
leads out of Sin and Unrighteousness them that believe in it, and obey it? But
they that are unfaithful, and disobedient to it, them it reproves and
condemns in their Hearts, and such hate it, and love rather to bear the words
of Men (though false Teachers) than to hear the voice of the Light, the word of
God's Grace in their Hearts, that reproves them for Sin, and is the true
Teacher that leads to Salvation from Sin; and from the Devil, the Author of
Sin, the deceitful Enemy of Mankind.

So the deceitful Antichristian Ministers hating the Light of Christ, were
unlike to speak well of it, and more unlike to possess others with the love of
it, or to turn their Minds to it, for they loved Darkness rather than the
Light, and endeavored to keep their Followers in Darkness, lest they should
turn from them.

But the true Christian Ministers they loved the Light, believed in it, walked
in it, and in the love and authority of it, they preached it, and said, 1 John
1.5, 6, 7.
That the preaching of the Light was the Message which they had heard of God,
and declared unto People, and they turned the Minds of many to it, who in the
love of it, received it, believed in it, became Children of it, walked in it,
had Fellowship one with another in it, and knew a cleansing from all Sin by the
Blood of Jesus Christ, the Author of their Faith in it.

Mark the difference between the true Ministers of Christ, and the
Antichristian Ministers; and all that desire the Salvation of their Souls,
ought to beware what they hear, and whom they follow.

And the difference between the Ministers of Christ, and the Ministers of
Antichrist, is yet more fully declared of by the Scriptures of Truth, for the
true Christian Ministers preached, that all should believe in the Name of
Christ Jesus, Rev. 19.13. Heb. 4.12.
whose Name is called the Word of God, which Word they said was quick, and
powerful, and sharper than any two-edged Sword, piercing to the dividing
asunder of the Soul, and Spirit, and of the Joints and Marrow; and is a
discerner of the Thoughts, and Intents of the Hearts: And they preached, that
this Word ought to be believed in, which was nigh, even in the mouth, Romans
10.8. 1 Pet. 1.23.
and in the heart, being the word of Faith which they preached: By which Word
(which lives and abides for ever) the true Christians were Born again, and so
were the Children of God, and Heirs of Eternal Life through Christ Jesus, who
is called the Word, John 1.1, 2, 4, 9.12, 13.
which was in the beginning with God, and was (and is) God, in whom was Life,
and the Life was the Light of Men, that was the true Light which enlighteneth
every Man (and Woman) that comes into the World: And they preached, that as
many as received him, and believed in his Name, to them he gave power to become
the Sons of God, which were Born not of Blood, nor of the will of the Flesh,
John 12.36. John 1.5. Rev. 21.24.
nor of the will of Man, but of God; and so they were Children of the Light by
believing in it, and Children of God who is Light, in which Light the Nations
of them which are saved must walk.

And the true Christian Ministers preached, that this Light, 1 Cor. 12.7. Jam.
1.21.
or Word, or Manifestation of the Spirit (which is given to every Man to profit
withal) was the engraffed Word, which is able to save the Soul; and they called
it the Word of God's Grace, (which brings Salvation, and) which is able to
build up, Isa. 20.32.
and to give an Inheritance among all them that are sanctified; Tit. 2.11.12.
and they said, that this Grace of God has appeared to all Men, teaching (them
who obeyed it) to live godly, righteously, and soberly; and to deny
Ungodliness, and worldly Lusts; and thus all the true Christians (as Christ
said) were to be taught of God; John 6.45. Romans 5.21. Romans 8.2.
and so Sin should not have dominion over them, they being not under the Law,
but under Grace: And they said, as Sin had reigned unto Death, so Grace might
reign through Righteousness to Eternal Life.

And so the true Christians could say, the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ
Jesus, had made them free from the Law of Sin and Death, Jer. 31.32, 33
which Law (according to the Promise of God, in his Covenant of Light, and
Grace) was put into their Minds, and written in their Hearts, so that they
should not need to teach every Man his Neighbor, and his Brother, saying, Know
the Lord, Heb. 8.10.11.
for all should know him, from the least even to the greatest: And they
preached, that what was spoken of by the Prophet Joel, Joel 2.28. Acts 2.16.17
Romans 8.14. Romans 8.9. Cor. 3.16.17. Gal. 5.5, 25.
was fulfilled; which God said, That he would pour out of his Spirit upon all
Flesh; and they said, As many as are led of the Spirit of God, they are the
Sons of God: And if any Man have not the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.1.
he is none of his; and so consequently is no true Christian; for the Spirit of
God dwells in true Christians; who through the Spirit wait for the hope of
Righteousness by Faith: And as they lived in the Spirit, so they exhorted to
walk in the Spirit, saying, There is no condemnation to them which are in
Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit: And John the
Apostle of Christ, often exhorts him that has an Ear to hear what the Spirit
says, Rev. 2.7, 11, 17, 29. -- and 3.6, 13, 22.

And by the preaching of the true Ministers of Christ, many came to receive the
Teachings of the Holy Spirit (or Holy Ghost, which is the same) and were led by
it, Romans 8.16. Isa. 54.13, 14. Jer. 31.32.33 John 6.45. Heb. 8.10.11.
and so became Children of God: And it was truly said among them, the Spirit it
self bears witness with our Spirits, that we are the Children of God; and so
they were all taught of God, as it was Prophesied of them.

They were taught of God by his Grace, Light, Spirit, or Word, being one and
the same, though called by several other Names, and Appellations (besides what
is before here written) according to the most suitable Expressions, whereby to
show the Operations, and Effects of it to the Understandings, and Capacities of
all: The Apostle John likewise calls it the Unction, Joh. 2.20.27
or Anointing; writing thus, Ye have an Unction from the Holy One, and ye know
all things; and again, the anointing which ye have received of him, abides in
you, and ye need not that any Man teach you, but as the same anointing,
teaches you of all things, and is truth, and is no Lie; and even as it has
taught you, ye shall abide in him: This (and much more to the same purpose) was
the Doctrine of the true Christian Ministers, as the Scriptures of Truth more
at large declare; and the true Ministers of Christ preach the same in our Age
and Generation.

And as the true Ministers of Christ, in his Authority preached his Divine
Word, Light, Grace, and Spirit; so by the same they preached up the Liberty of
his Gospel, and true Christian Dispensation; and preached down the use of the
Ceremonies of the Jewish Law (though formerly commanded of God, and given by
Moses his Servant) which was then to cease, being abolished by the Death of
Christ; they being (in their time) for Shadows, and Types of good things to
come by Christ; but he the Substance being come, having (as they truly
preached) nailed them to his Cross, and taken them out of the way, they were
not then to be used by them who had received the free, and glorious liberty of
his substantial Everlasting Gospel, in the inward Spiritual Dispensation of his
Word, Light, Grace, and Spirit in their Hearts, and Souls; whereby they knew
the glorious Liberty of the freeborn Children of God; they were not then to be
subject to Ordinances, neither burdened with Traditions, nor to observe Days,
and Times; as may at large be read in the holy Scriptures, particularly in
these places, Gal. 4.9, 10. Gal. 5.2, to 8. Ephesians. 2.13, to 17. Col. 2.14, to 23.
Romans 7.6. Heb. 7.11, 12.

But the deceitful Antichristian Ministers, could not bring any into the True
Faith, which is in the Name, Light; Grace, and Spirit of Christ, for they were
out of it themselves, and were not faithful, but disobedient to the Light, and
hated it, and would not bring their own Deeds thereto, lest they should be
reproved thereby: For though they might talk, and preach of the Name, Word,
Grace, Light, or Spirit of Christ, and speak there of great swelling words, to
allure, and draw others after them; yet all that was but in disobedience to
Christ, and in deceit, and therefore they could not (by such Preaching) bring
any into the true Faith of Christ, who is the Truth, nor bring any to believe
in his Light, and Grace which they hated, and did despite unto.

And the true Ministers preached, that true Christians had put off the old Man
with his deeds, Col. 3.9, 10, 11
and had put on the new Man, which is renewed in Knowledge after the Image of
him that Created him, where there is neither Greek, nor Jew, Circumcision, nor
Uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, Bond, nor free, but Christ is all, and in
all; and they preached up a Spiritual Circumcision, saying, That he is not a
Jew which is one outwardly, Romans 2.28, 29.
neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the Flesh; but he is a Jew
which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the Heart, in the Spirit,
and not in the Letter; whose praise is not of Men, but of God: And again,
saying to some, Ye are Circumcised with the Circumcision made without Hands, in
putting off the Body of the Sins of the Flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ,
being buried with him in Baptism, Col. 2.11, 12. to ^^c end.
wherein you are also risen with him, through the Faith of the Operation of
God. And it is plain, that the Apostle here meant no outward Ordinance of
Circumcision, nor of Baptism, for he writes after in the same Chapter thus, If
ye be dead with Christ from the Rudiments of the World, why, as though living
in the World, are ye subject to Ordinances (or burdened with Traditions, as
some Translate it) touch not, taste not, handle not, which all are to perish
with the using, after the Commandments, and Doctrines of Men: Which things have
indeed a show of Wisdom, in Will Worship and Humility, and neglecting of the
Body, not in any Honor to the satisfying of the Flesh; concerning which things
he warned them, lest any Man should beguile them, or spoil them through
Philosophy, or vain Deceit, after the Tradition of Men, after the Rudiments of
the World, and not after Christ: Read the Second Chapter to the Colossians.

And the same Apostle said, Phil. 3.3.
We are the Circumcision which worship God in the Spirit, and rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in the Flesh; which shows plainly that they
were Jews inwardly, and of the inward Circumcision (as all true Christians
are). And this agrees with the Doctrine of Christ himself, who said to the
Samaritan, Ye Worship ye know not what, we know what we Worship, for Salvation
is of the Jews: John 4.22, 23, 24.
But the hour comes, and now is, when the true Worshippers shall worship the
Father in Spirit, and in Truth; for the Father seekeths^^^h to worship him; God
is a Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit, and in
Truth.

So the Worship of the true Christians was in Spirit, and in the Truth, and in
the obedience of the Spirit of Truth, and not in outward Ordinances,
Observations of Times, Will Worship, nor in Acts of voluntary Humility; and
accordingly in the demonstration of the Spirit, the true Christian Ministers
preached; and not in the words that Man's Wisdom teaches, but which the same
Holy Spirit (or Holy Ghost) teaches; which preaching is foolishness to the
natural Man, 1 Cor. 2.13, 14.
for he receives not the Things of the Spirit of God, neither can he know
them, because they are spiritually discerned. But he that yields obedience to
the Light, or Manifestation of the Spirit, (which is given to every Man to
profit withal) he comes to discern his own Estate, and Condition, upon a
Spiritual Account; and as he faithfully follows the Leadings of it, he comes
to know a profiting by it, and in it, and (as he persevereth in the Love, 1
Cor. 2.9, 10.
and Obedience of it) it manifests and reveals inwardly unto such a one,
the Things which Eye has not seen, nor Ear heard, neither have entered into the
Heart of Man; which God has prepared for them that Love him.

Thus the Apostle Paul preached, 1 Cor. 2.4.
not with enticing words of Man's Wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit,
and of Power; and, said he, Christ sent me, not to Baptize, but to preach the
Gospel, 1 Cor. 1.17.
not with Wisdom of Words, lest the Cross of Christ should be made of none
effect: Gal. 1.11. to 17.
So he was a Minister sent of Christ by his Spirit, and by his Spiritual
Appearance in him, and to him, for otherwise he was a Persecutor of Christians,
after the Ascension of Christ.

And all that are true Ministers of Christ, are sent, and taught, and moved by
the Spirit of Christ; 1 Cor. 2.11. to 15.
for no Man can know the Things of God, but by his Spirit: And if any falsely
profess to be sent by his Spirit, their Deceit will be manifested by the Light
and Spirit of Christ, to them who walk in it; but as for such as pretend to be
Ministers of Christ, who say, Divine Revelation is now ceased, and mock at the
Teachings, 1 Pet. 1.19, 20, 21. Isa. 54.13, 14. John 6.45.
Leadings, and Movings of the Spirit of God, by which all that ever were
Children of God were led, and taught, and moved, as is fully declared by the
Scriptures of Truth, which they falsely profess to be their Rule; the Deceit,
Hypocrisy, and Wickedness of such, is manifest to the view of all who have not
wilfully shut their Eyes.

And so though Antichristians may talk, or preach of the Worship of God, and
may use Scripture words, and the words which Christ, and his Prophets, and
Ministers speak, which are Recorded in the Scriptures; yet they being erred
from his Spirit, wherein only the true Worship of God is performed; they are
out of the true Worship of God, and Worship they know not what; for their
Worship is in the Spirit of Error, and not in the Spirit of Truth; and all the
Preaching of such, with all their Learning, acquired Parts, and Philosophy, it
is but vain Deceit, and stands in the Wisdom that is from below, Jam. 3.15.
which is earthly, sensual, and devilish; and so those are moved by the Spirit
of the Devil, who mock at the movings of the Spirit of God, let their
Profession be what it will.

So the Scriptures show plainly, that there was Antichrists, or Antichristian
Ministers, in the Apostles Time, and that there was a great difference between
them and the Apostles, or true Ministers of Christ; and the Followers of those
false flattering Deceivers, were (as their Leaders were) principally deceived,
by giving heed to the Insinuations of the Old Serpent, their deceitful Enemy,
in their own Particulars.

For those that loved, and obeyed the Light of Christ Jesus in their own
Hearts, and Consciences, they came to a good understanding of their own
Estates, and Conditions inwardly; and also came thereby into a true discerning
of the difference, between the true Ministers of Christ, who were in, and by
the Light and Spirit of Christ, Commissionated to Preach the Gospel of Truth;
and those who without Commission from Christ (and in disobedience to his Light
and Spirit) preached for their own Carnal Ends and Designs; such could discern
between the Voice of Christ in his true Ministers, John 10.4, 5.
and a strange Voice in them that falsely pretended so to be.

Such could discern between those who preached for filthy Lucre, love of Money,
or any other self-end; and those whom the Love of Christ constrained to Preach;
2 Cor. 5.14.
without which Love (which they want who hate his Light) all Preaching (though
with never so much Excellency of words) is but as sounding Brass, 1 Cor. 14.1,
2, 3.
or a tinkling Cymbal; and without which, the most seeming excellent Works of
Piety, are nothing available.

Such could discern (in, and by the Light, and Spirit of Christ, which
searches all things, to which they were obedient) between them that were of
God, whom true Christians heard, 1 John 4.6.
and them that were of the World, whom the World heard; and thereby they knew
the Spirit of Truth, and the Spirit of Error. And such by the Light and Spirit
of Christ (in whom are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge) came
truly to discern the deceitful Devices, Col. 2.3. 2 Cor. 2.11.
and Snares of their Souls great Enemy, who in his Devilish Wisdom, and
Serpentine Subtilty, was continually endeavoring to entangle, and deceive them
(as he did others) both inwardly, by his dark, unclean, wicked Power; and
outwardly by the Deceit of the same Power, and Spirit in his deceived,
deceitful Antichristian Ministers, who transformed themselves as into the
Apostles, 2 Cor. 11.13, 14 15.
or Ministers of Christ; but the true Christians discerned them, and knew that
their end should be according to their Works; and they likewise knew that Satan
himself was transformed into an Angel of Light.

And yet in and by the true Light of Christ (which enlighteneth every Man that
comes into the World) they saw him to be what he is, to wit, a Serpent, a
Dragon, a roaring Lion, the Devil, an Adversary, a Murderer, a Devourer, a
wicked Spirit; and by many other Names, and suitable Descriptions, is he called
by the Scriptures of Truth, to describe the Visage of the Wicked One, that all
may in the Light of Christ behold his Deceitfulness, wherewith he is
continually endeavoring to Destroy, Murder, and Devour the Souls of the
Children of Men, both by his Transformed Instruments, and otherwise.

And all that profess Christianity, and oppose the Light, and Spirit of Christ,
they may fitly be said to be Transformed, or to Transform themselves, whether
Leaders or Followers of others; for they are neither Members of Christ,
Children of the Light, nor Children of God, who is Light, as all true
Christians are; and therefore such only Transform themselves into Christians;
that is, they pretend to be Christians falsely.

And such as are not Children of the Light, nor Children of God, whose Children
are they? Are not they Children of Darkness, and Disobedience, and of the Power
of Darkness, which is the Devil? Such are grossly deceived, and transformed, as
were those Jews who professed to be both the Children of Abraham, and of God,
and yet Christ said plainly unto them, John 8.33, to 45.
Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the Lusts of your Father ye will do.

And all People, in and by the Light and Manifestation of the Spirit of Christ,
may examine, and try themselves, whether they be true Christians, (who are
Children of God) yea, or nay: For the Spirit of Christ bears witness, with
true Christians, ^om. 8.16. 1 John ^.10.
that they are the Children of God; and consequently their Spirits bear witness
of the same, with the Spirit of Christ, and he that is of God has the witness
in himself: But he that is not sensible of the Spirit of Christ thus to witness
in him, that he is a Child of God, has not he the Manifestation or Testimony
of the Spirit (though possibly he may not believe what it is) that in his Heart
and Conscience testifies, that he is of his Father the Devil? Surely these
things are of great importance, and are worthy to be seriously, and weightily
considered of by all People, who desire the Salvation of their precious Souls;
and they who have truly believed in the Light of Christ, and yielded obedience
thereunto, have therein, and thereby seen, and weightily considered these
things, and have learned, and are learning, to avoid the Snares of the Devil's
deceit of Unrighteousness, wherewith he beguiles many to the Loss of their
Souls Happiness Eternally; although such, when so beguiled, may profess
Christianity, and look upon themselves to be Christians.

But the Light of Christ in true Christians shows, and discovers to them
the Deceit of their Spiritual Enemy, in all his Appearances, both in their own
particulars, and in others his deceived deceitful Members, and Ministers, who
in his Service may profess Christianity.

For true Christians are the Sheep of Christ, which hear, and know his Voice,
and follow him; John 10.3. to 14.
and a Stranger they will not follow, for they know not the Voice of Strangers;
but Christ is the good Shepherd, who gives his Life for the Sheep; and said
he, I know them, and am known of mine: whereby it is evident, that true
Christians have a true discerning of the Voice of Christ, (which is the Light
or Manifestation of his Spirit in them) from the Voice of a Stranger, which
(says he) they will flee from, whether in themselves, or from others.

And such may rightly be called Strangers, who disobey the Light, Voice, and
Spirit of Christ, Ephesians. 4.18, 19, 20, 21. Ephesians. 2.12. Isa. 42.6. Isa. 49.6.
which (if they obeyed it) would lead them in the Way of Life, which through
disobedience they err from, and lose, and so become alienated from the Life of
God, and Righteousness, and true Christianity; and such are Aliens from the
Commonwealth of Israel, and Strangers to the Covenant of Promise, which is
Christ, the true Light, and God's Salvation to the ends of the Earth.

And to such Christ is a Stranger (though they may profess great things in his
Name) and in the Sentence of true Judgment, he will say unto them (they not
being termed his Sheep, but Goats) I was a Stranger, Mat. 25.33.43, 46.
and ye took me not in; and then when such cannot be received of Christ, they
shall begin to say, We have eaten, and drunk in thy presence, and thou have
taught in our streets; but he will say, I tell you I know you not whence you
are, Luke 13.26.
depart from me, all ye Workers of Iniquity; and these shall go away into
Everlasting Punishment.

And those that say, Lord, Lord, but do not the Will of God (but disobey his
Voice, Light, Grace, and Spirit, whereby he would teach, and lead them to
Eternal Rest and Happiness) when they shall say to Christ, Lord, Lord, have we
not prophesied in thy Name? and in thy Name have cast out Devils? and in thy
Name done many wonderful Works? then (for all their large Profession) he will
profess unto them, saying, I never knew you, Mat. 7.21, 22, 23.
depart from me, ye that work Iniquity.

And among all sorts of People, called Christians, there will (at last) appear
to be but two; to wit, true, and false; or Sheep, and Goats; and it is very
like that the Sheep know themselves from Goats; and if the Goats be not very
senceless, they may possibly (by the Light) discern that they are none of the
Sheep.

And all that (by true Examination of themselves in the Light of Christ) do
perceive that they are not of his Sheep, who know him, and his Voice in them;
they must (upon necessity of Salvation) yield up their whole Hearts to seek the
Lord, if they expect Mercy from him, who is a God of Mercy to all that truly
fear him, and also hearken to the Voice, Light, and Manifestation of the Spirit
of his Son Christ Jesus in their Hearts, Souls and Consciences; to which as
they are faithful, and wait diligently, and seriously always in his fear, which
will keep their Hearts clean and upright to him) they in due time, may come
truly to know not only a following of the Lamb, which is likewise the great
Shepherd of the Sheep, but also) a being created anew into the Lamb-like
Nature, and so a being made new Creatures, even Lambs, or Sheep of the one Fold
of Eternal Rest, whereof Christ Jesus (the Lamb without blemish) is the true
Shepherd, who leads, and brings thither his Sheep: John 10.16.
Them (said he) I must bring, and they shall hear my Voice, and there shall be
one Fold, and one Shepherd.

So then true Christians (which are the Sheep of Christ) they hear the Voice of
Christ, they walk in his Light, they are taught by his Grace, and they are led
by the Manifestation of his Spirit in their Hearts, Souls, and Consciences;
which Voice, Light, Grace, and Manifestation is one.

And the true Christians did not only know them, who were gone out from them,
to be Antichrists; but they also knew that then amongst them there was false
Brethren, Gal. 2.4. 2 Cor. 11.26. Jude 4.
who came in (amongst them) privily, to spy out their true Christian Liberty,
whom the true Christians then knew to be perilous.

And the true Ministers of Christ (in and by his Light, and Spirit) saw, and
prophesied of an Apostasy, or falling away from the Truth, and that among
Christians; because they would not receive the love of the Truth (which, in the
inward parts, God loves) that they might be saved; therefore, said the Apostle
Paul, God shall send them strong Delusions, 2 These. 2.11, 12.
that they should believe a Lie; that they all might be damned, who believed
not the Truth, but had pleasure in Unrighteousness.

And likewise the same Apostle Paul prophesied, of the Man of Sin being
revealed, the Son of Perdition, who opposes, and exalts himself above all
that is called God, or that is worshipped; so that he as God, sits in the
Temple of God, showing himself that he is God: And be said to the
Thessalonians, 2 These. 2.1, to 13.
Ye know what withholds that he might be revealed in his time; for the
mystery of Iniquity does already work; only he who now le^teth, will let, until
he be taken out of the way; and then shall that wicked be revealed, whom the
Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his Mouth, and shall destroy with the
Brightness of his Coming; even him whose coming is after the working of Satan,
with all power, and signs, and lying wonders, and with all deceivableness of
Unrighteousness in them that perish. Now in as much as he, who is called the
man of sin, the Son of perdition, and the wicked one, is truly said to be in
them that perish, it is evident that he first (by his deceit, drawing them into
disobedience to the Light and Spirit of God) had beguiled, and deceived them,
and so by the working of his deceitful power, 1 Cor. 3.10, 17.
had gotten in them an usurped place of exaltation above the Light and Spirit
of God, which he had tempted them to disobey, 1 Cor. 6.19.
and oppose in themselves; and so he and his dark power thereby was exalted in
them, above the Light, Power, and Spirit of God, whose Temple true Christians
are.

And so the Devil, the Man of Sin, sits in the Temple of God (or that which
ought to be the Temple of God) being exalted above all that is called God, or
that is worshipped in, and by them that obey him: And let all mark, that he is
to be consumed, and destroyed with the Spirit of God, and with the Light or
brightness of Christ when he comes to rule and reign in People (whose right it
is) and that is when his Light or Voice in their Heart is obeyed.

And so though those who disobey the Light of Christ in themselves, may yet in
words confess him, Rom 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.18, 24
and profess Christianity, yet they by disobedience to his Light, which is the
Word of his Power, who is the Wisdom and Power of God; in yielding to, and
embracing the allurements, drawings, and temptations of the wicked One, thereby
he gets the power over them, and begets them into a belief of his Power,
persuading them that it is impossible for them, while they live in this World,
to be set free from the ruling, or prevailing of his Power over them.

And so he whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all Power, and
Signs, Ephesians. 2 2. Ephesians. 5.2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and Lying Wonders, who is the Prince of the Power of the Air, he works in
the Children of Disobedience; and he rules, and has all the power, and
prevalency in and over such, whom he holds in such a Belief, or Faith, that
they must carry a Body of Sin and Death while they live in this World, which is
a dead Faith, and never like to give Victory over the World, nor over Death,
nor him that has the power of Death, which is the Devil, nor over his Works.

And so such through disobedience to the Light of Christ (which is the Word of
Life, Phil. 2.16. Prove. 6.23. Prove. 21.16.
and the Reproofs of its Instruction the Way of Life) are wandered from the Way
of Life and Understanding, and remain in the Congregation of the Dead; Ephesians.
2.1.
and are dead in Trespasses and Sins; and are never like to be, by a dead
Faith, recovered to Life, to live to God in Christ Jesus, in whom is Eternal
Life; and such may contend for their dead Faith.

But the Faith which true Christians are earnestly to contend for, ^ude 3. Ephesians.
6.16. Phil. 1.27. Romans 10.8. 1 Timothy 6.12. 1 John 5.4. Chap. 2.13, 14.
which was once delivered to the Saints, stands in the Word of God's Power,
which is the Word of Faith, which the Apostles preached, which is nigh in the
Mouth, and in the Heart, and this is a Living Faith, and gives Victory, and
overcomes; as the true Christians testified.

And so they that in their dead Faith believe no overcoming the wicked One on
this side the Grave, they believe quite contrary to the true Christians, as the
Apostle John testified of them to whom he wrote, 1 John 4.4.
saying, Ye have overcome the wicked One; and though he writes, 1 John 1.8, 9,
10.
saying, If we say that we have no Sin, we deceive our selves, and the Truth is
not in us: yet he writes in the next words after, If we confess our Sins, he is
faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to cleanse us from all
Unrighteousness; If we say that we have not sinned, we make him a liar, and his
Word is not in us.

Now if the said Words (to wit, If we say that we have no Sin, etc.) which some
greatly object in this case, be taken as they are in the common Translations
yet that will not import the Apostle himself to be included; as the Scripture
has such Expressions; for the Apostle James, speaking of the Tongue, says,
Therewith curse we Men, etc. James 3.9. And Paul saying, Let us Eat and Drink,
for to morrow we dye, 1 Cor. 15.32. Who can conclude from hence, that the
Apostle James was a Curser of Men? Or that Paul was one of those luxurious
Ones, who used that saying about Eating and Drinking, which was reproved by the
Prophet? Isa. 22.13. and 56.12. Or who can from the Apostle John's Words here,
conlude that he then had Sin? For as the Apostle James explained his saying of
the Tongue, to wit, Therewith Curse we Men, by saving presently after, thus, My
Brethren, these things ought not to be so; verse. 10. And as Paul also explained
himself, when he said, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we dye, by saying
forthwith, Be not deceived, evil Communications corrupt good Manners, etc.
verse. 33, 34. So also the Apostle John in this place, after that which some
translate thus, to wit, If we say that we have no Sin, we deceive our selves,
and the truth is not in us (which might relate to the Conditions of others,
though not to his own present condition) says in the very next words thus, If
we confess our Sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our Sins, and to
cleanse us from all Unrighteousness. Now is not all Sin Unrighteousness? And
therefore what can be more plain than that the Apostle here declares that upon
Confession and Repentance, true Believers are not only forgiven, but also come
to be cleansed from Sin? And does he not also in the next Words before those
that are objected (as well as after) fully declare the same, speaking of the
Light (which they that love Sin, do not love) thus, If we walk in the Light,
etc. we have fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all Sin?

And moreover, according to said the common Translation, if any should think
the Apostle John here to be included, yet, he does not say, that we sin daily
in Thought, Word and Deed, nor that the best Performances of the Children of
God are sinful, or mixed with Sin; as the pleaders for Sin for term of Life,
say; therefore what he said, imports not the matter they contend for.

But according to those Translators (much approved by Protestants) Beza and
Pasor, and others, the aforesaid objectible Words of the Apostle John are to be
rendered thus, to wit, If we have said us not to have Sin (the Latin words being
thus, si dixerimus nos peccatum non habere; which are according to the
signification of the Greek words (in which the Apostle wrote) which are these
(...)) which implies the time past, and that there had been a time wherein
they could not have truly said that they had no Sin. See Beza's Latin
Testament, and Pasor's Lexicon.

But that all are to continue in Sin while in this World, the Words of the said
Apostle here, are very plain to the contrary, to wit, If we confess our Sins,
he is faithful, and just to forgive us our Sins, 1 John 1.7.
and to cleanse us from all Unrighteousness: And again, If we walk in the
Light, as he is in the Light, we have fellowship one with another, 1 John 2.1,
to 10.
and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all Sin: And again, My
little Children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not: And speaking
of Christ, he says, He that says I know him, and keeps not his
Commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him; And again says he, Every
one that has this Hope in him, purifieth himself, even as he is pure: And
again, Ye know that he was manifested to take away our Sin, and in him is no
Sin, whosoever abides in him, sins not: whosoever sins, has not seen
him, neither known him: Little Children, let no man deceive you (it seems,
there were pleader; for Sin, then) he that does Righteousness is righteous,
even as he is righteous, he that commits Sin is of the Devil; for the Devil
sins from the beginning: For this purpose was the Son of God manifested,
that he might destroy the works of the Devil; whosoever is born of God does not
commit Sin; for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin, because he is
born of God; in this the Children of God are manifest, and the Children of the
Devil.

By all which, and many other Scripture sayings, it is evident that the Faith
of those who believe that they cannot be free from sinning, but must carry a
Body of Sin, and a Body of Death while they are in this World, is quite
contrary to the Faith, and Testimony of true Christians.

For the Faith of true Christians is in Christ, the Power of God, 1 Cor. 1.2.
and the Wisdom of God; 1 Cor. 2.5. 2 Cor. 13.3.4, 5. 1 John 4.4. Phil. 2.13.
Romans 6.18, 22. Jude 24.
and that he is greater that is in them, than (the Prince of the power of the
Air) he that is in the World; and that he must rule in them whose right it is,
who works in them both to will, and to do; and their Faith is, that he is
more able to cleanse, and keep them free from Sin, as true Christians were, and
are, than the Devil is to lead them to Sin; the Wages whereof is Death, which
the Servants thereof must have.

And so though those whose Faith is dead, being servants of Sin, may profess
Christ (who is a quickening Spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45. Ephesians. 2.1, 2, to 7.
and quickened, and quickneth them that truly believe in him, who were dead in
Trespass and Sins) yet in that dead Faith they cannot enjoy the benefit (which
true Christians did, Romans 8.1, 2.
and do enjoy) which is to be set free from the Law of Sin and Death, by the
Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus; for according to their Faith, so it
is unto them.

For as the People of Christ's own Country were offended at him for his Wisdom,
and his mighty Works, and being astonished, said, Mark 6.1, to 7. Mat. 13.54,
to 58.
Whence has this Man this Wisdom and these mighty Works? Is not this the
Carpenter's Son? is not kis Mother called Mary? and his Brethren James, and
Joses, and Simon, and Judas? and his Sisters, are they not all with us? whence
then has this Man all these things? And he did not many mighty Works there,
because of their unbelief. So they that are offended at the Light of Christ in
his Spiritual Appearance in their Hearts, that shows them their Sins, and
reproves them in their Souls and Consciences for all their Offenses against
it, insomuch that they are sometimes astonished thereby; yet say they, Is not
this the Check of a Natural Conscience? Is not this a Natural Light that we are
born and bred up with? are not our Understandings and Knowledge in Arts and
Sciences, Brethren and Sisters to it, whence has it these things? And there
cannot in such be mighty Works done, because of their Unbelief.

But true Christians who have believed in the Light, Romans 8.11. Ephesians. 2. Romans
6.1, 2, to the end. Gal. 2.20. 1 Pet. 4.6. Phil. 2.13.
the Manifestation of the quickening Spirit of Christ in their Hearts and Souls,
they have (as they have been faithful in the obecience of it) known by the
effectual working of it in themselves, a being raised from the Death of Sin to
the Life of Righteousness, and that where Sin has abounded, Grace does much
more abound; and so to the Praise and Glory of God, they live by Faith in the
quickening Spirit of Christ in them.

But they that believe that they must carry a Body of Sin and Death with them
while they live in this World, and that the Devil's power and spirit must
prevail in them so long as they live, how can the Faith of such, or their Works
either, honor God or Christ, or his Power?

And they that deny Freedom from Sin being attainable while in this Life, 1 John 3.8. Jer. 23.6. Chap. 33.16. Dan. 9.24.
deny the very end and purpose of Christ's coming, which is to destroy the
Works of the Devil, and to put an end to Sin, and to finish Transgression, Romans
8.3, 4.
and bring in Everlasting Righteousness; and therefore it was prophesied that
he should be called, Mat. 21.1.
The Lord our Righteousness: and likewise it was said, Thou shall call his Name
Jesus, (which is Savior) for he shall save his People from their Sins; But are
such his People (or how does he save them from their Sins) who sin while they
live in this World?

And likewise, they that deny that Perfection to true Christians (who are
Saints) is attainable while they live, Ephesians. 4.11, to 17.
they deny the very end of the true Christian Ministry, which is for the
perfecting of the Saints; but they that are imperfect till they dye, how does
the Work of the Ministry perfect them? Eccles. 11.3.
or does the Death of the Body perfect them? for as the Tree falls, so shall
it lie.

And if any believe that the Power of God (if faithfully obeyed) is able to
make them free from Sin, and so perfect, one minute of an hour before Death;
why may they not as well believe that the same Power is able to make them so,
Heb. 13.8. Psalm. 111.3, 10.
two Minutes, or two Hours, or two Months, or two Years before Death? for that
Power is the same for ever, and the Righteousness and Praise thereof endures
for ever.

And they that think themselves to be true Christians, and Members of Christ,
and yet believe that they, and every other Member of his Body, while in this
World, must be (as the pleaders for Sin commonly confess themselves) full of
Bruises, and Wounds, and putrefying Sores, which daily, and continually renewed
Sin makes in them, from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of the Foot; 1 Cor.
6.15, 16. Chap. 12.12, to 27. Ephesians. 4.15, 16. Chap. 5.26, 27. 1 John 4.17.
such surely suppose that Christ has a very corrupt, putrid, imperfect Body,
which is his Church; contrary to what the Apostle Paul speaks of it, being,
holy, and without blemish, spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; and contrary to
what the Apostle John wrote, saying, Herein is our Love made perfect, that we
may have boldness in the Day of Judgment; because as he is, so are we in this
World; (speaking of God) which he truly could not have said, if they had not
been free from Sin, but full of Bruises, Wounds, and putrefying Sores (which
Sin makes in the Soul) but contrary to that, he says plainly, This is the Love
of God, 1 John 5.3.
that we keep his Commandments, and his Commandments are not grievous.

And although there be some three places in the Scriptures, which are
translated, as if they implied that all men sin; to wit, Eccles. 7.20. There is
not a just Man upon the Earth, that does good, and sins not; And 1 Kings
8.46. and 2 Chronicles. 6.36. If they sin against thee; for there is no Man that
sins not: Yet in all the said places, the Latin Translations as ( Iunius,
Tremellius, and Vatablus) render it (instead of, that sins not) that may not
sin, (or cannot sin) it being the very same Word that is used in Psalm 119.11.
(to wit) I have hid thy Word in my Heart, that I may not sin against thee. And
any sensible one may see that it is imperfect Sense to say, If they sin against
thee, for there is no Man that sins not; for if all Men sin continually,
there would be no occasion here to say, if they sin: but it is good sense to
say, if they sin against thee, for there is no Man that may not sin, or that
cannot sin; which only implies a possibility, and not a continuation of Sin;
as likewise the next Verse but one, after the last mentioned places, does,
where it is said, If they turn unto thee (that is, to God) with all their
Heart, and with all their Soul; which Words plainly intimate a possibility to
leave Sin, for such a turning is certainly no Sin.

But there is no Man but he may sin, if he be not continually watchful in the
Light against the Man of Sin, the Devil, who is continually endeavoring to
tempt Mankind to sin; but as Man waits in the true Light of Christ Jesus, 1
Pet. 5.8, 9. Jam. 4.7.
which is the Word of Faith, and the Word of God's Power in his Heart and Soul,
as he is truly faithful in the obedience of it, and walks in it, he comes to
feel Power in the Faith of it, to resist the Devil in all his Temptations, and
the Devil will flee from such a one, and has not power to take him captive at
his will; 2 Timothy 2.26.
as he has over his own whom he persuades that it is impossible for them to
recover themselves from under his sinful power, Heb. 11.6. Romans 14.23.
while they live in this World; and so they confess that their best Daties are
intermixed with Sin; and so they are, for whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin;
and it is plain that such are not turned to God with all their Heart, and with
all their Soul, whatsoever they profess.

For the Holy Scriptures say plainly, That as many as received Christ, and
believed on his Name, John 1.1, to 14. Rev. 19.13. Romans 10.8. 1 John 3.1, to
the end.
which is called the Word of God, which is nigh in the Mouth, and in the Heart,
to them he gave Power to become the Sons of God, which were born not of Blood,
nor of the Will of the Flesh, nor of the Will of Man, but of God; and such do
not commit Sin.

But admit that the common English Translation of the aforesaid Words of
Solomon, were true; Heb. 7.19. Heb. 9.9. Heb. 10.1. to 24.
yet that was under the time of the Law, which could not make perfect, as
pertaining to the Conscience, and that which was not attainable under that Law,
may by the Grace of God be attained in a Gospel state. Romans 8.1. to 5.


And although the Apostle Paul, writing to the Romans, says, The Good that I
would, I do not; but the Evil that I would not, Romans 7.9, to 25.
that I do: Yet it is plain by what he wrote before, and after that, in the
same Epistle, that he wrote not of his own then present condition, but of
himself as well as others passing through that Condition; for in that continued
kind of Speech he likewise there says, I am carnal sold under Sin; but a
little before he had told them, Romans 8.7.
the Carnal Mind is enmity against God, and is not subject to the Law of God,
neither indeed can be: And says he, The Natural (or Carnal) Man cannot receive
the Things of the Spirit of God; 1 Cor. 2.14.
for they are fool shness unto him, neither can he know them, because they are
Spiritually discerned. And in the beginning of his Epistle to the Romans,
aforesaid, he expresses himself to be able to impart unto them Spiritual
Gifts, Romans 1.11.
which a Carnal Man could not do.

By which it is plain, that when he wrote that Epistle, he was not Carnal sold
under Sin, neither a Servant of Sin; and therefore he was in another condition
than he had been in, of which he wrote the said objectible Words; And that
which renders it more plain, is, that in the same Epistle, before the said
Words, Romans 6.16. to 24.
he gave testimony of the Romans, to whom he wrote, that they were made free
from Sin, and become Servants of Righteousness, and Servants to God: But they
that are carnal, sold under Sin, are not so, for how can they be free from Sin,
who remain carnal sold under Sin?

And the Apostle immediately after that kind of Speech, which intimated his
former condition, declared plainly that he had (when he wrote that Epistle)
attained to a better state; for in the conclusion of that kind of speech, he
writes thus, I see another Law in my Members, warring against the Law of my
Mind, and bringing me into Captivity to the Law of Sin which is in my Members;
O wretched Man that I am, who shall deliver me from the Body of this Death? I
thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord: Now for what does he give thanks, if
not for Deliverance? for he says presently after, The Law of the Spirit of
Life in Christ Jesus, Romans 8.2.
has made me free from the Law of Sin and Death.

So it is plain that he was delivered, and set free from the Law of Sin and
Death, unto which he had been in Captivity while he was carnal, sold under Sin;
and therefore the aforesaid Words of Paul (with which some plead against the
possibility of freedom from Sin) cannot properly be rendered to describe his
present condition at the writing thereof.

And it may at large be read in the Epistles of the Apostle Paul (as also of
the other Apostles) that Freedom from sin, Ephesians. 2.4. to 11. Romans 6.22 1 Cor.
15.56, 57.
and the servitude thereof may be, and was attained by true Christians while in
this World.

And those that from the aforesaid Words of Paul, do plead for continuance in
sin during Life, 1 Cor. 15.32, 33, 34. Isa. 22.12, 13, 14. Isa. 56.10, 11, 12.
Wisd. 2.5, 6, 7.
they may as sensibly plead that he in a commanding manner spoke to the
Corinthians, saying, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we dye (which in
Scripture is recommended as a Motto of Epicures, and Libertines) though he
writes next after, saying, Be not deceived, Evil Communications corrupt good
Manners, awake to Righteousness and sin not, for some have not the knowledge of
God; I speak this to your shame.

But the Apostle Peter (as it were to put the matter concerning the
understanding of Paul's Words, out of all question, 2 Pet. 3.14, 15, 16.
writes thus, Be diligent that ye may be found of him without Spot, and
Blameless; and account that the Long suffering of our Lord is Salvation, even
as our beloved Brother Paul also, according to the Wisdom given unto him, has
written unto you: as also in all his Epistles speaking in them of these things,
in which are some things hard to be understood, which they that are unlearned,
and unstable, wrest, as they do also the other Scriptures, to their own
destruction.

By which Words, it is plain that some things written by Paul, and here spoken
of by Peter, were things concerning Spotlesness, and Blamelesness, which things
are not consistent with Sin, and concerning which things Paul wrote in all his
Epistles.

And it was such who obeyed not the Light and Grace of Christ (which is the
Word of Faith, Tit. 2.11, 12. Romans 10.8 2 Cor. 10.4, 5. 1 John 2.13, 14. 1 John
5.4
nigh in the Mouth, and in the Heart, which the Apostles preached) who were not
diligent to be found spotless and blameless; and it was such as those that
wrested Paul's Words to their own destruction; for such being in Sin, and out
of the living Faith (whereby true Christians overcome) they feeling themselves
under the power of the Man of Sin in themselves, he easily persuades them, that
there is no overcoming sin, or attaining freedom from sin, or spotlesness, and
blamelesness, on this side the Grave; and there he would have all Mankind.

And so such, Romans 6.18, 22.
quite contrary to the Doctrine of Paul (and of the other Apostles) wrest the
Words of Paul to their own destruction, Romans 8.2. (...) Cor. 15.57. 1 Timothy
6.12, 14. 2 Timothy 4.7. Heb. 11.6.
and plead for Sin with the Words that he wrote concerning his Warfare in the
Faith against Sin; though presently after he declares himself to be in another
condition; but they being out of that Faith, without which it is impossible to
please God, they do not undertake the Warfare aright, and therefore are not
like to witness the Victory, as Paul did.

And now let all those that plead for Sin for term of Life, beware lest they be
of those Unlearned and Unstable, who wrest the Words of Paul to their own
Destruction; for though they may have learned many Languages, and all the
Learning that can be gotten for Money at Schools and Colleges, yet if they be
not learned in the Mystery of the Faith of Christ, which is in his Light, and
Word of Faith, nigh in the Mouth and in the Heart, they will be found to be of
the unlearned that the Apostle Peter here speaks of; Acts 1.13.
for concerning humane Learring, Peter himself was called unlearned, and
ignorant.

And let all consider, whether are most likely to wrest the Apostles to their
own destruction; they who are truly diligent to be found spotless, and
blameless, who take his Words (as well as the words of the other Apostles)
against Sin, in so strict a sense, that according thereunto (and for f ar of
offending God) they dare not allow themselves in any Sin, lest it be to their
destruction; Job 28.28. Psalm. 111.10. Prove. 1.2, to 7. Prove. 9.10 Prove. 8.13.
Prove. 14, 26, 27. Prove. 13.14. Prove. 16.6.
or those that take liberty in Sin, and choose not the Fear of the Lord, which
is Wisdom, (whereby they might better understand the Words of the Wise, and
their dark Sayings) which Fear is not only to hate Evil, but to depart from
Evil, and from Sin, the snare of Death: and so they make use of the Apostle's
Words to plead for the continuance of Sin; reckoning that the Apostle (when he
wrote Letters on Truth's account, and reproved Sin with severity in others) was
himself continually sinning.

And so such, (who reject the Fear of God, and his Counsel in their Hearts)
they are persuaded (by the spirit of the Man of Sin in themselves) that though
they may strive, and talk against sin, yet, while they are in this World, they
must continue in sin, yea, even in their best Performances; and then what are
their worst? And so they do not believe that (while they live) God, Feb. 12.29.
who is a consuming Fire, is able (in them) with the Spirit of his Mouth, and
the Brightness of his Coming, to consume the Man of Sin (or the Body of Sin and
Death) whose coming is after the working of Satan, Mat. 3.11, 12. Luke 3.16, 17.
with all Power, and Signs, and Lying Wonders; and so (for all their using
signs of Baptism) that is a sign that they are not baptized througly with the
Baptism of Christ, who baptizeth with the Holy Spirit, and with Fire: whose Fan
is in his hand, and he will thoroughly purge his Floor, and gather his Wheat
into the Garner, but he will burn up the Chaff with unquenchable Fire. Mark,
his Floor, which is the Heart of Man, he will thoroughly purge, gather his
Wheat; and burn up the Chaff; that which proceeds from the Prince of the power
of the Air, the Spirit that works in the Children of disobedience. And what?
Mat. 15.18, 19, 20.
must Sin remain in the Heart when it is thoroughly purged? or if Sin be not in
the Heart, where is (...)?

And let all consider, that to whom they yield themselves servants to obey, Rom
6.16, 17.
his servants they are to whom they obey, whether of sin unto death, or of
obedience unto righteousness, as said the Apostle Paul: but how does any obey
unto Righteousness? or how is any right in the sight of God, that does continue
in Sin during Life? for the same Apostle plainly intimates the contrary
concerning true Christians, in his repeated Question, and Answer, saying, Romans
6.1, 2, 15.
Shall we continue in sin? God forbid.

And so it is plain, that those who continue in Sin, Acts 6.7. Romans 1.5. Romans
16.26. Ephesians. 6.11, 16. Joh. 2.13.
and believe that they must do so while they live, they are out of the
Obedience of the Faith of Christ in which true Christians are, and they want
the Shield thereof, wherewith true Christians are able to quench all the fiery
Darts of the wicked One: And so though such may strive, or talk of striving
against Sin, yet they are never like to get the Victory, while they take not
the only right Weapon, Ephesians. 6.17. Romans 10.8.
or Shield, which is Faith in his Word, the Word of Faith nigh in the Mouth,
Romans 13.12.
and in the Heart, which is the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Light that
truly manifests the Deeds of Darkness, which (while they are out of the
Faith) they know not how to put off, nor how to put on the Armor of Light
aright.

And such are unlearned in the Mystery of that Faith which is held in a pure
Conscience, 1 Timothy 3.9. Luke 17.21.
and in the Mystery of Godliness, and of the Kingdom o^ God, which is within;
and they are also unstable, and doubleminded, who would have their Sins, and
continue in them while they live, and have Heaven at their latter end
notwithstanding; and that is double mindedness; James 1.8.
and a double minded Man is unstabe in all his Ways.

And so being unlearned, and unstable, they wrest the Scriptures to their own
Destruction, in pleading for Sin all the while they live, which is the very
upholding of the Kingdom of the Prince of Darkness, for they can be his
subjects (in this World) no longer: and none are his subjects, but the
disobedient to the Light of Christ in themselves, and they are subjects to him
and his Power, and consequently in his Dominion, Rev. 16.10. Evh. 5.11, to 15.
John 3.18, to 21.
Empire and Kingdom, which is full of Darkness, working the Works of Darkness,
which Works are reproved, and manifested by the true Light in themselves, which
they hate, and rebel against, which is their Condemnation, let them profess
what they will.

But they that believe in the Light of Christ in their own Hearts and
Consciences, and are faithful in obedience thereunto, come to know deliverance
from the Power of Darkness, Col. 1.12, 13.
and Translation (while in this World) into the Kingdom of the dear Son of God,
and are made meet to be partakers of the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.

And let all that believe not this great Work of God to be possible, beware
lest that come upon them which was spoken of by the Prophet and the Apostle,
saying, Behold ye Despisers, and wonder, and perish; Hab. 1.5. Acts 13.40, 41.
for I work a Work in your days, which you shall in no wise believe, though a
Man declare it unto you.

And although the Apostle James writes, saying, In many things we offend all;
James 3.2.
yet he says in the very next Words, If any Man offend not in Word, the same
is a perfect man, and able also to bridle the whole Body; which is nothing
against Perfection being attainable, or a being made free from Sin, and able to
bridle and govern the whole Body: And again he says, (speaking of the Tongue)
Therewith bless we God even the the Father, James 3.9.10.
and therewith curse we Men which are made after the similitude of God; out of
the same Mouth proceeds Blessing, and Cursing; my Brethren these things ought
not so to be. So they that will say that the Apostle here speaks of himself
in many things offending; may as truly say that he proclaims himself to be a
Curser (which he here reproves) for the manner of speaking is in both alike,
being in one continued kind of Speech. And the same Apostle writes, saying, lay
a side all filthiness (and all Sin is filthiness) and superfluity of
naughtiness, and receive with meekness the engraffed Word, James 1.21, 22, 23,
24.
which is able to save your Souls; but be ye doers of the Word, and not hearers
only, deceiving your own selves; for if any be a hearer of the Word, and not a
doer, he is a like a Man beholding his natural Face in a Glass, for he
beholds himself, and goes his way, and straightway forgets what manner of
Man he was.

This engraffed Word (which is able to save the Soul) is the Word of God's
Salvation, which he has prepared before the Face of all People, Luk, 2.30, ^1,
32. Tit. 2.11, 12. Romans 10.8.
a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the Glory of his People, who are
Israclites indeed: And it is the Word of God's Grace which brings Salvation,
and has appeared to all Men, teaching true Christians: And it is the Word of
Faith which is near in the Mouth and in the Heart which the Apostles preached:
Psalm. 119.9, 10, 11.
and this is the Word which David hid in his Heart, that he might not sin
against God; and he accounted the only means whereby a Young Man may cleause
his Way, is by taking heed thereto according to this Word, which he said was
Lamp unto his Feet, Psalm. 119, 105.
and a Light unto his Path.

And so the Apostle James bids to be Doers, and not hearers only of this
Word, comparing them that hear and do not, to him that beholds his natural
Face in a Glass, etc. for they thereby see and know their condition to be
sinful and miserable, because of Disobedience; but not truly taking heed to
this Word, that (according to the teaching thereof) their Ways might be
cleansed: so they go from it, and more and more forget their sinful condition,
and what manner of Persons they are, how filthy by reason of sin, Rev. 21.27.
and how unfit they are for the Kingdom of Heaven, which no Unclean thing can
enter.

And it is the Man of Sin, that is the Devil, that tempts People into
disobedience to the Word, or Light of Christ in their Hearts; James 4 7.
but the said Apostle James says, Submit your selves unto God, resist the
Devil, and he will flee from you: And certainly none truly submit themselves
unto God, but they that submit to, and obey his Light, the Word of his Grace in
their own Hearts.

So then if the Devil (who is the author and original of all Sin) will flee
when he is resisted (steadfastly in the Faith) he being fled, those that he is
fled from, are not (surely) continually sinning: but Christ (who puts an end to
Sin, Jer. 23.6. Jer. 33.16. Dan 9.24.
and finisheth Transgression in them) brings in Everlasting Righteousness;
and such can truly call him (according to the Prophecies of Old) the Lord our
Righteousness; Romans 8.4, 9, 10, 14.
and this is to be fulfilled in them, who walk not after the Flesh, Gal. 5.25.
1 John 1.7.
but after the Spirit, and in the Light and Manifestation thereof.

And they that truly examine themselves, and prove themselves whether they be
in the Faith, 2 Cor. 13.3. Gal. 2.20. Col. 1.2^
they may know how that Jesus Christ) the Lord their Righteousness) is in them,
except they be Reprobates: thus the Apostle Paul wrote to the Corinthians, 2
Cor. 13.
who (through weakness in the Faith) sought a Proof of Christ speaking in him,
which speaking of Christ (he affirms) was to themwards not weak, but was
mighty in them.

By which it is evident that where the Man of Sin has prevailed by his
deceitful power in and upon any, when such come by the Light of Christ (the
Word of God's Power) in themselves, to be convinced of their Sins, and made
willing to resist the wicked One in the Faith of Christ) the Power of God; yet
it seems not easy (at the first) for such to believe in the mighty Speakings
of Christ, the Power of God, in themselves; nor to believe in Christ's Ability
to save and cleanse them from all Sin, and that he is able with the Spirit of
his Mouth, and the Brightness of his Coming, to consume and destroy the Man of
Sin, and his Works in them.

For while People yield their Members Servants to Sin, and profess
Christianity, the Man of Sin in themselves (and by his Instruments outwardly)
is ready to persuade them, either that a Priest can forgive them, or pronounce
Forgiveness to them for their Sins (as not only the Popish Priests, but others
(as for instance, the Author of the Book, called, The Practice of Piety) teach)
and that so they may be absolved from their Sins; or else he would persuade
them (as he does too many) That they must have the Righteousness of Christ only
imputed to them wholly without them, to justify them, though they be not
inwardly sanctified by the Word of his Power in their Hearts, and though they
be continually sinning (in Thought, Word and Deed) against his Light, the
Manifestation of his Spirit in their Consciences; and that they must believe
that they must only be saved by the Meri^s of Christ's Death and Sufferings
which he suffered for them (now above Sixte^n Hundred Years since) without the
Gates of Jerusalem, to satisfy the Justice of God for their Sins; but they
must not expect to be free from Sin. but to be continually sinning while they
live in this World.

So the Man of Sin, the Devil, will suffer his Servants to make as large a show
of Christianity as they can, so that they will continue in Sin, that is in
Service, and Slavery to him and his Power; but he wills not to have them
believe that they must be saved from their Sins by the precious Blood of Christ
which he has shed for them, Rev. 5.9. Tit. 2.12, 13, 14. Ephesians. ^2.5.
nor that they must be saved from their Sins, and redeemed from all Iniquity by
the Grace of God in their own Hearts, Heb. 2.9.
by which all true Christians were and are saved, and by which Christ tasted
Death for every Man; and the Man of Sin would have People to believe, Romans 8.2
Romans 6.18, 22. Heb 8.10.
that (while they are in this World) they cannot be set free from the Law of
Sin and Death, by the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus, as true
Christians witnessed that they were, and that Law was in their Hearts.

Thus the Prince or Ruler of Darkness keeps many in subjection to his dark
Power and Spirit, so that they consider not that they who live in Sin, Heb. 6.6.
and in disobedience to the Light of Christ's Spirit in themselves, crucify
Christ afresh, and put him to open shame; whereas the Apostle said, Let every
one that names the Name of Christ, depart from Iniquity; 2 Timothy 2.19. Gal.
5.24.
they that are Christ's, have crucified the Flesh, with the Affections and
Lusts: And the Apostle John writes, He that says he abides in Christ, (as
true Christians do) ought himself also to walk, even as be walked; 1 John 2.6.
1 John 4.13.
And said he, Ye know that he was manifested to take away our Sin, and in him
is no Sin; whosoever abides in him, sins not; whosoever sins, has not
seen him, neither known him: 1 John 3 5, 6, 7.
little Children, let no man deceive you, he that does Righteousness, is
righteous, even as he is righteous.

And the Apostle Paul says, The Church is subject to Christ in every thing,
(but they that live in Sin, are not so) and that he gave himself for it, Ephesians.
5.24, 25, 26, 27.
that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of Water by the Word
(which is nigh) that he might present it to himself a glorious Church, not
having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing: but that it should be holy, and
without blemish. And again he writes, The Weapons of our Warsare are not
Carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down strong holds, 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.
casting down Imaginations, and every high thing that exalts it self against
the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the
obedience of Christ.

And now let all that profess Christianity, examine and prove themselves
whether or no, they be thus subjected to Christ; for though he be the Author of
Eternal Salvation unto all them that obey him, Heb. 5.9. Heb. 2.9. Job 10.14,
15. Nah. 1.3. Romans 2.6, to 10. Rev. 22.12. John 1.4.
and though by the Grace of God he has tasted Death for every Man; yet he will
not acquit the Wicked, but (as he is a righteous Judge) he will render to every
Man according to his Deeds; and how shall those escape that neglect his great
Salvation, and rebel against his Light, (which is his Life) which they crucify
and oppress in themselves, by Sin, in their Affections and Lusts.

They are not like to escape the Righteous Judgments of God, who disobey the
Light of his Spirit in their Hearts, and obey the Man of Sin, the Devil, who
tempts them so to do; and so they yielding to his Temptations, are taken
captive by his power, which comes (through disobedience to God) to be exalted
in them above all that is called God, or that is worshipped, and so he swayes
and rules them (being his Subjects) by his dark power, who ought (as true
Christians are) to be subject to the Light of Christ, the Word of God's Power
in their Hearts.

And so, according to the persuasion of him whose power prevails over them,
many believe, Genesis 17.1. Mat. 5.48. 1 Cor. 13.11. 1 John 2.3, 3, 4, 5, 6.
and plead that none (though assisted by the Grace and Power of God) can keep
the Commandments of God, nor be freed from Sin, nor be made perfect while they
live in this World; And they may as well say plainly, that God is an hard
Master, and commands Impossibilities, or that he is unjust in requiring and
commanding his People and Children to forsake all Sin, and to be perfect, but
does not afford them sufficient means or power so to do; and so they seem to
render God more unjust then the evil Men, of which Christ spoke, If ye being
evil, Mat. 7.11. Luke 16.13.
know how to give good Gifts to your Children, how much more shall your Father
which is in Heaven, give good things (or give the Holy Spirit) to them that ask
him.

And also they may as well say, that Christ promised that which he will not, or
cannot perform, Mat. 7.7. and 21, 22. Ma^k 11.24. Luke 11.9. John 16.23, 24.
for he said, Whatsoever ye ask in Prayer believingly, or in my Name, ye shall
receive, or it shall be given unto you. Now probably all Professor; of
Christianity will confess, that all ought (according to Christ's Command) to
Pray for Freedom from Sin, and Perfection, while they are in this World, and
that, believingly too; but if they believe that it is not attainable, to what
purpose then should they Pray continually for it? For they that Pray, and not
in the Faith, do not obtain what they pray for; but if their Faith were in the
Light and Power of Christ, it might be otherwise with them: for why may not
Perfection be attainable as well in our Age, which is under a Gospel
Dispensation, as it was before, as the Scriptures of Truth testify.

For Enoch walked with God, which no Man while sinning, can do: Gen 5.22. Genesis
6, 9, 22.
And Noah was a Just Man, and perfect in his Generation, and walked with God;
and it is said, that, according to all that God commanded him, so did he: Job
1.8. and 2.3. Luke 1.6.
And Job was a Perfect and Upright Man: And Zacharias and Elizabeth were both
Righteous before God, walking in all the Commandments and Ordinances of the
Lord blameless. Who can believe that these before mentioned, were actually
sinning? And these were before or in the time of the outward Law, which was
given by Moses, who typified Christ, Romans 10.4.
who is the End of the Law for Righteousness, to every one that believes.

And under the more glorious Dispensation of the Gospel, the Scripture is very
plain, and largely testifies of Christians, that they were made free from Sin;
for the Apostle Paul writing to the Romans, says, Romans 6.22.
But now being made free from Sin, and become Servants to God, ye have your
fruit unto Holiness, and the end Everlasting Life: He does not say, that they
were continually sinning in Thought, Word, and Deed, and must be so during
their Lives.

And again he writes to the Ephesians thus, But God who is rich in mercy, for
his great Love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in Sins, has
quickened us together with Christ (by Grace ye are saved) and has raised us up
together, Ephesians. 2.4, 5, 6, 10.
and has made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: For (says
he) we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God
has ordained that we should walk in them, Those that are daily, or continually
sinning, are far from the state the Ephesians were in.

Now such who hold that Perfection or Freedom from Sin is not attainable by the
Grace of God in this World, will commonly confess that every degree of service
done to Satan, is an act of treachery, and disloyalty against the King of
Heaven; and every Sin, is certainly some degree of service done to Satan;
therefore such may as well hold, that it is impossible while in this World, to
do any thing but act treachery and disloyalty against God, the King of Heaven:
but certainly Death, is the reward of treachery and disloyalty, and the Wages
of Sin.

And that Perfection, or a state of being made free from Sin, is required of
true Christians, is very plain from these Scripture Testimonies; Mat^h. 5 48. 2
Cor. 13.11. 1 John 2.3, 4, 5, 6. and Chap. 3.2, to 10. Which Scriptures contain
the Words of the positive Commands of Christ, and his Apostles, and declare an
absolute necessity to leave Sin, and are therefore sufficient to show the great
Mistake of those, who esteem themselves true Christians, or Children of God,
while they continue in Sin.

And so let every particular (Male and Female) examine themselves (in the Light
of Christ Jesus in their Hearts) whose Servants they are, whether of Sin unto
Death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness; and whose Children they are, whether
Children of the Light, and of God; or Children of Darkness and of the Devil;
for they are certainly of the one; and also whose power rules in their Heart,
whether it be the power of God, or the power of the Devil, for the power of one
of them will rule.

And let all consider the Apostle's sayings, that, The wrath of God is revealed
from Heaven against all Ungodliness, See G. Pa. Lex. Romans 1.18.
and Vnrightenusness of Men, who hold (or rather withold, detain, or
suppress) (see G. Pasor's Lexicon) the Truth in Unrighteousness; and if the
Righteous scarcely be saved, 1 Pet. 4.18 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12. Luke 21.35.
where shall the Ungodly and the Sinner appear: And therefore let none put afar
from them the Day of the Lord, which will come as a Thief in the Night, and as
a Snare upon all them that dwell on the Face of the whole Earth.

And therefore, according to Christ's Admonition, let all Watch and Pray
continually, Luke 21.36.
that they may be accounted worthy to escape all those things that shall come
to pass, and to stand before him) that Sinners cannot stand before) in the
Great Day of his Wrath, when the Kings of the Earth, and the Great Men, and the
Rich Men, and the chief Captains, and Bondmen, and Freemen, Rev. 6.15, 16, 17.
shall hide themselves, and say to the Rocks and to the Mountains, Fall on us,
and hide us from the Face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the Wrath
of the Lamb; for the great Day of his Wrath is come, and who shall be able to
stand?

And so let all, Rich and Poor, High and Low, of what state or condition
soever, consider, Amos 4.13. Isa. 59.18. Eccles. 12.14. Jer. 25.14. Romans 2.6,
7, 8, 9, 10.
that they must appear before him, who not only knows, but also (by his Light
in their Hearts) declares unto them what their Thoughts are; and that they must
before him, give an Account of their Deeds done in the Body, whether good or
evil, and they must be recompensed accordingly; and Indignation, Wrath,
Tribulation and Anguish shall be upon every Soul that does Evil, but to them
who do well, and patiently continue in well doing, glory, honor, peace, and
eternal Life.

And all those who love their evil Deeds, or Words so well, that they think
they cannot leave them till they dye, what an Account will they have to give
then? because they hated the Light of Christ which reproved them in their
Hearts and Conscientes (for every one that does Evil, John 3.20.
hates the Light) therefore they must be cast into outer Darkness (they must
then have Darkness enough) where there is Weeping, Mat. 8.12. Chapter 22.13. Chapter
24.51. Chapter 25.30.
Wailing, and gnashing of Teeth.

And though the Swearer think it impossible to leave Swearing, or the Drunkard
think it impossible to forsake Drunkenness, and those that are accustomed to
sinful Words or Actions, think it impossible to leave them (because the Man of
Sin has gotten power over them, and so persuades them) yet those that have
chosen the Fear of the Lord, and believed in his Name, in his Light, in the
Word of his Power in their Hearts, and from the very Heart have obeyed the
Teachings thereof, have come in the Lord's due time to know hard things to be
made easy to them, and the power of Christ (in which they have believed) to be
stronger in them, than the power of the Man of Sin which once prevailed in them.

But those have first sought the Kingdom of God and his Righteousness, and they
have sought God with all their Heart, Deuteronomy. 4.29. Pro. 8.17. Mat. 7.7. Chapter
21.22. Mark 11.24.
and with all their Soul, and have experienced his Promise truly fulfilled,
that they who seek so, shall find him: And Christ, the Wisdom and Power of God,
has been their Beloved, and they have sought him early, and found him, as he
promised, Luke 11.9. John 16.24.

But while they sought him, as in the Night, or in Darkness; and in their ease,
as upon their Beds, then they sought him, but they found him not; and when they
arose and sought him as about the City where multitudes dwell) and in the broad
Ways, (of Profession) wherein many walk, where there is room for Sin, there
they sought him, but they found him not; and then they enquired of the Watchmen
that go about the City (the professed Teachers, and pretended Ministers of
Christ) saying particularly, Isa. 56.10, 11, 12. Cant. 3.1, 2.
Saw ye him whom my Soul loves? Alas! the Watchmen were blind, and all
ignorant, as such like were in the days past, and they saw him not (how should
they?) but they smote and wounded these diligent Enquirers after Christ their
Beloved, in telling them that is impossible really to enjoy him, the
Righteousness of God in them, to be the Lord their Righteousness, while in this
World; they must only have the Righteousness of Christ imputed to them; for
they cannot be freed from Sin, and the Body of Death, while they are on this
side the Grave, said the Watchmen: And such Doctrine as this, smote and wounded
the Enquirers, who could not so be satisfied, because there was no enjoyment of
their Soul's beloved, and therefore they passed from them; and it was but a
little that they passed from them, Cant. 3 3, 4.
and they found him whom their Souls loved, and they held him and would not let
him go, for all the Glory of the World.

But these were and are such as were first sick of Love; who mightily thirsted
after the Fountain of the Water of Life, Cant. 5.8. Rev. 21.6. Isa 55.1. Mat.
5.6. Luke 14.33. Luke 14.26. Rev. 13.11. John 12.25. Luke 9.23. and 24. Mat.
8.19, 20. Rev. 14.4. John 10.5, 27. Joh. 14.4, 5, to 26. John 16.13 Phil. 2.7.
Luke 6.20. to 36. Mat. 5.1, 2, to 48.
who truly hungered and thirsted after Righteousness, that could forsake all
that they had, knowing that none but such can be true Disciples of Christ; and
who could (not only) forsake, but also hate (the enticement of) Father and
Mother, Wife and Children, Brethren and Sisters, yea, and their own Lives also;
for none others (though they could come to him) can be true Disciples of
Christ, for he that loves his Life, shall lose it; these were and are they who
denied themselves, and took up their Cross daily, and followed Christ; who
heard and believed in his Voice, his Word, his Light, the Manifestation of his
Spirit (the Spirit of Truth which leads into all Truth, or into Truth in
every thing; these were and are they who are willing (with Christ) to make
themselves of no reputation; who can rejoice, and be exceeding glad, when men
revile them and persecute them, and say all manner of Evil falsely (for Christ's
sake) against them; these were and are poor in Spirit, meek and low in Heart,
and could and can endure Persecution for Righteousness sake; and can do good
to, and love them that hate them, and bless those that curse them, and Pray for
those that despightfully use them; and it was these who received, and do
receive the comfortable Promises of Christ fulfilled in them, and came, and do
come to the true enjoyment of their Souls beloved, Mat. 10 22. Mat. 24.^^.
and are despised, and hated of all Men, and of all Nations for Christ's Name
sake; and are zealously affected to Christ who gave himself for them, that he
might redeem them from all Iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
People, Tit. 2.14.
zealous of good Works.

But those that continue in Sin, and plead for Sin to continue in them till
they dye, how can they know Purification or Redemption from all Iniquity? such
have not in them the true Christians hope; for the Apostle says, 1 John 3.3. 1
John 4.17. 1 John 2.6. 1 John 3.7.
Every one that has (...) this Hope in them, purifieth himself, even as Christ
is pure; but such are not as he is in this World, as true Christians are; such
walk not as he walked; such are not righteous, even as he is Righteous; such do
not truly seek, and therefore do not find; such do not truly hunger and thirst
after Righteousness, and therefore they are not filled (with it) as Christ
promised. Mat. 5.6.


For none can be so filled, or satisfied, who believe not in the Light of
Christ in their own Hearts, but disobey and rebel against it, Job 24.13
and abide not in the Paths thereof, and know not the Ways thereof, which is
the Path of the Just, that is as a shining Light, Prove 4.18, 19.
that shines more and more unto the perfect Day; but the Way of the Wicked is
as Darkness, 1 John ^.10, 11.
they know not at what they stumble; for he that abides in the Light, there is
none occasion of stumbling in him; but they who abide in Sin while they live,
they stumble while they live, because they know not whither they go, nor how
near they are to the Pits brink, for they walk in Darkness, and so in a
dangerous state.

And so the power of Darkness, the power of the Man of Sin prevailing upon
them, who yield their Members Servants thereunto, it comes to rule over them,
and makes them ambitious to rule over, and to exercise Lordship over others,
their fellow Creatures with much Pride and Austerity, expecting and desiring to
receive, and receiving Honor from them, and one from another, and seek not the
Honor that comes from God only, and this shows (according to the Words of
Christ) that they are out of the true, living, John 5.44. 1 John 5.4. Ephesians.
6.16. 1 John 2.13, 14, 15.
Christian Faith, and so in the false, dead, Antichristian Faith, which gives
no Victory, as the true Faith does; for such are overcome and captivated by the
love of the Honors, Pleasures, Preferments, and Vanities of the World, which
if any man love, (said the Apostle) the love of the Father is not in him.

And so though the dark Power of the Man of Sin, more and more prevail upon and
captivate them, yet the Light of Christ in their Hearts and Consciences often
shows them their Sins, and for Sin checks and reproves them, and shows them
the dangerous, dismal consequences of Sin; but they not believing in the Light
of Christ, the Word of Faith, Romans 10.8. Heb 5.13.
and the Word of Righteousness, do not submit themselves unto the Righteousness
of God, (nor unto Christ, who is the end of the Law for Righteousness to every
one that believes) no more then old Israel did, Romans 10.1, 2, 3, 4.

And so though they may be zealous for their several Professions, and (as the
Jews were) for their Traditions, Ordinances and Ceremonies, which they use,
some after one manner, and some after another, according to their particular
Apprehensions and Imaginations, seeking to find Souls-satisfaction by using
outward typical shadowy things; which they cannot find whilst they neglect the
Light, the Substance, the Word of God's Grace in their Hearts, the Word of
Faith, Act. 20.32. Act. 13.26. 1 John 1.11. Col. 1.5. Mat. 13.19. John 3.36.
the Word of Salvation, the Word of Wisdom, the Word of Truth, the Word of
Christ, the Word of Life, the Word of Reconciliation, the Word of the Kingdom
of God which is in the Heart; and so they being in unbelief, the Wrath of God
abides on them in all their doings; For whatsoever is not of Faith, is Sin,
Romans 14.23.

And so their best Performances, their Prayers, their Preaching, and whatsoever
they can do in that state, is sinful, as they generally confess. But they who
seek the Lord (while he may be found) with all their Hearts and Souls, and
cannot rest satisfied till he manifest himself in his Love, but patiently, in
true brokenness and contrition of Heart, wait under his Judgments, till his
Indignation for Sin be overpast, as they continue faithful in true self-denial,
bearing patiently the daily Cross to their own Wills, the Lord will (in his own
time) satisfy such with his Mercy, and with his everlasting Kindness.

But if any flatter themselves, that they shall have Peace, although they walk
in the stubbornness of their own Hearts, they shut the Door of Mercy against
themselves, and when they have sinned out, and slighted the Day of their
Visitation (wherein the love of God in and by his Light (in their Hearts)
visits them, and striveth with them) then the Spirit of God cease to strive
any longer with them, and they are wholly given up to be ruled by the Man of
Sin, who is exalted in them above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped; Psalm. 14.1, 2, 3, 4.
and although some of them may be wickeder then others, yet none of them are
righteous at all; there is none of them that does good, no not one; but many of
them do badly with eagerness, eating up the People of the Lord as they eat
Bread.

And they do not only prey upon those who depart from Iniquity (who make
themselves a Prey) but they often prey upon one another, Isa. ^.15.
and sometimes war about their Ceremonies and Ordinances; and many thousands
have been killed upon that account; and many they have put to Death for their
Testimony for God, who have by his Spirit been raised up (even in the darkest
times of Apostasy) to testify against the Abominations set up by the ruling
power of the Man of Sin, the Devil and his Instruments.

And many call the Popes, or Pope of Rome, the Man of Sin, which the Apostle
said should be revealed, who may (by the Light of Christ in their own Hearts)
be sensible of the Man of Sin, and his power and works in themselves unto them
revealed; and therefore it were good for such first, by the Power of God, to be
cleansed from him, and his power, and works inwardly in themselves, lest they
become more and more like unto him

But indeed the Popes of Rome have been the chief visible Rulers of the false
Church, drunk with the Blood of the Saints, and Martyrs of Jesus, Rev. 17.5, 6.
and the Mother of Harlots, and the many Abominations of the Earth; and the
Inventers and setters up of the pestilent Traditions, and idolatrous Ceremonies
still used in the Apostasy from the Truth, and many who look upon themselves as
reformed from Popery, are yet (in a great measure) found in many of their
pernicious Practices, and Inventions to get Money by.

For the Popes having been, in a great degree, influenced by the power and
spirit of the Man of Sin, the Devil; and having had the highest outward
Exaltation over the Nations, and Kings of the Earth, or at least, having
claimed or challenged it, may fitly be said to have been, or to be the highest
Representatives of the Man of Sin.

And amongst the many Popish Cheats, none seems greater then their Purgatory,
or their telling of a purging Place from Sin after this Life, whereby many are
cheated of Eternal Happiness, by living (in hopes thereof) securely in Sin
while they live; and many cheated of their Money also, for Pardon and
Indulgences from the Pope, to redeem the Souls of their deceased Friends out of
Purgatory.

Which is contrary to the Truth, and to the Record of the Holy Scriptures,
which say, where the Tree falls, there shall it be, and every Tree that
brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down and cast into the Fire; Ecc'e.
11.3. Mat. 3.10.
and Christ said, Enter ye in at the straight Gate, for wide is the Gate and
broad is the Way that leads to Destruction, and many there be that go in
thereat; because straight is the Gate, and narrow is the Way that leads unto
Life, and few there be that find it: And beware (said he) of false Prophets in
Sheeps clothing, which are inwardly ravening Wolves; ye shall know them by
their Fruits: A good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit, neither can a corrupt
Tree bring forth good Fruit; every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit, is
hewn down, and cast into the Fire, Matthew. 10.7, to 20.

Now if a good Tree cannot bring forth evil Fruit, how is it then that all good
men are continually sinning? for Sin is Evil Fruit: And if every such a one as
brings not forth good Fruit, must be cast into the Fire, and there must lie,
how can the Pope (or any Man else) recover such out of the Fire? And if it be
the wide Gate, and broad Way that leads to Destruction, how can they that
walk therein escape Destruction? or the Pope deliver them from it when they
come to the end of their Journey?

But yet this Antichristian Doctrine of a Purgatory after this Life, is upheld
by the Popes, and by their Cardinals, Bishops and Councils, to their great gain
of Money to themselves, and their Clergy, so called; and upon this groundless
point of their Faith hangs many of their Antichristian Ceremonies to get Money
by, as their Trentals, Masses, Diriges, Requiems, Indulgences, Pardons,
Jubilees, and their pretended power of Binding, and Loosing, and their Prayers
for the Dead. And though many pretending Reformation from Popery, deny their
Purgatory and Prayers for the Dead, yet they claim Popish Wages for Praying for
the Dead, which they call Mortuaries, and annex it to their Tithes, for which
they cast them, that cannot for Conscience sake pay them, into Prison; and so
they deny the Work, but claim the Wages, which is more unreasonable then to
work for Wages

And it is a general Tenet of pretended Reformists, that none can be fully
cleansed from Sin on this side the Grave, and yet confess they, that no unclean
thing shall enter into Heaven; and then where must they be cleansed? or how
will they escape the Popes Purgatory, which they also deny?

And the Popes and their Abettors (on the other hand) say, Council of Trent.
Can. 10. Ellar. lib. 2 de justific. chap. 2. page 129.
That they can do more good Works than God has commanded, which they call
Works of Supererogation, which they hold, not only meritorious of Eternal Life,
and of singular Glory in Heaven, but also that they may communicate of the
abundance of these their Merits unto others; but this Doctrine is also false,
and also Antichristian.

For the Apostle of Christ said, I labored more abundantly then they all,
(speaking of the Apostles) and yet not I, 1 Cor. 15.10.
but the Grace of God, which was with me; and by the Grace of God (said he) I
am what I am; and (said he) the Grace of God that brings Salvation, has
appeared to all men, teaching us, (so it was his Teacher or Commander) that
denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, Tit. 2.11, 12.
we should live Soberly, Righteously, and Godly in this present world. So the
Grace of God teaches to live Godly, or like God, who works all in all in his
Servants, and by his Spirit (the Manifestation whereof is given to every Man to
profit withal) gives the Word of Wisdom, and Faith, 1 Cor. 12.6, 7, to 12.
and Gists of Healing, and working of Miracles, and discerning of Spirits, etc.
dividing to every Man severally as he will; and so it is God that works in
his People both to will and to do, Phil. 2.13. Isa. 64.6.
of his own good pleasure; and all Man's own Righteousness is as filthy Rags.

Therefore they who say, 1 John 4.17 1 John 3.3, 7.
that they can outlive the Teachings or Commands of the Grace of God, which
teaches to live Godly, or like God, as true Christians do; it is plain, that
such are not (as true Christians are) the workmanship of God (by his Grace)
created in Christ Jesus unto good Works, which God has ordained and prepared
for his Servants to walk in; Ephesians. 2.10.
but it is certain that such are exalted in their Imaginations, by the working
of the Man of Sin, who is exalted in them above the Word of God's Power in
their Hearts; and so he as God, sits in the Temple of God (the Heart)
showing himself that he is their God, Acts 20.28. Heb. 9.12.
who with his wicked deceivableness has deceived them in a high degree, or
else they durst not speak such Words, or teach such Doctrine.

And so no Men can communicate any of their Merits toward the saving of others
(that Pretense being an abominable Cheat to get Money by) for true Christians
are what they are by the Grace of God, and the working thereof in their Hearts,
and never pretend to any of their own Merits, for their Salvation is only by
Christ, who bath obtained Eternal Redemption for them, and purchased them with
his own Blood.

And as the Man of Sin is yielded unto, obeyed and worshipped, by them upon
whom he prevaiss with his Temptations, he becomes exalted in their minds, and
proud, ambitious, and imperious like himself; and then they are offended when
others do not bow or submit unto them; and as by his deceit he prevails in
them, he makes them (like himself) Deceivers, Liars, and Hypocrites, and yet
they would be called true Christians, and Children of God, like the Jews
formerly (who were in the same Nature, though not Profession) to whom Christ
said, Ye are of your Father the Devil, and the Lusts of your Father ye will do,
John 8.44.
he was a Murderer from the beginning, and abode not in the Truth, because
there is no Truth in him.

And so the Devil being a Murderer, and a Liar, makes his Children and
Servants (as like himself as he can) of a murdering lying Spirit, and apt to
persecute and murder those over whom they have the power, that cannot comply
with their Doctrines, Worships, Traditions, Inventions, Customs and Practices,
by them (in the dark and woeful Apostasy from the Truth) invented, ordained, set
up and practiced.

And all false Churches, or gatherings of People, what Name soever they go
under, are all one in the ground; for being erred from the Light and Spirit of
Christ (who is the Way of God, the Truth it self, and the Life of
Righteousness) they are all wandered into Confusion, and that is the ground in
which all who are erred from the Light of Christ in themselves remain, let them
profess what they will. And so as Babel's Builders of Old would build
themselves a Tower, whose top might reach to Heaven, but were defeated by being
all confounded in their Languages, who before were all of one Speech, and of
one Language; so all that are erred from the Light of Christ in themselves,
being gone into Confusion inwardly, they would have a Tower, (or a Way) of
their own making or building, to get to Heaven by, and they can but build it
where they are, that is in Confusion.

And so all who are erred and strayed from the Way of God, the Light of Christ
in their own Hearts, and depend upon Men of Languages to teach them or guide
them to Heaven, are in Confusion, and may fitly be called Children of Babylon,
and Mystery Babylon the Great is their Mother, who is the Mother of Harlots,
Rev. 17.
and Abominations of the Earth, whom the Servant of Christ saw drunken with the
Blood of the Saints, and of the Martyrs of Jesus; and this Woman is the great
Whore that sits upon many Waters, which Waters are Peoples, and Multitudes,
and Nations, and Tongues; so Tongues or Languages is one part of her Seat.

And this Woman is the great Whore, with whom the Kings of the Earth have
committed Fornication, and the Inhabitants of the Earth have been made drunk
with the Wine of her Fornication; and this Woman is that great City that
reigns over the Kings of the Earth, and she is become the Habitation of
Devils, and the Hold of every foul Spirit, and a Cage of every unclean and
hateful Bird; for all Nations have drunk of the Wine of the Wrath of her
Fornication, and the Merchants of the Earth are waxed rich through the
abundance of her Delicacies.

But how much this False Church, this City Babylon has glorified her self, and
lived deliciously; so much Torment and Sorrow must be given her, for she says
in her Heart, I sit a Queen, and am no Widow, and shall see no Sorrow;
therefore shall her Plagues come in one day, Death, and Mourning, and Famine,
and she shall utterly be burned with Fire; for strong is the Lord God, who
judges her: and the Kings of the Earth who have committed Fornication, and
lived deliciously with her, shall bewail her and lament for her, when they
shall see the Smoke of her Burning, standing afar off for fear of her Torment,
shall say, Alas! alas! that great City Babylon, that mighty City; for in one
Hour is thy Judgment come.

And the Merchants of the Earth shall weep, and mourn over her, for no Man
buyeth their Merchandise any more (a great number of Priests, and covetous
Preachers will be at a great loss then, and that Day is now drawing near) for
fear of her Torment, weeping, and wailing, and saying, Alas! alas! that great
City that was clothed in fine Linen, and Purple, and Scarlet, and decked with
Gold, and precious Stones, and Pearls, for in one hour, so great Riches is come
to naught.

But Heaven, and the holy Apostles and Prophets, shall then rejoice over her,
when God has avenged them on her; Rev. 18.
for by her Sorceries were all Nations deceived, and in her is, and will be
found the Blood of the Prophets, and of the Saints, and of all that were slain
upon the Earth.

And if this false whorish Church had not had a large and splendid Profession
of Christianity and Religion, she could not possibly have magnified her self so
much, nor by her Sorceries could she so have deceived all Nations; and if it
had not been a Golden Cup that she handed forth to the Nations, being full of
Abomination and Filthiness of her Fornication, probably she co^uld not have
allured the Inhabitants of the Earth, so freely and generally to have drunk of
it, as they have done, with which they have been made drunk, brutish and
ravenous, so that as Wolves they have preyed upon the Sheep of Christ, (true
Christians, who loved their Enemies and Persecutors) and in killing of them,
they thought they did God good Service (as Christ foretold) being drunk with
the Wine of the Whore's Fornication. Joh. 16.2.


And so they were far from the Nature of Christ, and from his Teachings, who
came not to destroy men's Lives, but to save them, and taught (and by his Spirit
teaches) all his Disciples to love their Enemies; but they are far from loving
their Enemies, who kill, or persecute their Friends, for witnessing to the
Truth, though it reprove them for Sin; for Sin may cause them to be destroyed,
but it will never do any of them any Good; thus all Persecutors are acted by
the Murdering Spirit of the Man of Sin, and drunk with the Wine of the Whores
Cup.

And so as Cain (who was the first Persecutor about Religion) had a Mark set
upon him, lest any finding him should kill him;) so all Persecutors about
Religion have a mark set upon them, for their Persecuting is an infallible Mark
or Token whereby all may know that their Religion is vain, and that they are no
true Christians, but false Pretenders to Christianity.

For the Apostle Paul said, All that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy
3.12.
shall suffe Persecution; and so they are no persecutors, but persecuted, and
can Pray for such as persecute them: And when Paul was called Saul, he was a
Persecutor, and consenting to the Death of Stephen, who prayed for his
Persecutors and Murderers; Romans 8.10.
but when he believed in the Light, the Word of Faith in the Heart, and ceased
to kick against the Pricks of it, and obeyed the Teachings of it, then of a
Persecutor he became a Preacher of the Cross of Christ, which he bare through
much Persecution, even unto Death, 2 Cor. 4.17.
and could say, This light Affliction which is but for a Moment, works for us
a far more exceeding and eternal weight of Glory; and said he, I reckon that
the Sufferings of this present time, Romans 8.18.
are not worthy to be compared to the Glory that shall be revealed in us: So he
changed for a better condition.

And so all Professors of Christianity, of what sort soever, that are
Persecutors, are within the compass of the false Church, Mystery Babylon, in
whom is found the Blood of all the Righteous that are slain upon the Earth.

And though such differ among themselves, one Preaching this, and another that
different Doctrine, and often go to Wars, and kill one another about their
pretended Religions, and Doctrines, and Tenets, and which of them can get the
upperhand, prey upon, vex, and trouble the others, yet none of them all can
endure to be persecuted themselves; but when they are under, they creep into
Corners, and hide, or run, or seek to save themselves by joining with the
Worship of their Persecutors in Hypocrisy, and being at difference thus among
themselves (like Herod and Pilate) yet they can all agree to set at naught, and
mock, and persecute Christ in his Members.

But true Christians, Children of the Light, are Children of God, and God is
their Friend, and therefore they fear not what Man can do unto them, for they
know that God their Father will preserve his faithful Children; and they are
Members of Christ, (the Truth) and the Truth is precious in their Eye, and
their Faith in it is worth contending for, and worth suffering for, and for it
they can suffer what God their Father sees meet, and Man can inflict no more;
and so true Christians are freely given up to suffer Persecution for Christ,
the Lord their Righteousness, knowing it will be to the glory of God, if he so
please, and also having an Eye to the Recompense of Reward.

And now is fulfilled that which was prophesied by the Prophet Isaiah, saying,
In the Day when the Branch of the Lord shall be beautiful and glorious, Isa.
4.1, 2.
and the Fruit of the Earth excellent and comely for all them that are escaped
of Israel; then seven Women shall take hold of one man, saying, We will eat our
own Bread, and wear our own Apparel, only let us be called by thy Name to take
away our Reproach.

And now is the Name of Christ, who is called the Branch, become of esteem with
many Nations, and so is beautiful and glorious; and the Fruit that in many
Christians, in deep Sufferings, and otherwise, has been and is brought forth,
is excellent and comely; and so now there are many divided Professions among
People, and every Gathering of them, of each sort, call themselves by the
honorable Name of Christians, and so they seem to take hold of Christ, and
would be called by his Name, to have their Reproach taken away, for they will
eat their own Bread, feed upon their own Imaginations, Carnal Knowledge and
Sensual Wisdom, and also upon their Pleasures and Vanities, and likewise they
will wear their own Apparel, have their own Professions, and cover with a
Covering, but not of the Spirit of God; (no, for they mock at the Movings of
the Spirit, and at the clothing of the Spirit; but if any Man have not the
Spirit of Christ, he is none of his) and so they know not a feeding upon the
Bread of Life which Christ gives, nor a being clothed with the fine Linen,
which he gives to be clothed withal; but are a Reproach to the Name of
Christ, and therefore their Reproach is not taken away, they have not the end
of their desire; being out of the Life of true Christianity, they cannot have
truly the Name.

And such, in every of their ragged Prosessions wherewith they would cover
themselves, (like Adam and Eve with Fig Leaves) in each of their Companies,
have Teachers, which call themselves Divines; and why so? because they were
brought up at Natural Schools and Colleges, and have learned Languages, as
Latin, Greek and Hebrew (but there have been many more Languages than those
since the building of Babel) and it was Latin, Greek and Hebrew which Pilate
set over the Head of Christ, when they crucified him; Luke 23.38.
and so such set Latin, Greek and Hebrew over Christ in his Spiritual
Appearance by his Light, Grace, and the Manifestation of his Spirit in their
Hearts, where he is crucified afresh in their Affections and Lusts; and so they
are more sensual than divine. And those their Teachers having paid much for
their Learning, they make as rich Merchandise of it as they can, they get as
large Benefices or Wages as they can, and no doubt but they set forth their
Merchandise as gorgeously as they can, too; especially till their Benefices or
Wages be confirmed (as they think) upon them; and then vendible, or not
vendible, they will have their rate, or with force and with cruelty take it.

And these are the Merchants of the Earth (for their Merchandise is earthly,
and bought for Money, which cannot buy Heaven) who are waxen Rich through the
abundance of the Delicacies of Babylon, with whom they Trade, and at the fall
of Babylon (which hastes apace) they will weep and mourn over her, Rev. 18.3,
11.
for no Man will buy their Merchandise any more; for true Christians cannot
hire Teachers to deceive People (nor pay to them) who strengthen the Hands of
Evildoers, preaching Peace where there is no Peace.

And thus these Merchants, false Prophets, Teachers and Priests being waxed
rich, Jer. 5.31.
like the false Prophets and Priests of Old, they bear Rule by their Means, and
in the power of Darkness, the power of the Man of Sin, in the woeful Night of
Apostasy, the Heads of them, the Popes of Rome have ruled over the Kings of the
Earth, and have declared, pronounced and defined that every Creature upon
necessity of Salvation, must be subject to them, the Popes, who say, their
Doctrine is infallible; but now many know that much of it is contrary to the
Doctrine of Christ, and his Apostles.

And now the Everlasting Day of God is at hand, in which the Name of the Lord
shall be great among the Heathen, Mal 1.11.
from the rising of the Sun unto the going down of the same, and in the Light
of Christ, the Son of Righteousness, (which is arisen, and is arising with
healing in his Wings, unto many who have feared, Mal. 4.2.
and do fear the Name of the Lord) many are made sensible of the same; and know
that the Light thereof is driving away the Spiritual Darkness (of the woeful
Night of Apostasy) which has long covered the Earth, and the Hearts of the
People, and many shall come to see plainly the deceit of the Merchants of
Babylon, which is revealed, and is to be yet more and more revealed by the
Light and Spirit of Christ, and they who see their deceit plainly (except they
be very foolish) will buy their Merchandise no more, and then down falls their
Trade.

And now let all (who are convinced of the Popish Error in telling of a Purging
from Sin after this Life, and yet say that there is no freedom from Sin
attainable on this side the Grave;) consider that no unclean thing can enter
into the Kingdom of Heaven, Rev. 21.27.
and then, where and when must their Souls be made clean from Sin, if not while
their Bodies live?

And let all such examine themselves inwardly in the true Light of Christ
Jesus, whether they be not in the Suburbs of the City Babylon, or in Confusion?
and whether or no they be fit for the Kingdom of Heaven, into which nothing
that defiles, or works abomination, or makes a lie, can in anywise enter:
but they that are written in the Lamb's Book of Life, in whose Light the
Nations of them which are saved must walk, Rev. 21.23, 24, 27.

And all those who in any measure see themselves to be in Babylon, or in
Confusion inwardly, as all are who disobey the Light of Christ, and walk not in
the Path thereof, but would have Salvation in their own Ways, or Religions,
which they reckon were the Religions of their Forefathers, as the Jews did of
Old, who reckoned themselves Abraham's Children, and yet would not believe in
Christ, whose Day Abraham saw, and rejoiced to see, whose Day the said Jews
despised, and slighted the Visitation thereof unto them: Now it is high time
for all such to take diligent heed to the Light of Christ in their own Hearts,
which only can truly give them a true discovery inwardly of their several
Estates and Conditions in which their Souls stand in the sight of God, who
knows the Secrets of all Hearts.

And as they carefully mind and obey this true Light, which secretly reproves
for Sin in their Hearts and Consciences, John 6.2. John 8.12.
it will certainly show them whether they work the Works of God, which is to
believe on him, or on that which God has sent, which is on the Light, which
whosoever follows, shall not walk in Darkness, but shall have the Light of
Life: Ephesians. 5.13.
Or they work the Works of the Man of Sin, the Works of Darkness, which are
reproved, and reprovable by the Light; for whatsoever is reproved or
reprovable, is made manifest by the Light.

And so all by Examination may prove and try themselves, whether they be in the
true Faith of Christ which gives the Victory, and so the Apostle advised,
adding thereunto these Words, Know ye not your own selves (said he) how that
Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be Reprobates.

Oh! it is a dreadful thing to sell Eternal Happiness for Earthly Trifles, (and
what else is all the Glory of the World?) as Esau, being faint, (it seems he
wanted true Faith) he sold his Birthright for a Mess of Pottage, and lost the
Blessing, being hunting abroad; Heb. 12.17.
and afterward could not find a Place of Repentance, though he sought it
earnestly, or carefully, and that with Tears.

And so let all beware, lest they bring themselves into Esau's condition, for
they cannot find a Place of Repentance when they have sinned out their Day, and
sold Heaven for a little Vanity: And let none hunt abroad like Esau, who that
while lost the Blessing; but every one at home, may do well to take heed to the
Light, though it shine but as in a dark Place, until the Day dawn, and the
Day Star arise in their Hearts.

For it it a terrible thing to neglect the Day of the Visitation of the Love of
God, in and by the Light and Grace of Jesus Christ; (for he would not that any
should perish) as Jerusalem did, whom he would often have gathered as a Hen
gathers her Chickens under her Wings, but she would not; wherefore Christ
wept over her, saying, Oh! that thou had known in this thy Day, the things
which concern thy Peace, but now they are hid from thine Eyes; And then he
declared of the Woe, Confusion, and Misery, that was therefore to come upon her,
by her Enemies prevailing over her, because she knew not the time of her
Visitation, Luke 19.41, 42, 43, 44.

And so Woe, Confusion and Misery, will certainly come upon every particular Man
or Woman, by the prevailing Power of their Enemy, the Man of Sin, the Power of
Darkness, who reject the Light of Christ, and rebel against it, and neglect the
Day of their Souls Visitation by it.

For the Light of Christ, who is the Sun of Righteousness is extended to all
Mankind, to teach People to fear the Name of God, that so the Sun of
Righteousness may arise upon them, and that they may be gathered under the
healing Wings thereof, as a Hen gathers her Chickens; and so Christ stands
at the Door of Peoples Hearts, and knocks, and desires, Rev. 3.20
and entreats, that they may open unto him, that he may come in unto them,
and Sup with them, and they with him.

But all they who reject his Counsel, and will none of his Reproof, but delight
in Vanity, and do not choose the Fear of the Lord, who when he knocks, will
not open; when he calls, will not answer; and when he stretches out his
Hand, Prove. 1.
refuse to be gathered; these may seek him, but shall not find him; these may
call, but he will not answer; these may cry, but he will not hear them.

And it is not Profession only that will stand any instead (though it be of the
very Truth it self) without Faithfulness to God, in the Great and Terrible Day
of the Lord which is at hand, Zeph. 1.12.
wherein the will Plead with all Flesh, and stain the Glory thereof; wherein he
will search Jerusalem with Candles, and punish the Men that are settled on
their Lees; for the Lord, by his Light, searches the Heart, and tries the
Reins, Jer. 17.10.
even to give to every Man according to his Ways, and according to the Fruit of
his Doings.

And now God requires all People to hear his beloved Son, who speaks from
Heaven by his Light in their Hearts, his Heavenly Voice, which Voice from
Heaven says, Come out of Babylon, my People, Rev. 18.4.
that ye be not partakers of her Sins, and that ye receive not of her Plagues:
he that has an Ear to hear, let him hear what the Spirit says: And let none
refuse him that speaks from Heaven for if they escaped not who refused him
that spoke on Earth, Heb. 12.25.
of how much sorer Punishment shall they be worthy, who turn away from him that
speaks from Heaven?

And they who call themselves Protetestants, (what sort soever they be of) who
protest against the Abominations of the Pope and the Church of Rome, if they
come not to the Light, nor bring their Deeds to it, that their Deeds may be
made manifest by it that they are wrought in God, they are yet but in Babylon,
in Confusion, and in Darkness, and there they are in the inventing Nature, in
which Popery first arose, and from which sprung their Ceremonies and Ordinances
to get Money by; and so they are far from the Nature of them who first began to
protest against Popery, who according to what was made manifest, answered the
Light in their Hearts, and were wonderfully preserved.

And so they who profess Christianity, and are erred from the Light of Christ
in their own Hearts, and live in Disobedience to it, they are walking in the
Way of the Man of Sin, who is their Leader and Ruler; And what need such to
call the Church of Rome Babylon? or the Pope, (who is called the Head of it)
Antichrist, or the Man of Sin, who are in Spiritual Babylon, and subject to the
Spirit of Antichrist in themselves?

For the Papists themselves (as they do) tell of an Antichrist, or a Man of Sin
to be revealed, of which one of them, called Robert Persons (in his Book
entitled, A Christian Directory, or Resolution, printed Permissu superiorum,
that is, with the License of Superiors, in the Year 1622, in Part 1. and Chap.
7. and in Page 246.) thus writes, That, according to the written Prophecies of
Ezekiel, Daniel, Saint John in the Revelation; a little before the last General
Day of Judgment, there shall be revealed the Man of Sin, called Antichrist;
who, after the Conquest of many Kings and Kingdoms, shall make himself the
Monarch, and absolute Owner of the World, and shall exercise upon good
Christians more Barbarous Cruelty, and shed more Innocent Blood within the
space of three Years and an half, (which shall be the term of his outrageous
Tyranny) than all other Enemies of God have done from the beginning.

In which Words the said Robert Persons writes as if the Man of Sin, or
Antichrist, were not yet revealed, or not yet come to his Exaltation, but the
said (Apostle) John, whom he quotes, testified. That the Spirit of Antichrist,
in his time, 1 John 4.3.
was in the World, and that there were then many Antichrists, whereby (says
he) we know that it is the last time: Joh. 2.18.
And if the Spirit of Antichrist, and many Antichrists were then so known to
true Christians, that thereby they knew it was the last time, it must needs
follow that Antichrist was in the Apostles time revealed.

But if the Papists mean a Visible Man, called Antichrist, and a Monarch and
absolute Owner of the World, who exercises upon others, good Christians, much
barbarous Cruelty, and sheddeth much Innocent Blood, whether then may not all
(except themselves, and have they not reason too?) who have but heard of their
Visible Head, the Popes, and what Monatchs, and what absolute Owners of the
World they have been, and what Barbarous Cruelty they have exercised upon good
Christians, and what an abundance of Innocent Blood they have caused to be
shed, during the term of their outrageous Cruelty, reasonably conclude that the
Head of the Papists, the Pope, has been, or is that Antichrist, that Monarch,
that exerciser of barbarous Cruelty upon good Christians, and that shedder of
much Innocent Blood, mentioned in the written Prophecies of Ezekiel, Daniel,
and the Apostle John, which the said Robert Persons, one of the Popish Priests,
writes of as aforesaid; who writes, or styles himself, Priest of the Society of
Jesus, which signifies Savior, but seems rather of the Society of Destroyers,
for Blood - shedders are Destroyers.

And this appears by the Decrees of their own Councils, which tend to enjoin
all to conform, or burn; an Antichristian Decree indeed; and woe will be the
portion of them who make such Unrighteous Decrees, and prescribe such grievous
things: what will they do in the Day of Visitation? and in the Desolation which
shall come from far? to whom will they fly for Help, and where will they leave
their Glory? Isa. 10.1, 2, 3, 4.

And if any be offended at what is here written, let such know, that he that
writes this, has no evil will or prejudice in his Heart toward any Man, or
any People in the World, but desires the good of all, even as he desires the
same for himself, and (according to the Mind of Christ) would not that any
should perish, but that all through true Repentance, might find Mercy, and
obtain Eternal Salvation by Jesus Christ.

For I have (by woeful Experience) known a time when the deceivable unrighteous
power of the Devil, the Man of Sin, prevailed upon me so far, that I could not
then believe, that ever I could be free from Sin while in this World, because I
daily felt my self overcome by, and subject to Sin, which daily deceived me;
and so I was persuaded of the common received Tenet, viz. No freedom from Sin
whilst in this World, but that all must carry a Body of Sin, and a Body of
Death whilst on this side the Grave.

And so was I long in a miserable condition, being often troubled exceedingly
in my Heart and Conscience, with a deep sense of my own sinful condition, which
in and by the true Light of Christ Jesus in my Heart and Conscience, I plainly
saw to be very wicked and deplorable, wherewith my Soul was grievously
oppressed, but knew not how to be eased of my Burden, which seemed to me such
an intolerable heavy Burden or Load, that I was very near to have fainted under
it; for the more I looked into my inward condition, the worse it then seemed
unto me, being exceedingly afraid lest the Lord should have cut me off in mine
Iniquity wherewith I had provoked him.

And the sense of this my Condition, kept me in a constant Care lest I should
do any thing whatsoever that might further incense or provoke the Lord God of
Heaven and Earth against me, and so make my Load more grievous; and as I thus
looked upon my Soul to be in a most wretched forlorn condition, and in
continual danger to be cast into everlasting Fire (in which the Devil and his
Angels are tormented Day and Night for ever, and ever) then for a long season I
cried in bitterness of Soul unto the Lord, that I believed knew the very seeret
Thoughts and Intents of all Hearts, that he would show Mercy unto me, and teach
me to know the Way wherein he would have me to walk; for I was yet as a
Stranger to, and unacquainted with that which then, and formerly, reproved me
for Sin in my Heart, which is the Light of Christ, and the true Christians
Spiritual Way to God, which when I did, or spoke any thing that added unto my
Burden, ever made me sensible that it was wrong before I did it; and this
aggravated my Sorrow.

And after several Months continuance in this dolorous condition, by the Light
of Christ in my Heart, I saw the emptiness and insufficiency of all Formal and
Ceremonial Worship of God, that is not in his own Spirit and Truth in the
inward parts, which Spirit God ever hears the cry of, and which Truth he ever
loves, out of which I could not but judge my self to have been, with those I
associated my self in that formal insufficient Worship, which was no sooner
ended, but (though Confession of Sins, and Prayer for Repentance (in a seeming
Zeal) had been made, and Sin preached against) yet before parting (and
sometimes in the Worship too) the spirit and power of the Man of Sin, that
tempts into all Sin, arose amongst us, causing Laughter, and ^olly, and Vanty
to appear amongst us, which was far from a State of true Repentance.

And though of late, before I had kept over the Witness of God, the Light in my
Conscience (though it had often reproved me for Sin) and had been like the rest
of the company with whom I joined in Worship; yet then the sense of my own
deplorable state being upon me continually) I could not appear in my former
Jollity and Vanity amongst them; but though mine Eye was chiefly upon mine own
condition, yet I could not be unsensible of their state, which had so lately
been mine own; but, in the love that thinks no evil, I mourned over them, and
sorrowed for them, who then began to deride me.

And after I had thus remained for a Season (till I durst no longer delay the
time) then I began to question them that had been my Teachers, concerning the
Light, (the Way of God, and the Just Man's Path) which had convinced me of all
my Sins, and in my Heart and Conscience reproved me for the same; but alas! the
Teachers, though professing to be Ministers of Christ the Light, yet they were
untaught by the Light, and untaught of God, by whom all true Christians are
taught, as Christ, and his Holy Prophets and Apostles declared, John 6.45. Isa.
54.13. John 14.26. 1 Kings 8.35, 36. Heb. 8.11. 1 John 5.20.

And being willing to be satisfied as fully as I could amongst them, as well
concerning the Light, as their doubtful Doctrines, Ordinances and Ceremonies, I
passed over a considerable time, in reasoning and discoursing with those of my
Teacher, whom I judged most able; but though the most (or all) of them
understood several Languages, yet none of them owned the true Light wherewith
Jesus Christ enlighteneth every Man (and Woman) that comes into the World to
be saving, John 1.9.
or of sufficiency to lead to Salvation, whereby I plainly saw that they were
as Strangers to it and had not tried the Virtue of it.

For the Scriptures also are herein very plain, John 1.1, 4, 9.
that this Light is the Life which was in the Eternal Word (which is Christ)
which was in the beginning with God, which Word was (and is) God; and so this
Light is certainly divine, and consequently sufficient to lead to Salvation,
all that faithfully give up with all their Hearts, Tit. 2.11, 12. Ephesians. 2.8. 2
Cor. 12.9.
to follow it and obey its Requirings; and this Light is the Grace of God that
brings Salvation, which has appeared to all Men, and was the true Christians
Teacher, and by it they were saved, through Faith; for it was and is
sufficient; and it was and is the Manifestation of the Spirit of Christ which
is given to every Man to profit withal; 1 Cor. 12.7. Ephesians. 5.13. Romans 1.10.
and whatsoever makes manifest, is Light, which makes manifest all things
that are reproved, and whatsoever may be known of God, is manifest within.

But the said Teachers said, That Revelation was now ceased, and that in our
days none must expect to enjoy God or Christ in his inward appearance in the
Heart, Soul, and Conscience, in which his Servants the Prophets, Apostles, and
true Christians enjoyed him in days past, but that now God has in the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, called the Bible, given us wholly to
understand our Duty toward him, and one unto another, and that none can know
God but by the Scriptures.

And indeed none can know God but by that which the Scriptures declare of,
which is the Light or Spirit, for I then knew certainly that though I had often
(with zeal and delight) read the Scriptures, yet I knew not rightly my own
condition, nor how far I was from the state of a true Christian, till I gave
diligent heed to the Light, of Christ, the Grace of God in my own Heart and
Conscience; and as I waited low in it, by it I received a clear discovery of my
own state toward God, and what was needful for me to know.

And though the Apostle Paul writing to Timothy, says, Of a Child thou have
known the Holy Scriptures, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17.
which are able to make thee wise unto Salvation, (yet, says he it is) through
Faith which is in Christ Jesus: Mark that, Romans 10.6, 7, 8.
It is through Faith which is in Christ Jesus, the Light, and the Word of Faith
nigh in the Heart, and in the Mouth. And says Paul, All Scripture given by
Insporation of God, is profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction,
for Instruction in Righteousness, that the Man of God may be perfect, thoroughly
furnished unto all good Works. So they that deny Perfection through Faith which
is in Christ Jesus, to be attainable on this side the Grave, for which end the
Scriptures, by the Inspiration of God, were given; do not such deny the very
end for which the Scriptures were given?

But the Apostle Paul did not write (according to the common Translation) that
All Scripture is given by Inspiration of God; Take notice of this, for the Word
(Is) is added, there being nothing for it in the original Greek Copies: And
also, the Word Scriptures, signifies Writings, whether good, or bad; and no
bad Writings are given by the Inspiration of God: Therefore they that profess
the Scriptures to be their Rule and Standard, should not add to their Rule or
Standard, lest they be found to falsify it.

And so, whilst I was thus reasoning with my former Teachers, I became fully
satisfied concerning their Ignorance of the Truth, and their Insufficiency to
be Teachers or Guides to direct in the Way of Salvation, being out of it
themselves; and so I became as it were weaned, and in weaning from the Breast I
had formerly sucked, which was the Conceivings of the Wisdom of Men, and in the
Eyes of the World I became a Fool, and was reckoned mad, and a Changeling, and
I durst not give way to the Entreaties, nor to the Threatenings, neither of
Parent nor Relations, though near and dear unto me, whose Welfare every way I
defired, as my own, yet then they became as mine Enemies, being mightily
offended with me; though after some time, more Friendly again then before, some
of them came to be unto me.

And when the said Teachers said unto me, Why do you question our Religion, for
we exhort People to Virtue, and to live Holily, and to strive against Sin. I
answered, saying, Whether is it possible that the Soul of Man may be Cleansed
from Sin on this side the Grave? They replied, No; then considered I; Ah! then
where must my Soul be cleansed; and to strive and fight against Sin all the
time of a Man's Life, and never to get the Victory, but always to be overcome;
surely this is not the good Fight of Faith, but a very uncomfortable fighting,
when a man knows, or thinks, before he fight, that he certainly must be
conquered.

And when they said unto me, You may live as Holily, and as strictly, and as
free from Sin as you can or will, and yet continue of our Religion too, for we
command no Vices, nor are not against any of our Hearers living holily and
strictly, but advise them to it.

Then I answered, Ah! but I am unsatisfied, and I have read in the Scriptures,
That they who seek the Lord with all their Heart shall find him; and I believe
this is true; but alas! I have not yet found him to my Satisfaction, and I am
resolved (whatever comes) to seek him with all my Heart, and I hope that I
shall find him; and so I considered, that he who would find the Lord to his
satisfaction, and enjoy his Blessing, must not walk in the Counsel of the
Ungodly, nor stand in the Way of Sinners, and so I durst no longer join with
them in their Worship.

For I believed, that they who seek God aright, and so find him to their
Satisfaction, must seek him Inwardly and Spiritually; for he is a Spirit, and
is not to be found in Carnal Ordinances, Ceremonies or Traditions of Men, which
the said Teachers pleaded for; and I had been very zealous in those things, but
found no profit, until I took heed to the Light of Christ in mine own Heart and
Conscience.

And as I continued waiting upon God in his Light, and taking heed unto it, the
Day dawned more and more upon me, and the Day Star arose in my Heart, and I
plainly saw the emptiness of all outward Ceremonies, invented in the wosul
Night of Apostasy, and set up (when the Power of Darkness ruled in the Heart)
by such as were disobedient to the Light, in their own Wills, and for filthy
Lucres sake.

And I came to see plainly, that the true Worship of God is only performed in
his own Spirit and Truth, the Mani estation whereof is the true Light, out of
which none can know God, nor worship him acceptably, but worship they know not
what; and the Worship of God is in Fear and Trembling before him, and at his
Word in the Heart, and such are accepted of God, and shall be accepted with
him, and with such he will dwell, as the Scriptures largely testify; read John
4.20, to 25. Mich. 6.8. Isa. 66.2, 5. Ezra 9.4. and 10.3. Jer. 5.21, 22. and
33.9. Psalm. 2.11. Dan. 6.26.

And so I durst not but deny all Worships prescribed by the Wisdom of Men, and
set-up by Men, which were not in the Spirit and Truth of God; neither durst I
embrace the Pleasures or Preferments of the World, for I was sensible both of
their danger and Vanity, and that the Words of Christ were true, who said, If
any man will come after me, Luke 9.23, 24, 25. Luke 14.27.
let him deny himself, and take up his Cross daily, and follow me, and
whosoever does not bear his Cross, and follow me, cannot be my Disciple; for
whosoever will save his Life, shall lose it; but whosoever will lose his Life
for my sake, the same shall save it; for what is a man advantaged if he gain
the whole World, and lose himself, or be cast away?

And now I am not of their Persuasion, who believe that there is no Salvation,
nor Freedom from Sin on this side the Grave, and that the Souls of true
Christians cannot be cleansed from Sin while their Bodies live in this World;
for that is contrary to the Truth, and to the Testimony of the Holy Scriptures;
and where Sin has a place in the Heart or Soul of any, there the Man of Sin
has a place, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all Power, and
Signs, and Lying Wonders; whom the Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his
Mouth, and shall destroy with the Brightness of his coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.8, 9.

And so, much of the Worship of them, in whom the Man of Sin rules by his
Power, consists in Ceremonies and Signs, for he will allow them all Signs of
that which is good, so that they may be content without the Substance, yea,
even the very Name (at least in Profession, or Pretense) of Christians, though
he have quite bereaved them of the Nature of true Christians; and allow them
outward Signs of Baptism also, at least, whilst incapable Infants, which they
may afterward be told of, and taught to believe that they were thereby made
Children of God, Members of Christ, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven,
Mat. 8.10, 11.
although they know nothing experimentally of the one Baptism of Christ, which
is with the Holy Spirit (or Ghost) and with Fire; nor believe in the Light, the
Manifestation of the Spirit of Christ, in which all true Christians believe,
who are really Members of Christ, Children of God, and Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven, Mat. 13.19.
being led and taught by his Light and Spirit and obeying the Word of the
Kingdom (which is one with the Light) and is sown in the Hearts of all Men.

And Christ said to the unbelieving Pharisees, that, The Kingdom of God comes
not with Observation, or outward Show; neither shall they say, Lo here, or Lo
there, for (says he) behold, Luke 17.21.
the Kingdom of God is within you: And why may it not as well be said now, to
be within those who are ignorantly seeking it without them?

For their Teachers teach them to believe, that they were made Inheritors of
the Kingdom of Heaven, when they were Infants, by their outward Baptism, and
yet they have it to seek, and know not where it is to be found, but seek it (as
they are taught) and expect it to come with their Observations, outward Shows
and Signs without them, and Pray (at least, in Words) to God, saying, Thy
Kingdom come; and yet believe not in the Word of his Kingdom, which is sown in
their Hearts, which is the Light, Grace, and Manifestation of the Spirit of
Christ, which reproves them for Sin in their Hearts and Consciences.

And so whilst they disobey the Word of the Kingdom, the Light in themselves,
they are making themselves Strangers to God and his Kingdom, through
disobedience, and so are unlike to be Inheritors of it, though they make never
so large a Profession of seeking it in their Observations, outward Shows and
Signs; for there it is not to be found, much less inherited.

And John the Baptist, who baptized with Water to Repentance, we read not that
he baptized Infants; for what should Infants repent of? but he Preached,
saying, Repene ye, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand: So it seems the
Kingdom of Heaven was near then; and to some who came to his Baptism, he said,
O, Generation of Vipees, who has warned you to flee from the Wrath to come?
bring forth therefore Fruits meet for Repentance, or (as some translate)
answerable to amendment of Life; for (said he) the Ax is laid to the Root of
the Tree; Mat. 3.
therefore every Tree that brings not forth good Fruit, is hewn down, and
cast into the Fare: But do not Infants sprinkled with Water (or Baptized, as
they call it afterward bring forth Fruits, rather to be repented of, than meet
for Repentance?

So it seems, they that came to John's Baptism, which was with Water to
Repentance, if they brought not forth Fruits meet for Repentance, they were
little or no better, being to be hewn down, and cast into the Fire: And where
can any read that John's Baptism, being outward, could make any true
Christians? Was it not before Christ, that John came Baptizing with Water? and
before there were any called Christians? for we read not of that Name given
till after the Ascension of Christ; and if John's Baptism could not make
Christians, how should Sprinkling of Infants now? or the outward Baptism of any
others either? It is not like that they that now take upon them to baptize
either Infants or others for Money (for which none can buy the Gift of God)
should exceed John, who was sent of God, Acts 8.20.
and did it freely without Money.

And John was sent to bear witness of the Light, that all Men through him might
believe, that was the true Light, John 1.8, 9, 10.
which lights every Man that comes into the World, though the World knew it
not; But the Baptizers, Dippers and Sprinklers in our days, are far from
bearing witness to the true Light, for they cry out against it, and give it
many ridiculous Names, John 3.20.
and Titles; and this is according to the Words of Christ, that, Every one that
does Evil, hates the Light.

And what a strange thing does it seem, that any should believe (which some
suppose) that Sprinkling an Infant with a little Water, (some after one manner,
and some after another) should make it a true Christian? For true Christians
are Members of Christ, and Children of God, and Heirs of the Kingdom of Heaven;
but no Man can make them so: for it is only by believing in the Light of
Christ, and obeying it, that a true Christian state is atta ned unto; and so
true Christians are Children of God, Tit. 3.5, 6, 7. Ephesians. 4.5.
who is Light, and Heirs of his Kingdom; and these have experience of the one
Baptism of Christ by his Spirit, even the washing of Regeneration (or of the
New Birth) and are sensible of the renewings of his Spirit also.

But it is a very poor Evidence, concerning so great a matter, as Eternal
Happiness, or true Christianity is, only to be told to a Man (or Woman) or to
see it written in a Book, that when he was an Infant, or a Child of a few days
old, he was baptized and made a Christian; whenas he knows nothing of
certainty that he is so; but rather has an Evidence in his own Heart, plainly
and truly witnessing that he is in the Gall of Bitterness, and in the Bond of
Iniquity, and is not led and guided by the Spirit of Christ, as true Christians
are; and so if he weightily examine himself, he may find his estate (to be
otherwise then some would persuade him to believe of it) and see it to be very
Miserable.

John bare Testimony of Christ, saying, There comes one after me, which is
preferred before me, for he was before me, and I knew him not; but that he
should be made manifest to Israel, John 1.30, 31, 32, 33. John 3.30.
therefore am I come baptizing with Water: And says he, The same is he that
baptizeth with the Holy Ghost, or Spirit; and said he, he must increase, but I
must decrease.

So it is plain, that the reason why John Baptized with Water, was, that
Christ, and his Spiritual Baptism, (which only can render Men true Christians)
should be made manifest to Israel; but there can be no such Reason given for
Infants Baptism; for Christ and Baptism has been long talked of by Sprinklers
of Infants, and still both Hearers and Preachers, strangers to Christ and his
Baptism; how then should they make him, or his Baptism manifest or known to
little Infants?

And Christ said, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God;
John 3.3.
but they who believe in the Light, the incorruptible Word of God in their
Hearts, Look in the Margined Bibles.
and so become Children of the Light, and of God, being Born again, (or from
above, as the Word implies) they in the Light see and discern the Kingdom of
God within them, Romans 14.17.
which consists in Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Spirit (or
Ghost) which are inwardly to be known.

And this Sign of Baptism, wherewith now adays they sign Infants, and reckon it
a Badge of Christianity, they call a Sacrament (and some say there are Seven
Sacraments, and others say, but two, to be used in the Church of Christ) though
in all the Holy Scriptures they find no mention of the Word Sacrament, and they
say, It was commanded by Christ, because he said to his Disciples, Mat. 28.19.
Go, teach all Nations, Baptizing them in, or (when truly translated) into the
Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit, or Ghost.

Observe, here he first bad them to teach them; so they should let Teaching be
before Baptizing: But how can they teach Infants? And he commanded this to his
Disciples, who were learners of him, and Witnesses of his Resurrection; but
they are not such, who act contrary to his Commands.

And he bad them to Baptize into the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of
the Holy Spirit: Now this Name of God is called the Word, Light, Love, and Holy
Spirit, which is placed in his Spiritual Temple, where God dwells, of which,
Deuteronomy. 12.5. 1 Kings 8.29. 2 Chronicles. 7.12. 2 Cor. 3.16.
the Temple that Solomon built, was a Type, or Figure, in which he said he
would place his Name, which outward Temple was destroyed; but true Christians
are the holy Spiritual Temple of God, and it was prophesied, the Glory of the
second Temple should exceed that of the first, Hag. 2.4, 7, 8.

But they who pretend to baptize Infants with Water, Rev 19 13.
they do not believe in the Name of God, which is his Word and Light in the
Heart; and so they are not like to baptize either Infants, or others, in it, or
into it, being out of it themselves.

And in the Command of Christ there is no mention at all of Water, for the
Disciples to baptize withal; they being to preach Repentance and Remission of
Sins in his Name, among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem; Luke 24.47, 49.
And behold (said he) I send the Promise of my Father upon you; but tarry ye in
the City of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with Power from on High: And so they
tarried at Jerusalem until they were endued with Power from on High; and then
they declared what the Promise of the Father was, that Christ had sent upon
them, even that which was spoken by the Prophet Joel; And it shall come to pass
in the last days (says God) I will pour of my Spirit upon all Flesh; Acts
2.16, 17, 18.
and your Sons and your Daughters shall prophecy; and your Young Men shall see
Visions, and your Old Men shall dream Dreams; and on my Servants, and on my
Handmaidens, I will pour out in these days of my Spirit, and they shall
prophecy.

So the Disciples of Christ preached other Doctrine then the Sprinklers of
Infants, and the pretending Baptizers of this Age preach, for they cannot
endure to hear of the Spirit of God being poured out upon all Flesh, but they
mock at the Movings of the Spirit of God in his Servants and Handmaidens, as if
there were no such thing now; which shows that they are not endued with Power
from on High, and so they are short of John the Baptist, who was sent of God,
John 1.6, 7.
and said, A man can receive nothing, except it be given him from Heaven, John
3.27.

And so, they having no Authority from God, but only from Men, take upon them
to sprinkle Infants after the Ordinances of Men, and call it Baptism, having a
ridiculous Custom of using Godfathers, and Godmothers, as they call them, and
another of signing Infants in the Forehead with the Sign of the Cross, some
using Oil, Spittle, Salt, and other silly Ceremonies, having nothing at all in
the Holy Scriptures to warrant such things, being invented in the Apostasy, in
the deceitful Wisdom of the Antichristian Spirit, that has prevailed, and
drawn from the Simplicity of true Christianity, into the love of outward Signs,
which are Antichristian.

Another Argument, for their Custom of Sprinkling Infants, is, the Words that
Christ spoke, saying, Suffer little Children to come unto me, and forbid them
not, for such is the Kingdom of God; Mark. 10.14,15.
and whosoever shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little Child, he shall
not enter therein.

Now they who sprinkle Infants, bring them to Water, which Christ commanded
not; but do they bring them to Christ? Nay, do they not rather keep them from
him? teaching them to kneel down, and ask Blessing of them called their
Godfathers and Godmothers, and teaching them to say, that by or in Baptism in
their Infancy, they are made Members of Christ, and Children of God, and
Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven; and so do they not train them up after the
Traditions of Men, after the Rudiments of the World, and not after Christ?

And do not many, called Christians, and Protestants, in their Profession of
Religion, compel their Children to these things, in their Childhood? Is it not
Blasphemy and Idolatry thus to teach, and practice? and whether such things be
bringing Children to Christ, or keeping them from him, and from his Light, and
Grace, and the Manifestation of his Spirit (wherewith every one ought to
profit) let the honest, single hearted judge.

And concerning the Saying of Christ, that, Whosoever shall not receive the
Kingdom of God as a little Child, he shall not enter therein: 1 Pet. 1.23.
That is no proof of the need of Water, for true Christians are Children of the
Light, and are born of the Incorruptible Word of God, which lives, John 3.5.
and abides for ever; and such (though they be Men in outward Stature, yet)
are as little Children; being little and low in their own esteem.

For Christ said, Except a Man be born of Water, and of the Spirit, he cannot
enter into the Kingdom of God: (And this some allege for proof of their
Infants Baptism, though neither Infant nor outward Water be mentioned, for a
Man is not an Infant) and here Christ speaks of the Spiritual Water (which
washes the inside unto Regeneration, or the New Birth) Zech. 13.
which springs out of the Fountain opened to the House of David, and to the
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, for Sin and for Uncleanness, which also purges from
Idolatry and false Prophecy; Isa. 55.1.
as was prophesied.

And to these Waters, every one that thirsts, may come, and buy without
Money, and without Price: (So they need not give Money to be sprinkled) And
Christ says, John 7.37, 38.
If any man thirst, let him come unto me and drink; and he that believes on
me, out of his Belly shall flow Rivers of Living Water; And says he, I will
give unto him that is athirst, of the Fountain of the Water of Life freely,
Rev. 21.6. Joh. 4.14.
and he that drinks of the Water that I shall give him, it shall be in him a
Well of Water springing up unto Eternal Life.

So it is this Spiritual Water that inwardly washes and regenerateth unto
Eternal Life, without the washing whereof none can enter into the Kingdom of
God; and they that are born of this Water and of the Spirit, they are Children
of the Light, and of the Kingdom of God, and they are truly as little Children
in the receiving of his Kingdom, though they be outwardly Men of Stature.

And the Apostle John writing to the Christians, calls them Little Children,
saying, If we walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, 1 John 1.7.
we have fellowship one with another, and the Blood of Jesus Christ his Son
cleanses us from all Sin: (Here is a cleansing beyond the Priest's sprinkling
of Infants) and says he, 1 John 2.1.
My little Children, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not: And again,
The Darkness is past, and the true Light now shines, he that says he is in
the Light, and hates his Brother, is in Darkness even until now; he that
loves his Brother, abides in the Light, 1 John 2.8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
and there is none occasion of stumbling in him; but he that hates his
Brother, is in Darkness, and walks in Darkness, and knows not whither he
goes, because that Darkness has blinded his Eyes. I write unto you, little
Children, because your Sins are forgiven you for his Names sake. And again, he
writes, 1 John 2.18, 20, 28.
Little Children, it is the last Time, and as ye have heard that Antichrist
shall come, even now there are many Antichrists: But (says he) ye have an
Unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things (those were intelligent
little Children.) Again he says, Now little Children, abide in him: And again,
Little Children, let no man deceive you, he that does Righteousness, 1 John 3.7
8, 9, 10, 18.
is righteous, even as he is righteous: he that commiteth Sin, is of the Devil;
for the Devil sins from the beginning: for this purpose was the Son of God
manifested, that he might destroy the Works of the Devil: whosoever is born of
God, does not commit Sin; for his Seed remains in him, and he cannot sin,
because he is born of God: In this the Children of God are manifest, and the
Children of the Devil: whosoever does not Righteousness, is not of God, neither
he that loves not his Brother: And again, My little Children, let us not love
in Word, neither in Tongue, but in Deed, and in Truth: And again, Ye are of God
little Children, and ^^ve overcome; and says he, Hereby know we that we are in
him, and he in us, 1 John 4.4, 12. 1 John 5.21.
because he has given us of his Spirit: And again, Little Children, keep your
selves from Idols.

So it appears, that the Children of the Light, the Children of God, who had
received and believed in the Word of Faith in the Heart, which the Apostles
preached, the Word of the Kingdom of God, and were born of it, they were
frequently called little Children; therefore that saying (to wit, Whosoever
shall not receive the Kingdom of God as a little Child, he shall not enter
therein) makes nothing for the Doctrine of the Priests Infant Baptism, neither
is it any warrant for the same.

And let every one that reads this, take diligent notice of what is here
before quoted, which the Apostle John wrote to them which he called little
Children, and seriously examine themselves whether they be such little
Children, and whether their Teachers teach such, or the same Doctrine, either
to Children or others, and if they perceive any difference, it is good for them
weightily to consider it. For the single Eye can see plainly that it is because
People have neglected the Substance, that they have idolized the Shadow; and
being by their subtle Enemy deceived, and drawn from obedience to the Light of
Christ in their own Hearts and Consciences, they are become dark and vain in
their Imaginations, and walk in Darkness, and know not whither they go; or else
they could not surely for shame talk of Godfathers and Godmothers, and of Men
making Infants Children of God, and Members of Christ, and Inheritors of the
Kingdom of Heaven, and yet profess the Scriptures to be their Rule, which
mention no such thing.

And whereas some may say, That outward Water Baptism is a Sacrament, wherein
there is an outward visible Sign of an inward Spiritual Grace, and if it do
Children no good, (say they) it can do them no hurt. It is granted, that whilst
they are not capable of understanding, it can neither do them hurt nor good;
but when they come to be taught a Lie, that is, to believe that by Baptism in
their Infancy they were made Christians, and Members of Christ, that does them
much hurt, as I have in my own particular experienced; for because of such
teachings, when I was young, I was ready to conclude my self to be a Christian,
and a Child of God, whenas the Grace of God in my own Heart (which they told me
my Baptism was a sign of) testified plainly to me, that it was not so with me,
and that my condition was very dangerous, and yet I then should have thought my
self highly affronted, if any Man had told me so.

And so I know by experience, that my being taught to believe and depend upon
the outward visible Sign, made me to neglect the Teachings of the inward
spiritual Grace of God in my own Heart and Conscience; and made me more secure
and careless of my Duty toward God, in not answering the requirings and
teachings of his Grace, in order that I might be prepared to render an account
to God of his Talent which he had given me; and so I saw perfectly (before I
left them) that my Teachers had deceived me, as it was formerly, the Leaders of
the People caused them to err, Isa. 5.16.
and they that were led of them, were destroyed.

(...) is recorded, that Claudius Espontius, a Popish Bishop at a Council at
Pysoy in France, in the Year 1500, ordained that Infants Baptism should be
received by Tradition, because it could not be proved as a Command from the
Scriptures; and yet many that profess Reformation from Popery, and profess the
Scriptures to be their Rule, are contending for it, and practicing it, to get
Money by; having no warrant from God, nor the Scriptures of Truth for it, nor
any Example, but Popish Tradition; and such are certainly Deceivers, and
deceived.

But some may think that outward Water Baptism is a Seal of Christianity, and
therefore to be used, because in some Cases, and to some People it was used by
the Apostles, among the Primitive Chrisitans, as they can read:

As to its being a Seal of Christianity; if it were a Seal to one, it is
likewise so to others that have it, and so a Seal to them all; but no outward
Sign is needful to be a Seal to true Christianity, for it is Inward and
Spiritual, and therefore cannot be known by any outward Seal, neither does it
admit of the impression of any such outward Seal, for true Christians are
sealed by the Holy Spirit of God to the Day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30.
and so they need no outward Seal; for if an outward seal would do, many would
get that upon their own terms; and so many get outward Baptism for Money, which
pleases the Priests well, though it profits nothing to the buyer of it: But
it is the true, inward, Spiritual Baptism of Christ that is the true Seal
wherewith all true Christians are sealed to the Day of Redemption, by the
Spirit of God.

And although it is said, that Abraham received the Sign of Circumcision, Romans
4.11, to 17.
a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith which he had, yet being uncircumcised,
(yet it was) that he might be the Father of all them that believe, though they
be not circumcised; whereby it is plain, that true Christians, who are of the
Faith of Abraham, (who saw the Day of Christ) may truly be called Children of
Abraham, though they have not the Sign, nor Seal of Circumcision outwardly; but
they who were naturally the Children of Abraham, and were not in the Faith of
Abraham, Mat. 3.9.
that would not avail them.

And although Circumcision of Infants was commanded by the Law of Moses, (which
Law of Ceremonies and Types, was abolished by the offering up of Christ the
Substance, the Antitype, who is the end of the Law for Righteousness, to every
one that believes; Romans 10.4.
read the 8th, 9th, and 10th Chapters of the Hebrews;) yet concerning
Circumcision (which was a cutting off the Foreskin of the Flesh, and typified
the Substantial Spiritual Circumcision by Christ, Romans 2.29.
and the cutting off the foreskin of the Heart, which thing true Christians
witness) Paul the Apostle of Christ said, 1 Cor. 7.1.
Circumcision is nothing, nor Uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping the
Commandments of God; and also, in Christ Jesus, neither Circumcision avails
any thing, nor Uncircumcision, Gal. 5.6. Gal. 6.15.
but Faith which works by Love -- or a New Creature.

And so though some allege, that outward Water Baptism was instituted in the
stead of outward Circumcision, yet there is no proof for it, neither does the
Apostle mention any such thing; but says, that Faith that works by Love, and
the keeping of the Commandments of God, and being a New Creature avails, but
not Circumsion.

Also, to the Collosians he writes thus, to wit, In whom also ye are
circumcised with the Circumcision made without Hands, in putting off the Body
of the Sins of the Flesh, by the Circumcision of Christ, buried with him in
Baptism, wherein also you are risen with him, through the Faith of the
operation of God, who has raised him from the Dead: And he says to them of
Christ's Blotting out the Handwriting of Ordinances, that was against us,
which was contrary to us, and took it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross;
and says he to them, Wherefore if ye be dead with Christ from the Rudiments (
See Margined Bibles.
or Elements) of the world, why as though living in the World, are ye subject
to Ordinances? or (as some translate) burdened with Traditions; touch not,
taste not, handle not; which are all to perish with the using; after the
Commandments and Doctrines of Men, Col. 2.11, 12, 14, 20, 21, 22.

Thus it is very plain, that the Apostle here writes of the Spiritual
Circumsion of Christ, and of his Spiritual Baptism through the Faith of the
operation, or working, of God; and was far from preaching up such outward
Ordinances, declaring that they were against them, and contrary to them, who
were true Christians, and he bad them not to touch, taste, nor handle such
things; saying they were all to perish with the using after the Commandments
and Doctrines of Men: And so now the Commanders and Teachers of their Ordinance
of Water Baptism (as also of their other Ordinances and Traditions) some of
them command and teach it after one way, and others after other ways, and yet
all profess the Scriptures to be their Rule, and therefore some of them are
erred from the direction of their Rule; yea, are they not all erred from their
professed Rule? for the Scriptures plainly testify against such Ordinances and
Traditions, as being contrary to true Christians.

But these Baptizers for Money are so far erred from the Light and Grace of
Christ in themselves (which the Scriptures testify of) and now are so darkened
by the dark, deceitful Antichristian Spirit, that they allege the foresaid
11th and 12th. Verses of the second Chapter to the Colossians, to be their
proof for the Institution of Water Baptism in the room of Circumcision; whenas
the said Verses themselves, and the remainder of the Chapter plainly shows
otherwise, as is before rehearsed, even the 20th, 21st, and 22d, Verses of it.

And the Apostle Peter intimates, that the Salvation of Noah and his Family in
the Ark by, or in Water, was a Type or Figure of Baptism inwardly, saying, The
Antitype whereunto, even Baptism does now save us, 1 Pet. 3.20, 21.
(not the putting away of the filth the Flesh, but the answer of a good
Conscience toward God) by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ: The common
Translation has it thus, The like Figure whereunto, even Baptism; but the Word
in the Greek is (...), that is, the thing figured, or typified, or signified,
or the Antitype: So here is a great difference between the common Translation;
which says, The like Figure; and what it should be, that is, the thing
figured: And it is plain, that the Baptism here spoken of, was more than a
Figure, being the Substantial Spiritual Baptism of Christ, which (said Peter)
saves us by the Resurrection of Jesus Christ: Col. 2.12.
and Paul writing to the Colossians, said of it, Wherein also ye are risen with
him, through the operation of God: So it is clear, that the Apostles meant the
one, true, inward and spiritual Baptism of Christ, which all true Christians
are to witness.

And so according to the Scriptures, there is as much Reason for them that use
Water Baptism, to say that it was instituted instead of the saving by the Water
of the Flood in the days of Noah, as that it was instituted in the room or
stead of Circumcision; for the Scriptures mention that to be a Type of Baptism,
but not Circumcision; and we read not that the Apostles preached up one outward
Ordinance in the room of any other.

But the Baptism of John, with Water unto Repentance, did plainly, by a Figure
or Sign, show or typifie the Spiritual Baptism of Christ to weak Capacities,
and to them who were unacquainted with his Spiritual Washing and Cleansing, by
his Blood, 1 John 1.7.
which cleanses them that walk in the Light, as he is in the Light, from all
Sin; and the Apostle Paul writing to the Corinthians, and speaking of Thieves,
Covetous, Drunkards, 1 Cor. 6.11.
Revilers, and such others as shall not inherit the Kingdom of God (as true
Christians do) writes thus, to wit, And such were some of you: but ye are
washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the Name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the Spirit of our God.

And said Paul to them, 1 Cor 1.14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
I thank God that I Baptized none of you, but Crispus and Gaius, lest any
should say that I had baptized in my own Name, and I Baptized also The Household
of Shephanas, besides I know not whether I haptized any other; for Christ sent
me not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel: So the Apostle Paul declared that
he was not sent to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel, which (says he) is the
Power of God; And if the Apostle Paul was not sent to Baptize; how, and by
whom, are the Baptizers, Dippers and Sprinklers of this Age sent?

For he told the said Corinthians, 1 Cor. 11.
that he supposed himself not a whit behind the very chiefest Apostles; 2 Cor.
12.11. Romans 1.16.
and said, In nothing am I behind the very chiefest Apostles; and he being
sent, not to Baptize, but to Preach the Gospel, the Power of God to Salvation,
and that where Christ was not named, lest he should build upon another man's
Foundation, Romans 15.15. to 24.
being a Minister of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, who from Jerusalem round
about unto Illyricum fully preached the Gospel; so that no doubt, if the true
Apostles of Christ had esteemed outward Baptism of necessity to Salvation, then
Paul (who was in nothing behind the very chiefest of them) might have been sent
to Baptize, as well as to Preach.

And the Message of Paul was, to open the Eyes of People, and to turn them from
Darkness to Light, and from the Power of Satan unto God, that they might
receive Forgiveness of Sins, Acts 26.17, 18.
and Inheritance among them which are sanctified by Faith in Christ; and it was
agreeable to the Message which the other Apostles had to declare, 1 John 1.5.
That God is Light, and in him is no Darkness at all. And many received Paul's
Message, and believed in the Light, the Word of Faith nigh in the Mouth and in
the Heart, Ephesians. 5.8. 1 Pet. 1.23. Ephesians 4.5. Ephesians. ^.26.
which he and the other Apostles preached; and so became Children of the Light,
and were born of the Incorruptible Word, and knew the One Baptism which he
preached of, wherewith Christ sanctifies and cleansoth his Church by the
washing of Water in the Word, as it is in the Greek, (...) that is in the Word,
which implies a Spiritual Washing or Cleansing; though some translate it by
the Word.

And Paul said, 1 Cor. 12.13.
By one Spirit we are all baptized into one Body, whether we be Jews or
Gentiles, whether we be Bond or Free, and have been all made to drink into one
Spirit, Gal. 3.26, 27, 28.
and also, as many of you as have been baptized into Christ, have put on
Christ: And again, So many of us as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were
baptized into his Death; that like as Christ was raised from the Dead, by the
Glory of the Father, Romans 6.3, 4.
even so we also should walk in Newness of Life.

So by all these Sayings, it is plain, and evident, that Paul, and the true
Apostles preached up the One, Spiritual Baptism of Christ, which only renders
men true Christians, Children of God, and Members of Christ, although they did
sometimes comply with the weakness of some concerning outward Baptism, to gain
them to the Truth, and to instruct them in the Mystery of Godliness, 1 Cor.
9.20, 21, 22. Acts 16.3.
and in the Knowledge of the Spiritual Baptism of Christ; and so Paul declared,
saying, To the weak became I as weak, that I might gain the Weak, etc. and
therefore he circumcised Timothy; and so if any pretend to follow the Example
of the Apostles, in baptizing with outward Water, they may as well, by the same
pretense, use Circumcision also: And Paul also complied to purify himself
according to the Law of Moses, for the sake of many of the Jews that beheved,
but were zealous of the Law, Acts 21.20, to 27. And so the pretending
Baptizers, with as much warrant, may imitate the Apostle in Purification
according to the Law of Moses, as well as in Baptism.

But although Paul, in Christian liberty, did such things in compliance with
them that were weak in the Faith, (in order to bring them out of their many
Ceremonies, rather than keep them in them) yet he could not do so for fear of
Perseeution, he would not be compelled to such things, neither do them for the
gain of Money, nor the like; for writing to the Galatians, he says, As many as
desire to make a Fair show in the Flesh they constrain you to be circumcised,
Gal. 6.12. Gal. 5.11.
only lest they should suffer Persecution for the Cross of Christ; and (says
he) I Brethren, if I yet preach Circumcision, why do I yet suffer Persecution?
then is the offense of the Cross ceased.

So it seems that some professing Christianity (who were not obedient to the
Light of Christ in their own Hearts, which teaches to bear his Cross
patiently) preached up Circumcision, lest they should have suffered
Persecution, and yet such desired to make a fair show in the Flesh; but the
true Ministers of Christ did not so, for (notwithstanding the Threats of Men,
and the consequence of Persecution) in the Faith of the Power of God, and in
the love and obedience of the Light of Christ in their Hearts, they preached
Liberty from all such burdensome things, and in his Name and Authority preached
his Cross Boldly; and declared that such as preached otherwise, were false and
anrichristian.

And do not many, desiring to make a fair Show (of Christianity) in the Flesh,
now preach up Water Baptism, and that of Infants, with other such Ceremonies,
for fear of Persecution, or for Money, and their own carnal ends, not having
any authority from Christ, or his Apostles for such things?

Therefore let all beware of such false Prophets and Deceivers, as Christ
himself forewarned of, saying, Many shall come in my Name, saying, I am Christ,
and shall deceive many; and said he, If any man say unto you, Mat. 7.1^, to 21.
Mat. 24.23, 2. Luke 2 8.
Lo here is Christ, or there; believe it not, for (said he) there shall arise
false Christ's, and false Prop^e^s; and shall show great Signs and Wonders, in
so much that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very El^ct.

And so now there are many come as in the Name of Christ, and they all say that
he is Christ, as he foretold; so they profess him in Words; and so deceive
many; saying also, Lo here is Christ, (in this Profession, Ceremony, or Sign)
and Lo there is Christ, (in that Observation, Ordinance, or Tradition) but they
that believe in his true Light, the Manifestation of his Spirit in their
Hearts, which he said, should reprove the World of Sin, John 15 8.
etc. they do not believe them; and though they show great Signs, as of
Baptism, and the like; yet the Children of Light see them, and by their Signs
and by their Fruits, know them to be the Deceivers that Christ foretold of;
Mat. 7.16.
and though they show great Wonders, and the World wonder after them; yet true
Christians cannot be deceived by them, knowing them to be influenced by the
Power of the Man of Sin in their Hearts, whose coming is after the working of
Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and Lying Wonders.

And now it is good for all to beware that they truly examine themselves in the
Light of Christ Jesus in their Hearts, whether they be really the Children of
God, yea, or nay; Romans 8.16 1 John 5.10.
and they may certainly know, for he that is of God, has the Witness in
himself God gives to his Children to Know that he is their Father, and that
they are his Children; but the Man of Sin, he would not that his Children
should know who is their Father, for he being deceitful, persuades them (as
far as he can) that they are the Children of God; but the Manifestation of the
Spirit of God, the Light (during the Day of their Visitation) in their Hearts
reproves them of their Sins, and often shows, and testifyeth in them, unto
them, the Contrary, to wit, that they are not Children of God,

And so let all inwardly examine themselves truly, Romans 8.9. 2 Cor. 3.6.
whether or no they be Members of Christ, being baptized by his One Spirit into
his One Body, for if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his,
and it is his quickening Spirit that gives Life to all his Members, and makes
them sensible in what state and condition they are.

And so let none be satisfied with being told that in their Infancy, or any
time else, in their Baptism with outward Water, they were made Members of
Christ, and Children of God, etc. For that will not stand them in any stead,
when they must give an account to God of their improvement of the Talent which
he has given them to profit withal; and let none pres^me to teach Children or
others, that they were in outward Baptism made Members, of Christ, or Children
of God; lest the Blood of such be required at their Teachers Hand, and so both
the Teacher and the taught perish.

For John the Baptist, speaking of Christ, John 3.30.
said, He must increase, but I must decrease, intimating, that his Baptism was
to give place to the Spiritual Baptism of Christ with his Spirit and Fire; and
John said, His fan is in his Hand, and he will thor wly purge his Floor, and
gather the Wheat into his Garner, but he will burn the Chaff with unquenchable
Fire; and this all ought to take notice of, for this Baptism of Christ is of
absolute necessity to Salvation; of which, that all might come to be partakers,
the Light, the Manifestation of the Spirit of Christ, has appeared in the
Hearts of all, and is given to every man to profit withal, John 1.8. Luke 3.6.
to which John (who was sent to bear witness of the true Light) bare
Testimony, saying, All flesh shall see the Salvation of God; and also Simeon;
saying; as to the Lord, Mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation, which thou have
prepared before the Face of all People; Luk 2.30, 31, 32.
a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and the glory of thy People Israel.

And seeing that the Salvation of God prepared before the face of all People;
is Christ; Oh! Let all (who would enjoy the Salvation of God) come to this
Light, which reproves for all Sin in every Heart and Conscience, that by
believing therein, and bringing there Deeds to it into true Examination; they
may, through the judgment thereof, know the true Spiritual Baptism of Christ,
in their Hearts, Souls, and Consciences, where they may come to know him to be
in them, unto them, as a Refiners Fire, and as Fullers Soape that will purge
away all the Dross, and wash away every Spot and Stain, as they abide faithful,
and continue freely given up withal their Hearts to abide the burnign of this
Fire, and the scowring with this Soape; and so they may know the washing with
pure Water, and come to have their Hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience,
and may know a drawing near unto God with a true Heart in full assurance of
Faith, and so they may witness in themselves a Cleansing, and Salvation from
Sin by the Blood of Christ Jesus, and his inward Spiritual Baptism, or washing;
And this advice was given by the Prophet in days ago, who said; O Jerusalem,
wash thy Heart from Wickedness that thou may be saved; how long shall vain
Thoughts lodge within thee: Jer. 4.14. read Isaiah 1.16. to 21.

And let none despise the day of small things, the small appearance of the
Light in themselves; Luke 13.1^.
(though it be unto them but as little as a grain of Mustardseed) but rather
like the man that was born Blind (who could not see the Light which shone round
about him) whose Eyes Christ opened; which, John ^.1. and 2 to 9.
when he had anointed with the Clay made with his own Spittle, he bad him to go
and wash in the Pool of Siloam, which by interpretation signifies sent; and he
went and ^a^hed, and came seeing: and so let all receive the anointing of
Christ Spiritually, and wash in that which is sent of God into their Hearts,
that so the Eyes of their Minds, and Understandings may be opened, and God will
open their Hearts (like Lidia's formerly) to attend to, and understand the
things of God, which concern their precious, and perpetual Peace. And such may
truly say, who have the Eyes of their Minds so opened, as the man who had, his
outward Eyes opened, who said, One thing I know, that whereas I was Blind, John
9.2^.
no^ I see; and such have great cause to rejoice, whose Eyes the Lord has
opened to see his Light and his Salvation inwardly, for as it is a grievous and
dangerous thing for a Man, that should walk, to be outwardly Blind; so it is
far more dangerous for a man (who ought to walk in the Spiritual Way of God) to
be spiritually and inwardly Blind; and so is it so much the more joyful to
receive spiritual Sight inwardly.

And though men be never so wise, and know never so much, understand all
Languages, and in their Memories can retain all the Scriptures, and can
comprehend things wonderfully in their Understandings; yet, if their Minds be
not turned inward to the true Light of Christ in their own Hearts (which
lights every man that comes into the World) so as to believe in the
Sufficiency of it; they are in Spiritual Blindness; for God has made Foolish
the Wisdom of this World; and has chosen the foolish things of the World to
confound the wise, and God has chosen the weak things of the World to cons^^^d
the things that are mighty; and base things of the World, and things which are
despised, has God chosen; yea, and things that are not, to bring to naught
things that are: That no Flesh should glory in his Presence, 1 Cor. 1.20, 27,
28, 29.

For it is very plain, that Men of the greatest Wit, Learning, Arts, and Parts,
often are like the Rebellions that were formerly, who refused the Waters of
Shiloah, or Siloam, which signifies by interpretation, sent, or sending (by
washing wherein the Man received his Sight) which Waters go softly; and they
rejoiced in Rezin (which signifies a Post-Messenger) and in Pckah the Son of
Remalia, (which signifies the Openings of one cast away from the Lord)
therefore the Lord would bring upon them, the Waters of the River strong and
many, even the King of Assyria, that should overflow, and go over them: Isa.
8.6, 7, 8.

Even so, all those (be they never so wise or learned) that refuse the Light of
Christ, and are disobedient and unfaithful to it, and will not by it be
restrained from their evil ways, though it reprove them in their Hearts, nor
will not be washed from their Filthiness, by that which God has sent for that
end and purpose; but rejoice in Postmessengers, and in the Openings of such as
are as cast away from the Lord by reason of disobedience (who for their own
Carnal ends, will use all their endeavors to retain them in their Ways,
Ordinances, Ceremonies, and Preachings) certainly the Lord will bring upon such
the Waters of Confusion, strong, and many, which shall overflow them more, and
more, until they be overwhelmed.

And so in the pure Love of God that thinks no Evil is this written, that all
who come to hear or read the same may be warned to examine themselves in the
Light of Christ Jesus in their Hearts and Consciences, whether they be truly
the Children of God, yea, or nay; and whether or no the Light or Manifestation
of the Spirit of Christ bear witness with their Spirits that they are Children
of God, and Members of Christ, by being truly baptized by his Spirit with his
inward Spiritual Baptism into his One Body; for he or she that does not in some
measure witness this inwardly, is yet short of the state of a true Christian,
and consequently is no true Child of God, nor Member of Christ, nor yet in a
state of Salvation by Christ, and so never the better (for being sprinkled,
dipped, or washed with outward Water) as in the sight of God.

For Christ said, Not every one that says unto me, Mat. 7.21.
Lord, Lord, shall enter into the Kingdom of Heaven, but he that does the Will
of my Father which is in Heaven: And the Will of God is not that any should
perish, John 3.16. Luke 2.30, 31, 32. John 1.9.
but that all might come to Repentance, and enjoy his Eternal Salvation, which
he has prepared before the face of all People, a true Light that lights
every man; and he commands all to hear his beloved Son, who says, Believe in
the Light, Luke 17.21. Mat. 13.1, to 23.
that ye may be the Children of the Light, which is the Word of the Kingdom of
God, which is within, and is sown in the Hearts of all; yea, even those that
are compared to the Ground by the Wayside, who (though they hear it) yet
understand it not, but the wicked One comes and catches away that which was
sown in their Hearts: And so whoever thou art that read this, beware lest
this be thy condition, for then Woe and Misery must be thy portion for ever; but
thy fading and deluding Pleasures will soon be past.

And therefore if there be any tender Desires in thy Heart after God, and after
the enjoyment of his Heavenly Kingdom; oh, then first seek his Kingdom and the
Righteousness of it, and that thou may find it, hearken to the Word of his
Kingdom, which is the Light, that reproves for Sin in thy own Heart and
Conscience, and obey thou the Reproofs of its Instruction, Prove. 6.23 Prove.
10.17.
for that is the Way of Life, and walk thou therein; and so as thou continuest
faithful in the obedience of it, it will teach thee to deny thy self of Sin
more and more, (which all that teach for Money cannot do) and it will teach
also to take up thy daily Cross to thy own Lusts; and to follow Christ in the
Regeneration, or New Birth, Luke 9.23. John 8.12. Rev. 14.4.
and so thou may come inwardly to know the true Spiritual Baptism of Christ
with his Spiritual Fire, and Fan, and Water, to burn up Sin, root and branch in
thee; and to blow away all Lightness, and Vanity; and to wash thee inwardly
from sin which has defiled thee; and so thou may know a walking as a Child
of the Light, in newness of Life, and enjoy the Salvation of God.

For it is pla^n; that true Christians, are truly baptized with the inward and
spiritual Baptism of Christ, and are Children of God who is Light, through
believing in the Light of Christ in their Hearts, T^ess. 5 John 12.35, 36, 46.
and the Spirit of God bears witness with their Spirits, that they are the
Children of God; and Heirs of God, Romans 8.16, 17.
and Joint Heirs with Christ; and they are led of his Spirit, and walk in his
Light; Romans 8.14. 1 Cor. 12.13. Luke 12.32.
and they are also members of Chrst, being baptized by his one Spirit into his
one Body; and they are also Inheritours of the Kingdom of Heaven, by the
obedience of Faith in the Word of his Kingdom in their Hearts.

And I know by certain experience that though I was, in my Childhood and Youth,
told by my Parents, and others, that I was baptized in my Infancy, and that
such were my Godfathers, and such a one was my Godmother (of whom I was taught
Idolatrously to ask Blessing) and also was taught (according to their
Catechism) that in that Baptism I was made a Member of Christ, and a Child of
God, and an Inheritour of the Kingdom of Heaven; and I was so trained up in my
Youth by my Parents (yet in a somewhat moderate manner) and being held in this
implicit Faith, (by yielding to the power of Darkness) I was prevailed upon to
stand as a Godfather (as they term it) to three Children which were sprinkled
with Water.

Yet ever when I took a serious view of my own condition, by the Light of
Christ Jesus in my own Heart (though I knew not then what it was) I plainly saw
that I was not in such a condition as I heard the Preachers Preach of, and I my
self could read of, that the Children of God were in^ for the Light and
Manifestation of the Spirit of Christ, instead of bearing witness with my
Spirit that I was a Child of God, it bore witness in my Heart and Conscience
against my Sins, and reproved me for them, and so witnessed with my Spirit and
Conscience that I was not a Child of God though no Man was my Accuser: And so
it showed me how unclean I was (as the Preachers used to confess in their
Prayers) even full of Bruises, and Wounds and putrefying Sores inwardly, as
from the Crown of the Head to the Soles of my Feet, and therefore unlike a
Child of God, or a Member of Christ, and unfit to be an Inheritour of the
Kingdom of Heaven, which no unclean thing can enter.

And blessed be the Day wherein I first received the reproof of the Light in
the Love of it, for there had been a time wherein I had slighted its Reproofs;
and when it troubled me in my Heart and Conscience for my Sins then I sometimes
gat amongst such as are called merry Company to put the trouble away; but well
was it for me that the reproof pursued me, until I inwardly received it in its
love; and then in some little time I saw Sin to be exceeding sinful, yea and
loathsome too; and I became weary of it; and could no longer delight in folly
and vanity (where Sin ever dweleth) no more then a man can delight to see
others to laugh at him for his being outwardly full of grievous Wounds, and
Bruises, and putrefying loathsome Sores; as I was inwardly.

And so my greatest need and desire was to be inwardly healed, (for I saw I was
unlike to heal others, or to assist to make them Children of God, being in that
forlorn condition) for I saw my self to be in extreme need of an able
Physician; and therefore I consulted them that had been my Teachers, who
pretended to be Divines, and spiritual Physicians (having great need of such a
one) and they told me that my distemper could not be cured on this side the
Grave, and said it was not to be expected that any Soul of Man can be cleansed
from Sin and from the contagion of it, and have the grievous Wourds and Bruises
and loathsome Sores that Sin has made all over it, to be cured, till its Body
dye.

And when I had considered their dismal Opinion (for they could not tell me
where my Soul could certainly be cleansed or cured after the death of my Body,
but judged it could not be before) then I preceived they were all like Job's
Visitants, when he was afflicted outwardly as I was inwardly, to whom he said;
Job. 1^.4, 15, 16
ye are all Physicians of no value; and speaking of God, he said, though he
slay me, yet will I trust in him; and he also shall be my Salvation; for an
Hypocrite shall not come before him; and so Job had a confidence and faith in
God that he would save him; and whatever became of aim he would cursed in God.

And I then had a little Grain of the Faith in which Job was, that God would
cleanse me, and heal me, if I continued Faithful unto him, and would be my
Salvation; and therefore though my said Teachers, and pretending Physicians,
offered me (then not questioning their Pay, if I would Buy) more of their
Physic and Salve, yet I durst Buy no more of them; but refused both their
Physic and Merchandise, knowing it to be certainly of a pernicious quality,
and that it would but cast me into a Spiritual Lethargy, and so stupifie my
Senses, that I should not be sensible of my dangerous condition; for while I
bought of it (before-time) I knew it was apt to make me so; but though I left
Trading with them then, which is now some Years since, and had paid formerly as
freely and duly as other their Customers, and owed them nothing; and since that
time never bought, nor offered to Buy any more such Physic, etc. yet Men have
Yearly made spoil of my Goods, pretending they want Pay of me for their
Physic, which I would not have taken upon their Gift; for I have met with a
far better Physician, who can Cure all manner of Diseases; (and therefore I
wtll deal with them, and their Physic no more) and this is a Physician of
Value, who can, and is willing to Cure all manner of inward Diseases, of the
Souls of those, who with all their Hearts commit themselves to him and his
Heavenly Orderings; and neither requires nor plundereth for Tithes, nor other
Wages, for his Excellent Cure, when fully performed.

But these Men that pretend to be Spiritual Physicians, though they confess
themselves to be all overspread with the Contagion and Leprosy of Sin, and
believe that they, and all People must be so whilst their Bodies live; for
their Preaching and Confessing is to that effect; and so they are not like to
Cure others of it; though they hold their Trade of advising People against Sin,
that brings this Contagion and Leprosy upon them, and others might as
needfully advise the Pretended Physicians, for they themselves know not how to
be rid of their Leprosy; yet these Pretenders claim, and rob, and make havoc
of Peoples Goods, and cast them into Prison, for Tithes and Wages for their
Advice, and pay for their unprofitable Physic, though People have not had it,
nor would have, neither Buy any of their deadly Physic.

And so they are worse than Gehazi, who when his Master Elisha would receive
nothing (though freely offered) for the Cure of the Leprosy of Naaman the
Syrian, being through Elisha's Advice, 2 Kings 5.
by dipping himself Seven times in Jordan, fully performed; yet this Gehazi
(being Covetous) ran after Naaman, and took somewhat of that he offered to
Elisha; which was given to Gehazi very freely; and yet Elisha (by the
Manifestation of the Spirit of God) knowing what he had done, said to his
Servant Gehazi, The Leprosy therefore of Naaman shall cleave unto thee, and
unto thy Seed for ever; and he went out from his presence, a Leper as white as
Snow.

And now these Pretenders to be Spiritual Physicians, (though the Cure never be
performed, nor can be by their Directions and though People have nothing of
Advice or Physic from them) they are like Gehazi, and so of his Seed
spiritually, for Gifts and Rewards, yea, and more, for Tithes and Wages for
their Advice or Physic, and take it by force, and so worse than their Father
Gehazi; and so the Leprosy of Naaman, which clave unto Gehazi, and unto his
Seed, cleaves unto these Pretenders, being spiritually of Gehazi his Seed, and
so they are all spiritually Lepers (as indeed they know it, and confess
themselves to be spiritually Leprous, being sensible of it by the Light in
their own Hearts, which they hate, because it reproves for their unrighteous
Doings; and the Children of the Light see their Leprosy, which cleaves to
them spiritually, to be even as white as Snow, so plain to be seen.

But the Light of Christ Jesus, which reproves for Sin in the Hearts, and in
the Consciences of People (though it may be despised, and rejected; 2 Kings
5.11, 12.
as Naaman despised Jordan before he tried it) as in the Love of it any
receives it, and with a true Heart obeys it, it will direct such a one to
the spiritual Jordan, which is by Interpretation, the River of Judgment, which
is inwardly to be known, where Christ Baptizeth with his Holy Spirit, and
washes away the Contagious Leprosy of Sin, and heals the Bruises, and
Wounds, and loathsome put^ifying Sores which Sin had made in the Soul, as the
dipping, and washing in it is time after time, abode in, and that in true
faithfulness; and therefore they who have tried the Virtue of it, do freely
recommend the trial of its Virtue, to all who are ignorant of it, and are
willing to be recovered from the spiritual Leprosy of Sin.

And now I heartily acknowledge my great Error; who, being in a wretched
sinful state my self, did undertake and promise for Infants that, which I then
believed impossible for me ever to perform my self; to wit, That they should
forsake the Devil, and all his Works, and keep God's holy Will and
Commandments, and walk in the same all the Days of their lives; Oh, what an
abominable thing is it, thus to Promise and Vow unto God (who knows the
Secrets of all Hearts) that Children shall do that, which a Man who promises
it, believes that he shall never be able to do himself? God accepts of no
such Sureties.

For it is a Ridiculous thing amongst Man, for a Man to become Surety for the
Debt of others, that is never like to be able to pay the one half of his own
Debt: And then certainly God will not so be mocked; and therefore let this
serve for a warning to all that hear or read this, that they undertake no such
thing, for the Lord will plead with all who are found in such things, by his
Light in their Consciences; and he will fight against them with the Sword of
his Mouth; Rev. 2.16. Acts 3.22, 23. Joh. 13.7, 8, 9.
and every Soul that will not hear his Voice, the Word of his Grace, and Light
in their Hearts and Consciences, and suffer him thereby to wash them in his
spiritual Baptism, they have no part in him, but shall be cut off.

And though some pretend that the Children sprinkled, may receive Benefit by
the Faith of their Sureties, 1 King. 17.17, to 24. 2 King. 4.18, to 37. Luke
8.49. Luke 7.10.
called Godfathers and Godmothers, and allege Examples to prove it; as the
Widows Son being raised to Life, and Jairus Daughter also, by the Faith of
their Parents; and the Centurions Servant restored to Health, by the Faith of
his Master, and such others; but this proves nothing at all to their purpose;
for there is no mention made of Godfathers nor Godmothers, nor of them,
promising any thing for the Parties restored, nor yet of Water Baptism, nor of
paying the Priest for it; and the Lord is often pleased, and has been
formerly, to answer the Desires and Cries that he has begotten in the Hearts
of his Faithful Ones, upon the behalf of others, in making them Instrumental in
his Hand, for the Benefit of whom it pleases him; but it does not follow, that
God requires one Man to be Surety for another, and especially to perform that,
which he believes he cannot not perform himself; Romans 14.12. Mat. 12.36.
but every one must give account of himself to God, and that of every idle word.

And what a Ridiculous, Profane, and Foolish thing does it appear to be, and
without the least Ground of Scripture, to Teach Children to say, Such a one is
my Godfather, 2 Cor. 1.11, 12.
or Godmother? Is it not far more absurd than that which Paul reproved the
Corinthians for, because they said, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo, and I of
Cophas, and I of Christ?

Nevertheless, it is of absolute Necessity to Salvation, that every one be
truly careful to perform that which they say was promised in their Baptism, to
wit, That they should forsake the Devil, and all his Works, the Pomps and
Vanities of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the Flish; but do
not their Teachers teach them (when they have their Money, and this Promise of
them) to believe, that they cannot perform this Promise, whilst they live in
this World? And is not that confused Baptizing and Teaching? And how should it
be otherwise, being composed in Babylon, that is, in Confusion, in the False
Church, the Whore, that is adulterated from God?

And if any that reads this, by the Light of Christ in their Consciences, see
their sinful Condition, and that they are in any part of Babylon, or its
Suburbs, let them hearken to the Voice of his Light and Grace in their Hearts
and Consciences, which says, Come out of Babylon my People, that ye be not
Partakers of her Sins, and that ye receive not of their Plagues; and as they
truly and inwardly are retired to the Light, they will see the Wounds, and
Bruises, and Sores which Sin has made in their Souls; and they dare not let
them be slightly healed, by the Fair Speeches and Persuasions of Men; neither
can all that Babylon's Merchants say, satisfy, that any such Salve as they
have to sell, can make their Souls sound: But as they freely give up with all
their Hearts to seek him, who is the desire of all Nations, and the Beloved of
the Souls of the Righteous, who Cures all manner of Diseases, he will give
Eye Salve, that they may more and more see; and he will wash, and bind up their
Wounds, and pour in Oil, as he sees meet, in his own time.

And as the Lord led the Israelites out of Egypt by his Servant Moses, so will
he lead them out of Spiritual Babylon, by the Hand and Power of his Son Ghrist
Jesus the Spiritual Prophet, whom Moses Prophesied of, Acts 3.22.
that God would raise up in the midst of his People, like unto me, said he, him
shall ye hear in all things, and every Soul that will not hear that Prophet,
shall be destroyed; and so as the Israelites were led through the Red Sea,
which the Lord divided for them to pass through; Exodus 14.
so the Lord will make way through Difficulties and Exercises, for all them to
pass through, who are freely willing to be led by the Light, and hearken to the
Voice of Christ in their Hearts; and as the Enemies of the Israelites pursued
them, even into the divided Sea, and made them afraid; even so their spiritual
Enemies may pursue them in their Exercises; but as they abide still and quiet
in their Minds, and trust in the Lord, they shall see the salvation of God, and
their Enemies that they then see, they shall never see them again; for as the
Egyptians were overthrown in their pursuit of Israel in the Red Sea, so the
Lord will overwhelm and destroy the spiritual Enemies of such as truly Follow
and Believe in him.

And so as the Israelites were Baptized unto Moses in the Cloud, 1 Cor. 10.2.
and in the Sea, so they must be Baptized into Christ Jesus in bitter Trials
and Exercises; and as Moses, and the Children of Israel, Exodus 15.^.
sung of the salvation of God, when they had passed through the Sea, and saw
their Enemies destroyed; even so they will have great cause to rejoice, whose
spiritual Enemies God has destroyed, and they may sing of God's salvation.

And as Israel was led through the Wilderness, Hos. 2.14.
so will the Lord allure his People, as into the Wilderness spiritually, and
there he will speak to their Hearts; and as they are faithful and obedient to
follow him in the Wilderness, without murmuring; they will come to know a
passing through the spiritual Jordan, Jesh. 3.17.
or River of Judgment, as on dry Ground, into the Promised Land: And so they
may know an entering into the Rest of God, Heb. 4.9
or the true spiritual keeping of the Christian Sabbath, which remains to the
People of God; Isa. 58.13. Joh. 6.28, 29. Phil. 2.13.
in which they ^^e not to do their own Ways, nor find the^^ ^^wn pleasure, nor
speak their own words; and so they may know a working of the Works of God; and
know God to work in them, both to will and to do of his own good pleasure, and
know a ceasing from their own Works, as God did from his.

And such as these it is who know aright the true, inward, and spiritual
Baptism of Christ with his Holy Spirit and Fire; who know him to be unto them
inwardly like a Refiners Fire, and as Fullers Soap; Mal. 3.2. Zech. 13.9. Mal.
3.17, 18.
who refineth them as Silver is refined, and tries them as Gold is tried; and
the Lord makes them his Jewels, and these can discern between the Righteous
and the Wicked; between him that serves God, and him that serves him not.

And these are such as were sometimes Darkness (whilst the Power of Darkness
prevailed in them, over them) but now they are light in the Lord, Ephesians. 5.8, 9,
10.11. John 12.36. 1 These. 5.5.
and they walk as Children of the light, and have no fellowship with the
unfruitful Works of Darkness, but rather reprove them; these (according to
Christ's Command) having believed in the light, are become Children of the
light, and they walking in the light, 1 John. 1.
as God is in the light, have Unity and Fellowship one with another; and the
Blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses them from all Sin.

And so in the light Knowledge is given to them of the Mysteries of the Kingdom
of God, Col. 2.2. Mat. 13.28.
they being also Children of it, and though they know nothing of diverse
Languages; yet, in and by the Light and Spirit of Christ, they can try the
Spirits, whether they are of God, and hereby know they the Spirit of God; 1
John 4.1, 2, 3.
and every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh,
is not of God, and this is the Spirit of Antichrist, Mat. 4.25.
1 John 4.1, 2, 3. Now mark, All Antichrists, as Men, say that Christ is Christ
(as Christ foretold that they should) but their Spirits deny him to be come in
the Flesh; to wit, denying the end of his coming in the Flesh.

And so they, who (being under the Dominion of the Man of Sin) teach, that
there is no freedom from sin at tainable on this side the Grave; they say that
Christ is Christ, and in words own that he came in the Flesh, as the Holy
Scriptures declare: But does not their Spirit deny the very end of his coming
in the Flesh, Dan. 9.24.
which is to finish Transgression, and to make an end of sins, and to bring in
Everlasting Righteousness; and to sanctify and cleanse (true Believers who
are) his Church, Ephesians. 5.26, 27.
that he may present it to himself, a glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing?

And likewise many of them that Fight, and Kill one another, and the Servants
of Christ also about Religion; such say that Christ is Christ, and in words own
his coming in the Flesh; but does not their Spirit deny the very end of his
coming, which was not to destroy Men's Lives, but to save them? Luke 9.56.
And he said, My Kingdom is not of this World, else would my Servants Fight,
and said, All that take the Sword, shall perish with the Sword: Mat. 26.52.
And so it was Prophesied concerning true Christians, that they should say to
one another, Come ye, Isa. 2.4, 5.
and let us walk in the light of the Lord; and that they should beat their
Swords into Plough-shares, and their Spears into Pruning Hooks, and should not
learn War any more; and he that kills with the Sword, shall be killed with
the Sword: Here is the Patience, Rev. 13.10.
and the Faith of the Saints.

And likewise all Persecutors about Religion, who profess Christ to be Christ,
and say he is come in the Flesh; does not their Spirit deny the end of his
coming, in denying his Doctrine, who said, Mat. 5.39, 44.
Love your Enemies, do good to them that hare you; and pray for them that
despitefully use you, and and persecute you; and said, Resist not evil, 1 These.
4.9. Isa. 54.13. John 6.45. Mat. 5.12.
but whosoever smites thee on the Right Cheek, turn unto him the other also?
And true Christians are all taught of God, to love one another, (and their
Enemies also) and great shall be their Peace; and they can rejoice, and be
glad, when they are persecuted for Righteousness sake.

And likewise Professors of Christianity, who Challenge to take Tithes, (which
were given too the Children of Lev^, who had no other Inheritance, for their
service of the Tabernacle, and for Offerings under the Law, etc.) they say,
That Christ is Christ, and that he came in the Flesh, and suffered under
Pontius Pilate, and by the persuasion of the Chief Priests, was Crucified, and
that he rose from the Dead, Mat. 5.17. Ephesians. 2.15. Heb. 7.11, to 28.
and Ascended into Heaven, etc. as the holy Scriptures declare; but for all
this Confession in words, does not their Spirit deny the very end or his coming
in the Flesh, which was to fulfill that Law that gave Tithes, and abolish it,
and disanul it? Yea, moreover, does not their Spirit persuade, That People
ought to pay Tithes as under the Law, which made none Christians, which Law
could not be abolished till Christ was Crucified? And then does it not follow
certainly, that it persuades (as the Jewish Chief Priests did) that Christ may
be Crucified again, Mat. 27.20.
and so both in Takers and Payers of Tithes, denies Christ Crucified?

And it is observable that one William Thorp, whom those Reformed from Popery
own to be a Martyr, being brought before Thomas Arundel Archbishop of
Canterbury, and then Chancellor of England, in the Year 1407. and examined;
giving a clear Testimony (according to the Holy Scriptures) against Tithes, as
being no Gospel Maintenance, amongst other notable Answers, said, That those
Priests that Challenge to take Tithes, deny Christ come in the Flesh; to which
the Bishop replied, saying, Heard ye ever Lossel speak thus; and this William
Thorp is one, whom the Tythe-takers now own for a Martyr, (except they have
lately rejected the Books of Martyrs, because they bear Witness against many of
their Popish Practices) read the large Testimony of William Thorp against
Tithes and Swearing; is the Book called, Acts and Monuments, in pages 536, 537

And likewise they that Preach up Infants Baptism, as they call it, but can
find no Divine Warrant, not President for it, and they whouse many Cer mo^ie^,
Ordinances, and Traditions, (besides that about Infants) most of which they
reckon (if not all) as outward visible signs of inward spiritual Graces; being
used after the Commandments, Doctrines, and Traditions of Men; such say that
Christ is Christ, and that he was Crucified on a Cross, as the Scriptures
declared: But does not their Spirit deny Christ come in the Flesh, Ephesians. 2.15.16
Col. 2.14.
whose coming in the Flesh was to abolish the Law, and the Enmity, even the Law
of Commandments contained in Ordinances; blotting out the Handwriting of
Ordinances, which was against true Christians, and contrary to them, and took
it out of the way, nailing it to his Cross? Call. 4.9.
And if these things (which the Apostle of Christ called weak and beggarly
Elements) were contrary to true Christians formerly, how come they to be for
them now?

But true Christians are Baptized into the Death of Christ, Romans 6.3, 4.
by his spiritual Baptism, and they are also Buried with him by Baptism (which
Death with Christ, and Burial with Christ, Col. 2.6, to 23.
Infant-sprinklers know little of) and they are also dead with Christ from the
Rudiments, or Ordinances of the World, if they be true Christians, and are not
to be subject to Ordinances, (nor to touch, taste, nor handle them) which are
after the Doctrines and Commandments of Men, and are all to perish with the
using; though they have (as the Apostle said) a show of Wisdom in Will Worship
and Humility, and neglecting of the Body, not in any honor to the satisfying
of the Flesh: Or as some more sensibly Translate the last Sentence thus, See
Margined Bibles.
But they are of no Value, save for the filling (or satisfying) of the Flesh.

And so their signs have a show of Wisdom, in Will Worship and voluntary
Humility, and they have a show of neglecting the Body; and so has their
Fasting to be seen of Men, Mat. 6.1, to 19.
and their Prayers, and their Alms to be seen of Men, which Christ taught to
beware of.

And Christ said to such as pleaded for the Traditions of the Elders, about
washing of Hands, and Pots, and Cups, and Brazen Vessels, Mark 7.9, to 10.
and of Tables: Well (said he) has Esaias Prophesied of you Hypocrites, as it
is written, This People honors me with their Lips, but their Heart is far
from me; howbeit in vain do they Worship me, teaching for Doctrines the
Commandments of Men, and said he, Ye reject the Commandment of God, that ye may
keep your own Tradition, or, Mat. 15.6.
thus have ye made the Commandment of God of none effect by your Tradition.

And so where the Power of the Man of Sin prevails inwardly, there he keeps
People, by his Instruments, in a Belief or Persuasion, that outward Shows,
Signs, Ordinances, and Ceremonies, are of necessity to be used, and practiced
by Christians, and that, it is impossible to keep any Order, or quiet
Discipline in the Church without Ceremonies, and some plead the Authority of
Christ for them, and of his Apostles, who Preached and Taught the contrary: And
so their pleading is without ground or warrant from Christ or his Apostles, for
their Signs, and Ceremonies, and Traditions, by which they make the Commandment
of Christ of none effect.

And the Commandment of Christ is to believe in the Light, that they may be
Children of it: And the Children of the Light see and know the emptiness and
insufficiency of all the Shows, Signs, Shadows, and Ceremonies of the Man of
Sin, which were invented by his dark Power, in the Night of Apostasy from the
Spirit of Christ, and used after the Doctrines and Traditions of Men, after the
Rudiments of the World, and not after the Doctrine of Christ, nor his Apostles.

But if they, that Teach such things as these for Doctrines, to get Money by,
had not a show of Christianity, and a show of believing in Christ, and in the
Scriptures of Truth, they walking contrary, could not prevail upon many who
Believe the Truth of the Holy Scriptures, and the Doctrine of Christ and his
Apostles Recorded therein, to embrace their Doctrines, and receive them for
Teachers, nor to pay for their Teachings, who through Covetousness with feigned
words, 2 Pet. 1.19. 2 Pet. 2.2.3.
make Merchandise of such as follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom
the Way of Truth (which the Scriptures declare of, even the Light, the sure
Word of Prophecy in the Heart) is evil spoken of: For if the False Church,
called Mystery Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of
the Earth, had not been Arrayed in Purple, and Scarlet Color, and decked with
Gold, and precious Stones, and Pearls, then probably the Kings of the Earth
would not have been so apt to commit Fornication with her: Rev. 17.1, 2, to 6.
And so if those that Preach up this or that Ordinance, or Tradition, to get
Money withal, contrary to the Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles, did not deck
themselves, and their Doctrines, with the precious words of Christ and his
Apostles, making them to serve to their Purposes as far as they can, with all
the feigned words and fair speeches that they can study out, or invent, their
Trade would soon fail, and their Merchandise be rejected; as it is by the
Children of the Light, who plainly see their deceit, let their shows be as fair
as they can.

Now if it be any thing whereby God is really honored, or the Name of Christ
exalted, or People bettered, or edified in Christ the Truth; there is no reason
why any such thing should be wanting amongst Christians; but such Ceremonies,
Types, Signs, and Shadows, which the Holy Scriptures declare of, which were in
their Time and Season appointed of God, to be as Figures, Types or Shadows to
them who were as under the Cloud, to typifie or show forth Christ to come, and
to be as Shadows of good things to come, Col. 2.^^.
and to be as Explanations of the Great Mystery of Godliness; which, by the
prevailing Power of Darkness, was hid from Ages and Generations, which is made
manifest to his Saints (who have believed in, Col. 1.26, 27.
and walk in his Light) which is Christ in them the hope of Glory: So now
Christ, the Antitype, the End of all Figures, Types, and Shadows, being come,
and also inwardly revealed, and made manifest, why then should not all those
outward Ceremonies, Types, Figures, Signs, and Shadows cease, seeing there is
no Warrant, nor Command of God, nor Christ, nor of his Holy Apostles, left upon
Record in the Scriptures of Truth, for the continuance of them?

For that which was a Figure for the time then present, in which were offered
both Gifts, Heb. 7.18, 19 Heb. 9.9, 10. Ephesians. 2.15.16.
and Sacrifices; that could not make him that did the service perfect, as
pertaining to the Conscience, which stood only in Meats, and Drinks, and diverse
Washings imposed on them (to wit, the Jews) until the time of Reformation; that
Law of Commandments, contained in Ordinances, was disanulled, or made void, for
the weakness, and unprofitableness thereof, by Christ who came to fulfill,
abolish, disanul, and make void the same.

And the Apostle says, If that first Covenant, had been faultless, then should
no place have been sought for the second; for, finding fault with them, the
Lord said, Behold the Days come, Jer. 31.31, 32, 33, 34. Heb. 8.7, 8, 9, 10, 11.
when I will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, and the House of
Judah; not according to the Covenant that I made with their Fathers in the Day
that I took them by the Hand, to lead them out of the Land of Egypt, because
they continued not in my Covenant, and I regarded them not, says the Lord: But
this is the Covenant that I will make with the House of Israel, after those
Days, says the Lord; I will put my Laws into their Mind, and write them in
their Hearts; and I will be to them a God, and they shall be to me a People:
And they shall not teach every Man his Neighbor, and every Man his Brother,
saying, Know the Lord, for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest;
and I will be merciful to their unrighteousness, and their sins, and their
iniquities will I remember no more: So here is a clear Testimony to God's Law
in the Mind, and in the Heart, Prove. 6.23.
which is the Light that reproves for sin, and the Reproof of its Instruction
is the Way of Life, and the Law of the Spirit of Life in Christ Jesus sets
(them who walk in the Light, the Way of Life) free from the Law of sin and
death: Romans 8.2.
But it does not so set them free from the Law of sin and death, who love not
the inward Law and Light of Life, but are in Bondage to outward Ordinances,
John 8.12. Joh. 12.35, 36. Gal. 4.9.
and weak and beggarly Elements, which the Apostles of Christ reproved.

And said the Apostle Paul, in that he says a New Covenant, he has made the
first old, now (said he) that which decays and waxes old, is ready to Vanish
away; and so he testified in his Day, that the outward Covenant (or Law of
Ceremonies, or of Commandments contained in Ordinances) was old, and ready to
vanish away, and it was his Exercise and Travail, to bring those that in any
measure believed in Christ out of those Ceremonies, Ordinances, and weak and
beggarly Elements, into the Obedience of the Inward Law of God put into their
Mind, and written in their Hearts, that therein they might walk as Children of
the Light, which now the Preachers up of Ordinances, and Elements hate, and
speak evil of, and cannot endure to hear of. Read the Epistles of Paul to the
Hebrews, Galatians, Colossiani and Ephesians.

And so there is a great difference between the Ministers of Christ, whose
Labor and Travail was and is to turn People from Darkness to Light, that they
may believe in it, become Children of it, and walk in it, and come out of the
use of outward Ordinances, and Elements, into the true Worship of God in his
Spirit, and Light: And the Ministers of the Man of Sin, whose labor is to keep
People from believing in the Light, and in the sufficiency of it, and so to
keep them in Darkness, where sin, and the Works of darkness are done, which are
inwardly reproved by the Light; and so to keep People in the use of such
outward Signs, Ceremonies, Ordinances, and Elements, (in their Vain and
Ignorant Worship) which are Taught variously, according to the Traditions and
Doctrines of Men; and that for their Gain of Tithes, Money, and outward
Preferment, far different from the expectation of the Ministers of Christ,
whose Travail and Preaching often is, and has been in the hazard of their
Lives, and outward Estates.

And they that receive, believe in, walk in, and continue in the New Covenant
of the Everlasting Gospel of God, which is the Light, Grace, Law, and Spirit of
God in their Hearts, there is no need for them to be subject to Ordinances of
Men, nor to be burdened writh there Traditions, 2 Cor. 3.
nor to be in Bondage to weak and beggarly Elements, in their true Worship of
God, John 4.24. Col. 2.20. Romans 8.21. Gal. 5.1. Gal. 4.9.
which is in his Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty;
and such are all led and taught by the Spirit of God, and stand fast in the
glorious Liberty of the Children of God, wherewith Christ has made them free
from the Yoke of Bondage to outward Elements, Ordinances, and Traditions of Men.

And the Children of God (who stand in their Liberty) are the Babes, unto whom
the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God are revealed, which are hid from the Wise
and Prudent of the World; Mac. 11.25.
and these Babes have believed the Record of the Three that bear Record in
Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Spirit, and these Three are One; and
this is the Record, that God has given unto them Eternal Life, and this Life
is in his Son, and these Babes believe on the Son of God, 1 John 5.1, 2, to 12.
and have in themselves the Record, or Witness (being One in signification) and
this is the Witness of God, which is greater than the Witness of Men, which
Witness the Spirit bears, because the Spirit is Truth; and so there are Three
that bear witness in Earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood, and these
Three agree in One, witnessing with the Spirits of these Babes, (who are true
Christians) that they are the Children of God: And these are not dead Witnesses
(as outward Water is dead) but are living Witnesses; John 6.63. 1 Cor. 15.45.
for the living Spirit bears Witness, 2 Cor. 3.6. Tit. 3.5. Jer. 4.14. John
4.10. Isa. 4.4. 1 John 1.7.
which Spirit quickens, and gives Life; and the living Water bears
Witness, which Water washes the Heart from filth, and wickedness, which Water
Christ gives to them that are athirst, and ask; and the Blood, which is not
dead (for the Blood is the Life, Dent. 12.23.) bears Witness, which Blood
cleanses them that walk in the Light, as God is in the Light, from all sin:
And so these Three, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood agree in One,
witnessing, or bearing Witness (in the Earth, to wit, the Hearts of true
Christians) of, and unto the inward Baptism of Christ.

And these Babes being Born not of Corruptible Seed, 1 Pet. 1.23, 24, 25. Heb.
4.12. Ephesians. 6.17. Ephesians. 6.25.
but of Incorruptible, by the Word of God, which lives and abides for ever;
which is quick and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged Sword, 1 Pet. 2.2.
which is the Sword of the Spirit of God, by which the true inward Circumcision
is made, and the true inward Baptism of Christ in the Heart wrought: These, as
now Born Babes, desiring the sincere Milk of this Living Word, how should their
tender Heavenly Father (who knows all their Needs, and Necessities) but
afford them Nourishment by the same, that they may grow thereby? And though
these Babes at the first be but as unskilful in the Word of Righteousness, Heb.
5.12, 13.14. Col. 2.19.
and use (as it were) Milk, and not strong Meat, yet as they truly hunger after
the Divine Milk of this Word, they come to be satisfied therewith, and
nourished thereby, and so they grow and increase, with the increase of God,
till they come to have their senses truly exercised (by reason of use) to
discern both good and evil, and then the Apostle calls them perfect (or of
full Age, as some Translate) to whom strong Meat belongs; and so then they
know an eating of the Bread of God, which comes down from Heaven, and gives
Life unto the World.

And Christ said, If any Man eat of this Bread, he shall live for ever, and
says he, The Bread that I will give is my Flesh; John 6.32, 33, to 63.
which I will give for the Life of the World; and he said to the Jews, Verily,
verily, I say unto you, Except ye eat my Flesh, and drink my Blood, ye have no
Life in you; whosoever eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, has Eternal Life,
and I will raise him up at the last Day; for my Flesh is Meat indeed, and my
Blood is Drink indeed: He that eats my Flesh, and drinks my Blood, dwells
in me, and I in him; as the Living Father has sent me, and I live by the
Father, so he that eats me shall live by me: This is the Bread that came down
from Heaven; not as your Fathers did eat Manna, and are dead, he that eats
this Bread shall live for ever; and to them that murmured at these sayings,
Christ said, Does this offend you? What, and if you shall see the Son of Man
ascend up where he was before? It is the Spirit that quickens, the Flesh
profits nothing: The words that I speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they
are Life.

And so it is plain, Mat. 4.4.
that true Christians live by the words that Christ speaks in their Hearts,
and Souls, and Consciences, by his Light and Grace, the answering of which in
faithful Obedience, is as Meat and Drink to their Souls, and they know the Law
of the Mouth of God to be better unto them, John 14.10. Psalm. 119.72. Mal. 2.7.
than Thousands of Gold and Silver: And as in Times past under the Law, the
Priests Lips were to keep Knowledge, Col. 2.3.
and the People were to seek the Law at his Mouth; so the Lips of Christ, (who
is a Priest for ever after the Order of Melchizedeck) they keep Knowledge, and
in him are hid all the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge, and all true
Christians inwardly seek the Law at his Mouth, and their Souls live by the
words that proceed out of it, Psalm. 26.8.9. 1 Timothy 6.16. Isa. 60.19.
and these are abundantly satisfied with the fatness of God's House (who
dwells in the Light) and these drink of the River of his Pleasures, for with
him is the Fountain of Life, and in his Light they see Light, and the Lord will
be unto them an Everlasting Light, and their God, their Glory.

But they that believe not in the Light of Christ in their Hearts, but rebel
against it, and kick against the Pricks, and Reproofs of it; how should such be
satisfied with the fatness of God's House? Or how should such know an eating of
the Bread that Christ gives, which is his Flesh and Blood, and a dwelling in
Christ, and Christ in them? Or how should such know the words that Christ
speaks unto them, by his Light, Grace, and Spirit in their Hearts, to be
Spirit and Life unto their Souls? And if they know not, neither witness these
things in some measure in themselves, how then can they know themselves to be
true Christians?

For true Christians know that they are of God, and the whole World lies in
wickedness, and can truly say, 1 John 5.18, 19, 20.
We know that the Son of God is come, and has given us an Understanding, that
we may know him that is true; and we are in him that is true, even in his Son
Jesus Christ; this is the true God and Eternal Life.

Also to them who believed in the Light, John 8.12.
and learned to deny themselves, and follow him, that they might enjoy the
Light of Life, Christ said, I am the true Vine, my Father is the Husbandman, ye
are the Branches, he that abides in me, and I in him, the same brings forth
much Fruit, John 15.
for without me ye can do nothing; if ye abide in me, and my words abide in
you, ye shall ask what ye will, and it shall be done unto you; herein is my
Father glorified that ye bear much Fruit, so shall ye be my Disciples; as the
Father has loved me, so have I loved you, continue ye in my love: If ye keep
my Commandments ye shall abide in my love; this is my Commandment, that ye love
one another even as I have loved you: If the World hate you, ye know that it
hated me before it hated you; if ye were of the World, the World would love his
own, but because ye are not of the World, but I have chosen you out of the
World, therefore the World hates you. And as Christ said, I am the true Vine,
and my Father is the Husbandman, he also said, Every Branch IN ME that bears
not Fruit, he takes away; and every Branch that bears Fruit, John 15.
he purges it, that it may bring forth more Fruit: Now (said he to his) are ye
clean through the Word that I have spoken unto you; abide in me, and I in you;
as the Branch cannot bear Fruit of it self, except it abide in the Vine, no
more can ye, except ye abide in me, for without me ye can do nothing: If a Man
abide not in me, he is cast forth as a Branch, and is withered.

And so they that are true Christians, and Children of God, and Members of
Christ, being Taught by his Light and Grace in their Hearts in which they have
believed, they are Branches of Christ the true Vine, and they partake of the
Nourishment, that through the true Vine is extended unto them the Branches; as
they abide in the Vine; but they that abide not in him the Vine, are cast forth
as Branches, and are withered; which answers to the other saying of Christ,
to wit, Except ye eat the Flesh of the Son of Man, and drink his Blood, John
6.53.
ye have no Life in you.

For this answers to the eating of the Flesh, and drinking of the Blood of
Christ: And as the Branches in the Vine live by Nourishment of the Life of the
Vine, in whom they abide; so they that eat the Flesh, and drink the Blood of
Christ, says he, they dwell in me, and I in them; 1 Cor. 12.27. Ephesians. 4.16.
Ephesians. 5.29, 30.
and he that eat home shall live by me, says Christ: And so the Branches of
the Vine feed upon, and drink or suck in of the Sap, or Life of the Vine, and
live by it; as also the Members of the Body do, by the Nourishment of the Body.

And also Christ said, I am the good Shepherd, the good Shepherd gives his
Life for the Sheep: And said he, I know my Sheep, and am known of mine; for
(says he) they know my Voice, and they sollow me, John 10.
and I give unto them Eternal Life, and they shall never perish, neither shall
any Man pluck them out of my Hand; but he said to the Jews, (who believed not
in the Light as he commanded, but were Taught by the Doctrines and Traditions
of Men) ye believe not, because ye are not of my Sheep, as I said unto you; my
Sheep hear my Voice.

So Christ is the good Shepherd, who feeds his Sheep with his own Life, as
well as the true Vine, whereof his Sheep are the Branches, John 6.48, to 58.
and partake of the very Life and Nature of him the Vine, who is the Bread of
Life, of which if any Man eat, he shall live for ever, and dwell in Christ, and
Christ in him; and so they are as the Vine and the Branches dwelling in each
other, and such Branches bear Fruit to the Glory of the Vine in which they
dwell, which Fruit and Branches are precious in the Eye of God the Husbandman,
to whom Glory belongs, and is ascribed for ever: And these Branches are the
Sheep of Christ their good Shepherd, and they hear, and diligently hearken unto
the Voice, or Light, or Manifestation of his Spirit in their Hearts, and the
words thereof unto them spoken, they are SPIRIT, and they are LIFE; and so they
know his quickening Spirit to minister Life to their Souls, in which they live,
and grow, and bring forth excellent, Isa 4.2, 3, 4.
and comely Fruit, whereby God their Heavenly Father is glorified.

And because many believe not the words of Christ concerning the eating of the
Bread of Life, and the eating of his Flesh, and drinking of his Blood, but
murmured, and went back, and walked no more with him; therefore he said to the
Twelve Disciples, Will ye also go away? John 6.66, to 70.
And one answered, saying, Lord to whom shall we go? Thou have the words of
Eternal Life, and we believe, and are sure that thou art that Christ, the Son
of the Living God: So they were satisfied, and knew him by the words of Eternal
Life, which he spoke unto them: And so he will satisfy all who truly hunger
and thirst after him, by the words of his Spirit, if they believe in the Light,
and obey it.

But those that are in Unbelief and Disobedience to the Light in their own
Hearts, they have no such satisfaction, for the Light which inwardly reproves
them for sin and disobedience, is the Manifestation of the Spirit of Christ, by
which he speaks unto his Sheep, who know his Voice, and satisfies them with
the words of Eternal Life, and with the Bread of Life, and Water of Life, unto
which, Isa. 55.1. ^er. 22.17.
by his Light or spiritual Voice, he inviteth all that thirst to come, and
take, and drink freely, without Money, and without Price.

But they that Rebel against the Light, Prove. 6.23.
and will not hearken to its Reprof, they err from the Way of Life, and
Understanding, Prove. 21.16.
(though never so worldly-wise) and they remain among the Congregation of the
Dead; and cannot (in that state) know a feeding upon the Bread of Life, nor a
drinking of the Water of Life, which Christ gives to the Faithful; for they
abide not in Christ the true Vine, but are cast forth as Branches, and
withered; and it will not profit them at all to have a Name to live, and be
dead.

And this eating of spiritual Meat, 1 Con. 0.1, 2, 3, 4.
and drinking of spiritual Drink, was witnessed by the Fathers (in Israel) who
were all under the Cloud, and all passed through the Sea, and were all Baptized
unto Moses in the Cloud, and in the Sea; for said the Apostle, they all drank
of the spiritual Rock that followed them, (or went with them) and that Rock was
Christ, and these were directed by Moses to the word very nigh in the Mouth,
Dent. 30.11, 12, 13, 14.
and in the Heart, and he told them of the Prophet, that God would raise up
unto them in the midst of them, that was to be heard in all things, which the
Martyr Steven said was Christ, who was with the Church in the Wilderness, whom,
said he, our Fathers would not obey, Acts 7, 37, to 51.
but thrust him from them, and in their Hearts turned back again into Egypt:
And he said to the Jews, The stiff, necked and uncircumcised in Heart and Ears,
ye do always resist the Holy Ghost, as your Forefathers did, so do ye.

And so they that believe in, and faithfully obey the Light of Christ, which is
the Manifestation of his Holy Spirit, and the Word of his Grace in their Hearts
(which is nigh to reprove for sin) they become Children of the Light, and with
his inward Baptism, by his own Spirit, they are all Baptized into one Body,
whereof Christ is the Head; and so they are Members of Christ, whether they be
Jews or Gentiles, 1 Cor. 12.11, 12, to 21.
whether they be Bond or Free, being all made to drink into his one Spirit; for
as the Apostle Paul says, The Body is not one Member but many; for as the Body
is one, and has many Members, and all the Members of that one Body, being
many, Ephesians. 4.5.
are one Body, so also is Christ: And says he, If they were all one Member,
where were the Body; but now are they many Members, yet but one Body: And these
all eat the same spiritual Meat, and drink the same spiritual Drink, even of
the spiritual Rock Christ Jesus, of which the Fathers (who were under the
Cloud) of old drank, and of which all the Servants, Children, and People of
God, and Disciples, and Members of Christ, in all Ages have drunk: Even as all
the Members of the Body receive Nourishment from or of the Body, and as all the
Branches (or Members) of the Vine, receive. Nourishment of the Vine, in which
they dwell.

But they that believe not in, but Rebel against the Light, the Manifestation
of the Spirit of Christ in their Hearts, they resist his Holy Spirit, and will
not by it be Baptized into his one Body, and so they are not Members of Christ,
nor Branches of him the true Vine; nor, they do not receive Nourishment from
him, as his Members and Branches do, neither do they know an eating of his
Flesh, or drinking of his Blood, to have Eternal Life thereby, though they may
talk much of it; for the power of Death and Darkness, even the Man of Sin,
prevails over such, and they are subject to his unclean, dark, unholy Spirit,
and so are Servants to him, whose coming is after the working of Satan, with
all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders. And so he prevailing upon them to
yield to his Temptations, and to obey his Power, and so to disobey the Light of
Christ in their Hearts, which reproves them for sin, so that they can have no
true spiritual satisfaction, then he persuades them to endeavor for
satisfaction in the use of outward Signs, as well of Baptism before treated of,
as also of eating and drinking the Lord's Supper; to wit, cating his Flesh, and
drinking his Blood; and so they use Bread and Wine as signs thereof; but, it is
but after the Doctrines and Commandments of Men (some after one manner, and
others after another manner) for the Spirit of the Man of Sin does not Baptize
its Followers all into one Body (as the Spirit of Christ does his Followers, to
whom he gives one Heart, Jer. 31.39.
and one Way) but it makes them of many different Hearts and Ways, and fills
all its Followers with Confusion and Disorder inwardly and outwardly: For some
believe that the visible Bread and Wine, at or by the words of their Priest,
are Converted or Transubstantiated into the very Body and Blood of Christ, and
so they think they eat the Body of Christ with their outward Mouths, though
under the form of outward Bread; and that they drink his Blood under the form
of outward Wine. See Council of Trent, Sess. 13. C. 1.

Others hold that the Body of Christ is in, or with, or about the Bread and
Wine; others only use it in remembrance of Christ's Death, etc. affirming, That
the Body of Christ is not there Corporally or Substantially, but yet that it is
Really and Sacramentally received by the Faithful in the use of outward Bread
and Wine.

In Contention about these Opinions (especially about that first mentioned)
much Innocent Blood has been shed, which is a plain Argument, and Evidence,
that such Blood-shedders are not such as feed spiritually upon the Flesh and
Blood of Christ Jesus; Mat. 26.5^.
whose coming is not to destory Men's Lives, but to save them.

But it is also very plain, that such who kill and destroy one another, or the
Servants of Christ, about their Religions and Opinions, John 16.2.
are such as Rebel against the Light or Manifestation of Christ's Spirit in
their Hearts, being gradually drawn to that high degree of Rebellion, Luke
23.34.
by their being prevailed upon by the deceitful Power of the Man of Sin, even
the Power of Death and Darkness in themselves, which makes them so dark and
senseless in spiritual things, Acts 3.17.
that they know not what they do (no more than the Jews did when they Crucified
Christ who came to save them) but they think they do God good service, 1 Cor.
2.7.8, 9, 10.
(as Christ foretold of them) when they kill his Servants and Children, in
whom, in and by his own meek innocent Spirit, he appears, testifying against
all ungodliness and wickedness.

And so they become, as Mystery Babylon, their Mother, drunken with the Blood
of the Saints, and Martyrs of Jesus; whose Plagues shall come in one Day,
Death, and Mourning, and Famine; instead of eating, (as they say) the Flesh,
and drinking the Blood of Christ Jesus, and having Eternal Life thereby.

And as concerning the said Opinions themselves, it is needless to make
particular Refutations of them; if any think themselves to be clear from
shedding Innocent Blood, concerning their manner of Doctrine, and using of
their Bread and Wine, and that they have killed none about that matter
particularly, though they have warred with, and probably killed some about
Religious Tenets, etc. let such consider, That he who abides not in Christ the
true Vine, (which none can do, but they that continue in his Love and Doctrine)
is cast forth as a Branch, and is withered, not knowing a partaking of his
Virtuous Life, which is called his Flesh and Blood; and the Love and Doctrine
of Christ teaches, Mat. 5.39, 44. Mat. 7.12. Mat. 7.28. Luke 12.4.
not to resist evil, but when any smites on the Right Cheek, to turn the other
also, and to love Enemies, and to pray for Persecutors and despiteful Users,
and to do as they would be done unto, and not to be afraid of them that kill
the Body, but cannot kill the Soul: And which of them, of any of the said three
Opinions about their Bread and Wine, continue in this Love and Doctrine of
Christ?

But such as war, sight, oppress, persecute, or cast into Prison Innocent
People, (till Death if they can) for Wages for Preaching, or make havoc and
spoil of their Goods, or Imprison them, for Tithes, Easter-Reckonings, or
Midsummer Dues, as they call them; or for not paying for their Bread and Wine,
which they neither had, nor would buy, knowing therein is no true spiritual
Food, (as the Sellers of it pretend) and also knowing true and substantial Food
for their Souls daily given of God freely, which those Sellers of Bread and
Wine are ignorant of; for if they knew it, they would not persecute those for
their Price of their Bread and Wine who will not Buy of it: And also they that
Persecute, or Imprison others for meeting together to Worship God in his holy
Fear, Spirit and Truth; they that do such things, are far from doing to others
as they would have others to do to them, and are far from a state of loving
their Enemies, and of truly praying for Persecutors, and despiteful Users of
themselves, being themselves Enemies and Persecutors, and despiteful Users of
others; and they are far from turning the one Cheek to the smiter, when the
other is smitten, and so not resisting evil, who themselves persecute, smite,
or abuse the Innocent: And if such suspect danger, how should they but be
afraid of them that kill the Body, who are such evil Doers themselves to the
Bodies and Goods of the Innocent? And so live unprepared for Death themselves.

And let it be considered, whether Persecution, and Imprisonment of the
Innocent for Tithes and Wages for Preaching, and about their Worship of God,
etc. be not Persecution of Christ in his Members? And whether any of such
Enters of Bread, and Drinkers of Wine in their Worship of any of the said Three
Opinions, especially their Teachers, when many of them are such Persecutors,
and despiteful Users of others, when they have power? And whether such be not
guilty of the Body and Blood of Christ, and so in their eating and drinking
their Sacramental Bread and Wine, as they call it, eat and drink their own
Damnation, not discerning the Lord's Body, which is a spiritual Body? And what
Condition are the Followers in, when the Leaders are such?

And as to those who take the Bread and Wine in remembrance of the Death of
Christ, and affirm, That the Flesh and Blood of Christ is Really and
Sacramentally received by the Faithful, in the use of Bread and Wine, and make
the Communion or Participation thereof to relate to that outward Body, that was
Born of the Virgin Mary, and suffered without the Gates at Jerusalem, in Judea;
whereas it should relate to the spiritual Body, Flesh and Blood of Christ, the
spiritual Rock, which was, and is the Souls Food of his Faithful Servants in
all Ages: And who als tie this Participation of the Body and Blood of Christ,
to the Ceremony of breaking outward Bread (used by him with his Disciples) as
if it were only to be enjoyed in the use of that Ceremony, and therefore reckon
that Ceremony to be a perpetual standing Ordinance in the Church of Christ, and
of Necessity to be used, Mat. 26.26, 27, 28. Mark 14.22. Luke 22.17, 18, 19, 20.
because the Evangelist Luke only, (for Matthew and Mark mention only the
action) Records that Christ took Bread, and gave thanks, and brake it, and
gave unto his Disciples, saying, This is my Body, which is given for you; this
do in remembrance of me: And both before, and after taking of the Bread, Luke
mentions that he took the Cup, and giving thanks, said, This Cup is the New
Testament in my Blood which is shed for you; or as Matthew relates, This is my
Blood of the New Testament.

Upon this said Sentence, to wit, this do in remembrance of me, lies the
stress of the Argument, that Christ commanded the Continuance of this Ceremony,
of taking outward Bread and Wine in his Church in remembrance of him,
perpetually; but the words (being spoken figuratively, as they also grant)
imply no such thing; but rather the Discourse mentioned by Luke, Luke 22.
makes plainly to appear, that Christ intended only that their so doing, which
was in a state of their weakness, might be a means to instruct them in the
Mystery of the spiritual eating of his Flesh, and drinking of his Blood in his
Kingdom, Luke 17.21.
which was within them.

And to this purpose he said, With desire I have desired to eat this Passover
with you before I suffer, for I say unto you, I will not any more eat thereof,
until it be fulfilled in the Kingdom of God; and said he, I will not drink of
the Fruit of the Vine, until the Kingdom of God shall come; and said he, Ye are
they which have continued with me in my Temptations, and I appoint unto you a
Kingdom, as my Father has appointed unto me, that ye may eat and drink at my
Table in my Kingdom: Luke 22.15, to 38.
And said he, I say unto you, That this that is written must yet be
accomplished in me; he was numbered among the Transgressors; for the Things
concerning me have an end.

By which words it is plain, that Christ appointed to his Disciples, that they
should eat and drink spiritually at his Spiritual Table, in his heavenly
Kingdom, which was within them; which shall never have an end, and that the
outward things concerning him were to have an end; for the inward or spiritual
things concerning him have no end: And so, by the outward Bread and Wine which
he gave them, he instructed them in the knowledge of their spiritual eating of
the daily Bread of Life, Mat. 6.5, to 15. John 6.51.
without which no Soul can live to God, which he bade them to pray in secret
for, which comes down from Heaven, and gives Life, which Bread Christ gives,
which is his Flesh: And also in the knowledge of their spiritual drinking of
the new and spiritual Wine (in his Kingdom) which is his Blood, and is also the
Living Water which he freely gives, and inviteth all and every one that is
athirst to come unto, John 4.10, 13, 14.
and take; which Water whosoever drinks shall never thirst (their Souls will
not want Refreshment from any outward Bread, John 7.37, 38.
Wine, or Water) but, says Christ, the Water that I shall give him, shall be
in him a Well of Water springing up into Eternal Life.

Now observe, it was Christ's Disciples, who had learned of him, to deny
themselves, and to take up their Cross (to their own wills) daily; and who had
left all to follow him, with whom he desired to eat, and did eat the Passover,
and whom he so instructed by the Bread and Wine, which showed forth his Death:
But there was a great difference between these his Disciples, and the Priests
of those Times, 1 Cor. 5.7.
who were very strict in keeping the Passover, which Typified Christ, the true
Passover, and caused him to be Crucified, and so all that will not be
instructed by the Light of Christ, in their own Hearts, nor learn of him, that
they may truly be his Disciples, nor will not deny themselves, nor take up
their Cross, nor follow Christ spiritually; such may be strict in their outward
Performances, wherein they know not what they do, Crucifying Christ afresh in
their Affections, and in their Lusts; but God is displeased with all such their
Performances. And they who disobey the Light of Christ in their own Hearts and
Consciences, are all ignorant of the true spiritual Food, which Christ daily
ministers to the Souls of the Children of the Light; and such depend upon the
Shadow or Ceremony, not enjoying the Substance; and as such (as they) did by
Christ formerly, so now they number among Transgressors the Children of God,
who feed upon the Bread of Life, the Flesh and Blood of Christ, and know the
end of the things concerning him.

Now People may eat Bread, and drink Wine in remembrance of Christ, and of his
Death also, and yet not spiritually eat the Flesh, nor drink the Blood of
Christ, for they are two different things; and the Apostle Paul, reproving the
Corinthians for some abuses about their eating and drinking in their
Assemblies, and of themselves, mentions the words of Christ, to wit, this do
in remembrance of me; 1 Cor. 11.20. to 28.
and concerning the Cup, he renders the Command thus, to wit, this do as often as
ye do it in remembrance of me; and says Paul, As often as ye shall eat this
Bread, and drink this Cup, ye do show the Lord's Death till he come; wherefore
whosoever shall eat this Bread, and drink the Cup of the Lord unworthily, shall
be guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord.

Where it is to be observed, that the Corinthians being newly Convinced, and in
a weak estate of Faith, of which mention is often made in this first Epistle of
Paul to them, and being in the use of this Ceremony of eating and drinking in
their Assemblies, they performed it as a Religious Act, and so it is to all
those that use it as a Religious Act, for as much as therein their end is to
remember the Lord's Body that was Crucified for them, and his Blood that was
shed for them; and to show the Lord's Death: But to remember the Lord, and his
Body, and Blood, and to show forth his Death, is not the same as to partake of
the Flesh and Blood of Christ; for the Lord and his Death may be remembered by
those who do not truly partake of his Flesh and Blood.

And the words of the Command mentioned by Paul, are also to be considered, to
wit, This do as often as ye do it in remembrance of me; which Command does not
imply, that they were always to continue in that Ceremony of outward eating and
drinking in their Assemblies, in remembrance of Christ; the continuance of it
was not so positively commanded, Genesis 17.9, to 14.
as the continuance of Circumcision was, and also of keeping the Passover; for
Circumcision was commanded of God, Exodus 12.14.
to be in their Flesh for an Everlasting Covenant; and the Passover was
commanded of God, Phil. 3.2, 3. Romans 2.28. 1 Cor. 5.7. Gal. 4.10.11.
to be kept a Feast by an Ordinance for ever, and yet the true Apostle of
Christ, under the Gospel Dispensation, labored to bring People out of the
outward use of them; to witness them inwardly in themselves; but that saying in
the said Command about the Cup, to wit, As often as ye do it, implies, that they
were not enjoined how often they should do it, nor how long they should continue
in that practice; and so though the Corinthians, Romans 14.
or others, were then in such a practice; it is not binding upon others to use
it, no more than was observations of Days, or making a difference between Meats.

And those that do truly partake of the Flesh and Blood of Christ, as he
himself says, they dwell in him (as the Branches do in the Vine) and he
dwells in them, John 6.56. John 15.5.
(as the Life of the Vine extends through all its living Branches) and
therefore such cannot but remember him, as naturally as a Man remembereth his
natural Food, when hungry or thirsty; and so they need no Ceremonies to put
them in remembrance of him, or of his Death; who always bear about in the Body
the dying of the Lord Jesus, 2 Cor. 4.10.
that the Life also of Jesus may be made manifest in their Body: And so such
truly know Christ to be come, the Abolisher of Ceremonies, and outward Typical
Ordinances.

And so it is good for every one to be a Disciple of Christ (which none can be,
but who learneth of him, by his Light, the Manifestation of his Spirit in their
Hearts, which reproves for sin) before they presume to eat Bread, and drink
Wine, thereby to show forth his Death, lest they eat and drink their own
Damnation, not discerning the Lord's Body: And if any believe it is their Duty
so to take or use Bread and Wine; and make it a matter of Conscience to
forbear, yet if they do not so prepare, and examine themselves, as is required
of all that appear before the All-seeing Eye of God, to perform every Religious
Act whatsoever, then surely they do it unworthily; and instead of feeding upon
the precious Flesh and Blood of Christ, or of truly remembering him, or showing
forth his Death, they make themselves guilty of the Body and Blood of the Lord;
and so they unworthily eating, and drinking the Cup of the Lord, as it is to
them, they eat and drink Damnation to themselves.

And though such pretend to be sorry for their sins, whereby Christ is as in
them Crucified, and seem to be thankful for what Christ has done for them, who
laid down his Life for them; yet they are in the same Spirit, in which formerly
were the Jews, Scribes, and Pharisees, who garnished the Sepulchers of the
Prophets, and said, If we had lived in the Days of our Fathers, we would not
have been partakers with them in the Blood of the Prophets; Mat. 23.29.30.
but Christ pronounced Woe unto them, as being guilty of the Blood of the
Prophets.

And if the Command of Christ be taken in the strictest sense, John 13.1, to 16.
concerning the Bread and Cup, yet, in perusal of the Writings of the Beloved
Disciple of Christ, John the Evangelist, we find that Christ washing his
Disciples Feet, enjoined them as strictly to that Ceremony, which he performed
with more observable Circumstances, than that of the Bread and Cup; for we read
that he rose from Supper, laid aside his Garments, poured out Water into a
Basin, and began to wash the Disciples Feet, and to wipe them with the Towel
wherewith he was girded; and coming to Simon Peter, Peter said, Lord do thou
wash my Feet? Jesus answered, What I do thou know not now, but thou shall
know hereafter; and when Peter denied to let him wash them, Jesus answered, If
I wash thee not, thou have no part in me: Then after he had washed their Feet,
and taken his Garments, and was set down again, (with more words) he said unto
them; If I your Lord and Master have washed your Feet, ye ought also to wash
one another Feet, for I have given you an Example that ye should do as I have
done to you.

And so may not all (that are willing) see, that this Ceremony last rehearsed,
either in respect of the time when it was appointed, or the Circumstances, or
the Command enjoining the use of it, has as much, or more, in it, to prove it
instituted by Christ, to be a perpetual standing Ordinance in his Church, as
either of the other two Ceremonies, to wit, of Baptism, and of Bread and Wine?
And yet by those Reformed from the extreme grosness of Popery, this Ceremony of
washing Feet is not at all used in their Assemblies; though their Christianity
seems mostly to depend upon the use of the other two Ceremonies, to wit, of
their Baptism, and of Bread and Wine, amongst the generality of them that use
them.

So they that use, plead for, and call Sacraments, the Signs or Ceremonies of
Baptism, and Bread and Wine, as by the Command or Institution of Christ, or of
his Apostles; they may with as much or more reason, use, and plead for the
Ceremonies of washing one another Feet, and of Anointing the Sick with Oil;
Jam. 5.14.
and call them Sacraments also, (as the Papists (who have more of them) do) for
either of the last mentioned, seems to be full as positively commanded, as
being of as much necessity, as the other, according to the Scriptures of Truth.

And they that use them in-imitation of the Apostles of Christ, they may as
well use Circumcision, or the outward purifying according to the Jewish Law,
and abstain from Blood, and things strangled, and use laying on of Hands; but
then they should cause others to receive the Holy Spirit, by their laying on of
Hands, as the Apostles did; which thing some practice, but not with the like
effect, nor is it so like to be, whilst they themselves (who lay on Hands) do
not so much as pretend to be guided by the Holy Spirit of God, but mock at the
movings of it; which shows them to have much of the Spirit of the Man of Sin,
as also they have many of his Signs.

And as concerning the Primitive Christians using the Ceremony of Bread and
Wine, so they also used several others; for having been accustomed to many
Ceremonies and Observations, they would not easily be weaned from them all at
once, and therefore might use some suitable Types, which the Apostle for a
Season suffered, in condescension to their weakness, thereby instructing them
cocerning the Mystery of Christ, and laboring to bring them on by degrees,
from their Carnal Conceptions, and Knowledge of Christ after the Flesh, 2 Cor.
5.14, to 17.
to know him in the Spirit revealed in them, unto them, Baptizing them by his
Spirit into his one Body, of which every Member receives daily suitable
Nourishment from Christ the Head, from whom all the Body by Joints and Bands,
having Nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase
of God.

And so when the Apostle of Christ had brought the Colossians to this estate,
and to know Christ in them the hope of Glory, then he labors to bring them
quite out of the use of Ordinances and Ceremonies, as may be read at large in
the first and second Chapters of his Epistle to them; and says he, Why are ye
subject to Ordinances, touch not, taste not, handle not; and says he to them
also, Let no Man judge you in Meat, or in Drink, or in respect of an Holy Day,
or of the New Moon, or of the Sabbath Days, which are a shadow of things to
come, but the Body is of Christ, or in Christ.

And also when the Galatians came to be Children of God, and that God had sent
forth the Spirit of his Son into their Hearts, Gal. 3.26. Gal. 4.6, 9. Gal. 5.1.
Paul says to them, Now after ye have known God, or rather are known of God,
how turn ye again to the weak and beggarly Elements, whereunto ye desire again
to be in Bondage? And says he to them, Stand fast therefore in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not entangled again with the Yoke of
Bondage.

And also the Ephesians, Ephesians. 2.13, 14, 15.
who were sometimes far off, and were as Darkness, when they were made nigh, by
the Blood of Christ, and Children of the Light, and saved by Grace, to whom was
one Lord, one Faith, one Baptism, one God, and Father of all, above all,
through all, and in them all: Paul says, Ephesians. 4.5.6.
Christ had broken down the middle Wall of Partition; Ephesians. 5.5.
having abolished in his Flesh the Enmity, even the Law of Commandments
contained in Ordinances.

So the use of outward Baptism, and eating, and drinking in the Assemblies, of
those who had but newly received the Faith of Christ, having their Minds lately
turned from Darkness to Light, it was to instruct them (in condescension to
their weakness) in the Mystery of Christ the Substance, the Spiritual Purifier,
and the Spiritual Rock, and heavenly Bread of Life, which they were to come to
know an inward and spiritual partaking of, and feeding upon; and when they came
to this state, then they were tostand in the liberty wherewith Christ had made
them free, and not to be any longer in Bondage to outward Elements, Ceremonies,
Ordinances, or Traditions, as is very plain by the Apostles Doctrine; for when
he wrote against outward Ordinances, Elements and Traditions, he no where
makes any Exception at all.

For the Apostle Paul testified, That the Kingdom of God is not Meat and Drink,
Romans 14.
but Righteousness, and Peace, and Joy in the Holy Spirit, and that none ought
to judge one another, concerning Meats, or Drink, or observation of Days;
saying, Every one of us shall give account of himself to God; showing to the
Romans, that there is no necessity for Christians to observe them; and also
writing to the Colossians concerning the same matter, he plainly gives the
Reason further, Why no Man ought so to judge, which is, Christ's blotting out
the Handwriting of Ordinances, Col. 2.14. to 17.
that was against us, and contrary to us, and taking it out of the way, nailing
it to his Cross.

And as there was no necessity for them in the Apostles time, so now, surely
there is no occasion for them; for their outward Water, and outward Bread and
Wine, have been long used, and preached of amongst People, and yet People that
use them, and pay for them, are as ignorant of Christ the Spiritual Baptizer,
and Spiritual Bread of Life, as ever they were; Isa. 55.2.
so they spend their Money for that which is not Bread for their Souls, as it
is pretended, and their labor for that which satisfies not: Certainly they
that buy of such Merchandise, make as bad a Bargain as possibly can be, for
neither does it profit them, neither have they any occasion to buy it, when as
Christ says, Rev. 22.17.
Let him that is athirst come, and whosoever will, let him take the Water of
Life freely: And says by the Prophet, Ho, every one that thirsts, come ye to
the Waters, and he that has no Money, come ye, buy and eat, yea come, buy Wine
and Milk without Money, and without Price; hearken diligently unto me, and eat
ye that which is good, and let your Soul delight it self in fatness.

But they that sell their Baptism, and their Bread and Wine, and their
Preaching, and the like, and they that buy of them also, are not inclined
thereby, (but in dependence thereof are hindered) to come to, and believe in the
Light, the Voice of Christ in their own Hearts, whereby Christ inviteth all to
come and take of the Water of Life, that thirst after it; and so such are far
from the enjoyment of the Rich Satisfaction, which Christ gives to the Souls
of the Children of the Light; though they may talk largely of these things,
Prove. 3.18. Job 28.12, to 28.
(for Death and Hell have heard of the Fame of Wisdom, who is a Tree of Life to
them that lay hold upon her) and though such may read, and use, and profess all
the Writings of the Prophets and Apostles of Christ; yet not being led by the
same Spirit that they were, and the Children of the Light (who are Members of
Christ) are, and have been led in all Ages, (though they may profess the same)
yet they are prevailed upon by the contrary Spirit, and are as lulled asleep in
security by the power of their deceitful Enemy the Man of Sin, who with his
Signs (without the living substance) satisfies them, as with a Dream; for an
hungry Man may Dream that he is eating, but when he is awakened out of his
sleep, Joel 1.5. Ephesians. 5.14. Romans 13.11, 12
behold nothing but Hunger and Famine; and when any such (whereof I have been
one) come to be truly awakened, then they may plainly see, what substance or
service their Signs and Shadows are of, and how insignificant they are to the
satisfying of their Souls.

And so the use of those things which formerly might be of benefit for the
Instruction of some, is now to many, a means to keep them in Ignorance; for it
was ever the endeavor of the Devil, the Man of Sin, to draw the Minds of
People from obedience to the Light, Neh. 9.20. Job 24.13.
and Spirit of God, which God gives to instruct them (though many rebel
against it) into a satisfaction in outward Performances without the Spirit,
which were never acceptable unto God, for the Lord in all Ages required People
to obey his Voice, which is the Light, the Manifestation of his Spirit in their
Hearts; as plainly appears by these places of holy Scripture, Jer. 7.21, to
25. 1 Samuel 15.22, 23. Isa. 1.11, to 20. and Chap. 66.1, to 4. Jer. 14.12. Hos.
5.6. Hos. 8.13. Amos 5.21, 22. Micah 6.6, to 9. Mat. 15.1, to 9. Mark 7.1, to
23.

And so Christ stands at the Door of Peoples Hearts, and by his Voice or
Light knocks, and reproves for sin: Rev. 3.20. Luke 22.29.30. Luke 17.21.
Rev. 2.17. Rev. 22.14, 17
And if any Man hear his Voice, and open the Door, Christ will come in to him,
and sup with him, and he with him, at his heavenly Table in his Kingdom, which
is within; and this is a blessed Supper, to eat of the hidden Manna, and of the
Tree of Life, and to drink of the Water of Life freely: But this sweet
Satisfaction all they are ignorant of, who depend upon Signs, and Shadows, and
Men's Traditional Ordinances, and neglect the Light, the Voice of Christ in
their Hearts.

And they that have builded, as it were, strong Cities, in their own
Conceivings; as upon Christ, the true Foundation, 1 Cor. 3.13, 13, 14. Isa.
10.17, 18. Isa. 17.9.10, 11 Isa. 51.4, to 9. Isa. 30.26, 27, 28.
whether it be as Gold, Silver, precious Stones, Wood, Hay, or Stubble; the
Spiritual Day of God (the Light whereof to the Children of God, reveals the
Man of Sin, and his Works) shall declare every Man's Work, of what sort it is;
and every Man's Work that will not abide the fiery Trial thereof, shall be
burnt; and all their strong Cities shall be as a forsaken Bough; who forget the
God of their Salvation, and are not mindful of the Voice and Light of Christ,
the Rock of their Strength: And the Harvest of all their Planting, and Sowing,
and Building, shall be a heap in the Day of Grief, and of desperate Sorrow.

But the Times of Ignorance God has winked at; Acts 17.30.
and in the woeful Night of the Apostasy of the Nations, who have generally
fallen away from the Spirit and Doctrine of Christ, and his Holy Apostles,
though they had the Holy Scriptures to peruse; certainly the God of Mercy has
appeared by the Light of his Son in the Hearts of many in that dark time, whose
Minds being inclined truly after him, he has comforted them according to the
innocence of their Hearts, and in some measure satisfied them with his Mercy,
they answering him according to what was revealed unto them in them; though
through Education, and the Traditions of Men, they were kept in the use of
outward Ceremonies.

And many (in those dark Times) who faithfully minded the Appearance of Christ,
by his Light in their Hearts, they grew strong in the Faith, and saw the
emptiness of Signs, and Ceremonies, and Shadows; and were enabled by the Light,
the Word of God's Power in their Hearts, to stand in the Controversy of God,
witnessing for him (according to what they knew) against all the Gross and
Idolatrous Practices, and against the Error and Deceit of the Man-made
Priests, and Teachers of the Times wherein they lived: Mic. 7.1. Isa. 17.6, 7, 8
Although those in Comparison of the multitudes resisting, were but as the
Grape-gleanings of the Vintage, or like two or three Berries on the top of a
Tree.

And many were put to Death for their Testimonies about several things, and
particularly about the Popish Tenet of Transubstantiation beforementioned; for
denying that the substance of Bread and Wine, by the words of the Priest is
Transubstantiated, or changed into the very substance of that same Eo^y, Flesh,
and Blood of Christ, which was Born of the Virgin Mary, and Crucified by the
Jews; and for saying, That the Bread was but a signification, and not the Body
that Christ suffered in; and that the words of Christ (whilst in the Body in
which he suffered, which Body was not the Bread that he gave his Disciples to
eat before it was Crucified) spoken concerning the Bread, to wit, this is my
Body, etc. were spoken siguratively, and in the same sense that Christ called
himself, a Vine, and a Door, etc. And for this matter the Papists Burned the
Bodies of many Innocent Christians; and yet they called themselves Christians,
but were far from the nature of true Christians, who cannot render evil for
evil, and so are far from putting any to Death, or Persecuting about Religion.

And yet this is undeniable, that it was a Thousand Years after Christ, before
their Tenet of Transubstantiation crept in, and was generally received by, or
in their Greek and Latin Churches; witness Elfricus his Homily (that was
Anciently, before his time, received by the then Papists) which the said
Elfricus (an Archbishop of Canterbury) Translated out of the Latin into the
Saxon Language, which Homily was clear against Transubstantion, saying, That
the Bread, or Eucharist, is not the Body that Christ suffered in; which the
said Elfricus, and one Wulfstius then Bishop of Sherburn, and one Wulfstane
Archbishop of York (who all had their Calling and Succession in the Roman or
Popish Church) commanded the Priests to read publicly on Easter Day (so
called) to the common People, for their better Preparation or Instruction in
the Sacrament (as they called it.) See the Epistle of Elfricus in Worcester
Library, compared with a Book in the Saxon Tongue at Excester.

Thus the Man of Sin, the Power of Darkness, has drawn his Followers from one
degree of Darkness to another; for since then in Queen Mary's Days, the Papists
Burned Hundreds of Men and Women, for confessing their Faith, that the Bread,
or Eacharist, (as they call it) is not the Body that Christ suffered in: And so
they might have Burned many more, but the Lord disappointed them; and so all
Persecutors about Religion must meet with disappointments; and God will be the
great Reward of the Righteous.

For they that hearken unto the Voice, or Light of Christ, who is the Sun of
Righteousness, Prove. 9.10.
which shines in their Hearts, and reproves for Sin, it will teach them the
fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of true Wisdom, Rev. 21.24.
and as they faithfully obey this Light, wherein they that are saved must walk,
they shall know the Beams of the Sun of Righteousness, to be displayed more and
more upon them; and shall know that the Reproofs of its Instruction is the Way
of Life, Prove. 6.2^. Prove. 4.8. Isa. 35.8. 1 John 1.7.
and that the Light is the Path of the Just, and shines more and more unto the
perfect Day; and as they walk in that Way, (which is the Way of Holiness,
wherein the Wayfaring Men, though Fools, shall not err) they will know a
cleansing from Sin by the Blood of Jesus Christ, and so a Fellowship with true
Christians who walk in the same Way, Jer. 6.16.
which as it is a good Old Way, so also it is the New and Living Way, which
Christ has Consecrated for the Faithful, through the Vail, Heb. 10.20.
that is to say, his Flesh; and such, fearing the Name of the Lord, they will
meet with Refreshment in the Way, whereby they will grow as Calves of the
Stall; Mal 4.2. Mat. ^.5.
and they truly hungring and thirsting after Righteousness, will come to be
satisfied, and the Sun of Righteousness will arise unto them more and more,
with Healing in his Wings, that can heal all their Distractions, and resolve
all their Doubts, and hard Questions.

And the Day is coming, and now is broken forth, Cant. 2.17.
that the Shadows must flee away, and the Everlasting Gospel must be Preached
again, unto them that dwell on the Earth, and to every Nation, and Kindred, and
Tongue, and People, and immediately the Voice of the Angel will follow, saying,
Babylon is fallen, Rev. 14, 6, 7, 8.9 10. Rev. 17.4.
is fallen, that great City, because she made all Nations drink of the Wine of
the Wrath of her Fornication, which she handed forth to them in a Golden Cup;
and the Voice of the other Angel follows, saying, If any Man Worship the
Beast, and his Image, and receive his Mark in his Forehead, or in his Hand, the
same shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God, which is poured out, without
mixture, into the Cup of his Indignation, and shall be tormented with Fire and
Brimstone in the presence of the Holy Angels, and in the presence of the Lamb,
in whose Light they that are saved must walk.

Therefore let all mark this, who receive the Mark of the Cross in their
Foreheads, or offer their Infants to it; or who receive the Eucharist, as the
Merchants call it, or their Bread and Wine, in their Right Hands; for the Beast
would cause all both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive
his Mark in their Right Hand, or in their Forehead, and would have no Man to
buy nor sell, save he that has his Mark; so he Excommunicates out of Church,
and Market, (as they say) those that will not pay for his marking; and if the
King of the Country give him Power, he throws them into Prison upon his
Excommunication; as many in England have experience.

Now the Mark of the Beast, which is the Man of Sin, is his Signs; for the
Apostle Paul said, His Coming is with Signs; 2 These. 2.9.
and therefore it is good for all to beware, that they neither receive nor buy
his Signs, Rev. 13.15.
which is his Mark, of those that would compel, or cause them to buy their
Water Baptism, or their Bread and Wine, and tell them, that they are outward
visible Signs of inward and spiritual Graces; for he that receives his Mark
(that is his Signs) the same shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God; Acts
17.30.
for though the Times of Ignorance God has winked at, yet now in the
Dispensation of his Everlasting Gospel, which is now preached again, in this
the Day of his Power, he commands all Men, every where, to Repent, and to
Fear God, Rev. 14.7.
and give Glory to him, for the Hour of his Judgment is come; and to Worship
him that made Heaven, and Earth, and the Sea, and the Fountains of Waters.

And in this the Hour of his Righteous Judgments, Rev. 18.10.
God will judge this Scarletcoloured Beast, full of Names of Blasphemy, which
is ascended out of the Bottomless Pit, and shall go into Perdition; and also he
will judge the Whore, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth, who
is drunken with the Blood of the Saints, and with the Blood of the Martyrs of
Jesus; that sits upon the Beast, and is arrayed with Purple and Scarlet
Color, and decked with Gold, and precious Stones, and Pearls, having a Golden
Cup in her Hand, full of Abominations, and filthiness of her Fornication: And
God (whose Judgments are true and righteous) is judging this great Whore, Rev.
19.2.
which has corrupted the Earth with her Fornication, and he will avenge the
Blood of his Servants at her Hand.

And this great Whore, that sits upon the Waters, which Waters are Peoples,
and Multitudes, Rev, 17.15, 18
and Nations, and Tongues, is the False Church, that is called Babylon, (which
signifies Confusion) which is that great City, which has Reigned over the
Kings of the Earth; and certainly all People that are gone a Whoring (after any
other Lovers) from the Teachings, Leadings, and Guidings of the Light, and
Spirit of Christ in their own Hearts, are within the Empire of this great
Whore, or of the Beast that carries her, whatsoever they profess; or
whatsoever Names and Titles they be distinguished by, or whatsoever their
Professions be called; for all that dwell upon the Earth (whose Names are not
written in the Book of Life of the Lamb, slain from the Foundation of the
World) they all Worship the Scarlet-colored Beast, which carries this great
Whore, Rev. 13.8. Rev. 17.7, 16.
which must be Burned with Fire; and how should their Names be written in the
Book of Life of the Lamb (whose Life is the true Light in the Heart, John 1.4,
9. John 12.36. Rev. 21.24.
and Conscience, in which all ought to believe, and to obey it) who rebel
against his true Light in their Hearts, and will not obey it, nor walk in it
that they might be saved?

And let all beware of receiving, Rev. 13.1.
or retaining the Name of the Beast, which is written upon his Seven Heads,
which Name is the Name of Blasphemy, which he causes all to have, that sell
and buy; for he causes that no Man might buy or sell, save he that has the
Mark or Name of the Beast, or the Number of his Name, so he Excommunicateth out
of Church and Market (as their saying is) all that will not receive his Name of
Blasphemy; and so he has caused those that are erred from the true Light in
all their several Professions (which are his Heads, Rev. 17.9.
and the Mountains on which the Whore sits) to Blaspheme against the Light,
and speak evil of it, and to give unto it many Blasphemous Names and Titles;
and so his Name is a Name of Blasphemy, which those receive, that are erred in
their Hearts, from the Light of the Lamb, wherein the Nations of them that are
saved, must walk: And they shall have no true rest Day nor Night who Worship
the Beast, and his Image, and whosoever receives the Mark of his Name.

And so it is a dangerous and destructive thing to Worship the Beast, Rev.
13.7, 15.
to whom power has been given over all Kindreds, and Tongues, and People; or
to Worship the Image of the Beast, which has both spoken, and caused, that as
many as would not Worship the Image of the Beast, should be killed: And yet all
the World has wondered after the Beast, and worshipped the Beast, Rev. 13.3, 4.
saying, Who is like unto the Beast? Who is able to make War with him? And so
all that disobey, and rebel against the Light of Christ in their Hearts, they
Worship the Beast, and wonder after the Beast, and beastliness, and filthiness;
and believe that there can be no overcoming of the Beast, nor true cleansing
from filthiness, before their Bodies possess the Grave; which is as much as to
say, who is able to make War with the Beast? And likewise all that receive, or
pay for anything of that which is called Religion, or Worship, in any sort of
Profession whatsoever, for fear of the Threatenings of Men, or in Disobedience
and Unbelief of the Light of Christ in their Hearts, they thereby Worship the
Image of the Beast, whose Image is Disobedience, and Darkness, and Cruelty; and
so all who in any manner disobey the Light of Christ in their Hearts, for fear
of the Cruelty of Men, they Worship this Image of the Beast, and must drink of
the Wine of the Wrath of God.

For the Day of God's Power is come, in the Light whereof many have believed,
which has taught them the fear of the Lord, and has led them in his Way,
which is strength to the upright, Prove. 10.29. Prove. 29.25.
where Cruelty of Men cannot hurt them, and therefore they fear not Man; for
the fear of Man brings a Snare, but whosoever puts his Trust in the Lord shall
be safe, for in the fear of the Lord is strong Confidence, and his Children
have a place of Refuge; and the fear of the Lord is a Fountain of Life, Prove.
14.26, 27.
to depart from the Snares of Death, and from the fear of Man that brings a
Snare, who can but kill the Body; and therefore they whose Hands God had taught
spiritually to War, Psalm. 18.34. 2 Cor. 10.4. Mat. 10.28.
and their Fingers to Fight without Carnal Weapons, they will only fear God,
who is able to destroy both Soul and Body in Hell; for God's Salvation is nigh
them that fear him; and the Name of the Lord is their strong Tower, into which
they run, Prove. 18.0.
and are safe from the fear of evil.

And so the Care of the Children of God (who have good will to all Men) is not
to please Man, but to please God, and faithfully to follow the Lamb, Christ,
the Captain of their Salvation, in whose Light they walk, Psalm. 99.3.
and in whose great and terrible Name their Confidence is strong; and so they
are ready and willing to follow their Captain, having on the whole Armor of
God, Romans 13.12.
the Light, even the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of his Spirit, and the
Breastplate of his Righteousness, Ephesians. 6.11, to 18.
and their Loins girt about with Fruth, and their Feet shod with the
Preparation of the Gospel of Peace, and above all, taking the Shield of Faith,
wherewith they shall be able to quench all the fiery Darts of the Wicked: And
so when the Beast, and the Kings of the Earth, and their Armies are gathered
together to make War against the Lamb, Rev. 19.19, 20, 21.
and his Army; then shall the Beast be taken, and with him the False Prophet;
who had deceived them that had received the Mark of the Beast, and them that
worshipped his Image; these both must be cast alive into a Lake of Fire burning
with Brimstone; mark this, they must be so cast alive: And the Remnant must be
slain, with the Sword that proceeds out of the Mouth of the Lamb; and so the
Lamb and his Followers shall have the Victory.

And the pure Everlasting Gospel, Romans 1.16.
which is the Power of God, which is now Preached again, if it be hid, it is
hid in them that are lost, as the Scripture says (though some Translate, to
them that are lost) in whom the God of this World has blinded the Minds of
them which believe not, 2 Cor. 4.34.
lest the Light of the Glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God (who
is Light) should shine unto them, 2 John 1.5.
and so they that believe in the Light of the Gospel in them, it will shine
unto them, as they are Faithful to it; but the Man of Sin, the God of this
World, with his Signs, and all the means that he, and his Ministers, or
Members, can use, endeavors to blind the Minds of People, that he may keep
them in Darkness, unto Destruction with himself.

And those that God makes Instruments, Acts 20.24. Tit. 2.11. 1 Cor. 2.4, to
14.
in his Power, to Preach the Everlasting Gospel of his Grace, that brings
Salvation, they Preach not with enticing words of Man's Wisdom, nor in the
words that Man's Wisdom teaches, (as Man-made Preachers do) but which the Holy
Spirit teaches; and they Preach not themselves, but Christ Jesus, the Lord,
and their selves Servants for Jesus sake; for God, who commanded the Light to
shine out of Darkness, 2 Cor. 4.3, to 7.
has shined in their Hearts, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory
of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ; Acts 26.18.
and so their Errand is to turn People from Darkness to Light, and from the
Power of Satan, (which is the Power of Darkness) unto God, who is Light.

And so the Message of the true Ministers of the Gospel in this Day, and the
Message of the true Ministers of it in the Primitive Times of Christianity, is
one and the very same; for the Message of the true Ministers of the Gospel,
which they had heard of God, and declared unto People, was, that God is Light,
and in him is no Darkness at all, (and they that walk in Darkness have no
Fellowship with him) and they Preached, 1 John ^. 1, to 7.
and wrote to People, that they should walk in the Light, that they might have
Fellowship with them, whose Fellowship truly was with the Father, and with his
Son Jesus Christ: And they preached not, neither wrote, that, which they had
not Experience of; but of that which was from the beginning, which they had
spiritually heard, and seen, and handled, of the Word of Life; and they
Preached not up Carnal Ordinances, nor Signs, nor Shadows, but against them;
and Preached the true Doctrine of Christ Jesus the Substance.

And the Doctrine of Christ concerning Faith (without which it is impossible to
please God) is this, Heb. 11, 6. John 12.10, to 37.
while ye have Light, believe in the Light, that ye may be the Children of
Light; and yet many believed not, because the God of this World had blinded
their Minds, and hardened their Hearts; and the Chief Priests were Cruel
against him for his Doctrine, in those Days, (as they are against the Light
now) and consulted to put him to Death: And the true Ministers of Christ they
preached this Doctrine; that it is the Life in the Word (which is Christ) that
is the Light of Men, Joh. 1.1. to 12
and the true Light that lights every Man (and Woman) that comes into the
World; 1 Cot. 12.7. Ephesians. 5.7, to 15.
and they called the Light also the manifestation of the Spirit, given to every
Man to profit withal; and said, Whatsoever does make manifest, is Light; and
all things that are reproved, Romans 1.18, 19.
are made manifest by the Light; and whatsoever may be known of God is manifest
within; and they called it the Word of Faith (nigh in the Mouth, and in the
Heart) which they preached; Romans 10.8. Jam. 6.21, to 26.
and the Engraffed Word that is able to save the Soul; and the Word of God's
Grace that brings Salvation, Acts 20.32. Tit. 2.11, 1.2 2 Cor. 5.19. Phil.
2.16. Col. 3.16. Luke 17.20, 21. Mat. 13.18, to 23.
which has appeared to all Men, to teach; and they called it the Word of
Reconciliation, which God had put in them, (as Margined Bibles truly say it is
in the Greek) and the Word of Life, and the Word of Salvation, and the Word of
Christ, which they advised some to let it dwell in them richly; and the Word
of Righteousness: And Christ himself called it the Word of the Kingdom (of
God, which is within) which is sown in the Heart: And many other suitable
Names, and significant Appellations has Christ and his Ministers given to the
Light, which they preached, that People might believe in it, Recorded in the
Holy Scriptures; and this was, and is, and is to be, the Doctrine of Christ and
his Ministers.

But this is terrible Doctrine to the Devil, the Man of Sin, the Power of
Darkness; for when People believe in the Light of Christ in their Hearts, and
in the Sufficiency of it, and come into the Obedience of it, then the very
Foundation of the Devil's Kingdom comes to be shaken, and the Kingdom of
Christ (in some measure) comes to be enjoyed in them: And this Doctrine is
also terrible to the Ministers of the Man of Sin, who undertake to teach
People, and tell them, that the way to Christ is in the frequenting of their
Ordinances, Preachings, Prayers, and Worships, and in the use of their
Elements, Ceremonies, and Traditions; when as all of it is but for their
Tithes, Benefices, Wages, worldly Interest and Promotion; for when any come to
believe in the Light of Christ in their Hearts, and to receive its Teachings,
in the Love of it, they will know the free Teachings of Christ by his Light, to
teach them to profit in Spiritual Things; and first to deny themselves of their
Beloved Sins, and so they will find ease and satisfaction of Soul, which all
their former Teachers (with all their fair words, John 6.45. Isa. 48.17. Isa.
54.23. Jer. 23.32. Psalm. 119.165. John 14.16, to 27.
and preachings never so much against sin) could not profit them in at all; but
God freely teaches all his People to profit, and in their profiting in his
Fear, and Obedience, great shall be their Peace; and therefore they who truly
learn the Teachings of God by his Light, they will never Hire other Teachers,
neither pay toward the Elements and Ordinances of the Worships, of Men's
Institutions or Doctrines; but they will deny them all, and Worsip the Image of
the Beast no more.

And they, who in the Faith and Obedience of the Light in their Hearts, have in
true Hunger and Thirst after Righteousness, forsaken all, for the Gain of its
Rich Satisfaction, Psalm. 29.11.
the Lord will give strength unto them, and plentifully bless them with his
Peace, which passes all the Understending of Men, and it will rule in their
Hearts, and keep their Hearts and Minds through Christ Jesus, in a continual
watchfulness against the Adversary of their Souls Peace; and also in a
continual earnest breathing, or praying to the Lord for a daily and constant
supply of the Heavenly Bread and Water of Life, without which (they know) their
Souls cannot live unto God, but the Power of Death and Darkness will again
prevail in them, and over them.

And all those that in and by the Light, the Word of God's Grace, have
Authority from Christ in the Movings of his Spirit, and in the Constrainings of
his Love in their Hearts, to preach his Everlasting Gospel; such preach not for
Gifts, visible Rewards, Tithes, nor outward Benefices, neither Covet they any
Man's Silver, or Gold, or Apparels, but their labor of Love in the Service of
Christ, is to bring People from the Teachings of Men, which are fallible, to
the Teachings of (their Teacher, which is) the true Light, even the Grace of
God which brings Salvation, which has appeared to all Men, which was the
Teacher of the Apostles of Christ, which Teacher is Infallible; that all by
receiving his Teachings, and believing in the sufficiency of this Grace, Light,
or Manifestation of the Spirit of Christ in their Hearts, which is given to
every Man to profit withal, might so far profit therewith, as to become
Children of the Light, and so Children of God, Isa. 48.17, 18.
who are all led of the Spirit of God, who reaches his People to profit: And
also that being delivered from the Bondage of Corruption, and the Corruptible
Traditions, and Ordinances of Men, all such may know and enjoy the glorious
Liberty of the Children of God, who are not to be subject to such Traditions,
or Ordinances; and this is the Doctrine of the true Ministers of Christ, as
appears by these, and many other places of Holy Scripture, Romans 8. Chap. 2
Cor. 3.2, to 18. Gal. 4.1, to 15. Gal. 5.1, to 26. Ephesians. 2.1, to 22. Col. 1, and
2. Chapters. Heb. 8, 9, and 10. Chapters. Mat. 10.7, 8, 9, 10. 1 Timothy 6.3, to
12. Acts 20.24, to 36. 2 Cor. 12.8, to 20. 1 Cor. 9.16, to 23. 2 Pet. 1.18, 19.
Heb. 12.22, to 26. Rev. 2.7, 17, 29. Rev. 3.

But they who in their Humane Wisdom or Learning, or both; (for the love of
Money, Gifts, Rewards, Tithes, Benefices, outward Interest or Promotion)
undertake to Preach, and style themselves Ministers of the Gospel of Christ,
and claim the precious Name of Christianity; such mock at the mentioning of the
Movings, and Leadings, and Gindings of the Spirit of Christ, whereby it
appears that they are not moved, nor led, nor guided by it in their
preaching, and so it is another Spirit, even the Spirit of the Man of Sin, by
which they are moved to Preach, for it must be the one of the two Spirits that
moves them; but he that has not the Spirit of Christ, Romans 8.8, to 17. 3 Cor.
12.3.
is none of his, and so is no true Christian; and no Man can truly say that
Jesus is the Lord, but by the Holy Spirit; so it is plain, that he that is not
moved, led, and guided by the Holy Spirit of Christ, is none of the Ministers
of Christ.

And such Preachers have only their Authority from Men, by which they Preach,
and not at all from God, as all true Ministers of the Gospel have; and so their
Labor is quite contrary to the Labor of the Ministers of Christ; for they
preach up Signs, Ceremonies, Ordinances, and Traditions of Men, and labor to
keep People in dependence upon them, which are all to perish with the using,
that thereby they may keep them in Ignorance, to receive, admire, and depend
upon their Teachings; that for their Preaching they may pay them Wages, Tithes,
Easter Reckonings, Midsummer Dues, etc. as they call them, or give them Gifts,
Rewards, Honors, or Esteem; and so with their Signs, and all their other
Endeavors, they labor to keep People from believing in the Sufficiency of the
Light of Christ, Acts 20.32. Tit. 2.11, 12.
the Word of God's Grace in their own Hearts, which is the Teacher of all true
Christians, and which brings Salvation; Isa. 5.13. John 6.45. Heb. 8.10, 11.
Jor. 31.34.
that so they may keep them in dependence upon Man's Teachings, and from the
Teachings of God, who teaches all his Children, and all true Christians, who
must all know him, from the least, even to the greatest of them.

And if any Pleaders for Signs or Ceremonies, think themselves obliged to the
use of them, by reason of any Command from Christ, or his Apostles, yet they
may certainly know, (and that is more than think) that they make not near so
great a matter, of the other plain and positive Commands of Christ and his
Apostles, but generally act quite contrary to many of them, as plainly
appears; for Christ commanded his Ministers, Mat. 10.8, Mat. 19.27, to 30,
Mark 10.28, to 31. Tuke 14.33.
saying, Freely ye have received, freely give; but because many such Preachers
have paid dear for their Learning, therefore perhaps they may not think that
Command obliging upon them; but they may read, that they to whom this Command
was given, had left all to follow Christ; and Christ says, He that forsakes
not all that he has, he cannot be my Disciple.

And whether such Preachers have freely received or not, all may see that they
are far from freely giving their Preaching, or Ministry, who Persecute, cast
into Prison, or make Spoil or Havoc of the Goods of Innocent People, only
because they cannot receive their Teaching, nor pay them for it; nor for their
Ceremonies, such as Bread and Wine, and outward Baptism, or others, which they
make a Trade of to get Money by, which is quite contrary to the Command of
Christ, and of his Apostles; and so such are also far from for saking all for
the sake of Christ, and far from being his Disciples, or keeping his Commands.

And Christ said to his Ministers, Behold, I send you forth as sheep in the
midst of wolves, Mat. 20.1. to 42.
be ye therefore wise as serpents, and harmless as doves; but they that
Persecute, or cast into Prison others, for not paying them for their Preaching,
or their Ceremonies, they obey not this Command, being far from the harmlesness
of Doves; and indeed they are not so wise as the Serpent, who has deceived
them, and blinded their Minds with the love of outward things (with which they
know not how soon they must part) so that they cannot see the things which
concern Everlasting Peace; yet the Serpent has endued them with much of his
Wisdom, whereby both they themselves, and many others through them are deceived;
but the Children of the Light, in the Wisdom that comes from above, see beyond
all his and their deceit, and they often with much exercise experience, that
such as claim Tithes, etc. for their Preaching and Ceremonies (though in the
Serpents Wisdom, they may cover as with Sheeps clothing) they are inwardly
(and often manifest it outwardly) as ravening Wolves amongst Sheep, and not as
Sheep amongst Wolves, and so they observe not Christ's Command of being
harmless as Doves.

And likewise Christ and his Apostle commanded, saying, Mat. 5.33, to 38. Jam.
5.12.
Swear not at all, neither by heaven, neither by the earth, neither by any
other Oath, but let your Yea, be Yea, and your Nay, Nay, lest ye fall into
Condemnation, and this the Apostle commanded above all things: And Christ said,
Whatsoever is more than yea, yea, and nay, nay, comes of evil; but the
Pleaders for Ceremonies, Signs and Shadows, they make light of this great
Command, and plead generally for Swearing; and at their very entrance into
their Office or Calling, to get their Tithes or Wages, etc. they must Swear,
and so break the Commandment of Christ at the beginning of their pretended
Ministry of his Gospel, in which they Preach up Signs and Ceremonies, for which
they can find no such plain nor positive Command from Christ, or from his
Apostles; as they may find against any Swearing at all: And of what success, to
the good of any, can their Ministry be, the beginning of which is
indisobedience to the strict and positive Command of Christ?

And it is evident by many undoubted Histories, and Records of the Transactions
of former Times, that true Christians (as well under Apostatized Titular
Christians, as under Heathens) have deeply suffered for their Obedience to
Christ's Command, in denying to Swear upon any account; and it is also evident,
that the Preachers up of Signs and Ceremonies, who plead for Swearing, get more
Tithes and Money for their Preaching, than they could get by denying of
Swearing; but if (according to the Apostles intimation) by Swearing they are
fallen, into Condemnation, who can get them out again, though they should give
him all their Tithes and Money to get them out?

So it is very plain, that they who pretend by Command from Christ to preach up
Ceremonies, Signs, or what they call Sacraments, do practice disobedience to
several of the plain and positive Commands of Christ; but above all, that
weighty and positive Command of Christ concerning Faith, Heb. 11.6.
(without which it is impossible to please God) which Command is this, John
12.36.
While ye have light, believe in the light, that ye may be children of light;
this they cannot endure to hear of, they are far surely from keeping it; and
what a Faith have they, who believe not as Christ commands to believe?

Now every one that does evil hates the light, John 3.16, to 21.
neither comes to the light, lest his Deeds should be reproved; and so such
are far from believing in the light, neither would they have others to believe
in it, who hate and speak evil of the light, as the Ceremony-Preachers
generally appear to do; but they who have come to the light, and brought their
Deeds to the light, Mat. 24.24. Mat. 7.15, to 20.
and through Faith in it are become Children of light, these know False Prophets
by their Fruits, and their Signs, as Christ foretold; and many of their own
Followers also are convinced by the light of Christ in their own Hearts (though
but as strangers to it) of much Deceit and Hypocrifie amongst them; and they
that take heed to this light that inwardly reproves for sin, and give up their
Hearts in the love of it, to answer the requirings of it, to them it will
discover daily more and more; but they that resist it, and go from it, the God
of this World, (even the Spirit of the Man of Sin, who prevails upon such
with his Power and Signs) blinds their Minds, and so the Blind leading, Mat.
15.14.
and following the Blind, both fall into the Ditch.

And if any reckon their Ceremonies, as necessary to distinguish them from
others, as Turks, Mahometans and Jews, etc. who do not at all believe, that
Christ the Messiah is come in the Flesh; yet there is no ground for such an
Assertion, for they are more distinct from them who use no such Ceremonies,
Ordinances, nor Traditional Observations at all; for the Turks, Mahometans,
Jews, and Heathens, all of them have many such things, though not the same, yet
as ridiculous as any of theirs that profess Christianity, and they are not like
to change their own Ceremonies and Observations for others with them, or by the
Persuasions of them, who can show no better ground for their own, than can be
shown for sprinkling of Infants, and having to them Godfathers and God mothers,
so called, etc.

And so that which makes the People of God to be best distinguished from
Turks, Mahometans, outward Jews, and Heathens, is to take heed unto, believe
in, and obey the true light of Christ in their Hearts and Consciences,
wherewith he lights all, without exception; which is the Grace of God that
brings Salvation, ^^t. 2.11, 12.
and has appeared to all Men, teaching those that are willing to be taught of
it, to deny all ungodliness and worldly Lusts, to wit, Adultery, Fornication,
Uncleanness, Lasciviousness, Idolatry, Witchcraft, Hatred, Variance, Gal.
5.14.20, 21.
Wrath, Strife, Covetousness, Emulations, Seditions, Heresies, Envyings,
Murders, Drunkenness, Revelling, and such like things, in which Turks,
Mahometans, outward Jews, and Heathens are generally too apt to be sound; and
all that are in these, or any of these things, though they profess
Christianity, are yet but as in the same ground with them, and so little
distinction, but in Name, can be made betwixt them.

But they that are faithfully given up in their Hearts and Minds to obey the
light, the saving Grace of God, it teaches them to live soberly, Gal. 5.22,
23, 24.
righteously and godly in this present World, and so to live in peace, love,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, and temperance; and so here is
a clear distinction between these who are true Christians, and these called
turks, Mahometans, outward Jews, and Heathens, who generally live in
ungodliness and worldly Lusts; though some of them for Temperance and
Moderation, have far exceeded many Professors of Christianity, who unworthily
claimed the Name of Christians.

But they seem to imitate the Jews, who have, and plead for Typical Ceremonies,
Heb. 9.9, 10.11, 12.
and Ordinances, for Meats, and Drinks, and diverse Washings, and Observations
of certain Days, Gal. 2.
and Times, wherein they command to abstain from some sorts of Meats, or from
labor; but they seem to exceed the Jews concerning Times of Marriage, Col. 2.
who forbid Marriage at some particular Days, Romans 14.6.
or Months, or Times; or to their Priests some forbid Marriage at any time: But
such were Prophesied of by the Apostle of Christ, who accounted forbidding to
Marry, and commanding to abstain from Meats, 1 Timothy 4.1, 2, 3.
the Doctrine of Devils.

And they seem to imitate the Jews in taking Tithes; now Tithes were given to
the Tribe of Levi, Numb. 18.20, to 38. Deuteronomy. 14.22, to 29. Neh. 10.37, 38.
of which the Priests, as Aaron and his Sons, etc. were, and the Priests were
to have a Tenth Part of the Tithes, and the rest was for the Portion of the
other Levites, (having none other Inheritance) and for the Fatherless, and
Widows, and Strangers: But now the Priests Challenge the whole Tithes (which
may be as much as a Sixth Part of the clear Profits) all to themselves, and
would rather have more, than let either Levite, or Fatherless, or Widow have
part with them; for when a Widow has her Husband taken from her by Death, then
presently the Priest, or his Tythe-farmer, or Servant, comes to threaten the
Widow (if she be not free to pay) for a Mortuary, as they call it; what
Children soever she have to maintain, if all her Husbands Goods but amount to 6
l. 6 s. 8 d. though perhaps the Priest's Income amount to an Hundred times so
much for one Year.

And their Mortuaries (so called) in the very Midnight, caused by the
prevailing Power of Darkness in the Apostasy and Popery, were invented for pay
for Prayers for the Dead, to bring their Souls out of Purgatory, as the Pope
and Priests (that had terrified poor People with a Dream of Purgatory after
Death) told and preached to People; and that the Soul of the Dead might share
in the Stock of Merits that they pretended they had to Sell to them, who came
with Money to buy: And now those Priests, that pretend Reformation from Popery,
and deny to pray for the Dead, are not ashamed to Claim Mortuaries, the Wages
of Prayers for the Dead.

And Mortuaries, and Pigs, and other things, they have annexed to their Tithes,
and so now the Priests exceed all the whole Tribe of Levi for Tithes; though a
Tenth Part of their Tithes, given by the Law of Moses sufficed the Jewish
Priests, who were part of the Tribe of Levi; but now under the Gospel
Dispensation, Christ Jesus, Heb. 7. Heb. 8. Heb. 9. Heb. 10.
who came of the Tribe of Judah, is become the High Priest for ever, who by
Offering up himself once for all, has changed the Levitical Priesthood, and
the Law that gave Tithes; and has established his Law of the New Covenant
written in the Heart, and his Everlasting Priesthood, which is inwardly to be
witnessed by true Christians.

But the Ceremony-preachers imitate the Jews and Heathens nearer in their
Swearing, and pleading, for Swearing upon a Book, which is Swearing by a Sign,
a Jewish, or Heathenish Custom, and contrary to the Command of Christ and his
Apostle.

And likewise they imitate the Heathens, in keeping and using their Names of
Days and Months, who were Idolaters, and adored diverse Idols, and approprated
Seven of them unto the Seven Days of the Week, and worshipped each Idol on the
appointed Day.

On the First Day of the Week, See Versti^an's Antiquities, and Cambden's Brit.
the old Saxon Heathens (whom Records mention to have been the first that
brought in those Names) they worshipped the Idol of the Sun, which was placed
in a Temple, and there Sacrificed unto, to the Adoration whereof they gave to
that Day the Name of Sunday; likewise on the Second Day of the Week, they
worshipped their Idol of the Moon, and from thence it retains the Name of
Monday or Moonday; and the Third Day of the Week, they Dedicated to the Worship
of an Idol called Tuisco; and the Fourth for an Idol called Wooden; and the
Fifth to an Idol called Thor; and the Sixth to an Idol called Friga; and the
Seventh Day of the Week, to an Idol called Seator; and from thence came the
Names of Tuesday, Wodensday (or Wednesday) Thorsday, Friday and Saturday; so
they may see from whence those Names of the Days came.

And also the Heathens named the Months thus, they called the first Month
Maron, from Mars, whom they called the God of Battle; and the second Month
called they April, from a Title of Venus, whom they called the Goddess of Love
and Beauty; and they called the Third Month May, from Maia, otherwise called
Flora, who was a Strumpet in Rome, and on the first Day of that Month she set
up a Pole before her Door to allure her Lovers, and thence came the Name of
May Pole; and they called the Fourth Month June, from Juno, whom they called
the Goddess of Wealth; and the fifth and sixth Months they called July and
August, in Honor to Julius Caesar, and Augustus Caesar, two Roman Emperors;
and four of the other Months retain their proper Names after the Latins, as
September, October, November, and December; but the Eleventh Month they called
January, from Janus a King of Italy, who for his Wisdom they pictured with two
Faces, and honored him as a God; and they called the Twelfth Month February,
from Februnus, otherwise called Pluto, whom they called the God of Hell; and so
they may see how their Names of the Months, and Days, came from the Heathens.

And in as much as the People of God the Jews, under the Law, were strictly
commanded to make no mention of the Names of other Gods, Exodus 23.13.
nor let it be heard out of their Months; Psalm. 15.4.
and David in obedience thereunto, said, That he would not take their Names
into his Lips; therefore Christians (being Jews inwardly) ought not to use such
Names, who are under a more glorious Dispensation than the outward Jews were;
for how can they truly claim the Name of Christians, who call the Days, and
Months, (that God has given them, wherein they ought to serve him) by the
Profane Names of the Heathenish False Gods, and Idols?

And so the Preachers up of Ceremonies and Ordinances of Men, may see how they
imitate the Jews and Heathens, and therefore it is to no purpose for them to
use or plead for their Ceremonies, as necessary to distinguish them from Jews,
and Heathens.

Now as the Man of Sin, after the working of Satan, comes with all Power, and
Signs, and lying Wonders, and so prevails upon People (who may profess
Christianity) by his dark Power to disobey the light of Christ in their Hearts;
so People come to be by degrees darkened, and blinded in their Minds, and their
Senses come to be so stupefied, that they more and more depend upon their
Teachers (though they be as blind and stupid as themselves) and after their
Doctrines depend upon their Signs and Ceremonies, which they receive as
Ordinances of Christ, but know not, neither truly seek to know the Substance
Christ Jesus, whose Religion they profess, but are out of, as indeed all are,
(though they may profess the Truth as it is in Jesus) who disobey the light,
and walk not after the Spirit of Christ, (though they talk never so much of it)
but walk after the Flesh.

And because many that pretend Reformation from Popery (the Nest of Ceremonies
and Traditions) look upon these Two Ceremonies (which they call Sacraments) to
wit, outward Baptism, and eating Bread, and drinking Wine (which they call the
Lord's Supper) to be now practiced, and of necessity to be used, because of a
Command of Christ, or his Apostles; therefore what is here before-written
(though much might be added) is that all concerned may see, and examine, and
know, that without the substance in some measure enjoyed, the Types and
Ceremonies never profited at all; and that by believing in, and obeying, and
walking according to the Teachings of the Grace or Light of Christ in their own
Hearts and Consciences, they may in the Fellowship and Unity of all the
Children of God, John 6.51, to 58. Luke 22.15, to 31. Luke 17.20, 21.
enjoy true satisfaction by the Bread of Life, which Christ freely gives to
all true Christians, which Bread is his Flesh; and likewise may drink freely of
the Wine of the Kingdom of God, (which Christ termed as the Blood of the Grape)
which is his Blood, which he gives to true Christians to drink at his Table in
his Kingdom, which is within.

And so in and by the Light and Spirit of Christ, they may know and enjoy the
liberty of true Christianity, from the Bondage of, and unto any sort of weak
and beggarly Ements, Types, Signs, Ceremonies, Ordinances, and Traditions of
Men, which after Men's Doctrines and Commandments, are all to perish with the
using; and into the use of which, the Man of Sin is apt to lead People; and the
Devil himself may creep into the use of them.

And the Man of Sin likewise allows, (or rather teaches) to his Followers
(in whom he rules by his Power) in a Profession of Christianity, to use more
Signs than those of Baptism, and of Bread and Wine, for which there is no
ground at all from Christ, or his Apostles, nor is there any mention of any
Command for such things in the Scriptures of Truth; all which are too many to
be mentioned here, but some of them may be noted.

As the white Linen, or Surplice, which their Priest, or Minister must wear
when he reads Prayers, etc. which is reckoned to be a Sign of, (or else taken
for the true) fine Linen, Rev. 19.7, 8.
clean, and white, which is the Righteousness of the Saints, which is given to
the Lamb's Wife, (the Church and Spouse of Christ) to be arrayed with: Jer.
23.6. Jer. 33.15, 16 M^^. 4.2, 3.
Now the Righteousness of the Saints is Christ, of whom it was Prophesied, that
he should be called, The Lord our Righteousness; and he is called, the Branch
of Righteousness, and the Sun of Righteousness, and in him is the true light
that enlighteneth every Man that comes into the World; and unto them that fear
the Name of the Lord, Luke 1.78, 79. Zech. 3.8.
will he arise with healing in his Wings, and they shall go forth, and grow up
as Calves of the Stall, and shall tread down the wicked that shall be as Ashes
under the Soles of their Feet.

And this Sun of Righteousness, which is Christ, arrayeth those that believe in,
2 Cor. 4.6.
and love, and obey, and walk in his light (which shines in their Hearts) with
his glorious Beams, and puts on them the white Robe of Righteousness; for these
walk in the light of the Lamb, that takes away the Unrighteousness, Rev. 7.13,
14. Rev. 12.11. Rev. 14.4, 5.
and they follow him (though it be through great Tribulation) whithersoever he
goes or leads; and these are they that overcome by the Blood of the Lamb,
and by the Word of their Testimony, who love not their Lives unto Death; and
coming out of great Tribulation, wash their Robes, and make them white in the
Blood of the Lamb.

But the Priest's Surplice is not washed after that manner, but rather in the
spoil of other Peoples Goods, gotten by Deceit or Violence; and when it is
washed, and made as white as he can get it made, yet the Leprofie of Gehazi, 2
King. ^.27.
which cleaves to his Seed for ever, which was, and is as white as Snow, is as
plain to be seen upon the Priest's Mind, by the single Eye, as his white
Surplice is to be seen upon his Back by the natural Eye; for all that covet
Gifts or Rewards for Preaching, or the like, are of the Seed of Gehazi; and
much more, Persecutors for Wages for their Preaching, are plain to be seen so
to be, being worse than Gehazi.

And another Sign, which the Man of Sin teaches and allows to his Followers,
is the Sign of the Cross of Christ, as they call it, which they make of Gold,
Silver, Wood, or Stone, etc. which in the Wisdom of the Man of Sin, is highly
exalted in the Popes Territories; but the Exalters of this Sign of the Cross,
refuse to take up the daily Cross of Christ, who is the Power and Wisdom of
God; and the preaching of the Cross of Christ is to them that perish
foolishness, but to them that are saved it is the Power of God, whereby the
World is Crucified to them, and they unto the World; and the Apostles preaching
of the Cross of Christ, 1 Cor. 1.17, to 30.
was a stumbling block to them that required a Sign, and so it is now; and it
was foolishness to them that sought after Wisdom, and so it is now; Luke 9.23.
and Christ says, If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and
take up his Cross daily, and follow me.

Now this true self-denial, and taking up daily of the Cross of Christ, that
Crucifieth to the World, and Crucifieth the Flesh with the Affections and Lusts
thereof, it is not so light a matter, as is the taking up of a little Golden,
or Silver, or Wooden Cross, and the carrying of it, which pleases the Carnal
Mind, that is Enmity against God, and would have the Mind satisfied with the
Sign, Ephesians. 2.16.
though it be far from the Substance; Romans 8.6, 7.
for the Cross of Christ Crucifyeth the Carnal Mind, and Slays the Enmity in
those that daily bear it; and all that know the state of true Christianity,
they inwardly know a daily taking up, and bearing of the Spiritual Cross of
Christ, Gal. 5.24.
which in them Crucifieth the Carnal Mind, and the Flesh, with its Affections
and Lusts, and thereby their Souls come to witness liberty in the Service of
Christ, and to answer his Requirings by his light in their Hearts; and such
need not to make, or carry outward Crosses, to put them in mind of the
Crucifixion of Christ.

For the Admirers and Carriers of outward Crosses, pretend that they are
helpful, to put them in Mind that Christ was Crucified for them, when as they
may carry as many of them as they can bear on their Backs, and yet be
Crucifying Christ inwardly; and so there is a great difference between the
Cross of Christ, which is the Power of God; (without the taking up and bearing
of which, none can obtain the Crown of Life and Salvation) and those Crosses
that are made of Silver, or Wood, etc. that any Child can carry; or those that
are made with Water in the Foreheads of Children, or others, which some
Pretenders to be Reformed from Popery yet use.

And concerning the Invention of their outward Crosses, it is Recorded, That
(before the Name of Pope was given, or the Bishop of Rome Entitled Universal)
one Mocarius Bishop of Jerusalem, See Socrat. 1 Cap. 6, 9. Plat. Polid.
Deborus, etc.
was the means (with one Helena) that the Cross was found in the Year 310. so
it seems the Apostles and Primitive Christians made no stir about the outward
Cross, otherwise it would not have been neglected Three Hundred Years: And
Agapetus Bishop of Rome, first commanded People to go a Processioning, to
follow the Cross in the Year 533. this is contrary to Christ and his Apostles:
And as the Power of the Man of Sin prevailed, those Crosses, and other
Inventions, were more and more esteemed, so that in the Year 569. King Conwell
had always a Silver Cross carried before him, and caused Crosses to be set
first upon every Steeple in England.

And the Days of the Invention and Exaltation of the Cross, are to be found in
most Almanacks or Kalenders; Plat. Pan. Bec. fol. 355.
the one being on the Third Day of the Third Month (called May) which is called
Invent. Crucis, or holy Cross, or Helena's Day, because they say she helped to
find it; and the other is on the Fourteenth Day of the Seventh Month, or
September, which is called Exalt. Crucis, or holy Cross, or holy Rood; so they
may see not only the Year, but the Month and Day of the Invention, and
Exaltation of their Crosses.

It were large to write of all the Signs, Ceremonies, and silly Superstitious
Practices, which the Apostate Christians (upon whom the Power of the Man of Sin
prevailed) have by degrees (as the Apostles Prophesied that they should)
brought into their Churches, so called, some instituting one thing, and some
another, in the fallen Wisdom, for their outward Gain, part of them being
derived from the Jews, and part from the Heathens; and the Inventions or
Introductions of them, are largely to be found upon Record; (notwithstanding
the strict Inquisitions and Search that has by the Papists been made for the
destruction of such Books) where is to be found the Authors Names, and the
Times when they were first imposed upon, and received by and amongst them
called Christians; witness Eusibius lib. 5. Aug. lib. de Haeres. Becon's Works.
Hospinian de Orig. Temp. Pageon of Popes Acts and Monuments, and many others.

And at the dawning of the Day of God, (which is breaking forth upon the
Nations, Cant. 2.17.
and the Shadows (of the dark Apostasy) are flying away) many being Convinced
by the Light of Christ in their Hearts, concerning the Vanity of many of the
Superstitious Popish Ceremonies, as well as of their destructive Doctrines,
Tenets, and Practices; they in following and minding the Light (which had
Convinced them) they upon good ground separated from the Papists, and protested
against their Abominations; and so according to what they knew made a
Reformation, and were called Protestants.

And at that time, great was the Work of God, in bringing many in some measure
out of Babylon, the City of Confusion; wherein many had long been held in
Captivity; and for bearing the same Testimony, that the Protestants then bore
against the Invented Idolatrous Ceremonies, Signs, and Superstitious Practices
of the Times, had suffered greatly under the Popes Usurped Exalted Power, and
under his Subjects the Apostatized Christians, and many had been Murdered.

And those that in their Day and Time answered and obeyed the Light, that in
their Hearts convinced them of their own Sins, and also of the Error and
Superstition of Popery, and continued to the end in sincerity of Heart,
answering the Requirings of the Lord, according to what he made manifest to
them in their Hearts, they laid down their Heads in Peace with God, who
preserved them in their Exercises, to their endless Comfort, and to his own
Praise.

But many by negligence, in not answering the Lord, according to what he made
known by his Light in them, were prevailed upon by the deceit of the Man of
Sin, to rest as satisfied with the Form of the Protestant Worship and Religion,
and with the Pleasures, Riches and Honors of the World; and so rested short of
the Possession of the Life and Power of Godliness, and Christianity; though
they held the Profession and Name of Christians and Protestants, and such
rather went backwards toward Popery again, than forward toward a full
Reformation from it.

For though there was a denying, and a protesting against many Popish
Ceremonies and Superstitious Practices, and a denying of the Pope their Head,
and the Head of the Romish Church, which was well so far (for Christ is the
Head of his Church, which is his Body; and he ought to rule and sway by his
holy Light, Power, and Spiritual Scepter in the Hearts of People) yet many that
professed Christ, and Reformation from Popery, they would not that he should
rule over them, but they desired to rule over others; for when they that
reckoned themselves Ministers of the Reformed Churches, became settled in their
Benefices, Tithes, and other Incomes; then they assumed to themselves great
Names and Titles, as the Most Reverend, and Right Reverend, and Reverend the
Archbishops; and below them, the Reverend Lord Bishops, (now the Title of
Reverend, implies, that they are to be scared, and worshipped, and honored)
and Archdeacons, Deans, Doctors, etc. yea, and every Parish Priest can claim,
or assume to himself the Title of Rector, which is Governor, or Ruler of his
Parish; and so they call themselves Governors or Rulers.

And how the Parish Priests (which are but of the Inferior sort) have ruled by
Force and Cruelty, (like the False Prophets and Shepherds of old, Ezekiel. 34.2.
to 17.
who did eat the Fat, and clothed with the Wool, and killed them that were
fed, but fed not the Flock) and how they have Persecuted, Sued at Law, and
Imprisoned them that could not receive them for Ministers of Christ, nor pay
them for their Preaching (though they heard it not) and how Cruel they are, and
have been for their Tithes and Wages, it is very manifest and well-known to
many in these Nations.

But the true Ministers of Christ, over, and in whom he governs by his Light
and Spirit, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 9.16, to 20. 2 Cor. 4.3, to 18. Mar.
10.42, 43, 44. Acts 20.35.
they do not so; but serve Christ their Master, Ruler and Governor, and are
really Servants for his sake; as he said to his formerly, that they should not
be as the Rulers of the Gentiles, that exercise Lordship over them; but said
he, Whosoever of you will be the chiesest, let him be servant of all: And said
he, Freely ye have received freely give; and it is better, or more blessed, to
give than to receive: And this is the Knowledge and Practice of the true
Ministers of Christ; so there is a great difference betwixt them, and the
Parish Priests.

And so though the aforesaid Reformers, upon good ground denied the Popes
Headship and Authority, and rejected several of his Superstitious Ceremonies,
yet the Reformation was but in part, and the Reformers (though some of them
answered what they knew) yet came not fully to the Doctrine, and Practice, and
Order of the Primitive Christians, as is plain, for they retained the Popish
Tithes, Oblations, Mortuaries, Surplices, Tippets, Hoods, square Caps, and
their Bells, Pulpits, Altars, Tables, Fonts, Organs, and Pipes; and also they
observed the Popish Lent, Gal. 4.9, 10, 11. 2 Pet. 2. 1 Timothy 4, 1, 2, 3.
and other Fasting Days; and they observed (like the Papists) and called some
Days, Holy Days, as if others were unholy; and (a cording to the Papists) they
also forbad Marriage in Lent, and at several other times of the Year; and such
things were Prophesied of, to come in the Apostasy; but there is o Ground nor
Authority for them from Christ, nor from the Scriptures of Truth, but against
them.

And they also retained much of the Popish Mass Book, only turned into English,
and some of the grossest Expressions left out, which as King Edward the Sixth
(writing to quiet some in Devonshire that opposed its being Englished) said,
were so fond, that it were a shame to hear them in English; and they also
retained the Popish Letany and Suffrages, as they call them; and the Popish
Order in reading such a Collect, and such a Prayer, and such a part of the
Gospel, (as they say) and such (...), and such a First Lesson, o^ Second
Lesson, and such a Chapter or Psalm, on such a Day, and others on other Days,
with several other Superstitions Practices, which when settled upon their Lees
(as some of them were) they could comply with; and some of them probably being
against all or many of these things, yet could not get those that had been
trained up in the abundance of Popish Ceremonies, to come out of them suddenly,
though they might be Convinced of the Folly of them; and they that drew back, and
minded not the true Light that had Convinced, were not like to leave them at
all: And these things are yet retained as Apostolical, by many that call
themselves Protestants, though there was none of them practiced by the Apostles,
or Primitive Christians, but were since Invented in the Apostasy.

And some that took heed diligently to the Light of Christ in their Hearts,
they came to see beyond many things, which in imitation of Popery, were kept in
practice by pretended Reformers; and such separated from them, upon good
ground, and so they were called Separatists, Fanatics, Puritans, and by
several other Names: And still whatever they professed, yet they who (not
minding the Light of Christ in themselves) were prevailed upon by the Power of
the Man of Sin, their Hearts were darkened, and they came not forward out of
Superstition, nor yet to a Settlement in the Truth, as they did who truly
followed the Lord in his Light, as he was pleased to manifest himself unto them
in their Hearts.

And so there came to be so many sorts of Names given to Professors of
Christianity; because when any People being further Convinced of any
Superstitious Practices left them off, and separated from those that used them,
then presently there was some Nickname given unto them; and such as might be
Convinced and Separated with them, but not truly minding the Light that
Convinced them in their Hearts, they lost the true substantial Power and Life
of Christianity, though they might hold the Form, and Profession, and
Nickname: And when others, upon the same good ground, separated themselves
from amongst those Professors, then they soon had some other Name also given
unto them.

And so when any sort of Professors, that were in any kind of Form of Worship,
how many soever they were, without the Life and Power of Godliness; those
amongst them that faithfully obeyed the true Light in their Hearts, they could
not continue in Unity with them, but were (in obedience to the Light)
constrained to separate from them (though they might suffer Persecution for it)
because they knew that the Lord would not accept of them in that dead formal
Worship; and so they must either leave the dead Worship of their former Fellow
Professors, or else they should therein become as dead with them again; and so
be worse than at the first, even twice dead, as the Apostle said, Jude 12.

But on the other Hand, those who held the Profession, but (through
Disobedience to the Light in their Hearts) had lost the Power of Godliness;
they could turn with the Times; and so many that had professed to be
Protestants a considerable time, when Queen Mary being a Papist, commanded that
Mass should be sung in Latin again, and so should be used in all Churches (as
they called them) in England, etc. and so set up Popery again, as in its Power
in England, etc. then the said professing Protestants, Priests, and People
generally complied thereunto, and took an Oath contrary to their former
Profession, to be true to Saint Peter, to the Church of Rome, and to the Pope
their Holy Father, and to persecute to their Power all Opposers; saying, So
help me God, and the Holy Evangelists.

Yet they that took diligent heed to the Light of Christ in their Hearts, and
were faithful to answer the Requirings of God, thereby made known unto them,
they were preserved constant Witnesses for God against Popery, and all the
abominable Superstitious Practices thereof, as by the Light they were made
sensible of the same, in that Bloody Reign of Queen Mary, under which many of
them were persecuted to Death, and Burned, and Killed by the Blood-thirsty
Apostates that called themselves Christians, but were Strangers to true
Christianity, and to the Life and Power of Godliness.

Notwithstanding after the Death of the said Queen Mary, then Queen Elizabeth
coming to the Crown, and denying the Pope, she was Entitled Supreme Head of
the Church, and she with her Parliament, made an Act for the Uniformity of
Prayer, etc. with much of the Mass, all in English again, and then of above
Nine Thousand Bishops, Priests, Deans, Prebends, Masters of Colleges,
Archdeacons and Abbots that had formerly sworn to be true to the Pope and
Popery, there was not above an Hundred and Twenty that refused to take an Oath
against Popery; so it appears, that Eight Thousand, Eight Hundred, and
Fourscore of the said Nine Thousand, that had lately caused to be Burned
Hundreds for denying in Queen Mary's Reign to Bow to Popery, then refused not
to Swear against Popery themselves, as History relates.

And in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, many suffered deeply for testifying against
the Popish Superstitious Practices and Ceremonies, then by the Bishops Orders
retained and used; and for meeting together to Worship God in his Fear, Spirit,
and Truth; and they were Imprisoned, and extreme hardly used, in so much that
(in their Petition to the Parliament) they reckoned the Cruelty of their
Persecutors, to exceed the Cruelty of the Heathenish and Popish professed
Tyrants and Persecutors, and said, The Records of the Heathen Persecutions
under Nero, Trajan, Decius, Galienus, Maximinian, etc. could scarcely afford
any Examples of the like Cruelty that was used to them; they craved but the
liberty either to die openly, or live openly in the Land of their Nativity; and
many of them ended their Days in loathsome Prisons.

And Six of them were put to Death, Sealing their Testimonies with their Blood,
whose Names follow, viz. Henry Barrow, and John Greenwood, who were Executed at
Tyburn; John Penry at Thomas a Waterings near London, William Denis at Thetford
in Norfolk, and one Coppin, and one Elias, at Edmundsbury in Suffolk: And it
appears by Records, that the Chief Instruments of their Death was the Clergy,
and not the Queen; for one Doctor Rainolds, being by Queen Elizabeth much
pressed to tell her, what he thought concerning the said Barrow and Greenwood,
at last told her, That he was persuaded, if they had lived, they would have
been Two as worthy Instruments for the Church of God, as has (said he) been
raised up in this Age; then the Queen sighed, and said no more: But afterward
being near the place of their Suffering, and calling it to mind, she demanded
of the Earl of Cumberland (who was present at their Execution) what an End they
made; he answered, A very godly end, and prayed for your Majesty, and the
State: And there was a Famous Preacher, one Phillips, (having seen and heard
Barrow's Speeches, and Preparation for Death) who said, Barrow! Barrow! my Soul
be with thine!

And after Queen Elizabeth's Decease, in the Reigns of King James and King
Charles the First, many called Puritans, etc. suffered greatly, and some, for
no other Cause, but for refusing to join with the public Worship Established
by the Bishops, and for separating themselves from the Church of England, were
Banished the Land of England.

And this is observable, that the Long Parliament in the Year 1644. denying the
Common prayer Book, and by an Assembly of Priests, setting out a Directory for
Public Worship; the generality of the Priests then Conformed to that, calling
the Common Prayer Book Popish Rags of Rome, Dregs of the Whores Cup, and the
English Mass, etc. And when Oliver Cromwell was made Protector, he took Course
in the Year 1653. for the Glergies Recovering their Tithes, and other Dues, as
they pretended; and many of the People of God, who were led by his Light and
Spirit to testify against Tithes, and to deny to pay them, because they could
not uphold what Christ came to pull down, and were also made willing, with the
hazarding of their Lives and Estates, to preach the Everlasting Gospel of
Christ freely in Sincerity and Truth, denying to join with their Man-made
Hypocritical Worship; and telling them plainly, that if they repented not God
would overturn them, as it came to pass; many such then suffered deeply by and
under their Cruelty, who through Killing and taking Possession, were come from
a suffering state themselves, into high Places of Earthly Authority, where
being settled, they soon forgot their own Sufferings, and their Covenants and
Vows made to the Lord therein, and trod in the Antichristian and Popish steps
of Persecution themselves, of whose Cruelty both Old England and New England
are Witnesses; but the Lord preserved his People in Constancy and Faithfulness
to him, in their great and many Sufferings.

But notwithstanding all the aforesaid Reflections against Popery, and the
Common Prayer Book, when King Charles the Second was Restored in the Year 1660.
and the Common Prayer Book enjoined again, how generally it was received and
entertained of the Clergy, is yet fresh in the Memories of many; and how the
strictest sort of them, in Times of Persecution, joined with it again, or crept
into Corners, and ran from their Assemblies, upon the sight of Informers, or
the like, it is very well known; whereby it appears, they themselves, who
contended against the true Light, and the Faith that is in it, thought their
own Faith not worth suffering for, (as really it is not) and so they could not
abide Persecution.

But in Times of Toleration for Liberty of Conscience, those would numerously
appear in public again; though when a Storm of Persecution arose, (as in the
latter end of the Reign of King Charles the Second) then few of them durst
appear: But when King James the Second began his Reign, and proclaimed Liberty
of Conscience (which is desirable to all People) which hitherto continues, and
is now by Act of Parliament confirmed; then, and since then, the
Corner-creepers have bodly appeared in public again.

By what is premised, it is plain and evident, that they who were prevailed
upon by the power of the Man of Sin, the power of the Devil, and of Darkness,
to disobey the Light, the Word of God's Grace and Power in their own Hearts,
(whatever they might profess of Christianity, yet) they went in the Way of the
Man of Sin, and as they persevered therein, he came to be exalted in them, over
all that is called God, and so he made them Liars, Persecutors, and Murderers
like himself, who was a Liar, and a Murderer from the beginning; and such could
turn as the Times turned, from one Religion or Profession to the contrary, to
and fro, any whither, to save themselves, and their worldly things, with which
the God of the World has blinded their Minds, lest the Light of the Glorious
Gospel of Christ (who is the Image of God, 2 Cor. 4.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.
who is Light) should shine in them.

And also it is plain and evident, that they that faithfully obeyed the Light
and Spirit of Christ, in their own Hearts, they resisted the power of the Man
of Sin in themselves, and through Faith in the Word of God's Power in their
Hearts, were in good measure made Conquerors over the power of the Adversary in
their Hearts, and to the Honor of God, through the same Faith and Obedience of
his Light, they were enabled patiently to undergo what their Antichristian
Persecutors, the Members of the Man of Sin, were suffered to inflict upon them,
which was not only Imprisonment, and loss of outward Enjoyments and
Possessions, but also to many Death it self; they would rather part with Goods,
and Life, and all, than lose their Heavenly Treasure, which God had given into
their Earthen Vessels; the Excellency of which Treasure and Power is of God;
and out of the sight of all those who disobey the Light of Christ in their
Hearts.

And so they in whose Hearts God (who commands the Light to shine out of
Darkness) has shined, to give the Light of the Knowledge of the Glory of God
in the Face of Jesus Christ, who not only by his Light in his Faithful People,
reveals the Man of Sin, but also with the Spirit of his Mouth will consume,
and with the Brightness of his Coming will destroy the Man of Sin, and his
Works) these having tasted, and experienced something of the Goodness of God to
their Souls, not only of the Revelation, but also of the Destruction of the Man
of Sin, and his Works in themselves, and also having sweet and satisfactory
Comfort and Consolation in their Hearts, in the Love of God given unto them,
these cannot with the Times turn (as Hypocrites do) from one Profession of
Religion to another; for these are fully satisfied concerning the Way of God,
which is straight, and narrow; and not like the Ways of the Man of Sin, the
Devil, the Serpent, which are crooked, like himself, and broad, and wide, and
can hold of all sorts of Professors, and too many go in thereat.

But these, being Children of the God of Truth, who is Light; they love to walk
in their Fathers way, which is the true Light, and so they cannot, neither dare
they go out of it into the Ways of the Man of Sin, and so serve him again in
the least, for they have had too much of his Tyrannical Servitude before, and
though his Children love his Ways, wherein they have their pain bringing
Pleasures, yet the Children of God love them not, but in the fear of God hate
them all, and love the Light of Christ Jesus in their Hearts, the Way of God
their Father: And so it is in vain for Men to offer to force them out of God's
Way into their ways; for they dare not, for fear of offending their Heavenly
Father, comply in the least, to Worship God after any other Way or Manner, but
as he manifests himself, in the Light of his Spirit of Truth in their Hearts,
and Consciences; in which only, with acceptance, he is to be worshipped.

Neither can they again embrace, or come into the Bondage of Corruptible
Elements, Ceremonies, or Traditions of Men, Gal. 4.9. Romans 8.14, to 22.
for which there is no warrant from God their Father, lest they forfeit their
glorious liberty of the Children of God, Gal. 5.1. Tim. 2.12. Phil. 1.29. 1
Pet. 4.12, to 19. Col. 1.23, to 28.
whose Spirit bears witness with their Spirits, that they are the Children of
God, and if Children, then Heirs, Heirs of God, and Joint-heirs with Christ:
And they know, that if they suffer with him, they shall also be glorified
together; and they account that the sufferings of the present time, are not
worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in them: And such
can truly rejoice, that unto them it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only
to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake; and this was the state of
the Primitive Christians.

And as there is a great difference between the outward husk, sign, or show of
Religion of the Followers of the Man of Sin, who are his Children; and the
pure, spiritual, undefiled Worship and Religion of the Followers of Christ, who
are Children of God; so there is as great a difference between the Nature of
the true Christians and false, and between the Children of God, and the
Children of the Devil; and also between the Persecutor for Religion, and the
Persecuted for true Religion; and so doubtless as great a difference will, and
must be between their Rewards.

And so every one, Male or Female, Rich or Poor, High or Low, (as they tender
the Eternal Salvation of their precious Souls) are to examine themselves, in
and by the true Light of Christ Jesus, which is the Manifestation of his Spirit
in their Hearts, whether they Worship God in his Light, John 4.20. to 25. Mat.
15.7, 8, 9. Isa. 29.13, 14. Acts 17, 22, to 31. Col. 2.6, to 23. Mat. 15.2, to
15.
and Spirit, and Truth, in which only his pure, spiritual, undefiled Worship is
acceptably performed? Or whether their Worship ^e formal, and taught, and
prescribed by the Traditions, Precepts, and Commandments of Men, and so but a
sign or show of Religion, being Will Worship, and Voluntary Humility, which
Christ and his Apostles warned People to beware of? For all such Worshippers
worship God in vain, or worship they know not what; and the Reward of
Hypocrisy shall be their Portion; for they be Blind leading of the Blind; and
if the Blind lead the Blind, both shall fall into the Ditch.

And likewise it concerns all truly to examine themselves inwardly in the
Light of Christ, whether they be Baptized truly, with the one Baptism of Christ
by his spiritual Water, and the Fire, and Fan of his Spirit, with which he
will, and is able, thoroughly to purge his Floor, Mat. 3.11.12. Heb. 9.14. 1 Pet.
1.22, 23.
even the Hearts, Souls and Consciences of true Believers, and that only makes
fit to inherit the Kingdom of Heaven? And so whether they be Children of the
Light, and of God, who is Light, and Born again of the Water, and of the
Spirit, whose witness agrees in one, witnessing with their Spirits that they
are the Children of God, Born of his Incorruptible Word, which lives and
abides for ever? Or whether they have only been Baptized or Sprinkled with
Water by a Man; and because thereof are taught to believe, that then they were
made Children of God, and Members of Christ, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of
Heaven? And if they have no better Assurance than such Baptizing, or Sprinkling
with outward Water, then the Light and Spirit of Christ will bear witness in
their Hearts, that they are not Children of Light, nor of God; and then whose
Children are they?

And likewise all may examine themselves, in and by the true Light in their
Hearts, whether they be in the true Religion, or not? That is, Whether or no
they be true Christians, John 6.45.
who are all taught of God by the Light, Grace, and Spirit of his Son Christ
Jesus in their Hearts? Or they be but Pretenders to Christianity, having a
Profession or Form of Godliness, but denying the Life and Power thereof,
resisting and rebelling against the strivings, and movings, and teachings of
the Light, Grace, and Spirit of Christ, and embracing, and complying with the
temptations, motions, and teachings of the Spirit of Antichrist, and the Power
of Darkness, which is the Devil: And such can profess that they know God, Tit.
1.15, 16.
but in Works they deny him, which is abominable: And every one that does
Truth, John 3.18.19, 20, 21.
comes to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are
wrought in God; but every one that does evil hates the light, neither comes
to the light, lest his deeds should be reproved, or discovered; and so loving
Darkness rather than the Light, that is the Condemnation.

And it is certain, that all who love not the Light of Christ Jesus in
themselves, and believe not in the sufficiency of it, are deceived by the
deceivableness of the Man of Sin, the Power of Darkness, whose coming is after
the working of Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders: And as he
first by his deceit prevailed upon Mankind, so thereby he still endeavors to
keep all in subjection to him, who is the Father of Lies, through his
Allurements, and Bewitching Persuasions that all is well; and that though they
do yet more and more continue to practice such and such things, which he
tempts to, (but the Light reproves for) yet he persuades that it may be
well with them, and they may repent afterward time enough: And thus he draws
People on in his Service from time to time, till the Day of their Visitation be
over, and the things that concern Everlasting Peace be hid from their Eyes, and
then there remains no place of Repentance to be found, though they seek it
carefully with Tears, as Esau did, but was rejected. Heb. 12.^7.


And so though People do not answer nor obey the Light, that in their Hearts
convinces them of their evil Deeds, yet the Man of Sin persuades, as far as
he can, that it is impossible so to do, whilst on this side the Grave; and so
he labors continually to keep People satisfied in the woeful Condition into
which he has drawn them: And to this end he has his Ministers preaching his
Doctrine, that none ought to believe, that it is possible that they can be
freed from sin by the Power of God, whilst they live upon the Earth; and some
of them Preach of a Purgatory, to cleanse from sin after Death; though the
Doctrine of Christ and his Apostles (before-treated of) largely testifies the
contrary, as it is declared in the Holy Scriptures, which the said Preachers
profess, b t (for all their Learning) cannot understand, whilst they resist the
Light and Spirit of God, by which the Scriptures were given forth.

And therefore every one (upon necessity of Salvation) is to take heed to the
Advice and Warning of Christ, Mat. 24. 1 John 3.7. 2 These. 2.3. Col. 2.18.
Phil. 3.2. Gal. 3.1, 2.
and his Apostles, that no Man deceive them; for according to Christ's
forewarning, many have come, and are come in his Name, saying, That he is
Christ, (so they profess Christianity) and by their showing of great Signs and
Wonders, have deceived, and do deceive many, who look upon them to be what they
are not; but they, who believing in the Light, are become Children of the
Light, they see them plainly, and know them (by their Fruits) to be what they
are, and therefore they can neither receive them, nor pay them Wages, (for
their preaching) that they may any longer deceive others, in drawing the Minds
of People from the true Light in their Hearts, after their deceitful Signs and
Wonders, and so to Eternal Destruction.

Though it is not like that any should be deceived by such false Prophets, or
Instruments of the Man of Sin, but such as disobey the Light of Christ, and are
also prevailed upon by the power of Darkness in themselves, which alienateth
them from the Light and Life of God, the quickening Spirit of Christ the Second
Adam, the Manifestation or Light whereof reproves and convinces inwardly all,
who have not quite outlived the Day of their Visitation, that are in the
fallen Estate of the First Adam, of their Sins and Transgressions, even in
their best Performances; which, John 3.16, to 22. Prove. 6.22, 23. 8 (...) Prove.
10.17.
according to the Knowledge by the Light inwardly given to them, they generally
confess to be sinful, or mixed with sin; not knowing, nor believing that it is
what it is that reproves them, nor that the Reproofs of its Instruction are
the Way of Life, as the Scriptures of Truth witness.

And so such, who Rebel against the true Light in their Hearts, are in great
danger of being Eternally deceived, by the Power of Darkness in the false
Christ's, and false Prophets, which Christ Jesus, the Truth, foretold of, that
they should show great Signs and Wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible)
they should deceive the very Elect; but, said he to his Disciples, Mat. 24.
I have told you before, wherefore if they shall say unto you, behold he is in
the desert, go not forth; behold he is in the secret chambers, believe it not;
for as the lightning comes out of the east, and shines even unto the west, so
also shall the coming of the Son of Man be: And said he, If any man shall say
unto you, lo here is Christ, or there, believe it not: And said he, Verily I
say unto you, this generation shall not pass, till all these things be
fulfilled: And accordingly his Beloved Disciple John witnessed, that in his
time there were many Antichrists, 1 John 2.18, 19, 20.
or false Christ's, and Prophets; but to them who believed in, and walked in the
true Light, he said, Ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all
things; so they knew better things than to be deceived by the false Christ's and
false Prophets.

By which it is plain, that Christ, who said of himself, John 8.12, to 25.
I am the light of the world; and to the Pharisees, who accused him of bearing
false Record in so saying of himself, he said, John 12.35, 36.
If ye believe not that I am he, ye shall die in your sins, and whither I go ye
cannot come: And also commanded, saying, While ye have the light, believe in
the light, that ye may be children of light. He commanded his Disciples not to
go forth after, nor to believe those that say, Christ is here, or there, or in
the Desert, or in the secret Chambers, nor those that show great Signs and
Wonders, though such come in his Name, and say that he is Christ, and so make a
Profession of him.

And so they, who in the Obedience of Christ, believe in his Light, and thereby
become Children of the Light, which the true Primitive Christians witnessed of,
and left upon Record, that it shined in their Hearts, to give the Light of the
Knowledge of the Glory of God, in the Face of Jesus Christ; they dare not go
forth, nor can they believe them that say, that a piece of Bread, or a Wafer,
(after Consecration, as they call it) is the very Christ, or the very Body of
Christ; neither can they any whit the more believe them that say, Lo here is
Christ, in this Ceremony, or in this Ordinance; or in this Profession, or the
other Fellowship, or Form of Faith, or Directory, or Communion whatsoever of
them, who show never so great Signs, Ceremonies, and Wonders; or make never so
great a Professo^^ of Christianity, either in praying, or preaching, or the
like; John 1.1, to 10. 1 Cor. 12.7.
who deny the true Light of Christ, or walk not in it, which is the
Manifestation of his Spirit, and enlighteneth every Man that comes into the
World; and is given to every Man to profit withal.

For the Children of the Light are taught of it, to watch in it continually
against every Appearance of Evil, and of the Author thereof, the Devil their
Adversary, 1 Pet. 5.8.
who as a roaring Lion, walks about seeking whom he may devour; and so they
are to be continually careful, according to the Command of Christ, and his
Apostles, that no Man deceive them; and to prove all things, and hold fast that
which is good; for it is not a trivial thing, but a weighty concern to them,
and of absolute necessity to the Salvation of their Souls, to be always
watching against, and waiting to be preserved from the beguiling deceit of the
Devil, and his Instruments; who with all his Power, and Signs, and lying
Wonders, are continually endeavoring to deceive, which deceivableness of
unrighteousness, is-so apt to prevail upon Mankind, that Christ said, If it
were possible they should deceive the very elect; and then surely the careless
and rebellious are like to be deceived by them, and led to Eternal Misery.

And although Christ and his Apostles advised and commanded, to beware of them
which should show great Signs and Wonders, yet some have been, and are so far
erred from the true Light and Doctrine of Christ, that they not only tell, and
make Books of the great Wonders, which (they say) have been done by, and
amongst them, but also reckon them as certain Marks of the Church of Christ;
though Christ and his Apostles told of them, being the Mark; of Antichrist, and
the false Prophets. And so with their Wonders, and Powers, and Signs, they have
deceived, and do deceive many, as Christ and his Apostles foretold.

And as the Apostle John prophesied concerning the Beast, that he beheld coming
up out of the Earth, that does great Wonders, Rev. 13.11, to 15.
so that he makes Fire to come down from Heaven upon the Earth, in the sight
of Men, and deceives them that dwell on the Earth, by the means of those
Miracles which he had power to do; so it is that which comes up out of the
Earth (not that which comes down from Heaven) that does their great Wonders;
and it is that which is learned at their Schools, Colleges, and Academies of
Earthly and Spoiling Philosophy, and Vain Deceit, Col. 2.^.
(which the Apostle charged to beware of) and not that which is received of
Christ Jesus, that capacitates the Members of Antichrist, and of the Beast, to
be so prevalent with their Power, Signs, Wonders, and Alluring Enchantments,
and Poisonous Societies upon People to deceive them, Rev. 18.23. Ephesians. 5.6. Romans
16.18.
by their Enticing Words, and Fair Speeches, and their making a pretense of
Christianity, by coming in Christ's Name, (though he never sent them) and their
saying that he is Christ, covering themselves with a Profession of him: But woe
(says the Lord) to the Rebellious Children, that take Counsel, but not of me;
and that cover with in covering, but not of my Spirit, Isa. 30.1.

And so the Members of Antichrist (the Man of Sin) who are learned in the
Mysteries of their Craft, and are influenced with the beguiling subtilty of
their Master the Serpent, they employ all their Wits, Arts, and Parts in their
earthly and sensual Wisdom (and for their earthly and quickly perishing Gain)
to draw Peoples Minds from the Light, the Manifestation of the Spirit of Christ
in their Hearts, which is given to them to profit withal, that so they may keep
them under the power of Darkness, and in Admiration of their Teachings, Signs,
Ceremonies, Splendour, and Wonders, with which they infatuate the Ears, Eyes,
and Minds of People, that so they may depend upon them, and rest under their
covering of Profession.

And those that such Deceivers could not prevail upon, to follow them in their
Superstitious Practices, them they oftentimes Burned (or Sentenced to be
Burned) to Death, when they had power in their Hands (as woeful Experience has
largely declared) and for their so doing, pretended Authority from Heaven; and
does not this their wondrous murdering practice, and pretense of having
Authority from Heaven to Burn People, seem somewhat like the Beast's, making
Fire to come down from Heaven, in the sight of Men?

And those that are prevailed upon by them, and do admire their Signs and
Wonders, might possibly have as much or more admired the Wonders done by the
Magicians of Egypt, Exodus 7.11, to 23.
in causing their Rods to become Serpents, and the Waters to become Blood, and
in bringing up Frogs upon the Land of Egypt; and those that cover with a
covering, and not of the Spirit of the Lord, and ask not at his Mouth, but walk
to go down as into Egypt (a Land of Darkness) to strengthen themselves as in
the strength of Pharaoh, and trust as in the shadow of Egypt, Isa. 30.1, 2, 3
the strength of Pharaoh shall be their shame, and the trust in the shadow of
Egypt their Confusion.

It may be objected, that Christ and his Apostles confirmed his Doctrine by
Miracles; but then that was at the first, when they preached down the outward
Law, and the Ceremonies thereof, which God had commanded them by Moses that
they should observe: And when they first published the Glad-tydings of the
Gospel of the Grace and Peace of Christ, Heb. 8.9, 10, 11.
the New Covenant before promised, the Law written in the Heart. But they (who
neglect this inward Law) who now reckon of their Wonders, have, and retain many
Ceremonies and Superstitious Practices, for which they have no Ground nor
Warrant from God, nor Christ, nor his Apostles, as the Jews had for theirs; and
so there is no need of outward Miracles, to confirm the preaching down of their
modern Superstitious Ceremonies, they being plainly repugnant to the Doctrine
of Christ, and his Apostles, Recorded in the Scriptures of Truth, which contain
also Prophesies of their Signs and Wonders too, to come in the Apostasy, which
things are exactly come to pass.

And it is more than they can do by all their Miracles, (if they can do any) to
confirm any Honest hearted true seeker after God, in their Belief of many of
the Wonder pleaders Doctrines, as that of Transubstantiation, and of Purgatory,
Prayers to and for the Dead, Indulgences for Money, Worship of Images, etc.
Stories of Wonders will convince few, that their Faith and Practice, concerning
these things, is acceptable with God.

Now we read of as many (or more) that vilified the outward Miracles that
Christ did, as were Converted to him by them: And they to whom Christ himself
preached, Mat. 9.34. Mat. 12.24. Mark 3.22. Luke 11.15. Jo. 12.36.37. Jo.
10.19.21, 22.
saying, While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may be the
children of light: Though he had done many Miracles before them, yet they
believed not on him: And the whole multitude of the Country of the Gadarenes
round about, besought him to depart from them, for they were taken with a great
fear, because of a notable Miracle that he had wrought amongst them; and so
they that believed not in the Light, Luke 8.37.
the Manifestation of the Spirit of Christ in their Hearts, they did not
believe his Miracles, nor in him for his Works sake.

But they who believed in the Light, the Name of Christ in their Hearts, they
believed both him and his Works, who said, He that believes on me, John 14.12.
(or in me) the works that I do he shall do also; and greater works than these
shall he do, because I go to my Father: And likewise he said, The hour is
coming, John 5.25.
and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they
that hear shall live: And so such as have been dead in Trespasses and Sins
against God, and his Light, when their Minds have been truly turned to the true
Light of Christ, Col. 3.1, 2. to 17.
which is the Voice of the Son of God, and reproves for Sin in the Heart, as
they have believed in it, and taken diligent heed to the reproofs of its
Instruction, which is the Way of Life, Prove. 6.23.
they have known a being made alive to God, and a being dead unto Sin, in which
formerly they lived.

And so many have been, and are made living Witnesses of the wonderful
Operation of the quickening and healing Power and Spirit of Christ in their
Hearts, Souls, and Consciences; and have certainly and sensibly known, and do
know, Luke 7.22.
that the Blind have been restored to sight, the Lame have been made sound, the
Lepers have been cleansed, the Deaf have heard, and the Dead are raised up, and
live to the Praise and Glory of God, in that which is out of the sight and
reach of the World, Col. 3.3.
that lies in wickedness; for their Life is hid with Christ in God, who has
raised from Death, and with the daily Bread of Eternal Life, preserves their
depending Souls alive in his Love; and this is far more satisfaction than the
seeing, hearing of, or doing of any outward Miracles that can be done by Man,
to know the Lord's wonderful doings in themselves, Psalm. 118.22, to 28.
and that the Stone which the builders refused, is become the head Stone of the
corner; the true Light (which Babel's Builders have refused) the Lord has made
to become such a Day, that those which he has quickened can (with trembling in
his presence) rejoice and be glad in it.

These are Built upon the sure Foundation, the tried Stone, the precious Corner
Stone that God has laid in Sion for a Foundation, Isa. 28.16. 1 Cor. 10.3.
Deuteronomy. 32.4.
according to his Promise of old; this Foundation is the Rock of Ages, and the
Spiritual Rock of Spiritual Israel, which is the Satisfactory Nourishment of
all that are true Israelices indeed: The Pope of Rome is not this Rock; nor a
Succession of their Popes, nor the Apostle Peter, is not this Rock, though the
word Peter signifies a Stone, or a Rock, but the Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of
the Living God, is this Heavenly Rock, against which the Gates of Hell shall
not prevail.

For when Jesus Christ asked his Disciples, saying, Mat. 16.15, 16, 17, 18.
Whom say ye that I am? Peter answered and said, Thou art Christ the Son of the
Living God; Jesus answered and said, Blessed art thou Simon the Son of Jonas,
for flesh and blood has not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in
heaven; and I say also unto thee, that thou art Peter, and upon this Rock I
will build my Church, and the Gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.

By which words it is plain, that Peter was not the Rock upon which Christ
would Build his Church, neither was Flesh and Blood that Rock, but the
Revelation of his Father which is in Heaven, and that is by the Son; for Christ
had told them before, saying, Mat. 11.27.
No man knows the Son buy the Father, neither knows any man the Father but
the Son, Luke 10.22.
and he so whomsoever the Son will reveal him.

And not only did the Apostle Paul testify, That another foundation can no man
lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ, 1 Cor. 10.4. 1 Cor. 3.11. Ephesians.
2.20.
the Rock and Corner Stone; but also the Apostle Peter himself testified, that
Christ was as a Living Stone, disallowed indeed of Men, but chosen of God, and
precious, and the Chief Corner Stone laid in Sion, Isa. 28.16.
(according to Isaiah's Prophecy) and that he was a Stone of stumbling, and a
Rock of offense, to them which stumble at the Word (which is nigh in the mouth,
and in the heart) being disobedient: And also he said, 1 Pet. 2.1, to 10.
That true Believers coming unto this (Rock) as unto a Living Stone, are also
as lively Stones Built up a Spiritual House, (then out of the sight of the
Carnal-minded) an Holy Priesthood to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable
to God by Jesus Christ, (the Popes Mass is no such Spiritual Sacrifice) and
that they are a Chosen Generation, a Royal Priesthood, an Holy Nation, (then no
Witness Pageon of Popes, and the Papists Order to allow Whore-houses,
proclaimed and published, Jan. 24th. 1509.
Whore-houses allowed amongst them as have been at Rome) a Peculiar People, to
show forth the Praises of Him, who has called them out of darkness into his
mavelous light; of which Light he wrote thus, speaking of the Voice which
came to Christ from the Excellent Glory, he said, We have also a more sure Word
of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye take heed, 2 Pet. 1.10, to 20.
as unto a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the
day star arise in your hearts.

And so according to the Testimony of Christ, and of his Apostles Peter and
Paul, Christ is the Rock upon which his Church is Built, against which the
Gates of Hell shall not prevail, and not Peter; for did not the Gates of Hell
prevail against Peter? In so much that we read in the very same Chapter some
Verses, after mention is made of Christ's Building his Church upon the Rock,
Mat. 16.23.
that in answer to other words of Peter, Christ said to him, Get thee behind me
Satan, thou art an Offense unto me, for thou savourest not the things that be
of God; and was not he prevailed against by the Gates of Hell; Mark 14.66, 10
72. Luke 22.54, to 62. John 18.25, 26, 27.
after that, even so far as to deny his Lord and Master, and to Curse and
Swear? And did not Peter err, and so was not Infallible? Though the Popes that
pretend to be Peter's Successors reckon themselves Infallible, and that they
cannot err.

And so it plainly appears, that Peter was not that Rock upon which Christ
Builds his Church, and that the Popes who call themselves Peter's Successors,
Bellar. de Poot. lib. ^. C^^ 1. Ibid. lib. 4. C. 6. Bellar. Con^ov. Tom. 2
the Head of the Church, and the Vicars of Christ, Princes of Priests, and say
they sit in Peter's Chair, and that they have the Keys of the Kingdom of
Heaven, to bind and loose, and remit, and retain Sins, and that they cannot
Err, are in these things found Liars and Deceivers, and so Servants of the
great Deceiver, the Father of Lies; for the Apostle Peter declared that Christ
is the Rock, and the Popes say, Peter and his Successors are the Rock; the
Apostle said, Christ was the Head of his Church, and the Popes say, Col. 2.19.
Ephesians. 1.22.
they are the Head of Christ's Church; Peter ^alled not himself the Prince of
Priests, for he wrote to the Christians, saying, That coming to Christ as a
Living Stone, they were as lively Stones Built up a Spiritual House, and an
Holy Priesthood to offer up Spiritual Sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus
Christ, which Sacrifices acceptable to God are invisible; but so is not a
Wafer, the Sacrifice of the Mass-Priests, of whom the Pope styleth himself
Prince; which Wafer a Mouse or a Rat would not be afraid of; and do they not
say, it is the very Flesh, Blood and Bones of Christ Jesus, who suffered
without the Gates of Jerusalem? Which is abominable Deceit!

And though Peter, and the rest of the Apostles, who were in the Power of God,
had that which did open into the Kingdom of Heaven, and shut out that which did
defile, and was unclean; yet Peter Sold no Indulgences nor Pardons for Money,
as the Popes have done, or do; but he Prophesied of such false Teachers to
come, who (said he) shall privily bring in Damnable Heresies, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3.
even denying the Lord that bought them, and many shall follow their pernicious
Ways, by reason of whom, the Way of Truth shall be evil spoken of, and through
Covetousness, shall they with feigned words make Merchandise of you.

And so the Apostle Peter plainly foretold of the false Teachers, who Teach for
Hire, and Divine for Money, and through Covetousness, with feigned words, make
Merchandise of People, and deny the Lord that bought them; of which fort of
Teachers the Popes have been the Head, which have no part in the Church of
Christ, they being neither Head, nor Members of it; for Peter acknowledged that
Christ is the Rock, upon which his true Church is Built, but the Popes say,
that Peter is that Rock, and that they are his Successors, and so they deny the
Lord that bought them, and account themselves in his place; and many have
followed their pernicious Ways in preaching for Hire, or Tithes, and Gifts or
Rewards; and all such deny the Doctrine of Christ, who said, Freely ye have
received, freely give; and so they deny the Lord that bought them, and speak
evil of the Way of Truth, that they may readily make Merchandise of People with
their feigned (or lying) words, as Peter Prophesied; and so it is plain, that
the Popes are the Head of the Deceivers, and false Teachers, that Christ and
his Apostles foretold of.

And as for Peter's Keys, (that the Popes have reckoned that they keep, and
with them the Power of Binding and Loosing, etc.) however they have been
esteemed of; yet it is written of Pope Julius the Third, a noted Sodomist, that
he destroyed Two Hundred Thousand Christians in the space of Seven Years, (the
abominable wicked Lives of many of them, and also their many flat
Contradictions, being upon Record) and that he intending to make War against
the French, and marching to the Bridge of Tyber, he threw Peter's Keys into the
River Tyber, saying, Peter's Keys help not, let Paul 's Sword defend Witness
Prideaux Introd. and Burton's Wonderful Prodigies of Judgment and Mercy.
us; and yet that Pope could sell his Pardons: And except the Keys were found
again, (which I never read of yet) have not all their Popes Pardons been sold
without the Keys since? And have not People been greatly deceived, who gave
their Mosey for Pardons to them, that had not the Keys of Heaven to lot them
in; as they made them to believe that they had? And does it not seem as if the
Pope erred, who threw away Peter's Keys? And it was written of him thus, He
sells Heaven, but has not Heaven himself.

But the Kingdom of Heaven is within, Luke 17.21. Mat. 13.89.
and the Word of that Kingdom is in the Heart, (and so the Keys of the Kingdom
of Heaven are Spiritual, and not to be seen by a Carnal Eye; and it is only
they who receive, believe in, and obey that Word (the Word of Faith) in their
Hearts, that by the Keys know an opening, and so an entrance into the Kingdom
of Heaven; and thus testified Peter, who advised them to whom he wrote, to take
heed to this sure Word, the Light, and to give diligence to make their Calling
and Election sure: 2 Pet. 1.10. to 20.
And so the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven are not made by a Smith upon an
Anvil, as probably the Popes Keys may, which must rust, perish, and be of no
esteem, for the Day is at hand, wherein no Man buyeth their Merchandise any
more. Rev. 18.11.


It is Recorded in undoubted Histories, what Bloody Persecution, and Monstrous
Murders the Roman Emperors (in the time of those called the Ten Persecutions)
inflicted upon the Suffering Christians in the Primitive Times, and then was
there any talk of a Pope for a Visible Head of the Church at Rome? Or then was
Rome any more accounted of than the others? The Churches at Jerusalem, See
Hist. Magd. Cent. 5. Chap. 19. and Leo. ad Gal. Epist. 77, and 89.
at Constantinople, at Alexandria, at Cesaria, and at Cypr^is, had as much
Power in their several Churches as Rome had, during the first Three Hundred
Years after Christ. And the Elders or Bishops of the said other Churches, did
sometimes sharply reprove the Bishop of Rome; and it was, at the least, Six
Hundred Years after Christ, (as Records declare) when Phocas, Platina Christ.
Misseas Hen. Panteleon etc. Epist. 32 33, 34. Cap. 76.77.
to aspire to the Empire of Rome, Murdered his Master Mauritius, and his
Children; and Phocas somewhat searing, and willing to have the Favor of
B^^isace the Third, then Bishop of Rome, cohdescendeth to all his Petitions,
and grants him to be Head Bishop over all Christian Churches; and here begun
the Name of Pope, being the first Rise of Rome's Visible Head.

And as the Popes had their Rise by a Murderer, so a Murdering, Persecuting
Spirit has influenced them, as their Bloody Principles, and Murdering
Practices have abundantly declared to the World; witness the sad Massacres of
the Waldenses in Provence, in the Year 1545. and of Christians in Haly in
Calabria, in the Year 1560. and likewise in France of above Thirty Thousand
Persons, in the Year 1572. and the Irish Massacre in the Year 1642. (being yet
fresh in Memory) wherein by the Papists were put to several sorts of Death in
the Province of Vlster, an Hundred and Fifty Thousands of People.

The Number of the Slain in the other Three Provinces not being upon Record;
with the Burning of Hundreds in England, in the Reign of the Popish Queen Mary;
with the dreadful Cruel Spanish Inquisition, and several others of Popish
Massacres, too large here to be inserted.

And so though the Popes of Rome have pretended to Christianity, and have
called themselves Vicars of Christ, yet they and their Adherents have been as
Cruel, and as Bloody Persecutors of Christians as the Roman Emperors, who hated
Christianity, were before them, and have equalled (if not exceeded) the said
Emperors, in their Cruel and Barbarous Murders, acted with all manner of
Cruelty that possibly could be Invented, which stands upon Record, that all may
see it; read Clark's Martyrology, and Fox's Acts and Monuments, and a Book
called, Ireland's Tears, and the History of the Churches of Piedmont, Collected
and Compiled by Samuel Morland, in the Year 1658.

And not only have the Popes been Persecutors, where they could prevail by
means of the Kings or Governors of the Nations, but also they have Lorded it
over Emperors and Kings, Deposing and setting Up at their Pleasure, whom they
thought meet for their Purposes; as the Apostle Peter never did.

And thus Mystery Babylon the Great, the Mother of Harlots, and Abominations of
the Earth, has Reigned over the Kings of the Earth, who have given their
Strength and Power, unto the Scarlet-colored Beast that has carried her,
which ascends out of the Bottomless Pit, and goes into Perdition; and this
false Church, this Woman, this Whore, this great City that has made all
Nations to drink of the Wine of the Wrath of her For^ication, which she has
handed forth to them in a Golden Cup, she has been, and is drunk with the
Blood of the Saints, and Martyrs of Jesus, and her Sins have reached unto
Heaven, therefore shall her Plagues come in one day, and she shall be utterly
Burnt with Fire, for strong is the Lord God who judges her, Rev. 17, and 18
Chapters.

And all that err from, rebel against, and believe not in the Light, the
Manifestation of the Spirit of Christ in their Hearts, they will be found in
Babylon, the City of Confusion; and how great or large soever their Professo^^
of Christianity may be, yet in that great Day of the Lord, (which hastes
apace) such will be found in an Antichristian Estate, and Partakers of the Sins
of Babylon, and consequently must receive of her Plagues, Rev. 18.4.

And now the Light, the Voice of God's mighty Power, calls unto all for
Faithfulness, and Obedience thereunto; and that all that are in Babylon, who
have not yet quite out lived the Day of their Visitation, may come out of her,
and may be no longer Partakers of her Sins, lest they Eternally partake and
receive of her Plagues.

And all that hearken to the Grace of God, the Light and Voice of Christ Jesus
in their own Hearts and Consciences, and believing therein, Tit. 2.11, 12, 13,
14.
continue in Faithfulness and Obedience thereunto, such shall more and more
come to know the Effectual Working thereof, even to the redeeming of their
Souls from all iniquity, and the purifying of their Hearts, and purging of
their Consciences from dead Works, to serve the Living God; and they shall know
the Ancient Prophecy fulfilled in them, That the Lord will pour, Ezekiel. 36.25,
to 31. Heb. 8, 9, 10, Chapters.
or sprinkle clean Water upon them, that they may be clean from all their
Filthiness and Idolatry (which is false Worship that is out of his Spirit) and
that he will give them a new Heart, and put a new Spirit within them.

And such shall see the Sun, Rev. 9.2.
and the Air clear again, which have been darkened by reason of the Smoke of the
Bottomless Pit; and shall know the Sun of Righteousness to arise upon them with
healing in his Wings, Mal. 4.2. Rev. 21.24. Rev. 22.14.17. 2 These. 2.3, to 10.
and a walking with them that are saved in the Light of the Lamb, and shall
know to do his Commandments, that they may have Right to the Tree of Life, and
take of the Water of Life freely; and such will witness a growing up into him
in all things, who is the Head of his Church, Christ Jesus, from whom the whole
Body fitly joined together, Ephesians. 4.15, 16.
and compacted by that which every Joint supplieth, according to the effectual
working in the measure of every part, makes Increase of the Body, unto the
edifying of it self in Love.

And the Members of that Body are faithful Stewards of the Grace of God, Tit.
2.11, 12. Mat. 13.10, 11 Mar. 4.10, 11 Luke 8.9, 10. John 14.17, to 27. Joh.
7.16, 17 Joh. 8.31, 32 1 John 2.27.
which brings Salvation, and teaches them, that denying ungodliness, and
worldly lusts, they should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present
world: And it is only they who are truly taught of the Grace of God (which has
appeared to all Men) that are true Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
Mysteries of God, for they are the Disciples of Christ, unto whom it is given
to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, but unto others it is not
given, but they are as Parables to them.

Now the Grace of God teaches none to Persecute about Religion, nor to make
Merchandise of People, through Covetousness with feigned words, as the Popes
(and other sorts of Priests) have done; and so though the Popes have professed
to be Peter's Successors, and to sit in Peter's Chair, and to have the
Stewardship of the Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven; yet they have been, and
are found not only out of the Faith, wherein the Apostle Peter served God; but
to be such false Prophets as Peter Prophesied of; 2 Pet. 2.1, to ^0.
and so not faithful Stewards of the Grace of God, being not willing to be
taught by it in their own Hearts; and so for all their Learning, and for all
their Talk, and for all their Splendour of Profession, they are ignorant of the
Mysteries of the Kingdom of Heaven, wherein they pretend to be Stewards.

For the Apostle Peter said to Simon the Sorcerer, (who offered Money, saying,
Acts 8.18, 19, 20.
Give me also this power, etc.) Thy Money perish with thee; because thou have
thought that the gift of God may be purchased with Money, thou have neither
part nor lot in this matter; so Peter was far from selling the Gift of God,
(and Pardon of Sin is the Gift of God) though the Popes, and Priests, for Money
have pretended that they could Sell Pardons, etc.

And so all the Offerers, or Pretenders to Sell the Spiritual Gifts of God for
Money, as well as they who desire for any outward thing, to Buy the same of any
Man, they have neither Part nor Lot in the true Stewardship of the Grace of
God, nor of the Mysteries thereof, but all their Worship, their Sacrifices,
Offerings, and Prayers, in that state, are Abomination unto him; and therefore
(as Cain was with his Brother Abel) so they are wroth with those, whose
Offerings and Worships finds respect with God, being in the Spirit of God,
which they are erred from, as also was Cain.

And so these also run greedily after the Error of Balaam for a Reward; and
though they Preach Peace to them that buy of them, yet they prepare War against
such as put not into their Mouths; these are such as Judge for Reward, Teach
for Hire, and Divine for Money, and yet seem to lean upon the Lord, Mi^^h 3.
and say, Is not the Lord amongst us? no evil shall come upon us: But when such
as these cry unto the Lord, he will not hear them, but he (the Light whom they
have rejected) will hide his Face from them, and then surely Night will be unto
them, that they shall not have a Vision; for so it was Prophesied of such
deceitful Prophets; no marvel then if they say, Vision is ceased, and
Revelation ceased; for it was said, The sun shall go down over them, and the
day shall be dark over them, that they shall not Divine; the seers shall be
ashamed, and the diviners confounded; yea, they shall all cover their lips, for
there is no answer of God: So here is the Work and Wages of false Prophets
described.

And now is at hand the great and notable Day of the Lord, wherein he will try
and weigh all People in the just Balance of his Sanctuary; and it will come as
a Thief in the Night, in an unexpected and terrible time and manner, upon all
the Children of Disobedience, in whose Hearts the Prince of the Power of the
Air works and rules; and they being Airy, and Light, and Wanton, which are
compared to Chaff, will be found too light in the trial, and upon them will the
unquenchable Fire take hold; Mat. 3.12.
and in that day their Leaders and Teachers, of whom it is said, Mic. 7.4.
The best of them is as a Briar, and the most upright is sharper than a
Thorn-hedge, Eccles. 7.6.
who are thus compared to Briars and Thorns, (whose end is to be burned) their
end must be like the end of the laughter of a Fool, which is compared to the
crackling of Thorns under a Pot; and all their Wit and Learning, Arts and Parts
can then yield them small satisfaction.

So there is a great difference between these false Teachers, and their
Rewards, and the Ministers of Christ, and their Rewards; for the Apostle Peter
said, 1 Pet. 4.10.
As every man has received the gift, so minister the same one to another, as
good stewards of the manifold grace of God. 1 Pet. 5.2, 3, 4.
Feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the oversight thereof; not by
constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a recady mind; neither
as being Lords over God's Heritage, but being ensamples to the flock; and when
the chief shepherd shall appear, ye shall receive a crown of glory, that fades
not away. So the Reward of the Ministers of Christ, who are faithful Stewards
of his manifold Grace, and diligently improve the Talent which he has given
them, shall be a Crown of (never-fading) Glory.

And they that are faithful to God, though it be but as in a little, may be made
Stewards or Rulers over more; but they who are unfaithful, whether in much or
little, that is committed to them, and sin against the Light and Grace of
Christ in their Hearts, and continue in so doing, how can such expect any other
from the Hand of the Lord, Mat. 25.14, to 31.
but the unprofitable Servant's Reward, which is to be cast into outer
Darkness, where shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth?

And certainly the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, will render to every Man and
Woman according to their Works, and will bring all People upon the Face of the
whole Earth to an account, (not how strictly they have obeyed the Orders, Laws,
and Injunctions about Religion, made by Popes, Cardinals, Bishops, or Priests
of any sort, who say, Lo here, or lo there, in this Way, or in that Form, is
the true Religion, but) he will have an account how every one has improved and
profi ed with the Talent which he has given them to profit withal, which is
the Manifestation of his Holy Spirit, the true Light inwardly enlightening
every Man; and the Word of his Kingdom in their Hearts, the Word of Faith, nigh
in the Heart, and in the Mouth, which is the Grace of God that brings
Salvation, and has appeared to all Men; and this Word, Grace, and Light,
inwardly reproves for Sin in the Hearts and Consciences of People; and woe to
them that turn not at its Reproof.

But all that in the love of it receive it, and believe in it, and give up
their Hearts and Minds freely to learn of it, will become sensible of the
powerful Work of it more and more in their Hearts; for it teaches all that
believe in it, and carefully take heed to it, to deny all ungodliness and
worldly Lusts; and to deny all other teachings of Men, who are not taught by
it, but turn from it, into wantonness or worldly-mindedness; and it teaches to
deny paying any thing to any Man for his Teachings, whereby he may deceive
People; for the Teachings of Christ are free, and all Christ's Ministers have
freely received, and they freely give, and Covet no Man's Silver, Acts 20.32,
33, 34.
nor Gold, nor Apparel, nor other of his worldly things, but are content with
such things as they have; and Godliness with Contentment is to them great Gain.

And so the Grace of God which brings Salvation, is the Teacher of all true
Christians, and teaches them to live soberly, Tit. 2.11, to 15.
righteously and godly in this present world, looking for that blessed hope,
and the glorious appearing of the great God and Savior Jesus Christ, who gave
himself for them, that he might redeem them from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people zealous of good works, who have profited with the
Talents that God has bestowed upon them, and must enter into the Joy of their
Lord, having hearkened diligently to the Reproof of Instruction, in their own
Hearts, which is the Way of Life, and love to walk therein, even in the Just
Man's Path, Prove. 4.18.
which is as a shining Light, that shines more and more unto the perfect Day
of Redemption and Salvation from all Iniquity; 1 Cor. 6.2. Ephesians. 4.30.
and these glorify God in their Bodies, and in their Spirits, which are his;
to whom belongs the Honor, and the Glory, and the Praise, for ever, and for
evermore, Amen.

The END.

