MICHEL SEIGNEVR DE MONTAIGNE.


Printed for T. Bassett M. Gilliflower and W. Hensman.

ESSAYS OF MICHAEL SEIGNEUR DE MONTAIGNE.

IN THREE BOOKS.

With Marginal Notes and Quotations of the cited Authors.

And an Account of the Author's LIFE.

New rendered into English By CHARLES COTTON, Esquire.

-- Viresque acquirit eundo. Virg. lib. 4. Aen. The First Volume.

LONDON, Printed for T. Basset at the George in Fleetstreet, and M. Gilliflower
and W. Hensman in Westminster Hall, 1685.

To the Right Honorable GEORGE Marquess, Earl, and Viscount Hallifax, Baron of
Eland, Lord Privy Seal, and one of His Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council.
MY LORD,
IF I have set down, the only opportunity I ever had of kissing your Lordships
Hands, amongst the happy Encounters of my Life, and take this occasion, so many
Years after, to tell you so, your Lordship will not, I hope, think your self
injured by such a Declaration from a Man that honors You; nor condemn my
Ambition, when I publish to the World, that I am not altogether unknown to You.
Your Lordship, peradventure, may have forgot a Conversation so little worthy
your remembrance: but the memory of your Lordship's obliging fashion to me all
that time, can never dye with me; and though my Acknowledgment arrives thus
late at you, I have never left it at home when I went abroad into the best
Company. My Lord, I cannot, I would not flatter you, I do not think your
Lordship capable of being flattered, neither am I inclined to do it to those
that are: but I cannot forbear to say, that I then received such an impression
of your Virtue, and Noble Nature, as will stay with me for ever. This will
either excuse the Liberty I presume to take in this Dedication, or, at least,
make it no wonder; and I am so confident in your Lordships Generosity, that I
assure my self you will not deny your Protection to a Man whose greatest
Public Crime is that of an ill Writer. A better Book (if there be a better of
the kind (in the Original I mean) had been a Present more fitly suited to your
Lordships Quality and Merit, and to my Devotion: I could heartily wish it such:
but as it is, I lay it at your Lordship's Feet, together with

My Lord, Your Lordships Most humble, and most obedient Servant, Charles Cotton.

THE TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE TO THE READER.
MY Design in attempting this Translation, was to present my Country with a
true Copy of a very brave Original; How far I have succeeded in that Design is
left to every one to judge; and I expect to be the more gently censured, for
having my self so modest an Opinion of my own Performance, as to confess that
the Author has suffered by me, as well as the former Translator; though I hope,
and dare affirm, that the misinterpretations* I shall be found guilty of, are
neither so numerous, nor so gross. I cannot discern my own Errors, it were
impardonable in me if I could, and did not mend them; but I can see his (except
when we are both mistaken) and those I have corrected; but am not so ill
natured as to show where. In truth, both Mr. Florio, and I are to be excused,
where we miss of the sense of the Author, whose Language is such in many
Places, as Grammar cannot reconcile, which renders it the hardest Book to make
a justifiable version of that I yet ever saw in that, or any other Language I
understand: insomuch, that though I do think, and am pretty confident, I
understand French as well as many Men, I have yet sometimes been forced to
grope at his meaning. Peradventure the greatest Critic would in some Places
have found my Author abstruse enough. Yet are not these Mistakes I speak of
either so many, or of so great importance, as to cast any scandalous blemish
upon the Book; but such as few Readers can discover, and they that do, will I
hope easily excuse.

The Errors of the Press, I must in part take upon my self, living at so remote
a distance from it, and supplying it with a slubber'd Copy from an illiterate
Amanuensis; the last of which is provided against in the Quires that must
succeed.

THE LIFE OF MICHAEL SEIGNEUR DE MONTAIGNE, Almost entirely taken out of his
own WORKS.
THE Race of Michael Seigneur de Montaigne, in Perigord, was Noble, but Noble
without any great luster till his time: As to Estate, he was seized of above
two thousand Crowns of yearly Revenue. He was born to his Father the third in
order of Birth of his Children, and by him delivered to Gossips of the meanest
Condition to be baptized, with a Design rather to oblige, and link him to those
who were likely to stand in need of him, than to such as he might stand in need
of. He moreover sent him from his Cradle to be brought up in a poor Village of
his, and there continued him all the while he was at Nurse, and longer, forming
him to the lowest, and most common manner of Living: Wherein he certainly so
well inured himself to Frugality and Austerity, that they had much ado, during
all the time of his Infancy especially, to correct the refusals he made of
things that Children of his age are commonly greedy of, as Sugars, Sweetmeats,
March-panes, and the like.

No doubt the Greek and Latin Tongues are a very Fair and a very great Advance;
but, as he himself observes, they are now a days too dear bought. His Father
having made all diligent inquiry that possibly could be amongst the Learned Men
for an exquisite method of Education, was cautioned of the inconvenience then
in Use, and told, that the tedious time that is employed in the Languages of
the Ancient Greeks and Romans, which cost them nothing, is the only reason,
that we cannot arrive to that grandeur of Soul, and perfection of Knowledge
that was in them. The expedient that he found out for this was, that whilst he
was at Nurse, and before he began to Speak, he delivered him to the Care of a
German, who since died a famous Physician in France, totally ignorant of our
Language, and very well versed in the Latin Tongue. This Man, that he had
brought out of his own Country, and entertained with a very great Salary for
this purpose, had the Child continually in his Arms, to whom there were added
two others more moderately Learned, to attend him, and to Relieve the first,
which three entertained him with no other Language but Latin. As to the rest of
the Family, it was an inviolable Rule, that neither his Father, nor so much as
his Mother, Man or Maid, spoke any Word in his hearing, but such as every one
had learned only to prattle with him. And it is not to be believed how all of
them profited by this Method; his Father and Mother learned by this means Latin
enough to understand, and to serve themselves withal at need, as also those
Servants did, who were most about his Person. To be short, they did Latin it at
such a Rate, that it overflowed to the Neighboring Villages, where, by Use,
several Latin Appellations of Artizans and their Tools, have got footing, and
there remain to this day. For his part, he was above six years old before he
understood any more of French, or Perigordin, than of Arabic, and without Art,
Books, Grammar, or Precepts, without Whipping, and without Tears, he had
learned to speak as pure Latin as his Master, for he could neither alter it nor
mix it. If, for Example, they gave him a Theme after the College Mode; they
gave it to others in French, but they were fain to give it him in ill Latin to
put it into good: And Nicholas Gronchi, who has writ a Book de Comitiis
Romanorum, Guiliaume Guerente, who has writ a Commentary upon Aristotle, George
Buchanan, that great Scotch Poet, and Mark Anthony de Mureta, whom both France
and Italy acknowledge for the best Orator of his Time, his Domestic Tutors,
have often since told him, that he had that Language in his Childhood so ready,
and at hand, they were afraid to accost him.

As to the Greek, his Father designed to have it taught him by Art, but by a
new Method, and that by way of Sport and Recreation. they tossed their
Declensions to and fro, after the manner of those, who by certain Tricks upon
the Chess-board, learn Arithmetic, and Geometry: so, amongst other things, he
had been advised to make him relish Learning and Duty, by an unforced Will, and
his own Device, and to Educate his Soul with all Sweetness and Liberty, without
Austerity or Compulsion. Which he also did to such a degree of Superstition,
that seeing some are of Opinion, that it troubles the Brain of Children to be
suddenly roused in a Morning, and to be snatched away from sleep, wherein they
are much deeper plunged than men, with haste and violence; he always caused him
to be waked by the sound of some Musical Instrument, and was never unprovided
of a Musician for that purpose.

But, as they who are impatient to be cured, submit to all sorts of Remedies,
and every ones Advice; the good Man, being extremely timorous of failing in a
thing he had so much set his Heart upon, suffered himself at last to be carried
away by the common Opinion, which, like Cranes, always follow that which went
before, and submitted to Custom, having now no more those Persons about him,
who had given him the first Instructions, that he had brought out of Italy. And
about the sixth Year of his Age sent him to the College of Guyenne, at that
time very flourishing, and the best in France. And there it was not possible to
add any thing to the Care he had in choosing for him the best Chamber-Tutors,
and in all other Circumstances of Education, wherein he reserved several
particular Forms, contrary to the College Usance; but so it was, that it was a
College still, and this unusual method of Education, was here of no greater
advantage to him, than at his first coming to prefer him to one of the higher
Classes, for at thirteen Years of Age, he had run thorough his whole Course.

At the Age of three and thirty he married a Wife, though, might he have been
left free to his own Choice, he would have avoided marrying, even Wisdom her
self, had she been willing. But it is to much purpose, says he, to resist
Custom, and the common Usance of Life will have it so. Nevertheless, this
Marriage of his was not Spontaneous, he was put upon it, and led to it by odd
Accidents. And as great a Libertine as he confesses himself to be, he more
strictly observed his Matrimonial Vow, than he expected from, or had proposed
to himself.

His Father left him Montaigne in Partage, as the eldest of his Sons,
Prophesying that he would Ruin it, considering his Humor, so little disposed
to live at home: But he was deceived, for he lived upon it as he entered into
it, excepting, that it was something better, and yet without Office, or any
other Foreign helps. As to the rest, if Fortune never did him any violent or
extraordinary Offense, so she never showed him any signal Favor: Whatever he
had in his House that proceeded from her Liberality, was there before he came
to it, and above a hundred Years before his Time: He never in his own
particular had any solid and essential Advantages, for which he stood indebted
to her Bounty. She showed him Airy, Honorary, and Titular Favors, without
Substance; She procured for him the Collar of the Order of St. Michael, which,
when young, he coveted above all other things, it being at that time the utmost
mark of Honor of the French Nobless, and very Rare. But of all her Favors,
there was none with which he was so well pleased, as an Authentic Bull of a
Roman Burgess, that was granted to him with great civility and bounty, in a
Journey he made to Rome, which is transcribed in Form in the sixth Chapter of
the third Book of his Essays.

Messieurs de Bourdeaux, elected him Mayor of their City, being then out of the
Kingdom, and at Rome, and yet more Remote from any such Expectation, which made
him excuse himself; but that would not serve his turn, and moreover the King
interposed his Command. It Is an Office that ought to be looked upon with the
greatest Esteem, as it has no other Perquisits and Benefits belonging to it,
than the mere honor of its Execution. It lasts but two years, but may, by a
second Election, be continued longer, though that rarely happens. It was to
him, and had been so twice before, once some years since to Monsieur de Lausac,
and more lately to Monsieur de Byron, Marshall of France, in whose place he
succeeded, and left his to Monsieur de Matiguon, also Marshall of France,
proud of so noble a Fraternity. His Father, a Man of great Honor and Equity,
had formerly also had the same Dignity. All the Children his Wife brought died
at Nurse saving Leonor an only Daughter, whom he disposed in marriage some two
Years before his Death.

The first printing of his Essaies was in the Year 1580, at which time the
public Applause gave him, as he says, a little more assurance than he
expected. He has since added, but corrected nothing: His Book having been
always the same, saving that upon every new Impression, he took the Privilege
to add something, that the Buyer might not go away with his Hands quite empty.
His Person was strong, and well knit; his Face not fat, but full, his
Complexion betwixt Jovial and Melancholic, moderately Sanguine and hot; his
Constitution healthful and spritely, rarely troubled with Diseases, till he
grew into Years, that he begun to be afflicted with the Cholick and Stone: As
to the rest, very obstinate in his hatred, and contempt of Physicians
Prescriptions; an hereditary Antipathy; his Father having lived threescore and
fourteen Years, his Grandfather threescore and nine; and his great Grandfather
almost fourscore Years, without having ever tasted any sort of Medicine.

He died in the Year 1592, the 13 th of September: a very constant, and
Philosophical Death, being aged fifty nine Years, six Months, and eleven Days;
and was buried at Bourdeaux, in the Church of a Commandery of St. Anthony, now
given to the religious Feuillantines: where his Wife Francoise de la Cassaigne,
and his Daughter, have erected for him an honorable Monument, having, like his
Ancestors, past over his Life and Death in the Catholic Religion.

The Contents of the Chapters of the first Book.
Chapter 1. THat Men by various ways arrive at the same End. Chap. 2. Of Sorrow.
Chap. 3. That our Affections carry themselves beyond Us. Chap. 4. That the Soul
discharges her Passions upon false Objects, where the true are wanting. Chap.
5. Whether the Governor of a Place besieged ought himself to go out to parle.
Chap. 6. That the Hour of Parle is dangerous. Chap. 7. That the Intention is
Judge of our Actions. Chap. 8. Of Idleness. Chap. 9. Of Liars. Chap. 10. Of
Quick or Slow Speech. Chap. 11. Of Prognostication. Chap. 12. Of Constancy.
Chap. 13. The Ceremony of the Interview of Princes. Chap. 14. That men are
justly punished for being obstinate in the Defense of a Fort, that is not in
reason to be defended. Chap. 15. Of the Punishment of Cowardice. Chap. 16. A
Proceeding of some Ambassadors. Chap. 17. Of Fear. Chap. 18. That Men are not
to judge of our Happiness, till after Death. Chap. 19. That to study Philosophy
is to learn to Dye. Chap. 20. Of the Force of Imagination. Chap. 21. That the
Profit of one Man is the Inconvenience of another. Chap. 22. Of Custom, and
that we should not easily change a Law received. Chap. 23. Various Events from
the same Counsel. Chap. 24. Of Pedantry. Chap. 25. Of the Education of
Children. To Madam Diana of Foix, Countess of Gurson. Chap. 26. That it is
folly to measure Truth and Error by our own capacity. Chap. 27. Of Friendship.
Chap. 28. Nine and twenty Sonnets of Estienne de la Boetie to Madam de
Grammont, Countess of Guisson. Chap. 29. Of Moderation. Chap. 30. Of Cannibals.
Chap. 31. That a Man is soberly to judge of Divine Ordinances. Chap. 32. That
we are to avoid Pleasures, even at the expense of Life. Chap. 33. That Fortune
is oftentimes observed to act by the Rule of Reason. Chap. 34. Of one Defect in
one Government. Chap. 35. Of the Custom of wearing Cloths. Chap. 36. Of Cato
the younger. Chap. 37. That we Laugh and Cry for the same thing. Chap. 38. Of
Solitude. Chap. 39. A Consideration upon Cicero. Chap. 40. That the Relish of
Goods and Evils does in a great Measure depend upon the Opinion we have of
them. Chap. 41. Not to Communicate a Man 's Honor. Chap. 42. Of the Inequality
amongst us. Chap. 43. Of Sumptuary Laws. Chap. 44. Of Sleep. Chap. 45. Of the
Battle of Dreux. Chap. 46. Of Names. Chap. 47. Of the Incertainty of our
Judgment. Chap. 48. Of Horses dressed to the Menage, called Destrials. Chap. 49.
Of Ancient Customs. Chap. 50. Of Democritus and Heraclitus. Chap. 51. Of the
Vanity of Words. Chap. 52. Of the Parcimony of the Ancients. Chap. 53. Of a
Saying of Caesar. Chap. 54. Of Vain Subtilties. Chap. 55. Of Smells. Chap. 56.
Of Prayers. Chap. 57. Of Age.
ERRATA.
PAge 8. l. 15. read Saciety. p. 18. l. 23. r. were to deprive. p. 25. l. 13.
r. solicitude. ib. l. 28. r. solicitude. p. 28. l. 11. r. solicitude. p. 44. l.
21. r. of the two Counts. p. 58. l. 4. r. come to the Court. p. 65. l. 14. r.
from dreams. p. 70. l. 8. r. conlineet. p. 72. l. 9. r. fortui^ous. id. l. 16.
r. fortunately. p. 73. l. 13. r. flying way. p. 77. l. 21. r. it is enough. p.
85. l. 30. r. Periander. p. 96. l. 13. r. Panick. ib. l. 18. dicique. p. 111.
l. 26. r. imbellis. p. 132. l^ 14. r. 'twas I. ib. l. 17. r. answer him. and l.
26. r. lassitude. p. 136. l. 8. r. his enflamed. p. 153. l. 1. r. his sight. p.
157. l. 21. r. changed. p. 159. l. 20. r. Whirle-batts. p. 170. l. 18. r. cense
the men. p. 188. l. 5. r. those. p. 190. l. 7. r. of doing. p. 200. l. 17. r.
were to. p. 229. l. 14. r. form of. p. 232. l. 22. r. Grammar. p. 233. l. 7. r.
incite. p. 238. l. 27. r. hope. p. 239. l 2. r. with any one. p. 240. l. 5. r.
Cento's. What other Errata's shall occur, not here mentioned, the Reader is
desi^'d to amend at his discretion.

ESSAYS OF Michael Seigneur de Montaigne.
The First BOOK.
CHAP. I. That Men by various Ways arrive at the same end.
THE most likely and most usual way in Practice of appeasing the Indignation of
such as we have any way offended, when we see them in Possession of the Power
of Revenge, and find that we absolutely lie at their Mercy, is by Submission
(than which, Submission mollifies the Hearts of the offended.
nothing more flatters the Glory of an Adversary) to move them to Commiseration
and Pity: and yet Bravery, Constancy, and Resolution, however quite contrary
means, have sometimes served to produce the same effect. Edward the Black
Prince.
Edward the Black Prince of Wales (the same who so long governed our Province
of Guienne, a Person whose high Condition, excellent Qualities, and remarkable
Fortune, have in them a great deal of the most noble and most considerable
Parts of Grandeur) having, through some Misdemeanors of theirs, been highly
incensed by the Limosins, and in the heat of that Resentment taking their City
by Assault, was not, in the Riot commonly attending such Executions, either by
the Outcries of the People, or the Prayers and Tears of the Women and
Children, abandoned to Slaughter and prostrate at his Feet for Mercy, to be
stayed from prosecuting his Revenge; till, penetrating further into the Body of
the Town, he at last took notice of three French Gentlemen, Remarkable Valor
of three French Gentlemen.
who with incredible Bravery, alone sustained the whole Power of his victorious
Army: and then it was, that the Consideration of, and the Respect unto so
remarkable a Virtue, first stopped the Torrent of his Fury, and that his
Clemency, beginning in the Preservation of these three Cavaliers* was
afterward extended to all the remaining Inhabitants of the City. Scanderbeg.
Scanderbeg Prince of Epirus, in great Wrath pursuing one of his Soldiers,
with a resolute Purpose to kill him, and the Soldier having in vain tried by
all the ways of Humility and Supplication to appease him, seeing him
notwithstanding obstinately bent to his Ruin, resolved, as his last Refuge, to
face about and expect him with his Sword in his Hand; which Behavior of his
gave a sudden stop to his Captains Fury, who for seeing him assume so notable a
Resolution, received him to Grace: an Example, however, that might suffer
another Interpretation with such as have not read of the prodigious Force and
Valor of that invincible Prince. The Emperor Conrade the 3 d. having besieged
Guelpho Duke of Bavaria, would not be prevailed upon, what mean and unmanly
Satisfactions soever had been tendered to him, to condescend to milder
Conditions, than that the Ladies and Gentlewomen only who were in the Town
might go out without Violation of their Honor, on Foot, and with so much only
as they could carry about them. Conjugal Love.
Which was no sooner known, but that out of Magnanimity of Heart, and an Excess
of good Nature, they presently contrived to carry out, upon their Shoulders,
their Husbands and Children, and even the Duke himself; a Sight at which the
Emperor was so pleased, that, ravished with the Generosity of the Action, he
wept for Joy, and immediately extinguishing in his Heart the mortal and
implacable Hatred he had conceived against this Duke, he from that time
forward, treated Him and His with all Humanity and Affection. The one, or the
other, of these two ways, would with great Facility work upon my Nature; for I
have a mavelous Propensity to Mercy and Mildness, and to such a degree of
Tenderness, that I fancy, of the two I should sooner surrender my Anger to
Compassion than Esteem: And yet Pity is reputed a Vice amongst the Stoics, who
will that we succor the Afflicted, but not that we should be so affected with
their Sufferings as to suffer with them. Pity reputed a Vice amongst the
Stoics.
I conceived these Examples not ill suited to the Question in hand, and the
rather, because therein we observe these great Souls, assaulted and tried by
these two several ways, to resist the one without relenting, and to be shook
and subjected by the other.

It is true, that to suffer a Man's Heart to be totally subdued by Compassion,
may be imputed Facility, Effeminacy, and Over-tenderness; whence it comes to
pass, that the weakest Natures, as of Women, Children, and the common sort of
People, are the most subject to it: but after having resisted, and disdained
the Power of Sighs and Tears, to surrender a Man's Animosity to the sole
Reverence of the sacred Image of Virtue, this can be no other than the Effect
of a strong and inflexible Soul, enamored of, and ravished with a Masculine
and obstinate Valor. Nevertheless, Astonishment and Admiration may in less
generous Minds beget a like Effect. Witness the People of Thebes, who having
put two of their Generals upon Trial for their Lives, for having continued in
Arms beyond the precise Term of their Commission, very hardly pardoned
Pelopidas, who bowing under the weight of so dangerous an Accusation, had made
no manner of Defense for himself, nor produced other Arguments than Prayers and
Supplications to secure his Head; whereas, on the contrary, Epaminondas being
brought to the Bar, and falling to magnify the Exploits he had performed in
their Service, and after a haughty and arrogant manner reproaching them with
Ingratitude and Injustice, they had not the Heart to proceed any further in his
Trial, but broke up the Court and departed, the whole Assembly highly
commending the Courage and Confidence of this Man. The Cruelty of Dionysius the
Tyrant.
Dionysius the elder, after having by a tedious Siege, and through exceeding
great Difficulties, taken the City of Rhegium, and in it the Governor Phyton,
a very gallant Man, who had made so obstinate a Defense, he was resolved to
make him a tragical Example of his Revenge; in order whereunto, and the more
sensibly to afflict him, he first told him, That he had the Day before caused
his Son and all his Kindred to be drowned: To which Phyton returned no other
Answer but this, That they were then by one Day happier than he. After which,
causing him to be stripped, and delivering him into the Hands of the Tormentors,
he was by them not only dragged thorough the Streets of the Town, and most
ignominiously and cruelly whipped, but moreover, villified with most bitter and
contumelious Language: yet still, in the Fury of all this Persecution, he
maintained his Courage entire all the way, with a strong Voice and undaunted
Countenance proclaiming the glorious Cause of his Death; namely, for that he
would not deliver up his Country into the Hands of a Merciless Tyrant; at the
same time denouncing against him a sudden Chastisement from the offended Gods.
At which the Tyrant rolling his Eyes about, and reading in his Soldiers Looks,
that instead of being incensed at the haughty Language of this conquered Enemy,
to the Contempt of him their Captain and his Triumph, they not only seemed
struck with Admiration of so rare a Virtue, but moreover inclined to Mutiny,
and were even ready to rescue the Prisoner out of the Hangman's hands, he
caused the Execution to cease, and afterward privately caused him to be thrown
into the Sea. Man (in good earnest) is a mavelous vain, fickle, and unstable
Subject, and on whom it is very hard to form any certain or proportionate
Judgment. For Pompey could pardon the whole City of the Mammertines, Pompey.
though furiously incensed against it, upon the single Account of the Virtue
and Magnanimity of one Citizen, Zeno, who took the Fault of the Public wholly
upon himself; neither entreated other Favor, but alone to undergo the
Punishment for all: and yet Sylla's Host, having in the City of Perusia
manifested the same Virtue, obtained nothing by it, either for himself or his
Fellow-Citizens. And, directly contrary to my first Examples, the bravest of
all Men, and who was reputed so gracious and civil to all those he overcame,
Alexander the Great, Alexander.
having after many great Difficulties forced the City of Gaza, and entering,
found Betis, who commanded there, and of whose Valor in the time of this Siege
he had most noble and manifest Proof; alone, forsaken by all his Soldiers, his
Arms hacked and hewed to pieces, covered all over with Blood and Wounds, and
yet still fighting in the Crowd of a great Number of Macedonians, who were
laying on him on all sides, he said to him, netled at so dear bought a Victory,
and two fresh Wounds he had newly received in his own Person, Thou shall not
dye Betis so honorably as thou do intend, but shall assuredly suffer all the
Torments that can be inflicted on a miserable Captive. To which Menaces the
other returning no other Answer, but only a fierce and disdainful Look; What,
Obstinate silence of Besis.
says the Conqueror (observing his obstinate Silence) Is he too stiff to bend
a Knee! Is he too proud to utter one suppliant Word! I shall certainly conquer
this Silence; and if I cannot force a Word from his Mouth, I shall at least
extract a Groan from his Heart. And thereupon converting his Anger into Fury,
presently commanded his Heels to be boar'd through, causing him alive to be
dragged, mangled, and dismembered at an infamous Carts-Tail. Was it that the
height of Courage was so natural and familiar to this Conqueror, that because
he could not admire, he should the less esteem this Hero? Or was it that he
conceived Valor to be a Virtue so peculiar to himself, that his Pride could
not, without Envy, endure it in another? Or was it that the natural Impetuosity
of his Fury was incapable of Opposition? Certainly, had it been capable of any
manner of Moderation or Society, it is to be believed, that in the Sack and
Desolation of Thebes, to see so many valiant Men lost and totally destitute of
any further Defense, cruelly massacred before his Eyes, would have appeased it:
where there were above six thousand put to the Sword, of which not one was seen
to fly, or heard to cry out for Quarter; but on the contrary, every one running
here and there to seek out and to provoke the Victorious Enemy to help them to
an honorable end. Not one who did not to his last Gasp yet endeavor to
revenge himself, and with all the Arms of a brave Despair to sweeten his own
Death in the Death of an Enemy. Yet did their Virtue create no Pity, and the
length of one day was not enough to satiate the Thirst of the Conquerours
Revenge; but the Slaughter continued to the last Drop of Blood that was capable
of being shed, and stopped not till it met with none but naked and impotent
Persons, old Men, Women, and Children, of them to carry away to the number of
thirty thousand Slaves.

CHAP. II. Of Sorrow.
NO Man living is more free from this Passion than I, who neither like it in my
self, nor admire it in others, and yet generally the World (I know not why) is
pleased to grace it with a particular Esteem, endeavoring to make us believe,
That Wisdom, Virtue, and Conscience, shroud themselves under this grave and
affected Appearance. Foolish and sordid Disguise! The Italians however under
the Denomination of Un Tristo, decipher a clandestine Nature, a dangerous and
ill-natured Man: and with good reason, it being a Quality always hurtful,
always idle and vain, and as cowardly, mean, and base, by the Stoics expressly,
and particularly forbidden their Sages: But the Story, nevertheless, says, that
Psammenitus, King of Egypt, being defeated and taken Prisoner by Cambyses King
of Persia, seeing his own Daughter pass by him in a wretched Habit, with a
Bucket to draw Water, though hi^ Friends about him were so concerned as to
break out into Tears and Lamentations at the miserable sight; yet he himself
remained unmoved, without uttering a Word of Discontent, with his Eyes fixed
upon the Ground: and seeing moreover his Son immediately after led to
Execution, still maintained the same Gravity and Indifference; till spying at
last one of his Domestics dragged away amongst the Captives, he could then hold
no longer, but fell to tearing his Hair, and beating his Breast, with all the
other Extravagancies of a wild and desperate Sorrow. A Story that may very
fitly be coupled with another of the same kind, of a late Prince of our own
Nation, who being at Trent, and having News there brought him of the Death of
his elder Brother, but a Brother on whom depended the whole Support and Honor
of his House, and soon after of that of a younger Brother, the second Hope of
his Family, and having withstood these two Assaults with an exemplary
Resolution, one of his Servants happening a few days after to dye, he suffered
his Constancy to be overcome by this last Accident; and parting with his
Courage, so abandoned himself to Sorrow and Mourning, that some from thence
were forward to conclude, that he was only touched to the Quick by this last
Stroke of Fortune; but, in truth, it was, that being before brim full of Grief,
the least Addition overflowed the Bounds of all Patience. Which might also be
said of the former Example, did not the Story proceed to tell us, That (
Cambyses asking Psammenitus, Why, not being moved at the Calamity of his Son
and Daughter, he should with so great Impatience bear the Misfortune of his
Friend? It is (answered he) because this last Affliction was only to be
manifested by Tears, the two first exceeding all manner of Expression. And
peradventure something like this might be working in the Fancy of the ancient
Painter, who being in the Sacrifice of Iphigenia to represent the Sorrow of the
Assistants proportionably to the several Degrees of Interest every one had in
the Death of this fair innocent Virgin; and having in the other Figures laid
out the utmost Power of his Art, when he came to that of her Father, he drew
him with a Veil over his Face, meaning thereby, that no kind of Countenance was
capable of expressing such a degree of Sorrow. Which is also the reason why the
Poets feign the miserable Mother Niobe, having first lost seven Sons, and
successively as many Daughters, to be at last transformed into a Rock,
Diriguisse malis, Ovid. Met. lib. 6.

-- Whom Grief alone
Had Power to stiffen into Stone.
Thereby to express, that melancholic, dumb, and deaf Stupidity, which benums
all our Faculties when oppressed with Accidents greater than we are able to bear;
and indeed the Violence and Impression of an excessive Grief must of necessity
astonish the Soul, and wholly deprive her of her ordinary Functions: as it
happens to every one of us, who upon any sudden Alarm of very ill News, find
our selves surpised, stupefied, and in a manner deprived of all Power of
Motion, till the Soul, beginning to vent it self in Sighs and Tears, seems a
little to free and disingage it self from the sudden Oppression, and to have
obtained some room to work it self out at greater Liberty.

Aeneid. l. 11.
Et via vix tandem voci laxata dolor est.
Yet scarce at last by struggling Grief, a Gate
Unbolted is for Sighs to sally at.
In the War that Ferdinand made upon the Widow of King John of Hungary about
Buda, a Man at Arms was particularly taken notice of by every one for his
singular gallant Behavior in a certain Encounter; unknown, highly commended,
and as much lamented, being left dead upon the Place: but by none so much as by
Raisciac a German Lord, who was infinitely enamored of so unparalleled a
Virtue. When the Body being brought off, and the Count, with the common
Curiosity coming to view it, the Arms were no sooner taken off, but he
immediately knew him to be his own Son. A thing that added a second Blow to the
Compassion of all the Beholders; only he, without uttering a Word, or turning
away his Eyes from the woeful Object, stood fixtly contemplating the Body of his
Son, till the Vehemence of Sorrow having overcome his Vital Spirits, made him
sink down stone-dead to the Ground. Chi puo dir com' egli arde e in picciol
fuoco? Petrarca, Sonetto 158.

-- What Tongue is able to proclaim
How his Soul melted in the gentle Flame?
say the Inamorato's, when they would represent an insupportable Passion.

misero quod omnes
Eripit sensus mihi. Nam simul te
Lesbia aspexi, Cat. Epig. 52.
nihil est super mi
Quod loquar amens.
Lingua sed torpet tenuis sub artus
Flamma dimanat sonitu suopte
Tinniunt aures, gemina teguntur
Lumina nocte.
-- all-conquering Lesbia, thine Eyes
Have ravished from me all my Faculties:
At the first Glance of their victorious Ray
I was so struck I knew not what to say;
Nor had a Tongue to speak, a subtle Flame
Crept through my Veins; my tinkling Ears became
Deaf without Noise, and my poor Eyes I found
With a black Veil of double Darkness bound
Neither is it in the height and greatest fury of the Fit that we are in a
condition to pour out our Complaints, or to sally into Courtship, the Soul
being at that time overburthened, and laboring with profound Thoughts; and the
Body dejected and languishing with Desire; and thence it is, that sometimes
proceed those accidental Impotencies that so unseasonably surprise the willing
Lover, and that Frigidity which by the force of an immoderate Ardour so
unhappily seizes him even in the very lap of Fruition: For all Passions that
suffer themselves to be relished and digested are but moderate.

Seneca Hipol. Act. 2. Scen. 3.
Curae leves loquuntur, ingentes stupent.
His Grief's but easy who his grief can tell,
But piercing Sorrow has no Article.
A surprise of unexpected Joy does likewise often produce the same Effect.

Virg. Aeneid. 3.
Vt me conspexit venientem, and Troja circum
Arma amens vidit, magnis exterrita monstris,
Diriguit visu in medio, calor ossa reliquit,
Labitur, and longo vix tandem tempore fatur.
Soon as she saw me coming, and beheld
The Trojan Ensigns waving in the Field,
O'er-joy'd, and ravished at th'unlook't for sight,
She turned a Statue, lost all feeling quite;
Life's gentle Heat did her stiff Limbs forsake,
She swoon'd, and scarce after long swooning spoke.
To these we have the Examples of the Roman Lady, who died for Joy to see her
Son safe returned from the defeat of Cannae; and of Sophocles, and Dionisius
the Tyrant, who died of Joy; and of Talva, who died in Corsica, reading News of
the Honors the Roman Senate had decreed in his Favor. We have moreover one,
in our times, of Pope Leo the tenth, who, upon News of the Taking of Milan, a
thing he had so ardently and passionately desired, was raped with so sudden an
excess of Joy, that he immediately fell into a Fever and died. And for a more
authentic Testimony of the imbecility of Humane Nature, it is recorded by the
Ancients, that Diodorus the Logician died upon the Place, out of an extreme
Passion of Shame, for not having been able in his own School, and in the
presence of a great Auditory, to disingage himself from a nice Argument that
was propounded to him. I for my part am very little subject to these violent
Passions; I am naturally of a stubborn Apprehension, which also by Discourse I
every day harden, and fortify more and more.

CHAP. III. That our Affections carry themselves beyond us.
SUch as accuse Mankind of the Folly of gaping and panting after future things,
and advise us to make our benefit of those which are present, and to set up our
rest upon them, as having too short a reach to lay hold upon that which is to
come, and it being more impossible for us, than to retrieve what is past; have
hit upon the most universal of Humane Errors, if that may be called an Error
to which Nature it self has disposed us, who in order to the subsistence, and
continuation of her own Work, has, amongst several others, prepossessed us with
this deceiving Imagination, as being more jealous of our Action, than afraid of
our Knowledge. For we are never present with, but always beyond our selves.
Fear, Desire, and Hope, are still pushing us on toward the future, depriving
us in the mean time of the sense and Consideration of that which is, to amuse
us with the thought of what shall be, even when we shall be no more.

Seneca, Epist. 98.
Calamitosus est Animus futuri anxius.
A Mind that anxious is of things to come,
Is still abroad, finding no rest at home.
We find this great Precept often repeated in Plato, Do thine own Work, and
know thy self. Of which two Parts, both the one and the other generally
comprehend our whole Duty, and consequently do each of them complicate and
involve the other; for, who will do his own Work aright, will find that his
first Lesson is to know himself: and who rightly understands himself will never
mistake another Man's Work for his own, but will love and improve himself above
all other things, will refuse superfluous Employments, and reject all
unprofitable Thoughts and Propositions. And, as Folly on the one side, though
it should enjoy all it can possibly desire, would notwithstanding never be
content, so on the other, Wisdom does ever acquiesce with the present, and is
never dissatisfied with its immediate Condition: and that is the reason why
Epicurus dispenses his Sages from all Foresight and Care of the future.
Amongst those Laws that relate to the Dead, I look upon that to be the best, by
which the Actions of Princes are to be examined and sifted after their Decease.
They are equal at least, whilst living, if not above the Laws, and therefore
what Justice could not inflict upon their Persons, it is but reason should be
executed upon their Reputations, and the Estates of their Successors; Things
that we often value above Life it self: A Custom of singular Advantage to those
Countries where it is in use, and by all good Princes as much to be desired,
who have reason to take it ill, that the Memories of the Tyrannical and Wicked
should be used with the same Reverence and Respect with theirs. We owe, it is
true, Subjection and Obedience to all our Kings, whether good or bad, alike,
for that has respect unto their Office; but as to Affection and Esteem, those
are only due to their Virtue. Let it be granted, that by the Rule of Government
we are with Patience to endure unworthy Princes, to conceal their Vices, and to
assist them in their indifferent Actions, whilst their Authority stands in need
of our Support: yet, the Relation of Prince and Subject being once at an end,
there is no reason we should deny the Publication of our real Wrongs and
Sufferings to our own Liberty and common Justice, and to interdict good
Subjects the Glory of having submissively and faithfully served a Prince, whose
Imperfections were to them so perfectly known, never to deprive Posterity of so
good an Example; and such as out of respect to some private Obligation, shall,
against their own Knowledge and Conscience, espouse the Quarrel, and vindicate
the Memory of a faulty Prince, do a particular Right at the Expense and to the
Prejudice of the Public Justice. Livy does very truly say, That the Language
of Men bred up in Courts is always sounding of vain Ostentation, and that their
Testimony is rarely true, every one indifferently magnifying his own Master,
and stretching his Commendation to the utmost extent of Virtue and Sovereign
Grandeur: and it is not impossible but some may condemn the Freedom of those two
Soldiers, who so roundly answered Nero to his Face, the one being asked by
him, Why he bore him ill Will? I loved thee, answered he, whilst thou were
worthy of it, but since thou art become a Parricide, an Incendiary, a Waterman,
a Fiddler, a Player, and a Coachman, I hate thee as thou do deserve: and the
other, Why he should attempt to kill him? Because, said he, I could think of no
other Remedy against thy perpetual Mischiefs. But the public and universal
Testimonies that were given of him after his Death (and will be to all
Posterity, both of him and all other wicked Princes like him) his Tyrannies and
abominable Deportment considered, who, of a sound Judgment, can reprove them? I
am scandalized, I confess, that in so sacred a Government as that of the
Lacedaemonians, there should be mixed so hypocritical a Ceremony at the
Enterrment of their Kings; where all their Confederates and Neighbors, and all
sorts and Degrees of Men and Women, as well as their Slaves, Ceremony of the
Lacedaemonians at the Enterrment of their Kings.
cut and slashed their Foreheads in Token of Sorrow, repeating in their Cries
and Lamentations, That that King (let him have been as wicked as the Devil) was
the best that ever they had; by this means attributing to his Quality the
Praises that only belong to Merit, and that of Right is properly due to the
most supreme Desert, though lodged in the lowest and most inferior Subject.
Aristotle (who will still have a hand in every thing) makes a Quaere upon the
Saying of Solon, That none can be said to be happy until he be dead. Whether
then any one of those who have lived and died according to their Hearts Desire,
if he have left an ill Repute behind him, and that his Posterity be miserable,
can be said to be happy? Whilst we have Life and Motion, we convey our selves
by Fancy and Preoccupation, whither and to what we please; but once out of
Being, we have no more any manner of Communication with what is yet in Being:
and it had therefore been better said of Solon, That Man is never happy,
because never so till after he is no more.

-- Quisquam
Lucret. lib^ 3.
Vix radicitus e vita se tollit, and ejicit
Sed facit esse sui quiddam super inscius ipse,
Nec removet satis a projecto corpore sese, and Vindicat.
No dying Man can truss his Baggage so,
But something of him he must leave below:
Nor from his Carcass that does prostrate lie
Himself can clear, or far enough can fly.
Bertrand de Glesquin, dying before the Castle of Rancon near unto Puy in
Auvergne, the Besieged were afterward, upon Surrender, enjoined to lay down
the Keys of the Place upon the Corpse of the dead General. Bartolomew d'
Alviano, the Venetian General, happening to dye in the Service of the Republic
in Brascia; and his Corpse being to be carried thorough the Territory of Verona,
an Enemy's Country, most of the Army were of Opinion to demand safe Conduct
from the Veronese, supposing, that upon such an Occasion it would not be
denied: but Theodoro Trivulsio highly opposed the Motion, rather choosing to
make his way by force of Arms, and to run the hazard of a Battle, saying, it
was by no means decent, and very unfit, that he who in his Life was never
afraid of his Enemies should seem to apprehend them when he was dead. And in
truth, in Affairs of almost the same Nature, by the Greek Laws, he who made
Suit to an Enemy for a Body to give it Burial, did by that Act renounce his
Victory, and had no more Right to erect a Trophy; and he to whom such Suit was
made, was ever, whatever otherwise the Success had been, reputed Victor. By
this means it was, that Nicias lost the Advantage he had visibly obtained over
the Corinthians, and that Agesilaus on the contrary, assured that he had before
very doubtfully gained of the Baeotians. These Proceedings might appear very
odd, had it not been a general Practice in all Ages, not only to extend the
Concern of our Persons beyond the Limits of Life, but moreover, to fancy that
the Favor of Heaven does not only very often accompany us to the Grave, but
has also, even after Life, a Concern for our Ashes: of which there are so many
ancient Examples (waving those of our own Observation of later date) that it is
not very necessary I should longer insist upon it. Edward King of England, and
the first of that Name, having in the long Wars betwixt him and Robert King of
Scotland, had sufficient Experience of how great Importance his own immediate
Presence was to the Success of his Affairs, having ever been victorious in
whatever he undertook in his own Person; when he came to dye, bound his Son in
a solemn Oath, that so soon as he should be dead, he should boil his Body till
the Flesh parted from the Bones, and reserve them to carry continually with him
in his Army, so often as he should be obliged to go against the Scots; as if
Destiny had inevitably grapled Victory even to those miserable Remains. Jean
Zisca, the same who so often in Vindication of Wicliffe's Heresies, infested
the Bohemian State, left order that they should flea him after his Death, and
of his Skin to make a Drum, to carry in the War against his Enemies, fancying
it would much contribute to the Continuation of the Successes he had always
obtained in the War against them. In like manner, certain of the Indians, in a
Day of Battle with the Spaniards, carried with them the Bones of one of their
Captains, in consideration of the Victories they had formerly obtained under
his Conduct. And other People of the same new World do yet carry about with
them in their Wars the Relics of valiant Men who have died in Battle, to
incite their Courage, and advance their Fortune: of which Examples, the first
reserve nothing for the Tomb, but the Reputation they have acquired by their
former Achievements; but these proceed yet further, and attribute a certain
Power of Operation. The last Act of Captain Bayard is of a much better
Composition; who, finding himself wounded to Death with a Harquebuze Shot, and
being by his Friends importuned to retire out of the Fight, made Answer, That
he would not begin at the last Gasp to turn his Back to the Enemy; and
accordingly still fought on, till feeling himself too faint, and no longer able
to sit his Horse, he commanded his Steward to set him down against the Root of
a Tree, but so that he might dye with his Face toward the Enemy, which he also
did. I must yet add another Example equally remarkable, for the present
Consideration, with any of the former. The Emperor Maximilian, great
Grandfather to Philip the Second, King of Spain, was a Prince endowed
throughout with great and extraordinary Qualities, and amongst the rest, with a
singular Beauty of Person; but had withal, a Humor very contrary to that of
other Princes, who for the dispatch of their most Important Affairs convert
their Close-stool into a Chair of State, which was, that he would never permit
any of his Bedchamber, Modesty of Maximilian the Emperor.
in what familiar degree of Favor soever, to see him in that Posture; and
would steal aside to make Water as religiously as a Virgin, and was as shy to
discover either to his Physician, or any other whatever, those Parts that we
are accustomed to conceal: and I my self, who have so impudent a way of
Talking, am nevertheless naturally so modest this way, that unless at the
Importunity of Necessity, or Pleasure, I very rarely and unwillingly
communicate to the Sight of any, either those Parts or Actions that Custom
orders us to conceal, wherein I also suffer more Constraint than I conceive is
very well becoming a Man, especially of my Profession: but he nourished this
modest Humor to such a degree of Superstition, as to give express Orders in
his last Will, that they should put him on Drawers so soon as he should be
dead; to which methinks he would have done well to have added, that he should
have been hoodwinked too that put them on. The Charge that Cyrus left with his
Children, that neither they nor any other should either see or touch his Body
after the Soul was departed from it, Cyrus's Reverence to Religion. Xenophon.
I attribute to some superstitious Devotion of his, both his Historian, and
Himself, amongst other great Qualities, having strewn the whole Course of
their Lives with a singular Respect to Religion. I was by no means pleased with
a Story was told me by a Man of very great Quality, of a Relation of mine, and
one who had given a very good Account of himself both in Peace and War; that
coming to dye in a very old Age, of an excessive Pain of the Stone, he spent
the last Hours of his Life in an extraordinary Solitude about ordering the
Ceremony of his Funeral, pressing all the Men of Condition who came to see him,
to engage their Word to attend him to his Grave, importuning this very Prince,
who came to visit him at his last Gasp, with a most earnest Supplication, that
he would order his Family to be assisting there, and withal representing
before him several Reasons and Examples to prove that it was a Respect due to a
Man of his Condition; and seemed to dye content, having obtained this Promise,
and appointed the Method and Order of this Funeral Parade. I have seldom heard
of so long-lived a Vanity. Another, though contrary Solitude (of which also I
do not want domestic Example,) seems to be somewhat a Kin to this; That a Man
shall cudgel his Brains at the last Moments of his Life, to contrive his
Obsequies to so particular and unusual a Parcimony, as to conclude it in the
sordid expense of one single Servant with a Candle and Lanthorn. And yet I see
this Humor commended, and the Appointment of Marcus Aemilius Lepidus, who
forbad his Heirs to bestow upon his Hearse even the common Ceremonies in use
upon such Occasions. Is it yet Temperance and Frugality to avoid the Expense
and Pleasure of which the use and knowledge is imperceptible to us? See here an
easy and cheap Reformation. If Instruction were at all necessary in this case,
I should be of Opinion, that in this, as in all other Actions of Life, the
Ceremony and Expense should be regulated by the Ability of the Person deceased;
and the Philosopher Lycon prudently ordered his Executors to dispose of his
Body where they should think most fit, and as to his Funerals, to order them
neither too superfluous, nor too mean. For my part, I should wholly refer the
ordering of this Ceremony to Custom, and shall, when the time comes,
accordingly leave it to their Discretion, to whose Lot it shall fall to do me
that last Office. Totus hic locus est contemnendus in nobis non negligendus in
nostris; Cicero tusc. l. 1.
The Place of our Sepulture is wholly to be contemned by us, but not to be
neglected by our Friends; and it was a holy Saying of a Saint, Curatio funeris
conditio Sepulturae, August. de Civit. Dei.
pompa Exequiarum, magis sunt vivorum solatia, quam subsidia mortuorum, The
Care of Funerals, the Place of Sepulture, and the Pomps of Exequies, are rather
Consolations to the Living than any Benefit to the Dead. Which made Socrates
answer Criton, who at the Hour of his Death asked him, how he would be buried,
How you will, said he. If I could concern my self further than the Present
about this Affair, I should be most tempted, as the greatest Satisfaction of
this kind, to imitate those who in their Lifetime entertain themselves with
the Ceremony of their own Obsequies beforehand, and are pleased with viewing
their own Monument, and beholding their own dead Countenance in Marble. Happy
are they who can gratify their Senses by Insensibility, and live by their
Death! I am ready to conceive an implacable Hatred against all Democracy and
Popular Government, (though I cannot but think it the most natural and
equitable of all others) so often as I call to mind the inhumane Injustice of the
People of Athens, who, without Remission, or once vouchsafing to hear what they
had to say for themselves, put to death their brave Captains newly returned
triumphant from a Naval Victory they had obtained over the Lacedaemonians near
the Arginusian Isles; the most bloody and obstinate Engagement that ever the
Greeks fought at Sea; for no other Reason, but that they rather followed their
Blow and pursued the Advantages prescribed them by the Rule of War, than that
they would stay to gather up and bury their Dead: an Execution that is yet
rendered more odious by the Behavior of Diomedon, who being one of the
condemned, and a Man of most eminent, both politic and military Virtue, after
having heard their Sentence, advancing to speak, no Audience till then having
been allowed, instead of laying before them his own Innocence, or the Impiety
of so cruel an Arrest, only expressed a Sollitude for his Judges Preservation,
beseeching the Gods to convert this Sentence to their own Good, and praying
that for neglecting to pay those Vows which he and his Companions had done
(which he also acquainted them with) in Acknowledgment of so glorious a
Success, they might not pull down the Indignation of the Gods upon them; and so
without more Words went courageously to his Death. But Fortune a few Years
after punishing them in their kind, made them see the Error of their Cruelty:
for Chabrias, Captain General of their Naval Forces, having got the better of
Pollis, Admiral of Sparta, about the Isle of Naxos, totally lost the Fruits of
his Success and Content with his Victory of very great Importance to their
Affairs: not to incur the danger of this Example, and lose a few Bodies of his
dead Friends that were floating in the Sea, gave opportunity to a world of
living Enemies to sail away in Safety, who afterward made them pay dear for
this unseasonable Superstition.

Quaeris quae jaceas post obitum loco? Seneca Troa Choro. 2.

Quae non nata jacent.
Do ask where thou shall lie when dead?
With those that never Being had.
This other restores the sense of Repose to a Body without a Soul: Neque
sepulcrum, quo recipiat, habeat portum corporis: Cicero Tusc. l. 1.

Vbi remissa humana vita, Corpus requiescat a malis.
Nor with a Tomb as with a Haven blessed,
Where, after Life, the Corpse in Peace may rest.


As Nature demonstrates to us, that several dead things retain yet an occult
Sympathy and relation to Life; Wine changes its flavor and complexion in
Cellars, according to the changes and seasons of the Vine from whence it came;
and the Flesh of Venison alters its condition and taste in the powd'ring-tub,
according to the seasons of the living Flesh of its kind, as it is observed by
the curious.

CHAP. IV. That the Soul discharges her Passions upon false Objects, where the
true are wanting.
A Gentleman of my Country, who was very often tormented with the Gout, being
importuned by his Physicians totally to reclaim his Appetite from all manner of
salt Meats, was wont presently to reply, that he must needs have something to
quarrel with in the extremity of his Fits, and that he fancied, that railing
at, and cursing one while the Bolognia Sawsages, and another the dried Tongues
and the Hamms, was some mitigation to his pain. And in good earnest, as the Arm
when it is advanced to strike, if it fail of meeting with that upon which it
was designed to discharge the blow, and spends it self in vain, does offend the
Striker himself; and as also, that to make a pleasant Prospect the Sight should
not be lost and dilated in a vast extent of empty Air, but have some Bounds to
limit and circumscribe it at a reasonable distance, Ventus ut amittit vires,
nisi robore densae
Occurrant Sylvae, spatio diffusus inani.
As Winds do lose their strength, unless withstood
By some dark Grove of strong opposing wood.


So it appears, that the Soul, being transported and discomposed, turns its
violence upon it self, if not supplied with something to oppose it, and
therefore always requires an Enemy object on which to discharge its Fury and
Resentment. Plutarch says very well of those who are delighted with little Dogs
and Monkeys; that the amorous part that is in us, for want of a legitimate
Object, rather than lie idle, does after that manner forge, and create one
frivolous and false; as we see that the Soul, in the exercise of its Passions,
inclines rather to deceive it self, by creating a false and fantastical
Subject, even contrary to its own Belief, than not to have something to work
upon. And after this manner Brute Beasts direct their Fury to fall upon the
Stone or Weapon that has hurt them, and with their Teeth even execute their
Revenge upon themselves, for the Injury they have received from another.

Pannonis haud aliter post ictum saevior Vrsa Claudian.

Cui jaculum parva Lybis amentavit habena,
Se rotat in vulnus telumque irata receptum
Impetit, and secum fugientem circuit Hastam.
So the fierce Bear, made fiercer by the smart
Of the bold Lybians mortal guided Dart,
Turns round upon the Wound, and the tough Spear
Contorted over her Breast does flying bear.
What causes of the misadventures that befall us do we not invent? what is it
that we do not lay the fault to right or wrong, that we may have something to
quarrel with? Those beautiful Tresses, young Lady, you may so liberally tear
off, are no way guilty, nor is it the whiteness of those delicate Breasts you
so unmercifully beat, that with an unlucky Bullet has slain your beloved
Brother; quarrel with something else. Livy, speaking of the Roman Army in
Spain, says, that for the loss of two Brothers, who were both great Captains,
Flere omnes repent, and offensare capita, Livy dec. 3. l. 5.
that they all wept, and tore their Hair. It Is the common practice of
Affliction. And the Philosopher Bion said pleasantly of the King, who by
handfuls pulled his Hair off his Head for Sorrow, Does this man think that
Baldness is a Remedy for Grief? Who has not seen peevish Gamesters worry the
Cards with their Teeth, and swallow whole Bales of Dice in revenge for the Loss
of their Money? Xerxes whipped the Sea, and writ a Challenge to Mount Athos;
Cyrus employed a whole Army several days at work, to revenge himself of the
River Gnydus, for the Fright it had put him into in passing over; and Caligula
demolished a very beautiful Palace for the Pleasure his Mother had once enjoyed
there. I remember there was a Story current, when I was a Boy, That one of our
Neighboring Kings having received a Blow from the Hand of GOD, swore he would
be revenged, and in order to it, made Proclamation, that for ten Years to come
no one should pray to him, or so much as mention him throughout his Dominions:
by which we are not so much to take measure of the Folly, as the Vainglory of
the Nation of which this Tale was told. They are Vices that indeed always go
together; but such Actions as these have in them more of Presumption than want
of Wit. Augustus Caesar, having been tossed with a Tempest at Sea, fell to
defying Neptune, and in the Pomp of the Circensian Games, to be revenged,
deposed his Statue from the place it had amongst the other Deities. Wherein he
was less excusable than the former, and less than he was afterward, when
having lost a Battle under Quintilius Varus in Germany, in Rage and Despair he
went running his Head against the Walls, and crying out, O Varus! give me my
Men again! for these exceed all Folly, forasmuch as Impiety is joined with it,
invading God himself, or at least Fortune, as if she had Ears that were subject
to our Batteries; like the Thracians, who when it Thunders or Lightens, fall to
Shooting against Heaven with a Titanian Madness, as if by Flights of Arrows
they intended to reduce God Almighty to Reason. Though the ancient Poet in
Plutarch tells us, Point ne se faut couroucer aux affairs,
Plutarch.
Il ne leur chaut de toutes nos choleres.
We must not quarrel Heaven in our Affairs,
That little for a mortal Anger cares.


But we can never enough decry nor sufficiently condemn the senseless and
ridiculous Sallies of our unruly Passions.

CHAP. V. Whether the Governor of a Place besieged ought himself to go out to
parle.
LVcius Marcius, the Roman Legate, in the War against Persius King of Macedon,
to gain time wherein to reinforce his Army, set on foot some Overtures of
Accommodation, with which the King being lulled asleep, concluded a Cessation
for certain days, by this means giving his Enemy opportunity and leisure to
repair his Arms, which was afterward the Occasion of his own Ruin. The elder
sort of Senators, notwithstanding mindful of their Forefathers Virtue, were by
no means satisfied with this Proceeding; but on the contrary condemned it, as
degenerating from their ancient Practice, which they said was by Valor, and
not by Artifice, Surprises, and Night-Encounters; neither by pretended Flight,
Ambuscadoes, and deceitful Treaties, to overcome their Enemies; never making
War till having first denounced it, and very often assigned both the Hour and
Place of Battle. Out of this generous Principle it was that they delivered up
to Pyrrhus his treacherous Physician, and to the Hetrurians their disloyal
Schoolmaster. And this was indeed a Procedure truly Roman, and nothing allied
to the Grecian Subtilty, nor the Punick Cunning, where it was reputed a Victory
of less Glory to overcome by Force than Fraud. Deceit may serve for a need, but
he only confesses himself overcome who knows he is neither subdued by Policy,
nor Misadventure, but by dint of Valor, in a fair and manly War. And it very
well appears by the Discourse of these good old Senators, that this fine
Sentence was not yet received amongst them, -- Dolus an virtus quis in Host
requirat? Aeneid. l. 2.

No Matter if by Valor, or Deceit,
We overcome, so we the better get.


The Achaians (says Polybius) abhorred all manner of double-dealing in War, not
reputing it a Victory, unless where the Courages of the Enemy were fairly
subdued. Tacit. in Agric.
Eam vir sanctus, and sapiens sciet veram esse victoriam, quae salva fide, and
integra dignitate parabitur. An honest and a prudent Man will acknowledge that
only to be a true Victory which he has obtained without Violation of his own
Faith, or any Blemish upon his own Honor, says another.

Ennius.
Vos ne velit, an me regnare hera quidve ferat fors
Virtute experiamur.
If you or I shall rule, lets fairly try,
And Force and Fortune give the Victory.
In the Kingdom of Ternates, amongst those Nations which we so broadly call
Barbarians, they have a Custom never to commence War till it be first
denounced; adding withal, an ample Declaration of what they have to do it
withal, with what, and how many Men, what Ammunitions, and what both offensive
and defensive Arms; but that being done, they afterward conceive it lawful to
employ this Power without Reproach, any way that may best conduce to their own
ends. The ancient Florentines were so far from obtaining any Advantage over
their Enemies by Surprise, that they always gave them a Months Warning before
they drew their Army into the Field, by the continual Tolling of a Bell they
called Martinella. For what concerns us who are not so scrupulous in this
Affair, and who attribute the Honor of the War to him who has the better of
it, after what manner soever obtained, and who after Lysander say, Where the
Lion's Skin is too short we must eech it out with the Foxes Case. The most
usual Occasions of Surprise are derived from this Practice, and we hold that
there are no moments, wherein a Chief ought to be more circumspect, and to have
his Eye so much at watch, as those of Parle's, and Treaties of Accommodation;
and it is therefore become a general Rule amongst the Martial men of these
latter Times, that a Governor of a Place never ought in a time of Siege to go
out to parle. It was for this that in our Fathers days the Seigneurs de
Montmard and d' Assigni defending Mouson against the Count de Nassau, were so
highly censured; yet in this Case it would be excusable in that Governor, who
going out, should notwithstanding do it in such manner, that the Safety and
Advantage should be on his side; as Count Guido de Rangoni did at Reggio (if we
are to believe Bellay, for Guicciardin says it was he himself) when Monsieur de
l' Escut approached to parle, who stepped so little a way from his Fort, that a
Disorder happening in the interim of Parle, not only Monsieur de l' Escut and his
Party who were advanced with him found themselves by much the weaker, (insomuch
that Alessandro de Trivulcio was there slain) but he himself was constrained,
as the safest way, to follow the Count, and relying upon his Honor to secure
himself from the danger of the Shot within the very Walls of the Town. Eumenes,
being shut up in the City of Nora by Antigonus, and by him importuned to come
out to speak with him, as he sent him word it was fit he should to a better Man
than himself, and one who had now an Advantage over him, returned this notable
Answer, Tell him, said he, that I shall never think any Man better than my
self, whilst I have my Sword in my hand: and would never consent to come out to
him, till first, according to his own Demand, Antigonus had delivered him his
own Nephew Ptolomeus in Hostage. And yet some have done rather better than
worse in going out in Person to parle with the Assailant; witness Henry de
Vaux, a Cavalier of Champagne, who being besieged by the English in the Castle
of Commercy, and Bartholomew de Bone, who commanded at the Leaguer, having so
sapp'd the greatest part of the Castle without, that nothing remained but
setting Fire to the Props to bury the Besieged under the Ruins, he requested
the said Henry to come out to speak with him for his own Good; which the other
accordingly doing, with three more in Company with him, and his own evident
Ruin being made apparent to him, he conceived himself singularly obliged to
his Enemy, to whose Discretion after he and his Garrison had surrendered
themselves, Fire being presently applied to the Mine, the Props no sooner began
to fail, but the Castle was immediately turned topsy turvy, no one Stone being
left upon another. I could, and do, with great Facility, rely upon the Faith
of another; but I should very unwillingly do it in such a Case, as it should
thereby be judged that it was rather an Effect of my Despair, and want of
Courage, than voluntary, and out of Confidence and Security in the Faith of him
with whom I had to do.

CHAP. VI. That the Hour of Parle is dangerous.
I Saw notwithstanding lately at Mussidan, a Place not far from my House, that
those who were driven out thence by our Army, and others of their Party, highly
complained of Treachery, for that during a Treaty of Accommodation, and in the
very interim that their Deputies were treating, they were surprised, and cut to
pieces: a thing that peradventure in another Age, might have had some color of
foul Play; but (as I said before) the Practice of Arms in these days is quite
another thing, and there is now no Confidence in an Enemy excusable, till after
the last Seal of Obligation; and even then the Conqueror has enough to do to
keep his Word: so hazardous a thing it is to entrust the Observation of the
Faith a Man has engaged to a Town that surrenders upon easy and favorable
Conditions, to the Necessity, Avarice, and License of a victorious Army, and to
give the Soldier free Entrance into it in the heat of Blood. The Faith of
military Men very uncertain.
Lucius Aemilius Regillus, a Roman Praetor, having lost his time in attempting
to take the City of Phocaea by force, by reason of the singular Valor
wherewith the Inhabitants defended themselves against him, conditioned at last
to receive them as Friends to the People of Rome, and to enter the Town, as
into a Confederate City, without any manner of Hostility; of which he also gave
them all possible Assurance: but having for the greater Pomp brought his whole
Army in with him, it was no more in his Power, with all the Endeavor he could
use, to command his People: so that Avarice and Revenge despising and trampling
under foot both his Authority and all Military Discipline, he there at once saw
his own Faith violated, and a considerable part of the City sacked and ruined
before his Face. Cleomenes was wont to say, That what Mischief soever a Man
could do his Enemy in time of War was above Justice, and nothing accountable to
it in the Sight of Gods and Men. And according to this Principle, having
concluded a Cessation with those of Argos for seven days, the third Night after
he fell upon them when they were all buried in Security and Sleep, and put them
to the Sword; alleging for his Excuse, That there had no Nights been mentioned
in the Truce: but the Gods punished his Perfidy. In a time of Parle also, and
that the Citizens were intent upon their Capitulation, the City of Cassilinum
was taken by Surprise, and that even in the Age of the justest Captains, and
the best Discipline of the Roman Militia: for it is not said, that it is not
lawful for us in Time and Place to make Advantage of our Enemies want of
Understanding, as well as their want of Courage: and doubtless War has a great
many Privileges, that appear reasonable, even to the Prejudice of Reason. And
therefore here the Rule fails, Neminem id agere ut ex alterius praedetur
inscitia, Cicero de Offic. l. 3.
That no one should prey upon another Folly. But I am astonished at the great
Liberty allowed by Xenophon in such Cases, and that both by Precept, and the
Example of several Exploits of his complete General. An Author of very great
Authority, I confess, in those Affairs, as being in his own Person both a great
Captain and a Philosopher of the first Form of Socrates his Disciples; and yet
I cannot consent to such a measure of License as he dispenses in all Things and
Places. Monsieur d' Aubigny, having besieged Capua, and played a furious
Battery against it, Signior Fabricio Colonne, Governor of the Town, having
from a Bastion begun to parle, and his Soldiers in the mean time being a
little more remiss in their Guard, our People took advantage of their Security,
entered the Place at unawares, and put them all to the Sword. And of later
Memory, at Yvoy, Signior Juliano Romero having played that part of a Novice to
go out to Capitulate with the Constable, at his Return found his Place taken.
But, that we might not escape Scot-free, the Marquess of Pescara having laid
Siege to Genoa, where Duke Octavio Fregosa commanded under our Protection, and
the Articles betwixt them being so far advanced that it was looked upon as a
done thing, and upon the Point to be concluded, several Spaniards in the mean
time being slipped in under the Privilege of the Treaty, seized on the Gates,
and made use of this Treachery as an absolute and fair Victory: and since at
Ligny in Barrois, where the Count de Brienne commanded, the Emperor having in
his own Person beleaguered that Place, and Bartheville, the said Count's
Lieutenant, going out to parle, whilst he was Capitulating the Town was taken.
Ariosto. Cant. 15.
Fu il vincer sempre maj laudabil cosae
Vinca si o per fortuna, o per ingegno.
Fame ever does the Victor's Praises ring,
And Conquest ever was a glorious thing,
Which way soever the Conqu'rour purchased it,
Whether by Valor, Fortune, or by Wit.
say they: But the Philosopher Chrysippus was of another Opinion, wherein I
also concur; for he was used to say, That those who run a Race, ought to employ
all the Force they have in what they are about, and to run as fast as they can;
but that it is by no means fair in them to lay any hand upon their Adversary to
stop him, nor to set a Leg before him to throw him down. And yet more generous
was the Answer of that great Alexander to Polypercon, who persuaded him to take
the Advantage of the Nights Obscurity to fall upon Darius; By no means (said
he) it is not for such a Man as I am to steal a Victory, Malo me fortunae
poeniteat, Quint. Curt. 1.4.
quam victoriae pudeat, I had rather repent me of my Fortune than be ashamed of
my Victory.

Atque idem fugientem haud est dignatus Orodem Aeneid. l. 10.

Sternere, nec jacta coecum dare Cuspide vulnus:
Obvius, adversoque occurrit, seque viro vir
Contulit, haud furto melior, sed fortibus armis.
His Heart disdained to strike Orodes dead,
Or, unseen, basely wound him as he fled;
But gaining first his Front, wheels round, and there
Bravely opposed himself to his Career:
And fighting Man to Man, would let him see
His Valor scorned both Odds and Policy.
CHAP. VII. That the Intention is Judge of our Actions.
IT IS a Saying, That Death discharges us of all our Obligations. However, I
know some who have taken it in another Sense. Henry the Seventh, King of
England, articled with Don Philip Son to Maximilian the Emperor, and Father to
the Emperor Charles the Fifth, when he had him upon English Ground, that the
said Philip should deliver up the Duke of Suffolk of the White Rose, his mortal
Enemy, who was fled into the Low Countries, into his Hands; which Philip (not
knowing how to evade it) accordingly promised to do, but upon condition
nevertheless, that Henry should attempt nothing against the Life of the said
Duke, which, during his own Life he performed; but coming to dye, in his last
Will, commanded his Son to put him to Death immediately after his Decease. And
lately, in the Tragedy, that the Duke of Alva presented to us in the Persons of
two Counts, Egmont and Horn, at Brussels, there were very remarkable Passages,
and one amongst the rest, that the said Count Egmont (upon the security of
whose Word and Faith Count Horn had come and surrendered himself to the Duke of
Alva) earnestly entreated that he might first mount the Scaffold, to the end
that Death might disingage him from the Obligation he had past to the other. In
which Case, methinks Death did not acquit the former of his Promise, and the
second was satisfied in the good Intention of the other, even though he bad not
died with him: for we cannot be obliged beyond what we are able to perform, by
reason that the Effects and Intentions of what we promise are not at all in our
Power, and that indeed we are Masters of nothing but the Will, in which, by
necessity, all the Rules and whole Duty of Mankind is founded and established.
And therefore Count Egmont, conceiving his Soul and Will bound and indebted to
his Promise, although he had not the Power to make it good, had doubtless been
absolved of his Duty, even though he had outlived the other; but the King of
England wilfully and premeditately breaking his Faith, was no more to be
excused for deferring the Execution of his Infidelity till after his Death,
than Herodotus his Mason, who having inviolably, during the time of his Life,
kept the Secret of the Treasure of the King of Egypt his Master, at his Death
discovered it to his Children. I have taken notice of several in my time, who,
convinced by their Consciences of unjustly detaining the Goods of another, have
endeavored to make amends by their Will, and after their Decease: but they had
as good do nothing, and delude themselves both in taking so much time in so
pressing an Affair, and also in going about to repair an Injury with so little
Demonstration of Resentment and Concern. They owe over and above something of
their own, and by how much their Payment is more strict and incommodious to
themselves, by so much is their Restitution more perfect, just, and
meritorious; for Penitency requires Penance: but they yet do worse than these,
who reserve the Declaration of a mortal Animosity against their Neighbor to
the last Gasp, having concealed it all the time of their Lives before, wherein
they declare to have little regard of their own Honor whilst they irritate the
Party offended against their Memory; and less to their Conscience, not having
the Power, even out of Respect to Death it self, to make their Malice dye with
them; but extending the Life of their Hatred even beyond their own. Unjust
Judges, who defer Judgment to a time wherein they can have no Knowledge of the
Cause! For my part, I shall take Care, if I can, that my Death discover nothing
that my Life has not first openly manifested, and publicly declared.

CHAP. VIII. Of Idleness.
AS we see some Grounds that have long lain idle, and untilled, when grown rank
and fertile by rest, to abound with, and spend their Virtue, in the Product of
innumerable sorts of Weeds, and wild Herbs, that are unprofitable, and of no
wholesome use, and that to make them perform their true Office, we are to
cultivate and prepare them for such Seeds as are proper for our Service. And as
we see Women that without the Knowledge of Men do sometimes of themselves bring
forth inanimate and formless Lumps of Flesh, but that to cause a natural and
perfect Generation they are to be husbanded with another kind of Seed; even so
it is with Wits, which if not applied to some certain Study that may fix and
restrain them, run into a thousand Extravagancies, and are eternally roving
here and there in the inextricable Labyrinth of restless Imagination.

Sicut aquae tremulum labris ubi lumen ahenis
Sole repercussum, aut radiantis imagine Lunae, Aeneid. l. 8.

Omnia per-volitat late loca, jamque sub auras
Erigitur, summique ferit laquearia tecti.
Like as the quivering Reflection
Of Fountain Waters, when the Morning Sun
Darts on the Basin, or the Moon's pale Beam
Gives Light and Color to the captive Stream,
Whips with fantastic motion round the place,
And Walls and Roof strikes with its trembling Rays.
In which wild and irregular Agitation, there is no Folly, nor idle Fancy they
do not light upon: -- velut aegri somnia, vanae
Hor. de Art Poetica.
Finguntur species --
Like sick men's Dreams, that from a troubled Brain
Phantasms create, ridiculous and vain.


The Soul that has no established Limit to circumscribe it, loses it self, as
the Epigrammatist says, Martial. lib. 7. Epig. 72.
Quisquis ubique habitat, maxim nusquam habitat.
He that lives every where, does no where live.


When I lately retired my self to my own House, with a Resolution, as much as
possibly I could, to avoid all manner of Concern in Affairs, and to spend in
privacy and repose the little remainder of time I have to Live: I fancied I
could not more oblige my mind than to suffer it at full leisure to entertain
and divert it self, which I also now hoped it might the better be entrusted to
do, as being by Time and Observation become more settled and mature; but I
find, -- variam semper dant otia mentem. Lucan. l. 4.

-- Even in the most retired Estate
Leisure it self does various Thoughts create.
that, quite contrary, it is like a Horse that has broke from his Rider, who
voluntarily runs into a much more violent Career than any Horseman would put
him to, and creates me so many Chimaera's and fantastic Monsters one upon
another, without Order or Design, that, the better at leisure to contemplate
their Strangeness and Absurdity, I have begun to commit them to Writing, hoping
in time to make them ashamed of themselves.

CHAP. IX. Of Liars.
THere is not a Man living, whom it would so little become to speak of Memory
as my self, for I have none at all; and do not think that the World has again
another so treacherous as mine. My other Faculties are all very ordinary and
mean; but in this I think my self very singular, and to such a Degree of
Excellence, that (besides the Inconvenience I suffer by it, which merits
something) I deserve, methinks, to be famous for it, and to have more than a
common Reputation: though, in truth, the necessary (...) of Memory considered,
Plato had Reason when he called it a great and powerful Goddess. In my Country,
when they would decipher a Man that has no Sense, they say, such a one has no
Memory; and when I complain of mine, they seem not to believe I am in earnest,
and presently reprove me, as tho I accused my self for a Fool, not discerning
the Difference betwixt Memory and Understanding; wherein they are very wide of
my Intention, and do me Wrong: Experience rather daily showing us on the
contrary, that a strong Memory is commonly coupled with infirm Judgment: and
they do me moreover (who am so perfect in nothing as the good Friend) at the
same time a greater Wrong in this, that they make the same Words which accuse
my Infirmity, represent me for an ungrateful Person; wherein they bring my
Integrity and good Nature into Question upon the account of my Memory, and from
a natural Imperfection, unjustly derive a defect of Conscience. He has forgot,
says one, this Request, or that Promise; he no more remembers his Friends, he
has forgot to say or do, or to conceal such and such a thing for my sake. And
truly, I am apt enough to forget many things, but to neglect any thing my
Friend has given me in charge, I never do it. And it should be enough,
methinks, that I feel the Misery and Inconvenience of it, without branding me
with Malice, a Vice so much a Stranger, and so contrary to my Nature. However,
I derive these Comforts from my Infirmity; first, that it is an Evil from which
principally I have found reason to correct a worse, that would easily enough
have grown upon me, namely, Ambition; this Defect being intolerable in those
who take upon them the Negotiations of the World, an Employment of the greatest
Honor and Trust among Men: secondly, that (as several like Examples in the
Progress of Nature demonstrate to us) she has fortified me in my other
Faculties, proportionably as she has unfurnished me in this; I should otherwise
have been apt implicitly to have reposed my Wit and Judgment upon the bare
Report of other Men, without ever setting them to work upon any Inquisition
whatever, had the strange Inventions and Opinions of the Authors I have read
been ever present with me by the Benefit of Memory: thirdly, That by this Means
I am not so talkative, for the Magazine of the Memory is ever better furnished
with matter than that of the Invention; and had mine been faithful to me, I had
e're this, deaf'd all my Friends with my eternal Babble, the Subjects
themselves rowsing and stirring up the little Faculty I have of handling, and
applying them, heating and extending my Discourse. It Is a great Imperfection,
and what I have observed in several of my intimate Friends, who, as their
Memories supply them with a present and entire Review of things, derive their
Narrative from so remote a Fountain, and crowd them with so many impertinent
Circumstances, that though the Story be good in it self, they make a shift to
spoil it; and if otherwise, you are either to curse the Strength of their
Memory, or the Weakness of their Judgment: and it is a hard thing to close up a
Discourse, and to cut it short, when you are once in, and have a great deal
more to say. Neither is there any thing wherein the Force and Readiness of a
Horse is so much seen, as in a round, graceful, and sudden stop; and I see even
those who are pertinent enough, who would, but cannot stop short in their
Career: for whilst they are seeking out a handsome Period to conclude the
Sense, they talk at random, and are so perplexed, and entangled in their own
Eloquence, that they know not what they say. But above all, old Men, who yet
retain the Memory of things past, and forget how often they have told them, are
the most dangerous Company for this fault; and I have known Stories from the
Mouth of a Man of very great Quality, otherwise very pleasant in themselves,
become very troublesome, by being a hundred times repeated over and over again.
The fourth Obligation I have to this infirm Memory of mine, is, that by this
means I less remember the Injuries I have received; insomuch, that (as the
Ancient said) I should have a Protocole, a Register of Injuries, or a Prompter,
like Darius, who, that he might not forget the Offense he had received from
those of Athens, so often as he sat down to Dinner, ordered one of his Pages
three times to whoop in his Ear, Sir, remember the Athenians: and also, the
Places which I revisit, and the Books I read over again, still smile upon me
with a fresh Novelty. It is not without good Reason said, That he who has not a
good Memory should never take upon him the Trade of Lying. I know very well,
that the Grammarians distinguish betwixt an Untruth and a Lie, and say, that to
tell an Untruth is to tell a thing that is false, but that we our selves
believe to be true; and that to Lie, is to tell a thing which we know in our
Conscience to be utterly false and untrue; and it is of this last sort of Liars
only that I now speak. Now these do either wholly contrive and invent the
Untruths they utter, or so alter and disguise a true Story, that it always ends
in a Lie; and when they disguise and often alter the same Story according to
their own Fancy, it is very hard for them at one time or another to escape being
trap'd, by reason that the real Truth of the Thing having first taken
Possession of the Memory, and being there lodged, and imprinted by the way of
Knowledge and Science, it will be ever ready to present it self to the
Imagination, and to shoulder out any Falsehood of their own contriving, which
cannot there have so sure and settled Footing as the other; and the
Circumstances of the first true Knowledge evermore running in their Minds, will
be apt to make them forget those that are illegitimate, and only forged by
their own Fancy. In what they wholly invent, forasmuch as there is no contrary
Impression to justle their Invention, there seems to be less danger of
tripping; and yet even this also, by reason it is a vain Body, and without any
other Foundation than Fancy only, is very apt to escape the Memory, if they be
not careful to make themselves very perfect in their Tale. Of which I have had
very pleasant Experience, at the Expense of such as profess only to form, and
accommodate their Speech* to the Affair they have in hand, or to the Humor of
the Person with whom they have to do; for the Circumstances to which these men
stick not to enslave their Consciences; and their Faith being subject to
several Changes, their Language must accordingly vary: from whence it happens,
that of the same thing they tell one Man, that it is this, and another that it
is that, giving it several Forms and Colors; which Men, if they once come to
confer Notes, and find out the Cheat, what becomes of this fine Art? To which
may be added, that they must of Necessity very often ridiculously trap
themselves; for, what Memory can be sufficient to retain so many different
Shapes as they have forged upon one and the same Subject? I have known many in
my Time, very ambitious of the repute of this fine piece of Discretion; but
they do not see, that if there be a Reputation of being wise, there is really
no Prudence in it. In plain Truth, Lying is a hateful and an accursed Vice. We
are not Men, nor have other Tie upon one another, but our Word. If we did but
discover the Horror and ill Consequences of it, we should pursue it with Fire
and Sword, and more justly than other Crimes. I see that Parents commonly, and
with Indiscretion enough, correct their Children for little innocent Faults,
and torment them for wanton childish Tricks, that have neither Impression, nor
tend to any Consequence: whereas, in my Opinion, Lying only, and (what is of
something a lower Form) Stomach, are the Faults which are to be severely whipped
out of them, both in the Infancy and Progress of the Vices, which will
otherwise grow up and increase with them; and after a Tongue has once got the
Knack of lying, it is not to be imagined how impossible almost it is to reclaim
it. Whence it comes to pass, that we see some, who are otherwise very honest
Men, so subject to this Vice. I have an honest Lad to my Tailor, who I never
knew guilty of one Truth, no not when it had been to his Advantage. If Falsehood
had, like Truth, but one Face only, we should be upon better Terms; for we
should then take the contrary to what the Liar says for certain Truth; but the
Reverse of Truth has a hundred thousand Figures, and a Field indefinite without
Bound or Limit. The Pythagoreans make Good to be certain and finite, and Evil,
infinite and uncertain; there are a thousand ways to miss the White, there is
only one to hit it. For my own part, I have this Vice in so great horror, that
I am not sure I could prevail with my Conscience to secure my self from the
most manifest and extreme Danger, by an impudent and solemn Lie. An ancient
Father says, That a Dog we know is better Company than a Man whose Language we
do not understand. Ut externus non alieno sit hominis vice, Plin. Not. Hist.
lib. 7. cap. 1.
As a Foreigner, to one that understands not what he says, cannot be said to
supply the Place of a Man, because he can be no Company. And how much less
sociable is false Speaking than Silence? King Francis the First bragged, that he
had, by this means, non-plus'd Franciso Taverna, the Ambassador of Francisco
Sforza, Duke of Milan, a Man very famous for his Eloquence in those days. This
Gentleman had been sent to excuse his Master to his Majesty about a thing of
very great Consequence; which was this: King Francis, to maintain evermore some
Intelligence in Italy, out of which he had lately been driven, and particularly
in the Duchy of Milan, had thought it (to that end) convenient to have
evermore a Gentleman on his Behalf to lie Leiger in the Court of that Duke; an
Ambassador in Effect, but in outward Appearance no other than a private Person
who pretended to reside there upon the single Account of his own particular
Affairs; which was so carried, by reason that the Duke, much more depending
upon the Emperor, especially at a time when he was in a Treaty of a Marriage
with his Niece, Daughter to the King of Denmark, and since Dowager of Lorrain,
could not own any Friendship or Intelligence with us, but very much to his own
Prejudice. For this Commission then one Merveille a Millanois Gentleman, and a
Querry to the King, being thought very fit, he was accordingly dispatched
thither with private Letters of Credence, his Instructions of Ambassador, and
other Letters of Recommendation to the Duke about his own private Concerns, the
better to color the Business; and so long continued in that Court, that the
Emperor at last had some Incling of his real Employment there, and complained
of it to the Duke, which was the Occasion of what followed after, as we
suppose; which was, that under Pretense of a Murder by him committed, his
Trial was in two days dispatched, and his Head in the Night struck off in
Prison. Signior Francisco then being upon this Account, came to the Court of
France, and, prepared with a long counterfeit Story to excuse a thing of so
dangerous Example, (for the King had applied himself to all the Princes of
Christendom, as well as to the Duke himself, to demand Satisfaction for this
Outrage upon the Person of his Minister) had his Audience at the morning
Council; where, after he had for the Support of his Cause, in a long
premeditated Oration, laid open several plausible Justifications of the Fact,
he concluded, that the Duke his Master had never looked upon this Merveille for
other than a private Gentleman, and his own Subject, who was there only in
order to his own Business, neither had he ever lived after any other manner;
absolutely disowning that he had ever heard he was one of the King's Domestic
Servants, or that his Majesty so much as knew him, so far was he from taking
him for an Ambassador. When having made an end, and the King pressing him with
several Objections and Demands, and sifting him on all hands, gravelled him at
last, by asking, why then the Execution was performed by Night, and as is were
by Stealth? At which the poor confounded Ambassador, the more handsomely to
disingage himself, made Answer, That the Duke would have been very loath, out
of Respect to his Majesty, that such an Execution should have been performed in
the Face of the Sun. Any one may guess if he was not well schooled when he came
home, for having so grossly trip'd in the Presence of a Prince of so delicate a
Nostril as King Francis. Pope Julius the Second, having sent an Ambassador to
the King of England, to animate him against King Francis, the Ambassador
having had his Audience, and the King, before he would give a positive Answer,
insisting upon the Difficulties he found in setting on foot so great a
Preparation as would be necessary to attack so potent a King, and urging some
Reasons to that Effect, the Ambassador very unseasonably replied, that he had
also himself considered the same difficulties, and had represented as much to
the Pope. From which Saying of his, so directly opposite to the Thing
propounded, and the Business he came about, which was immediately to incite him
to War, the King first derived Argument, (which also he afterward found to be
true) that this Ambassador, in his own private Bosom, was a Friend to the
French; of which having advertised the Pope, his Estate at his Return home was
confiscate, and himself very narrowly escaped the losing of his Head.

CHAP. X. Of quick or slow Speech.
Onc ne fut a tous toutes Graces donnees.
All Graces by All-liberal Heaven
Were never yet to all men given.

AS we see in the Gift of Eloquence, wherein some have such a Facility and
Promptness, and that which we call a present Wit, so easy, that they are ever
ready upon all Occasions, and never to be surpised: and others more heavy and
slow, never venture to utter any thing but what they have long premeditated,
and taken great Care and Pains to fit and prepare. Now, as we teach young
Ladies those Sports and Exercises which are most proper to set out the Grace
and Beauty of those Parts wherein their chiefest Ornament and Perfection lie;
so in these two advantages of Eloquence, to which the Lawyers and Preachers of
our Age seem principally to pretend. If I were worthy to advise, the slow
Speaker, methinks, should be more proper for the Pulpit, and the other for the
Bar; and that because the Employment of the first does naturally allow him all
the Leisure he can desire to prepare himself, and besides, his Career is
performed in an even and unintermitted Line, without stop or interruption;
whereas, the Pleader's Business and Interest compells him to enter the Lists
upon all Occasions, and the unexpected Objections and Replies of his adverse
Party, justle him out of his Course, and put him, upon the Instant, to pump for
new and extempore Answers and Defenses. Yet, at the Interview betwixt Pope
Clement and King Francis at Marcelles, it happened quite contrary, that Monsieur
Poyett, a man bred up all his Life at the Bar, and in the highest Repute for
Eloquence, having the Charge of making the Harangue to the Pope committed to
him, and having so long meditated on it beforehand, as (as it was said) to
have brought it ready made along with him from Paris; the very day it was to
have been pronounced, the Pope, fearing something might be said that might give
Offense to the other Princes Ambassadors who were there attending on him, sent
to acquaint the King with the Argument which he conceived most suiting to the
Time and Place, but by chance quite another thing to that Monsieur de Poyett
had taken so much Pains about: so that the fine Speech he had prepared, was of
no use, and he was upon the Instant to contrive another; which finding himself
unable to do, Cardinal Bellay was constrained to perform that Office. The
Pleader's Part is, doubtless, much harder than that of the Preacher; and yet,
in my Opinion, we see more passable Lawyers than Preachers. It should seem that
the nature of Wit is, to have its operation prompt and sudden, and that of
Judgment, to have it more deliberate, and more slow: but he who remains totally
silent for want of leisure to prepare himself to speak well, and he also whom
leisure does no ways benefit to better speaking, are equally unhappy. It Is said
of Severus, that he spoke best extempore, Severus Cassius.
that he stood more obliged to Fortune, than his own Diligence, that it was an
advantage to him to be interrupted in speaking, and that his Adversaries were
afraid to nettle him, lest his Anger should redouble his Eloquence. I know
experimentally, a Disposition so impatient of a tedious and elaborate
Premeditation, that if it do not go frankly and gayly to work, can perform
nothing to purpose. We say of some Compositions, that they stink of Oil, and
smell of the Lamp, by reason of a certain rough harshness that the laborious
handling imprints upon those where great Force has been employed: but besides
this, the solicitude of doing well, and a certain striving and contending of a
mind too far strained, and over-bent upon its Undertaking, breaks, and hinders
it self, like Water, that by force of its own pressing violence and abundance,
cannot find a ready issue through the neck of a Bottle, or a narrow Sluice. In
this condition of Nature, of which I was now speaking, there is this also, that
it would not be disordered, and stimulated with such a Passion as the Fury of
Cassius; for such a Motion would be too violent and rude: it would not be
justled, but solicited, and would be roused and heated by unexpected, sudden,
and accidental Occasions. If it be left to it self, it flags and languishes,
Agitation only gives it grace and vigor. I am always worst in my own
possession, and when wholly at my own dispose, Accident has more title to any
thing that comes from me, than I; Occasion, Company, and even the very rising
and falling of my own Voice, extract more from my Fancy, than I can find when I
examine and employ it by my self; by which means, the things I say are better
than those I write, if either were to be preferred, where neither are worth any
thing. This also befalls me, that I am at a loss, when I seek, and light upon
things more by chance, than by any inquisition of my own Judgment. I perhaps
sometimes hit upon something when I write that seems queint and spritely to me,
but will appear dull and heavy to another. But let us leave this Subject. Every
one talks thus of himself according to his Talent. For my part, I am already so
lost in it, that I know not what I was about to say, and in such cases, a
stranger often finds it out before me. If I should always carry my Razor about
me, to use so often as this inconvenience befalls me, I should make clean work:
but some Occurrence or other, may at some other time, lay it as visible to me
as the Light, and make me wonder what I should stick at.

CHAP. XI. Of Prognostications.
FOr what concerns Oracles, it is certain, that a good while before the coming
of our Savior Christ, they began to lose their Credit; for we see that Cicero
is troubled to find out the cause of their decay, in these words; Cic. de
Divin. l. 2.
Cur isto modo jam Oracula Delphis non eduntur, non modo nostra aetate, sed jam
diu, ut nihil possit esse contemptius? What should be the reason that the
Oracles at Delphos are so uttered, not only in this Age of ours, but moreover a
great while ago, that nothing can be more contemptible? But as to the other
Prognostics, calculated from the Anatomy of Beasts at Sacrifices, (which Plato
does in part attribute to the natural Constitution of the Intestines of the
Beasts themselves) the scraping of Poultry, the flights of Birds: Aves quasdam
rerum augurandarum causa natus esse putamus; Cic. de Natura Deor. l. 2.
We think some sorts of Birds to be purposely created upon the account of
Augury, Claps of Thunder the winding of Rivers, Ibidem.
Multa cernunt Auruspices, multa Augures provident, multa Oraculis declarantur,
multa Vaticinationibus, multa Somniis, multa Portentis, Soothsayers and Augurs
conjecture and foresee many things, and many things are foretold in Oracles,
Prophecies, Dreams, and Portents; and others of the like Nature, upon which
Antiquity founded most of their public and private Enterprises, Christian
Religion has totally abolished. And although there yet remain amongst us some
Practices of Divination from the Stars, from Spirits, from the Shapes and
Complexions of men, for Dreams and the like, (a notable Example of the wild
curiosity of our Nature to grasp at and anticipate future things, as if we had
not enough to do to digest the present) -- cur hanc tibi rector Olympi Lucan.
l. 2*

Solicitis visum mortalibus addere curam,
Noscant venturos ut dira per omnia clades?
Sit subitum quodcunque paras, sit coeca futuri
Men's hominum fati, liceat sperare timenti.
Why, thou great Ruler of Olympus, why
Have thou to timorous Mortality
Added this Care, that men should be so wise
To know, by Omens, future Miseries?
Free us from this unnecessary care,
Unlooked for send the Ills thou do prepare;
Let humane Minds to future things be blind,
That Hope, amidst our Fears, some place may find.
(Ne utile quidem est scire quid futurum sit: Miserum est enim nihil
proficientem angi: It is not indeed convenient to know what shall come to pass;
for it is a miserable thing to be vexed and tormented to no purpose.) Yet are
they of much less Authority now than heretofore. Which makes the Example of
Francis Marquess of Saluzzo so much more remarkable; who being Lieutenant to
King Francis the First, in his Army beyond the Mountains, infinitely favored
and esteemed in our Court, and obliged to the King's Bounty for the Marquizate
it self, which had been forfeited by his Brother; and as to the rest, having no
manner of Provocation given him to do it, and even his own Affection opposing
any such Disloyalty; suffered himself to be so terrified (as it was confidently
reported) with the fine Prognostics that were spread abroad in favor of the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, and to our Disadvantage, (especially in Italy,
where these foolish Prophecies were so far believed, that great Sums of Money
were laid, and others ventured out upon return of greater when they came to
pass, so certain they made themselves of our Ruin) that having bewailed to
those of his Acquaintance who were most intimate with him, the Mischiefs that
he saw would inevitably fall upon the Crown of France, and the Friends he had
in that Court, he unhandsomely revolted, and turned to the other side; but to
his own Misfortune nevertheless, what Constellation soever governed at that
time. But he carried himself in this Affair like a Man agitated with diverse
Passions; for having both Towns and Forces in his hands, the Enemy's Army under
Antonio de Leva close by him, and we not at all suspecting his Design, it had
been in his Power to have done more than he did; for we lost no Men by this
Infidelity of his, nor any Town, but Fossan only, and that after a long Siege,
and a brave Defense. Prudens futuri temporis exitum Hor. l. 3. Ode 29.

Caliginosa nocte premit Deus,
Ridetque si mortalis ultra
Fas trepidat.
The eternal Mover has in Shades of Night
Future Events concealed from humane sight,
And laughs when he does see the timorous Ass
Tremble at what shall never come to pass.
-- ille potens sui Ib. Ode 41*

Laetusque deget, cui licet in diem
Dixisse vixi cras vel atra
Nube Polum pater occupato,
Vel sole puro.
He free and merrily may live, can say,
As the day passes I have lived to day;
And for to morrow little does take Care,
Let the World's Ruler make it foul or fair.
Id. l. 2. Ode 16.
Laetus in praesens animus quod ultra est
Oderit curare:
A mind that is cheerful in its present State,
To think of any thing beyond will hate.
And those who take this Sentence in a contrary Sense, Cic. de Divin. l. 2.
interpret it amiss. Ista sic reciprocantur, ut and si Divinatio sit, Dii sint,
and si Dii sint, sit Divinatio, These things have that mutual Relation to one
another, that if there be such a thing as Divination, there must be Deities;
and if Deities, Divination: much more wisely Pacuvius; Id. ex Pacuvio.
Nam istis qui linguam avium intelligunt,
Plusque ex alieno jecore sapiunt, quam ex suo,
Magis audiendum, quam auscultandum censeo.
Who the Birds Language understand, and who
More from Brutes Livers than their own do know,
Are rather to be heard than hearkened to.


The so celebrated Art of Divination amongst the Tuscans, took its Beginning
thus: A Labourer striking deep with his Culter into the Earth, saw the Demy-God
Indiginae dixere Tagem, qui primus Hetruscam. Edocuit gentem casus aperire
futuros. Ovid. Meta. l. 15.
Tages to ascend with an Infantine Aspect, but endued with a mature and Senile
Wisdom. Upon the Rumor of which, all the People ran to see the sight, by whom
his Words and Science, containing the Principles and means to attain to this
Art, were recorded, and kept for many Ages. A Birth suitable to its Progress! I
for my part should sooner regulate my Affairs by the chance of a Die, than by
such idle and vain Dreams. And indeed, in all Republics, a good share of the
Government has ever been referred to chance. Plato, in the civil Regiment that
he models according to his own Fancy, leaves the Decision of several things of
very great Importance wholly to it, and will, amongst other things, that such
Marriages as he reputes legitimate and good, be appointed by Lot, and
attributing so great Virtue, and adding so great a Privilege to this
accidental choice, as to ordain the Children begot in such Wedlock to be
brought up in the Country, and those begot in any other to be thrust out as
spurious and base; yet so, that if any of those Exiles, notwithstanding, should
peradventure in growing up give any early hopes of future Virtue, they were in
a Capacity of being recalled, as those also who had been retained were of being
exiled in case they gave little Expectation of themselves in their greener
Years. I see some who are mightily given to Study, pore and comment upon their
Almanacks, and produce them for Authority when any thing has fallen out pat:
though it is hardly possible, but that these well-Wishers to the Mathematics
in saying so much, must sometimes stumble upon some Truths amongst an infinite
Number of Lies. Quis est enim qui totum diem jaculans non aliquando contineet?
Adagium Cic. de Divin.
For who shoots all day at Buts that does not sometimes hit the White? I think
never the better of them for some accidental Hits. There would be more
certainty in it if there were a Rule and a Truth of always lying. Besides, no
Body records their Flim-flams and false Prognostics, forasmuch as they are
infinite and common; but if they chop upon one Truth, that carries a mighty
Report, as being rare, incredible, and prodigious. So Diogenes, surnamed the
Atheist, answered him in Samothrace, who showing him in the Temple the several
Offerings and Stories, in Painting, of those who had escaped Shipwreck, said to
him, Look you (said he) you who think the Gods have no care of humane things,
what do you say by so many Persons preserved from Death by their especial
Favor? Why, I say, (answered he) that their Pictures are not here who were
cast away, which were by much the greater number. Cicero observes, that of all
the Philosophers who have acknowledged a Deity, Xenophanes only has endeavored
to eradicate all manner of Divination: which makes it the less a Wonder, if we
have sometimes seen some of our Princes, to their own cost, rely too much upon
these Fopperies. I wish I had given any thing, that I had with my own Eyes seen
those two great Rarities, the Book of Joachim the Calabrian Abbot, which
foretold all the future Popes, their Names, and Figures; and that of the
Emperor Leo, which prophesied of all the Emperors and Patriarchs of Greece.
This I have been an Eyewitness of, that in public Confusions, men astonished
at their Fortune, have abandoned their own Reason superstitiously to seek out
in the Stars the ancient Causes and Menaces of their present mishaps, and in my
time have been so strangely successful in it, as to make men believe, that this
Study, being proper to fix and settle piercing and volatile Wits, those who
have been any thing versed in this knack of unfolding and untying Riddles, are
capable in any sort of Writing, to find out what they desire. But above all,
that which gives them the greatest Room to play in, is the obscure, ambiguous,
and fantastic Gibberish of their prophetic Canting, where their Authors
deliver nothing of clear Sense, but shroud all in Riddle, to the end that
Posterity may interpret, and apply it according to their own Fancy. Socrates
his Demon, or Familiar, might perhaps be no other but a certain Impulsion of
the Will, which obtruded it self upon him without the advice or consent of his
Judgment; and in a Soul so enlightened as his was, and so prepared by a
continual exercise of Wisdom and Virtue, it is to be supposed, those
Inclinations of his, though sudden and undigested, were ever very important,
and worthy to be followed. Every one finds in himself some Image of such
Agitations, of a prompt, vehement, and foetuitous Opinion. It Is I that am to
allow them some Authority, who attribute so little to our own Prudence, and who
also my self have had some, weak in Reason, but violent in Persuasion and
Disswasion, (which were most frequent with Socrates) by which I have suffered
my self to be carried away so foetunately, and so much to my own Advantage,
that they might have been judged to have had something in them of a Divine
Inspiration.

CHAP. XII. Of Constancy.
THE Law of Resolution and Constancy does not imply, that we ought not, as much
as in us lies, to decline, and to secure our selves from the Mischiefs and
Inconveniences that threaten us; nor consequently, that we shall not fear lest
they should surprise us: on the contrary, all decent and honest ways and means
of securing our selves from Harms, are not only permitted, but moreover
commendable, and the Business of Constancy chiefly is, bravely to stand to, and
stoutly to suffer those Inconveniences which are not otherwise possibly to be
avoided. There is no motion of Body, nor any guard in the handling of Arms, how
irregular or ungraceful soever, that we dislike or condemn, if they serve to
deceive or to defend the Blow that is made against us; insomuch, that several
very warlike Nations have made use of a retiring and flying away of Fight, as a
thing of singular Advantage, and by so doing have made their Backs more
dangerous than their Faces to their Enemies. Of which kind of Fighting, the
Turks yet retain something in their Practice of Arms to this day; and Socrates,
in Plato, laughs at Laches, who had defined Fortitude to be a standing firm in
their Ranks against the Enemy: What (says he) would it then be a reputed
Cowardice to overcome them by giving Ground? urging at the same time the
Authority of Homer, who commends Aeneas for his Skill in running away. And
whereas Laches, considering better on it, justifies his first Argument upon the
Practice of the Scythians, and in general all Cavalry whatever, he again
attacks him with the Example of the Lacedaemonian Foot, (a Nation of all other
the most obstinate in maintaining their Ground) who in all the Battle of
Platea, not being able to break into the Persian Phalanx, unbethought
themselves to disperse and retire, that by the Enemies supposing they fled,
they might break, and disunite that vast Body of Men in the Pursuit, and by
that Stratagem obtained the Victory. As for the Scythians, it is said of them*
that when Darius went his Expedition to subdue them, he sent, by an Herald,
highly to reproach their King, That he always retired before him, and declined
a Battle; to which Indathyrsez (for that was his Name) returned Answer, That it
was not for fear of him, or of any Man living, that he did so, but that it was
the way of Marching in practice with his Nation, who had neither tilled Fields,
Cities, nor Houses to defend, or to fear the Enemy should make any Advantage
of: but that if he had such a Stomach to fight, let him but come to view their
ancient place of Sepulture, and there he should have his Fill. Nevertheless, as
to what concerns Cannon Shot, when a Body of Men are drawn up in the Face of a
Train of Artillery, as the Occasion of War does often require, it is unhandsome
to quit their Post to avoid the Danger, and a foolish thing to boot, forasmuch
as by reason of its Violence and Swiftness we account it inevitable, and many a
one, by ducking, stepping aside, and such other motions of Fear, has been
sufficiently laughed at by his Companions. And yet in the Expedition that the
Emperor Charles the Fifth made into Provence, the Marquis de Guast going to
discover the City of Arles, and venturing to advance out of the Blind of a
Windmill, under favor of which he had made his Approach, was perceived by the
Seigneurs de Bonneval and the Seneschal of Agenois, who were walking upon the
Theater Aux arenes; who having showed him to the Sieur de Villiers, A Theater
where public Shows of Riding, Fencing, etc. were exhibited.
Commissary of the Artillery, he traversed a Culverine so admirable well, and
levelled it so exactly right against him, that had not the Marquis, seeing Fire
given to it, slipped aside, it was certainly concluded, the Shot had taken him
full in the Body. And in like manner, some Years before, Lorenzo de Medici,
Duke of Vrbin, and Father to the Queen Mother of France, laying Siege to
Mondolpho, a Place in the Territories of the Vicariat in Italy, seeing the
Cannoneer give Fire to a Piece that pointed directly against him, it was well
for him that he duck'd, for otherwise, the Shot, that only razed the top of his
Head, had doubtless hit him full in the Breast. To say truth, I do not think
that these Evasions are performed upon the account of Judgment; for how is any
Man living able to judge of high or low Aim on so sudden an Occasion? And it is
much more easy to believe, that Fortune favored their Apprehension, and that
it might be a means at another time, as well to make them step into the danger,
as to teach them to avoid it. For my own part, I confess, I cannot forbear
starting when the Rattle of a Harquebuze thunders in my Ears on a sudden, and
in a Place where I am not to expect it, which I have also observed in others,
braver Fellows than I; neither do the Stoics pretend, that the Soul of their
Philosopher should be proof against the first Visions and Fantasies that
surprise him; but as a natural Subject, consent that he should tremble at the
terrible noise of Thunder, or the sudden Clatter of some falling Ruin, and be
affrighted even to Paleness and Convulsion. And so in other Passions, provided
a Man's Judgment remain sound and entire, and that the Site of his Reason
suffers no Concussion nor Alteration, and that he yields no consent to his
Fright and Discomposure. To him who is not a Philosopher, a Fright is the same
in the first part of it, but quite another thing in the second; for the
Impression of Passions does not remain only superficially in him, but
penetrates further, even to the very Seat of Reason, and so, as to infect and
to corrupt it. He judges according to his Fear, and confirms his Behavior to
it. But in this Verse you may see the true State of the wise Stoic learnedly
and plainly expressed: Men's immota manet, lachrymae volvuntur inanes. Virg.
Aen. l. 2.

The Eye perhaps frail, fruitless showers rains,
Whilst yet the Mind firm and unshook remains.


The wise Peripatetick is not himself totally free from perturbations of Mind,
but he moderates them by his Wisdom.

CHAP. XIII. The Ceremony of the Interview of Princes.
THere is no Subject so frivolous, that does not merit a Place in this Rapsody.
According to the common Rule of Civility, it would be a kind of an Affront to
an Equal, and much more to a Superior, to fail of being at home, when he has
given you notice he will come to visit you. Nay, Queen Margaret of Navarr
further adds, that it would be a Rudeness in a Gentleman to go out to meet any
that is coming to see him, let him be of what condition soever; and that it is
more respective, and more civil to stay at home to receive him, if only upon
the account of missing of him by the way, and that is enough to receive him at
the door, and to wait upon him to his Chamber. For my part, who as much as I
can endeavor to reduce the Ceremonies of my House, I very often forget both
the one and the other of these vain Offices, and peradventure some one may take
Offense at it; if he do, I am sorry, but I cannot find in my heart to help it;
it is much better to offend him once, than my self every day, for it would be a
perpetual slavery; and to what end do we avoid the servile attendance of
Courts, if we bring the same, or a greater trouble, home to our own private
houses? It is also a common Rule in all Assemblies, that those of less quality
are to be first upon the Place, by reason that it is a State more due to the
better Sort to make others wait and expect them. Nevertheless, at the Interview
betwixt Pope Clement and King Francis at Marselles, the King, after he had in
his own Person taken order in the necessary Preparations for his Reception and
Entertainment, withdrew out of the Town, and gave the Pope two or three days
respite for his Entry, and wherein to repose and refresh himself before he came
to him. And in like manner, at the Assignation of the Pope and the Emperor at
Bolognia, the Emperor gave the Pope leave to come thither first, and came
himself after; for which, the reason then given was this; that at all the
Interviews of such Princes, the greater ought to be first at the appointed
Place, especially before the other, in whose Territories the Interview is
appointed to be, intimating thereby a kind of deference to the other, it
appearing proper for the less to seek out, and to apply themselves to the
greater, and not the greater to them. Not every Country only, but every City,
and so much as every Society, have their particular Forms of Civility. There
was care enough taken in my Education, and I have lived in good Company enough
to know the Formalities of our own Nation, and am able to give Lesson in it; I
love also to follow them, but not to be so servilely tied to their observation,
that my whole Life should be enslaved to Ceremony; of which there are some,
that provided a man omits them out of Discretion, and not for want of Breeding,
it will be every whit as handsome. I have seen some People rude, by being
over-civil, and troublesome in their Courtesy: though, these Excesses
excepted, the knowledge of Courtesy and good Manners is a very necessary
study. It is, like Grace and Beauty, that which begets liking and an
inclination to love one another at the first sight, and in the beginning of an
Acquaintance and Familiarity; and consequently, that which first opens the
door, and intromits us to Better our selves by the Example of others, if there
be any thing in their Society worth taking notice of.

CHAP. XIV. That Men are justly punished for being obstinate in the Defense of
a Fort that is not in reason to be defended.
Valor has its bounds, as well as other Virtues, which once transgressed, the
next step is into the Territories of Vice, so that by having too large a
Proportion of this Heroic Virtue, unless a man be very perfect in its limits,
which upon the Consines are very hard to discern, he may very easily unawares
run into Temerity, Obstinacy, and Folly. From this consideration it is, that we
have derived the Custom in times of War, to punish even with Death those who
are obstinate to defend a Place that is not tenable by the Rules of War. In
which case, if there were not some Examples made, men would be so confident
upon the hopes of Impunity, that not a Hen-roost but would resist, and stop a
Royal Army. The Constable Monsieur de Montmorency, having at the Siege of Pavie
been ordered to pass the Tesine, and to take up his Quarters in the Fauxbourg
St. Antonie, being hindered so to do by a Tower that was at the end of the
Bridge, which was so impudent as to endure a Battery, hanged every man he found
within it for their labor. And again since, accompanying the Daulphin in his
Expedition beyond the Alps, and taking the Castle of Villane by Assault, and
all within it being put to the Sword, the Governor and his Ensign only
excepted, he caused them both to be trussed up for the same reason; as also did
Captain Martin du Bellay, then Governor of Turin, the Governor of St. Bony,
in the same Country, all his People being cut in pieces at the taking of the
Place. But forasmuch as the Strength or Weakness of a Fortress is always
measured by the Estimate and Counterpoise of the Forces that attack it (for a
Man might reasonably enough despise two Culverines, that would be a Madman to
abide a Battery of thirty pieces of Cannon) where also the Greatness of the
Prince who is Master of the Field, his Reputation, and the Respect that is due
unto him, is always put into the Balance, it is dangerous to affront such an
Enemy: and besides, by compelling him to force you, you possess him with so
great an Opinion of himself and his Power, that thinking it unreasonable any
Place should dare to shut their Gates against his victorious Army, he puts all
to the Sword, where he meets with any Opposition, whilst his Fortune continues;
as is very plain in the fierce and arrogant Forms of summoning Towns, and
denouncing War, savouring so much of Barbarian Pride and Insolence in use
amongst the Oriental Princes, and which their Successors to this day do yet
retain and practice. And even in that remote Part of the World where the
Portuguese subdued the Indians, they found some States where it was an
universal and inviolable Law amongst them, that every Enemy, overcome by the
King in Person, or by his representative Lieutenant, was out of Composition
both of Ransom and Mercy. So that above all things, a Man should take heed of
falling into the hands of a Judge who is an Enemy and victorious.

CHAP. XV. Of the Punishment of Cowardice.
I Once heard of a Prince, and a great Captain, having a Narration given him as
he sat at Table of the Proceeding against Monsieur de Vervius, who was
sentenced to Death for having surrendered Bullen to the English, openly
maintained, that a Soldier could not justly be put to Death for his want of
Courage. And, in truth, a Man should make a great Difference betwixt Faults
that merely proceed from Infirmity, and those that are visibly the Effects of
Treachery and Malice: for in the last they will fully act against the Rules of
Reason, that Nature has imprinted in us; whereas in the former it seems as if
we might produce the same Nature, who left us in such a state of Imperfection,
and defect of Courage for our justification. Insomuch, that many have thought
we are not justly questionable for any thing but what we commit against the
Light of our own Conscience. And it is partly upon this Rule, that those ground
their Opinion, who disapprove of Capital and Sanguinary Punishments inflicted
upon Heretics and Miscreants; and theirs also, who hold that an Advocate or a
Judge are not accountable for having ignorantly failed in their Administration.
But as to Cowardice, it is most certain, that the most usual way of chastising
that is by Ignominy and Disgrace; and it is supposed that this Practice was
first brought into use by the Legislator Cherondas; and that before his time
the Laws of Greece punished those with Death who fled from a Battle; whereas he
ordained only that they should be three days exposed in the public Place
dressed in Women's Attire, hoping yet for some Service from them, having awaked
their Courage by this open Shame; Suffundere malis hominis sanguinem quam
effundere, choosing rather to bring the Blood into their Cheeks than to let it
out of their Bodies. It appears also, that the Roman Laws did anciently punish
those with Death who had run away: for Ammianus Marcellinus says, that the
Emperor Julian commanded ten of his Soldiers, who had turned their Backs in
an Encounter against the Parthians, to be first degraded, and afterward put to
death, according (says he) to the ancient Laws, and yet elsewhere, for the
like Offense, he only condemns others to remain amongst the Prisoners under the
Baggage Ensign. The punishment the People of Rome inflicted upon those who fled
from the Battle of Cannae, and those who run away with Cneius Fulvius, at his
Defeat, did not extend to death. And yet methinks Men should consider what they
do in such Cases, lest disgrace should make such Delinquents desperate, and not
only faint Friends, but implacable and mortal Enemies. Of late memory, the
Seigneur de Franget, Lieutenant to the Marshall de Chattilion's Company,
having by the Marshall de Chabanes been put in Governor of Fontarabie, in the
Place of Monsieur de Lude, and having surrendered it to the Spaniard, he was
for that condemned to be degraded from all Nobility, and both himself and his
Posterity declared ignoble, taxable, and for ever incapable of bearing Arms;
which severe Sentence was afterward accordingly executed at Lions: and since
that, all the Gentlemen who were in Guise when Count Nassau entered into it
underwent the same Punishment, as several others have done since for the like
Offense. Notwithstanding, in case of such a manifest Ignorance or Cowardice as
exceeds all other ordinary Example, it is but reason to take it for a sufficient
Proof of Treachery and Malice, and for such it ought to be censured and
punished.

CHAP. XVI. A Proceeding of some Ambassadors.
I Observe in all my Travels this Custom, ever to learn something from the
Information of those with whom I confer (which is the best School of all other)
and to put my Company upon those Subjects they are the best able to speak of:
Basti al nocchiero ragionar de venti,
Al bifolco de j Torj, Ariosto. Navita de ventis, de tauris narrat aratra,
Ememorat miles vulnera, pastor oves propert*
and le sue Piaghe
Contj'l guerrier, conti'l Pastor glj armenti.
The Seamen best can reason of the Winds,
Of Oxen none so well as laboring Hinds;
The huffing Soldier best of Wounds and Knocks,
And gentler Shepherds of their harmless Flocks.
For it often falls out, that, on the contrary, every one will rather choose to
be prating of another Man's Province than his own, thinking it so much new
Reputation acquired; witness the Jeer Archidamus put upon Pariander, That he
had quitted the Glory of being an excellent Physician to gain the Repute of a
very bad Poet. And do but observe how large and ample Caesar is to make us
understand his Invention of building Bridges, and contriving Engines of War,
and how succinct and reserved in Comparison, where he speaks of the Offices of
his Profession, his own Valor, and military Conduct. His Exploits sufficiently
prove him a great Captain, and that he knew well enough; but he would be
thought a good Engineer to boot; a quality something rare, and not much to be
expected in him. The elder Dionysius was a very great Captain, as it befitted
his Fortune he should be; but he took very great Pains to get a particular
Reputation by Poetry, and yet he was never cut out for a Poet. A Gentleman of
the long Robe being not long since brought to see a Study furnished with all
sorts of Books, both of his own and all other Faculties, took no occasion at
all to entertain himself with any of them, but fell very rudely and
impertinently to descant upon a Barricado placed before the Study-door, a thing
that a hundred Captains and common Soldiers see every day without taking any
notice or offense.

Optat ephippia bos piger, optat arare caballus.
The lazy Ox would Saddle have and Bit,
The Steed a Yoke, neither for either fit.
By this course a Man shall never improve himself, nor arrive at any Perfection
in any thing. He must therefore make it his Business, always to put the
Architect, the Painter, the Statuary, as also every Mechanic Artizan, upon
discourse of their own Capacities. And to this purpose, in reading Histories,
which is every Body's Subject, I use to consider what kind of Men are the
Authors; which, if Persons that profess nothing but mere Learning, I, in and
from them principally observe and learn the Style and Language; if Physicians,
I upon that account the rather incline to credit what they report of the
Temperature of the Air, of the Health and Complexions of Princes, of Wounds,
and Diseases; if Lawyers, we are from them to take notice of the Controversies
of Right and Title, the Establishment of Laws and Civil Government, and the
like; if Divines, the Affairs of the Church, Ecclesiastical Censures, Marriages
and Dispensations; if Courtiers, Manners and Ceremonies; if Soldiers, the
things that properly belong to their Trade, and principally the Accounts of
such Actions and Enterprises wherein they were personally engaged; and if
Ambassadors, we are to observe their Negotiations, Intelligences, and
Practices, and the Manner how they are to be carried on. And this is the reason
why (which perhaps I should have lightly passed over in another) I dwelt upon
and maturely considered one Passage in the History writ by Monsieur de Langey
(a Man of very great Judgment in things of that nature) which was, after having
given a Narrative of the fine Oration Charles the Fifth had made in the
Consistory at Rome, and in the Presence of the Bishop of Mascon and Monsieur de
Velley our Ambassadors there, wherein he had mixed several tart and injurious
Expressions to the Dishonor of our Nation; and amongst the rest, That if his
Captains and Soldiers were not Men of another kind of Fidelity, Resolution,
and sufficiency in the Knowledge of Arms, than those of the King, he would
immediately go with a Rope about his Neck and sue to him for Mercy, (and it
should seem the Emperor had really this, or a very little better Opinion of
our military Men, for he afterward, twice or thrice in his Life, said the very
same thing) as also, that he challenged the King to fight him in his Shirt with
Rapier and Poigniard in a Boat: the said Sieur de Langey pursuing his History,
adds, that the forenam'd Ambassadors, sending a Dispatch to the King of these
things, concealed the greatest part, and particularly the two last Passages. At
which I could not but wonder, that it should be in the Power of an Ambassador
to dispense with any thing which he ought to signify to his Master, especially
of so great Importance as this, coming from the Mouth of such a Person, and
spoke in so great an Assembly; and should rather conceive it had been the
Servant's Duty faithfully to have represented to him the whole and naked Truth
as it past, to the end, that the Liberty of disposing, judging, and concluding,
might absolutely have remained in him: for either to conceal, or to disguise
the Truth for fear he should take it otherwise than he ought to do, and lest it
should prompt him to some extravagant Resolution, and in the mean time to leave
him ignorant of his Affairs, should seem, methinks, rather to belong to him who
is to give the Law, than to him who is only to receive it; to him who is in
supreme Command, and best can judge of his own Interests, and not to him who
ought to look upon himself as inferior in Authority, so also in Prudence and
good Counsel: but let it be how it will, I for my Part would be loath to be so
served in my little Concerns. We do so willingly slip the Collar of Command
upon any Pretense whatever, and are so ready to usurp upon Dominion, and every
one does so naturally aspire to Liberty and Power, that no Utility whatever
derived from the Wit or Valor of those he does employ, ought to be so dear to
a Superior, as a downright and sincere Obedience. To obey more upon the
Account of Understanding than of Subjection, is to corrupt the Office, and to
subvert the Power of Command; insomuch that P. Crassus, the same whom the
Romans reputed five times happy, at the time when he was Consul in Asia, having
sent to a Greek Engineer to cause the greater of two Masts of Ships that he had
taken notice of at Athens, to be brought to him, to be employed about some
Engine of Battery he had a design to make; the other, presuming upon his own
Science, and sufficiency in those Affairs, thought fit to do otherwise than
directed, and to bring the less; which also, according to the Rules of Art, was
really more proper for the use to which it was designed: but Crassus, though he
gave ear to his Reasons with great Patience, would not however take them, how
sound or convincing soever, for current Pay, but yet remained so highly
offended at his Disobedience, that he caused him to be sufficiently whipped for
his Pains, valuing the Interest of Discipline much more than of the thing.
Notwithstanding, we may on the other side consider, that so precise and
implicit an Obedience as this, is only due to positive and limited Commands.
The Employment of an Ambassador is never so confined; several things in the
management of Affairs, and in the various and unforeseen Occurrences and
Accidents that may fall out in the Management of a Negotiation of this nature,
being wholly referred to the absolute Sovereignty of their own Conduct: neither
do they simply execute only, but also to their own Discretion and Wisdom form
and model their Master's Pleasure; and I have in my time known Men of Command
who have been checked for having rather obeyed the express Words of the King's
Letters, than the necessity of the Affairs they had in hand. Men of
Understanding do yet to this day condemn the Custom of the Kings of Persia, to
give their Lieutenants and Agents so little Rein, that upon the least arising
Difficulties they must evermore have Recourse to their further Commands; this
delay in so vast an extent of Dominion having often very much prejudiced their
Affairs. And Crassus, writing to a man whose Profession it was best to
understand those things, and pre-acquainting him to what use this Mast was
designed, did he not seem to consult his Advice, and in a manner invite him to
interpose his better Judgment?

CHAP. XVII. Of Fear.
Obstupui, Virg. Aen. l. 2.
steteruntque comae and vox faucibus haesit.
I was amazed, struck Speechless, and my Hair
On end upon my Head did wildly stare.

I Am not so good a Naturalist as to discern by what secret Springs Fear has
its motion in us; but I am wise enough to know, that it is a strong Passion,
and such a one, that the Physicians say there is no other whatever that sooner
disthrones our Judgment from its proper Seat; which is so true, that I my self
have seen very many become frantic thorough Fear; and even in those of the
best settled Temper, it is most certain, that it begets a terrible Astonishment
and Confusion during the Fit. I omit the Vulgar sort, to whom it one while
represents their Great-Grandsires, risen out of their Graves in their Shrowds,
another while Hob-Goblins, Specters, and Chimaera's: but even amongst Soldiers
(a sort of men over whom, of all others, it ought to have the least Power) how
often has it converted Flocks of Sheep into armed Squadrons, Reeds and
Bull-rushes into Pikes and Lances, Friends into Enemies, and the French White
into the Red Crosses of Spain! When Monsieur de Bourbon took the City of Rome,
an Ensign who was upon the Guard at the Bourg St. Pierre, was seized with such
a Fright upon the first Alarm, that he threw himself out at a Breach with his
Colors upon his Shoulder, and ran directly upon the Enemy, thinking he had
retreated toward the inward Defenses of the City, and with much ado, seeing
Monsieur de Bourbon's People, who thought it had been a Sally upon them, draw
up to receive him, at last came to himself, and saw his Error; and then facing
about, he retreated full speed thorough the same Breach by which he had gone
out; but not till he had first blindly advanced above three hundred Paces into
the open Field. It did not however fall out so well with Captain Julius his
Ensign at the time when St. Paul was taken from us by the Count de Bures and
Monsieur du Reu, for he, being so astonished with Fear, as to throw himself and
his Fellows out at a Skyt-gate, was immediately cut to pieces by the Enemy; and
in the same Siege it was a very memorable Fear, that so seized, contracted, and
froze up the Heart of a young Gentleman, that he sunk down stone dead in the
Breach, without any manner of Wound or Hunt at all. The like Madness does
sometimes push on a whole Multitude; for in one of the Encounters that
Germanicus had with the Germans, two great Parties were so amazed with Fear,
that they ran two opposite ways, the one and the other to the same place, from
which either of them had fled before. Sometimes it adds Wings to the Heels, as
in the two first, and sometimes nails them to the Ground, and fetters them from
moving; as we read of the Emperor Theophilus, who, in a Battle he lost against
the Agarens, was so astonished and stupefied, that he had no Power to fly; adeo
pavor etiam auxilia formidat, Quint. Curt. l. 3.
so much does Fear dread even the means of Safety; till such time as Manuel,
one of the principal Commanders of his Army, having jogged and shak'd him so as
to rouse him out of his Trance, said to him, Sir, if you will not follow me, I
will kill you: for it is better you should lose your Life, than, by being
taken, to lose your Empire. But Fear does then manifest its utmost Power and
Effect, when it throws us upon a valiant Despair, having before deprived us of
all sense both of Duty and Honor. In the first pitched Battle the Romans lost
against Hannibal, under the Consul Sempronius, a Body of ten thousand Foot,
that had taken a Fright, seeing no other Escape for their Cowardice, went, and
threw themselves headlong upon the great Battalion of the Enemies, which also
with wonderful force and fury they charged thorough and thorough, and routed
with a very great slaughter of the Carthaginians, by that means purchasing an
ignominious flight at the same price they might have done a glorious Victory.
The thing in the World I am most afraid of is Fear, and with good reason, that
Passion alone, in the trouble of it, exceeding all other Accidents. What
Affliction could be greater or more just than that of Pompey's Followers and
Friends, who, in his Ship, were Spectators of that horrid and inhumane murder?
Yet so it was, that the Fear of the Egyptian Vessels they saw coming to board
them, possessed them with so great a Fear, that it is observed they thought of
nothing, but calling upon the Mariners to make haste, and by force of Oars to
escape away, till being arrived at Tire, and delivered from the apprehension of
further danger, they then had leisure to turn their thoughts to the loss of
their Captain, and to give vent to those tears and lamentations that the other
more prevalent Passion had till then suspended.

Tum pavor sapientiam omnem mihi ex animo expectorat.
My Mind with great and sudden fear oppressed,
Was, for the time, of Judgment dispossessed.
Such as have been well banged in some Skirmish, may yet, all wounded and
bloody as they are, be brought on again the next day to charge: but such as
have once conceived a good sound Fear of the Enemy, will never be made so much
as to look him in the Face. Such as are in immediate Fear of losing their
Estates, of Banishment, or of Slavery, live in perpetual Anguish, and lose all
Appetite and Repose; whereas such as are actually poor, Slaves and Exiles,
oft-times live as merrily as Men in a better Condition: and so many People,
who, impatient of the perpetual Alarms of Fear, have hanged and drowned
themselves, give us sufficiently to understand, that it is more importunate and
insupportable than Death it self. The Greeks acknowledge another kind of Fear
exceeding any we have spoke of yet, a Passion that surprises us without any
visible Cause, by an impulse from Heaven; so that whole Armies and Nations have
been struck with it. Such a one was that, which brought so wonderful a
Desolation upon Carthage, where nothing was to be heard but Voices, and
Outcries of Fear, where the Inhabitants were seen to sally out of their Houses
as to an Alarm, and there to charge, wound, and kill one another, as if they
had been Enemies come to surprise their City. All things were in strange
Disorder and Fury; till with Prayers and Sacrifices they had appeased their
Gods: and this is that they call a Punick Terror.

CHAP. XVIII. That Men are not to judge of our Happiness till after Death.
-- scilicet ultima semper
Ovid. Met. l. 3.
Expectanda dies homini est, divique beatus,
Ante obitum nemo supremaque funera debet.
Men's last days still to be expected are,
E're we of them our Judgments do declare;
Nor cannot of any one be rightly said,
That he is happy, till he first be dead.

EVery one is acquainted with the Story of King Craesus to this purpose, who
being taken Prisoner by Cyrus, and by him condemned to dye, as he was going to
Execution, cried out, O Solon, Solon! which being presently reported to Cyrus,
and he sending to inquire of him what it meant, Croesus gave him to understand,
that he now found the Advertisement Solon had formerly given him true to his
Cost, which was, That men, however Fortune may smile upon them, could never be
said to be happy, till they had been seen to pass over the last day of their
Lives, by reason of the uncertainty and mutability of Humane things, which upon
very light and trivial occasions, are subject to be totally changed into a
quite contrary condition. And therefore it was, that Agesilaus made answer to
one that was saying, what a happy young man the King of Persia was, to come so
young to so mighty a Kingdom; It Is true, (said he) but neither was Priam
unhappy at his years. In a short time, of Kings of Macedon, Successors to that
mighty Alexander, were made Joyners and Scriveners at Rome, of a Tyrant of
Sicily, a Pedant at Corinth, of a Conqueror of one half of the World, and
General of so many Armies, a miserable Suppliant to the rascally Officers of a
King of Egypt. So much the prolongation of five or six Months of Life cost the
Great and Noble Pompey; and no longer since than our Fathers days, Ludovico
Forza, the tenth Duke of Millan, whom all Italy had so long truckled under, was
seen to dye a wretched Prisoner at Loches, but not till he had lived ten Years
in Captivity, which was the worst part of his Fortune. The fairest of all
Queens, Mary, Qu. of Scots.
Widow to the greatest King in Europe, did she not come to dye by the hand of
an Executioner? Unworthy and barbarous Cruelty! and a thousand more Examples
there are of the same kind; for, it seems, that as Storms and Tempests have a
Malice to the proud, and overtow'ring heights of our lofty Buildings, there are
also Spirits above that are envious of the Grandeurs here below.

Lucret. l. 5.
Vsque adeo res humanas vis abdita quaedam
Obterit, and pulcros Fasces, saevasque secures
Proculcare ac ludibrio sibi habere videtur.
By which it does appear, a Power unseen
Rome's awful Fasces, and her Axes keen
Spurns under foot, and plainly does despise,
Of humane Power the vain Formalities.
And it should seem also that Fortune sometimes lies in wait to surprise the
last Hour of our Lives, to show the Power she has in a Moment to overthrow what
she was so many Years in building, making us cry out with Laberius, Macrob. l.
2. c. 2.
Nimirum hac die una plus vixi, mihi quam vivendum fuit, I have lived longer by
this one day than I ought to have done. And in this Sense, this good Advice of
Solon may reasonably be taken; but he being a Philosopher, with which sort of
Men the Favors and Disgraces of Fortune stand for nothing, either to the
making a Man happy or unhappy, and with whom Grandeurs and Powers, Accidents of
Quality, are upon the Matter indifferent: I am apt to think that he had some
further Aim, and that his meaning was, that the very Felicity of Life it self,
which depends upon the Tranquillity and Contentment of a well-descended Spirit,
and the Resolution and Assurance of a well-ordered Soul, ought never to be
attributed to any Man, till he has first been seen to play the last, and
doubtless the hardest act of his Part, because there may be Disguise and
Dissimulation in all the rest, where these fine Philosophical Discourses are
only put on; and where Accidents do not touch us to the Quick, they give us
leisure to maintain the same sober Gravity; but in this last Scene of Death,
there is no more counterfeiting, we must speak plain, and must discover what
there is of pure and clean in the bottom. Nam verae voces tum demum pectore ab
imo Lucret. l. 3.

Ejiciuntur, and eripitur persona, manet res.
Then then at last Truth issues from the Heart,
The Vizor's gone, we act our own true part.
Wherefore, at this last all the other Actions of our Life ought to be tried
and sifted. It Is the Master-day, it is the day that is judge of all the rest,
It Is the Day (says one of the Ancients) that ought to be judge of all my
foregoing Years. To Death do I refer the Essay of the Fruit of all my Studies.
We shall then see whether my Discourses came only from my Mouth, or from my
Heart. I have seen many by their Death give a good or an ill Repute to their
whole Life. Scipio, the Father-in-law of Pompey the great, in dying well, wiped
away the ill Opinion, that till then every one had conceived of him.
Epaminondas being asked which of the three he had in greatest esteem, Chabrias,
Iphicrates, or himself; You must first see us die (said he) before that
Question can be resolved: and in truth, he would infinitely wrong that great
Man, who would weigh him without the Honor and Grandeur of his End. God
Almighty has ordered all things as it has best pleased him: But I have in my
time seen three of the most execrable Persons that ever I knew in all manner of
abominable living, and the most infamous to boot, who all dyed a very regular
Death, and in all Circumstances composed even to Perfection. There are brave,
and fortunate Deaths. I have seen Death cut the Thread of the Progress of a
prodigious Advancement, and in the height and Flower of its increase of a
certain Person, with so glorious an end, that in my Opinion his Ambitious and
generous Designs had nothing in them so high and great as their Interruption;
and he arrived, without completing his course, at the Place to which his
Ambition pretended, with greater Glory, than he could himself either hope or
desire, and anticipated by his Fall the Name and Power to which he aspired, by
perfecting his Career. In the Judgment I make of another man's Life, I always
observe how he carried himself at his Death; and the principal Concern I have
for my own, is, that I may dye handsomely, that is, patiently, and without noise.

CHAP. XIX. That to study Philosophy, is to learn to dye.
CIcero says, That to study Philosophy is nothing but to prepare a Man's self
to dye. The reason of which is, because Study and Contemplation do in some sort
withdraw from us, and deprive us of our Souls, and employ it separately from
the Body, which is a kind of Learning to dye, and a resemblance of Death; or
else because all the Wisdom and reasoning in the World, does in the end
conclude in this Point, to teach us not to fear to dye. And to say the Truth,
either our Reason does grossly abuse us, or it ought to have no other Aim but
our Contentment only, nor to endeavor any thing but in Sum to make us live
well, and, as the Holy Scripture says, at our Ease. All the Opinions of the
World agree in this, That Pleasure is our end, though we make use of diverse
means to attain unto it, they would otherwise be rejected at the first motion;
for who would give Ear to him that should propose Affliction and Misery for his
end? The Controversies and Disputes of the Philosophical Sects upon this Point
are merely verbal, Transcurramus solertissimas nugas, Seneca Epist.
Let us skip over those learned and subtle Fooleries and Trifles; there is more
in them of Opposition and Obstinacy than is consistent with so sacred a
Profession: but what kind of Person soever Man takes upon him to personate, he
over-mixes his own part with it; and let the Philosophers all say what they
will, the main thing at which we all aim, even in Virtue it self, is Pleasure.
It pleases me to rattle in their Ears this Word, which they so nauseate to
hear; and if it signify some supreme Pleasure and excessive Delight, it is
more due to the Assistance of Virtue, than to any other Assistance whatever.
This Delight, for being more gay, more sinewy, more robust, and more manly, is
only to be more seriously voluptuous, and we ought to give it the Name of
Pleasure, as that which is more benign, gentle, and natural, and not that of
Vigor, from which we have derived it: the other more mean and sensual part of
Pleasure, if it could deserve this fair Name, it ought to be upon the Account
of Concurrence, and not of Privilege; I find it less exempt from Traverses and
Inconveniences, than Virtue it self; and besides that, the Enjoyment is more
momentary, fluid, and frail, it has its Watchings, Fasts, and Labors, even to
Sweat and Blood; and moreover, has particular to it self so many several sorts
of sharp and wounding Passions, and so stupid a Saciety attending it, as are
equal to the severest Penance. And we mistake to think that Difficulties should
serve it for a Spur, and a seasoning to its Sweetness, as in Nature one
Contrary is quickened by another, and to say when we come to Virtue, that like
Consequences and Difficulties overwhelm and render it austere and inaccessible;
whereas, much more aptly than in Voluptuousness, they enable, sharpen, and
heighten the perfect and divine Pleasure they procure us. He renders himself
unworthy of it who will counterpoise his Expense with the Fruit, and does
neither understand the Blessing, nor how to use it. Those who Preach to us,
that the quest of it is craggy, difficult, and painful, but the Fruition
pleasant and grateful, what do they mean by that, but to tell us that it is
always unpleasing? The most perfect have been forced to content themselves to
aspire unto it, and to approach it only without ever possessing it. But they
are deceived, and do not take notice, that of all the Pleasures we know, the
very Pursuit is pleasant. The Attempt ever relishes of the quality of the thing
to which it is directed, for it is a good part of, and consubstantial with the
Effect. The Felicity and Beatitude that glitters in Virtue, shines throughout
all her Apartments and Avenues, even to the first Entry, and utmost Pale and
Limits. Now of all the Benefits that Virtue confers upon us, the Contempt of
Death is one of the greatest, as the means that accommodates Humane Life with a
soft and easy Tranquillity, and gives us a pure and pleasant Taste of Living,
without which all other pleasure would be extinct; which is the Reason why all
the Rules by which we are to live center and concur in this one Article. And
although they all in like manner with one consent endeavor to teach us also to
despise Grief, Poverty, and the other Accidents to which humane Life, by its
own Nature and Constitution, is subjected, it is not nevertheless with the same
Importunity, as well by reason the forenamed Accidents are not of so great
necessity, the greater part of Mankind passing over their whole Lives without
ever knowing what Poverty is, and some without Sorrow or Sickness; as
Xenophilus the Musician, who lived a hundred and six Years in a perfect and
continual Health; as also because, at the worst, Death can, whenever we please,
cut short, and put an end to all these Inconveniences. But as to Death, it is
inevitable. Omnes eodem cogimur, omnium
Versatur Vrna, serius, Horat. l. 2. Ode 3.
ocius
Sors exitura, and nos in aeternum
exilium impositura Cymbae.
We all are to one Voyage bound; by turn,
Sooner or later, all must to the Urn:
When Charon calls aboard we must not stay,
But to eternal Exile sail away.
And consequently, if it frights us, it is a perpetual Torment, and for which
there is no Consolation nor Redress. There is no way by which we can possibly
avoid it, it commands all Points of the Compass; we may continually turn our
Heads this way and that, and pry about as in a suspected Country, quae quasi
saxum Tantalo semper impendet, Cicero de finib. l. 1.
but it, like Tantalus his Stone, hangs over us. Our Courts of Justice often
send back condemned Criminals to be executed upon the Place where the Fact was
committed; but carry them to all fine Houses by the way, and prepare for them
the best Entertainment you can, -- non Sicula Dapes Hor. l. 3. Ode 1.

Dulcem elaborabunt saporem:
Non Avium, Citharaeque cantus
Somnum reducent.
-- the tastes of such as these
Choicest Sicilian Dainties cannot please,
Nor yet of Birds, or Harps the Harmonies
Once charm asleep, or close their watchful Eyes.
do you think they could relish it? and that the fatal end of their Journey
being continually before their Eyes, would not alter and deprave their Pallat
from tasting these Regalio's?

Claud.
Audit iter numeratque dies spatioque viarum
Metitur vitam, torquetur peste futura.
He time and space computes, by length of ways
Sums up the number of his few sad days,
And his sad thoughts, full of his fatal doom,
Can dream of nothing but the blow to come.
The end of our Race is Death, it is the necessary Object of our aim, which if
it fright us, how is it possible to advance a step without a Fit of an Ague?
the Remedy the Vulgar use, is not to think on it: but from what brutish
stupidity can they derive so gross a blindness? They must bridle the Ass by the
Tail. Lucret. l. 4.
Qui capite ipse suo instituit vestigia retro.
He who the order of his steps has laid
To light and natural motion retrograde,
it is no wonder if he be often trap'd in the Pitfall. They use to fright People
with the very mention of Death, and many cross themselves, as it were the name
of the Devil; and because the making a man's Will is in reference to dying, not
a man will be persuaded to take a Pen in hand to that purpose, till the
Physician has passed sentence upon him, and totally given him over, and then
betwixt Grief and Terror, God knows in how fit a condition of Understanding he
is to do it. The Romans, by reason that this poor syllable Death was observed
to be so harsh to the Ears of the People, and the sound so ominous; had found
out a way to soften and spin it out by a Periphrasis, and instead of
pronouncing bluntly, such a one is dead, to say, such a one has lived, or such
a one has ceased to live; for, provided there was any mention of Life in the
case, though past, it carried yet some sound of Consolation. And from them it
is that we have borrowed our expression of the late Monsieur such and such a
one. Peradventure (as the Saying is) the term we have lived is worth our money.
The Author's birth
I was born betwixt eleven and twelve a clock in the Forenoon the last of
February 1533. according to our Computation, beginning the Year the first of
January, and it is now but just fifteen days since I was complete nine and
thirty years old; I make account to live at least as many more. In the mean
time, to trouble a man's self with the thought of a thing so far off, is a
senseless Foolery. But what? Young and Old dye after the very same manner, and
no one departs out of Life otherwise, than if he had but just before entered
into it; neither is any so old and decrepid, who has heard of Methusalem, that
does not think he has yet twenty years of Constitution good at least. Fool that
thou art, who has assured unto thee the term of Life? Thou depend'st upon
Physicians Tales and Stories, but rather consult Experience, and the fragility
of Humane Nature: for, according to the common course of things, it is long
since that thou liv'dst by extraordinary Favor. Thou have already outlived
the ordinary term of Life, and that it is so, reckon up thy Acquaintance, how
many more have died before they arrived at thy Age, than have attained unto it,
and of those who have ennobled their Lives by their Renown, take but an
Account, and I dare lay a Wager, thou will find more who have dyed before than
after five and thirty years of age. It is full both of Reason and Piety too, to
take Example by the Humanity of Jesus Christ himself, who ended his Life at
three and thirty years. The greatest man, that ever was no more than a man,
Alexander, died also at the same Age. How many several ways has Death to
surprise us? Hor. l. 2. Od. 13.
Quid quisque vitet, nunquam homini satis
Cautum est in horas.
Man fain would shun, but it is not in his Power
TO evade the dangers of each threatening hour.
To omit Fevers and Pleurisies, who would ever have imagined that a Duke of
Brittany should be pressed to death in a Crowd, as that Duke was at the entry
of Pope Clement into Lions? Have we not seen one of our Henry II of France,
running against Montgomery.

2. Philip the eldest son of Lewis the Gross, the 40th King of France.


Kings killed at a Tilting, and did not one of his Ancestors dye by the justle
of a Hog? Aeschylus, being threatened with the fall of a house, was to much
purpose so circumspect to avoid that danger, when he was knocked of the head by
a Tortoise-shell falling out of an Eagles Talons in the Fields. Another was
choked with a Grape-stone; an Emperor killed with the scratch of a Comb in
combing his Head. Aemilius Lepidus, with a stumble at his own threshold, and
Anfidius with a justle against the door, as he entered the Council Chamber. And
betwixt the very Thighs of Women, Cornelius Gallus the Praetor, Tigillinus
Captain of the Watch at Rome, Ludovico Son of Guido de Gonzaga Marquis of
Mantua, and (of worse example) Spensippus, a Platonic Philosopher, and one of
our Popes. The poor Judge Bebius, whilst he reprieved a Criminal for eight
days only, was himself condemned to death, and his own day of Life was
expired. Whilst Caius Julius the Physician was anointing the Eyes of a Patient,
Death closed his own; and, if I may bring in an Example of my own Blood; A
Brother of mine, Captain St. Martin, a young man, of three and twenty years
old, who had already given sufficient testimony of his Valor, playing a match
at Tennis, received a blow of a Ball a little above his right Ear, which,
though it was without any manner of sign of Wound, or depression of the Skull,
and though he took no great notice of it, nor so much as sat down to repose
himself, he nevertheless died within five or six hours after, of an Apoplexy
occasioned by that blow. Which so frequent and common Examples passing every
day before our Eyes, how is it possible a man should disingage himself from the
thought of Death; or avoid fancying that it has us every moment by the Collar?
What matter is it, you will say, which way it comes to pass, provided a man
does not terrify himself with the expectation? For my part, I am of this mind,
that if a man could by any means avoid it, though by creeping under a Calves
skin, I am one that should not be ashamed of the shift: all I aim at is, to
pass my time pleasantly, and without any great Reproach, and the Recreations
that most contribute to it, I take hold of, as to the rest, as little glorious
and exemplary as you would desire. -- praetulerim delirus inersque videri,
Horace, Epist. 2. l. 2.
Dum mea delectant mala me, vel denique fallant,
Quam sapere, and ringi.
A Fool, or Coward, let me censured be,
Whilst either Vice does please, or cozen me,
Rather, than be thought wise, and feel the smart
Of a perpetual aching, anxious Heart.
But it is folly to think of doing any thing that way. They go, they come, they
gallop and dance, and not a word of Death. All this is very fine: but withal,
when it comes either to themselves, their Wives, their Children, or Friends,
surprising them at unawares, and unprepared, then what torment, what outcries,
what madness and despair! Did you ever see any thing so subdued, so changed and
so confounded? A man must therefore make more early trial of it; and this
brutish negligence, could it possibly lodge in the Brain of any man of Sense
(which I think utterly impossible) sells us its merchandise too dear. Were it
an Enemy that could be avoided, I would then advise to borrow Arms even of
Cowardice it self to that effect: but seeing it is not, and that it will catch
you as well flying, and playing the Poltron, as standing to it like a man of
Honor.

Nempe and fugacem persequitur virum, Idem. l. 3. Ode. 2.

Nec parcit umbellis juventae
Poplitibus timidoque tergo.
No speed of foot prevents Death of his prize,
He cuts the Hamstrings of the man that flies;
Nor spares the tender Stripling's back, does start
TO outrun the distance of his mortal Dart.
And seeing that no temper of Arms is of proof to secure us, Propert. l. 3.
Eleg. 17. alias 16.
Ille licet ferro, cautus se condat, and aere
Mors tamen inclusum protrahet inde caput.
Shell thee with Steel or Brass, advised by dread,
Death from the Cask will pull the cautious Head.
let us learn bravely to stand our ground, and fight him. And to begin to
deprive him of the greatest Advantage he has over us, let us take a way quite
contrary to the common course. Let us disarm him of his Novelty and
Strangeness, let us converse, and be familiar with him, and have nothing so
frequent in our thoughts as Death; Let us upon occasions represent him in all
his most dreadful shapes to our imagination; at the stumbling of a Horse, at
the falling of a Tile, at the lest prick with a Pin, let us presently consider,
and say to our selves, Well, and what if it had been Death it self? and
thereupon let us encourage and fortify our selves. Let us evermore amidst our
jollity and Feasting, set the remembrance of our frail condition before our
Eyes, never suffering our selves to be so far transported with our Delight, but
that we have some intervals of reflecting upon, and considering how many
several ways this Jollity of ours tends to Death, and with how many dangers it
threatens it. The Egyptians were wont to do after this manner, who in the
height of their Feasting and Mirth, caused a dried Skeleton of a Man to be
brought into the Room to serve for a Memento to their Guests.

Omnem creed diem tibi diluxisse supremum, Horat. l. 1. Epist. 4.

Grata superveniet, quae non sperabitur hora.
Think every day, soon as the day is past,
Of thy Lives date, that thou have lived the last;
The next day's joyful Light thine Eyes shall see,
As unexpected, will more welcome be.
Where Death waits for us is uncertain; let us every where look for him. The
Premeditation of Death is the Premeditation of Liberty; who has learnt to dye
has forgot to serve. There is nothing of Evil in Life, for him who rightly
comprehends, that Death is no Evil: to know how to dye delivers us from all
Subjection and Constraint. Paulus Aemylius answered him whom the miserable King
of Macedon, his Prisoner, sent to entreat him that he would not lead him in his
Triumph, Let him make that Request to himself. In truth, in all things, if
Nature do not help a little, it is very hard for Art and Industry to perform
any thing to purpose. I am in my own Nature not melancholic, but thoughtful;
and there is nothing I have more continually entertained my self withal than
the Imaginations of Death, even in the gayest and most wanton time of my Age.

Catullus. Number. 69.
Jucundum cum aetas florida ver ageret.
Of florid Age in the most pleasant Spring.
In the Company of Ladies, and in the height of Mirth, some have perhaps
thought me possessed with some Jealousy, or meditating upon the Uncertainty of
some imagined Hope, whilst I was entertaining my self with the Remembrance of
some one surpised a few days before with a burning Fever of which he died,
returning from an Entertainment like this, with his Head full of idle Fancies
of Love and Jollity; as mine was then, and that for ought I knew the same
Destiny was attending me. Lucret. l. 3.
Jam fuerit, nec post unquam revocare licebit.
But now he had a Being amongst Men,
Now gone, and never to be recalled again.
Yet did not this Thought wrinkle my Forehead any more than any other. It is
impossible but we must feel a sting in such Imaginations as these at first; but
with often revolving them in a Man's Mind, and having them frequent in our
Thoughts, they at last become so familiar as to be no trouble at all:
otherwise, I for my Part should be in a perpetual Fright and Frenzy; for never
Man was so distrustful of his Life, never Man so indifferent for its Duration.
Neither Health, which I have hitherto ever enjoyed very strong and vigorous,
and very seldom interrupted, does prolong, nor Sickness contract my Hopes.
Methinks I escape every minute, and it eternally runs in my Mind, that what may
be done to morrow may be done to day. Hazards and Dangers do, in truth, little
or nothing hasten our end; and if we consider how many more remain and hang
over our Heads, besides the Accident that immediately threatens us, we shall
find that the Sound and the Sick, those that are abroad at Sea, and those that
sit by the Fire, those who are engaged in Battle, and those who sit idle at
home, are the one as near it as the other. Nemo altero fragilior est: Senec.
Ep. 91.
nemo in crastinum sui certior, No Man is more frail than another, no more
certain of the morrow. For any thing I have to do before I dye, the longest
leisure would appear too short, were it but an Hours Business I had to do. A
Friend of mine the other day turning over my Table Book, found in it a
Memorandum of something I would have done after my Decease, whereupon I told
him, as it was really true, that though I was no more than a League's distance
only from my own House, and merry and well, yet when that thing came into my
Head, I made haste to write it down there, because I was not certain to live
till I came home. As a man that am eternally brooding over my own thoughts, and
who confine them to my own particular Concerns, I am upon the matter at all
hours as well prepared as I am ever like to be, and Death, whenever he shall
come, can bring nothing along with him I did not expect long before. We should
always (as near as we can) be booted and spurred, and ready to go, and above
all things to take care at that time to have no business with any one but a
man's self: Horat. l. 2. Ode 16.
Quid brevi fortes jaculamur aevo Multa?
Why cut'st thou out such mighty Work, vain man?
Whose Life's short date's comprised in one poor span?
For we shall there find work enough to do, without any need of Addition; One
complains, more than of Death, that he is thereby prevented of a glorious
Victory; another, that he must dye before he has married his Daughter, or
settled, and provided for his Children; a third seems only troubled that he
must lose the society of his beloved Wife; a fourth, the conversation of his
Son, as the principal Concerns of his Being. For my part, I am, thanks be to
God, at this instant in such a condition, that I am ready to dislodge, whenever
it shall please him, without any manner of regret. I disengage my self
throughout from all Worldly Relations, my leave is soon taken of all but my
self. Never did any one prepare to bid adieu to the World more absolutely and
purely, and to shake hands with all manner of Interest in it, than I expect to
do. The deadest Deaths are the best. -- miser, o miser, Lucret. l. 3.
(aiunt) omnia ademit
Vna dies infesta mihi tot praemia vitae;
Wretch that I am (they cry) one fatal day
So many joys of Life has snatched away.
And the Builder, -- manent (dit il.) opera interrupta, Aeneid. l. 4.
minaeque
Murorum ingentes, aequataque machina Coelo.
Stupendous Piles (says he) neglected lie,
And Towers whose Pinacles do pierce the Sky.
A man must design nothing that will require so much time to the finishing, or
at least with no such passionate desire to see it brought to Perfection. We are
born to action. Cum moriar medium solvar and inter opus. Ovid. Amor. lib. 2.
Eleg. 10.

When Death shall come, he me will doubtless find
Doing of something that I had designed.
I would always have a man to be doing, and, as much as in him lies, to
extend, and spin out the Offices of Life; and then let Death take me planting
Cabages, but without any careful thought of him, and much less of my Garden's
not being finished. I saw one dye, who at his last gasp seemed to be concerned
at nothing so much, as that Destiny was about to cut the thread of a Chronicle
History he was then compiling, when he was gone no farther than the fifteenth
or sixteenth of our Kings. Lucret. l. 3.
Illud in his rebus non addunt, nec tibi earum
Jam desiderium rerum, superinsidet una.
They tell us not that dying we have no more
The same desires and thoughts that heretofore.
We are to discharge our selves from these vulgar and hurtful Humors and
Concerns. To this purpose it was, that men first appointed the places of
Sepulture, and Dormitories of the dead, near adjoining to the Churches, and in
the most frequent places of the City, to accustom (says Licurgus) the common
People, Women, and Children, that they should not be startled at the sight of a
dead Corse; and to the end, that the continual Objects of Bones, Graves,
Monuments, and Funeral Obsequies should put us in mind of our frail condition.
Quinetiam exhilerare viris convivia caede
Silius Italicus, l. 11.
Mos olim, and misere epulis spectacula dira
Certatum ferro, saepe and super ipsa cadentum
Pocula, respersis non parco sanguine mensis.
'Twas therefore that the Ancients at their Feasts
With tragic Objects used to treat their Guests,
Making their Fencers with their utmost spite,
Skill, Force, and Fury, in their presence fight,
Till streams of Blood of those at last must fall,
Dashed over their Tables, Dishes, Cups and all.
And as the Egyptians after their Feasts were wont to present the Company with
a great Image of Death, by one that cried out to them, Drink and be merry, for
such shall thou be when thou art dead; so it is my Custom to have Death not
only in my Imagination, but continually in my Mouth; neither is there any thing
of which I am so inquisitive, and delight to inform my self, as the manner of
men's Deaths, their Words, Looks, and Gestures; nor any places in History I am
so intent upon; and it is manifest enough, by my crowding in Examples of this
kind, that I have a particular fancy for that Subject. If I were a Writer of
Books, I would compile a Register with a Comment of the various Deaths of men,
and it could not but be useful, for who should teach men to dye, would at the
same time teach them to live. Dicearchus made one, to which he gave that Title;
but it was designed for another, and less profitable end. Peradventure some one
may object, and say, that the pain and terror of dying indeed does so
infinitely exceed all manner of imagination, that the best Fencer will be quite
out of his Play when it comes to the Push: but let them say what they will, to
premeditate is doubtless a very great Advantage; and besides, is it nothing to
come so far, at least, without any visible Disturbance or Alteration? But
moreover, Nature her self does assist and encourage us. If the Death be sudden
and violent, we have not leisure to fear; if otherwise, I find, that as I
engage further in my Disease, I naturally enter into a certain loathing, and
disdain of Life. I find I have much more ado to digest this Resolution of dying
when I am well in Health than when sick languishing of a Fever; and by how much
I have less to do with the Commodities of Life, by reason I even begin to lose
the use and Pleasure of them, by so much I look upon Death with less Terror and
Amazement; which makes me hope, that the further I remove from the first, and
the nearer I approach to the latter, I shall sooner strike a Bargain, and with
less Unwillingness exchange the one for the other. And, as I have experimented
in other Occurrences, that, as Caesar says, things often appear greater to us
at distance than near at hand, I have found, that being well, I have had
Diseases in much greater Horror than when really afflicted with them. The
Vigor wherein I now am, and the Jollity and Delight wherein I now live, make
the contrary Estate appear in so great a disproportion to my present condition,
that by imagination I magnify, and make those inconveniences twice greater
than they are, and apprehend them to be much more troublesome, than I find them
really to be, when they lie the most heavy upon me, and I hope to find Death
the same. Let us but observe in the ordinary changes and Declinations our
Constitutions daily suffer, how Nature deprives us of all sight and sense of
our bodily decay. What remains to an old man of the vigor of his Youth and
better days? Heu senibus vitae portio quanta manet? Corn. Galli. vel potius
Maximian. Eleg. 1.

Alas, to men, of youthful Heat bereft,
How small a Portion of Life is left?
Caesar, to an old weather-beaten Soldier of his Guards, who came to ask him
leave that he might kill himself, taking notice of his withered Body, and
decrepid motion, pleasantly answered, Thou fanciest then that thou art yet
alive. Should a man fall into the Aches and impotencies of Age, from a spritely
and vigorous Youth on the sudden, I do not think Humanity capable of enduring
such a change: but Nature, leading us by the hand, an easy, and as it were, an
insensible pace, step by step conducts us to that miserable condition, and by
that means makes it familiar to us, so that we perceive not, nor are sensible
of the stroke then, when our Youth dies in us, though it be really a harder
Death, than the final Dissolution of a languishing Body, which is only the
Death of old Age; forasmuch as the Fall is not so great from an uneasy Being
to none at all, as it is from a spritely and florid Being to one that is
unweildy and painful. The Body, when bowed beyond its natural spring of
Strength, has less Force either to rise with, or support a Burden; and it is
with the Soul the same, and therefore it is, that we are to raise her up firm
and erect against the Power of this Adversary: for as it is impossible she
should ever be at rest, or at Peace within her self, whilst she stands in fear
of it; so if she once can assure her self, she may boast (which is a thing as
it were above Humane Condition) that it is impossible that Disquiet, Anxiety,
or Fear, or any other Disturbance, should inhabit, or have any Place in her.
Horat. l. 3. Ode 3.
Non vultus instantis tyranni
Mente quatit solida, neque Auster
Dux inquieti turbidus Adriae,
Nec fulminantis magna Jovis manus.
A Soul well settled is not to be shook
With an incensed Tyrant's threatening Look;
Nor can loud Auster once that Heart dismay,
The ruffling Prince of stormy Adria;
Nor yet the advanced hand of mighty Jove,
Though charged with Thunder, such a Temper move.
She is then become Sovereign of all her Lusts and Passions, Mistress of
Necessity, Shame, Poverty, and all the other Injuries of Fortune. Let us
therefore, as many of us as can, get this Advantage, which is the true and
sovereign Liberty here on Earth, and that fortifies us wherewithal to defy
Violence and Injustice, and to contemn Prisons and Chains.

-- in Manicis, Hor. l. 1. Epist. 16.
and
Compedibus, saevo te sub custode tenebo.
Ipse Deus simul atque volam, me solvet: opinor,
Hoc sentit, moriar, mors ultima linea verum est.
With rugged Chains I Will load thy Hands and Feet,
And to a surly Keeper thee commit;
Why let him show his worst of Cruelty,
God will, I think, for asking, set me free:
Ay, but he thinks I Will dye; that Comfort brings,
For Death's the utmost Line of Humane things.
Our very Religion it self has no surer humane Foundation than the Contempt of
Death. The Contempt of Death a certain Foundation of Religion.
Not only the Argument of Reason invites us to it; for why should we fear to
lose a thing, which being lost, can never be missed or lamented? But also
seeing we are threatened by so many sorts of Death, is it not infinitely worse
eternally to fear them all, than once to undergo one of them? And what matter
is it when it shall happen, since it is once inevitable? To him that told
Socrates, the thirty Tyrants have sentenced thee to Death; and Nature them,
said he. What a ridiculous thing it is to trouble and afflict our selves, about
taking the only Step that is to deliver us from all Misery and Trouble? As our
Birth brought us the Birth of all things, so in our Death is the Death of all
things included. And therefore to lament and take on, that we shall not be
alive a hundred Years hence, is the same Folly as to be sorry we were not alive
a hundred Years ago. Death is the beginning of another Life. So did we weep,
and so much it cost us to enter into this, and so did we put off our former
Veil in entering into it. Nothing can be grievous that is but once, and is it
reasonable so long to fear a thing that will so soon be dispatched? Long Life,
and short, are by Death made all one; for there is no long, nor short, to
things that are no more. Aristotle tells us, that there are certain little
Beasts upon the Banks of the River Hypanis, that never live above a day: they
which dye at eight of the Clock in the Morning, dye in their Youth, and those
that dye at five in the Evening, in their extremest Age: which of us would not
laugh to see this Moment of Continuance put into the consideration of Weal or
Woe? The most, and the least of ours in comparison of Eternity, or yet to the
Duration of Mountains, Rivers, Stars, Trees, and even of some Animals, is no
less ridiculous. But Nature compells us to it; Go out of this World, says she,
as you entered into it; the same Pass you made from Death to Life, without
Passion or Fear, the same, after the same manner, repeat from Life to Death.
Your Death is a part of the Order of the Universe, it is a part of the Life of
the World.

-- inter se mortales mutua vivunt, Lucret. l. 2.

Et quasi curores vitai lampada tradunt.
Mortals amongst themselves by turns do live, Alluding to the Athenian Games,
wherein those that run a Race carried Torches in their Hands; and the Race
being done, delivered them into the Hands of those who were to run next.

And Life's bright Torch to the next Runner give.
It Is the Condition of your Creation; Death is a part of you, and whilst you
endeavor to evade it, you avoid your selves. This very Being of yours that you
now enjoy is equally divided betwixt Life and Death. The day of your Birth is
one days advance toward the Grave. Prima, quae vitam dedit, hora, carpsit.
Senec. Her. tur. chor. 3.

The Hour that gave of Life the benefit,
Did also a whole Hour shorten it.
Nascentes morimur, finisque ab origin pendet.
Manil. Ast. l. 4.
As we are born, we dye, and our Life's end
Upon our Life's beginning does depend.
All the whole time you live you purloin from Life, and live at the expense of
Life it self; the perpetual work of our whole Life is but to lay the foundation
of Death; you are in Death whilst you live, because you still are after Death,
when you are no more alive. Or if you had rather have it so, you are dead after
Life, but dying all the while you live; and Death handles the dying much more
rudely than the dead. If you have made your profit of Life, you have had enough
of it, go your way satisfied. Lucret. l. 3.
Cur non ut plenus vitae conviva recedis.
Why should thou not go like a full gorged Guest,
Sated with Life, as he is with a Feast?
If you have not known how to make the best use of it, and if it was
unprofitable to you, what need you care to lose it, to what end would you
desire longer to keep it? Ibid.
-- cur amplius addere quaeris
Rursum quod pereat male and ingratum occidat omne?
And why renew thy time, to what intent
Live over again a Life that was ill spent?
Life in it self is neither good nor evil, it is the Scene of good or evil, as
you make it; and, if you have lived a day, you have seen all, one day is equal,
and like to all other days; there is no other Light, no other other Shade,
this very Sun, this Moon, these very Stars, this very Order and Revolution of
things, is the same your Ancestors enjoyed, and that shall also entertain your
Posterity. Non alium videre patres, aliumve nepotes Aspicient. Lucret. vel
Manil.

Your Grandsires saw no other things of old,
Nor shall your Nephews other things behold.
And come the worst that can come, the distribution and variety of all the Acts
of my Comedy, is performed in a Year. If you have observed the Revolution of
the four Seasons, they comprehend, the Infancy, Youth, Virility, and old Age of
the World. The Year has played his part, and knows no other way, has no new
Farce, but must begin and repeat the same again; it will always be the same
thing.

Versamur ibidem, atque insumus usque. Lucret. l. 3.

Where still we plot, and still contrive in vain,
For in the same state still we do remain.
Atque in se sua per vestigia volvitur annus. Virg. Georg. l. 2.

By its own footstepts led, the Year does bring
Both ends together in an annual Ring.
Time is not resolved to create you any new Recreations. Lucret. l. 3.
Nam tibi praeterea quod machiner, inveniamque
Quod placeat, nihil est, eadem sunt omnia semper.
More Pleasures than are made Time will not frame,
For to all times, all things shall be the same.
Give place to others, as others have given place to you. Equality is the Soul
of Equity. Who can complain of being comprehended in the same Destiny wherein
all things are involved? Besides, live as long as you can, you shall by that
nothing shorten the space you are to lie dead in the Grave; it is all to no
purpose; you shall be every whit as long in the condition you so much fear, as
if you had died at Nurse. -- licet quotvis, vivendo vincere secla,
Ibidem.
Mors aeterna tamen, nihilominus illa manebit.
And live as many Ages as you will,
Death ne'rtheless shall be eternal still.
And yet I will place you in such a condition as you shall have no reason to be
displeased; Ibidem.
In vera nescis nullum fore mart alium te
Qui possit vivus tibi te lugere peremptum,
Stansque jacentem.
When dead, a living self thou can not have,
Or to lament, or trample on thy grave.
Nor shall you so much as wish for the Life you are so concerned about.

Nec sibi enim quisquam tum se vitamque requirit, Ibidem.

Nec desiderium nostri nos afficit ullum.
Life, nor our selves we wish in that Estate,
Nor Thoughts of what we were unrest create.
Death were less to be feared than nothing, if there could be any thing less
than nothing. -- multo mortem minus ad nos esse putandum, Ibidem.

Si minus esse potest quam quod nihil esse videmus.
If less than nothing any thing can show,
Death then would both appear, and would be so.
Neither can it any way concern you, whether you are living or dead: living, by
reason that you are still in being, dead, because you are no more. Moreover, no
one dies before his Hour: and the Time you leave behind was no more yours, than
that was lapsed, and gone before you came into the World; nor does it any more
concern you.

Respice enim quam nil ad nos anteacta vetustas Ibidem.

Temporis aeterni fuerit.
Look back, and tho Times past eternal were,
In those before us yet we had no share.
Wherever your Life ends it is all there; neither does the Utility of living
consist in the length of days, but in the well husbanding and improving of
Time, and such an one may have been who has longer continued in the World than
the ordinary Age of Man; that has yet lived but a little while. Make use of
Time while it is present with you. It depends upon your Will, and not upon the
number of Days, to have a sufficient length of Life. Is it possible you can
imagine never to arrive at the Place toward which you are continually going?
and yet there is no Journey but has its end. But if Company will make it more
pleasant, or more easy to you, does not all the World go the self same way?
Ibidem.
-- omnia te vita perfuncta sequentur.
When thou art dead, let this thy Comfort be,
That all the World, by turn, must follow thee.
Does not all the World dance the same Brawl that you do? Is there any thing
that does not grow old as well as you? A thousand Men, a thousand Animals, and
a thousand other Creatures, dye at the same Moment that you expire.

Lucret. l. 2.
Nam nox nulla diem, neque noctem aurora secuta est,
Quae non audierit mistos vagitibus aegris
Ploratus mortis comites, and funeris atri.
No Night succeeds the Day, nor Mornings Light
Rises to chase the sullen Shades of Night,
Wherein there is not heard the dismal Groans
Of dying Men, mixed with the woeful moans
Of living Friends, as also with the Cries
And Dirges fitting funeral Obsequies.
To what end should you endeavor to avoid, unless there were a possibility to
evade it? you have seen Examples enough of those who have received so great a
benefit by Dying, as thereby to be manifestly delivered from infallible
Miseries; but have you Talked with any of those who have feared a Disadvantage
by it? It must therefore needs be very foolish to condemn a thing you neither
experimented in your own Person, nor by that of any other. Why (says Nature)
do thou complain of me and Destiny? Do we do thee any wrong? Is it for thee
to govern us, or for us to dispose of thee? Though peradventure thy Age may not
be accomplished, yet thy Life is. A Man of low Stature is as much a man as a
Giant; neither Men, nor their Lives, are measured by the Ell. Chiron refused to
be immortal, when he was acquainted with the Conditions under which he was to
enjoy it, by the God of time it self, and its Duration, his Father Saturn. Do
but seriously consider how much more insupportable an immortal and painful Life
would be to man than what I have already designed him. If you had not Death to
ease you of your Pains and Cares, you would eternally curse me for having
deprived you of the Benefit of Dying. I have, it is true, mixed a little
Bitterness with it, to the end, that seeing of what Convenience and Use it is,
you might not too greedily and indiscreetly seek and embrace it: and that you
might be so established in this Moderation, as neither to nauseate Life, nor
have an Antipathy for dying, which I have decreed you shall once do, I have
tempered the one and the other betwixt Pleasure and Pain: and was I that first
taught Thales, the most eminent of all your Sages, that to Live and to Dye were
indifferent; which made him very wisely answer who asked him, Why then he did
not dye? because (says he) it is indifferent. The Elements of Water, Earth,
Fire, and Air, and the other Parts of this Creation of thine, are no more the
Instruments of thy Life than they are of thy Death. Why do thou fear thy last
day, it contributes no more to thy dissolution than every one of the rest? The
last Step is not the cause of Cassitude, it does but confess it. Every Day
travels toward Death, the last only arrives at it. These are the good Lessons
our Mother Nature teaches. I have often considered with my self whence it
should proceed, that in War the Image of Death, whether we look upon it as to
our own particular danger, or that of another, should without Comparison appear
less dreadful than at home in our own Houses, (for if it were not so, it would
be an Army of whining Milk-sops) and that being still in all Places the same,
there should be notwithstanding much more Assurance in Peasants, and the meaner
sort of People, than others of better Quality and Education: and do verily
believe, that it is those terrible Ceremonies and Preparations wherewith we set
it out, that more terrify us than the thing it self; a new quite contrary way
of living, the Cries of Mothers, Wives and Children, the Visits of astonished
and afflicted Friends, the Attendance of pale and blubbered Servants, a dark
Room set round with burning Tapers, our Beds environed with Physicians and
Divines; in sum, nothing but Ghostliness and Horror round about us, render it
so formidable, that a Man almost fancies himself dead and buried already.
Children are afraid even of those they love best, and are best acquainted with,
when disguised in a Vizor, and so are we; The Vizor must be removed as well
from Things as Persons; which being taken away, we shall find nothing
underneath but the very same Death that a mean Servant, or a poor Chambermaid,
died a day or two ago, without any manner of Apprehension or Concern. Happy
therefore is the Death that deprives us of the leisure to prepare things
requisite for this unnecessary Pomp, a Pomp that only renders that more
terrible which ought not to be feared, and that no Man upon Earth can possibly
avoid.

CHAP. XX. Of the Force of Imagination.
Axiom. Scholast.
FOrtis imaginatio generat casum, A strong Imagination begets Accident, say the
Schoolmen. I am one of those who are most sensible of the Power of
Imagination: Every one is justled, but some are overthrown by it. It has a very
great Impression upon me; and I make it my Business to avoid, wanting force to
resist it. I could live by the sole help of healthful and jolly Company. The
very sight of another Pain does materially work upon me, and I naturally usurp
the Sense of a third Person to share with him in his Torment. A perpetual Cough
in another tickles my Lungs and Throat. I more unwillingly visit the sick I
love, and am by Duty interested to look after, than those I care not for, and
from whom I have no expectation. I take possession of the Disease I am
concerned at, and lay it too much to heart, and do not at all wonder that Fancy
should distribute Fevers, and sometimes kill such as allow too much Scope, and
are too willing to entertain it. Simon Thomas was a great Physician of his
time: I remember, that happening one day at Tholouze to meet him at a rich old
Fellows House, who was troubled with naughty Lungs, and discoursing with his
Patient about the method of his Cure; he told him, that one thing which would
be very conducing to it, was, to give me such Occasion to be pleased with his
Company, that I might come often to see him, by which means, and by fixing his
Eyes upon the Freshness of my Complexion, and his Imagination upon the
Sprightliness and Vigor that glowed in my Youth, and possessing all his Senses
with the flourishing Age wherein I then was, his Habit of Body might
peradventure be amended, but he forgot to say that mine at the same time might
be made worse. Gallus Vibius so long cudgelled his Brains to find out the
Essence and Motions of Folly, till by the Inquisition, in the end he went
directly out of his Wits, and to such a Degree, that he could never after
recover his Judgment; and he might brag that he was become a Fool by too much
Wisdom. Some there are who thorough Fear prevent the Hangman; like him whose
Eyes being unbound to have his Pardon read to him, was found stark dead upon
the Scaffold, Imagination occasions Diseases and Death.
by the Stroke of Imagination. We start, tremble, turn pale, and blush, as we
are variously moved by Imagination; and being a-bed, feel our Bodies agitated
with its Power to that degree, as even sometimes to Expiration. And boiling
Youth when fast asleep, grows so warm with Fancy, as in a Dream to satisfy
amorous Desires.

Lucret. l. 4.
Vt quasi transactis saepe omnibus rebus profundant
Fluminis ingentes fluctus vestemque cruentent.
Who fancy gulling Lies, enflamed Mind
Lays his Loves Tribute there, where not designed.
Although it be no new thing to see Horns grown in a Night on the Forehead of
one that had none when he went to Bed; notwithstanding, what befell Cyppus, a
noble Roman, is very memorable; who having one day been a very delighted
Spectator of a Bull-baiting, and having all the night dreamt that he had Horns
on his Head, did, by the Force of Imagination, really cause them to grow there.
Passion made the Son of Croesus to speak, who was born dumb, by that means
supplying him with so necessary a Faculty, which Nature had denied him. And
Antiochus fell into a Fever, enflamed with the Beauty of Stratonissa too deeply
imprinted in his Soul. Pliny pretends to have seen Lucius Crossitius, who from
a Woman was turned into a Man upon her very Weddingday. Pontanus, and others,
report the like Metamorphosis that in these latter days have happened in Italy,
and through the vehement Desire of him and his Mother.

Vota puer solvit, Ovid.
quae foemina voverat Iphis.
Iphis, a Boy, the Vow defrayed
That he had promised when a Maid.
My self passing by Vitry le Francois, a Town in Champagne, saw a Man the
Bishop of Soissons had in Confirmation, called German, whom all the Inhabitanrs
of the Place had known to be a Girl till two and twenty Years of Age, called
Mary. He was at the time of my being there very full of Beard, Old, and not
Married, who told us, that by straining himself in a Leap, his male Instruments
came out; and the Maids of that Place have to this day a Song, wherein they
advise one another not to take too great Strides, for fear of being turned into
Men, as Mary German was. It is no wonder if this sort of Accident frequently
happen; for if Imagination have any Power in such things, it is so continually
and vigorously bent upon this Subject, that to the end it may not so often
relapse into the same Thought, and Violence of Desire, it were better once for
all to give these young Wenches the Things they long for. Some stick not to
attribute the Scars of King Dagobert, and St. Francis, to the Force of
Imagination; and it is said, that by it Bodies will sometimes be removed from
their Places; and Celsus tells us of a Priest whose Soul would be ravished into
such an Ecstasy, that the Body would, for a long time, remain without Sense or
Respiration. St. Augustine makes mention of another, who, upon the hearing of
any lamentable or doleful Cries, would presently fall into a Swoon, and be so
far out of himself, that it was in vain to call, hollow in his Ears, pinch, or
burn him, till he voluntarily came to himself; and then he would say, that he
had heard Voices as it were a-far off, and did feel when they pinched and
burned him: and to prove that this was no obstinate Dissimulation in defiance
of his Sense of Feeling, it was manifest, that all the while he had neither
Pulse nor Breathing, It Is very probable, that Visions, Enchantments, and all
extraordinary Effects of that Nature, derive their Credit principally from the
Power of Imagination, working and making its chiefest Impression upon vulgar
and more easy Souls, whose Belief is so strangely imposed upon as to think
they see what they do not: I am not satisfied, and make a very great Question,
Whether those pleasant Ligatures with which this Age of ours is so fettered,
that there is almost no other Talk, are not mere voluntary Impressions of
Apprehension and fear; for I know by experience, in the Case of a particular
Friend of mine, one for whom I can be as Responsible as for my self, and a Man
that cannot possibly fall under any manner of Suspicion of insufficiency, and
as little of being enchanted, who having heard a Companion of his make a
Relation of an unusual Frigidity that surpised him at a very unseasonable
time; being afterward himself engaged upon the same Account, the Horror of the
former Story on a sudden so strangely possessed his Imagination, that he ran
the same Fortune the other had done; and from that time forward (the scurvy
Remembrance of his Disaster running in his Mind, and tyrannizing over him) was
extremely subject to Relapse into the same Misfortune. He found some Remedy,
however, for this Inconvenience, by himself franckly confessing, and declaring
beforehand to the Party with whom he was to have to do, the Subjection he lay
under, and the Infirmity he was subject to, by which means the Contention of
his Soul was in some sort appeased; and knowing that now some such Misbehaviour
was expected from him, the Restraint upon those Faculties grew less, and he
less suffered by it, and afterward, at such times as he could be in no such
Apprehension, as not being about any such Act (his Thoughts being then
disengaged and free, and his Body being in its true and natural Estate) by
causing those Parts to be handled and communicated to the Knowledge of others,
he was at last totally freed from that vexatious Infirmity. After a Man has
once done a Woman right, he is never after in danger of misbehaving himself
with that Person, unless upon the account of a manifest and excusable Weakness.
Neither is this Disaster to be feared, but in Adventures where the Soul is
over-extended with Desire or Respect, and especially where we meet with an
unexpected Opportunity that requires a sudden and quick Dispatch; and in those
Cases, there is no possible means for a Man always to defend himself from such
a Surprise as shall put him damnably out of Countenance. And yet I have known
some, who have secured themselves from this Mischance by coming half sated
elsewhere, purposely to abate the ardour of his Fury, and others, who by being
grown old, find themselves less impotent by being less able; and particularly
one, who found an Advantage by being assured by a Friend of his, that he had a
Counter-charm against certain Enchantments that would defend him from this
Disgrace. The Story it self is not much amiss, and therefore you shall have it.
A Count of a very great Family, and with whom I had the Honor to be very
familiarly intimate, being Married to a very fair Lady, who had formerly been
pretended to, and importunately courted by one who was invited to, and present
at the Wedding, all his Friends were in very great Fear, but especially an old
Lady his Kinswoman, who had the ordering of the Solemnity, and in whose House
it was kept, suspecting his Rival would, in Revenge, offer foul Play, and
procure some of these kind of Sorceries to put a Trick upon him; which Fear she
also communicated to me, who, to comfort her, bad her not trouble her self, but
rely upon my Care to prevent or frustrate any such Designs. Now I had, by
chance, about me a certain flat Plate of Gold whereon were graven some
Celestial Figures, good to prevent Frenzy occasioned by the Heat of the Sun,
or for any Pains of the Head, being applied to the Suture; where, that it might
the better remain firm, it was sowed to a Ribban to be tied under the Chin. A
Foppery Cousin-German to this of which I am speaking, and by Jaques Pelletier,
who lived in my House, presented to me for a singular Rarity, and a thing of
Sovereign Virtue. I had a fancy to make some use of this Knack, and therefore
privately told the Count, that he might possibly run the same Fortune other
Bridegrooms had sometimes done; especially some Persons being in the House, who
no doubt would be glad to do him such a Courtesy, but let him boldly go to
Bed, for I would do him the Office of a Friend, and if need were, would not
spare a Miracle that it was in my Power to do, provided he would engage to me,
upon his Honor, to keep it to himself, and only when they came to bring him
his Cawdle, A Custom in France to bring the Bridegroom a Cawdle in the middle
of the night, on his Wedding night.
if Matters had not gone well with him, to give me such a Sign, and leave the
rest to me. Now he had his Ears so battered, and his Mind so prepossessed with
the eternal Tattle of this Business, that when it came to it he did really find
himself tied with the Trouble of his Imagination, and accordingly at the time
appointed gave me the Sign. Whereupon, I whispered him in the Ear, That he
should rise under Pretense of putting us out of the Room, and after a jesting
manner pull my Nightgown from my Shoulders, throw it over his own, and there
keep it till he had performed what I had appointed him to do, which was, that
when we were all gone out of the Chamber he should withdraw to make Water,
should three times repeat such and such Words, and as often do such and such
Actions: that at every of the three times he should tie the Ribban I put into
his Hand about his Middle, and be sure to place the Medal was fastened to it
(the Figures in such a Posture) exactly upon his Reins, which being done, and
having the last of the three times so well girt and fast tied the Ribban that
it could neither untye nor slip from its Place, let him confidently return to
his Business, and withal not to forget to spread my Gown upon the Bed, so that
it might be sure to cover them both. These ridiculous Circumstances are the
main of the Effect, our Fancy being so far seduced, as to believe, that so
strange and uncouth Formalities must of necessity proceed from some abstruse
Science. Their Inanity gives them Reverence and Weight. However, certain it is,
that my Figures approved themselves more Venerian than Solar, and the fair
Bride had no reason to complain. Now I cannot forbear to tell you, it was a
sudden Whimsey, mixed with a little Curiosity, that made me do a thing so
contrary to my Nature; for I am an Enemy to all subtle, and counterfeit
Actions, and abominate all manner of Fraud, though it be but for Sport; for
though the Action may not be wicked in it self, yet it is done after a wicked
manner. Amasis, King of Egypt, married Laodicea a mavelous beautiful Greek
Virgin, who, tho famous for his Abilities elsewhere, found himself quite
another Man with his Wife, and could by no means enjoy her; at which he was so
enraged, that he threatened to kill her, suspecting her to be a Witch. As it is
usual in things that consist in Fancy; she put him upon Devotion, who having
accordingly made his Vows to Venus, he found himself divinely restored the very
first Night after his Oblations and Sacrifices. Now in plain truth, Women are
to blame to entertain us with that disdainful, coy, and angry Countenance they
commonly do, which extinguishes our Vigor, as it kindles our Desire; which
made the Daughter in Law of Pythagoras to say, That the Woman who goes to Bed
to a Man, must put off her Modesty with her Petticoat, and put it on again with
the same. The Soul of the Assailant being disturbed with many several Alarms,
is easily astonished, and soon loses the Power of Performance; and whoever the
Imagination has once put this Trick upon, and confounded with the Shame of it,
(and she never does it but at the first Acquaintance, by reason Men are then
more ardent and eager, and also at this first Account a Man gives of himself,
he is much more timorous of miscarrying) having made an ill Beginning, he
enters into such Indignation and Despite at the Accident, as will in following
Opportunities be apt to remain, and continue him in the same Condition. As to
what concerns Married People, having the Year before them (as we say) they
ought never to compel, or so much as to offer at the Feat, if they do not find
themselves very ready: and it is better indecently to fail of handselling the
Nuptial Sheets, and of paying the Ceremony due to the Wedding-night, when a Man
perceives himself full of Agitation and Trembling, expecting another
opportunity at a better and more private Leisure, when his Fancy shall be
better composed, than to make himself perpetually miserable, for having
misbehav'd himself, and been baffled at the first assault. Till possession be
taken, a man that knows himself subject to this Infirmity, should leisurely and
by degrees make several little trials and light offers, without obstinately
attempting at once to force an absolute conquest over his own mutinous and
indisposed Faculties; such as know their members to be naturally obedient to
their desires, need to take no other care but only to counterplot their Fancy.
The indocile and rude liberty of this scurvy Member, is sufficiently
remarkable, by its importunate, unruly, and unseasonable tumidity and
impatience, at such times as we have nothing for it to do, and by its more
unseasonable stupidity and disobedience, when we stand most in need of his
vigor, so imperiously contesting the authority of the Will, and with so much
obstinacy denying all solicitation both of hand and fancy. And yet though his
Rebellion is so universally complained of, and that proofs are not wanting to
condemn him, if he had nevertheless feed me to plead his Cause, I should
peradventure bring the rest of his fellow members into suspicion of complotting
this mischief against him, out of pure envy at the importance, and ravishing
pleasure particular to his Employment, so as to have by Confederacy armed the
whole World against him, by malevolently charging him alone with their common
offense. For let any one consider, whether there is any one Part of our Bodies
that does not often refuse to perform its Office at the Precept of the Will,
and that does not often exercise its Function in defiance of her Command. They
have every one of them proper Passions of their own, that rouse and awake,
stupifie and benum them, without our Leave or Consent. How often do the
involuntary motions of the Countenance discover our inward Thoughts, and betray
our most private Secrets to the Knowledge of the Standers by? The same Cause
that animates this Member, does also, without our Knowledge, animate the Lungs,
Pulse, and Heart, the sight of a pleasing Object imperceptibly diffusing a
Flame thorough all our Parts with a febrifick motion. Is there nothing but
these Veins and Muscles that swell, and flag without the Consent, not only of
the Will, but even of our Knowledge also? We do not command our Hairs to stand
an end, nor our Skin to shiver either with Fear or Desire. The Hands often
convey themselves to Parts to which we do not direct them. The Tongue will be
interdict, and the Voice sometimes suffocated when we know not how to help it.
When we have nothing to eat, and would willingly forbid it, the Appetite of
Eating and Drinking does not for all that forbear to stir up the Parts that are
subjected to it, no more nor less than the other Appetite we were speaking of,
and in like manner does as unseasonably leave us. The Vessels that serve to
discharge the Belly have their proper Dilatations and Compressions, without,
and beyond our Intelligence, as well as those which are destined to purge the
Reins. And that which to justify the Prerogative of the Will, St. Augustine
urges, of having seen a Man who could command his Backside to discharge as
often together as he pleased, and that Vives does yet fortify with another
Example in his time of one that could Fart in Tune, does nothing suppose any
more pure Obedience of that Part; for is any thing commonly more tumultuary or
indiscreet? To which let me add, that I my self knew one so rude and
ungoverned, as for forty Years together made his Master-Vent with one continued
and unintermitted Hurricane, and it is like will do till he expire that way, and
vanish in his own Smoke. And I could heartily wish, that I only knew by
Reading, how often a Man's Belly, by the Denial of one single Puff, brings him to
the very door of an exceeding painful Death; and that the Emperor, who gave
Liberty to let fly in all Places, had at the same time given us Power to do it.
But for our Will, in whose Behalf we prefer this Accusation, with how much
greater Similitude of Truth may we reproach even her her self with Mutiny and
Sedition for her Irregularity and Disobedience? Does she always will what we
would have her to do? Does she not often will what we forbid her to will, and
that to our manifest Prejudice? Does she suffer her self any more than any of
the other, to be governed and directed by the Results of our Reason? To
conclude, I should move in the Behalf of the Gentleman, Cazzo.
my Clyent, it might be considered, that in this Fact, his Cause being
inseparably conjoined with an Accessory, yet he is only called in Question, and
that by Arguments and Accusations, that cannot be charged, nor reflect upon the
other: whose Business indeed is sometimes inoportunely to invite, but never to
refuse, and to allure after a tacit and clandestine manner; and therefore is
the Malice and Injustice of his Accusers most manifestly apparent. But be it
how it will, protesting against the Proceedings of the Advocates and Judges,
Nature will, in the mean time, proceed after her own way: who had done but
well, if she had endowed this Member with some particular Privilege, The
Author of the sole immortal Work of Mortals, A divine Work according to
Socrates, and of Love, Desire of Immortality, and himself an immortal Demon.
Some one perhaps by such an Effect of Imagination may have had the good luck to
leave Videlicet the Pox.
that behind him here in France, which his Companion who has come after, and
behaved himself better, has carried back with him into Spain. And that you may
see why Men in such cases require a mind prepared for the thing they are to do.
Why do the Physicians tamper with, and prepossess beforehand their Patients
credulity with many false promises of Cure, if not to the end, that the effect
of imagination may supply the imposture and defect of their Aposeme? They know
very well, that a great Master of their Trade has given it under his hand, that
he has known some with whom the very sight of a potion would work: which
Examples of Fancy and Conceit come now into my head, by the remembrance of a
story was told me by a domestic Apothecary of my Father's, a blunt Swisse (a
Nation not much addicted to vanity and lying) of a Merchant he had long known
at Thoulouse, who being a valetudinary, and much afflicted with Fits of the
Stone, had often occasion to take Clysters, of which he caused several sorts to
be prescribed him by the Physicians, according to the accidents of his Disease:
one of which being one time brought him, and none of the usual forms, as
feeling if it were not too hot, and the like, being omitted, he was laid down
on his Belly, the Syringe put up, and all Ceremonies performed, injection
excepted; after which, the Apothecary being gone, and the Patient accommodated
as if he had really received a Clyster, he found the same operation and effect
that those do who have taken one indeed; and if at any time the Physician did
not find the Operation sufficient, he would usually give him two or three more
after the same manner. And the Fellow moreover swore to me, that to save
charges (for he paid as if he had really taken them) this sick man's Wife,
having sometimes made trial of warm Water only, the effect discovered the
Cheat, and finding these would do no good, was fain to return to the old way. A
Woman fancying she had swallowed a pin in a piece of Bread, cried out of an
intolerable pain in her Throat, where she thought she felt it stick: but an
ingenious Fellow that was brought to her, seeing no outward Tumor nor
alteration, supposing it to be only Conceit taken at some Crust of Bread that
had hurt her as it went down, caused her to vomit, and cunningly, unseen, threw
a crooked Pin into the Basin, which the Woman no sooner saw, but believing she
had cast it up, she presently found her self eased of her pain. I my self knew
a Gentleman, who having treated a great deal of good Company at his house,
three or four days after bragged in jest (for there was no such thing) that he
had made them eat of a baked Cat; at which, a young Gentlewoman, who had been
at the Feast, took such a horror, that falling into a violent vomiting and a
Fever, there was no possible means to save her. Even brute Beasts are also
subject to the force of Imagination as well as we; as is seen by Dogs, who dye
of grief for the loss of their Masters, and are seen to quest, tremble, and
start, as Horses will kick and whinney in their sleep. Now all this may be
attributed to the affinity and relation betwixt the Souls and Bodies of Brutes,
but it is quite another thing when the Imagination works upon the Souls of
rational men, and not only to the prejudice of their own particular Bodies, but
of others also. And as an infected Body communicates its Malady to those that
approach, or live near it, as we see in the Plague, the small Pox, and sore
Eyes, that run through whole Families and Cities; Dum spectant oculi laesos,
laeduntur and ipsi: Ovid. Amor. l. 2.

Multaque corporibus transitione nocent.
Viewing sore eyes, eyes to be sore are brought,
And many ills are by transition caught.
So the Imagination being vehemently agitated, darts out Infection capable of
offending the stranger Object. The Ancients had an opinion of certain Women of
Scythia, that being animated and enraged against any one, they killed them only
with their looks. Tortoises and Ostriches hatch their Eggs with only looking on
them, which infers, that their Eyes have in them some ejaculative virtue. And
the eyes of Witches are said to be dangerous and hurtful.

Nescio quis teneros oculus mihi fascinat agnos. Virg. Eclog. 3.

What Eye it is, I do not know,
My tender Lambs bewitches so.
Magicians are no very good Authority for me: but we experimentally see, that
Women impart the Marks of their Fancy to the Children they carry in their
Wombs; witness her that was brought to Bed of a Moor: and there was presented
to Charles the Emperor, and King of Bohemia, a Girl from about Pisa, all over
rough, and covered with Hair, whom her Mother said to be so conceived by reason
of a Picture of St. John Baptist, that hung within the Curtains of her Bed. It
is the same with Beasts, witness Jacob's ring-streaked and spotted Goats, and
Sheep, and the Hares and Partridges that the Snow turns white upon the
Mountains. There was at my House a little while ago, a Cat seen watching a Bird
upon the top of a Tree, who for some time mutually fixing their Eyes upon one
another, the Bird at last let her self fall as dead into the Cats Claws, either
dazzled and astonished by the Force of her own Imagination, or drawn by some
attractive Power of the Cat. Such as are addicted to the Pleasures of the
Field, have, I make no question, heard the Story of the Faulconer, who having
earnestly fixed his Eyes upon a Kite in the Air, laid a Wager, that he would
bring her down with the sole Power of Sight, and did so, as it was said; for
the Tales I borrow, I charge upon the Consciences of those from whom I have
them. The Discourses are my own, and found themselves upon the Proofs of
Reason, not of Experience; to which every one has Liberty to add his own
Examples: and who has none, (the Number and Varieties of Accidents considered)
let him not forbear to believe that these I set down are enough: and if I do
not apply them well, let some other do it for me. And also in the Subjects of
which I treat, viz. of our Manners and Motions, the Testimonies and Instances I
produce, how fabulous soever, provided they are possible, serve as well as the
true; whether it has really happened or no, at Rome or at Paris, to Peter or
John, it is still within the Verge of Possibility, and humane Capacity, which
serves me to good use, and supplies me with Variety in the things I write. I
see, and make my Advantage of it as well in Shadow as in Substance; and amongst
the various Examples I every where meet with in History, I cull out the most
rare and memorable to fit my own Turn. There are some Authors whose only end
and Design it is, to give an Account of things that have happened; mine, if I
could arrive unto it, should be to deliver what may come to pass. There is a
just Liberty allowed in the Schools, of supposing and contriving Simile's, when
they are at a Loss for them in their own Reading: I do not, however, make any
use of that Privilege, and as to that Affair in superstitious Religion surpass
all Historical Authority. In the Examples which I here bring in, of what I have
heard, read, done, or said, I have forbid my self to dare to alter even the
most light and indifferent Circumstances: my Conscience does not falsify one
Tittle, what my Ignorance may do I cannot say. And this it is that makes me
sometimes enter into Dispute with my own Thoughts, whether or no, a Divine, or
a Philosopher, Men of so exact and tender Wisdom and Conscience, are fit to
write History: for, how can they stake their Reputation upon the Public Faith?
how be responsible for the Opinions of Men they do not know? and with what
Assurance deliver their Conjectures for current Pay? Of Actions performed
before their own Eyes, wherein several Persons were Actors, they would be
unwilling to give Evidence upon Oath before a Judge; and cannot be so
familiarly and thoroughly acquainted with any for whose Intentions they would
become absolute Caution. For my part, I think it less hazardous to write things
past, than present, by how much the Writer is only to give an Account of things
every one knows he must of necessity borrow upon Trust. I am solicited to
write the Affairs of my own Time, by some who fancy I look upon them with an
Eye less blinded with Prejudice, or Partiality, than another, and have a
clearer Insight into them by reason of the free Access Fortune has given me to
the Heads of both Factions: but they do not consider, that to purchase the
Glory of Salust, I would not give my self the Trouble, being a sworn Enemy as I
am to all Obligation, Assiduity, and Perseverance: besides that, there is
nothing so contrary to my Style, as a continued and extended Narrative, I so
often interrupt, and cut my self short in my Writing only for want of Breath. I
have neither Fancy, nor Expression worth any thing, and am ignorant beyond a
Child, of the Phrases, and even the very Words proper to express the most
common things; and for that Reason it is, that I have undertaken to say only
what I can say, and have accommodated my Subject to my Force. Should I take one
to be my Guide, peradventure I should not be able to keep Pace with him, and in
the Precipitancy of my Career might deliver Things, which upon better Thoughts,
in my own Judgment, and according to Reason, would be criminal, and punishable
in the highest degree. Plutarch would tell us of what he has delivered to the
Light, that it is the Work of others, that his Examples are all, and every
where exactly true, that they are useful to Posterity, and are presented with a
Luster that will light us the way to Virtue, which was his Design: but it is
not of so dangerous consequence as in a Medicinal Drugg, whether an old Story
be so or so.

CHAP. XXI. That the Profit of one Man is the Inconvenience of another.
DEmades the Athenian, condemned one of his City, whose Trade it was to sell
the Necessaries for Funeral Ceremonies, upon Pretense that he demanded
unreasonable Profit, and that that Profit could not accrue to him, but by the
Death of a great Number of People. A Judgment that appears to be ill grounded,
for as much as no Profit whatever can possibly be made but at the Expense of
another, and that by the same Rule he should condemn all manner of Gain of what
kind soever. The Merchant only thrives, and grows rich, by the Pride,
Wantonness, and Debauchery of Youth; the Husbandman by the Price and Scarcity
of Grain; the Architect by the Ruin of Buildings; Lawyers, and Officers of
Justice, by the Suits and Contentions of Men; nay, even the Honor and Office
of Divines are derived from our Death and Vices. A Physician takes no Pleasure
in the Health even of his Friends, says the ancient Comical Greek, nor a
Soldier in the Peace of his Country, and so of the rest. And, which is yet
worse, let every one but dive into his own Bosom, and he will find his private
Wishes spring, and his secret Hopes grow up at another Expense. Upon which
Consideration it comes into my Head, that Nature does not in this swerve from
her general Polity; for Physicians hold, that the Birth, Nourishment, and
Increase of every thing, is the Corruption and Dissolution of another.

Nam quodcumque suis mutatum finibus exit, Lucret. l. 2.

Continuo hoc mors est illius, quod fuit ante.
For what from its own Confines charged does pass,
Is straight the Death of what before it was.
CHAP. XXII. Of Custom, and that we should not easily change a Law received.
HE seems to me to have had a right and true apprehension of the power of
Custom, who first invented the Story of a Country-woman, who having accustomed
her self to play with, and carry a young Calf in her Arms, and daily continuing
to do so as it grew up, obtained this by Custom, that when grown to be a great
Ox she was still able to bear it. For, in truth, Custom is a violent and
treacherous School-mistris. She, by little and little, slily, and unperceived,
slips in the foot of her Authority, but having by this gentle and humble
beginning, with the benefit of Time, fixed and established it, she then unmasks
a furious and tyrannick Countenance, against which we have no more the courage
or the power so much as to lift up our Eyes. We see it at every turn forcing
and violating the Rules of Nature: Vsus efficacissimus rerum omnium magister;
Plin. l. 6.
Custom is the great Master of all things. I believe Plato's care in his
Republic, and the Physicians, who so often submit the Reasons of their Art to
the authority of Habit; as also the story of that King, who by Custom brought
his Stomach to that pass, as to live by Poison, and the Maid that Albertus
reports to have lived upon Spiders; and in that new World of the Indies, there
were found great Nations, and in very differing Climates, who were of the same
Diet, made provision of them, and fed them for their Tables; as also, they did
Grasshoppers, Mice, Bats and Lizards; and in a time of scarcity of such
Rarities, a Toad was sold for six Crowns, all which they cook, and dish up with
several Sawces. There were also others found, to whom our Diet, and the Flesh
we eat were venomous and mortal. Consuetudinis magna vis est: Pernoctant
venatores in nive: Cicero Tusc. l. 2.
in montibus uri se patiuntur: Pugiles, Caestibus contusi, ne ingemiscunt
quidem. The power of Custom is very great: Hunts-men will one while lie out all
night in the Snow, and another suffer themselves to be parched in the
Mountains; and Fencers, inured to beating, when banged almost to pulp with
Clubs and Whirde-Bats, disdain so much as to groan. These are strange Examples,
but yet they will not appear so strange if we consider what we have ordinary
experience of, how much Custom stupifies our Senses; neither need we go to be
satisfied of what is reported of the Cataracts of Nile; and of what
Philosophers believe of the Music of the Spheres, that the Bodies of those
Circles being solid and smooth, and coming to touch, and rub upon one another,
cannot fail of creating a wonderful Harmony, the changes and cadencies of
which, cause the Revolutions and Dances of the Stars: but that the hearing
Sense of all Creatures here below, being universally, like that of the
Egyptians, deaf'd, and stupefied with the continual Noise, cannot, how great
soever perceive it. Smiths, Millers, Pewterers, Forge-men, and Armorers, could
never be able to live in the perpetual Noise of their own Trades, did it strike
their Ears with the same Violence that it does ours. My perfumed Doublet
gratifies my own Smelling at first, as well as that of others; but after I have
worn it three or four Days together, I no more perceive it; but it is yet more
strange, that Custom, notwithstanding the long Intermissions and Intervals,
should yet have the Power to unite and establish the Effect of its Impressions
upon our Senses, as is manifest in such as live near unto Steeples, and the
frequent noise of the Bells. I my self lie at home in a Tower, where every
Morning and Evening a very great Bell rings out the Ave Maria, the Noise of
which shakes my very Tower, and at first seemed insupportable to me; but having
now a good while kept that Lodging, I am so used to it, that I hear it without
any manner of Offense, and often without awaking at it. Plato reprehending a
Boy for playing at some childish Game, Thou reprov'st me (says the Boy) for a
very little thing: Custom (replied Plato) is no little Thing. And he was in the
right; for I find that our greatest Vices derive their first Propensity from
our most tender Infancy, and that our principal Education depends upon the
Nurse. Mothers are mightily pleased to see a Child writhe off the Neck of a
Chicken, or to please it self with hurting a Dog or a Cat; and such wise
Fathers there are in the World, who look upon it as a notable Mark of a Martial
Spirit, when he hears his Son mis-call, or sees him domineer over a poor
Peasant, or a Lacquey, that dares not reply, nor turn again; and a great sign
of Wit when he sees him cheat and overreach his Playfellow by some malicious
Trick of Treachery and Deceit; but for all that, these are the true Seeds and
Roots of Cruelty, Tyranny, and Treason. They bud and put out there, Deceit
ought to be corrected in the greenest Years.
and afterward shoot up vigorously, and grow to a prodigious Bulk and Stature,
being cultivated and improved by Custom: and it is a very dangerous Mistake to
excuse these vile Inclinations upon the Tenderness of their Age, and the
triviality of the Subject: first, it is Nature that speaks, whose Declaration
is then more sincere, and inward Thoughts more undisguised, as it is more weak
and young: secondly, the Deformity of Cousenage does not consist, nor depend
upon the Difference betwixt Crowns and Pins; but merely upon it self, for a
Cheat is a Cheat be it more or less; which makes me think it more just to
conclude thus, Why should he not cozen in Crowns since he does it in Pins, than
as they do, who say, they only play for Pins, he would not do it if it were for
Money. Children should carefully be instructed to abhor even the Vices of their
own contriving; and the natural Deformity of those Vices ought so to be
represented to them, that they may not only avoid them in their Actions, but
especially so to abominate them in their Hearts, that the very Thought should
be hateful to them, with what Mask soever they may be palliated or disguised. I
know very well, for what concerns my self, that for having been brought up in
my Childhood to a plain, and sincere way of dealing, and for having then had an
Aversion to all manner of juggling and foul Play in my Childish Sports and
Recreations (and indeed it is to be noted, that the Plays of Children are not
performed in Play, but are to be judged in them as their most serious Actions)
there is no Game so small wherein from my own Bosom naturally, and without
study or endeavor, I have not an extreme Aversion for Deceit. I shuffle, and
cut, and make as much clatter with the Cards, and keep as strict Account for
Farthings, as it were for double Pistols, when winning or losing against my
Wife and Daughter is indifferent to me, as when I play in good earnest with
others for the roundest Sums. At all Times, and in all Places, my own Eyes are
sufficient to look to my Fingers; I am not so narrowly watched by any other,
neither is there any I more fear to be discovered by, or to offend.

I saw the other day, at my own House, a little Fellow who came to show himself
for Money, a Native of Nants, born without Arms, who has so well taught his
Feet to perform the Services his Hands should have done him, that indeed they
have half forgot their natural Office, and the use for which they were
designed; the Fellow too calls them his Hands, and we may allow him so to do,
for with them he cuts any thing, charges and discharges a Pistol, threads a
Needle, Sows, Writes, and puts off his Hat, combs his Head, plays at Cards and
Dice, and ^ll this with as much Dexterity as any other could do who had more,
and more proper Limbs to assist him; and the Money I gave him he carried away
in his Foot, as we do in our Hand. I have seen another, who being yet a Boy,
flourished a two-handed Sword, and (if I may so say) handled a Halbert with
the mere Motions and Writhing of his Neck and Shoulders for want of hands,
tossed them into the Air, and caught them again, darted a Dagger, and cracked a
Whip as well as any Coachman in France. But the Effects of Custom are much
more manifest in the strange Impressions she imprints in our Minds, where she
meets with less Resistance, and has nothing so hard a Game to play. What has
she not the Power to impose upon our Judgments and Belief? Is there any so
fantastic Opinion (omitting the gross Impostures of Religions, with which we
see so many populous Nations, and so many understanding men, so strangely
besotted; for this being beyond the reach of Humane Reason, any Error is more
excusable in such as thorough the Divine Bounty are not endued with an
extraordinary Illumination from above) but of other Opinions are there any so
senseless and extravagant, that she has not planted and established for Laws in
those Parts of the World upon which she has been pleased to exercise her Power?
And therefore that ancient Exclamation was exceeding just, Cicero de Natu. Deor.
Non pudet Physicum, id est speculatorem, venatoremque naturae, ab animis
consuetudine imbutis quaerere testimonium veritatis? Is it not a Shame for a
Philosopher, that is, for an Observer and Hunter of Nature, to derive Testimony
from Minds prepossessed with Custom? I do believe, that no so absurd or
ridiculous Fancy can enter into Humane Imagination, that does not meet with
some Example of Public Practice, and that consequently our Reason does not
ground, and support it self upon. There are People, amongst whom it is the
Fashion to turn their Backs upon him they salute, and never look upon the Man
they intend to honor. There is a place, where, whenever the King spits, the
greatest Ladies of his Court put out their hands to receive it; and another
Nation, where the most eminent Persons about him stoop to take up his Ordure in
a Linen Cloth. Let us here steal room to insert a Story. A French Gentleman,
of my acquaintance, was always wont to blow his Nose with his Fingers, (a
thing very much against our Fashion) would justify himself for so doing, and
was a man very famous for pleasant Repertees, who, upon that occasion, asked
me, what Privilege this filthy Excrement had, that we must carry about us a
fine Handkerchief to receive it, and which was more, afterward to lap it
carefully up, and carry it all day about in our Pockets, which, he said, could
not but be much more nauseous and offensive, than to see it thrown away, as we
did all other Evacuations. I found that what he said was not altogether without
Reason, and by being frequently in his Company, that slovenly action of his was
at last grown familiar to me; which nevertheless we make a face at, when we
hear it reported of another Country. Miracles appear to be so, according to our
ignorance of Nature, and not according to the Essence of Nature. The
continually being accustomed to any thing, blinds the eye of our Judgment.
Barbarians are no more a wonder to us, than we are to them; nor with any more
reason, as every one would confess, if after having traveled over those remote
Examples, Men could settle themselves to reflect upon, and rightly to confer
them. Humane Reason is a Tincture equally infused almost into all our Opinions
and Customs, of what form soever they are, infinite in Matter, infinite in
Diversity. But I return to my Subject.

There are a People, where (his Wife and Children excepted) no one speaks to
the King but through a Trunk. In one and the same Nation the Virgins discover
those Parts that Modesty should persuade them to hide, and the married Women
carefully cover and conceal. To which, this Custom in another Place has some
Relation, where Chastity, but in Marriage, is of no Esteem, for unmarried Women
may prostitute themselves to as many as they please, and being got with Child,
may lawfully take Physic in the sight of every one to destroy their Fruit. And
in another Place, if a Tradesman marry, all of the same Condition, who are
invited to the Wedding, lie with the Bride before him; and the greater number
of them there is, the greater is her Honor, and the Opinion of her Ability and
Strength: if an Officer marry, it is the same, the same with a Nobleman, and so
of the rest, excepting it be a Labourer, or one of mean Condition, for then it
belongs to the Lord of the Place to perform that Office; and yet a severe
Loyalty during Marriage is afterward strictly enjoined. There is a place where
Bawdy-houses of Young Men are kept for the Pleasure of Women, as we know there
are of Women for the Necessities of Men; and also Marriages, where the Wives go
to War as well as the Husbands, and not only share in the dangers of Battle,
but moreover in the Honors of Command. Others, where they wear Rings not only
through their Noses, Lips, Cheeks, and on their Toes, but also weighty Gymmals
of Gold thrust through their Paps and Buttocks: Where, in eating, they wipe
their Fingers upon their Thighs, Genitories, and the Soles of their Feet: Where
Children are excluded and Brothers and Nephews only inherit; and elsewhere,
Nephews only, saving in the Royal Family, and the Succession of the Crown:
where, for the Regulation of Community in Goods and Estates observed in the
Country, certain Sovereign Magistrates have committed to them the universal
Charge, and over-seeing of the Agriculture, and Distribution of the Fruits
according to the Necessity of every one: Where they lament the Death of
Children, and Feast at the Decease of old Men: Where they lie ten or twelve in
a Bed, Men and their Wives together: Where Women, whose Husbands come to
violent Ends, may marry again, and others not: Where the servile Condition of
Women is looked upon with such Contempt, that they kill all the native Females,
and buy Wives of their Neighbors to supply their Use; Where Husbands may
repudiate their Wives, without showing any Cause, but Wives cannot part from
their Husbands, for what cause soever. Where Husbands may sell their Wives in
case of sterility; Where they boil the Bodies of their dead, and afterward
pound them to a pulp, which they mix with their Wine, and drink it; Where the
most coveted Sepulture is to be eaten with Dogs, and elsewhere by Birds; Where
they believe the Souls of the happy live in all manner of Liberty, in
delightful Fields, furnished with all sorts of Delicacies, and that it is those
Souls, repeating the words we utter, which we call Echo. Where they fight in
the Water, and shoot their Arrows with the most mortal Aim, swimming; Where,
for a sign of Subjection, they lift up their Shoulders, and hang down their
Heads, and put off their shoes when they enter the King's Palace. Where the
Eunuchs, who take charge of the Religious Women, have moreover their Lips and
Noses cut away, and disguised, that they may not be loved; and the Priests put
out their own Eyes, to be better acquainted, with their Demons, and the better
to receive and retain their Oracles; Where every one creates to himself a Deity
of what he likes best, according to his own Fancy; the Hunter, a Lion or a Fox,
the Fisher, some certain Fish, and Idols of every Humane Action or Passion; in
which place the Sun, the Moon, and the Earth are the principal Deities, and the
form of taking an Oath is, to touch the Earth, looking up to Heaven; and there
both Flesh and Fish is eaten raw; Where the greatest Oath they take is, to
swear by the Name of some dead Person of Reputation, laying their hand upon his
Tomb; Where the New Years Gift the King sends every Year to the Princes, his
Subjects, is Fire, which being brought, all the old Fire is put out, and the
neighboring People are bound to fetch of the new, every one for themselves,
upon pain of Treason; Where, when the King, to betake himself wholly to
Devotion, retires from his Administration, (which often falls out) his next
Successor is obliged to do the same; by which means the Right of the Kingdom
devolves to the third in Succession; Where they vary the Form of Government,
according to the seeming necessity of Affairs; Depose the King when they think
good, substituting ancient men to govern in his stead, and sometimes
transferring it into the hands of the Common People; Where Men and Women are
both Circumciz'd and also Baptized; Where the Soldier, who in one, or several
Engagements, has been so fortunate, as to present seven of the Enemies Heads to
the King, is made noble: where they live in that rare and singular Opinion of
the Mortality of the Soul: Where the Women are delivered without Pain or Fear:
Where the Women wear Copper Fetters upon both their Legs, and if a Louse bite
them, are bound in Magnanimity to bite them again, and dare not marry till
first they have made their King a Tender of their Virginity, if he please to
accept it: Where the ordinary way of Salutation is by putting a Finger down to
the Earth, and then pointing it up toward Heaven: Where Men carry Burdens
upon their Heads, and Women on their Shoulders, the Women pissing standing, and
the Men cowring down: Where they send their Blood in token of Friendship, and
unsee the men they would nour, like Gods: Where not only to the fourth, but in
any other remote Degree, Kindred are not permitted to marry: Where the Children
are four Years at Nurse, and sometimes twelve; in which Place also it is
accounted mortal to give the Child suck the first day after it is born: Where
the Correction of the male Children is peculiarly designed to the Fathers, and
to the Mothers of the Females; the Punishment being to hang them by the Heels
in the Smoke: Where they eat all sorts of Herbs, without other Scruple, than of
the Illness of the Smell: Where all things are open, the finest Houses, and
that are furnished with the richest Furniture, without Doors, Windows, Trunks,
or Chests to lock, a Thief being there punished double to what they are in
other Places: Where they crack Lice with their Teeth like Monkeys, and abhor to
see them killed with ones Nails: Where in all their Lives they neither cut
their Hair, nor pare their Nails; and in another Place, pare those of the
Right Hand only, letting the left grow for Ornament and Bravery: Where they
suffer the Hair on the right side to grow as long as it will, and shave the
other; and in the neighboring Provinces, some let their Hair grow long before,
and some behind, shaving close the rest: Where Parents let out their Children,
and Husbands their Wives, to their Guests to hire: Where a Man may get his own
Mother with Child, and Fathers make use of their own Daughters, or their Sons,
without Scandal or Offense: Where at their solemn Feasts they interchangeably
lend their Children to one another, without any consideration of Nearness of
Blood. In one Place Men feed upon Humane Flesh, in another, it is reputed a
charitable Office for a Man to kill his Father at a certain Age; and elsewhere,
the Fathers dispose of their Children whilst yet in their Mothers Wombs, some
to be preserved and carefully brought up, and others they proscribe either to
be thrown off, or made away. Elsewhere the old Husbands lend their Wives to
Young Men; and in another place they are in common, without offense; in one
place particularly, the Women take it for a mark of Honor to have as many gay
fringed Tassels at the bottom of their Garment, as they have lain with several
men. Moreover, has not Custom made a Republic of Women separately by
themselves? Has it not put Arms into their Hands, made them to raise Armies,
and fight Battles? and does she not by her own Precept instruct the most
ignorant Vulgar, and make them perfect in things which all the Philosophy in
the World could never beat into the Heads of the wisest men? For we know entire
Nations, where Death was not only despised, but entertained with the greatest
Triumph; where Children of seven years old offered themselves to be whipped to
death, without changing their Countenance; where Riches was in such Contempt,
that the poorest and most wretched Citizen would not have deigned to stoop to
take up a Purse of Crowns. And we know Regions very fruitful in all manner of
Provisions, where, notwithstanding the most ordinary Diet, and that they are
most pleased with, is only Bread, Cresses, and Water. Did not Custom moreover
work that Miracle in Chios, that of seven hundred Years it was never known,
that ever Maid or Wife committed any act to the prejudice of her Honor? To
conclude; there is nothing in my opinion, that she does not, or may not do; and
therefore with very good reason it is, that Pindar calls her the Queen, and
Empress of the World. He that was seen to beat his Father, and reproved for so
doing, made answer, that it was the Custom of their Family; that in like manner
his Father had beaten his Grandfather, his Grandfather his great
Grandfather, and this, says he, pointing to his Son, when he comes to my Age,
shall beat me. And the Father, whom the Son dragged and haled along the
streets, commanded him to stop at a certain Door, for he himself, he said, had
dragged his Father no farther, that being the utmost limit of the hereditary
Insolence the Sons used to practice upon the Fathers in their Family. It is as
much by Custom as Infirmity, (says Aristotle) that Women tear their Hair, bite
their Nails, and eat Coals, Chalk, and such Trash, and more by Custom than
Nature, that men abuse themselves with one another. The Laws of Conscience,
which we pretend to be derived from Nature, proceed from Custom; every one
having an inward Veneration for the Opinions and Manners, approved and received
amongst his own People, cannot without very great Reluctance depart from them,
nor apply himself to them without applause. In times past, when those of Creet
would curse any one, they prayed the Gods to engage them in some ill Custom.
But the principal effect of the power of Custom is, so to seize and ensnare us,
that it is hardly in our power to disengage our selves from its gripe; or so to
come to our selves, as to consider of, and to weigh the things it enjoins. To
say the truth, by reason that we suck it in with our Milk, and that the face of
the World presents it self in this posture to our first sight, it seems as if
we were born upon condition to pursue this Practice; and the common Fancies
that we find in repute every where about us, and infused into our Minds with
the Seed of our Fathers, appear to be most universal and genuine. From whence
it comes to pass, that whatever is off the hinge of Custom, is believed to be
also off the hinges of Reason; and how unreasonably for the most part, God
knows. If, as we who study our selves, have learned to do, every one who hears
a good Sentence, would immediately consider how it does any way touch his own
private Concern, every one would find, that it was not so much a good Saying,
as a severe Lash to the ordinary Bestiality of his own Judgment: but men
receive the Precepts and Admonitions of Truth, as generally directed to the
Common Sort, and never particularly to themselves; and instead of applying them
to their own manners, do only very ignorantly and unprofitably commit them to
memory, without suffering themselves to be at all instructed, or converted by
them; But let us return to the Empire of Custom. Such People as have been bred
up to Liberty, and subject to no other Dominion but the authothority of their
own Will, every one being a Sovereign to himself, Democracy.
or at least governed by no wiser Heads than their own, do look upon all other
Form of Government as monstrous, and contrary to Nature. Monarchy.
Those who are inured to Monarchy do the same; and what opportunity soever
Fortune presents them with to change, even then, when with the greatest
difficulties they have disengaged themselves from one Master, that was
troublesome and grievous to them, they presently run, with the same
difficulties, to create another; being not able, how roughly dealt with soever,
to hate the Government they were born under, and the obedience they have so
long been accustomed to. It Is by the mediation and persuasion of Custom, that
every one is content with the place where he is planted by Nature; and the
High-landers of Scotland no more pant after the better Air of Tourain, than the
starved Scythian after the delightful Fields of Thessaly. Darius asking certain
Greeks what they would take to assume the Custom of the Indians, of eating the
dead Corpse of their Fathers, (for that was their Use, believing they could not
give them a better, nor more noble Sepulture, than to bury them in their own
Bodies) they made answer, That nothing in the World should hire them to do it;
but having also tried to persuade the Indians to leave their barbarous Custom,
and, after the Greek manner, to burn the Bodies of their Fathers, they
conceived a much greater horror at the motion. Every one does the same, for as
much as Use veils from us the true Aspect of things.

Lucret. l. 2
Nil adeo magnum, nec tam mirabile quicquam
Principio, quod non minuant mirarier omnes Paulatim.
Nothing at first so great, so strange appears,
Which by degrees, Use in succeeding Years
Renders not more familiar.
Taking upon me once to justify something in use amongst us, and that was
received with absolute Authority for a great many Leagues round about us, and
not content, as men commonly do, to establish it only by force of Law, and
Example, but enquiring still farther into its Original, I found the foundation
so weak, that I who made it my business to confirm others, was very near being
dissatisfied my self. It Is by this Receipt that Plato undertakes to cure this
unnatural and preposterous Loves of his Time, which he esteems of sovereign
Virtue; namely, That the public Opinion condemns them; That the Poets, and all
other sorts of Writers, relate horrible Stories of them. A Recipe, by virtue of
which the most beautiful Daughters no more allure their Fathers Lust; nor
Brothers of the finest Shape and Fashion their Sisters desire. The very Fables
of Thyestes, Oedipus, and Macareus, having with the Harmony of their Song
infused this wholesome Opinion and Belief into the tender Brains of Infants.
Chastity is in truth a great and shining Virtue, and of which the Utility is
sufficiently known; but to govern, and prevail with it according to Nature, is
as hard, as it is easy to do it according to Custom, and the Laws and Precepts
of sober Practice. The original and fundamental Reasons are of very obscure and
difficult search, and our Masters either lightly pass them over, or not daring
so much as to touch them, precipitate themselves into the Liberty and
Protection of Custom: such as will not suffer themselves to be withdrawn from
this original Source, do yet commit a greater Error, and submit themselves to
wild and beastly Opinions; witness Chrysippus, who in so many of his Writings
has strewn the little Account he made of incestuous Conjunctions, committed
with how near Relations soever. Whoever would disengage himself from this
violent Prejudice of Custom, would find several things received with absolute
and undoubting Opinion, that have no other Support than the hoary Head and
rivell'd Face of ancient Use; and things being referred to the Decision of
Truth and Reason, he will find his Judgment convinced and overthrown, and yet
restored to a much more sure Estate. For Example, I shall ask him, what can be
more strange than to see a People obliged to obey and pay a Reverence to Laws
they never understood, and to be bound in all their Affairs, both of private
and public Concern, as Marriages, Donations, Wills, Sales, and Purchases, to
Rules they cannot possibly know, being neither writ nor published in their own
Language, and of which they are of Necessity to purchase both the
Interpretation and the Use? Not according to the ingenious Opinion of Socrates,
who counseled his King to make the Trafficks and Negotiations of his Subjects,
free, frank, and of Profit to them, and their Quarrels and Debates burdensome,
and tart, and laden with heavy Impositions and Penalties; but by a prodigious
Opinion to make sale of Reason it self, and to allow the Law a course of
Traffic. I think my self obliged to Fortune that (as our Historians report) it
was a Gascon Gentleman, a Countryman of mine, who first opposed Charlemain,
when he attempted to impose upon us Latin and Imperial Laws. What can be more
severe or unjust, than to see a Nation, where, by lawful Custom, the Office of
a Judge is to bought and sold, where Judgments are paid for with ready Money,
and where Justice may legally be denied to him that has not wherewithal to
pay; a Merchandise in so great Repute, as in a Government to serve a fourth
Estate of wrangling Lawyers, to add to the three ancient ones of the Church,
Nobility, and People; which fourth Estate, having the Laws in their hands, and
sovereign Power over Men's Lives and Fortunes, make another separate Body of
Nobility: from whence it comes to pass, that there are double Laws, those of
Honor, and those of Justice, in many things positively opposite to one
another, the Nobles as rigorously condemning a Lie taken, as the other do a Lie
revenged: By the Law of Arms, he shall be degraded from all Nobility and Honor
who puts up an Affront; and by the Civil Law, he who vindicates his Reputation
by Revenge incurs a Capital Punishment: who applies himself to the Law for
Reparation of an Offense done to his Honor, disgraces himself; and who does
not, is censured and punished by the Law. Yet of these two so different things,
both of them referring to one Head, the one has the Charge of Peace, the other
of War; those have the Profit, these the Honor; those the Wisdom, these the
Virtue; those the Word, these the Action; those Justice, these Valor; those
Reason these Force, those the long Robe, these the short divided betwixt them.

For what concerns indifferent things, as Clothes, who would debauch them from
their true and real use, which is the Bodies Service and Convenience, and upon
which their original Grace and Decency depend, for the most fantastic, in my
Opinion, that can be imagined? I will instance amongst others, our flat Caps,
that long Tail of Velvet that hangs down from our Women's Heads, and that
lascivious and abominable model of a Member we cannot in Modesty so much as
name, which nevertheless we shamefully strut withal in public. These
Considerations notwithstanding will not prevail upon any understanding Man to
decline the common Mode; but on the contrary, methinks all singular and
particular Fashions are rather marks of Folly and vain Affection, than of sound
Reason, and that a wise man ought within to withdraw and retire his Soul from
the Crowd, and there keep it at Liberty, and in Power to judge freely of
things; but as to this outward Garb and Appearance, absolutely to follow and
conform himself to the Fashion of the Time. Public Society has nothing to do
with our Thoughts, but the rest, as our Actions, our Labors, our Fortunes, and
our Lives, we are to lend and abandon them to the common Opinion and Public
Service, as did that good and great Socrates who refused to preserve his Life
by a Disobedience to the Magistrate, though a very wicked and unjust one: for
it is the Rule of Rules, and the general Law of Laws, that every one observe
those of the Place wherein he lives. (...).
The Countries Customs to observe
Is decent, and does Praise deserve.
Besides, it is a very great doubt, whether any so manifest Benefit and
Advantage can accrue from the Alteration of a Law or Custom received, let it be
what it will, as there is Danger and Inconvenience in doing it; forasmuch as
Government is a Structure composed of several Parts and Members joined and
united together, with so strict Affinity and Union, that it is almost
impossible to stir so much as one Brick or Stone, but the whole Body will
settle and be sensible of it. The Legislator of the Thurians ordained, That
whosoever would go about either to abolish old Laws, or to establish new,
should present himself with a Halter about his Neck to the People, to the end,
that if the Innovation he would introduce should not be approved by every one,
he might immediately be hanged; and that of the Lacedaemonians made it the
Business of his whole Life, to obtain from his Citizens a faithful Promise,
that none of his Laws should be violated. The Ephorus who so rudely cut the two
Strings that Phrynis had added to Music, never stood to examine whether that
Addition made better Harmony, or that by that means the Instrument was more
full and complete; it was enough to him to condemn the Invention, that it was a
Novelty, and an Alteration of the old Fashion. Which also is the Meaning of the
old rusty Sword carried before the Magistracy of Marcelles. For my own part, I
have my self a very great Aversion for Novelty, what Face, or what Pretense
soever it may carry along with it, and have reason, having been an Eyewitness
of the great Inconveniences it has produced. A man cannot, I confess, truly
say, That the Miseries, which for so many Years have lain so heavy upon the
Kingdom of France, are wholly occasioned by it; but a Man may say, and with
color enough, that it has accidentally produced and begot both the Mischiefs
and Ruins that are since continued both without and against it, and it
principally that we are to accuse for these Disorders.

Ovid. in Ep.
Heu patior telis vulnera facta meis.
Alas! the Wounds I now endure
Which my own Weapons did procure.
They who give the first shock to a State, are voluntarily the first
overwhelmed in its Ruin; the Fruits of public Commotion are seldom enjoyed
by him who was the first Motor, he only troubles the Water for another Net,
and beats the Bush whilst another gets the Hare. The Unity and Contexture of
this Monarchy, having been manifestly in her old Age ripped and torn by this
thing called Innovation, has since laid open a Rent, and given sufficient
Admittance to the like Injuries in these latter Times. The Royal Majesty does
with greater Difficult stoop and debase it self from the height to the Middle,
than it falls and tumbles headlong from the Middle to the Foundation. But if
the Inventors did the greater mischief, the Imitators are more vicious, to
follow Examples of which they have felt, and punished both the Horror and the
Offense. And if there can be any degree of Horror in ill doing, these last are
indebted to the other for the Glory of contriving, and the Courage of making
the first Attempt. All sorts of new Disorder easily draw from this primitive
and overflowing Fountain, Examples and Presidents to trouble and discompose
our Government. We read in our very Laws made for the remedy of this first
Evil, the Beginning and Pretenses of all sorts of naughty Enterprises; and in
favor of public Vices, give them new and more plausible Names for their
Excuse, sweetning and disguising their true Titles, which must be done to win
forsooth, and reclaim us, Honesta oration est: but the best Pretense for
Innovation is of very dangerous Consequence; and freely to speak my Thoughts,
it argues methinks a strange self Love, and a great Presumption of a Man's
self, to be so fond of his own Opinions, that a public Peace must be
overthrown to establish them, and to introduce so many inevitable Mischiefs,
and so dreadful a Corruption of Manners, as a Civil War, and the Mutations of
State consequent to it, always brings in its Train; and to introduce them in a
thing of so high Concern, into the Bowels of a Man's own Country. Can there be
worse Husbandry than to set up so many certain and detected Vices against
Errors, that are only contested, and disputable whether they be such or no? And
are there any worse sorts of Vices than those committed against a man's own
Conscience, and the natural Light of his own Reason? The Senate, upon the
Dispute betwixt it and the People about the Administration of their Religion,
was bold enough to return this Evasion for current Pay: Ad Deos, id magis quam
ad se pertinere: ipsos visuros, ne sacra sua polluantur: That those things more
belong to the Gods to determine, than to them, let them therefore have a care
their sacred Mysteries were not profaned: according to that the Oracle
answered to those of Delphos, who, fearing to be invaded by the Persians, in
the Median War, inquired of Apollo, how they should dispose of the holy
Treasure of his Temple, whether they should hide, or remove it to some other
Place? He returned them Answer, that they should stir nothing from thence, and
only take care of themselves, for he was sufficient to look to what belonged to
him. Christian Religion has all the Marks of the utmost Utility and Justice:
but none more manifest than the severe Injunction it lays indifferently upon
all to yield absolute Obedience to the Civil Magistrate, and to maintain and
defend the Laws: of which, what a wonderful Example has the Divine Wisdom left
us, who, to work and establish the Salvation of Mankind, and to conduct this
his glorious Victory over Death and Sin, would do it after no other way, but at
the Mercy of our ordinary forms of Justice, submitting the Progress and Issue
of so high, and so salutiferous an Effect, to the blindness, and injustice of
our Customs and Observations, suffering the innocent Blood of so many of his
Elect, and so long a loss of so many Years to the maturing of this inestimable
Fruit? There is a vast difference betwixt the Cases of one that follows the
Forms and Laws of his Country, and another that will undertake to regulate and
change them; of which the first pleads Simplicity, Obedience, and Example for
his Excuse, who, what ever he shall do, it cannot be imputed to Malice, it is at
the worst but Mifortune. Quis est enim, quem non moveat clarissimis monumentis
testata, Cicero de Divin. 1.
consignataque antiquitas? For who is it that Antiquity, sealed, and attested
with so many glorious Monuments cannot move? Besides what Isocrates says, that
Defect is nearer allied to Moderation than Excess. The other is a much more
ruffling Gamester: for whosoever shall take upon him to choose, to alter, and
usurp the Authority of judging, ought to look well about him, and make it his
Business to discover the Defect of what he would abolish, and the virtue of
what he is about to introduce. This so easy, and so vulgar consideration, is
that which settled me in my Station, and kept even my most extravagant and
ungoverned Youth under the rein, so as not to burden my Shoulders with so
great a weight, as to render my self responsible for a Science of that
importance; and in this to dare, what in my better, and more mature Judgment, I
durst not do in the most easy, and indifferent things I had been instructed
in, and wherein the temerity of judging is of no consequence at all. It seeming
to me very unjust to go about to subject public and established Customs and
Institutions, to the weakness, and instability of a private and particular
Fancy, (for private Reason is but a private Jurisdiction) and to attempt that
upon the Divine, which no Government will endure a Man should do upon the Civil
Laws. With which, though humane Reason has much more Commerce, than with the
other; yet are they sovereignly judged by their own proper Judges, and the
utmost sufficiency, serves only to expound, and set forth the Law, and Custom
received, and neither to wrest it, nor to introduce any thing of Innovation.
And if sometimes the Divine Providence have gone beyond the Rules, to which it
has necessarily bound, and obliged us Men; it is not to give us any
Dispensation to do the same; those are only master strokes of the Divine hand,
which we are not to imitate, but admire, and extraordinary Examples, marks of
purposed, and particular Testimonies of Power, of the Nature of Miracles,
presented before us for Manifestations of its Almighty Operation, equally above
both our Rules and Forces, which it would be Folly, and Impiety to attempt to
represent and imitate; and that we ought not to follow, but to contemplate with
the greatest Reverence and Astonishment. Arts proper for his Person who has
Power to do them, and not for us. Cotta very opportunely declares, that when
Matter of Religion is in question, he will be governed by T. Coruncanus, P.
Scipio, P. Scaevola, who were the High Priests, and not by Zeno, Cleanthes, or
Chrysippus, who were Philosophers. God knows in the present Quarrel of our
Civil War, where there are a hundred Articles to dash out and to put in, and
these great and very considerable ones too, how many there are who can truly
boast, they have exactly and perfectly weighed and understood the grounds and
Reasons of the one and the other Party. It Is a Number (if it make any number)
that would be able to procure us very little Disturbance: but what becomes of
all the rest, under what Ensigns do they march, in what Quarter do they lie?
Theirs have the same Effect with other weak and ill applied Medicines, they
have only set the Humors they would Purge, more violently in working, stirred
and exasperated them by the Conflict, and left them still behind. The Aposeme
was too weak to Purge, but strong enough to weaken us; so that it does not
work, but we keep it still in our Bodies, and reap nothing from the Operation
but intestine Gripes and Dolours; so it is nevertheless, that Fortune still
reserving her Authority in Defiance of whatever we are able to do or say, does
sometimes present us with a Necessity so urgent, that it is requisite the Laws
should a little yield, and give way; and when one opposes the Increase of an
Innovation that thus intrudes it self by Violence, to keep a Man's self in so
doing in all Places, and in all things, within the Bounds and Rules prescribed,
against those who have the Power, and to whom all Things are lawful, that may
any way serve to advance their Design, who have no other Law nor Rule but what
serves best to their own Purpose; is a dangerous Obligation, and an intolerable
Inequality.

Aditum nocendi perfido praestat fides.
So simple Truth does her fair Breast disarm, Seneca in Oedip. Act. 3. Scen. 1.

And gives to Treachery a Power to harm.
Forasmuch as the ordinary Discipline of a healthful State does not provide
against these extraordinary Accidents, she presupposes a Body that supports it
self in its principal Members and Offices, and a common Consent to its
Obedience and Observation. A legal Proceeding is cold, heavy, and constrained,
and not fit to make Head against a headstrong and unbridled Proceeding. It Is
known to be to this day cast in the Dish of those two great Men, Octavius and
Cato, in the two Civil Wars of Scylla and Caesar, that they would rather suffer
their Country to undergo the last Extremities, than to relieve their
Fellow-Citizens at the Expense of its Laws, or to be guilty of any Innovation;
for in truth, in these last Necessities, where there is no other Remedy, it
would peradventure be more discreetly done, to stoop, and yield a little to
receive the Blow, than by opposing without Possibility or doing any good, to
give occasion to Violence to trample all under foot; and better to make the
Laws do what they can, when they cannot do what they would. After this manner
did he who suspended them for four and twenty Hours, and he who for once
shifted a Day in the Calendar, and that other who in the Month of June made a
Second of May. The Lacedaemonians themselves, who were so religious Observers
of the Laws of their Country, being straightened by one of their own Edicts, by
which it was expressly forbidden to choose the same Man to be Admiral; and on
the other side, their Affairs necessarily requiring, that Lysander should again
take upon him that Command, they made one Aratus Admiral, it is true, but
withal, Lysander went Superintendent of the Navy. And by the same Subtilty and
Equivocation, one of their Ambassadors being sent to the Athenians to obtain
the Revocation of some Decree, and Pericles remonstrating to him, that it was
forbid to take away the Tablet wherein a Law had once been engrossed, he
advised him to turn it only, that being not forbidden at all; and Plutarch
commends Philopoemen, that being born to Command, he knew how to do it, not
only according to the Laws, but also to overruled even the Laws themselves,
when the public Necessity so required.

CHAP. XXIII. Various Events from the same Counsel.
JAques Amiot, great Almoner of France, one day related to me this Story, much
to the Honor of a Prince of ours (and ours he is upon several very good
Accounts, though originally of Foreign Extraction) that in the time of our
first Commotions at the Siege of Rouen, this Prince, having been advertised by
the Queen Mother of a Conspiracy against his Life, and in her Letters
particular notice being given him of the Person who was to execute the
Business, (who was a Gentleman of Anjou, or else of Main, and who to this
Effect did frequently haunt this Prince's House) discovered not a Syllable of
this Intelligence to any one whatever, but going the next day to St. Katherines
Mount, from whence our Battery played against the Town (for it was during the
Time of a Siege) and having in Company with him the said Lord Almoner, and
another Bishop, he was presently aware of this Gentleman, who had been denoted
to him, and presently caused him to be called to his Presence; to whom, being
come before him, seeing him pale, and trembling with the Conscience of his
Guilt, he thus said, Monsieur such a one, You already guess what I have to say
to you, your Countenance discovers it, and therefore it is in vain to disguise
your Practice; for I am so well informed of your Business, that it will but
make worse for you, to go about to conceal or to deny it: you know very well
such and such Passages, (which were the most secret Circumstances of his
Conspiracy) and therefore be sure, as you tender your own Life, to confess to
me the whole Truth of your Design. The poor Man seeing himself thus trap'd, and
convinced (for the whole Business had been discovered to the Queen by one of
the Accomplices) was in such a Taking, he knew not what to do; but joining his
Hands to beg and sue for Mercy, he meant to throw himself at this Prince's
Feet, who taking him up, proceeded to say, Come on Sir, and tell me, have I at
any time heretofore done you any Injury? or have I, through my particular
Hatred or private Malice, offended any Kinsman or Friend of yours? It is not
above three Weeks that I have known you; What Inducement then could move you to
attempt my Death? To which the Gentleman, with a trembling Voice, replied, That
it was no particular Grudge he had to his Person, but the general Interest and
Concern of his Party, and that he had been put upon it by some who had
persuaded him it would be a meritorious Act, by any means to extirpate so great
and so powerful an Enemy of their Religion. Well, said the Prince, I will now
let you see, how much more charitable the Religion is that I maintain, than
that which you profess; Yours has persuaded you to kill me, without hearing me
speak, and without ever having given you any cause of Offense; and mine
commands me to forgive you, convict as you are, by your own Confession, of a
Design to murder me without Reason. Get you gone, that I see you no more; and
if you are wise, choose henceforward honester Men for your Counselors in your
Designs. The Emperor Augustus, being in Gaul, had certain information of a
Conspiracy L. Cinna was contriving against him, who thereupon resolved to make
him an Example; and to that end sent to summon his Friends to meet the next
morning in Counsel; but the night between he past over with great unquietness
of Mind, considering that he was to put to death a young man, of an illustrious
Family, and Nephew to the great Pompey, which made him break out into several
ejaculations of Passion: What then, said he, Shall it be said, that I shall
live in perpetual Anxiety, and continual Alarm, and suffer my Assassinates in
the mean time to walk abroad at Liberty? Shall he go unpunished after having
conspired against my Life, a Life that I have hitherto defended in so many
Civil Wars, and so many Battles both by Land and Sea? And after having settled
the Universal Peace of the whole World, shall this man be pardoned, who has
conspired not only to Murder, but to Sacrifice me? For the Conspiracy was to
kill him at Sacrifice. After which, remaining for some time silent, he re-begun
louder, and straining his Voice more than before to exclaim against himself,
and say, Why liv'st thou? If it be for the good of many that thou should
Dye? must there be no end of thy Revenges and Cruelties? Is thy Life of so
great value, that so many Mischiefs must be done to preserve it? His Wife
Livia, seeing him in this perplexity; Will you take a Woman's Counsel, said
she? Do as the Physicians do, who, when the ordinary Recipe's will do no good,
make Trial of the contrary. By severity you have hitherto prevailed nothing;
Lepidus has followed Savidienus, Murena Lepidus, Caepio Murena, and Egnatius
Caepio. Begin now, and try how Sweetness and Clemency will succeed. Cinna is
convict, forgive him, he will never henceforth have the Heart to hurt thee, and
it will be an Act of Glory. Augustus was glad that he had met with an Advocate
of his own Humor; wherefore, having thanked his Wife, and in the Morning
countermanded his Friends he had before summoned to Council, he commanded Cinna
all alone to be brought to him; who being accordingly come, and a Chair by his
Appointment set him, having commanded every one out of the Room, he spoke to
him after this manner: In the first place, Cinna, I demand of thee patient
Audience; do not interrupt me in what I am about to say, and I will afterward
give thee Time and Leisure to answer. Thou know, Cinna, that having taken
thee Prisoner in the Enemies Camp, and that an Enemy not only made, but born
so, I gave thee thy Life, restored thee all thy Goods, and finally put thee in
so good a posture, by my Bounty, of living well, and at thy ease, that the
Victorious envied the Conquered. The Sacerdotal Office which thou made Suit
to me for, I conferred upon thee, after having denied it to others, whose
Fathers have ever borne Arms in my Service: and after so many Obligations thou
have undertaken to kill me. At which Cinna crying out, that he was very far
from entertaining any so wicked a Thought; Thou do not keep thy Promise,
Cinna, (continued Augustus) that thou would not interrupt me. Yes, thou have
undertaken to murder me in such a Place, such a Day, in such and such Company,
and in such a Manner. At which Words seeing Cinna astonished and silent, not
upon the Account of his Promise so to be, but interdict with the Conscience of
his Crime; Why, proceeded Augustus, to what end would thou do it? Is it to
be Emperor? Believe me, the Republic is in a very ill Condition, if I am the
only Man betwixt thee and the Empire. Thou art not able so much as to defend
thy own House, and but the other day wast baffled in a Suit, by the opposed
Interest of a mean manumitted Slave. What, have thou neither Means nor Power in
any other thing, but only to attempt against Caesar? I quit claim to the
Empire, if there is no other but I to obstruct thy Hopes. Can thou believe,
that Paulus, that Fabius, that the Cassians and Servilians, and so many Noble
Romans, not only so in Title, but who by their Virtue honor their Nobility,
would suffer or endure thee? After this, and a great deal more that he said to
him, (for he was two long Hours in speaking) Well, Cinna, go thy way, said he,
I again give thee that Life in the Quality of a Traitor and a Parricide, which
I once before gave thee in the Quality of an Enemy. Let Friendship from this
time forward begin betwixt us, and let us try to make it appear whether I have
given, or thou have received thy Life with the better Faith; and so departed
from him. Some time after, he preferred him to the Consular Dignity,
complaining, that he had not the Confidence to demand it; had him ever after
for his very great Friend, and was at last made by him sole Heir to all his
Estate. Now from the time of this Accident, which befell Augustus in the
fortieth Year of his Age, he never had any Conspiracy or Attempt against him,
and therein reaped the due Reward of this his so generous and exemplary
Clemency. But it did not so well succeed with our Prince in the former Story,
his Moderation and Mercy not being sufficient so to secure him, that he did not
afterward fall into the Toils of the like Treason, so vain and frivolous a
thing is Humane Prudence; and in spite of all our Projects, Counsels, and
Praecautions, Fortune will still be Mistress of Events. We repute Physicians
fortunate when they hit upon a lucky Cure, as if there was no other Art but
theirs that could not stand upon its own Legs, and whose Foundations are too
weak to support it self upon its own Basis; and as if no other Art stood in
need of Fortunes Hand to assist in its Operations. For my part, I think of
Physic as much good or ill as any one would have me: for, Thanks be to God, we
have no great Traffic together. I am of a quite contrary Humor to other men,
for I always despise it; but when I am sick, instead of recanting, or entering
into Composition with it, I begin yet more to hate, nauseate, and fear it,
telling them who importune me to enter into a course of Physic, that they must
give me time to recover my Strength and Health, that I may be the better able
to support and encounter the violence and danger of the Potion: so that I still
let Nature work, supposing her to be sufficiently armed with Teeth and Claws to
defend her self from the Assaults of Infirmity, and to uphold that Contexture,
the Dissolution of which she flies and abhors: for I am afraid, lest instead of
assisting her when grappled, and struggling with the Disease, I should assist
her Adversary, and procure new Work, and new Accidents to encounter. Now I say,
that not in Physic only, but in other more certain Arts, Fortune has a very
great interest and share. The Poetic Raptures, and those prodigious flights of
Fancy, that ravish and transport the Author out of himself, why should we not
attribute them to his good Fortune, since the Poet himself confesses they
exceed his Sufficiency and Force, and acknowledges them to proceed from
something else than himself, and has them no more in his Power than the Orators
say they have those extraordinary Motions and Agitations that sometimes push
them beyond their Design. It is the same in Painting, where Touches shall
sometimes slip from the hand of the Painter, so surpassing both his Fancy and
his Art, as to beget his own Admiration. But Fortune does yet more accidently
manifest the share she has in all things of this kind, by the Graces and
Elegancies are found out in them, not only beyond the Intention, but even
without the Knowledge of the Artist. A judicious Reader does often find out in
other Men's Writings, other kind of Perfections, and finds in them a better
Sense and more quaint Expression than the Author himself either intended or
perceived. And, as to military Enterprises and Executions, every one sees how
great a hand Fortune has in all those Affairs; even in our very Counsels and
Deliberations there must certainly be something of Chance and good Luck mixed
with Humane Prudence, for all that our Wisdom can do alone is no great matter;
the more piercing, quick, and apprehensive it is, the weaker it finds it self,
and is by so much more apt to mistrust its own Virtue. I am of Sylla's Opinion,
and when I most strictly and nearer hand examine the most glorious Exploits of
War, I perceive, methinks, that those who carry them on, make use of Counsel
and Debate only for Customs sake, and leave the best part of the Enterprise to
Fortune, and relying upon her Favor and Assistance, transgress at every turn
the Bounds of Military Conduct, and the Rules of War. There happen sometimes
accidental Alacrities and strange Furies in their Deliberations, that for the
most part prompt them to follow the worst, and worst grounded Counsels, and
that swell their Courages beyond the Limits of Reason: Monluc in his
Commentarisse.
from whence it falls out, that many great Captains, to justify those
temerarious Deliberations, have been forced to tell their Soldiers, that they
were by some Inspiration and good Omen encouraged and invited to such Attempts.
Wherefore, in this Doubt and Uncertainty that the short-sightedness of Humane
Wisdom to see and choose the best, (by reason of the Difficulties that the
various Accidents and Circumstances of things bring along with them) does
perplex us withal, the surest way in my Opinion, did no other Consideration
invite us to it, more to pitch upon that wherein is the greatest Appearance of
Honesty and Justice, and not being certain of the shortest, to go the straitest
and most direct way; as in these two Examples I have before laid down; there is
no question to be made but it was more noble and generous in him who had
received the Offense, to pardon it, as they both did, than to do otherwise; and
if the former miscarried in it, he is not nevertheless to be blamed for his
good Intention: neither does any one know if he had proceeded otherwise,
whether by that means he had avoided the end his Destiny had appointed for him;
and he had however lost the Glory of so generous an Act. You will find in
History, of many who have been in this apprehension, that the most part have
taken the course to meet, and prevent Conspiracies by Punishment and Revenge;
but I find but very few who have reaped any Advantage by this proceeding;
witness so many Roman Emperors: and whoever finds himself in this danger,
ought not to expect much either from his Vigilance or Power; for how hard a
thing is it for a man to secure himself from an Enemy, who lies concealed under
the countenance of the most officious Friend we have, and to discover and know
the Wills and inward Thoughts of those who are continually doing us service.
It Is to much purpose to have a Guard of Strangers about a man's Person, and to
be always fenced about with a Pale of armed men; whosoever despises his own
Life, is always Master of that of another man. And moreover, this continual
suspicion, that makes a Prince jealous of all the World, must of necessity be a
strange Torment to him, and therefore it was, that Dion, being advertised that
Calippus watched all opportunities to take away his Life, had never the Heart
to enquire more particularly into it, saying, that he had rather dye, than live
in that misery, that he must continually stand upon his Guard, not only
against his Enemies, but his Friends also; which Alexander much more lively
manifested in effect, when having notice by a Letter from Parmenio, that
Philip, his most beloved Physician, was by Darius his money corrupted to poison
him, at the same time that he gave the Letter to Philip to read, supped off the
Potion he had brought him. Was not this by such a Resolution to express, that
if his Friends had a mind to dispatch him out of the World, he was willing to
give them opportunity to do it? This Prince is indeed the Sovereign President
of all hazardous Actions; but I do not know whether there be another passage in
his Life wherein there is so much steadiness and constancy as in this, nor so
illustrious an Image of the greatness of his Mind. Those who preach to Princes
so circumspect and vigilant a jealousy and distrust, under color of Security,
preach to them ruin and dishonor. Nothing Noble can ever be performed without
Danger. I know a Person, naturally of a very great daring and enterprizing
Courage, whose good fortune is continually prevented, and fore-stall'd by such
persuasions, that he must retire into the gross of his own Body, and keep those
he knows are his Friends continually about him, that he must not hearken to any
Reconciliation with his ancient Enemies, that he must stand off, and not trust
his Person in hands stronger than his own, what promises or offers soever they
may make him, or what advantages soever he may see before him. And I know
another, who has unexpectedly made his Fortune by following a contrary Advice.
Courage, the Reputation and Glory of which men seek with so greedy an Appetite,
represents and sets it self out when need requires, as magnificently in Querpo,
as in the neatest Arms, in a Closet, as well as a Camp; and this
over-circumspect and wary Prudence is a mortal Enemy to all high and generous
Exploits. Scipio, to sound Syphax his intention, leaving his Army, and
abandoning Spain, not yet secure, nor well settled in his new Conquest, could
pass over into Africa in two contemptible Bottoms, to commit himself, in an
Enemies Country, to the power of a Barbarian King, to a Faith untried and
unknown, without Precaution, without Hostage, under the sole security of the
greatness of his own Courage, his good Fortune, and the promise of his elevated
Hopes. Livius.
Habita fides ipsam plerumque fidem obligat. Trust oftentimes obliges Fidelity.
On the contrary, Fear and Diffidence invite and draw on injury and offense. The
most mistrustful of all our Kings settled his Affairs principally by
voluntarily giving up his Life and Liberty into his Enemies hands, by that
action manifesting that he had an absolute confidence in them, to the end they
might repose as great an assurance in him. Caesar did only oppose the
Authority of his Countenance, and the sharpness of his Rebukes to his mutinous
Legions, and rebellious Army.

-- stetit aggere fulti
Lucan. l. 5.
Cespitis, intrepidus vultu, meruitque timeri
Nil metuens.
Upon a Parapet of Turf he stood,
His manly face with Resolution shone,
And froze the Mutineers rebellious blood,
Challenging fear from all by fearing none.
But it is true withal, that this undaunted assurance is not to be represented
in its true and lively form, but by such whom the apprehension of Death, and
the worst that can happen, does no way terrify and affright; for to represent
a pretended Resolution with a pale and doubtful Countenance, and trembling
Limbs for the forced Service of an important Reconciliation, will effect
nothing to purpose. It Is an excellent way to gain the Heart, and conquer the
Will of another, to go submit, and entrust a man's Person to him, provided it
appear to be frankly done, and without the constraint of Necessity, and in such
a condition, that a man manifestly does it out of a pure and entire confidence
in the Party, at least with a Countenance clear from any Cloud of suspicion. I
saw, when I was a Boy, a Gentleman, who was Governor of a great City, upon
occasion of a Popular Commotion and Fury, not knowing what other course to
take, go out of a Place of very great Strength and Security, and commit himself
to the mercy of the seditious Rabble, in hopes by that means to appease the
Tumult before it grew to a more formidable Head: but it was ill for him that he
did so, for he was there miserably slain. But I am not nevertheless of opinion,
that he committed so great an Error in going out, as men commonly reproach his
Memory withal, as he did in choosing a gentle and submissive way for the
effecting his purpose, and in endeavoring to quiet this storm, rather by
obeying than commanding, and by Entreaty rather than Remonstrance; and am
inclined to believe, that a gracious Severity, with a Souldier-like way of
commanding, full of Security, and confidence suitable to the Quality of his
Person, and the Dignity of his Command, would have succeeded better with him;
at least, he had perished with greater Decency and Reputation. There is nothing
so little to be expected, or hoped for from this many-headed Monster, when so
incensed, as Humanity and good Nature; it is much more capable of Reverence and
Fear. I should also reproach him, that having taken a Resolution (in my
Judgment rather brave than rash) to expose himself weak and naked in this
tempestuous Sea of enraged Franticks, he ought boldly to have stemmed the
Current, and to have born himself bravely aloft; whereas coming to discover
his Danger nearer hand, and his Nose thereupon happening to bleed, he again
changed that demiss and fawning Countenance he had at first put on, into
another of Fear and Amazement, and filling both his Voice and Eyes with
Entreaties and Tears, and in that Posture endeavoring to withdraw and secure
his Person, that Carriage more enflamed their Fury, and soon brought the
Effects of it upon him. It was upon a time in a certain Place ordered by some,
who had no very good Meaning in it, that there should be a general Muster of
several Troops in Arms (for that is the most proper Scene of secret Revenges,
and there is no Place where they can be executed with greater Safety) and there
were public and manifest Appearances, that there was no safe coming for some,
whose principal and necessary Office it was to view them. Whereupon, a
Consultation was called, and several Counsels were proposed, as in a case that
was very nice, and of great Difficulty; and moreover, of important consequence.
Mine, amongst the rest, was, that they should by all means avoid giving any
sign of Suspicion, but that the Officers who were most in danger should boldly
go, and with cheerful and erect Countenances ride boldly and confidently
thorough the Files and Divisions, and that instead of sparing Fire (which the
Counsels of the major part tended to) they should entreat the Captains to
command the Soldiers to give round and full Volleys in Honor of the
Spectators, and not to spare their Powder: which was accordingly done, and
served to so good use, as to please and gratify the suspected Troops, and
thenceforward to beget a mutual and wholesome Confidence and Intelligence
amongst them. I look upon Julius Caesar's way of winning Men to him as the
best, and most plausible, that can possibly be put in practice. First, he tried
by Clemency to make himself beloved even by his very Enemies, contenting
himself in detected Conspiracies, only publicly to declare, that he was
pre-acquainted with them; which being done, he took a noble Resolution to
expect, without Solicitude or Fear, whatever might be the Event, wholly
resigning up himself to the Protection of the Gods and Fortune: for
questionless in this very Estate he was at the time when he was killed. A
Stranger having publicly said, that he could teach Dionysius, the Tyrant of
Syracusa, an infallible way to find out and discover all the Conspiracies his
Subjects should contrive against him, if he would give him a good Sum of Money
for his Pains: Dionysius, hearing of it, caused the Man to be brought to him,
that he might learn an Art so necessary to his Preservation; and having asked
him by what Art he might make such Discoveries, the Fellow made Answer, That
all the Art he knew, was, That he should give him a Talent, and afterward
boast that he had obtained a singular Secret from him. Dionysius liked the
Invention, and accordingly caused six hundred Crowns to be counted out to him.
It was not likely he should give so great a Sum to a Person unknown, but upon
the account of some extraordinary Discovery, the belief of which served to keep
his Enemies in awe. Princes however do very wisely, to publish the Informations
they receive of all the Practices against their Lives, to possess men with an
opinion they have so good Intelligence, and so many Spies abroad, that nothing
can be plotted against them, but they have present notice of it. The Duke of
Athens did a great many ridiculous things to establish his new Tyranny over
Florence: but this especially was most remarkable, that having received the
first intimation of the Conspiracies the People were hatching against him, by
Mattheo di Moroso, one of the Conspirators, he presently put him to death, to
suppress that Rumor, that it might not be thought any of the City disliked his
Government. I remember I have formerly read a Story of some Roman of great
Quality, who, flying the Tyranny of the Triumvirat, had a thousand times, by
the subtilty of as many Inventions, escaped from falling into the hands of
those that pursued him. It happened one day, that a Troop of Horse which was
sent out to take him, passed close by a Brake where he was squat, and missed
very narrowly of spying him: but he considering, upon the instant, the Pains
and Difficulties wherein he had so long continued, to evade the strict and
continual Searches were every day made for him, the little Pleasure he could
hope for in such a kind of Life, and how much better it was for him to dye once
for all, than to be perpetually at this pass, he start from his Seat himself,
called them back, showed them his Form, and voluntarily delivered himself up to
their Cruelty, by that means to free both himself and them from further
Trouble. To invite a man's Enemies to come and cut his Throat, was a Resolution
that appears a little extravagant and odd; and yet I think he did better to
take that course, than to live in a Quotidian Ague; and for which there was no
Cure. But seeing all the Remedies a Man can apply to such a Disease, are full
of Unquietness, and uncertain, it is better with a manly Courage to prepare ones
self for the worst that can happen, and to extract some Consolation from this,
That we are not certain the thing we fear will ever come to pass.

CHAP. XXIV. Of Pedantry.
I Was often, when a Boy, wonderfully concerned to see in the Italian Farces, a
Pedant always brought in for the Fool of the Play, and that the Title of
Magister was in no greater Reverence amongst us: for being delivered up to
their Tuition, what could I do less than be jealous of their Honor and
Reputation? I sought, I confess, to excuse them by the natural incompatibility
betwixt the Vulgar sort, and men of a finer thread, both in Judgment and
Knowledge, for as much as they go a quite contrary way to one another: But in
this, the thing I most stumbled at was, that the bravest men were those who
most despised them; witness our famous Poet du Bellay, Du Bellay.
Mais je hay par sur tout un scavoir pedantesque.
But of all sorts of Learning, that
Of the Pedant I most do hate.
And they used to do so in former times; for Plutarch says, that Grecian, and
Scholar, were names of reproach and contempt amongst the Romans. But since,
with the better experience of Age, I find they had very great reason so to do,
and that magis magnos Clericos, Rabelais*
non sunt magis magnos sapientes. The greatest Clerks are not the wisest men.
But whence it should come to pass, that a Mind enriched with the knowledge of
so many things, should not become more quick and spritely, and that a gross and
vulgar understanding should yet inhabit there, without correcting and improving
it self, where all the Discourses, and Judgments of the greatest Wits the World
ever had, are collected, and stored up, I am yet to seek. To admit so many
strange Conceptions, so great and so high Fancies, it is necessary, (as a young
Lady, and one of the greatest Princesses of the Kingdom, said to me once) that
a man's own be crowded, and squeezed together into a less compass, to make room
for the other. I should be apt to conclude, that as Plants are suffocated, and
drowned with too much nourishment, and Lamps with too much Oil, so is the
active part of the Understanding with too much study and Matter, which being
embarass'd, and confounded with the diversity of things, is deprived of the
Force and Power to disengage it self; and that by the pressure of this weight,
it is bowed, subjected, and rendered of no use. But it is quite otherwise, for a
Soul stretches and dilates it self proportionably as it fills. And in the
Examples (...) elder times, we see quite contrary, men v^^ry proper for public
Business, great Captains, and great Statesmen, very Learned withal; whereas
the Philosophers, a sort of men retired from all Public Affairs, have been
sometimes also despised, and rendered contemptible by the Comical liberty of
their own Times; their Opinions, and singularity of Manners, making them appear
to men of another method of living, ridiculous and absurd. Would you make them
Judges of a Controversy of common Right, or of the Actions of Men? they are
ready to take it upon them, and straight begin to examine, if he has Life, if
he has Motion, if Man be any other than an Ox? What it is to do, and to
suffer? and what Animals Law and Justice are? Do they speak of the Magistrates,
it is with a rude, irreverent, and indecent liberty. Do they hear a Prince, or a
King commended for his Virtue, they make no more of him, than of a Shepherd,
Goat-heard, or Neat-heard; a lazy Coridon, that busies himself only about
milking, and shearing his Herds and Flocks, and that after the rudest manner.
Do you repute any man the greater for being Lord of two thousand Acres of Land?
they laugh at such a pitiful Pittance, as laying claim themselves to the whole
World for their possession. Do you boast of your Nobility and Blood, for being
descended from seven rich successive Ancestors? they will look upon you with an
eye of Contempt, as men who have not a right Idea of the Universal Image of
Nature, and that do not consider how mamy Predecessors every one of us has had,
Rich, Poor, Kings, Slaves, Greeks, and Barbarians. And though you were the
fiftieth descent from Hercules, they look upon it as a great vanity, so highly
to value this, which is only a gift of Fortune. And even so did the Vulgar sort
of men nauseate them, as men ignorant of the beginning of things, where all
things were common, accusing them of Presumption and Insolence. But this
Platonic Picture is far different from that these Pedants are presented by:
For those were envied for raising themselves above the common sort of men, for
despising the ordinary Actions and Offices of Life, for having assumed a
particular and inimitable way of living, and for using a certain Method of
Bumbaste and obsolete Language, quite different from the ordinary way of
speaking: but these are contemned for being as much below the usual form, as
incapable of Public Employment, for leading a Life, and conforming themselves
to the mean and vile manners of the Vulgar. Odi homines ignava opera,
Philosopha Sententia. Peccuvius.
I hate men who talk like Philosophers, but do worse than the most slothful of
men. For what concerns those true Philosophers, I must needs say, that if they
were great in Science, they were yet much greater in Action. And, as it is said
of the Geometrician of Syracusa, Archimedes.
who having been disturbed from his Contemplation, to put some of his Skill in
Practice for the Defense of his Country, that he suddenly set on foot dreadful
and prodigious Engines, and that wrought Effects beyond all humane expectation;
himself notwithstanding disdained his own handiwork, thinking in this he had
played the Mechanic, and violated the Dignity of his Art, of which these
Performances of his, (though so highly cried up by the Public Voice) he
accounted but trivial Experiments, and inferior Models: so they, whenever they
have been put upon the Proof of Action, have been seen to fly to so high a
Pitch, as made it very well appear, their Souls were strangely elevated, and
enriched with the Knowledge of Things. But some of them, seeing the Reins of
Government in the hands of ignorant and unskilful Men, have avoided all Places
and Interest in the Management of Affairs; and he who demanded of Crates, How
long it was necessary to Philosophize, received this Answer, Till our Armies
(said he) are no more commanded by Fools and Coxcombs. Heraclitus resigned the
Royalty to his Brother, and to the Ephesians, who reproached him that he spent
his time in playing with Boys before the Temple; Is it not better, said he, to
do so, than to sit at the Helm of Affairs in your Company? Others having their
Imagination advanced above the thoughts of the World and Fortune, have looked
upon the Tribunals of Justice, and even the Thrones of Kings, with an Eye of
Contempt and Scorn; insomuch, that Empedocles refused the Royalty that the
Agrigentines offered to him. Thales, once inveighing in Discourse against the
Pains and Care Men put themselves to, to become rich; was answered by one in
the Company, that he did like the Fox, who found fault with what he could not
obtain. Whereupon, he had a mind, for the Jest's sake, to show them to the
contrary; and having upon this Occasion for once made a muster of all his Wits,
wholly to employ them in the Service of Profit, he set a Traffic on foot,
which in one Year brought him in so great Riches, that the most experienced in
that Trade could hardly in their whole Lives, with all their Industry, have
raked so much together. That which Aristotle reports of some who said of him,
Anaxagoras, and others of their Profession, that they were wise but not
prudent, in not applying their Study to more profitable things (though I do not
well digest this nice Distinction) that will not however serve to excuse my
Pedantick sort of Men, for to see the low and necessitous Fortune wherewith
they are content, we have rather Reason to pronounce that they are neither
wise, nor prudent. But letting this first Reason alone, I think it better to
say, that this Inconvenience proceeds from their applying themselves the wrong
way to the Study of Sciences; and that after the manner we are instructed, it
is no wonder if neither the Scholars nor the Masters become, though more
learned, ever the wiser, or more fit for Business. In plain Truth, the Cares
and Expense our Parents are at in our Education* point at nothing, but to
furnish our Heads with Knowledge; but not a Word of Judgment and Virtue. Cry
out of one that passes by, to the People, O, what a Learned! and of another, O,
what a good man goes there! they will not fail to turn their Eyes, and address
their Respect to the former. There should then be a third Crier, O the Puppies
and Coxcombs! Men are apt presently to enquire, Does such a one understand
Greek? Is he a Critic in Latin? Is he a Poet? or does he only pretend to
Prose? But whether he be grown better or more discreet, which are Qualities of
greater Value and Concern, those are never inquired into; whereas, we should
rather examine, who is better learned, than who is more learned. We only toil
and labor to stuff the Memory, and in the mean time leave the Conscience and
the Understanding unfurnished and void. And, like Birds who fly abroad to
forage for Grain, bring it home in the Beak, without tasting it themselves, to
feed their Young; so our Pedants go picking Knowledge here and there, out of
several Authors, and hold it at the Tongues end, only to spit it out, and
distribute it amongst their Pupils. And here I cannot but smile to think how I
have paid my self in showing the Foppery of this kind of Learning, who my self
am so manifest an Example; for, do I not the same thing throughout almost this
whole Treatise? I go here and there, culling out of several Books the Sentences
that best please me, not to keep them (for I have no Memory to retain them in)
but to transplant them into this; where, to say the Truth, they are no more
mine than in their first Places. We are, I conceive, knowing only in present
Knowledge, and not at all in what is past, no more than in that which is to
come. But the worst on it is, their Scholars and Pupils are no better nourished
by this kind of Inspiration, nor it makes no deeper Impression upon them, than
the other, but passes from hand to hand, only to make a show, to be tolerable
Company, and to tell pretty Stories, like a counterfeit Coin in Counters, of no
other use nor value, but to reckon with, or to set up at Cards. Apud alios
loqui didicerunt, non ipsi secum. Seneca Epist. 105.
Non est loquendum, sed gubernandum; They have learned to speak from others,
not from themselves. Speaking is not so necessary as Governing. Nature, to show
that there is nothing barbarous where she has the sole Command, does
oftentimes, in Nations where Art has the least to do, cause productions of Wit,
such as may rival the greatest Effects of Art whatever. As in relation to what
I am now speaking of, the Gascon Proverb, derived from a Corn-pipe, is very
quaint and subtle. Bouha prou bouha, mas a remuda lous dits qu'em. You may blow
till your Eyes start out; but if once you offer to stir your Fingers, you will
be at the end of your Lesson. We can say, Cicero says thus; that these were the
Manners of Plato, and that these are the very Words of Aristotle: but what do
we say our selves that is our own? What do we do? What do we judge? A Parrot
would say as much as that. And this kind of Talking puts me in mind of that
rich Gentleman of Rome, who had been sollicitous, with very great Expense, to
procure men that were excellent in all sorts of Science, which he had always
attending his Person, to the end, that when amongst his Friends any Occasion
fell out of speaking of any Subject whatsoever, they might supply his Place,
and be ready to prompt him, one with a Sentence of Seneca, another with a Verse
of Homer, and so forth, every one according to his Talent; and he fancied this
Knowledge to be his own, because in the Heads of those who lived upon his
Bounty. As they also do whose Learning consists in having noble Libraries. I
know one, who, when I question him about his Reading, he presently calls for a
Book to show me, and dare not venture to tell me so much, as that he has Piles
in his Posteriours, till first he has consulted his Dictionary, what Piles and
what Posteriours are. We take other Men's Knowledge and Opinions upon Trust;
which is an idle and superficial Learning: we must make it our own. We are in
this very like him, who having need of Fire, went to a Neighbors House to
fetch it, and finding a very good one there, fate down to warm himself without
remembering to carry any with him home. What good does it do us to have the
Stomach full of Meat, if it do not digest, and be not incorporated with us, if
it does not nourish and support us? Can we imagine that Lucullus, whom Letters,
without any manner of Experience made so great and so exact a Leader, learnt to
be so after this perfunctory manner? We suffer our selves to lean and rely so
over-strongly upon the Arm of another, that by so doing we prejudice our own
Strength and Vigor. Would I fortify my self against the fear of Death? it
must be at the Expense of Seneca: Would I extract Consolation for my self or my
Friend? I borrow it from him, or Cicero; whereas I might have found it in my
self, had I been trained up to make use of my own Reason. I do not fancy this
relative, mendicant, and precarious Understanding; for though we could become
learned by other Men's Reading, I am sure a Man can never be wise but by his own
Wisdom. (...). Proverb. Iamb.

Who in his own Concern's not wise,
I that Man's Wisdom do despise.
From whence Ennius, Cicero Epist. 6. l. 7. ex Ennio.
Nequidquam sapere sapientem, qui ipsi sibi prodesse non quiret; That wise man
knows nothing, who cannot profit himself by his Wisdom. Cicero de Fini. l. 1.
Non enim paranda nobis solum, sed fruenda sapientia est; For Wisdom is not
only to be acquired, but enjoyed. Dionysius laughed at the Grammarians, who
cudgelled their Brains to enquire into the Miseries of Ulysses, and were
ignorant of their own; at Musicians, who were so exact in tuning their
Instruments, and never tuned their Manners; and at Orators, who studied to
declare what was Justice, but never took care to do it. If the Mind be not
better disposed, if the Judgment be no better settled, I had much rather my
Scholar had spent his time at Tennis, for at least his Body would by that means
be in better Exercise and Breath. Do but observe him when he comes back from
School, after fifteen or sixteen Years that he has been there, there is nothing
so awkward and maladroit, so unfit for Company or Employment; and all that you
shall find he has got, is, that his Latin and Greek have only made him a
greater and more conceited Coxcomb than when he went from home. He should bring
his Soul repleat with good Literature, and he brings it only swelled, and
puffed up with vain and empty Shreds and Snatches of Learning, and has really
nothing more in him than he had before. These Pedants of ours, as Plato says of
the Sophists, their Cousin-Germans, are, of all Men living, they who most
pretend to be useful to Mankind, and who alone, of all Men, not only do not
better and improve that is committed to them, as a Carpenter or a Mason would
do, but make them much worse, and make them pay for being made so to boot. If
the Rule which Protagoras proposed to his Pupils were followed, either that
they should give him his own Demand, or make Affidavit upon Oath in the Temple
how much they valued the Profit they had received under his Tuition, and
accordingly satisfy him, our Pedagogues would find themselves basely
gravelled, especially if they were to be judged by the Testimony of my
Experience. Our vulgar Perigordin Patois does pleasantly call them Pretenders
to Learning, Lettre-ferits, as a Man should say, Letter-mark'd; a man on whom
Letters have been stamped by the Blow of a Mallet; and in truth, for the most
part, they appear to have a soft place in their Skuls, and to be deprived even
of common Sense. For you see the Husbandman, and the Cobbler, go simply and
honestly about their Business, speaking only of what they know and understand;
whereas these Fellows, to make parade, and to get opinion, mustering this
ridiculous knowledge of theirs, that swims and floats in the Superficies of the
Brain, are perpetually perplexing and entangling themselves in their own
Nonsense. They speak fine words sometimes, it is true, but let some body that is
wiser apply them. They are wonderfully well acquainted with Galen, but not at
all with the Disease of the Patient; they have already deaf'd you with a long
ribble-row of Laws, but understand nothing of the case in hand; They have the
Theories of all things, let who will put it in practice. I have sat by, when a
Friend of mine, in my own House, for sport sake, has with one of these Fellows
counterfeited a canting Galimatias, patcht up of several Expressions without
head or foot, saving that he now and then interlarded here and there some terms
that had relation to their Dispute, and held the Coxcomb in play a whole
Afternoon together, who all the while thought he had answered pertinently, and
learnedly to all his Objections. And yet this was a man of Letters, and
Reputation, and no worse than one of the long Robe. Vos O patricius sanguis
quos vivere par est Persius, Sat. 1.

Occipiti caeco, posticae occurrite sannae.
O you Patrician bloods, whose Laws commend
To have your heads from retrospexion blind,
Take this poor counsel of a faithful Friend,
Beware of having a Caldese behind.
Whosoever shall narrowly pry into, and thoroughly sift this sort of People,
wherewith the World is so pestered, will, as I have done, find, that for the
most part, they neither understand others, nor themselves; and that their
Memories are full enough, it is true, but the Judgment totally void and empty;
some excepted, whose own Nature has of it self formed them into better fashion.
Testimony of Adrianus Turnebus.
As I have observed for Example in Adrianus Turnebus, who having never made
other profession, than that of mere Learning only, and in that, in my opinion,
the greatest man that has been these thousand years, had nothing at all in him
of the Pedant, but the wearing of his Gown, and a little exterior fashion,
that could not be civilized to the Garb, which are nothing; and I hate our
People, who can worse endure a Pedantick Mode, than an ill contrived Mind, and
take their measures by the Leg a man makes, by his behavior, and so much as
the very fashion of his Boots, what a kind of man he is. For within all this,
there was not a more illustrious and polite Soul living upon Earth. I have
often purposely put him upon Arguments quite wide of his Profession, wherein I
found he had so clear an insight, so quick an apprehension, and so solid a
judgment: that a man would have thought he had never practiced any other thing
but Arms, and been all his life employed in Affairs of State. And these are
great and vigorous Natures, -- Queis art benigna
Juven. Sat. 14.
Et meliore luto finxit praecordia Titan.
-- With greater Art whose mind
The Sun has made of Clay much more refined.
that can keep themselves upright in defiance of a Pedantick Education. But it
is not enough that our Education does not spoil us; it must moreover alter us
for the better. Some of our Parlaments, when they are to admit Officers,
examine only their Talent of Learning; to which some of the others also add
the trial of Understanding, by asking their Judgment of some Case in Law, of
which the latter methinks proceed with the better Method: for although both are
necessary, and that it is very requisite they should be defective in neither,
yet, in truth, Knowledge is not so absolutely necessary as Judgment, and the
last may make shift without the other, but the other never without this. For as
the Greek Verse says, (...). Menander in Gnom.

Learning is nothing worth, if Wit
And Understanding be not joined with it.
To what Use serves Learning, if the Understanding be away? Would to God, that,
for the good of our Judicature, those Societies were as well furnished with
Understanding and Conscience, as they are with Knowledge. Non Vitae, sed Scolae
discimus; Sen. Epist. 106.
We do not study for the service of our future Life, but only for the present
use of the School. Whereas we are not to tie Learning to the Soul, but to work
and incorporate them together; not to tincture it only, but to give it a
thorough and perfect die; which, if it will not take color, and meliorate its
imperfect state, it were without question better to let it alone It Is a
dangerous weapon, and that will endanger to wound its master, if put into an
awkward, and unskilful hand: Vt fuerit melius non didicisse. So that it were
better never to have learned at all. And this peradventure is the reason, why
neither we, nor indeed Christian Religion, require much Learning in Women; and
that Francis Duke of Brittany, Son of John the Fifth (one being talking with
him about his Marriage with Isabelle the Daughter of Scotland, and adding that
she was homely bred, and without any manner of Learning) made answer, That he
liked her the better, and that a Woman was wise enough, if she could
distinguish her Husband's Shirt and his Doublet. So that it is no so great
wonder, as they make of it, that our Ancestors had Letters in no greater
Esteem, and that even to this day, they are but rarely met with in the Privy
Councils of Princes; and if this End and Design of acquiring Riches (which is
the only thing we propose to our selves, by the means of Law, Physic,
Pedantry, and even Divinity it self) did not uphold, and keep them in credit,
you would without doubt see them as poor and unregarded as ever. And what loss
would it be, if they neither instruct us to think well, nor to do well?
Postquam docti prodierunt, boni desunt; After once they become Learned, they
cease to be good. All other knowledge is hurtful to him, who has not the
Science of Honesty and good Nature. But the reason I glanced upon but now, may
it not also proceed from hence, that our Study, having almost no other Aim but
Profit, fewer of those, who by Nature are born to Offices and Employments,
rather of Glory than Gain, addict themselves to Letters; or for so little a
while (being taken from their Studies before they can come to have any taste of
them, to a Profession that has nothing to do with Books) that there ordinarily
remain no other to apply themselves wholly to Learning, but People of mean
Condition, who in that only study to live, and have Preferment only in their
Prospect; and by such People, whose Souls are both by Nature, and Education,
and domestic Example, of the basest Metal and Allay, the Fruits of Knowledge
are both immaturely gathered, ill-digested, and delivered to their Pupils quite
another thing. For it is not for Knowledge to enlighten a Soul that is dark of
it self; nor to make a blind man to see. Her Business is not to find a man
Eyes, but to guide, govern, and direct his steps, provided he have found Feet,
and strait Legs to go upon. Knowledge is an excellent Drug, but no Drug has
virtue enough to preserve it self from Corruption and Decay, if the Vessel be
tainted and impure wherein it is put to keep. Such a one may have a Sight clear
and good enough, who looks a squint, and consequently sees what is good, but
does not follow it, and sees Knowledge, but makes no use of it. Plato's
principal Institution in his Republic is, to fit his Citizens with Employments
suitable to their Nature. Nature can do all, and does all. Cripples are very
unfit for Exercises of the Body, and lame Souls for Exercises of the Mind.
Degenerate and vulgar Souls are unworthy of Philosophy. If we see a Shoemaker
with his Shoes out at the Toes, we say, it is no wonder; for, commonly, none go
worse shod than their Wives and they. In like manner, Experience does often
present us a Physician worse physick'd, a Divine worse reformed, and
frequently, a Scholar of less Sufficiency than another. Aristo of Chios had
anciently Reason to say, That Philosophers did their Auditories harm, forasmuch
as most of the Souls of those that heard them were not capable of making
benefit of their Instructions, and if they did not apply them to good, would
certainly apply them to ill: Cicero de Natu. Deor. l. 3.
(...) ex Aristippi, acerbos ex Zenonis Schola exire. They proceeded effeminate
Prodigals from the School of Aristippus, and Churles and Cynicks from that of
Zeno. In that excellent Institution that Xenophon attributes to the Persians,
we find, that they taught their Children Virtue, as other Nations do Letters.
Plato tells us, that the eldest Son in their Royal Succession, was thus brought
up; So soon as he was born he was delivered, not to Women, but to Eunuchs of
the greatest Authority about their Kings for their Virtue, whose Charge it was
to keep his Body healthful, and in good plight; and after he came to seven
Years of Age, to teach him to ride, and to go a Hunting: when he arrived at
fourteen he was transferred into the hands of four, the wisest, the most just,
the most temperate, and most valiant of the Nation; of which, the first was to
instruct him in Religion, the second to be always upright and sincere, the
third to conquer his Appetites and Desires, and the fourth to despise all
Danger. It Is a thing worthy of very great Consideration, that in that
excellent, and, in truth, for its Perfection, prodigious form, and civil
Regiment set down by Lycurgus, though so sollicitous of the Education of
Children, as a thing of the greatest Concern, and even in the very Seat of the
Muses, he should make so little mention of Learning; as if their generous
Youth, disdaining all other Subjection, but that of Virtue only, ought to be
supplied, instead of Tutors to read to them Arts and Sciences, with such
Masters, as should only instruct them in Valor, Prudence, and Justice. An
Example that Plato has followed in his Laws; the manner of whose Discipline was
to propound to them Questions upon the Judgments of Men, and of their Actions;
and if they commended or condemned this or that Person, or Fact, they were to
give a Reason for so doing; by which means they at once sharp'ned their
Understanding, and became skillful in the Laws. Mandane, in Xenophon, asking
her Son Cyrus how he would do to learn Justice, and the other Virtues amongst
the Medes, having left all his Masters behind him in Persia? He made Answer,
That he had learned those things long since; that his Master had often made him
a Judge of the Differences amongst his School-Fellows, and had one day whipped
him for giving a wrong Sentence; and thus it was, A great Boy in the School,
having a little short Cassock, by force took a longer from another that was not
so tall as he, and gave him his own in exchange: whereupon, I being appointed
Judge of the Controversy, gave Judgment, That I thought it best either of them
should keep the Coat he had, for that they both of them were better fitted with
that of one another than with their own: upon which, my Master told me, I had
done ill, in that I had only considered the Fitness and Decency of the
Garments, whereas I ought to have considered the Justice of the thing, which
requires that no one should have any thing forcibly taken from him that is his
own. But it seems poor Cyrus was whipped for his Pains, as we are in our
Villages, for forgetting the first Aoriste of (...): my Pedant must make me a
very learned Oration, in genere demonstrativo, before he can persuade me, that
his School is like unto that. They knew how to go the readiest way to work; and
seeing that Science, when most rightly applied, and best understood, can do no
more but teach us Prudence, moral Honesty, and Resolution, they thought fit to
initiate their Children with the knowledge of Effects, and to instruct them,
not by Hearsay, and by Rote, but by the Experiment of Action, in lively
forming and moulding them; not only by Words and Precepts, but chiefly Works
and Examples; to the end it might not be a Knowledge of the Mind only, but a
Complexion and a Habit: and not an Acquisition, but a natural Possession. One
asking to this Purpose, Agesilaus, what he thought most proper for Boys to
learn? What they ought to do when they come to be Men, said he. It is therefore
no wonder, if such an Institution have produced so admirable Effects. They used
to go, it is said, in the other Cities of Greece, to enquire out Rhetoricians,
Painters, and Musick-Masters; but in Lacedaemon, Legislators, Magistrates, and
Generals of Armies; at Athens they learnt to speak well, and here to do well;
there to disengage themselves from a Sophistical Argument, and to unravel
Syllogisms, here to evade the Baits and Allurements of Pleasure, and with a
noble Courage and Resolution to confute and conquer the menaces of Fortune and
Death; those cudgelled their Brains about Words, these made it their Business
to enquire into things; there was an eternal Babble of the Tongue, here a
continual Exercise of the Soul. And therefore it is nothing strange, if, when
Antipater demanded of them fifty Children for Hostages, they made Answer, quite
contrary to what we should do, That they would rather give him twice as many
full grown Men, so much did they value the loss of their Country's Education.
When Agesilaus courted Xenophon to send his Children to Sparta to be bred, it
is not, said he, there to learn Logic or Rhetoric, but to be instructed in
the noblest of all Sciences, namely, the Science to Obey, and to Command. It is
very pleasant to see Socrates, after his manner, rallying Hippias, who recounts
to him what a World of Money he has got, especially in certain little Villages
of Sicily, by teaching School, and that he got never a Penny at Sparta. What a
sottish and stupid People (says Socrates) are they, without Sense or
Understanding, that make no Account either of Grammars, or Poetry, and only
busy themselves in studying the Genealogies and Successions of their Kings,
the Foundations, Rises, and Declensions of States, and such Tales of a Tub!
After which, having made Hippias particularly to acknowledge the Excellency of
their Form of Public Administration, and the Felicity and Virtue of their
Private Life, he leaves him to guess at the Conclusion he makes of the
Inutilit^^s of his Pedantick Arts. Examples have demonstrated to us, that in
Military Affairs, and all others of the like Active Nature, the Study of
Sciences does more soften and untemper the Courages of Men, than any way
fortify and invite them. The most Potent Empire, that at this Day appears to
be in the whole World, is that of the Turks, a People equally inclined to the
Estimation of Arms, and the Contempt of Letters. I find, Rome was more Valiant
before she grew so Learned; and the most Warlike Nations at this time in Being,
are the most ignorant: of which, the Scythians, Parthians, and the great
Tamerlane, may serve for sufficient Proof. When the Goths overran Greece, the
only thing that preserved all the Libraries from the Fire, was, that some one
possessed them with an Opinion, that they were to leave this kind of Furniture
entire to the Enemy, as being most proper to divert them from the Exercise of
Arms, and to fix them to a lazy and sedentary Life. When our King Charles the
Eighth, almost without striking a Blow, saw himself possessed of the Kingdom of
Naples, and a considerable part of Tuscany, the Nobility about him attributed
this unexpected Facility of Conquest to this, that the Princes and Nobles of
Italy, more studied to render themselves ingenious and learned, than vigorous
and warlike.

CHAP. XXV. Of the Education of Children. To Madam Diana of Foix, Countess of
Gurson.
I Never yet saw that Father, but let his Son be never so decrepid, or
deformed, would not notwithstanding own him: not nevertheless, if he were not
totally besotted, and blinded with this Paternal Affection, that he did not
well enough discern his Defects: but that all Defaults notwithstanding, he is
still his. Just so do I, I see better than any other, that all I write are but
the idle Whimsies of a man that has only nibbled upon the outward Crust of
Sciences in his Nonage, and only retained a general and formless Image of them,
who have got a little snatch of every thing, and nothing of the whole a la mode
de France: For I know in general, that there is such a thing as Physic, a
knowledge in the Laws, four Parts in Mathematics, and, in part, what all these
aim and point at; and peradventure I yet know farther, what Sciences in general
pretend unto, in order to the Service of Humane Life: but to dive farther than
that, and to have cudgelled my Brains in the study of Aristotle, the Monarch of
all Modern Learning; or particularly addicted my self to any one Science, I
have never done it; neither is there any one Art of which I am able to draw the
first Lineaments and dead color; insomuch that there is not a Boy of the
lowest Form in a School, that may not pretend to be wiser than I, who am not
able to pose him in his first Lesson, which if I am at any time forced upon, I
am necessitated in my own defense, to ask him some Universal Questions, such as
may serve to try his natural Understanding; a Lesson as strange and unknown to
him, as his is to me. I never seriously settled my self to the reading any Book
of solid Learning, but Plutarch and Seneca; and there, like the Danaides, I
eternally fill, and it as constantly runs out; something of which drops upon
this Paper, but very little or nothing stays behind. History is my delight, as
to matter of Reading, or else Poetry, for which I have, I confess, a particular
kindness and esteem: for, as Cleanthes said, as the Voice, forced through the
narrow passage of a Trumpet, comes out more forcible and shrill; so, methinks,
a Sentence couched in the Harmony of Verse, darts more briskly upon the
Understanding, and strikes both my Ear and Apprehension with a smarter, and
more pleasing Power. As to the Natural Parts I have, of which this is the
Essay, I find them to bow under the burden; my Fancy and Judgment do but grope
in the dark, trip and stumble in their way, and when I have gone as far as I
can, I discover still a new and greater extent of Land before me, but with a
troubled and imperfect sight, and wrapped up in Clouds, that I am not able to
penetrate. And taking upon me to write indifferently of whatever comes into my
Head, and therein making use of nothing but my own proper and natural Force and
Ammunition, if it befell me, as oft-times it does, accidentally to meet in any
good Author, the same Heads and Common-places upon which I have attempted to
write, (as I did but a little before in Plutarch's Discourse of the Force of
Imagination) to see my self so weak and so forlorn, so heavy, and so flat, in
comparison of those better Writers, I at once pity and despise my self. Yet do
I flatter, and please my self with this, that my Opinions have often the honor
and good fortune to jump with theirs, and that I follow in the same Path,
though at a very great distance; I am farther satisfied to find, that I have a
Quality, which every one is not blessed withal, which is, to discern the vast
difference betwixt them and me; and notwithstanding all that, suffer my own
Inventions, low, and contemptible as they are, to run on in their Career,
without mending or plaistering up the Defects that this Comparison has laid
open to my own View; and in plain Truth, a Man had need of a good strong Back
to keep Pace with these People. The indiscreet Scriblers of our Times, who,
amongst their laborious Nothings, insert whole Sections, Paragraphs, and Pages,
out of ancient Authors, with a Design by that means to illustrate their own
Writings, do quite contrary; for this infinite Dissimilitude of Ornaments
renders the Complexion of their own Compositions, so pale, sallow, and
deformed, that they lose much more than they get. The Philosophers, Chrysippus
and Epicurus, were, in this, of two quite contrary Humors; for the first did
not only in his Books mix the Passages and Sayings of other Authors, but entire
Pieces, and in one the whole Medea of Euripides; which gave Apollodorus
occasion to say, That should a Man pick out of his Writings all that was none
of his, he would leave him nothing but blank Paper: whereas the latter, quite
contrary, in three hundred Volumes that he left behind him, has not so much as
any one Quotation. I happened the other day upon this Piece of Fortune; I was
reading a French Book, where after I had a long time run dreaming over a great
many Words, so dull, so insipid, so void of all Wit, or common Sense, that
indeed they were only words; after a long and tedious travel, I came at last to
meet with a piece that was lofty, rich, and elevated to the very Clouds: of
which, had I found either the Declivity easy, or the Ascent accessible, there
had been some excuse; but it was so perpendicular a Precipice, and so wholly
cut off from the rest of the Work, that by the six first words I found my self
flying into the other World, and from thence discovered the Vale from whence I
came so deep and low, that I had never since the Heart to descend into it any
more. If I should set out my Discourses with such rich Spoils as these, the
Plagiary would be too manifest in his own Defects, and I should too much
discover the imperfection of my own Writing. To reprehend the fault in others,
that I am guilty of my self, appears to me no more unreasonable, than to
condemn, as I often do, those of others in my self. They are to be every where
reproved, and ought to have no Sanctuary allowed them. I know very well how
imprudently I my self at every turn attempt to equal my self to my thefts, and
to make my style go hand in hand with them, not without a temerarious hopes of
deceiving the eyes of my Reader from discerning the difference; but withal, it
is as much by the benefit of my Application, that I hope to do it, as by that
of my Invention, or any Force of my own. Besides, I do not offer to contend
with the whole Body of these Champions, nor hand to hand to any one of them,
it is only by slights and little light attempts that I engage them; I do not
grapple with them, but try their strength only, and never engage so far as I
make a show to do; and if I could hold them in play, I were a brave Fellow; for
I never attaque them, but where they are most sinewy and strong. To cover a
man's self (as I have seen some do) with another man's Arms, so as not to
discover so much as their fingers ends; to carry on a Design (as it is not hard
for a Man that has any thing of a Scholar in him, in an ordinary Subject to do)
under old Inventions, patcht up here and there with his own Trumpery, and then
to endeavor to conceal the theft, and to make it pass for his own, is first
injustice, and meanness of Spirit in whoever do it, who having nothing in them
of their own fit to procure them a Reputation, endeavor to do it by attempting
to impose things upon the World in their own Name, which they have really no
manner of title to; and then a ridiculous Folly to content themselves with
acquiring the ignorant approbation of the Vulgar by such a pitiful Cheat, at
the price at the same time of discovering their insufficiency to men of
Understanding, who will soon smell out and trace them in those borrowed
Allegories, and from whom alone they are to expect a legitimate Applause. For
my own part, there is nothing I would not sooner do than that, neither have I
said so much of others, but to get a better Opportunity to excuse my self:
neither in this do I in the least glance at the Composers of Canto's, who
declare themselves for such; of which sort of Writers, I have in my time known
many very ingenious, and have their Rhapsodies in very great Esteem, and
particularly one, under the Name of Capilulus, besides the Ancients. These are
really Men of Wit, and that make it appear they are so, both by that and other
ways of Writing; as for Example, Lipsius, in that learned and laborious
Contexture of his Politics. But, be it how it will, and how inconsiderable
soever these Essays of mine may be, I will ingeniously confess, I never
intended to conceal them, no more than my old bald grizled Picture before them,
where the Graver has not presented you with a perfect Face, but the Resemblance
of mine. And these also are but my own particular Opinions and Fancies, and I
deliver them for no other, but only what I my self believe, and not for what is
really to be believed. Neither have I any other end in this Writing, but only
to discover my self, who also shall peradventure be another thing to morrow, if
I chance to meet any Book, or Friend, to convince me in the mean time. I have
no Authority to be believed, neither do I desire it, being too conscious of my
own inerudition to be able to instruct others.

A Friend of mine then having read the precedent Chapter, the other day told
me, that I should a little longer have insisted upon the Education of Children;
and farther have extended my Discourse upon so necessary a point: which, how
fit I am to do, let my Friends flatter me if they please, I have in the mean
time no such Opinion of my own Talent, as to promise my self any very good
success from my endeavor; but (Madam) if I had any sufficiency in this
Subject, I could not possibly better employ it, than to present my best
Instructions to the little Gentleman that threatens you shortly with a happy
Birth; (for you are too generous to begin otherwise than with a male) for
having had so great a hand in the treaty of your Marriage, I have a certain
particular right and interest in the greatness and prosperity of the Issue that
shall spring from it; besides that, your having had the best of my Services so
long in possession, does sufficiently oblige me to desire the Honor and
Advantage of all wherein you shall be concerned. But, in truth, all I
understand as to that particular is only this, that the greatest and most
important difficulty of Humane Science is the Education of Children. For as in
Agriculture, the Husbandry that is to precede Planting, as also planting it
self, is certain, plain, easy, and very well known; but after that which is
planted comes to take root, to spread, and shoot up, there is a great deal more
to be done, more Art to be used, more care to be taken, and much more
difficulty to cultivate and bring them to Perfection: so it is with Men; it is
no hard matter to get Children; but after they are born, then begins the
Trouble, Solicitude, and Care, virtuously to train, Principle, and bring them
up. The Symptoms of their Inclinations in that young and tender Age are so
obscure, and the Promises so uncertain and fallacious, that it is very hard to
establish any solid Judgment or Conjecture upon them. As Simon, for Example,
and Themistocles, and a thousand others, who have very much deceived the little
Expectation the World had of them: Cubs of Bears, and Bitches Puppies, do truly
and indeed discover their natural Inclination; but Men, so soon as ever grown
up, immediately applying themselves to certain Habits, engaging themselves in
certain Opinions, and conforming themselves to particular Laws and Customs, do
easily alter, or at least disguise, their true and real Disposition. And yet it
is hard to force the Propension of Nature; whence it comes to pass, that for
not having chosen the right Course, a Man often takes very great Pains, and
consumes a good part of his Age in training up Children to things, for which,
by their natural Aversion, they are totally unfit. In this Difficulty,
nevertheless, I am clearly of Opinion, that they ought to be elemented in the
best and most advantageous Studies, without taking too much notice of, or being
too superstitious in those light Prognostics they give of themselves in their
tender Years; to which Plato, in his Republic, gives, methinks, too much
Authority. But ( Madam) Science is doubtless a very great Ornament, and a thing
of mavelous use, especially in Persons raised to that degree of Fortune you
are; and in truth, in Persons of mean and low Condition, cannot perform its
true and genuine Office, being naturally more prompt to assist in the Conduct
of War, in the Government of Armies and Provinces, and in negotiating the
Leagues and Friendships of Princes and foreign Nations, than in forming a
Syllogism in Logic, in pleading a Process in Law, or in prescribing a Dose of
Pills in Physic. Wherefore, Madam, believing you will not omit this so
necessary Embelishment in the Education of your Posterity, who your self have
tasted the Fruits of it, and of a Learned Extraction (for we yet have the
Writings of the ancient Counts of Foix, from whom my Lord, your Husband, and
your self, are both of you descended, and Monsieur de Candale, your Uncle, does
every day oblige the World with others, which will extend the knowledge of this
Quality in your Family so many succeeding Ages) I will upon this occasion
presume to acquaint your Ladyship with one particular Fancy of my own, contrary
to the common Method, which also is all I am able to contribute to your Service
in this Affair. The charge of the Tutor or Governor you shall provide for your
Son, upon the choice of whom depends the whole Success of his Education, has
several other great and considerable Parts and Duties required in so important
a Trust, besides that of which I am about to speak, which however I shall not
mention, as being unable to add any thing of moment to the common Rules, that
every one who is qualified for a Governor is perfect in: and also in this
wherein I take upon me to advise, he may follow it so far only as it shall
appear rational, and conducing to the end at which he does aim and intend.

For a Boy of Quality then, who pretends to Letters not upon the account of
Profit, (for so mean an Object as that is unworthy of the grace and favor of
the Muses; and moreover, in that a man directs his Service to, and professes to
depend upon others) nor so much for outward ornament, as for his own proper and
peculiar use, and to furnish and enrich himself within, having rather a Desire
to go out an accomplished Cavalier, and a fine Gentleman, than a mere Scholar,
and a Learned Man; for such a one, I say, I would also have his Friends
sollicitous to find him out a Tutor, who has rather an Elegant than a Learned
Head, and both, if such a Person can be found; but however, to prefer his
Manners and his Judgment before his Reading, and that this Man should pursue
the Exercise of his Charge after a new method. It Is the Custom of
Schoolmasters, to be eternally thundering in their Pupils Ears, as they were
pouring into a Funnel, whilst their Business is only to repeat what the other
have said before: Now I would have a Tutor to correct this Error, and that at
the very first, he should, according to the Capacity he has to deal with, put
it to the Test, permitting his Pupil himself to taste and relish things, and of
himself to choose and discern them, sometimes opening the way to him, and
sometimes making him to break the Ice himself; that is, I would not have him
alone to invent and speak, but that he should also hear his Pupil speak in
turn. Socrates, and since him Arcesilaus, made first their Scholars speak, and
then they spoke to them. Cic. de Not. Deor. l. 1.
Obest plerumque iis qui dicere volunt, authoritas eorum qui docent; The
Authority of those who teach, is very often an impediment to those who desire to
learn. It is good to make him, like a young Horse, trot before him, that he may
judge of his going, and how much he is to abate of his own Speed, to
accommodate himself to the Vigor and Capacity of the other. For want of which
due proportion, we spoil all; which also to know how to adjust, and to keep
within an exact and due measure, is one of the hardest things I know, and an
effect of a judicious and well-tempered Soul, to know how to condescend to his
Puerile Motions, and to govern and direct them. I walk firmer, and more secure
up Hill than down, and such as according to our common way of Teaching,
undertake, with one and the same Lesson, and the same measure of direction, to
instruct several Boys of so differing and unequal Capacities, are infinitely
mistaken in their Method; and at this rate it is no wonder, if in a multitude of
Scholars, there are not found above two or three who bring away any good
account of their Time and Discipline. Let the Master not only examine him about
the Grammatical Construction of the bare words of his Lesson, but of the sense
and meaning of them, and let him judge of the Profit he has made, not by the
testimony of his Memory, but by that of his Understanding. Let him make him put
what he has learned into an hundred several Forms, and accommodate it to so
many several Subjects, to see if he yet rightly comprehend it, and have made it
his own, taking instruction by his progress from the Institutions of Plato.
It Is a sign of Crudity and Indigestion to vomit up what we eat in the same
condition it was swallowed down, and the Stomach has not performed its office,
unless it have altered the form and condition of what was committed to it to
concoct: so our minds work only upon trust, being bound and compelled to follow
the Appetite of another Fancy, enslaved and captivated under the Authority of
another's Instruction, we have been so subjected to the Tramel, that we have no
free, nor natural Pace of our own, our own Vigor and Liberty is extinct and
gone. Nunquam tutelae suae fiunt; Sen. Ep. 33.
They are ever in Wardship, and never left to their own Tuition. I was
privately at Pisa carried to see a very honest man; but so great an
Aristotelian, that his most usual Thesis was, That the Touchstone and Square
of all solid Imagination, and of the Truth, was an absolute conformity to
Aristotle's Doctrine; and that all besides was nothing but Inanity and
Chimaera; for that he had seen all, and said all. A Position, that for having
been a little too injuriously, and maliciously interpreted, brought him first
into, and afterward long kept him in great trouble in the Inquisition at Rome.
Let him make him examine, and thoroughly sift every thing he reads, and lodge
nothing in his Fancy upon simple Authority, and upon trust. Aristotle's
Principles will then be no more Principles to him, than those of Epicurus and
the Stoics: only let this Diversity of Opinions be propounded to, and laid
before him, he will himself choose, if he be able; if not, he will remain in
doubt.

Che non menche saper dubbiar m' aggrada.
Dante Inferno, Canto 12.
I love sometimes to doubt, as well as know.
For if he embrace the Opinions of Xenophon and Plato, by maintaining them,
they will no more be theirs, but become his own. Who follows another, follows
nothing, finds nothing, nay, is inquisitive after nothing. Non sumus sub Rege,
sibi quisque se vindicet; Let him at least know, that he knows. It will be
necessary that he imbibe their knowledge, not that he be corrupted with their
Precepts; and no matter if he forget where he had his Learning, provided he
know how to apply it to his own Use; Truth and Reason are common to every one,
and are no more his who spoke them first, than his who speaks them after. It Is
no more according to Plato, than according to me, since both he and I equally
see and understand them. Bees cull their several Sweets from this Flower, and
that Blossom, here and there where they find them, but themselves after make
the Honey, which is all, and purely their own, and no more Time and Marjoram:
so the several Fragments he borrows from others, he will transform and shuffle
together to compile a Work that shall be absolutely his own; that is to say,
his Judgment, his Instruction, Labor, and Study, tend to nothing else but to
incline, and make him capable so to do. He is not obliged to discover whence he
had his Ammunition, but only to produce what he has himself composed. Men that
live upon Rapine, and borrowing, expose their Purchases and Buildings to every
ones knowledge and view: but do not proclaim how they came by the Money. We do
not see the Fees and Perquisits belonging to the Function and Offices of a
Gentleman of the long Robe; but we see the Noble Alliances wherewith he
fortifies himself and his Family, and the Titles and Honors he has obtained
for him and his. No man divulges his Revenue; or at least which way it comes
in: but every one publishes his Purchaces, and is content the World should know
his good Condition. The Advantages of our Study are to become better and more
wise. It Is (says Epicharmus) the Understanding that sees and hears, it is the
Understanding that improves every thing, that orders every thing, and that
acts, rules, and reigns: all other Faculties are blind, and deaf, and without
Soul; and certainly, we render it timorous and servile, in not allowing it the
Liberty and Privilege to do any thing of it self. Who ever asked his Pupil
what he thought of Grammar and Rhetoric, or of such and such a Sentence of
Cicero? Our Masters dart and stick them full feathered in our Memories, and
there establish them like Oracles, of which the very Letters and Syllables are
of the substance of the thing. To know by rote, is no Knowledge, and signifies
no more but only to retain what one has entrusted to his Memory. That which a
man rightly knows and understands, he is the free Disposer of at his own full
Liberty, without any regard to the Author from whence he had it, or fumbling
over the Leaves of his Book. A mere Bookish Learning is both troublesome and
ungraceful; and though it may serve for some kind of Ornament, there is yet no
Foundation for any Superstructure to be built upon it, What true Philosophy is,
according to Plato.
according to the Opinion of Plato, who says, that Constancy, Faith, and
Sincerity, are the true Philosophy, and the other Sciences, that are directed
to other ends, to be adulterate and false. I could wish, that Paluel or Pompey,
the two famous Dancing-Masters of my Time, could have taught us to cut Capers,
by only seeing them do it, without stirring from our Places, as these men
pretend to inform the Understanding, without ever setting them to work; or that
we could learn to Ride, handle a Pike, touch a Lute, or Sing, without the
trouble of Practice, as these attempt to make us Judge, and Speak well, without
exercising us in Judging and Speaking. Now in this Initiation of our Studies,
and in the Progress of them, whatsoever presents it self before us is Book
sufficient; a Roguy Trick of a Page, a sottish Mistake of a Servant, or a Jest
at the Table, are so many new Subjects. And for this very Reason, Conversation
with men is of very great Use, and Travel into Foreign Countries of singular
Advantage; not to bring back (as most of our young Monsieurs do) an Account
only of how many Paces Santa Rotonda is in Circuit; or of the Richness of
Signiora Livia's Attire; or, as some others, how much Nero's Face, in a Statue
in such an old Ruin, is longer and broader than that made for him at such
another Place: but to be able chiefly to give an Account of the Humors,
Manners, Customs, and Laws of those Nations where he has been. And, that we may
whet and sharpen our Wits by rubbing them upon those of others. I would that a
Boy should be sent abroad very young (and principally to kill two Birds with
one Stone) into those neighboring Nations whose Language is most differing from
our own, and to which, if it be not formed betimes, the Tongue will be grown
too stiff to bend. And also it is the general Opinion of all, that a Child
should not be brought up in his Mother's Lap. Mothers are too tender, and their
natural Affection is apt to make the most discreet of them all so over-fond,
that they can neither find in their Hearts to give them due Correction for the
Faults they commit, nor suffer them to be brought up in those Hardships and
Hazards they ought to be. They would not endure to see them return all Dust and
Sweat from their Exercise, Fondness of Mothers pernicious to Education.
to drink cold Drink when they are hot, nor see them mount an unruly Horse, nor
take a Foil in hand against a rude Fencer, or so much as to discharge a
Carbine: and yet there is no Remedy; whoever will breed a Boy to be good for
any thing when he comes to be a Man, must by no means spare him, even when so
young, and must very often transgress the Rules of Phy^^ck: Vitamque sub dio,
Horat. l. 1. Ode 2.
and trepidis agat
In rebus.
He must sharp Cold and scorching Heat despise,
And most tempt Danger where most Danger lies.
It is not enough to fortify his Soul, you are also to make his Sinews strong;
for the Soul will be oppressed, if not assisted by the Members, and would have
too hard a Task to discharge two Offices alone. I know very well, to my Cost,
how much mine groans under the Burden, for being accommodated with a Body so
tender and indisposed, as eternally leans and presses upon her; and often in my
Reading perceive, that our Masters, in their Writings, make Examples pass for
Magnanimity and Fortitude of Mind, which really is rather Toughness of Skin and
Hardness of Bones; for I have seen Men, Women, and Children, naturally born of
so hard and insensible a Constitution of Body, that a sound cudgelling has been
less to them, than a Flirt with a Finger would have been to me, and that would
neither cry out, wince, nor quitch, for a good swinging Beating; and when
Wrestlers counterfeit the Philosophers in Patience, it is rather Strength of
Nerves than Stoutness of Heart. Now to be inured to undergo Labor, is to be
accustomed to endure Grief: Labor callum obducit dolori: Labor supplies Grief
with a certain Callus, Cicero Tusc. l. 2.
that defends it from the Blow. A Boy is to be inured to the Toil and Vehemence
of Exercise, to train him up to the Pain, and suffering of Dislocations,
Cholicks, Cauteries, and even Imprisonment, and the Rack it self; for he may
come, by Misfortune, to be reduced to the worst of these, which (as this World
goes) is sometimes inflicted on the Good, as well as the Bad. As for Proof, in
our present Civil War, whoever draws his Sword against the Laws, threatens all
honest Men with the Whip and the Halter. And moreover, by living at home, the
Authority of this Governor, which ought to be sovereign over the Boy he has
received into his Charge, is often checked, interrupted, and hindered by the
Presence of Parents; to which may also be added, that the Respect the whole
Family pay him, as their Master's Son, and the Knowledge he has of the Estate
and Greatness he is Heir to, are, in my Opinion, no small Inconveniences in
these tender Years. And yet even in this conversing with Men I spoke of but
now, I have observed this Vice, That instead of gathering Observations from
others, we make it our whole Business to lay our selves open to them, and are
more concerned how to expose and set out our own Commodities, than how to
increase our Stock by acquiring new. Silence therefore, and Modesty, are very
advantageous Qualities in Conversation: and one should therefore train up this
Boy to be sparing, and a good Husband of his Talent of Understanding, when once
acquired; and to forbear taking Exceptions at, or reproving every idle Saying,
or ridiculous Story, is spoke or told in his Presence; for it is a Rudeness to
controvert every thing that is not agreeable to our own Pallat. Let him be
satisfied with correcting himself, and not seem to condemn every thing in
another he would not do himself, nor dispute against common Customs. Let him be
wise without Arrogance, without Envy. Let him avoid these vain and uncivil
Images of Authority, this childish Ambition of coveting to appear better bred,
and more accomplished, than he really will by such Carriage discover himself to
be, and, as if Opportunities of interrupting and reprehending were not to be
omitted, to desire from thence to derive the Reputation of something more than
ordinary: for as it becomes none but great Poets to make use of the Poetical
License, allowed only to those of celebrated Art; it is also intolerable, that
any but Men of great and illustrious Souls should be priviledg'd above the
Authority of Custom; Si quid Socrates, and Aristippus contra morem, Cic. de
Offic. l. 1.
and consuetudinem fecerunt, idem sibi ne arbitratur licere: magnis enim illi,
and divinis bonis hanc licentiam assequebantur. If Socrates and Aristippus have
transgressed the Rules of Custom, let him not imagine that he is licensed to do
the same; for it was by great and sovereign Virtues that they obtained this
Privilege. Let him be instructed not to engage in Discourse, or dispute but
with a Champion worthy of him, and even there not to make use of all the little
Fallacies and Subtleties that are pat for his Purpose; but only such as may
best serve him upon that Occasion. Let him be taught to be curious in the
Election and Choice of his Reasons, to abominate Impertinence, and
consequently, to affect Brevity; but above all, let him be lesson'd to
acquiesce and submit to Truth so soon as ever he shall discover it, whether in
his Opponent's Argument, or upon better Consideration of his own; for he shall
never be preferred to the Chair for a mere clatter of Words and Syllogisms, and
is no further engaged to any Argument whatever, than as he shall in his own
Judgment approve it: nor yet is Arguing a Trade, where the liberty of
Recantation, and getting off upon better Thoughts, are to be sold for ready
Money. Neque, ut omnia, quae praescripta and imperata sint, Cic. Acad. l. 4.
defendat, necessitate ulla cogitur: Neither is there any Necessity or
Obligation upon him at all, that he should defend all things that are
recommended to, and and enjoined him. If his Governor be of my Humor, he will
form his Will to be a very good and Loyal Subject to his Prince, very
affectionate to his Person, and very stout in his Quarrel; but withal, he will
cool in him the desire of having any other tie to his Service, than merely a
Public Duty; because, besides several other Inconveniences, that are very
inconsistent with the honest Liberty every honest man ought to have, a man's
Judgment being bribed and prepossessed by these particular Obligations and
Favors, is either blinded, Dependence upon Princes.
and less free to exercise its Function, or shall be blemished either with
Ingratitude or Indiscretion. A man that is purely a Courtier, can neither have
Power nor Wit to speak or think otherwise than favorably and well of a Master,
who, amongst so many millions of other Subjects, has picked out him with his own
hand to nourish and advance. This Favor, and the Profit flowing from it, must
needs, and not without some show of Reason, corrupt his Understanding, and
deprive him of the freedom of speaking: and also we commonly see these People
speak in another kind of Phrase than is ordinarily spoken by others of the same
Nation, though what they say in that Courtly Language, is not much to be
believed in such Cases. Let his Conscience and Virtue be eminently manifest in
his speaking, and have only Reason for their guide. Make him understand, that
to acknowledge the Error he shall discover in his own Argument, though only
found out by himself, is an effect of Judgment and sincerity, which are the
principal things he is to seek after. That Obstinacy and Contention are common
qualities, most appearing in, and best becoming a mean and illiterate Soul.
That to recollect, and to correct himself, and to forsake an unjust Argument in
the height and heat of Dispute, are great, and philosophical Qualities. Let him
be advised, being in Company, to have his Eye and Ear in every corner of the
Room; for I find that the Places of greatest Honor are commonly possessed by Men
that have least in them, and that the greatest Fortunes are not always
accompanied with the ablest Parts. I have been present, when, whilst they at
the upper end of the Chamber have been only commending the Beauty of the Arras,
or the Flavor of the Wine, many things that have been very finely said, have
been lost and thrown away at the lower end of the Table. Let him examine every
Man's Talent, a Peasant, a Bricklayer, or a Passenger; a Man may learn something
from every one of these in their several Capacities, and something will be
picked out of their Discourse, whereof some use may be made at one time or
another; nay, even the Folly and Impertinence of others will contribute to his
Instruction. Observation.
By observing the Graces and Fashions of all he sees, he will create to himself
an Emulation of the good, and a contempt of the bad. Let an honest curiosity be
suggested to his Fancy of being inquisitive after every thing, and whatever
there is of singular and rare near the Place where he shall reside, let him go
and see it; a fine House, a delicate Fountain, an eminent Man, the Place where
a Battle has been anciently fought, and the Passages of Caesar and Charlemain.

Quae Tellus sit lenta gelu, quae putris ab aestu,
Ventus in Italiam quis been vela ferat. Propert. l. 4. Eleg. 39.

What Countries to the Bear objected lie,
What with the Dog Star Heats are parched and dry,
And what Wind fairest serves for Italy.
Let him enquire into the Manners, Revenues, and Alliances of Princes, things
in themselves very pleasant to learn, and very useful to know. In this
Conversing with Men, I mean, and principally those who only live in the Records
of History, he shall by reading those Books, Reading History.
converse with those great and heroic Souls of former and better Ages. It Is an
idle and vain Study I confess, to those who make it so, by doing it after a
negligent manner, but to those who do it with care and Observation, it is a
study of inestimable Fruit and value; and the only one, as Plato reports, the
Lacedaemonians reserved to themselves. What profit shall he not reap as to the
Business of Men, by reading the Lives of Plutarch? But withal, let my
Governor remember to what end his Instructions are principally directed, and
that he do not so much imprint in his Pupils Memory, the date of the Ruin of
Carthage, as the Manners of Hannibal and Scipio; nor so much where Marcellus
died, as why it was unworthy of his Duty that he died there. That he do not
teach him so much the Narative part, as the Business of History. The reading of
which, in my Opinion, is a thing that of all others we apply our selves unto
with the most differing, and uncertain Measures. I have read an hundred things
in Livie that another has not, or not taken notice of at least, and Plutarch
has read an hundred more there than ever I could find, or then peradventure
that Author ever Writ. To some it is merely a Grammar Study, to others the very
Anatomy of Philosophy, by which the most secret, and abstruse parts of our
humane Nature are penetrated into. There are in Plutarch many long Discourses
very worthy to be carefully read and observed, Elegy of Plutarch.
for he is, in my Opinion, of all other, the greatest Master in that kind of
Writing; but withal, there are a thousand others which he has only touched,
and glanced upon, where he only points with his Finger to direct us which way
we may go if we will, and contents himself sometimes with giving only one brisk
hit in the nicest Article of the Question; from whence we are to grope out the
rest: as for Example, where he says, That the Inhabitants of Asia came to be
Vassals to one only, for not having been able to pronounce one Syllable, which
is, No. Which Saying of his, gave perhaps matter and occasion to Boethius to
write his Voluntary Servitude. Even this but to see him pick out a light Action
in a man's Life; or a Word, that does not seem to be of any such Importance, is
it self a whole Discourse. It Is to our Prejudice that men of Understanding
should so immoderately affect Brevity; no doubt but their Reputation is the
better by it: but in the mean time we are the worse. Plutarch had rather we
should applaud his Judgment, than commend his Knowledge, and had rather leave
us with an Appetite to read more, than glutted with that we have already read.
He knew very well, that a Man may say too much even upon the best Subjects, and
that Alexandrides did justly reproach him who made very elegant, but too long
Speeches to the Ephori, when he said, O Stranger! thou speak the things thou
ought to speak, but not after the manner that thou should speak them.
Such as have lean and spare Bodies stuff themselves out with Clothes; so they
who are defective in Matter, endeavor to make amends with Words. Humane
Understanding is marvellously enlightened by daily Conversation with men, for we
are otherwise of our selves so stupid as to have our Sight limited to the
length of our own Noses. One asking Socrates of what Country he was, he did not
make Answer of Athens, but of the World; he whose Imagination is better
levelled, could carry further, embraced the whole World for his Country, and
extended his Society and Friendship to all Mankind; not as we do, who look no
further than our Feet. When the Vines of our Village are nip'd with the Frost,
the Parish Priest presently concludes, that the Indignation of God is gone out
against all Humane Race, and that the Cannibals have already got the Pip. Who
is it, that seeing the bloody Havoc of these Civil Wars of ours, does not cry
out, That the Machine of the World is near Dissolution, and that the Day of
Judgment is at hand; without considering, that many worse Revolutions have been
seen, and that, in the mean time, People are very merry in a thousand other
Parts of the Earth for all this? For my Part, considering the License and
Impunity that always attend such Commotions, I admire they are so moderate, and
that there is no more Mischief done. To him that feels the Hailstones patter
about his Ears, the whole Hemisphear appears to be in Storm and Tempest; like
the ridiculous Savoyard, who said very gravely, That if that simple King of
France could have managed his Fortune as he should have done, he might in time
have come to have been Steward of the Household to the Duke his Master: the
Fellow could not, in his shallow Imagination, conceive that there could be any
thing greater than a Duke of Savoy. And in truth we are all of us insensibly in
this Error, an Error of a very great Train, and very pernicious Consequence.
But whoever shall represent to his Fancy, as in a Picture, that great Image of
our Mother Nature, pourtrayed in her full Majesty and Luster, whoever in her
Face shall read so general and so constant a Variety, whoever shall observe
himself in that Figure, and not himself but a whole Kingdom, no bigger than the
least Touch or Prick of a Pencil in comparison of the whole, that man alone is
able to value things according to their true Estimate and Grandeur. This great
World which some do yet multiply as several Species under one Genus, is the
Mirror wherein we are to behold our selves, to be able to know our selves as we
ought to do. In short, I would have this to be the Book my young Gentleman
should study with the most Attention; for so many Humors, so many Sects, so
many Judgments, Opinions, Laws, and Customs, teach us to judge aright of our
own, and inform our Understandings to discover their Imperfection and natural
Infirmity, which is no trivial Speculation. So many Mutations of States and
Kingdoms, and so many Turns and Revolutions of public Fortune, will make us
wise enough to make no great wonder of our own. So many great Names, so many
famous Victories and Conquests drowned and swallowed in Oblivion, render our
Hopes ridiculous of eternizing our Names by the taking of half a score light
Horse, or a paltry Turret, which only derives its Memory from its Ruin. The
Pride and Arrogance of so many foreign Pomps and Ceremonies, the tumorous
Majesty of so many Courts and Grandeurs, accustom and fortify our Sight
without Astonishment to behold and endure the luster of our own. So many
millions of men buried before us, encourage us not to fear to go seek so good
Company in the other World: and so of all the rest. Pythagoras was wont to say,
That our Life retires to the great and populous Assembly of the Olympic Games,
wherein some exercise the Body, that they may carry away the Glory of the Prize
in those Contentions, and others carry Merchandise to sell for Profit. There
are also some (and those none of the worst sort) who pursue no other Advantage
than only to look on, and consider how, and why every thing is done, and to be
unactive Spectators of the Lives of other men, thereby the better to judge of,
and to regulate their own; and indeed, from Examples, all the Instruction
couched in Philosophical Discourses, may naturally flow, to which all humane
Actions, as to their best Rule, ought to be especially directed: where a Man
shall be taught to know, -- Quid fas optare, Persius, Sat. 3.
quid asper
Vtile nummus habet, patriae charisque propinquis
Quantum elargiri deceat, quem te Deus esse
Jussit, and humana qua part locatus es in re,
Quid sumus, aut quidnam victuri gignimur.
What he may wish, what is Money's natural use,
What to be liberal is, and what profuse,
What God commands an honest Man should be,
And here on Earth to know in what Degree
That God has placed thee, what we are, and why,
He gave us Being, and Humanity.
What it is to know, and what to be ignorant, what ought to be the End and
Design of Study, what Valor, Temperance, and Justice are, the difference
betwixt Ambition and Avarice, Servitude and Subjection, License and Liberty, by
what Token a man may know the true and solid Contentation, how far Death,
Affliction, and Disgrace, are to be apprehended. Virg. Aen. l. 6.
Et quo quemque modo fugiatque feratque laborem.
And which way every one may know
Labor to avoid or undergo.
By what secret Springs we move, and the Reason of our various Agitations and
Irresolutions: for methinks the first Doctrine with which one should season his
Understanding, ought to be that which regulates his Manners and his Sense; that
teaches him to know himself, and how both well to dye, and well to live.
Amongst the Liberal Sciences, let us begin with that that makes us free; not
that they do not all serve in some measure to the Instruction and Use of Life,
as all other things in some sort also do; but let us make choice of that which
directly and profess'dly serves to that end. If we are once able to restrain
the Offices of Humane Life within their just and natural Limits, we shall find
that most of the Sciences in use are of no great use to us, and even in those
that are, that there are many very unnecessary Cavities and Dilatations which
we were better to let alone, and following Socrates his Direction, limit the
Course of our Studies to those things only where a true and real Utility and
Advantage are to be expected and found.

-- Sapere aude,
Incipe Vivendi, qui recte prorogat Horam,
Rusticus expectat dum defluat amnis, Horat. l. 1. Epist. 2.
at ille
Labitur, and labetur in omne volubilis Ovum.
Dare to be wise; begin, who to their wrong,
The Hour of living well deferr too long,
Like Rustic Fools, sit with a patient Eye
Expecting when the murmuring Brook runs dry,
Whose Springs can never fail, 'till the last Fire
Lick up the Ocean, and the World expire.
It Is a great foolery to teach our Children Quid moveant Piscis, animosaque
signa Leonis,
Lotus, et Hesperia quid Capricornus aqua. Propert, l. 4. Eleg. 1.

What influence Pisces have, over what the ray
Of angry Leo bears the greatest sway,
Or Capricornus Province, who still laves
His threatening Forehead in the Hesperian Waves.
the Knowledge of the Stars and the Motion of the eighth Sphere, before their
own.

(...)
(...). Anacreon Ode 17.

How swift the seven Sisters Motions are,
Or the dull Churls how slow, what need I care.
Anaximenes writing to Pythagoras, To what purpose, said he, should I trouble
my self in searching out the Secrets of the Stars, having Death or Slavery
continually before my Eyes? For the Kings of Persia were at that time preparing
to invade his Country. Every one ought to say the same, Being assaulted, as I
am by Ambition, Avarice, Temerity, and Superstition, and having within so many
other Enemies of Life, shall I go cudgel my Brains about the Worlds
Revolutions? After having taught him what will make him more wise and good, you
may then entertain him with the Elements of Logic, Physic, Geometry, and
Rhetoric, and the Science which he shall then himself most incline to, his
Judgment being beforehand formed and fit to choose, he will quickly make his
own. The Way of instructing him ought to be sometimes by Discourse, and
sometimes by reading, sometimes his Governor shall put the Author himself,
which he shall think most proper for him, into his Hands, and sometimes only
the Marrow and Substance of it; and if himself be not conversant enough in
Books to turn to all the fine Discourses the Book contains, there may some Man
of Learning be joined to him, that upon every occasion shall supply him with
what he desires, and stands in need of, to recommend to his Pupil. And who can
doubt, but that this way of teaching is much more easy and natural, than that
of Gaza? In which the precepts are so intricate, and so harsh, and the Words so
vain, lean, and insignificant, that there is no hold to be taken of them,
nothing that quickens and elevates the Wit and Fancy, whereas here the Mind has
what to feed upon, and to digest: this Fruit therefore is not only without
comparison, much more fair and beautiful; but will also be much more early, and
ripe. It Is a thousand pitties, that Masters should be at such a pass in this
Age of ours, that Philosophy, even with Men of Understanding, should be looked
upon as a vain, and fantastic Name, a thing of no use, no value, either in
Opinion or Effect, of which I think these lousy Ergotismes, and little
Sophistry, by prepossessing the Avenues unto it, are the cause. And People are
much to blame to represent it to Children for a thing of so difficult access,
and with such a frowing, grim, and formidable aspect: who has disguised it
thus, with this false, pale, and ghostly Countenance? There is nothing more
aerie, more gay, more frolic, and I had like to have said, more wanton. She
preaches nothing but Feasting and Jollity; a melancholic thoughtful look shows
that she does not inhabit there. Demetrius the Grammarian finding in the Temple
of Delphos a Knot of Philosophers set chatting together, said to them, Either I
am much deceived, or by your cheerful and pleasant Countenances, you are
engaged in no very deep Discourse. To which one of them, Heracleon the
Magician, replied, It Is for such as are puzzled about enquiring whether the
future Tense of the Verb (...) be spelt with a double l, or that hunt after the
Derivation of the Comparatives (...), and the Superlatives (...), to knit their
Brows whilst discoursing of their Science: but as to Philosophical Discourses,
they always divert and cheer up those they entertain, and never deject them or
make them sad.

Juven. Sat. 9.
Deprendas animi tormenta latentis in aegro
Corpore, deprendas, and gaudia, sumit utrumque
Inde habitum facies.
Th'internal Anguish of a sick Man's mind
Your Eye may soon discern, and also find
The Joys of those in better Health that are,
For still the Face does the Mind's Livery wear.
The Soul that entertains Philosophy, ought to be of such a Constitution of
Health, as to render the Body in like manner healthful too; she ought to make
her. Tranquillity and Satisfaction shine so as to appear without, and her
Contentment ought to fashion the outward Behavior to her own Mould, and
consequently to fortify it with a graceful Confidence, an active Carriage, and
with a serene and contented Countenance. The most manifest sign of Wisdom is a
continual Cheerfulness; Cheerfulness a sign of Wisdom.
her Estate is like that of things in the Regions above the Moon, always clear
and serene. It Is Baraco and Baralipton that render their Disciples so dirty and
ill-favored, and not she; they do not so much as know her but by Hearsay. It
is she that calms and appeases the Storms and Tempests of the Soul, and who
teaches Famine and Fevers to laugh and sing; and that, not by certain imaginary
Epicycles, but by natural and manifest Reasons. She has Virtue for her end;
which is not, as the Schoolmen say, situate upon the summity of a
perpendicular Rock, and an inaccessible Precipice. Such as have approached her,
find it quite contrary, to be seated in a fair, fruitful, and flourishing
Plain, from whence she easily discovers all things subjected to her; to which
Place any one may however arrive, if he know but the easiest and the nearest
way, thorough shady, green, and sweetly flourishing Walks and Avenues, by a
pleasant, easy, and smooth Descent, like that of the Celestial Arches: It Is
for not having frequented this supreme, this beautiful, triumphant, and
amiable, this equally delicious and courageous Virtue, this so professed and
implacable Enemy to Anxiety, Sorrow, Fear and Constraint, who, having Nature
for her Guide, has Fortune and Pleasure for her Companions, that they have gone
according to their own weak Imagination, and created this ridiculous, this
sorrowful, querulous, despiteful, threatening, terrible Image of it to
themselves and others, and placed it upon a solitary Rock amongst Thorns and
Brambles, and made of it a Hobgoblin to fright People from daring to approach
it. But the Governor that I would have, that is such a one as knows it to be
his Duty to possess his Pupil with as much or more Affection than Reverence to
Virtue, will be able to inform him, that the Poets have evermore accommodated
themselves to the Public Humor, and make him sensible, that the Gods have
planted more Toil and Sweat in the Avenues of the Cabinets of Venus, than those
of Minerva, which, when he shall once find him begin to apprehend, and shall
represent to him a Bradamanta or an Angelica for a Mistress, a natural, active,
generous, and not a mankind, but a manly Beauty, in comparison of a soft,
delicate, artificial, simpring, and affected form; the one disguised in the
Habit of an Heroic Youth, with her beautiful face set out in a glittering
Helmet, the other tricked up in Curls and Ribbons like a wanton Minx; he will
then look upon his own Affection as brave and Masculine, when he shall choose
quite contrary to that effoeminate Shepherd of Phrygia. Such a Tutor will make
a Pupil to digest this new Doctrine, that the height and value of true Virtue
consists in the Facility, Utility, and Pleasure of its Exercise; so far from
Difficulty, that Boys, as well as Men, and the innocent as well as the subtle,
may make it their own; and it is by Order and good Conduct, and not by Force,
that it is to be acquired. Socrates, her first Minion, is so averse to all
manner of Violence, as totally to throw it aside, to slip into the more natural
Facility of her own Progress: It Is the Nursing-Mother of all humane Pleasures,
who in rendering them just, renders them also pure and permanent; in moderating
them, keeps them in Breath and Appetite; in interdicting those which she her
self refuses, whets our Desire to those that she allows; and, like a kind and
liberal Mother, abundantly allows all that Nature requires, even to Saciety, if
not to Lassitude; unless we will declaim, That the Regiment of Health stops the
Toper's Hand before he have drank himself Drunk, the Gluttons before he have
eaten to a Surfeit, and the Whore-masters Career before he have got the Pox, is
an Enemy to Pleasure. If the ordinary Fortune fail, and that she meet with an
indocile Disposition, she passes that Disciple by, and takes another, not so
fickle and unsteady as the other, which she forms wholly her own. She can be
Rich, be Potent and Wise, and knows how to lie upon soft Down, and perfumed
Quilts too: she loves Life, Beauty, Glory, and Health; but her proper and
peculiar Office is to know regularly how to make use of all these good things,
and how to part with them without Concern: an Office much more noble than
troublesome, and without which the whole Course of Life is unnatural,
turbulent, and deformed; and there it is indeed, that Men may justly represent
those Monsters upon Rocks and Precipices. If this Pupil shall happen to be of
so cross and contrary a Disposition, that he had rather hear a Tale of a Tub
than the true Narrative of some noble Expedition, or some wise and learned
Discourse; who at the Beat of Drum, that excites the youthful Ardour of his
Companions, leaves that to follow another that calls to a Morris, or the
Bears, and who would not wish, and find it more delightful, and more pleasing,
to return all Dust and Sweat victorious from a Battle, than from Tennis, or
from a Ball, with the Prize of those Exercises; I see no other Remedy, but that
he be bound Prentice in some good Town to learn to make minced Pyes, though he
were the Son of a Duke, according to Plato's Precept, That Children are to be
placed out, and disposed of, not according to the Wealth, Qualities, or
Condition of the Father, but according to the Faculties and the Capacity of
their own Soul. But since Philosophy is that which instructs us to live, and
that Infancy has there its Lessons as well as other Ages, why is it not
communicated to Children betimes? And why are they not more early initiated in
it?

Vdum, and molle lutum est, nunc, Pers. sit. 3.
nunc properandus, and acri
Fingendus sine fine rota.
The Clay is moist and soft, now, now make haste,
And form the Pitcher, for the Wheel turns fast.
They begin to teach us to live when we have almost done living. A hundred
Students have got the Pox before they have come to read Aristotle's Lecture of
Temperance. Cicero said, That though he should live two men's Ages, he should
never find leisure to study the Lyrick Poets; and I find these Sophisters yet
more deplorably unprofitable. The Boy we would breed has a great deal less time
to spare; he owes but the first fifteen or sixteen Years of his Life to
Discipline, the Remainder is due to Action: let us therefore employ that short
time in necessary Instruction. Away with the Logical Subtilties, they are
Abuses, things by which our Lives can never be amended: take me the plain
Philosophical Discourses, learn first how rightly to choose, and then rightly
to apply them, they are more easy to be understood than one of Bocace his
Novels; a Child from Nurse is much more capable of them, than of learning to
read or to write. Philosophy has Discourses equally proper for Childhood, as
for the decrepid Age of Men; Aristotle's method of Instructing Alexander the
Great.
and I am of Plutarch's mind, that Aristotle did not so much trouble his great
Disciple with the Knack of forming Syllogisms, or with the Elements of
Geometry, as with infusing into him good Precepts concerning Valor, Prowess,
Magnanimity, Temperance, and the Contempt of Fear; and with this Ammunition,
sent him, whilst yet a Boy, with no more than 30000 Foot, 4000 Horse, and but
42000 Crowns, to subjugate the Empire of the whole Earth. For the other Arts
and Sciences, Alexander, says, he highly indeed commended their Excellency and
Quaintness, and had them in very great Honor and Esteem, but not ravished with
them to that degree, as to be tempted to affect the Practice of them in his own
Person.

Pers. Sat. 5.
-- Petite hinc juvenesque, senesque
Finem animo certum, miserique viatica canis.
Young men, and old, from hence your selves befriend,
For both your Minds, with some sure aim and end;
And both therein against the time to come,
Wretched old Age, get a Viaticum.
Epicurus, in the beginning of his Letter to Meniceus, says, That neither the
youngest should refuse to Philosophize, nor the eldest grow weary of it: and
who does otherwise, seems tacitly to imply, that either the time of living
happily is not yet come, or, that it is already past: and yet for all that, I
would not have this Pupil of ours imprisoned, and made a Slave to his Book; nor
would I have him given up to the Morosity, and melancholic Humor, of a sour,
ill-natured Pedant. I would not have his Spirit cowed and subdued, by applying
him to the Rack, and tormenting him as some do, 14 or 15 Hours a day, and so
make a Pack-Horse of him. Neither should I think it good, when, by reason of a
solitary and melancholic Complexion, he is discovered to be much addicted to
his Book, to nourish that Humor in him: for that renders them unfit for Civil
Conversation, and diverts them from better Employments. And how many have I
seen in my time totally brutified by an immoderate Thirst after Knowledge?
Carneades was so besotted with it, that he would not find time so much as to
comb his Head, or to pare his Nails; neither would I have his generous Manners
spoiled and corrupted by the Incivility and Barbarity of those of another. The
French Wisdom has anciently been turned into Proverb, Early, but of no
Continuance; and in truth, we yet see, that nothing can be more ingenious and
pretty than the Children of France; but they ordinarily deceive the Hope and
Expectation has been conceived of them; and grown up to be men, have nothing
extraordinary, or worth taking notice of. I have heard men of good
Understanding say, these Colleges of ours to which we send our young People
(and of which we have but too many) make them such Animals as they are. But to
our little Monsieur, a Closet, a Garden, the Table, his Bed, Solitude and
Company, Morning and Evening, all Hours shall be the same, and all Places to
him a Study; for Philosophy, who, as the Formatrix of Judgment and Manners,
shall be his principal Lesson, has that privilege to have a hand in every
thing. The Orator Isocrates, being at a Feast entreated to speak of his Art,
all the Company were satisfied with, and commended his Answer; It is not now a
time, said he, to do what I can do; and that which it is now time to do, I
cannot do. For to make Orations and Rhetorical Disputes in a Company met
together to laugh and make good cheer, had been very unseasonable and improper,
and as much might have been said of all the other Sciences: But as to what
concerns Philosophy, that part of it at least that treats of Man, and of his
Offices and Duties, it has been the joint Opinion of all wise men, that, out of
respect to the sweetness of her Conversation, she is ever to be admitted in all
Sports and Entertainments. And Plato, having invited her to his Feast, we shall
see after how gentle and obliging a manner, accommodated both to Time and
Place, she entertained the Company, though in a Discourse of the highest and
most important nature. Aeque pauperibus prodest locupletibus aeque,
Et neglecta aeque pueris, senibusque nocebit. Horat. l. 1. Epist. 1.

It profits poor and rich alike, but when
Neglected, to old and young as hurtful then.
By which method of Instruction, my young Pupil will be much more, and better
employed than those of the College are: but as the steps we take in walking to
and fro in a Gallery, though three times as many, do not tire a man so much as
those we employ in a formal Journey, so our Lesson, as it were accidentally
occurring, without any set obligation of Time or Place, and falling naturally
into every action, will insensibly insinuate it self. By which means our very
Exercises and Recreations, Running, Wrestling, Music, Dancing, Hunting,
Riding, and Fencing, will prove to be a good part of our study. Behavior.
I would have his outward fashion and mien, and the disposition of his Limbs
formed at the same time with his Mind. It Is not a Soul, it is not a Body that we
are training up, but a man, and we ought not to divide him. And, as Plato says,
we are not to fashion one without the other, but make them draw together like
two Horses harnessed to a Coach. By which Saying of his, does he not seem to
allow more time for, and to take more care of Exercises for the Body, Exercises.
and to believe that the Mind in a good Proportion does her Business at the
same time too? As to the rest, this Method of Education ought to be carried on
with a severe sweetness, quite contrary to the practice of our Pedants, who,
instead of tempting and alluring Children to Letters by apt and gentle ways,
do in truth present nothing before them but Rods and Ferula's, Severity an
Enemy to Education.
Horror and Cruelty. Away with this Violence! away with this Compulsion! than
which, I certainly believe nothing more dulls and degenerates a well-descended
Nature. If you would have him apprehend shame and chastisement, do not harden
him to them. Inure him to Heat and Cold, to Wind and Sun, and to Dangers that
he ought to despise. Wean him from all effeminacy, and delicacy in Clothes and
Lodging, Eating and Drinking; accustom him to every thing, that he may not be a
Sir Paris, a Carpet-Knight, but a sinewy, hardy, and vigorous young man. I have
ever from a Child to the age wherein I now am, been of this opinion, and am
still constant to it. But amongst other things, the strict Government of most
of our Colleges has evermore displeased me, and peradventure they might have
erred less perniciously on the indulgent side. It Is the true House of
Correction of imprisoned Youth. They are taught to be debauched, by being
punished before they are so. Do but come in when they are about their Lesson,
and you shall hear nothing but the outcries of Boys under execution, with the
thundering noise of their Pedagogues, drunk with Fury, to make up the Consort.
A very pretty way this! to tempt these tender and timorous Souls to love their
Book, with a furious Countenance, and a Rod in hand! A cursed and pernicious
way of Proceeding! Besides what Quintilian has very well observed, that this
insolent Authority is often attended by very dangerous Consequences, and
particularly our way of Chastising. How much more decent would it be to see
their Classes strewn with green Leaves and fine Flowers, than with the bloody
Stumps of Birch and Willows? Were it left to my ordering, I should paint the
School with the Pictures of Joy and Gladness; Flora, and the Graces, as the
Philosopher Spencippus did his; that where their Profit is, they might there
have their Pleasure too. Such Viands as are proper and wholesome for Children,
should be seasoned with Sugar, and such as are dangerous to them, with Gall. A
Man would admire to see how sollicitous Plato is in his Laws concerning the
Gayety and Diversion of the Youth of his City, and how much he enlarges himself
upon their Races, Sports, Songs, Leaps, and Dances: of which, he says, that
Antiquity has given the ordering and Patronage particularly to Apollo, Minerva,
and the Muses. He insists long upon, and is very particular in giving
innumerable Precepts for Exercises; but as to the Lettered Sciences, says very
little, and only seems particularly to recommend Poecy upon the Account of
Music. All Singularity in our Manners and Conditions, is by all means to be
avoided, as inconsistent with civil Society. Who would not be astonished at so
strange a Constitution as that of Demophon, Steward to Alexander the Great, who
sweat in the Shade, and shivered in the Sun? I have seen those who have run
from the smell of a mellow Apple with greater Precipitation than from a
Harquebuze Shot; others run away from a Mouse; others vomit at the sight of
Cream, others ready to swoon at the sight of a Cat, as Germanicus, who could
neither endure the Sight nor the Crowing of a Cock. I will not deny, but that
there may peradventure be some occult Cause and natural Aversion in these
Cases; but certainly a Man might conquer it, if he took it in time. Precept has
in this wrought so effectually upon me, though not without some Endeavor on my
part, I confess, that Beer excepted, my Appetite accommodates it self
indifferently to all sorts of Diet. Young Bodies are supple, one should
therefore in that Age bend and ply them to all Fashions and Customs: and
provided a Man can contain the Appetite and the Will within their due Limits,
let a Young Man, a Gods Name, be rendered fit for all Nations and all Companies,
even to Debauchery and Excess if occasion be; that is, where he shall do it out
of Complacency to the Customs of the Place. Let him be able to do every thing,
but love to do nothing but what is good. The Philosophers themselves do not
justify Callisthenes for forfeiting the Favor of his Master Alexander the
Great, by refusing to pledge him a Cup of Wine. Let him laugh, play, and drink
with his Prince: nay I would have him, even in his Debauches, too hard for the
rest of the Company, and to excel his Companions in Ability and Vigor, and
that he may not give over doing it, either through Defect of Power or Knowledge
how to do it, but for want of Will. Seneca, Epist. 60.
Multum interest, utrum peccare quis nolit, aut nesciat; There is a vast
Difference betwixt forbearing to sin, and not knowing how to sin. I thought I
past a Complement upon a Lord, as free from those Excesses as any man whatever
in France, by asking him before a great deal of very good Company, How many
times in his Life he had been drunk in Germany, in the time of his being there
about his Majesty's Affairs; which he also took as it was intended, and made
Answer, Three times; and withal, told us the whole Story of his Debauches. I
know some, who for want of this Faculty, have found a great Inconvenience by it
in negotiating with that Nation. I have often with great Admiration reflected
upon the wonderful Constitution of Alcibiades, who so easily could transform
himself to so various Fashions without any Prejudice to his Health; one while
out-doing the Persian Pomp and Luxury, and another, the Lacedaemonian Austerity
and Frugality, as reformed in Sparta, as voluptuous in Ionia. Horat. l. 1*
Epist. 17.
Omnis Aristippum decuit color, and status, and res.
All Shapes and Colors you can name
Aristippus well became.
I would have my Pupil to be such a one, Id. ibid.
-- Quem duplici panno patientia velat,
Mirabor vitae via si conversa decebit,
Personamque feret non inconcinnus utramque
Whom Patience in patched Clothes does meanly shade,
Where a new Fortune a new Suit has made,
I shall admire if gracefully he can
The old Beggar hide in the new Gentleman.


These are my Lessons, and he who puts them in practice shall reap more
advantage than he who has had them read to him only, and only knows them. If
you see him, you hear him: if you hear him, you see him. God forbid, says one
in Plato, that to Philosophize were only to read a great many Books, and to
learn the Arts. Cic. Tusc. 4.
Hanc amplissimam omnium artium been vivendi disciplinam, vita magis quem
literis persequuti sunt: They have more illustrated and improved this
Discipline of living well, which of all Arts is the greatest, by their Lives,
than by their Reading. Leo, Prince of the Phliasians, asking Heraclides
Ponticus of what Art or Science he made Profession; I know, said he, neither
Art nor Science, but I am a Philosopher. One reproaching Diogenes, that, being
ignorant, he should pretend to Philosophy; I therefore, answered he, pretend to
it with so much the more reason. Hegesias, entreated that he would read a
certain Book to him; You are pleasant, said he, you choose those Figs that are
true and natural, and not those that are painted; why do you not also choose
Exercises which are naturally true, rather than those written and prescribed? A
Man cannot so soon get his Lesson by Heart as he may practice it: he will
repeat it in his Actions. We shall discover if there be Prudence in his
Exercises, if there be Sincerity and Justice in his Deportments, if there be
Grace and Judgment in his Speaking, if there be Constancy in his Sickness, if
there be Modesty in his Mirth, Temperance in his Pleasures, Order in his
Economy, and Indifferency in his Pallat, whether what he eats or drinks be
Flesh or Fish, Cic. ibid.
Wine or Water. Qui disciplinam suam non ostentationem scientiae, sed legem
vitae putet: quique obtemperet ipse sibi, and decretis pareat; Who considers
his own Discipline, not as a vain Ostentation of Science, but as a Law and Rule
of Life; and who obeys his own Decrees, and observes that Regiment he has
prescribed to himself. The Conduct of our Lives is the true mirror of our
Doctrine. Zeupidamus, to one who asked him, Why the Lacedaemonians did not
commit their Constitutions of Chivalry to Writing, and deliver them to their
Young Men to read; made Answer, That it was because they would inure them to
Action, and not amuse them with Words: with such a one, after fifteen or
sixteen Years study, compare one of our College Latinists, who has thrown away
so much time in nothing but learning to speak. The World is nothing but Babble;
and I hardly ever yet saw that Man who did not rather Prate too much, than
Speak too little; and yet half of our Age is embezled this way. We are kept
four or five Years to learn Words only, and to tack them together into Clauses;
as many more to make Exercises, and to divide a continued Discourse into so
many Parts; and other five Years at least to learn succinctly to mix and
interweave them after a subtle and intricate manner. Let us leave it to the
learned Professors. Going one day to Orleans, I met in the Plain on this side
Clery two Pedants traveling toward Bourdeaux, about fifty Paces distant from
one another, and a good way further behind them, I discovered a Troop of Horse,
with a Gentleman in the Head of them, which was the late Monsieur le Comte de
la Rochefoucaut: one of my People inquired of the foremost of these Domines, who
that Gentleman was that came after him, who having not seen the Train that
followed after, and I thinking he meant his Companion, pleasantly answered, A
pleasant Answer of a Pedant.
He is not a Gentleman, Sir; he is a Grammarian, and I am a Logician. Now we
who quite contrary, do not here pretend to breed a Grammarian, or a Logician,
but a complete Gentleman, let us leave them to throw away their Time at their
own Fancy: our Business lies elsewhere. Let but our Pupil be well furnished
with Things, Words will follow but too fast; he will pull them after him if
they do not voluntarily follow. I have observed some to make Excuses, that they
cannot express themselves, and pretend to have their Fancies full of a great
many very fine things, which yet, for want of Elocution, they cannot utter; a
mere Shift, and nothing else. Will you know what I think of it? I think they
are nothing but shadows of some imperfect Images and Conceptions that they know
not what to make of within, nor consequently bring them out: they do not yet
themselves understand what they would be at, and if you but observe how they
haggle, and stammer upon the point of Parturition, you will soon conclude, that
their Labor is not to Delivery, but about Conception, and that they are but
licking their formeless Embrio. For my part, I hold, and Socrates is positive
in it, that whoever has in his Mind a spritely and clear Imagination, he will
express it well enough in one kind or another, and, though he were dumb, by
Signs. Hor. de Art P^eti.
Verbaque praevisam rem non invita sequentur.
When once a thing conceived is in the Wit,
Words soon present themselves to utter it.
And as another as poetically says in Prose, cum Res Animum occupavare, Seneca.
Verba ambiunt. When things are once formed in the Fancy, Words offer
themselves in muster: and this other, Cicero de ^in. l. 3.
ipsae res Verba rapiunt. The things themselves force Words to express them. He
knows nothing of Ablative, Conjunctive, Substantive, or Grammar, no more than
his Lacquey, or a Fish-Wife of the Petit Pont; and yet these will give you a
Belly full of talk if you will hear them, and peradventure shall trip as little
in their Language as the best Masters of Art in France. He knows no Rhetoric,
nor how in a Preface to bribe the Benevolence of the courteous Reader; neither
does he care, nor is it very necessary he should know it. Indeed all this
Decoration of Painting is easily obscured and put down by the Luster of a
simple and blunt Truth: these fine Flourishes serve only to amuze the Vulgar,
of themselves incapable of more solid and nutritive Diet, as Afer does very
evidently demonstrate in Tacitus. The Ambassadors of Samos, prepared with a
long and elegant Oration, came to Cleomenes King of Sparta to incite him to a
War against the Tyrant Polycrates; who after he had heard their Harangue with
great Gravity and Patience, gave them this short Answer; As to the Exordium, I
remember it not, nor consequently the middle of your Speech; but for what
concerns your Conclusion, I will not do what you desire: A very pretty Answer
this, methinks, and a pack of learned Orators no doubt most sweetly confounded.
And what did this other say? The Athenians were to choose one of two Architects
for a Surveyor to a very great Building they had designed, of which, the first,
a pert affected Fellow, offered his Service in a long premeditated Discourse
upon the Subject, and by his Oratory inclined the Voices of the People in his
Favor; but the other in three Words, Lords of Athens, All that this Man has
said I will do. When Cicero was in the height and heat of his Eloquence, many
were struck with Admiration; but Cato did only laugh at it, saying, We have a
pleasant Ridiculum Consulum.
Consul. Let it go before, or come after, a good Sentence, or a thing well
said, is always in season, if it neither suit well with what went before, nor
has any very good Coherence with what follows after, it is however good in it
self. I am none of those who think that good Rhyme makes a good Poem. Let him
make short long, and long short if he will, it is no great matter; if there be
Invention, and that the Wit and Judgment have well performed their Offices, I
will say here is a good Poet, but an ill Rhymer. Hor. ser. lib. sat. 4.
Emunctae naris, durus componere versus.
His Fancy's rich, his Sense is clear
In Verse, though he has no good ear.
Let a Man, says Horace, divest his Work of all Ornaments and Measure, Tempora
certa, modosque, and quod prius ordine verbum est,
Posterius faciat, praeponens ultima primis,
Invenias etiam disjecti membra Poetae:
Let Tense, and Mood, and Words be all misplaced,
Those last that should be first, those first, the last,
Tho all things be thus shuffled out of Frame,
You Will yet a Poem find in According to that of Doctor Done, D. of St. Paul's
Anagram.
He will never the more forfeit his Praise for that; the very pieces will be
fine by themselves. Menander's Answer had this Meaning, who being reproved by a
Friend, the time drawing on at which he had precisely promised a Comedy that he
had not yet fallen in hand with it, It is made, and ready, said he, all to the
Verses. Having contrived the Subject, and disposed the Scenes in his Fancy, he
took little care for the rest. Since Ronsard and du Bellay have given
Reputation to our French Poesy, every little Dabler, for ought I see, swells
his Words as high, and makes his Cadences very near as harmonious as they. Plus
sonat, quam valet; Seneca, Epist. 40.
There were never so many Poetasters as now; but tho they find it no hard
matter to rhyme as musically as they, they yet fall infinitely short of
imitating the brave Descriptions of the one, and the curious Invention of the
other. But what will become of our young Gentleman, if he be attacked with the
sophistick Subtilty of some Syllogism? A Westphalia Ham makes a Man drink,
quenches Thirst; therefore a Westphalia Ham quenches Thirst. Why let him laugh
at it, and it will be more Discretion to do so, than to go about to answer it:
or let him borrow this pleasant Evasion from Aristippus, Why should I trouble
my self to untye that, which, bound as it is, gives me so much trouble? One
offering at this dialectick Juggling against Cleanthes, Chrysippus took him
short, saying, Reserve these Baubles to play with Children, and do not by such
Fooleries divert the serious Thoughts of a man of Years. If these ridiculous
Subtilties, contorta, and aculeata Sophismata, Cicero Acad. l. 4.
as Cicero calls them, are designed to possess him with an Untruth, they are
then dangerous; but if they signify no more than only to make him laugh, I do
not see why they should be so considerable, that a man need to be fortified
against them. There are some so ridiculous, as to go a Mile out of their way to
hook in a fine Word: Quint. l. 8.
Aut qui non verba rebus aptant, sed res arcessunt, quibus verba conveniant;
Who do not fit Words to the Subject, but seek out for things quite from the
Purpose to fit those Words they are so enamored of. And as another says, Sen.
Ep. 59.
Qui alicujus verbi decore placentis vocentur ad id, quod non proposuerant
scribere; Who by their Fondness of some fine sounding Word, are tempted to
something they had no Intention to treat of. I for my part rather bring in a
fine Sentence by Head and Shoulders to fit my purpose, than divert my Designs
to hunt after a Sentence. On the contrary, Words are to serve, and to follow a
man's purpose; and let Gascon come in Play where French will not do. I would
have things so exceed, and wholly possess the Imagination of him that hears,
that he should have something else to do, than to think of Words. The way of
Speaking that I love, is natural and plain, as well in Writing as Speaking, and
a sinewy and significant way of expressing a man's self, short and pithy, and
not so elegant and artificial as prompt and vehement. Haec demum sapiet dictio,
quae seriet. Epist. Lucani.

Most Weight and Wisdom does that Language bear,
Does pierce and captivate the Hearers Ear.
Rather hard than harsh, free from Affectation; irregular, incontiguous, and
bold, where every Piece makes up an entire Body; not like a Pedant, a Preacher,
or a Pleader, but rather a Souldier-like Style, as Suetonius calls that of
Julius Caesar; and yet I see no reason why he should call it so. I have never
yet been apt to imitate the negligent Garb, which is yet observable amongst the
Youngmen of our time, to wear my Cloak on one Shoulder, my Bonnet on one side,
and one Stocking in something more Disorder than the other, which seems to
express a kind of manly Disdain of those exotic Ornaments, and a Contempt of
Art; but I find that Negligence of much better use in the form of Speaking. All
Affectation, Affectation unbecoming a Courtier.
particularly in the French Gayety and Freedom, is ungraceful in a Courtier,
and in a Monarchy every Gentleman ought to be fashioned according to the Court
Model; for which reason, an easy and natural Negligence does well. I no more
like a Web where the Knots and Seams are to be seen, than a fine Proportion, so
delicate, that a man may tell all the Bones and Veins. Seneca, Epist. 40.
Quae veritati operam dat oration, incomposita sit, and simplex. Quis accurate
loquitur, nisi qui vult putide loqui? Let the Language that is dedicated to
Truth be plain and unaffected. For who studies to speak quaintly and
accurately, that does not at the same time design to perplex his Auditory? That
Eloquence prejudices the Subject it would advance, that wholly attracts us to
it self. And as in our outward Habit, it is a ridiculous Effeminacy to
distinguish our selves by a particular and unpracticed Garb or Fashion; so in
Language, to study new Phrases, and to affect Words that are not of current
use, proceeds from a Childish and Scholastic Ambition. Shall I be bound to
speak no other Language than what is spoken in the Courts of Paris?
Aristophanes the Grammarian was a little out, when he reprehended Epicurus for
this plain way of delivering himself, the End and Design of his Oratory being
only Perspicuity of Speech, and to be understood. The Imitation of Words by its
own Facility, immediately disperses it self thorough a whole People: but the
imitation of inventing, and fitly applying those Words, is of a slower
Progress. The Generality of Readers, for having found a like Robe, very
mistakingly imagine they have the same Body and Inside too, whereas Force and
Sinews are never to be borrowed, the Gloss and outward Ornament, that is, Words
and Elocution, may. Most of those I converse with, speak the same Language I
here write; but whether they think the same Thoughts I cannot say. The
Athenians (says Plato) are observed to study length and elegancy of Speaking;
the Lacedaemonians to affect Brevity; and those of Creet to aim more at the
Fecundity of Conception than the Fertility of Speech; and these are the best.
Zenon used to say, that he had two sorts of Disciples, one that he called
(...), curious to learn things, and these were his Favorites; the other,
(...), that cared for nothing but Words: not that fine Speaking is not a very
good and commendable Quality; but not so excellent and so necessary as some
would make it; and I am scandalized that our whole Life should be spent in
nothing else. I would first understand my own Language, and that of my
Neighbors with whom most of my Business and Conversation lies. No doubt but
Greek and Latin are very great Ornaments, and of very great use, but we buy
them too dear: I will here discover one way, which also has been experimented
in my own Person, by which they are to be had better cheap, and such may make
use of it as will. My Father having made the most precise Enquiry that any man
could possibly make amongst Men of the greatest Learning and Judgment, of an
exact method of Education, was by them cautioned of the Inconvenience then in
use, and made to believe, that the tedious time we applied to the learning of
the Tongues of them who had them for nothing, was the sole cause we could not
arrive to that Grandeur of Soul, and Perfection of Knowledge, with the ancient
Greeks and Romans: I do not however believe that to be the only Cause: but the
Expedient my Father found out for this, was, that in my Infancy, and before I
began to speak, he committed me to the care of a German, The Author's Education.
who since died a famous Physician in France, totally ignorant of our Language,
but very fluent, and a great Critic in Latin. This Man, whom he had fetched
out of his own Country, and whom he entertained with a very great Salary for
this only end, had me continually in his Arms: to whom there were also joined
two others of the same Nation, but of inferior Learning, to attend me, and
sometimes to relieve him; who all of them entertained me with no other Language
but Latin. As to the rest of his Family, it was an inviolable Rule, that
neither Himself, nor my Mother, Man nor Maid, should speak any thing in my
Company, but such Latin Words as every one had learnt only to gabble with me.
It is not to be imagined how great an advantage this proved to the whole
Family, my Father, and my Mother, by this means learning Latin enough to
understand it perfectly well, and to speak it to such a Degree, as was
sufficient for any necessary Use; as also those of the Servants did, who were
most frequent with me. To be short, we did Latin it at such a Rate, that it
overflowed to all the Neighboring Villages, where there yet remain, that have
established themselves by Custom, several Latin Appellations of Artizans and
their Tools. As for what concerns my self, I was above six years of Age before
I understood either French or Perigordin, any more than Arabic, and without
Art, Book, Grammar, or Precept, Whipping, or the expense of a Tear, had by that
time learned to speak as pure Latin as my Master himself. If (for Example) they
were to give me a Theme after the College fashion, they gave it to others in
French, but to me they were of necessity to give it in the worst Latin, to turn
it into that which was pure and good; and Nicholas Grouchi, who writ a Book de
Comitiis Romanorum; William Guirentes, who has writ a Comment upon Aristotle;
George Bucanan, that great Scotch Poet, and Marcus Antonius Muretus (whom both
France and Italy have acknowledged for the best Orator of his time) my
domestic Tutors, have all of them often told me, that I had in my Infancy that
Language so very fluent and ready, that they were afraid to enter into
Discourse with me; and particularly Bucanan, whom I since saw attending the
late Marshall de Brissac, then told me, that he was about to write a Treatise
of Education, the Example of which, he intended to take from mine, for he was
then Tutor to that Count de Brissac who afterward proved so valiant and so
brave a Gentleman. As to Greek, of which I have but a very little Smattering,
my Father also designed to have it taught me by a Trick; but a new one, and by
way of sport; tossing our Declensions to and fro, after the manner of those,
who by certain Games at Tables and Chess, learn Geometry and Arithmetic: for
he, amongst other Rules, had been advised to make me relish Science and Duty by
an unforced Will, and of my own voluntary motion, and to educate my Soul in all
Liberty and Delight, without any Severity or Constraint. Which also he was an
Observer of to such a degree, even of Superstition, if I may say so, that some
being of Opinion, it did trouble and disturb the Brains of Children suddenly to
wake them in the Morning, and to snatch them violently and over-hastily from
Sleep, (wherein they are much more profoundly envolv'd than we) he only caused
me to be waked by the Sound of some musical Instrument, and was never
unprovided of a Musician for that purpose: by which Example you may judge of
the rest, this alone being sufficient to recommend both the Prudence and the
Affection of so good a Father; who therefore is not to be blamed if he did not
reap Fruits answerable to so exquisite a Culture: of which, two things were the
cause. First, a steril and improper Soil: for, tho I was of a strong and
healthful Constitution, and of a Disposition tollerably sweet and tractable;
yet I was withal so heavy, idle, and indisposed, that they could not rouse me
from this Stupidity to any Exercise of Recreation, nor get me out to play. What
I saw, I saw clearly enough, and under this lazy Complexion nourished a bold
Imagination, and Opinions above my Age. I had a slothful Wit, that would go no
faster than it was led, a slow Understanding, a languishing Invention, and
after all, incredible defect of Memory; so that it is no wonder, if from all
these nothing considerable can be extracted. Secondly, (like those, who,
impatient of a long and steady cure, submit to all sorts of Prescriptions and
Receipts) the good Man being extremely timorous of any way failing in a thing
he had so wholly set his Heart upon, suffered himself at last to be overruled
by the common Opinion, and complying with the method of the time, having no
more those Persons he had brought out of Italy, and who had given him the first
Model of Education, about him, he sent me at six Years of Age to the College
of Guienne, at that time the best and most flourishing in France. And there it
was not possible to add any thing to the care he had to provide me the most
able Tutors, with all other Circumstances of Education, reserving also several
particular Rules contrary to the College Practice; but so it was, that with
all these Precautions, it was a College still. My Latin immediately grew
corrupt, of which also by Discontinuance I have since lost all manner of use:
so that this new way of Institution served me to no other end, than only at my
first coming to prefer me to the first Forms: for at thirteen Years old, that I
came out of the College, I had run thorough my whole Course (as they call it)
and in truth without any manner of Improvement, that I can honestly brag of, in
all this time. The first thing that gave me any Taste of Books, was the
Pleasure I took in reading the Fables of Ovid's Metamorphoses, and with them I
was so taken, that being but Seven or Eight Years old, I would steal from all
other Divertisements to read them, both by reason that this was my own natural
Language, the easiest Book that I was acquainted with, and for the Subject, the
most accommodated to the Capacity of my Age: for as for Lancelot du Lake,
Amadis de Gaul, Huon of Bourdeaux, and such Trumpery, which Children are most
delighted with, I had never so much as heard their Names, no more than I yet
know what they contain; so exact was the Discipline wherein I was brought up.
But this was enough to make me neglect the other Lessons were prescribed me;
and here it was infinitely to my Advantage, to have to do with an understanding
Tutor, who very well knew discreetly to connive at this and other Truantries of
the same nature; for by this means I ran thorough Virgil's Aeneids, Terence,
Plautus, and some Italian Comedies, allured by the Softness and Pleasure of the
Subject; whereas had he been so foolish as to have taken me off this Diversion,
I do really believe, I had brought nothing away from the College but a Hatred
of Books, as almost all our young Gentlemen do: but he carried himself very
discreetly in that Business, seeming to take no notice, and allowing me only
such time as I could steal from my other regular, and yet moderate Studies,
which whetted my Appetite to devour those Books I was naturally so much in love
with before. For the chief things my Father expected from their Endeavor to
whom he had delivered me for Education, was Affability of Manners, and good
Humor; and, to say the Truth, mine had no other Vice but Sloth and want of
Metal. There was no fear that I would do ill, but that I would do nothing; no
body suspected that I would be wicked, but useless; they foresaw an Idleness,
but no Malice in my Nature; and I find it falls out accordingly. The Complaints
I hear of my self are these, he is idle, cold in the Offices of Friendship and
Relation, and remiss in those of the Public; he is too particular, he is too
proud: but the most Injurious do not say, Why has he taken such a thing? Why
has he not paid such a one? But why does he part with nothing? Why does he not
give? And I should take it for a Favor that Men would expect from me no
greater Effects of Supererogation than these. But they are unjust to exact from
me what I do not owe; and in condemning me to it, they efface the Gratification
of the Act, and deprive me of the Gratitude that would be due to me upon such a
Bounty; whereas the active Benefit ought to be of so much the greater Value
from my hands, by how much I am not passive that way at all. I can the more
freely dispose of my Fortune the more it is mine, and of my self, the more I am
my own. Nevertheless, if I were good at setting out my own Actions, I could
peradventure very well repel these Reproaches, and could give some to
understand, that they are not so much offended, that I do not enough, as that I
am able to do a great deal more than I do. Yet for all this heavy Disposition
of mine, my Mind, when retired into it self, was not altogether idle, nor
wholly deprived of solid Inquisition, nor of certain and infallible Results
about those Objects it could comprehend, and could also without any Helps
digest them; but amongst other things, I do really believe, it had been totally
impossible to have made it to submit by Violence and Force. Shall I here
acquaint you with one Faculty of my Youth? I had great Boldness and Assurance
of Countenance, and to that a Flexibility of Voice and Gesture to any Part I
undertook to act. Alter ab undecimo tum me vix ceperat annus. Virg. Bucol. 8.

For the next Year to my eleventh had
Me but a very few days older made,
When I played the chiefest Parts in the Latin Tragedies of Bucanan, Guerente,
and Muretus, that were presented in our College of Guienne, with very great
Applause: wherein Andreas Goveanus, our Principal, as in all other Parts of his
Undertaking, was, without Comparison, the best of that Employment in France;
and I was looked upon as one of the chief Actors. It Is an Exercise that I do
not disapprove in young People of Condition, and have since seen our Princes,
by the Example of the Ancients, in Person handsomely and commendably perform
these Exercises; and it was moreover allowed to Persons of the greatest Quality
to profess, and make a Trade of it in Greece. Live. l. 6.26.
Aristoni Tragico actori rem aperit: huic and genus, and fortuna honesta erant:
nec Ars, quia nihil tale apud Graecos pudori est ea deformabat. He imparted
this Affair to Aristo the Tragedian, a man of a good Family and Fortune, which
nevertheless, did neither of them receive any Blemish by that Profession;
nothing of that kind being reputed a Disparagement in Greece. Nay, I have
always taxed those with Impertinence who condemn these Entertainments, and with
Injustice those who refuse to admit such Comedians as are worth seeing into the
good Towns, and grudge the People that public Diversion. Well-governed
Corporations take care to assemble their Citizens, not only to the solemn
Duties of Devotion, but also to Sports and Spectacles. They find Society and
Friendship augmented by it; and besides, can there possibly be allowed a more
orderly and regular Diversion than what is performed in the Sight of every one,
and very often in the Presence of the Supreme Magistrate himself? And I, for my
part, should think it reasonable, that the Prince should sometimes gratify his
People at his own Expense; and that in great and populous Cities there might be
Theaters erected for such Entertainments, if but to divert them from worse and
more private Actions. But, to return to my Subject, there is nothing like
alluring the Appetite and Affection, otherwise you make nothing but so many
Asses laden with Books, and by virtue of the Lash, give them their Pocket full
of Learning to keep; whereas, to do well, you should not only lodge it with
them, but make them to espouse it.

CHAP. XXVI. That it is Folly to measure Truth and Error by our own Capacity.
IT IS not perhaps without reason, that we attribute Facility of Belief, and
Easiness of Persuasion, to Simplicity and Ignorance; and I have heard the
Belief compared to the Impression of a Seal stamped upon the Soul, which by how
much softer and of less resistance it is, is the more easy to be imposed upon.
Vt necesse est lancem in libra ponderibus impositis de primis sic animum
perspicuis cedere; As the Scale of the Balance must give way to the Weight
that presses it down, so the Mind must of necessity yield to Demonstration: and
by how much the Soul is more empty and without Counterpoise, with so much
greater Facility it dips under the weight of the first Persuasion. And this is
the reason that Children, the common People, Women, and sick Folks, are most
apt to be led by the Ears. But then on the other side, it is a very great
Presumption, to slight and condemn all things for false that do not appear to
us likely to be true; which is the ordinary Vice of such as fancy themselves
wiser than their Neighbors. I was my self once one of those; and if I heard
talk of dead Folks walking, of Prophecies, Enchantments, Witchcrafts, or any
other Story I had no mind to believe, Somnia, terrores magicos, miracula, sagas,
Nocturnos lemures, portentaque Thessala;
Dreams, Magic Terrors, Wonders, Sorceries,
Hob-goblins, or Thessalian Prodigies.
I presently pitied the poor People that were abused by these Follies; whereas
I now find, that I my self was to be pitied as much at least as they; not that
Experience has taught me any thing to convince my former Opinion, tho my
Curiosity has endeavored that way; but Reason has instructed me, that thus
resolutely to condemn any thing for false and impossible, is arrogantly and
impiously to circumscribe and limit the Will of God, and the Power of Nature,
within the Bounds of my own Capacity, than which no Folly can be greater. If we
give the Names of Monster and Miracle to every thing our Reason cannot
comprehend, how many are continually presented before our Eyes? Let us but
consider through what Clouds, and as it were groping in the Dark, our Teachers
lead us to the Knowledge of most of the things we apply our Studies to, and we
shall find that it is rather Custom than Knowledge that takes away the Wonder,
and renders them easy and familiar to us. -- Jam nemo cessus, saturusque
videndi, Lucret. l. 2.

Suspicere in Coeli dignatur lucida Templa.
Already glutted with the Sight, now none
Heaven's lucid Temples deigns to look upon.
And that if those things were now newly presented to us, we should think them
as strange and incredible, if not more than any others. -- Si nunc primum
mortalibus adsint Id. ibid.

Ex improviso, seu sint objecta repent,
Nil magis his rebus poterat mirabile dici,
Aut minus ante quod auderent fore credere gentes.
Where things are suddenly, and by surprise
Just now objected new to mortal Eyes,
At nothing could they be astonished more,
Nor less than what they so admired before.


He that had never seen a River, imagined the first he met with to be the Sea,
and the greatest things that have fallen within our Knowledge, we conclude the
Extremes that Nature makes of the kind. Scilicet and fluvius qui non est
maximus, Id. ibid.
ei est
Qui non ante aliquem majorem videt, and ingens;
Arbor, homoque videtur, and omnia de genere omni
Maxim quae vidit quisque, haec ingentia fingit.
A little River unto him does seem,
That bigger never saw, a mighty Stream:
A Tree, a Man, any thing seems to his view
Of The kind the greatest, that never greater knew.
Consuetudine Oculorum, Cicero de Not. Deo. lib. 2.
assuescunt Animi, neque admirantur, neque requirunt rations earum rerum, quas
semper vident. Things grow familiar to Men's Minds by being often seen; so that
they neither admire, nor are inquisitive into things they daily see. The
Novelty, rather than the greatness of things, tempts us to enquire into their
Causes. But we are to judge with more reverence, and with greater
Acknowledgment of our own Ignorance and Infirmity of this infinite Power of
Nature. How many unlikely things are there testified by People of very good
Repute, which if we cannot persuade our selves absolutely to believe, we ought
at least to leave them in Suspense; for to conclude them impossible, is by a
temerarious Presumption to pretend to know the utmost Bounds of Possibility.
Did we rightly understand the difference betwixt impossible, betwixt
extraordinary, and what is contrary to the common Opinion of Men, in believing
rashly, and on the other side, in being not too incredulous, we should then
observe the Rule of Ne quid nimis, enjoined by Chilo. When we find in
Froissard, that the Count de Foix knew in Bearn the defeat of John King of
Castile at Juberoth the next day after, and the means by which he tells us he
came to do so, we may be allowed to be a little merry at it, as also at what
our Annals report, that Pope Honorius, the same day that King Phillip Augustus
died at Mant -- performed his public Obsequies at Rome, and commanded the like
throughout all Italy; the Testimony of these Authors not being perhaps of
Authority enough to restrain us. But what if Plutarch, besides several Examples
that he produces out of Antiquity, tells us, he is assured by certain
Knowledge, that in the time of Domitian, the News of the Battle lost by
Antonius in Germany, was published at Rome, many days Journey from thence, and
dispersed throughout the whole World, the same Day it was fought: and if Caesar
was of Opinion, that it has often happened, that the report has preceded the
accident; shall we not say, that these simple People have suffered themselves
to be deceived with the Vulgar, for not having been so clear sighted as we? Is
there any thing more delicate, more clear, more spritely, than Pliny's
Judgment, when he is pleased to set it to work? Any thing more remote from
vanity? Setting aside his Learning, of which I make less account, in which of
these do any of us excel him? And yet there is scarce a Puisne Sophister that
does not convince him of untruth, and that pretends not to instruct him in the
Progress of the Works of Nature: When we read in Bouchet the Miracles of St.
Hillary's Relics: away with it, his Authority is not sufficient to bear us the
Liberty of contradicting him: but generally to condemn all such like Stories,
seems to me an impudence of the worst Character. The great St. Augustine,
professes himself to have seen a blind Child recover sight upon the Relick of
St. Gervase, and St. Protasius at Millan, a Woman at Carthage cured of a
Cancer, by the sign of the Cross made upon her by a Woman newly baptized.
Hesperius, a familiar Friend of his, to have driven away the Spirits that
haunted his House, with a little Earth of the Sepulcher of our Lord: which
Earth being also transported thence into the Church, a Paralitick to have there
been suddenly cured by it. A Woman in Procession, having touched St. Stephens
Shrine with a Nosegay, and after rubbing her Eyes with it, to have recovered
her Sight lost many years before; with several other Miracles, of which he
professes himself to have been an Eye Witness. Of what shall we accuse him and
the two holy Bishops, Aurelius and Maximinus, both which he attests to the
Truth of these things? Shall it be of Ignorance, Simplicity, and Facility; or
of Malice, and Imposture? Is any Man now living so impudent, as to think
himself comparable to them, either in Virtue, Piety, Learning, Cicero 2. de
Div. l. 2.
Judgment, or any kind of Perfection? Qui ut Rationem nullam afferent, ipsa
Authoritate me frangerent. Who tho they should give me no Reason for what they
affirm, would yet convince me with their Authority. It Is a presumption of great
Danger and Consequence, besides the absurd Temerity it draws after it, to
contemn what we do not comprehend. For after that, according to your fine
Understanding, you have established the Limits of Truth and Error, and that
afterward there appears a Necessity upon you of believing stranger things than
those you have contradicted, you are already obliged to quit your hold, and to
acquiesce. That which seems to me so much to disorder our Consciences in the
Commotions we are now in concerning Religion, is the Catholics dispensing so
much with their Belief; they fancy they appear Moderate, and Wise, when they
grant to the Huguenosts some of the Articles in Question; but besides that,
they do not discern what advantage it is to those with whom we contend, to
begin to give Ground, and to retire, and how much this animates our Enemy to
follow his blow: these Articles which they insist upon as things indifferent,
are sometimes of very great importance, and dangerous Consequence. We are
either wholly and absolutely to submit our selves to the Authority of our
Ecclesiastical Polity, or totally throw off all Obedience to it. It Is not for
us to determine what and how much Obedience we owe to it, and this I can say,
as having my self made trial of it, that having formerly taken the liberty of
my own Swing and Fancy, and omitted or neglected certain Rules of the
Discipline of our Church, which seemed to me vain, and of no Foundation: coming
afterward to discourse it with learned Men, I have found those very things to
be built upon very good and solid Ground, and strong Foundation; and that
nothing but Brutality and Ignorance makes us receive them with less Reverence
than the rest: Why do we not consider what Contradictions we find in our own
Judgments, how many things were yesterday Articles of our Faith, that to day
appear no other than Fables? Glory and Curiosity are the Scourges of the Soul;
of which the last prompts us to thrust our Noses into every thing, and the
other forbids us to leave any thing doubtful and undecided.

CHAP. XXVII. Of Friendship.
HAving considered the Fancy of a Painter, I have that serves me, I had a mind
to imitate his way: For he chooses the fairest place, and middle of any Wall,
or panel a Wainscote, wherein to draw a Picture which he finishes with his
utmost care, and art, and the vacuity about it he fills with Grotesque; which
are odd Fantastic Figures without any grace but what they derive from their
variety, and the extravagancy of their shapes. And in truth, what are these
things I scribble, other than Grotesques, and Monstrous Bodies, made of
dissenting parts, without any certain Figure, or any other than accidental
Order, Coherence, or Proportion?

Desinit in piscem Mulier formosa superne. Hor. de Art. Poetica.

That a fair Woman's Face above does show;
But in a Fishes Tail does end below.
In this second part I go hand in hand with my Painter; but fall very short of
him in the first, and the better, my power of handling not being such, that I
dare to offer at a brave piece, finely painted, and set off according to Art. I
have therefore thought fit to borrow one of Estienno de Boitic, and such a one
as shall honor and adorn all the rest of my work; namely, a discourse that he
called, The voluntary Servitude: a piece writ in his younger years, by way of
Essay, in honor of liberty against Tyrants, and which has since run through
the hands of several Men of great Learning and Judgment, not without singular,
and merited commendation; for it is finely writ, and as full, as any thing can
possibly be: Though a Man may confidently say it is far short of what he was
able to do; and if in that more mature Age, wherein I had the happiness to know
him, he had taken a design like this of mine, to commit his thoughts to
writing, we should have seen a great many rare things, and such as would have
gone very near to have rivaled the best Writings of Antiquity: For in Natural
parts especially, I know no Man comparable to him. But he has left nothing
behind him, save this Treatise only, (and that too by chance, for I believe he
never saw it after it first went out of his hands,) and some Observations upon
that Edict of January, made Famous by our Civil Wars, which also shall
elsewhere peradventure find a place. These were all I could recover of his
Remains, I to whom, with so affectionate a remembrance, upon his Deathbed, he
by his last Will bequeathed his Library, and Papers, the little Book of his
Works only excepted, which I committed to the Press. And this particular
obligation I have to this Treatise of his, that it was the occasion of my first
coming acquainted with him; for it was showed to me long before I had the good
fortune to know him; and gave me the first knowledge of his name; proving so the
first cause and foundation of a Friendship, which we afterward improved, and
maintained, so long as God was pleased to continue us together, so perfect,
inviolate, and entire, that certainly the like is hardly to be found in Story,
and amongst the Men of this Age, there is no sign nor trace of any such thing
in use; so much concurrence is required to the building of such a one, that
it is much, if Fortune bring it but once to pass in three Ages. There is nothing
to which Nature seems so much to have inclined us, as to Society; and Aristotle
says, that the good Legislators had more respect to Friendship, than to
Justice. Now the most supreme point of its perfection in this: Perfect
Friendship, what.
for generally all those, that Pleasure, Profit, Public or Private Interest,
Create and Nourish, are so much the less Generous, and so much the less
Friendships, by how much they mix another cause, and design, than simple, and
pure Friendship it self. Neither do the four Ancient Kinds, Natural, Sociable,
Hospitable and Venerian, either separately, or jointly, make up a true and
perfect Friendship. That of Children to Parents is rather respect: Friendship
being nourisht by Communication, which cannot by reason of the great disparity,
be betwixt them: but would rather perhaps violate the duties of Nature; for
neither are all the secret thoughts of Fathers fit to be communicated to
Children, lest it beget an indecent familiarity betwixt them; neither can the
advices, and reproofs, which is one of the principal offices of Friendship, be
properly performed by the Son to the Father. There are some Countries, where
it is the Custom for Children to kill their Fathers; and others, where the
Fathers killed their Children, to avoid being sometimes an impediment to one
another in their designs; and moreover the expectation of the one does
naturally depend upon the ruin of the other. There have been great
Philosophers who have made nothing of this tie of Nature, as Aristippus for
one, who being pressed home about the affection he owed to his Children, as being
come out of him, presently fell to spit, saying, that that also came out of
him, and that he did also breed Worms, and Lice; and that other, that Plutarch
endeavored to reconcile to his Brother, I make never the more account of him,
said he, for coming out of the same hole. This name of Brother does indeed
carry with it an amicable and affectionate sound, and for that reason, he and I
called Brothers: but the complication of Interest, the division of Estates, and
that the raising of the one, should be the undoing of the other, does strangely
unnerve and slacken this fraternal tie: And Brothers pursuing their Fortune and
Advancement by the same Path, it is hardly possible, but they must of necessity
often justle, and hinder one another. Besides, why is it necessary that the
correspondence of Manners, Parts and Inclinations, which beget these true and
perfect Friendships, should always meet and concur in these relations. The
Father and the Son may be of quite contrary humors, and Brothers without any
manner of Sympathy in their Natures. He is my Son, he is my Brother, or he and
I are Cousin-germans; but he is Passionate, ill Natured, or a Fool. And
moreoever, by how much these are Friendships, that the Law, and Natural
Obligation, impose upon us; so much less is there of our own choice, and
voluntary freedom. Whereas that voluntary liberty of ours, has nothing but that
of Affection and Friendship, properly its own. Not that I have not in my own
person experimented all can possibly be expected of that kind, having had the
best, and most indulgent Father, even to an extreme old Age, that ever was, and
who was himself descended from a Family, for many Generations Famous, and
Exemplary for Brotherly Concord: Hor. l. 2. Ode. 2.
-- Et ipse
Notus in fratres animi Paterni.
And he himself noted the rest above,
Toward his Brothers for paternal Love.


We are not here to bring the Love we bear to Women, though it be an Act of our
own Choice, into comparison; nor rank it with the others; the Fire of which I
confess, Catul^us.
(Neque enim est Dea nescia nostri
Quae dulcem curis miscet amaritiem.)
(Nor is my Goddess ign'rant what I am,
Who pleasing Sorrows mixes with my Flame.)
is more active, more eager, and more sharp: but withal, it is more precipitous,
fickle, moving and inconstant: a Fever subject to Intermission, and Paroxisms,
that has seized but on one part, one corner of the Building; whereas in
Friendship, it is a general and universal Fire, but temperate, and equal, a
constant established heat, all easy, and smooth, without poynancy or roughness.
Moreover, in Love, it is no other than Frantic Desire, to that which flies from
us.

Come segue la lepre ill cacciatore Ariosto. Canto. 10.

Al freddo, al caldo, alla montagna, al litto:
Ne piu l'estima poi, che presa vede,
Et sol dietro a chi fugge affretta il piede.
Like Hunters, that the flying Hare pursue
Over Hill, and Dale, through Heat, and Morning Dew,
Which being taken, the Quarry they despise,
Being only pleased in following that which flies.
So soon as ever they enter into terms of Friendship, that is to say, into a
concurrence of Desires, it vanishes, and is gone, fruition destroys it, as
having only a fleshly end, and such a one as is subject to Satiety. Friendship
on the contrary, is enjoyed proportionably, as it is desired, and only grows
up, is nourisht and improves by enjoyment, as being of it self Spiritual, and
the Soul growing still more perfect by practice. Under, and subsellious to this
perfect Friendship, I cannot deny, but that the other vain Affections, have in
my younger Years found some place in my thoughts, that I may say nothing of
him, who himself confesses but too much in his Verses: So that I had both these
Passions, but always so, that I could my self well enough distinguish them, and
never in any degree of comparison with one another. The first maintaining its
flight in so lofty and so brave a place, as with disdain to look down, and see
the other flying at a far humbler pitch below. As concerning Marriage, besides,
that it is a Covenant, the entrance into which, is only free, but the
continuance in it, forced and compelled, having another dependence, than that
of our own Free Will, and a Bargain commonly contracted to other ends, there
almost always happens a Thousand Intricacies in it, to unravel, enough to break
the Thread, and to divert the Current of a Lively Affection: whereas Friendship
has no manner of Business or Traffic with any but it self. Moreover, to say
truth, the ordinary Talent of Women, is not such, as is sufficient to maintain
the Conference and Communication required, to the support of this Conjugal Tie;
nor do they appear to be endu'd with Constancy of Mind, to endure the pinch of
so hard and durable a Knot. And doubtless, if without this, there could be such
a free and voluntary familiarity contracted, where not only the Souls might
have this entire fruition, but the Bodies also might share in the Alliance, and
a Man be engaged throughout, the Friendship would certainly be more full and
perfect; but it is without example, that this Sex could ever arrive at such
perfection, and by the Ancient Schools, is wholly rejected; as also that other
Grecian License is justly abhorred by our manners; which also, for having,
according to their practice, a so necessary disparity of Age, and difference of
Offices betwixt the Lovers, hold no more proportion with the perfect Union and
Harmony that we here require, than the other. Cicero Tus. lib. 4.
Quis est enim iste amor amicitiae? cur neque deformem adolescentem quisquam
amat, neque formosam senem? For what is that Love of Friendship? why does no
one Love a deformed Youth, or a comely Old Man? Neither will that very Picture
that the Academy presents of it, as I conceive, contradict me, when I say, that
the first fury inspired by the Son of Venus into the heart of the Lover, upon
the sight of the Flower, and prime of a springing and blossoming Youth, to whom
they allow all the Insolences, and Passionate Attempts, that an immoderate
Ardour can produce, was simply founded upon an external Beauty, the false image
of Corporal Generation; for upon the Soul it could not ground this Love, the
sight of which, as yet lay concealed, was but now springing, and not of
maturity to Blossom. Which fury, if it seized upon a mean Courage, the means by
which he preferred his suit, were rich Presents, favor in advancement to
Dignities, and such Trumpery, which they by no means approve: If on a more
generous Soul, the pursuit was suitably generous, by Philosophical
Instructions, Precepts to revere Religion, to obey the Laws, to die for the
good of his Country; by examples of Valor, Prudence and Justice, the Lover
studying to render himself acceptable by the Grace and Beauty of his Soul, that
of his Body being long since faded and decayed, hoping by this mutual Society
to establish a more firm and lasting Contract. When this Courtship came to
effect in due season, (for that which they do not require in the Lover, namely,
Leisure and Discretion in his pursuit, they strictly require in the person
Loved; forasmuch as he is to judge of an internal Beauty, of difficult Knowledge,
and obscure Discovery,) then there sprung in the Person Loved the desire of a
spiritual Conception, by the mediation of a spiritual Beauty. This was the
Principal, the Corporeal, Accidental, and Second Causes, are all the wrong side
of the Lover. For this reason they prefer the Person Beloved, maintaining, that
the Gods in like manner prefer him too, and very much blame the Poet Aeschilus,
for having, in the Loves of Achilles and Patroclus, given the Lovers part to
Achilles, who was in the first flower and pubescency of his Youth, and the
handsomest of all the Greeks. After this general Familiarity, and mutual
Community of Thoughts, is once settled, supposing the sovereign and most worthy
Part to preside and govern, and to perform its proper Offices, they say, that
from thence great Utility derived, both to private and public Concerns. That
the force and power of Countries received their beginning from thence, and that
it was the chiefest security of Liberty and Justice. Of which, the Salutiferous
Loves of Harmonius and Aristogiton, is a good instance; and therefore it is,
that they called it Sacred and Divine, and do conceive, that nothing but the
Violence of Tyrants, and the Baseness of the common People, is mimical to it:
finally, all that can be said in favor of the Academy, is, that it was a Love
which ended in Friendship; which also well enough agrees with the Stoical
definition of Love. Cicero. Ibid.
Amorem conatum esse amicitiae faciendae ex pulchritudinis specie. That Love is
a desire of contracting Friendship by the Beauty of the Object. I return to my
own more just and true description. Cicero. Amic.
Omnino amicitiae, corroboratis jam confirmatis ingeniis, and aetatibus,
judicandae sunt. Those are only to be reputed Friendships, that are fortified
and confirmed by Judgment, and length of time. For the rest, which we commonly
call Friends, and Friendships, are nothing but Acquaintance, and Familiarities,
either occasionally contracted, or upon some design, by means of which, there
happens some little intercourse betwixt our Souls: but in the Friendship I
speak of, they mix and work themselves into one piece, with so universal a
mixture, that there is no more sign of the Seame by which they were first
conjoined. If a Man should importune me to give a reason why I Loved him; I
find it could no otherwise be expressed, than by making answer, because it was
he, because it was I. There is, beyond I am able to say, I know not what
inexplicable and fatal power that brought on this Union. We sought one another
long before we met, and by the Characters we heard of one another, which
wrought more upon our Affections, than in reason, mere reports should do, I
think by some secret appointment of Heaven, we embra'd in our Names; and at our
first meeting, which was accidentally at a great City entertainment, we found
our selves so mutually taken with one another, so acquainted, and so endeared
betwixt our selves, that from thenceforward nothing was so near to us as one
another. He writ an excellent Latin Satyr, which I since Printed, wherein he
excuses the precipitation of our intelligence, so suddenly came to perfection,
saying, that being to have so short continuance, as being begun so late, (for
we were both full grown Men, and he some Years the older,) there was no time to
lose; nor was ti'd to conform it self to the example of those slow and regular
Friendships, that require so many precautions of a long praeliminary
Conversation. This has no other Idea, than that of its self: this is no one
particular consideration, nor two, nor three, nor four, nor a thousand; it is I
know not what quintessence of all this mixture, which, seizing my whole Will,
carried it to plunge and lose it self in his, and that having seized his whole
Will; brought it back with equal concurrence and appetite, to plunge and lose
it self in mine. I may truly say, lose, reserving nothing to our selves, that
was either his or mine. When Laelius, in the presence of the Roman Consuls,
(who after they had sentenced Tiberius Gracchus, prosecuted all those who had
had any familiarity with him also,) came to ask Cajus Blosius, (who was his
chiefest Friend and Confident,) how much he would have done for him? And that
he made Answer, All things. How! All things! said Laelius, And what if he had
commanded you to Fire our Temples? He would never have commanded me that,
replied Blosius. But what if he had? said Laelius; Why, if he had, I would have
Obeyed him, said the other. If he was so perfect a Friend to Gracchus, as the
Histories report him to have been, there was yet no necessity of offending the
Consuls by such a bold confession, though he might still have retained the
assurance he had of Gracchus his disposition. However, those who accuse this
Answer as Seditious, do not well understand the Mystery; nor presuppose, as it
was true, that he had Gracchus his Will in his sleeve, both by the power of a
Friend, and the perfect knowledge he had of the Man. They were more Friends,
than Citizens, and more Friends to one another, than either Friends or Enemies
to their Country, or than Friends to Ambition and Innovation. Having absolutely
given up themselves to one another, either held absolutely the reins of the
others Inclination, which also they governed by Virtue, and guided by the
conduct of Reason, (which also without these, it had not been possible to do,)
and therefore Blosius his Answer was such as it ought to be. If either of their
Actions flew out of the handle, they were neither (according to my measure of
Friendship,) Friends to one another; nor to themselves. As to the rest, this
Answer carries no worse sound, than mine would do to one that should ask me, If
your Will should command you to Kill your Daughter, would you do it? And that I
should make Answer, that I would, for this expresses no consent to such an Act,
forasmuch as I do not in the least suspect my own Will, and as little that of
such a Friend. It Is not in the power of all the Eloquence in the World, to
dispossess me of the certainty I have of the intentions and resolutions of
mine; nay, no one Action of his, what face soever it might bear, could be
presented to me, of which I could not presently, and at first sight, find out
the moving cause: Our Souls have drawn so unanimously together, and we have
with so mutual a confidence laid open the very bottom of our hearts to one
another view, that I not only know his as well as my own; but should certainly
in any concern of mine, have trusted my interest much more willingly with him,
than with my self. Let no one therefore rank other common Friendships with such
a one as this. I have had as much experience of these, as another, and of the
most perfect of their kind: but I do not advise, that any should confound the
Rules of the one, and the other, for they would then find themselves much
deceived. In those other ordinary Friendships, you are to walk with a Bridle in
your hand, with Prudence and Circumspection, for in them the Knot is not so
sure, that a Man may not half suspect it will slip: Love him (said Chilo) so,
as if you were one Day to Hate him; and Hate him so, as you were one Day to
Love him. A Precept, that though abominable in the Sovereign, and perfect
Friendship which I intend, is nevertheless very sound, as to the practice of
the ordinary ones, now in fashion, and to which the saying that Aristotle had
so frequent in his Mouth, O my Friends, there is no Friend; may very fitly be
applied. And this glorious Commerce of good Offices, Presents and Benefits, by
which other Friendships are supported and maintained, do not deserve so much as
to be mentioned here; and is, by this concurrence and consent of Wills, totally
taken away, and rendered of no use; as the kindness I have for my self, receives
no increase, for any thing I relieve my self withal in time of need, (whatever
the Stoics say,) and as I do not find my self obliged to my self, for any
Service I do my self: So the Union of such Friends, being really perfect,
deprives them of all acknowledgment of such Duties, and makes them loath and
banish from their Conversation, these words of Division, and Distinction,
Benefit, Obligation, Acknowledgment, Entreaty, Thanks, and the like: All
Things, Wills, Thoughts, Opinions, Goods, Wives, Children, Honors and Lives,
being in effect, common betwixt them, and that absolute concurrence of
Affections being no other than one Soul in two Bodies, (according to that very
proper definition of Aristotle) they can neither lend, nor give any thing to
one another. This is the reason why the Lawgivers, to honor Marriage with
some imaginary resemblance of this divine Alliance, interdict all gifts betwixt
Man and Wife; inferring by that, that all should belong to each of them, and
that they have nothing to divide; or to give. If, in the Friendship of which I
speak, one could give to the other, the receiver of the Benefit would be the
Man that obliged his Friend; for each of them contending, and above all things,
studying how to be useful to one another, he that administers the occasion, is
the liberal Man, in giving his Friend the satisfaction of doing that toward
him, which above all things he does most desire. When the Philosopher Diogenes
wanted Money, he used to say, That he redemanded it of his Friends, not that he
demanded it; and to let you see the effectual practice of this, I will here
produce an ancient and a rare example; Eudamidas a Corinthian, had two Friends,
Charixenus a Sycionian, and Aretheus a Corinthian: this Man coming to Die,
being Poor, and his two Friends Rich, he made his Will after this manner; I
Bequeath to Aretheus the Maintenance of my Mother, to support and provide for
her in her Old Age; and to Charixenus I Bequeath the care of Marrying my
Daughter, and to give her as good a Portion as he is able; and in case that one
of these chance to Die, I hereby substitute the Surviver in his place. They who
first saw this Will, made themselves very merry at the Contents: but the
Executors being made acquainted with it, accepted the Legacies with very great
content; and one of them, Charixenus, Dying within five Days after, and
Aretheus by that means having the charge of both devolved solely to him: He
nourisht that Old Woman with very great care and tenderness, and of five
Talents he had in Estate, he gave two and a half in Marriage with an only
Daughter he had of his own, and two and a half in Marriage with the Daughter of
Eudamidas, and in one and the same Day solemnized both their Nuptials. This
Example is very full, if one thing were not to be objected, namely, the
multitude of Friends: For the perfect Friendship I speak of, is indivisible,
every one gives himself so entirely to his Friend, that he has nothing left to
distribute to others: But on the contrary, is sorry, that he is not double,
treble, or quadruple, and that he has not many Souls, and many Wills, to confer
them all upon this one subject. Common Friendships will admit of division, one
may Love the Beauty of this, the good Humor of that Person, the Liberty of a
third, the Paternal Affection of a fourth, the Fraternal Love of a fifth, and
so of the rest: But this Friendship that possesses the whole Soul, and there
rules and sways with an absolute Sovereignty, can possibly admit of no Rival.
If two at the same time should call to you for succor, to which of them would
you run? Should they require of you contrary Offices; how could you serve them
both? Should one commit a thing to your Secretary, that it were of importance
to the other to know, how would you disingage your self? A singular and
particular Friendship disunites and dissolves all other Obligations whatsoever.
The secret I have sworn not to reveal to any other, I may without Perjury
communicate to him who is not another, but my self. It Is Miracle enough
certainly, for a Man to double himself, and those that talk of tripling, talk
they know not of what. Nothing is extreme, that has its like; and who shall
presuppose, that of two, I Love one as much as the other, that they Love one
another too, and Love me as much as I Love them, does multiply in Friendship,
the most single and united of all things, and wherein moreover, one alone, is
the hardest thing in the World to find. The remaining part of this story suits
very well with what I said before; for Eudamidas as a Bounty and Favor,
Bequeaths to his Friends a Legacy of employing themselves in his necessity; he
leaves them Heirs to this liberality of his, which consists, in giving them the
opportunity of conferring a benefit upon him; and doubtless, the force of
Friendship is more eminently apparent in this act of his, than in that of
Aretheus. In short, these are effects not to be imagined nor comprehended by
such as have not experience of them, and which makes me infinitely honor and
admire the Answer of that young Soldier to Cyrus, by whom being asked how much
he would take for a Horse, with which he had won the prize of a Course, and
whether he would exchange him for a Kingdom? No, truly Sir, said he, but I
would give him with all my heart, to find a true Friend, could I find out any
Man worthy of that relation. He did not say ill in saying, could I find: for
though a Man may almost every where meet with Men sufficiently qualified for a
superficial acquaintance; yet in this, where a Man is to deal from the very
bottom of his heart, without any manner of reservation, it will be requisite,
that all the Wards and Springs be neatly and truly wrought, and perfectly sure.
In Leagues that hold but by one end, we are only to provide against the
imperfections, that particularly concern that end. It can be of no importance
to me, of what Religion my Physician or my Lawyer is, provided the one be a
good Lawyer, and the other a good Physician; this consideration has nothing in
common with the Offices of Friendship; and I am of the same indifferency in the
domestic acquaintance, my Servants must necessarily contract with me; I never
enquire, when I am to take a Footman, if he be Chaste, but if he be Diligent;
and am not solicitous, if my Chairman be given to Gaming, as if he be Strong
and Able; or if my Cook be a Swearer, or a good Cook. I do not however take
upon me to direct what other Men should do in the Government of their Families,
there are enough that meddle enough with that: but only give an account of my
method in my own.

Terence Hea. Act. 1. Sce. 1.
Mihi sic usus est: tibi, ut opus est facto, face.
This has my practice been; but thou may do,
What thy Affairs, or Fancy, prompt thee to.
In Table talk, I prefer the Pleasant and Witty, before the Learned and the
Grave: In Bed, Beauty before Modesty, and in common Discourse, Eloquence,
whether or no there be sincerity in that case. And, as he that was found
astride upon a Hobbyhorse, playing with his Children, entreated the person who
had surpised him in that posture, to say nothing of it, till himself came to
be a Father, supposing, that the fondness that would then possess his own Soul,
would render him a more equal Judge of such an Action: So I also could wish to
speak to such as have had experience of what I say: though, knowing how remote
a thing such a Friendship is from the common practice, and how rarely such are
to be found, I despair of meeting with any one qualified to such a degree of
competency. For even these Discourses left us by Antiquity upon this subject,
seem to me flat and low, in comparison of the sense I have of it, and in this
particular, the effects surpass the very precepts of Philosophy.

Nil ego contulerim jucundo sanus amico.. Hor. l. 1. Sat. 5.

I nothing to my self can recommend,
Like the delight of a facetious Friend.
The Ancient Menander declared him to be happy, that had had the good Fortune
to meet with but the shadow of a Friend; and doubtless he had good reason to
say so, especially, if he spoke by experience: For in good earnest, if I
compare all the rest of my Life, though thanks be to God, I have always past my
time pleasantly enough, and at my ease, and the loss of such a Friend excepted,
free from any grievous Affliction, and in great tranquillity of Mind, having
been contented with my natural and original Conveniences, without being
sollicitous after others; if I should compare it all, I say, with the Four
Years I had the happiness to enjoy the sweet Society of this excellent Man;
it is nothing but smoke, but an obscure and tedious Night, from the Day that I
lost him. -- Quem semper acerbum, Virg. Aene. z. 5.

Semper honoratum (sic Dii voluistis) habebo.
Which ever till I step into my Grave,
I shall in sad, but kind remembrance have.
I have only led a Sorrowful and Languishing Life; and the very Pleasures that
present themselves to me, instead of administering any thing of Consolation,
double my Affliction for his loss. We were halves throughout, and to that
degree, that methinks, by out-living him, I defraud him of his part. Terence
Heau. Act. 1. Sce. 1.
Nec jas esse ulla me voluptate hic frui
Decrevi, tantisper dum ille abest meus particeps.
And this against my self I have decreed,
Nothing of Pleasure shall my Fancy feed.
Since he is gone, for ever gone alas!
Who in all Joys my dear Co-partner was.
I was so accustomed to be always his second in all places, and in all
interests too, that methinks, I am no more than half a Man, and have but half a
Being. Horat. l. 12. Ode 4.
Illam meae si partem animae tulit
Maturior vis, quid moror altera,
Nec charius eque nec superstes
Integer? Ille dies utramque
Duxit ruinam.
Since that half of my Soul was snatched away
By riper Age, why does the other stay;
Which now is not dear; nor truly does survive?
That Day our double Ruin did contrive.
There is no Action or Imagination of mine, wherein I do not want him; I know
that his Advice and Assistance would be useful to me: for as he surpast me by
infinite degrees in Virtue, and all other Accomplishments; so he also did in
all Offices of Friendship.

Quis desiderio sit pudor, Horat. l. 1* Ode. 1.
aut modus
Tam chari capitis.
A moderate Mourning were a scandal here,
Where I Lament a Friend so truly dear.
O misero, frater adempte mihi! Catullus.

Omnia tecum una perierunt gaudia nostra,
Que tuus in vita, dulcis alebat amor,
Tu mea, tu moriens fregisti commoda frater,
Tecum una tota est, nostra sepulta anima.
Cujus ego interitu tota de mente fugavi
Hec studia, atque omnes delitias animi.
Alloquar? audiero nunquam tua verba loquentem?
Nunquam ego te vita, frater amabilior,
Aspiciam posthac? at certe semper emabo.
Ah! Brother, what a Life did I commence,
From that sad Day that thou were ravished hence!
Those Joys are gone, that whilst thou tarried'st here,
By thy sweet Conversation nourish't were.
With thee, when dying, my good Fortune fled,
And in thy Grave my Soul was buried.
The Muses at thy Funerals I forsook,
And of thy Joy my leave for ever took.
Dearer than Life, am I so wretched then,
Never to see, nor speak to thee again,
Nor hear thy Voice, now frozen up by Death?
Yet will I Love thee to my latest Breath.
But let us hear a little a Boy of Sixteen speak.

In this place I did once intend to have incerted those Mesmoirs upon that
famous Edict of January: But being I since find that they are already Printed,
and with a malicious design, by some who make it their business to molest, and
endeavor to subvert the state of our Government, not caring whether they mend
and reform it, Apology for Estienne de Boetie.
or no; and that they have confounded this Writing of his with others of their
own Leaven, I desisted from that purpose: But that the Memory of the Father may
not be interested, nor suffer with such, as could not come near hand to be
acquainted with his Principles; I here give them truly to understand, that it
was writ by him in his very green Years, and that by way of Exercise only, as a
common Theme that has been tumbled and tossed by a Thousand Writers. I make no
question, but that he himself believed what he writ, being so Conscientious
that way, that he would not so much as lie in jest: and do moreover know, that
could it have been in his own Choice, he had rather have been Born at Venice,
than at Soarlac, and he had reason: But he had another Maxim Soveraignly
imprinted in his Soul, very Religiously to Obey, and submit to the Laws under
which he was Born. There never was a better Citizen, more affectionate to his
Country; nor a greater Enemy to all the Commotions and Innovations of his time:
So that he would doubtless much rather have employed his Talent to the
extinguishing of those Civil Flames, than have added any Fuel to them: For he
had a Mind fashioned to the Model of better Ages. But in exchange of this
Serious Piece, I will present you with another of a more Gay and Frolic Air,
from the same Hand, and Writ at the same Age.

CHAP. XXVIII. Nine and Twenty Sonnets of Estienne de la Boetie, to Madam de
Grammont Countess of Guisson.
MAdam, I offer to your Ladyship nothing of mine, either because it is already
yours, or because I find nothing in my Writings worthy of you: But I have a
great desire that these Verses, into what part of the World soever they may
travel, may carry your Name in the Front, for the Honor will accrue to them,
by having the great Corisanda de Andonis for their safe Conduct: I conceive
this present, Madam, so much the more proper for you, both by reason there are
few Ladies in France who are so good Judges of Poetry, and make so good use of
it as you do; as also, that there is none who can give it that Spirit and Life
your Ladyship does, by that incomparable Voice Nature has added to your other
perfections; you will find, Madam, that these Verses deserve your esteem, and
will, I dare say, concur with me in this, that Gascony never yielded more
Invention, finer Expression, or that more evidence themselves to flow from a
Masters hand. And be not Jealous, that you have but the remainder of what I
Published some Years since, under the Name of Monsieur de Foix, your brave
Kinsman; for certainly these have something in them more spritely, and
luxuriant, as being Writ in a greener Youth, and enflamed with the Noble Ardour
that I will tell your Ladyship in your Ear. The other were Writ since, when he
was a Suitor in the honor of his Wife, already relishing of I know not what
Matrimonial Coldness: And for my part, I am of the same opinion with those, who
hold, that Poesy appears no where so Gay, as in a wanton and irregular Subject.

These Nine and Twenty Sonnets that were inserted here, are since Printed with
his other Works.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Moderation.
AS if we had an infectious Touch, we by our manner of handling corrupt things,
that in themselves are laudable and good: We may grasp Virtue so hard, till it
become Vicious, if we embrace it too straight, and with too violent a desire.
Those who say, there is never any excess in Virtue, for as much as it is no
Virtue, when it once becomes excess, only play upon words.

Horace l. 1. Epist. 6.
Insani sapiens nomen ferat, aequus iniqui,
Vltra quam satis est, virtutem si petat ipsam.
The Wise for Mad, the Just for Unjust pass,
When more than needs, even Virtue they embrace.
This is a subtle consideration in Philosophy. A Man may both be too much in
Love with Virtue, and be excessive in a just Action. Holy Writ agrees with
this, Be not Wiser than you should; but be soberly Wise. It Is like he means
Henry the 3 d of France.
I have known a great Man prejudice the Opinion Men had of his Devotion, by
pretending to be devout beyond all Examples of others of his condition. I Love
temperate and moderate Natures. An immoderate Zeal, even to that which is good,
though it does not offend, does astonish me; and puts me to study what Name to
give it. Neither the Mother of Pausanias, who was the first instructor of her
Sons process; and threw the first stone toward his Death: Nor Posthumus the
Dictator, who put his Son to Death, whom the Ardour of Youth had fortunately
pusht upon the Enemy a little more advanced than the rest of his Squadron, do
appear to me so just as strange; and I should neither advise, nor like to
follow so Savage a Virtue, and that costs so dear. The Archer that shoots over,
misses as well as he that falls short, and it is equally troublesome to my
sight, to look up at a great Light, and to look down into a dark Abyss.
Callicles in Plato, says, That the extremity of Philosophy is hurtful, and
advises not to dive into it beyond the limits of Profit: that taken moderately,
it is pleasant and useful: but that in the end, it renders a Man Brutish and
Vicious: A Contemner of Religion, and the common Laws, an Enemy to Civil
Conversation, and all Humane Pleasures, incapable of all Public
Administration, unfit either to assist others, or to relieve himself, and a fit
Object for all sorts of Injuries and Affronts, without remedy, or satisfaction:
He says true; for in its Excess, it enslaves our Natural Freedom, and by an
impertinent subtilty, leads us out of the fair and beaten way that Nature has
plained out for us. The Love we bear to our Wives is very lawful, and yet
Theology thinks fit to curb and restrain it. As I remember, I have read in one
place of St. Thomas of Aquin, where he condemns Marriages within any of the
forbidden degrees, for this reason, amongst others, that there is some danger,
lest the Friendship a Man bears to such a Woman, should be immoderate; for if
the Conjugal Affection be full and perfect betwixt them, as it ought to be, and
that it be over and above surcharged with that of Kindred too, there is no
doubt, but such an addition will carry the Husband beyond the bounds of reason.
Those Sciences that regulate the manners of Men, Divinity and Philosophy, will
have a saying to every thing. There is no Action so private that can escape
their Inspection and Jurisdiction, but they are best taught, who are best able
to censure and curb their own Liberty. It Is the Women that expose their
Nudities over freely upon the account of Pleasure, though in the Necessities of
Physic and Chyrurgery, they are more shy, and more reserved. I will therefore
in their behalf teach the Husbands, that is, such as are too extravagant and
sensual in the exercise of the Matrimonial Duty, this Lesson, that the very
Pleasures they enjoy in the Society of their Wives, are Reproachable, if
immoderate, and that a Licentious and Riotous abuse of them, are Faults* as
reprovable here, as illegitimate and adulterous Practices. Those Immodest and
Debauched Tricks and Postures, that the first Ardour suggests to us in this
Affair, are not only indecently, but inconveniently practiced upon our Wives.
Let them at least learn Impudency from another hand; they are always ready
enough for our Business, and I for my part always went the plain way to work.
Marriage is a Solemn and Religious Tie, and therefore the pleasure we extract
from thence, should be a sober and serious delight, and mixed with a certain
kind of Gravity; it should be a kind of discreet and conscientious pleasure.
And being that the chief end of it is Generation, some make a Question, whether
when Men are out of hopes of that fruit, as when they are superannuated, or
already with Child, it be lawful to lie with our Wives. It Is Homicide,
according to Plato, and certain Nations, (the Mohammedan, amongst others,)
Abominate all Conjunction with Women with Child, and others also, with those
who are Unclean. Zenobia would never admit her Husband for more than one
Encounter, after which, she left him to his own swing for the whole time of her
Conception, and not, till after that, would any more receive him: A brave
Example of Conjugal Continency. It was doubtless from some Lascivious Poet, and
one that himself was in great distress for a little of this sport, that Plato
borrowed this Story; that Jupiter was one Day so hot upon his Wife, that not
having so much patience, as till she could get to the Couch, he threw her upon
the Floor, where the vehemence of pleasure made him forget the great and
important Resolutions he had but newly taken with the rest of the Gods, in his
Celestial Council; and to brag, that he had had as good a Bout, as when he got
her Maidenhead unknown to their Parents. The Kings of Persia were wont to
invite their Wives to the beginning of their Festivals; but when the Wine began
to work in good earnest, and that they were to give the Reins to pleasure, they
sent them back to their private Appartments, that they might not participate of
their immoderate Lust, sending for other Women in their stead, with whom they
were not obliged to so great a decorum of respect. All Pleasures, and all sorts
of Gratifications, are not properly and fitly conferred upon all sorts of
Persons. Epaminondas had Committed a young Man for certain Debauches; for whom
Pelopidas mediated, that at his request he might be set at liberty, which
notwithstanding the great intelligence betwixt them, Epaminondas resolutely
denied to him, but granted it at the first word to a Wench of his, that made
the same intercession; saying, that it was a Gratification fit for such a one
as she, but not for a Captain. Sophocles being joint Praetor with Pericles,
seeing accidentally a fine Boy pass by: O what a delicate Boy is that, said he;
I, that were a Prize, answered Pericles, for any other, than a Praetor, who
ought not only to have his Hands, but his Eyes Chaste too. Elius Verus the
Emperor, answered his Wife, who Reproached him with his Love to other Women,
that he did it upon a Conscientious account, forasmuch as Marriage was a Name
of Honor, and Dignity, not of Wanton and Lascivious Desire. And our
Ecclesiastical History preserves the Memory of that Woman in great Veneration,
who parted from her Husband, because she would not comply with his indecent and
inordinate Desire. In fine, there is no so just and lawful pleasure, wherein
the Intemperance and Excess, is not to be Condemned. But, to speak the truth,
is not Man a most miserable Creature the while? It is scarce, by his Natural
Condition, in his power to taste one Pleasure pure and entire; and yet must he
be contriving Doctrines and Precepts, to Curtal that little he has; he is not
yet Wretched enough, unless by Art and Study, he Augment his own Misery.

Fortunae miseras auximus Art vias. Propert. lib. 3. Ele. 6.

We with Misfortune against our selves take part,
And our own Miseries increase by Art.
Humane Wisdom makes as ill use of her Talent, when she exercises it in
rescinding from the number and sweetness of those Pleasures, that are naturally
our due, as she employs it favorably, and well, in Artificially disguising and
tricking out the ills of Life, to alleviate the Sense of them. Had I ruled the
Roast, I should have taken another, and more natural course, which, to say the
truth, is both Commodious and Sacred, and should peradventure have been able to
have limited it too. Notwithstanding that both our Spiritual and Corporal
Physicians, as by compact betwixt themselves, can find no other way to cure,
nor other Remedy for the Infirmities of the Body, and the Soul, than what is
often times worse than the Disease, by tormenting us more, and by adding to our
Misery and Pain. To this end, Watchings, Fastings, Hair-shirts, remote and
solitary Banishments, perpetual Imprisonments, Whips, and other Afflictions,
have been introduced amongst Men: But so, that they should carry a sting with
them, and be real Afflictions indeed; and not fall out so, as it once did to
one Gallio, who having been sent an Exile into the Isle of Lesbos, news was not
long after brought to Rome, that he there Lived as Merry, as the Day was long;
and that what had been enjoined him for a Penance, turned to his greatest
Pleasure and Satisfaction: Whereupon the Senate thought fit to recall him home
to his Wife and Family, and confine him to his own House, to accommodate their
Punishment to his feeling and apprehension. For to him whom Fasting would make
more Healthful and more Spritely, and to him to whose Pallat Fish were more
acceptable than Flesh, it would be no proper, nor sanative Receipt; no more
than in the other sort of Physic, where the Drugs have no effect upon him who
swallows them with Appetite and Pleasure. The Bitterness of the Potion, and the
Abhorrency of the Patient, are necessary Circumstances to the Operation. The
Nature that would eat Rhubarb like Buttered Turnips, would frustrate the use
and virtue of it; it must be something to trouble and disturb the Stomach, that
must Purge and Cure it; and here the common Rule, that things are Cured by
their contraries, fails; for in this, one ill is Cured by another. This Belief
a little resembles that other so Ancient one, of thinking to Gratify the Gods
and Nature, by Self-murder; an Opinion universally once received in all
Religions, and to this Day retained in some. For in these later times wherein
our Fathers Lived, Amurath at the taking of Istmus, Immolated Six Hundred Young
Greeks to his Fathers Soul, in the nature of a propitiatory Sacrifice for the
Sins of the Deceased. And in those new Countries discovered in this Age of
ours, which are pure, and Virgins yet, in comparison of ours, this practice is
in some measure every where received. All their Idols reek with Humane Blood,
not without various Examples of Horrid Cruelty. Some they Burn alive, and half
Broiled, take them off the Coals to tear out their Hearts and Entrails; others,
even Women they fley alive, and with their Bloody Skins Clothe and Disguise
others. Neither are we without great Examples of Constancy and Resolution, in
this Affair: The poor Souls that are to be Sacrificed, Old Men, Women and
Children, going some Days before to beg Alms for the Offering of their
Sacrifice, and so Singing and Dancing, present themselves to the Slaughter. The
Ambassadors of the King of Mexico, setting out to Fernando Cortez the Power and
Greatness of their Master, after having told him, that he had Thirty Vassals,
of which, each was able to Raise an Hundred Thousand Fighting Men, and that he
kept his Court in the fairest and best Fortified City under the Sun, added at
last, that he was obliged Yearly to offer to the Gods Fifty Thousand Men. And
it is confidently affirmed, that he maintained a continual War, with some
Potent Neighboring Nations, not only to keep the Young Men in Exercise, but
principally, to have wherewithal to furnish his Sacrifices with his Prisoners
of War. At a certain Town in another place, for the welcome of the said Cortez,
they Sacrificed Fifty Men at once. I will tell you this one Tale more, and I
have done; Some of these People being Beaten by him, sent to Complement him,
and to Treat with him of a Peace, whose Messengers carried him Three sorts of
Presents, which they presented in these terms: Behold, Lord, here are Five
Slaves, if thou be a Furious God that feeds upon Flesh and Blood, eat
these, and we will bring thee more; if thou be an Affable God, behold here
Incence and Feathers; but if thou be a Man, take these Fowls and these
Fruits, that we have brought thee.

CHAP. XXX. Of Canniballs.
WHen Pyrrhus King of Epire Invaded Italy, having viewed and and considered the
Order of the Army, the Romans sent out to meet him; I know not, said he, what
kind of Barbarians (for so the Greeks called all other Nations) these may be;
but the Discipline of this Army that I see, has nothing of Barbarity in it. As
much said the Greeks of that Flaminius brought into their Country; and Philip
beholding from an Eminence, the Order and the distribution of the Roman Camp,
led into his Kingdom by Publius Sulpicius Galba, spoke to the same effect. By
which it appears, how Cautious Men ought to be, of taking things upon trust
from Vulgar Opinion, and that we are to judge by the Eye of Reason, and not from
common report. I have long had a Man in my House, that Lived Ten or Twelve
Years in the new World, discovered in these latter Days, and in that part of it
where Villegaignon Landed, which he called Antartick France. This Discovery of
so vast a Country seems to be of very great Consideration; and we are not sure,
that hereafter there may not be another, so many wiser Men than we have been
deceived in this. I am afraid our Eyes are bigger than our Bellies, and that we
have more Curiosity than Capacity: for we grasp at all, but catch nothing but
Air. Plato brings in Solon, telling a Story, that he had heard from the Priests
of Sais in Egypt, that of Old, and before the Deluge, there was a great Island
called Atlantis, situate directly at the Mouth of the Straight of Gibralter,
which contained more Ground, than both Africa and Asia put together; and that
the Kings of that Country, who not only possessed that Isle, but extended their
Dominion so far into the Continent, that they had a Country as large as Africa
to Egypt, and as long as Europe to Tuscany, attempted to Encroach even upon
Asia, and to subjugate all the Nations that Borders upon the Mediterranian Sea,
as far as the Gulf of Mare Maggiore; and to that effect, overran all Spain,
the Gauls, and Italy, so far, as to penetrate into Greece, where the Athenians
stopped the Torrent of their Arms: but sometimes after, both the Athenians, they,
and their Island, were swallowed by the Flood.

It is very likely, that this Violent Irruption and Inundation of Water, made a
wonderful Change, and strange Alteration, in the Habitations of the Earth: As
it is said, that the Sea then divided Sicily from Italy: Haec loc avi quondam,
and vasta connulsa ruina, Virg. Eneids l. 3.

Dissiluisse ferunt: cum protinus utraque tellus,
Vna foret.
It Is said, those places by the o'rebearing Flood,
Too Great and Violent to be withstood,
Split, and was thus from one another rent,
Which were before one Solid Continent.
Cyprus from Suria, the Isle of Negrepont, from the firm Land of Beacia, and
elsewhere, united Lands that were separate before, by filling up the Channel
betwixt them, with Sand and Mud; Horac. in Art. Poet.
Sterilisque diu palus, aptaque remis
Vicinas urbes alit, and grave sentit aratrum.
Where steril remigable Marshes now
Feed Neighboring Cities, and admit the Plough.
But there is no great appearance, that this Isle was this new World so lately
discovered: for that almost touched upon Spain, and it were an incredible effect
of an Inundation, to have tumbled so prodigious a Mass, above Twelve Hundred
Leagues: Besides, that our Modern Navigators have already almost discovered it
to be no Island, but firm Land, and Continent, with the East Indies on the one
side, and with the Lands under the two Poles on two others; or if it be
separate from them, it is by so narrow a Straight, and so inconsiderable a
Channel, that it never the more deserves the Name of an Island for that. It
should seem, that in this great Body, there are two sorts of Motions, the one
Natural, and the other Febrifick, as there are in ours. When I consider the
Impression that our River of Dordoigne has made in my time, on the right Bank
of its descent, and that in Twenty Years it has gained so much, and undermined
the Foundations of so many Houses, I perceive it to be an extraordinary
Agitation: for had it always followed this Course, or were hereafter to do it,
the prospect of the World would be totally changed. But Rivers alter their
Course, sometimes beating against the one side, and sometimes the other, and
sometimes quietly keeping the Channel. I do not speak of sudden Inundations,
the causes of which every Body understands. In Medoc, by the Seashore, the
Sieur d' Arsac my Brother, sees an Estate, he had there, Buried under the Sands
which the Sea Vomits before it: where the tops of some Houses are yet to be
seen, and where his Rents and Revenues are converted into pitiful Barren
Pasturage. The Inhabitants of which place affirm, That of late Years the Sea
has driven so vehemently upon them, that they have lost above Four Leagues of
Land. These Sands are her Harbingers. And we now see great heaps of moving
Sand, that march half a League before her.

The other Testimony from Antiquity, to which some would apply this discovery
of the new World, is in Aristotle; at least, if that little Book of unheard of
Miracles be his. He there tells us, That certain Carthaginians, having crossed
the Atlantic Sea without the Straight of Gibralter, and Sailed a very long
time, discovered at last, a great and fruitful Island, all covered over with
Wood, and Watered with several broad and deep Rivers; far remote from all firm
Land, and that they, and others after them, allured by the gratitude and
fertility of the Soil, went thither with their Wives and Children, and began to
Plant a Colony: But the Senate of Carthage visibly perceiving their People by
little and little, to grow thin, Issued out an express Prohibition, That no
one, upon pain of Death, should Transport themselves thither; and also drove
out these new Inhabitants; fearing, it is said, lest in process of time, they
should so multiply, as to supplant them themselves, and Ruin their State: But
this Relation of Aristotle's, does no more agree with our new found Lands, than
the other. This Man that I have is a plain ignorant Fellow, and therefore the
more likely to tell Truth: For your better bred sort of Men, are much more
Curious in their Observation, it is true, and discover a great deal more, but
then they gloss upon it, and to give the greater weight to what they deliver,
and allure your Belief, they cannot forbear a little to alter the Story; they
never represent things to you simply as they are, but rather as they appeared
to them, or as they would have them appear to you, and to gain the reputation
of Men of Judgment, and the better to induce your Faith, are willing to help
out the Business with something more than is really true, of their own
Invention. Now in this Case, we should either have a Man of Irreproachable
Veracity; or so Simple, that he has not wherewithal to Contrive, and to give a
Color of Truth to False Relations, and that can have no Ends in Forging an
Untruth. Such a one is mine; and besides, the little suspicion the Man lies
under, he has diverse times showed me several Seamen, and Merchants, that at
the same time went the same Voyage. I shall therefore content my self with his
Information, without enquiring what the Cosmographers say to the Business. We
should have Maps to trace out to us the particular places where they have been;
but for having had this advantage over us, to have seen the Holy Land, they
would have the privilege forsooth, to tell us Stories of all the other parts of
the World besides. I would have every one Write what he knows, and as much as
he knows, but no more; and that not in this only, but in all other Subjects:
For such a Person may have some particular Knowledge and Experience of the
nature of such a River; or such a Fountain; that as to other things, knows no
more, than what every Body does, and yet to keep a clutter with this little
Pittance of his, will undertake to Write the whole Body of Physics: A Vice
from whence great Inconveniences derive their Original.

Now, to return to my Subject, I find, that there is nothing Barbarous and
Savage in this Nation, by any thing that I can gather, excepting, That every
one gives the Title of Barbarity to every thing that is not in use in his own
Country: As indeed we have no other level of Truth and Reason, than the Example
and Idea of the Opinions and Customs of the place wherein we Live. There is
always the true Religion, there the perfect Government, and the most exact and
accomplished Usance of all things. They are Savages at the same rate, that we
say Fruits are wild, which Nature produces of her self, and by her own ordinary
progress; whereas in truth, we ought rather to call those wild, whose Natures
we have changed by our Artifice, and diverted from the common Order. In those,
the Genuine, most useful and natural Virtues and Properties, are Vigorous and
Spritely, which we have helped to Degenerate in these, by accomodating them to
the pleasure of our own Corrupted Palate. And yet for all this, our Taste
confesses a flavor and delicacy, excellent even to Emulation of the best of
ours, in several Fruits those Countries abound with, without Art or Culture;
neither is it reasonable, that Art should gain the Pre-eminence of our great
and powerful Mother Nature. We have so expressed her with the additional
Ornaments and Graces, we have added to the Beauty and Riches of her own Works,
by our Inventions, that we have almost Smothered and Choked her; and yet in
other places, where she shines in her own purity, and proper luster, she
strangely baffles and disgraces all our vain and frivolous Attempts.

Et veniunt hedetae sponte suae melius, Propert. l. 1. Ele. 2.

Surgit, and in solis formosior arbutus antris.
Et volucres nulla dulcius art canunt.
The Ivy best spontaneously does thrive,
Th'Arbutus best in shady Caves does live,
And Birds in their wild Notes, their Throats do streach,
With greater Art, than Art it self can teach.
Our utmost endeavors cannot arrive at so much as to imitate the Nest of the
least of Birds, its Contexture, Quaintness and Convenience: Not so much as the
Web of a Contemptible Spider. All things, says Plato, are produced either by
Nature, by Fortune, or by Art; the greatest and most beautiful by the one, or
the other of the former, the least and the most imperfect by the last. These
Nations then seem to me to be so far Barbarous; as having received but very
little form and fashion from Art and Humane Invention, and consequently, not
much remote from their Original Simplicity. The Laws of Nature however govern
them still, not as yet much vitiated with any mixture of ours: But in such
Purity, that I am sometimes troubled we were no sooner acquainted with these
People, and that they were not discovered in those better times, when there
were Men much more able to judge of them, than we are. I am sorry that Lycurgus
and Plato had no knowledge of them; for to my apprehension, what we now see in
those Natives, does not only surpass all the Images with which the Poets have
adorned the Golden Age, and all their Inventions in feigning a Happy Estate of
Man; but moreover, the Fancy, and even the Wish and Desire of Philosophy it
self; so Native, and so pure a Simplicity, as we by Experience see to be in
them, could never enter into their Imagination, nor could they ever believe
that Humane Society could have been maintained with so little Artifice; should
I tell Plato, that it is a Nation wherein there is no manner of Traffic, no
knowledge of Letters, no science of Numbers, no name of Magistrate, nor Politic
Superiority; no use of Service, Riches or Poverty, no Contracts, no
Successions, no Dividents, no Proprieties, no Employments, but those of
Leisure, no respect of Kindred, but common, no Clothing, no Agriculture, no
Metal, no use of Corn or Wine, and where so much as the very words that
signify, Lying, Treachery, Dissimulation, Avarice, Envy, Detraction and
Pardon, were never heard of: How much would he find his Imaginary Republic
short of his Perfection?

Hos Natura modos primum dedit. Virg. Georg. 2.

These were the Manners first by Nature taught.
As to the rest, they Live in a Country, beautiful and pleasant to Miracle, and
so Temperate withal, as my intelligence informs me, that it is very rare to hear
of a sick Person, and they moreover assure me, that they never saw any of the
Natives, either Paralitick, Blear-eyed, Toothless, or Crooked with Age. The
situation of their Country is all along by the Seashore, and enclosed on the
other side toward the Land, with great and high Mountains, having about a
Hundred Leagues in breadth between.. They have great store of Fish and Flesh,
that have no resemblance to those of ours: which they Eat without any other
Cookery, than plain Boiling, Roasting, and Broiling. The first that carried a
Horse thither, though in several other Voyages he had contracted an
acquaintance and familiarity with them, put them into so terrible a Fright,
that they Killed him with their Arrows before they could come to discover who
he was. Their Buildings are very long, and of capacity to hold Two or Three
Hundred People, made of the Barks of tall Trees, reared with one end upon the
ground, and leaning to, and supporting one another, at the top, like some of
our Barns, of which, the Covering hangs down to the very ground, and serves for
the side Walls. They have Wood so hard, that they cleave it into Swords, and
make Grills of it to Broil their Meat. Their Beds are of Cotton, hung swinging
in the Roof, like our Seamens Hammocks, for every one one, for the Wives lie
apart from their Husbands. They rise with the Sun, and so soon as they are up,
Eat for all Day, for they have no more Meals but that: They do not then Drink,
(as Suidas reports of some other People of the East, that never Drinks at their
Meals,) but Drink very often all Day after, and sometimes to a rousing pitch.
Their Drink is made of a certain Root, and is of the Color of our Claret;
which they never Drink but Lukewarm. It will keep above two or three Days, has
a quick Taste, is nothing Heady, but very comfortable to the Stomach, loosning
to Strangers, and a very pleasant Beverage to such as are used to it. They make
use, instead of Bread, of a certain White Matter, like Coriander Comfits; I
have tasted of it, the taste is sweet, and a little flat. All the whole Day is
spent in Dancing. Their Young Men go a Hunting after Wild Beasts with Bows and
Arrows, and one part of their Women are employed in preparing their Drink the
while, which is their chief Employment. There are some of their Old Men, who in
the Morning before they fall to Eating, Preach to the whole Family, as they
walk to and again from the one end of the House to the other, several times
repeating the same Sentence, till they have finished their turn, (for their
Houses are at least a Hundred Yards long,) Valor toward their Enemies, and
Love toward their Wives, being the two heads of his Discourse, never failing
in the close, to put them in mind, that they have so much the greater
obligation to it, because they provide them their Drink warm, and well ordered.
The fashion of their Beds, Ropes, Swords, and Wooden Bracelets, they tie about
their Wrists, when they go to Fight, and great Canes, boar'd hollow at one end,
by the Sound of which they keep the Cadance of their Dances, are to be seen in
several places, and amongst others, at my House. They shave all their hairy
parts, and much more neatly than we, without other Razor, than one of Wood, or
of Stone. They believe the Immortality of the Soul, and that those who have
Merited well of the Gods, are Lodged in that part of Heaven where the Sun
rises; and the Accursed in the West. They have I know not what kind of Priests,
and Prophets, that very rarely present themselves to the People, having their
abode in the Mountains. At their arrival there is a great Feast, and solemn
Assembly of many Villages made: that is, all the Neighbring Families, for every
House, as I have described it, makes a Village, and are about a French League
distant from one another. This Prophet declaims to them in public, exhorting
them to Virtue, and their Duty: But all their Ethics are terminated in these
two Articles, of Resolution in War, and Affection to their Wives. This also
Prophesies to them Events to come, and the Issues they are to expect from their
Enterprises, prompts them to, or diverts them from War: But let him look to it;
for if he fail in his Divination, and any thing happen otherwise, than he has
foretold, he is cut into a thousand pieces, if he be caught, and Condemned for
a false Prophet; and for that reason, if any of them finds himself mistaken, he
is no more to be heard of. Divination is a gift of God, and therefore to abuse
it, ought to be a Punishable Imposture. Amongst the Scythians, where their
Diviners failed in the promised effect, they were laid, Bound Hand and Foot,
upon Carts laden with Furs and Bavins, and drawn with Oxen, on which they were
Burnt to Death. Such as only meddle with things subject to the conduct of
Humane Capacity, are excusable in doing the best they can: But those other sort
of People that comes to delude us, with assurances of an extraordinary Faculty,
beyond our understanding: ought they not to be Punished, when they do not make
good the effect of their Promise, and for the temerity of their Imposture? They
have continual War with the Nations that Live further within the main Land,
beyond their Mountains, to which they go Naked, and without other Arms, than
their Bows, and Wooden-Swords, fashioned at one end like the head of a Javelin.
The Obstinacy of their Battles is wonderful, and never end without great
effusion of Blood: For as to running away, they know not what it is. Every one
for a Trophy brings home the head of an Enemy he has Killed, which he fixes
over the Door of his House. After having a long time treated their Prisoners
very well, and given them all the Regalia's they can think of, he to whom the
Prisoner belongs, invites a great Assembly of his Kindred, and Friends, who
being come, he ties a Rope to one of the Arms of the Prisoner, of which, at a
distance, out of his reach, he holds the one end himself, and gives to the
Friend he Loves best, the other Arm to hold after the same manner; which being
done, they two in the presence of all the Assembly, dispatch him with their
Swords. After that, they Roast him, Eat him amongst them, and send some Chops
to their absent Friends, which nevertheless they do not do, as some think, for
Nourishment, as the Scythians anciently did, but as a representation of an
extreme Revenge; as will appear by this, That having observed the Portugals,
who were in League with their Enemies, to inflict another sort of Death upon
any of them they took Prisoners: Which was, to set them up to the Girdle in the
Earth, to shoot at the remaining part till it was stuck full of Arrows, and
then to hang them: They that thought those People of the other World, (as those
who had sown the knowledge of a great many Vices amongst their Neighbors, and
who were much greater Masters in all sorts of Mischief than they,) did not
exercise this sort of Revenge without Mystery, and that it must needs be more
painful than theirs; and so began to leave their old way, and to follow this. I
am not sorry that we should here take notice of the Barbarous Horror of so
Cruel an Action, but that seeing so clearly into their faults, we should be so
blind in our own: For I conceive, there is more Barbarity in Eating a Man
Alive, than when he is Dead; in tearing a Body Limb from Limb, by Wracks and
Torments, that is yet in perfect Sense, in Roasting it by degrees, causing it
to be bit and worried by Dogs and Swine, (as we have not only read, but lately
seen; not amongst inveterate and mortal Enemies, but Neighbors, and fellow
Citizens, and which is worse, under color of Piety and Religion,) than to
Roast, and Eat him after he is Dead. Chrysippus, and Zeno, the Two Heads of the
Stoical Sect, were of Opinion, That there was no hurt in making use of our Dead
Carcasses, in what kind soever, for our necessity, and in feeding upon them
too; as our Ancestors, who being Besieged by Caesar in the City Alexia,
resolved to sustain the Famine of the Siege, with the Bodies of their Old Men,
Women, and other Persons, who were incapable of bearing Arms.

Juvenal. Sat. 15.
Vascones (fama est) alimentis talibus usi,
Produxere animas.
It Is said, the Gascons with such Meats as these,
In time of Siege their Hunger did appease.
And the Physicians make no Bones of employing it to all sorts of use, that is,
either to apply it outwardly, or to give it inwardly for the health of the
Patient: but there never was any Opinion so irregular, as to excuse Treachery,
Disloyalty, Tyranny and Cruelty, which are our familiar Vices. We may then call
these People Barbarous, in respect to the Rules of Reason: but not in respect
to our selves; who in all sorts of Barbarity exceed them. Their Wars are
throughout Noble and Generous, and carry as much Excuse and fair Pretense, as
their Humane Disease is capable of; having with them no other foundation, than
the sole Jealousy of Virtue. Their Disputes are not for the Conquest of new
Lands, those they already possess, being so fruitful by Nature, as to supply
them without Labor or Concern, with all things necessary, in such abundance,
that they have no need to enlarge their Borders. And they are moreover happy in
this, that they only covet so much as their natural necessities require: all
beyond that, is superfluous to them: Men of the same Age generally call one
another Brothers, those who are younger, Sons and Daughters, and the old Men
are Fathers to all. These leave to their Heirs in common this full possession
of Goods, without any manner of Division, or other Title, than what Nature
bestows upon her Creatures, in bringing them into the World. If their Neigbours
pass over the Mountains, and come to assault them, and obtain a Victory, all
the Victors gain by it is Glory only, and the advantage of having proved
themselves the better in Valor and Virtue: for they never meddle with the
Goods of the Conquered, but presently return into their own Country, where they
have no want of any thing necessary; nor of this greatest of all Goods, to know
happily how to enjoy their Condition, and to be Content. And these in turn do
the same. They demand of their Prisoners no other Ransom, than acknowledgment
that they are overcome: but there is not one found in an Age, who will not
rather choose to Die, than make such a Confession, or either by Word or Look,
recede from the entire Grandeur of an invincible Courage. There is not a Man
amongst them, who had not rather be Killed and Eaten, than so much as to open
his Mouth to entreat he may not. They use them with all Liberality and Freedom,
to the end their Lives may be so much the dearer to them; but frequently
entertain them withal with Menaces of their approaching Death, of the Torments
they are to suffer, of the preparations are making in order to it, of the
mangling their Limbs, and of the Feast is to be made, where their Carcasses is
to be the only Dish. All which they do, to no other end, but only to extort
some gentle or submissive word from them, or to Fright them so as to make them
run away; to obtain this advantage, that they were terrified, and that their
Constancy was shaken; and indeed, if rightly taken, it is in this point only,
that a true Victory does consist.

Claud. in Panegir.
-- Victoria nulla est,
Quam quae confessos animo quoque subjugat hosts.
No Victory can be entire, and true;
But what does Minds, as well as Limbs subdue,
The Hungarians a very Warlike People, never pretended further than to reduce
the Enemy to their Discretion; for having forced this Confession from them,
they let them go without Injury, or Ransom, excepting, at the most, to make
them engage their word, never to bear Arms against them again. We have several
advantages over our Enemies that are borrowed, and not truly our own; it is the
quality of a Porter, and no effect of Virtue, to have stronger Arms and Legs,
it is a Dead and Corporeal quality to be Active, it is an Exploit of Fortune to
make our Enemy stumble, or to dazzle him with the light of the Sun; it is a trick
of Science and Art, and that may happen in a mean base Fellow, to be a good
Fencer. The Estimate and Valor of a Man consist in the Heart, and in the Will,
there his true Honor Lives. Valor is Stability, not of Legs, and Arms, but of
the Courage, and the Soul; it does not lie in the Valor of our Horse, or our
Arms: but in our own. He that falls obstinate in his Courage. Si succiderit de
genu pugnat. Seneca Epist.
If his Legs fail him, Fight upon his Knees. He who for any danger of apparent
Death, abates nothing of his assurance, who Dying, does yet dart at his Enemy a
fierce and disdainful Look, is overcome not by us, but by Fortune, he is
Killed, not Conquered; the most Valiant, and sometimes the most Unfortunate.
There are also Defeats Triumphant to Emulation of Victories. Neither durst
those Four Sister-Victories, the fairest the Sun ever beheld, of Salamis,
Platea, Mycall and Sycyly, ever oppose all their united Glories, to the single
Glory of the Discomfiture of King Leonidas, and his Army, at the Pass of
Thermopyle. Whoever ran with a more glorious Desire, and greater Ambition, to
the winning, than the Captain Ischolas to the certain loss of a Battle. Who
could have found out a more subtle Invention to secure his safety, than he did
to assure his Ruin: He was set to defend a certain Pass of Peloponesus against
the Arcadians, which, considering the nature of the place, and the inequality
of Forces, finding it utterly impossible for him to do, and concluding, that
all who were presented to the Enemy, must certainly be left upon the place; and
on the other side, reputing it unworthy of his own Virtue, and Magnanimity, and
of the Lacedemonian name to fail in any part of his Duty, he chose a mean
betwixt these two Extremes, after this manner; The Youngest and most Active of
his Men, he would preserve for the Service and Defense of their Country, and
therefore sent them back; and with the rest, whose loss would be of less
consideration, he resolved to make good the Pass, and with the death of them,
to make the Enemy Buy their Entry as dear as possibly he could: as it also fell
out, for being presently Environed on all sides by the Arcadians, after having
made a great Slaughter of the Enemy, he, and his, were all cut in pieces. Is
there any Trophy dedicated to the Conquerours, which is not much more due to
these who were overcome. The part that true Conquering is to play, lies in the
Encounter, not in the coming off; and the Honor of Virtue consists in
Fighting, not in Subduing.

But to return to my Story, these Prisoners are so far from discovering the
least Weakness, for all the Terrors can be represented to them, that, on the
contrary, during the two or three Months, that they are kept, they always
appear with a cheerful Countenance; importune their Masters to make haste to
bring them to the Test, Defy, Rail at them, and Reproach them with Cowardice,
and the number of Battles they have lost against those of their Country. I have
a Song made by one of these Prisoners, wherein he bids them come all, and Dine
upon him, and welcome, for they shall withal Eat their own Fathers, and
Grandfathers, whose Flesh has served to feed and nourish him. These Muscles,
says he, this Flesh, and these Veins, are your own: Poor silly Souls as you
are, you little think that the substance of your Ancestors Limbs is here yet:
but mind as you Eat, and you will find in it the Taste of your own Flesh: In
which Song there is to be observed, an Invention that does nothing relish of
the Barbarian. Those that paint these People Dying after this manner, represent
the Prisoner spitting in the faces of his Executioners, and making at them a
wry Mouth. And it is most certain, that to the very last gasp, they never cease
to Brave and Defy them both in Word and Gesture. In plain truth, these Men are
very Savage in comparison of us, and of necessity, they must either be
absolutely so, or else we are Savager; for there is a vast difference betwixt
their Manners, and ours.

The Men there have several Wives, and so much the greater number, by how much
they have the greater Reputation and Valor, and it is one very remarkable
Virtue their Women have, that the same Endeavor our Wives have to hinder and
divert us from the Friendship and Familiarity of other Women, those employ to
promote their Husbands Desires, and to procure them many Spouses; for being
above all things sollicitous of their Husbands Honor, it is their chiefest care
to seek out, and to bring in the most Companions they can, forasmuch as it is a
Testimony of their Husbands Virtue. I know most of ours will cry out, that it is
Monstrous; whereas in truth, it is not so; but a truly Matrimonical Virtue;
though of the highest form. In the Bible, Sarah, Leah and Rachel, gave the most
Beautiful of their Maids to their Husbands, Livia preferred the Passion of
Augustus to her own interest, and the Wife of King Dejotarus of Stratonica, did
not only give up a fair young Maid, that served her, to her Husbands Embraces,
but moreover carefully brought up the Children he had by her, and assisted them
in the Succession to their Fathers Crown. And that it may not be supposed, that
all this is done by a simple and servile Observation to their common Practice,
or by any Authoritative Impression of their Ancient Custom, without Judgment,
or Examination; and for having a Soul so stupid, that it cannot contrive what
else to do, I must here give you some touches of their sufficiency, in point of
Understanding; besides what I repeated to you before, which was one of their
Songs of War, I have another, and a Love-Song, that begins thus; Stay Adder
stay, that by thy Pattern my Sister may draw the Fashion, and work of a Noble
Wreath, that I may present to my Beloved, by which means thy Beauty, and the
excellent Order of thy Scales shall for ever be preferred before all other
Serpents. Wherein the first Couplet, Stay Adder, etc. makes the Burden of the
Song. Now I have converst enough with Poetry to judge thus much: that not only,
there is nothing of Barbarous in this Invention: But moreover, that it is
perfectly Anacreontick: to which their Language is soft, of a pleasing Accent,
and something bordering upon the Greek Terminations. Three of these People, not
foreseeing how dear their knowledge of the Corruptions of this part of the
World, would one Day cost their Happiness and Repose, and that the effect of
this Commerce would be their Ruin, as I presuppose it is in a very fair way,
(Miserable Men to suffer themselves to be deluded with desire of Novelty, and
to have left the Serenity of their own Heaven, to come so far to gaze at ours,)
came to Roane, at the time that the late King Charles the Ninth was there:
where the King himself talked to them a good while, and they were made to see
our Fashions, our Pomp, and the form of a great City; after which, some one
asked their opinion, and would know of them, what of all the things they had
seen, they found most to be admired? To which they made Answer, Three things,
of which I have forgot the Third, and am troubled at it; but Two I yet
remember. They said, that in the first place they thought it very strange, that
so many tall Men wearing Beards, strong, and well Armed, who were about the
King, ('it is like they meant the Swiss of the Guard,) should submit to Obey a
Child, and that they did not choose out one amongst themselves to Command:
Secondly, (they have a way of speaking in their Language, to call Men the half
of one another,) that they had Observed, that there were amongst us, Men full,
and crammed with all manner of Conveniences, whilst in the mean time, their
halves were Begging at their Doors, Lean, and half starved with Hunger and
Poverty; and thought it strange, that these Necessitous halves, were able to
suffer so great an Inequality and Injustice, and that they did not take the
others by the Throats, or set Fire to their Houses. I talked to one of them a
great while together, but I had so ill an Interpreter, and that was so
perplexed by his own Ignorance, to apprehend my meaning, that I could get
nothing out of him, of any moment; Asking him, what advantage he reapt from the
Superiority he had amongst his own People? (for he was a Captain, and our
Mariners called him King,) he told me, to March in the Head of them to War;
and demanding of him further, how many Men he had to follow him? He showed me a
space of Ground, to signify, as many as could March in such a compass: which
might be Four or Five Thousand Men; and putting the question to him, whether or
no his Authority expired with the War? He told me this remained; that when he
went to Visit the Village of his dependence, they plained him Paths through the
thick of their Woods, through which he might pass at his ease. All this does
not sound very ill, and the last was not much amiss; for they wear no Breeches.

CHAP. XXXI. That a Man is soberly to judge of Divine Ordinances.
THings unknown, are the principal and true subject of Imposture, forasmuch as
in the first place, their very Strangeness lends them Credit, and moreover, by
not being subjected to our ordinary Discourse, they deprive us of the means to
question, and dispute them. For which reason, says Plato, it is much more easy
to satisfy the hearers, when speaking of the Nature of the Gods, than of the
Nature of Men, because the Ignorance of the Auditory affords a fair and large
Career, and all manner of Liberty, in the handling of profane and abstruce
things; and then it comes to pass, that nothing is so firmly believed, as what
we least know; nor any People so confident, as those who entertain us with
Fabulous Stories, such as your Alchymists, Judicial Astrologers,
Fortune Tellers, and Physicians, Id genus omne; to which I could willingly, if
I durst, join a sort of People, that take upon them to Interpret and Control
the Designs of God himself, making no question of finding out the cause of
every Accident, and to pry into the secrets of the Divine Will, there to
discover the Incomprehensible Motives of his Works. And although the variety,
and the continual discordance of Events, throw them from Corner to Corner, and
toss them from East to West, yet do they still persist in their vain
Inquisition, and with the same Pencil to Paint Black and White. In a Nation of
the Indies, there is this commendable Custom, that when any thing befalls them
amiss in any Rencounter or Battle, they Publicly ask Pardon of the Sun, who is
their God, as having committed an unjust Action, always imputing their Good or
Evil Fortune to the Divine Justice, and to that, submitting their own Judgment
and Reason. It Is enough for a Christian to believe, that all things come from
God, to receive them with acknowledgment of his divine and instructable Wisdom,
and also thankfully to accept and receive them, with what Face soever, they may
present themselves: But I do not approve of what I see in use, that is, to seek
to continue and support our Religion by the Prosperity of our Enterprises. Our
Belief has other Foundation enough, without going about to Authorize it by
Events: For the People accustomed to such Arguments as these, and so proper to
their own Taste, it is to be feared, lest when they fail of Success, they
should also stagger in their Faith: As in the War wherein we are now Engaged,
upon the account of Religion, those who had the better in the Business of
Rochelabeille; making great Brags of that success, as an infallible approbation
of their Cause, when they came afterward to excuse their Misfortunes of
Jarnac, and Moncontour, 'twas by saying, they were Fatherly Scourges and
Corrections; if they have not a People wholely at their Mercy, they make it
manifestly enough to appear, what it is to take two sorts of Grist out of the
same Sack, and with the same Mouth to blow Hot and Cold. It were better to
possess the Vulgar with the solid and real Foundations of Truth. 'Twas a brave
Naval-Battel that was gained a few Months since, against the Turks, under the
Command of Don John of Austria; but it has also pleased God at other times to
let us see as great Victories at our own Expense. In fine, it is a hard matter
to reduce Divine things to our Balance, without waste, and losing a great deal
of the weight. And who would take upon him to give a reason, that Arius, and
his Pope Leo, the principal Heads of the Arian Heresy, should Die at several
times of so like and strange Deaths, (for being withdrawn from the Disputation,
by the Griping in the Guts, they both of them suddenly gave up the Ghost upon
the Stool,) and would aggravate this Divine Vengeance by the Circumstance of
the place; might as well add the Death of Heliogabalus, who was also Slain in a
House of Office. But what? Ireneus was involved in the same Fortune; God being
pleased to show us, that the Good have something else to hope for; and the
Wicked something else to fear, than the Fortunes, or Misfortunes, of this
World: He manages, and applies them, according to his own secret Will and
Pleasure, and deprives us of the means, foolishly to make our own profit. And
those People both abuse themselves, and us, who will pretend to dive into these
Mysteries by the strength of Humane Reason. They never give one hit, that they
do not receive two for it; of which, St. Augustine gives a very great proof
upon his Adversaries. It Is a Conflict, that is more decided by strength of
Memory, than the force of Reason. We are to content our selves with the Light
it pleases the Sun to communicate to us, by Virtue of his Rays, and who will
lift up his Eyes to take in a greater, let him not think it strange, if for the
reward of his presumption, Sapien. Cap. 9. v. 13.
he there lose his sight. Quis hominum potest scire consilium Dei? aut quis
poterit cogitare, quid vebit Dominus? Who amongst Men can know the Council of
God? or who can think what the Will of the Lord is?

CHAP. XXXII. That we are to avoid Pleasures, even at the expense of Life.
I had long ago Observed most of the Opinions of the Ancients to concur in
this, That it is happy to Die, when there is more ill than good in Living, and
that to preserve Life to our own Torment and Inconvenience, is contrary to the
very Rules of Nature, as these old Laws instruct us.

(...)
(...)
(...).
Happy is Death, whenever it shall come
To him, to whom to Live is troublesome,
Whom Life does Persecute with restless Spite.
May Honorably bid the World good Night.
And infinitely better it is to Die,
Than to prolong a Life of Misery.
But to push this Contempt of Death so far, as to employ it to the removing our
selves from the danger of Coveting Honors, Riches, Dignities, and other
Favors, and Goods, as we call them, of Fortune, as if Reason were not
sufficient to persuade us to avoid them, without adding this new Injunction, I
had never seen it either Enjoined, or Practiced, till this passage of Seneca
fell into my hands; who advising Lucilius, a Man of great Power and Authority
about the Emperor, to alter his Voluptuous and Magnificent way of Living, and
to retire himself from this Worldly Vanity and Ambition, to some Solitary,
Quiet and Philosophical Life, and the other alleging some Difficulties. I am
of Opinion, says he, either that thou leave that Life, or Life it self; I would
indeed advise thee to the gentle way, and to untie, rather than to break, the
Knot thou have undiscreetly Knit, provided, that if it be not otherwise to be
unti'd, then resolutely break it. There is no Man so great a Coward, that had
not rather once fall, than to be always falling. I should have found this
Counsel conformable enough to the Stoical Roughness: But it appears the more
strange, for being borrowed from Epicurus, who writes the same thing upon the
like occasion to Idomenius. And I think I have Observed something like it, but
with Christian Moderation, amongst our own People. St. Hilary, Bishop of
Poictiers, that famous Enemy of the Arian Heresy, being in Syria, had
Intelligence thither sent him, that Abra his only Daughter, whom he left at
home under the Eye and Tuition of her Mother, was sought in Marriage by the
greatest Noblemen of the Country, as being a Virgin Virtuously brought up,
Fair, Rich, and in the Flower of her Age: whereupon he writ to her, (as it
appears upon Record,) that she should remove her Affection from all these
Pleasures and Advantages were proposed unto her; for he had in his Travels
found out a much greater and more worthy Fortune for her, a Husband of much
greater Power and Magnificence, that would present her with Robes, and Jewels
of inestimable value; wherein his design was, to dispossess her of the
Appetite, and use of Worldly Delights, to join her wholely to God: But the
nearest and most certain way to this, being, as he conceived, the Death of his
Daughter; he never ceased, by Vows, Prayers and Oraizens, to Beg of the
Almighty, that he would please to call her out of this World, and to take her
to himself; as accordingly it came to pass; for soon after his return, she
Died, at which he expressed a singular Joy. This seems to outdo the other,
forasmuch as he applys himself to this means at the first sight, which they
only take subsidiarily, and besides, it was toward his only Daughter. But I
will not omit the latter end of this Story, though it be from my purpose; St.
Hilaries Wife having understood from him, how the Death of their Daughter was
brought about, by his desires and design, and how much happier she was, to be
removed out of this World, than to have stayed in it: Conceived so Lively an
Apprehension of the Eternal and Heavenly Beatitude, that she Begged of her
Husband, with the extremest Importunity, to do as much for her; and God, at
their joint Request, shortly after calling her to him, it was a Death embraced
on both sides, with singular Content.

CHAP. XXXIII. That Fortune is oftentimes Observed to Act by the Rule of Reason.
THe Inconstancy, and various Motions of Fortune, may reasonably make us
expect, she should present us with all sorts of Faces. Can there be a more
express Act of Justice, than this? The Duke of Valentenois, having resolved to
Poison Adrian Cardinal of Cornetto, with whom Pope Alexander the Sixth, his
Father, and himself, were to go to Supper in the Vatican: he sent before a
Bottle of Poisoned Wine, and withal, strict Order to the Butler to keep it very
safe. The Pope being come before his Son, and calling for Drink, the Butler
supposing this Wine had not been so strictly recommended to his Care, but only
upon the account of its Excellency, presented it presently to the Pope, and the
Duke himself coming in presently after, and being confident they had not
meddled with his Bottle, took also his Cup; so that the Father Died immediately
upon the place, and the Son, after having been long tormented with Sickness,
was reserved to another, and a worse Fortune: Sometimes she seems to play upon
us, just in the nick of an Affair: Monsieur d' Estree at that time Guidon to
Monsieur de Vendosme; and Monsieur de Liques Lieutenant to the Company of the
Duke of Ascot, being both pretenders to the Sieur de Foungueselles his Sister,
though of several Parties, (as it often falls out amongst Frontier Neighbors,)
the Sieur de Liques carried her, but on the same Day he was Married, and which
was worse, before he went to Bed to his Wife, the Bridegroom having a mind to
break a Lance in Honor of his new Bride, went out to Skirmish, near to St.
Omers, where the Sieur d' Estree proving the stronger, took him Prisoner, and
the more to illustrate his Victory, the Lady her self was fain Conjugis ante
coacta novi dimittere collum, Gat^llus.

Quam veniens una, atque altera rursus hyems.
Noctibus in longis avidum faturasset amorem.
Of her fair Arms, the Amorous Ring to break,
Which clung so fast to her new Spouses Neck,
E're of two Winters many a friendly Night,
Had sated her Loves greedy Appetite.
to request him of Courtesy, to deliver up his Prisoner to her, as he
accordingly did, the Gentlemen of France never denying any thing to Ladies.
Does she not seem to be an Artist here? Constantine the Son of Hellen, founded
the Empire of Constantinople, and so many Ages after, Constantine the Son of
Hellen put an end to it. Sometimes she is pleased to Emulate our Miracles. We
are told, that King Clouis Besieging Angoulesme, the Walls fell down of
themselves by Divine Favor. And Bouchet has it from some Author, that King
Robert having sat down before a City, and being stole away from the Seige, to
go keep the Feast of St. Aignan at Orleans; as he was in Devotion, at a certain
place of the Mass, the Walls of the beleaguered City, without any manner of
Violence, fell down with a sudden Ruin. But she did quite contrary in our
Milan War; for Captain Rense laying Seige to the City Verona, and having
carried a Mine under a great part of the Wall, the Mine being sprung, the Wall
was lifted from its base, but dropped down again nevertheless, whole and entire,
and so exactly upon its foundation, that the Besieged suffered no Inconvenience
by that Attempt. Sometimes she plays the Physician, Jason Phereus being given
over by the Physicians, by reason of a desperate Imposthumation in his Breast;
having a mind to rid himself of his Pain, by Death at least, in a Battle, threw
himself desperately into the thickest of the Enemy, where he was so fortunately
wounded quite through the Body, that the Imposthume brake, and he was perfectly
cured. Did she not also excel the Painter Protogenes in his Art? Who having
finished the Picture of a Dog quite tired, and out of breath, in all the other
parts excellently well to his own liking, but not being able to express, as he
would, the slaver and foam that should come out of his Mouth, vexed, and angry
at his work, he took his Sponge, which by cleaning his Pencils, had imbibed
several sorts of Colors, and threw it in a rage against the Picture, with an
intent utterly to deface it; when Fortune guiding the Sponge to hit just upon
the Mouth of the Dog, it there performed what all his Art was not able to do.
Does she not sometimes direct our Counsels, and correct them? Isabel Queen of
England, being to Sail from Zeland into her own Kingdom, with an Army, in
favor of her Son, against her Husband, had been lost, had she come into the
Port she intended, being there laid wait for by the Enemy; but Fortune, against
her will, threw her into another Haven, where she Landed in safety. And he who
throwing a Stone at a Dog, hit, and killed, his Mother in Law, had he not
reason to pronounce this Verse, (...); Menander.

-- By this I see,
Fortune does better aim than we.
Fortune has more Judgment than we. Icetes had contracted with two Soldiers to
Kill Timoleon, at Adranon in Sicily. These Villains took their time to do it,
when he was assisting at a Sacrifice, who thrusting into the Crowd, as they
were making signs to one another, that now was a fit time to do their business,
in steps a third, who with a Sword takes one of them full drive over the Pate,
lays him dead upon the place, and away he runs. Which the other seeing, and
concluding himself discovered, and lost, he runs to the Altar, and begs for
Mercy, promising to discover the whole truth, which as he was doing, and laying
open the whole Conspiracy, behold the third Man, who being Apprehended, was, as
a Murderer thrust and haled by the People through the Prease, toward
Timoleon, and other the most Eminent Persons of the Assembly, before whom being
brought, he Cries out for Pardon, pleading, that he had justly Slain his Fathers
Murderer; which he also proving upon the place, by sufficient Witnesses, which
his good Fortune very opportunely supplied him withal, that his Father was
really Killed in the City of the Leontins, by that very Man on whom he had
taken his Revenge; he was presently Awarded Ten Attick The old Attick Mine was
75 Drach.
Mine, for having had the good Fortune, by designing to revenge the the Death
of his Father, to preserve the Life of the common Father of Sicily. This
Fortune in her Conduct, surpasses all the Rules of Humane Prudence. But, to
conclude, is there not a direct Application, of her Favor, Bounty and Piety,
manifestly discovered in this Action? Ignatius the Father, and Ignatius the
Son, being proscribed by the Triumviry of Rome, resolved upon this generous Act
of mutual kindness, to fall by the hands of one another, and by that means, to
frustrate and defeat the Cruelty of the Tyrants; and accordingly, with their
Swords drawn, ran full drive upon one another, where Fortune so guided the
points, that they made two equally Mortal Wounds, affording withal so much
Honor to so brave a Friendship, as to leave them just strength enough to draw
out their Bloody Swords, that they might have liberty to embrace one another in
this Dying Condition, with so close and hearty an Embrace, that the
Executioners cut off both their Heads at once, leaving the Bodies still fast
linked together in this Noble Knot, and their Wounds joined Mouth to Mouth,
affectionately sucking in the last Blood, and remainder of the Lives of one
another.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of one Defect in one Government.
MY Father, who for a Man, that had no other advantages, than Experience only,
and his own Natural Parts, was nevertheless of a very clear Judgment, has
formerly told me, The project of an Office of Enquiry.
that he once had thoughts of endeavoring to introduce this Practice; that
there might be in every City a certain place assigned, to which, such as stood
in need of any thing might repair, and have their Business entered by an
Officer appointed for that purpose; as for Example, I enquire for a Chapman to
Buy my Pearls: I enquire for one that has Pearls to Sell: Such a one wants
Company to go to Paris, such a one enquires for a Servant of such a Quality,
such a one for a Master, such a one enquires for such an Artificer, some for
one thing, some for another, every one according to what he wants. And
doubtless, these mutual Advertisements would be of no contemptible Advantage to
the Public Correspondency and Intelligence: For there are evermore Conditions
that hunt after one another, and for want of knowing one another occasion,
leave Men in very great necessity. I have heard, to the great shame of the Age
we Live in, that in our very sight, two most excellent Men for Learning, Died
so Poor, that they had scarce Bread to put in their Mouths: Lilius Gregorius
Giraldus in Italy, and Sebastianus Castalio in Germany: And do believe, there
are a Thousand Men would have invited them into their Families, with very
advantageous Conditions, or have Relieved them where they were, had they known
their wants. The World is not so generally* Corrupted, but that I know a Man,
that would heartily wish the Estate his Ancestors have left him, might be
employed, so long as it shall please Fortune to give him leave to enjoy it, to
secure rare and remarkable Persons of any kind, whom Misfortune sometimes
persecutes to the last degree, from the danger of Necessity; and at least,
place them in such a condition, that they must be very hard to please, if they
were not contented. My Father in his Oeconomical Government, had this Order,
(which I know how to commend, but by no means imitate,) which was, that besides
the Day-book, or Memorial of the Household Affairs, where the small Accounts,
Payments and Disbursements, which do not require a Secretaries hand, were
entered, and which a Bailiff always had in Custody; he Ordered him whom he kept
to write for him, to keep a Paper Journal, and in it to set down all the
remarkable Occurrences, and Day by Day the Memoires of the Histories of his
House: very pleasant to look over, when time begins to wear things out of
Memory, and very useful sometimes to put us out of doubt, when such a thing was
begun, when ended, what courses were debated on, what concluded; our Voyages,
Absences, Marriages, and Deaths, the reception of good, or ill news; the change
of principal Servants, and the like. An Ancient Custom, which I think it would
not be amiss for every one to revive in his own House; and I find I did very
foolishly in neglecting the same.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the Custom of Wearing Clothes.
WHatever I shall say upon this Subject, I am of necessity to invade some of
the bounds of Custom, so careful has she been to shut up all the Avenues. I
was disputing with my self in this shivering season, whether the fashion of
going Naked in those Nations lately discovered, is imposed upon them, by the
hot temperature of the Air, as we say of the Moors and Indians, or whether it
be the Original fashion of Mankind; Men of Understanding, forasmuch as all
things under the Sun, as the Holy Writ declares, are subject to the same Laws,
were wont in such Considerations as these, where we are to distinguish the
Natural Laws from those have been imposed by Man's Invention, to have recourse
to the general Polity of the World, where there can be nothing Counterfeited.
Now all other Creatures being sufficiently furnished with all things necessary
for the support of their being, it is not to be imagined, that we only should
be brought into the World in a defective and indigent Condition, and in such an
estate as cannot subsist without Foreign assistance; and therefore it is, that
I believe, that as Plants, Trees, and Animals, and all things that have Life,
are seen to be by Nature sufficiently Clothed and Covered, to defend them from
the Injuries of Weather, Lucret. l. 4.
Propteriaque fere res omnes, aut Corio sunt,
Aut seta, aut conchis, aut callo, aut cortice tectae.
Moreover all things, or with Skin, or Hair,
Or Shell, or Bark, or Callus Clothed are.
so were we: But as those who by Artificial Light put out that of the Day, so
we by borrowed Forms and Fashions have destroyed our own. And it is plain enough
to be seen, that it is Custom only which renders that impossible, that
otherwise is nothing so; for of those Nations who have no manner of knowledge of
Clothing, some are situated under the same Temperature that we are, and some
in much Colder Climates. And besides, our most tender Parts are always exposed
to the Air, as the Eyes, Mouth, Nose, and Ears; and our Country Laborers, like
our Ancestors in former times, go with their Breasts and Bellies open. Had we
been Born with a necessity upon us of wearing Petticoats and Breeches, there is
no doubt, but Nature would have Fortified those Parts she intended should be
exposed to the Fury of the Seasons, with a thicker Skin, as she has done the
Finger ends, and the Soles of the Feet. And why should this seem hard to
believe? I Observe much greater distance betwixt my Habit, and that of one of
our Country Bores, than betwixt his, and a Man that has no other Covering but
his Skin. How many Men, especially in Turkey, go Naked upon the account of
Devotion? I know not who would ask a Beggar, whom he should see in his Shirt in
the depth of Winter, as Brisk and Frolic, as he who goes Muffled up to the
Ears in Furs, how he is able to endure to go so? Why Sir, he might Answer, you
go with your Face bare, and I am all Face. The Italians have a Story of the
Duke of Florence his Fool, whom his Master Asking, How being so thin Clad, he
was able to support the Cold, when he himself, warm wrapped as he was, was hardly
able to do it? Why, replied the Fool, use my Receipt, to put on all your
Clothes you have at once, and you will feel no more Cold, than I. King Mossinissa
to an extreme Old Age, could never be prevailed upon to go with his Head
covered, how Cold, Stormy, or Rainy, soever the Weather might be: Which also is
reported of the Emperor Severus. Herodotus tells us, that in the Battles
fought betwixt the Egyptians, and the Persians, it was Observed both by
himself, and others, that of those who were left Dead upon the place, the Heads
of the Egyptians were found to be without comparison harder, than those of the
Persians, by reason that the last had gone with their Heads always covered from
their Infancy, first, with Biggins, and then with Turbans, and the others
always shaved, and open. And King Agesilaus observed to a decrepit Age, to wear
always the same Clothes in Winter, that he did in Summer. Caesar, says
Suetonius, Marched always at the Head of his Army, for the most part, on foot,
with his Head bare, whether it was Rain, or Sunshine, and as much is said of
Hannibal. Silius I^. li. 6.1.
-- Tum vertice nudo,
Excipere insanos imbres, Coelique ruinam.
Bare Head to March in Snow, and when it pours
Whole Cataracts of cold unwholesome showers.
A Venetian who has long Lived in Pegu, and is lately returned from thence,
writes, that the Men and Women of that Kingdom, though they cover all their
other Parts, go always Barefoot, and Ride so too. And Plato does very earnestly
advise, for the health of the whole Body, to give the Head and the Feet no
other Clothing, than what Nature has bestowed. He whom the Polacks have
Elected for their King, since ours came thence, who is indeed one of the
greatest Princes of this Age, never wears any Gloves, and for Winter, or
whatever Weather can come, never wears other Cap abroad, than the same he wears
at home. Whereas I cannot endure to go unbutton'd, or unti'd; our Neighboring
Laborers would think themselves in Chains, if they were so braced. Varro is of
Opinion, that when it was Ordained, we should be bare in the presence of the
Gods, and before the Magistrate, it was rather so Ordered, upon the score of
health, and to Inure us to the Injuries of Weather, than upon the account of
Reverence. And since we are now talking of Cold, and Frenchmen used to wear
variety of Colors, (not I my self, for I seldom wear other than Black, or
White, in Imitation of my Father,) let us add another Story of Captain Martin
du Bellay, who affirms, that in the Voyage of Luxenbourg, he saw so great
Frosts, that the Ammunition Wine was cut with Hatchets, and Wedges; was
delivered out to the Soldiers by Weight, and that they carried it away in
Baskets: and Ovid, Ovid. Trist. l. 3. El. 12.
Nudaque consistunt formam servantia test,
Vina, nec hausta meri, sed data frusta bibunt.
-- The Wine
Stripped of its Cask, retains the Figure still,
Nor do they Draughts, but Crusts of Bacchus swill.
At the Mouth of the Lake Maeotis, the Frosts are so very sharp, that in the
very same place where Methridates his Lieutenant had Fought the Enemy dry-foot,
and given them a notable Defeat, the Summer following he obtained over them a
Famous Naval Victory. The Romans Fought at a very great disadvantage, in the
Engagement they had with the Carthaginians near Placentia, by reason, that they
went on to Charge with their Blood fixed, and their Limbs Numm'd with Cold,
whereas Hannibal had caused great Fires to be dispersed quite through his Camp
to warm his Soldiers, and Oil to be distributed amongst them; to the end, that
Anointing themselves, they might render their Nerves more Supple and Active,
and fortify the Pores against the violence of the Air, and Freezing Wind, that
Raged in that Season. The Retreat the Greeks made from Babylon into their own
Country, is Famous, for the Difficulties and Calamities they had to overcome.
Of which, this was one, that being Encountered in the Mountains of Armenia with
a horrible Storm of Snow, they lost all knowledge of the Country, and of the
ways, and being driven up, were a Day and a Night without Eating or Drinking,
most of their Cattle Died, many of themselves Starved Dead, several struck
Blind with the driving, and the glittering of the Snow, many of them Maimed in
their Fingers and Toes, and many Stiff and Motionless with the extremity of the
Cold, who had yet their Understanding entire. Alexander saw a Nation, where
they Bury their Fruit Trees in Winter, to defend them from being destroyed by
the Frost, and we also may see the same. But concerning Clothes, the King of
Mexico changed four times a Day his Apparel, and never put them on more,
employing those he left off, in his continual Liberalities and Rewards, as
also, neither Pot, Dish, nor other Utensil of his Kitchen, or Table, was ever
served in Twice.

GHAP. XXXVI. Of Cato the Younger.
I am not guilty of the Common Error, of judging another by my self. I easily
believe, that in another Humor, that is contrary to my own; and though I find
my self engaged to one certain Form, I do not obliged others to it, as many do;
but believe and apprehend a Thousand ways of Living, and contrary to most Men,
more easily admit of Difference than Uniformity amongst us. I as frankly, as
any one would have me, discharge a Man from my Humors and Principles, and
consider him according to his own particular Model. Though I am not Continent
my self, I nevertheless sincerely Love, and approve the Continency of the
Capuchins, and other Religious Orders, and highly commend their way of Living.
I insinuate my self by imagination into their Place and Love, and Honor them
the more, for being other than I am. I very much desire, that we may be
Censured every Man by himself, and would not be drawn into the consequence of
common Examples. My Weakness does nothing alter the Esteem I ought to have of
the force and vigor of those who deserve it. Sunt qui nihil suadent, quam quid
se imitari posse confidunt. Cicero de Or. ad.
There are who persuade nothing but what they believe they can imitate
themselves. Crawling upon the Slime of the Earth, I do not for all that cease
to Observe up in the Clouds the inimitable height of some Heroic Souls: it is a
great deal for me to have my Judgment regular and right, if the effects cannot
be so, and to maintain this Sovereign part at least free from Corruption: it is
something to have my Will right and good, where my Legs fail me. This Age
wherein we Live, in our part of the World at least, is grown so stupid, that
not only Exercise, but the very Imagination of Virtue is defective, and seems
to be no other but College-Fashion. -- Virtutem verba putant, Horace Ep. 6. l.
1.
ut
Lucum ligna:
Words finely couched, these Men for Virtue take;
As if each Wood a Sacred Grove could make.
Quam vereri deberent, Cicero Tus. 1.
etiam si precipere non possent. Which they ought to Reverence, though they
cannot Comprehend. It Is a Gewgaw to hang in a Cabinet, or at the end of the
Tongue, as on the tip of the Ear, for Ornament only. There is no more Virtuous
Actions extant, and those Actions that carry a show of Virtue, have yet nothing
of its Essence; by reason, that Profit, Glory, Fear and Custom, and other such
like foreign Causes, put us in the way to produce them. Our Justice also,
Valor, and good Offices, may then be called so too, in respect to others, and
according to the face they appear with to the Public; but in the doer it can
by no means be Virtue, because there is another end proposed, another moving
cause. Now Virtue owns nothing to be hers, but what is done by her self, and
for her self alone. In that great Battle of Potidaea, that the Greeks under the
Command of Pausanias obtained against Mardonius, and the Persians, the
Conquerours, according to their Custom, coming to divide amongst them the Glory
of the Exploit, they attributed to the Spartan Nation the Pre-eminence of
Valor in this Engagement. The Spartans, great Judges of Virtue, when they came
to determine, to what particular Man of their Nation the Honor was due, of
having the best Behaved himself upon this occasion, found, that Aristodemus had
of all others hazarded his Person with the greatest Bravery: but did not
however allow him any Prize, or Reward; by reason that his Virtue had been
incited by a desire, to clear his Reputation from the Reproach of his
Miscarriage at the Business of Thermypole, and with a desire to Die Bravely, to
wipe off that former Blemish. Our Judgments are yet sick, and Obey the Humor
of our depraved Manners. I Observe most of the Wits of these Times pretend to
Ingenuity, by endeavoring to blemish and to darken the Glory of the Bravest
and most Generous Actions of former Ages, putting one Vile Interpretation or
another upon them, and forging and supposing vain Causes and Motives for those
Noble things they did. A mighty subtilty indeed! Give me the greatest and most
unblemished Action that ever the Day beheld, and I will contrive a Hundred
plausible Drifts and Ends to obscure it: God knows, who ever will stretch them
out to the full, what diversity of Images our Internal Wills do suffer under;
they do not so Maliciously play the Censurers, as they do it Ignorantly and
Rudely in all their Detractions. The same pains and license that others take to
Blemish and Bespatter these illustrious Names, I would willingly undergo to
lend them a shoulder to raise them higher. These rare Images, and that are
culled out by the consent of the wisest Men of all Ages, for the Worlds
Example, I should endeavor to Honor anew, as far as my Invention would
permit, in all the Circumstances of favorable Interpretation. And we are to
believe, that the force of our Invention is infinitely short of their Merit.
It Is the Duty of good Men to Pourtray Virtues as Beautiful as they can, and
there would be no Indecency in the Case, should our Passion a little Transport
us in favor of so Sacred a Form. What these People do to the contrary, they
either do out of Malice, or by the Vice of confining their Belief to their own
Capacity; or, which I am more inclined to think, for not having their sight
strong, clear and elevated enough, to conceive the splendor of Virtue in her
Native Purity: As Plutarch complains, that in his time some Attributed the
cause of the Younger Cato's Death, to his Fear of Caesar, at which he seems
very Angry, and with good reason: and by that a Man may guess how much more he
would have been offended with those, who have Attributed it to Ambitious
Senceless People! He would rather have performed a handsome, just and generous
Action, and to have had Ignominy for his Reward, than for Glory. That Man was
in truth a Pattern, that Nature chose out to show to what height Humane Virtue
and Constancy could arrive: but I am not capable of handling so Noble an
Argument, and shall therefore only set Five Latin Poets together by the Ears,
who has done best in the praise of Cato; and inclusively for their own too. Now
a Man well Read in Poetry, will think the two first, in comparison of the
others, a little Flat and Languishing; the Third more Vigorous, but overthrown
by the Extravagancy of his own force. He will then think, that there will be
yet room for one or two Gradations of Invention to come to the Fourth; but
coming to mount the pitch of that, he will lift up his Hands for admiration;
the last, the first by some space, (but a space that he will swear is not to be
filled up by any Humane Wit,) he will be astonished, he will not know where he
is. These are Wonders. We have more Poets, than Judges and Interpreters of
Poetry. It is easier to Write an indifferent Poem, than to Understand a good
one. There is indeed a certain low and moderate sort of Poetry, that a Man may
well enough judge by certain Rules of Art; but the true, supreme and divine
Poesy, is equally above all Rules and Reason. And whoever discerns the Beauty
of it, with the most assured and most steady sight, sees no more than the quick
reflection of a Flash of Lightning. This is a sort of Poesy, that does not
exercise, but ravishes and overwhelms our Judgment. The Fury that possesses him
who is able to penetrate into it, wounds yet a Third Man by hearing him repeat
it. Like a Loadstone, that not only attracts the Needle, but also infuses into
it the Virtue to attract others. And it is more evidently Eminent upon our
Theaters, that the Sacred Inspiration of the Muses, having first stirred up the
Poet to Anger, Sorrow, Hatred, and out of himself, to whatever they will, does
moreover by the Poet possess the Actor, and by the Actor consecutively all the
Spectators. So much do our Passions hang and depend upon one another. Poetry
has ever had that power over me from a Child, to Transpierce and Transport me:
But this quick resentment that is Natural to me, has been variously handled by
variety of Forms, not so much higher and lower, (for they were ever the highest
of every kind,) as differing in Color. First, a Gay and Spritely Fluency,
afterward a Lofty and Penetrating Subtilty; and lastly, a Mature and Constant
Force. Their Names will better express them; Ovid, Lucan, Virgil. But our Poets
are beginning their Career. Mart* lib. 6. Epig. 32.
Sit Cato dum vivit sane vel Caesare Major.
-- Let Cato's Fame,
Whilst he shall Live, Eclipse great Caesar's Name.
Says one.
-- Et invictum devicta Morte Catonem. Manil.

-- And Cato fell,
Death being overcome, invincible.
Says the Second. And the Third speaking of the Civil Wars betwixt Caesar and
Pompey, Victrix causa Diis placuit, sed Victa Catoni. Lucan. l. 1.

-- Heaven approves,
The Conquering Cause, the Conquered Cato loves.
And the Fourth upon the Praises of Caesar,
Et Cuncta terrarum subjacta, Hor. Car. lib. 2. Od. 1.

Praetor atrocem animum Catonis.
And Conquered all where e're his Eagle flew,
But Cato's Mind, that nothing could subdue.
And the Master of the Quire, after having set forth all the great Names of the
greatest Romans, ends thus, -- His dantem jura Catonem. Aeneid. l. 8.
Great Cato giving Laws to all the rest.

CHAP. XXXVII. That we Laugh and Cry for the same thing.
WHen we Read in History, that Antigonus was very much displeased with his Son,
for presenting him the Head of King Pyrrhus his Enemy, but newly Slain,
Fighting against him, and that seeing it, he wept: That Rene Duke of Lorraine
also Lamented the Death of Charles Duke of Burgundy, whom he had himself
Defeated, and appeared in Mourning at his Funeral: And that in the Battle of
Auroy, (which Count Montfort obtained over Charles de Blois, his Concurrent for
the Duchy of Brittany,) the Conqueror meeting the Dead Body of his Enemy, was
very much Afflicted at his Death, we must not presently Cry out, Petrarcha.
Et cosi auen che l' animo ciascuna,
Sua Passion sotto el contrario manto,
Ricopre, con la vista hor'chiara, hor bruna.
That every one, whether of Joy or Woe,
The Passion of their Mind can palliate so,
As when most Grieved, to show a Countenance clear,
And Melancholic when best pleased to appear.
When Pompey's Head was presented to Caesar, the Histories tell us, that he
turned away his Face, as from a sad and unpleasing Object. There had been so
long an Intelligence and Society betwixt them, in the management of the Public
Affairs, so great a Community of Fortunes, so many mutual Offices, and so near
an Alliance, that this Countenance of his ought not to suffer under any
Misinterpretation; or to be suspected for either False or Counterfeit, as this
other seems to believe: Tutumque putavit Lucan. lib. 9.

Jam bonus esse socer, lacrymas non sonte cadentes,
Effudit, gemitusque expressit pectore laeto,
Non aliter manifesta putans abscondere mentis,
Gaudia quam Lacrymes.
And now he saw
'Twas safe to be a Pious Father in Law,
He shed forced Tears, and from a Joyful Breast,
Fetched Sighs and Groans, conceiving Tears would best
Conceal his Inward Joy.
For though it be true, that the greatest part of our Actions, are no other
than Vizor and Disguise, and yet may sometimes be Real and True: that, Aulus
Gelli. Noct.
Haeredis fletus sub persona risus est.
The Heirs dissembled Tears behind the Skreen,
Could one but peep, would Joyful smiles be seen.
so is it, that in judging of these Accidents, we are to consider how much our
Souls are oft-times agitated with diverse Passions. And as they say, that in our
Bodies there is a Congregation of diverse Humors, of which, that is the
Sovereign, which according to the Complexion we are of, is commonly most
predominant in us: So, though the Soul have in it diverse motions to give it
Agitation; yet must there of necessity be one to overruled all the rest, though
not with so necessary and absolute a Dominion, but that through the Flexibility
and Inconstancy of the Soul, those of less Authority, may upon occasion,
reassume their place, and make a little Sally in turn. Thence it is, that we
see not only Children, who Innocently Obey, and follow Nature, often Laugh and
Cry at the same thing: but not one of us can boast, what Journey soever he may
have in hand, that he has the most set his Heart upon, but when he comes to
part with his Family and Friends, he will find something that troubles him
within; and though he refrain his Tears, yet he puts Foot in the Stirrupt, with
a Sad and Cloudy Countenance, and what gentle Flame soever may have warmed the
Heart of Modest, and Well-Born Virgins, yet are they fain to be forced from
about their Mothers Necks, to be put to Bed to their Husbands, whatever this
Boon Companion is pleased to say: Estne novis nuptis odio venus, anne parentum,
Frustrantur falsis gaudia lachrymalis, Catul. Number. 67.

Vbertim Thalami quas intra limina fundunt?
Non, ita me Divi, vera gemunt, juverint.
Does the Fair Bride the Sport so mainly Dread,
That she takes on so, when she is put to Bed,
Her Parents Joys to allay with a feigned Tear?
She does not Cry in Earnest, I dare Swear.
Neither is it strange to lament a person, whom a man would by no means should
be alive: When I rattle my man, I do it with all the mettle I have, and load
him with no feigned, but downright real Curses; but the heat being over, if he
should stand in need of me, I should be very ready to do him good: for I
instantly turn the leaf. When I call him Calf, and Coxcomb, I do not pretend to
entail those titles upon him for ever; neither do I think I give my self the
lie in calling him an honest man presently after. Were it not the sign of a
fool to talk to ones self, there would hardly be a day or hour wherein I might
not be heard to grumble, and mutter to my self, and against my self; Turd in
the fools teeth, and yet I do not think that to be my Character. Who for seeing
me one while cold, and presently very kind to my Wife, believes the one or the
other to be counterfeited, is an Ass. Nero taking leave of his Mother, whom he
sent to be drowned, was nevertheless sensible of some emotion at this farewell,
and was struck with horror, and pity. It Is said, that the light of the Sun is
not one continuous thing, but that he darts new rays so thick one upon another,
that we cannot perceive the intermission. Lucret. l. 5.
Largus enim liquidi fons luminis aetherius Sol
Irrigat assidue coelum candore recenti,
Suppedit atque novo confestim lumine lumen.
For the aetherial Sun that shines so bright,
Being a fountain large of liquid light,
With fresh Rays sprinkles still the cheerful Sky,
And with new light, the light does still supply.
Just so the Soul variously and interceptibly darts out her Passions. Artabanus
surprising once his Nephew Xerxes, Chid him for the sudden alteration of his
Countenance. As he was considering the immeasurable Greatness of his Forces
passing over the Hellespont, for the Grecian Expedition, he was first seized
with a palpitation of Joy, to see so many Millions of Men under his Command,
which also appeared in the Gayety of his Looks: But his Thoughts at the same
instant suggesting to him, that of so many Lives, once in an Age at most, there
would not be one left, he presently Knit his Brows, and grew Sad, even to
Tears. We have resolutely pursued the Revenge of an Injury received, and been
sensible of a singular Contentment for the Victory: But we shall Weep
notwithstanding: it is not for the Victory, though that we shall Weep: there is
nothing altered by that: but the Soul looks upon things with another Eye, and
represents them to it self with another kind of Face; for every thing has many
Faces, and several Aspects. Relations, old Acquaintance, and Friendships,
possess our Imaginations, and make them tender for the time: but the
Counterturn is so quick, that it is gone in a Moment. Nil a Deo fieri celeri
ratione videtur, Lucret. l. 3.

Quam si men's fieri proponit, and inchoat ipsa.
Ocius ergo animus quam res se perciet ulla,
Ante oculos quarum in promptu natura videtur.
No motions seem so brisk, and quick as those
The working mind does to be done propose.
Which once proposed, her violent motions are
Swifter than any thing we know by far.
And therefore, while we would make one continued thing of all this succession
of passion, we deceive our selves. When Timoleon laments the murder he had
committed upon so mature, and generous deliberation, he does not lament the
liberty restored to his Country, he does not lament the Tyrant, but he laments
his Brother: One part of his duty is performed, let us give him leave to
perform the other.

CHAP. XXXVIII. Of Solitude.
LEt us praetermit that old comparison betwixt the active, and the solitary
life, and as for the fine saying, with which Ambition and Avarice palliate
their vices, That we are not born for our selves, but for the public, let us
boldly appeal to those who are most interested in public affairs, let them lay
their hands upon their Hearts, and then say, whether, on the contrary, they do
not rather aspire to Titles and Offices, and that tumult of the World to make
their private advantage at the public expense. But we need not ask them the
question; for the corrupt ways by which they arrive at the height to which
their ambitions aspire, does manifestly enough declare that their ends cannot
be very good. Let us then tell Ambition, that it is she her self who gives us a
taste of Solitude; for what does she so much avoid as Society? What does she so
much seek as Elbow-room? A man may do well, or ill every where: but if what
Boas says be true, that the greatest part is the worse, or what the Preacher
says, that there is not one good of a thousand: Rari quippe boni numero vix
sunt totidem quot Juven. Sat. 13.

Thebazum Port vel divitis ostia Nili:
Because the number of the Goods's as few
As Thebes fair Gates; or rich Nile mouths does spew:
the contagion is very dangerous in the Crown. A man must either imitate the
vicious; or hate them: Both are dangerous, either to resemble them because they
are many, or to hate many, because they are unresembling. And Merchants that go
to Sea are in the right, when they are cautious that those who embark with them
in the same bottom, be neither dissolute Blasphemers, nor vicious otherways;
looking upon such society as unfortunate. And therefore it was, that Bias
pleasantly said to some, who being with him in a dangerous storm, implored the
assistance of the Gods, Peace, speak softly, said he, that they may not know
you are here in my company: And of more pressing exemple, Albuquerque Vice Roy
in the Indies, for Emanuel King of Portugal, in an extreme peril of Shipwreck,
took a young Boy upon his Shoulders, for this only end, that in the Society of
their common danger, his innocence might serve to protect him, and to recommend
him to the Divine favor, that they might get safe to Shore: It Is not that a
Wise Man may not live every where content, either alone, or in the crowd of a
Palace: But if it be left to his own choice, he will tell you, that he would
fly the very sight of the latter: He can endure it if need be; but if it be
referred to him, he will choose the first. He cannot think himself sufficiently
rid of Vice, if he must yet contend with it in other Men: Charondas* Punished
those for ill Men, who were Convict of keeping of ill Company. There is nothing
so Unsociable, and Sociable, as Man, the one by his Vice, the other by his
Nature. And Antisthenes in my opinion, did not give him a satisfactory Answer,
who Reproached him with frequenting ill Company, by saying, That the Physicians
Lived well enough amongst the Sick: for if they contribute to the health of the
Sick, no doubt, but by the Contagion, continual sight of, and familiarity with
Diseases, they must of necessity impair their own. Now the end I suppose is all
one, to Live at more leisure, and at greater ease: but Men do not always take
the right way; for they often think, they have totally taken leave of all
Business, when they have only exchanged one Employment for another. There is
little less trouble in Governing a private Family, than a whole Kingdom:
wherever the Mind is perplexed, it is in an entire disorder, and Domestic
Employments are not less troublesome, for being less important. Moreover, for
having shak'd off the Court, and Public Employments, we have not taken leave
of the principal Vexations of Life. -- Ratio, and prudentia curas, Hor. lib. 1.
Epist. 11.

Non locus effusi late maris arbiter aufert.
Reason and Prudence, our Affections ease,
Not remote Voyages, unknown Seas.
Our Ambition, our Avarice, Irresolution, Fears, and Inordinate Desires, do not
leave us when we forsake our Native Country: Hor. lib. 3. Ode. 1.
Et post equitem sedet atra cura.
And who does mount his Horse to this, will find,
He carries Black-brow'd Madam Care behind.
She often follows us even to Cloisters, and Philosophical Schools; nor Deserts,
nor Caves, Hair-shirts, nor Fasts, can disengage us from her: Virg. Ae. l. 4.
-- Haeret. lateri lethalis arundo.
The fatal Shaft sticks to the wounded Side.
One telling Socrates, that such a one was nothing Improved by his Travels, I
very well believe it, said he, for he took himself along with him. Hor. lib. 2.
Ode. 16.
Quid terras alio calentes
Sole mutamus? patria quis exul
Se quoque fugit?
To change our Native Soil, why should we Run
To seek out one warmed by another Sun?
For yet what Banished Man could ever find,
When furthest sent, he left himself behind?
If a Man do not first discharge both himself, and his Mind, of the Burden
with which he finds himself Oppressed, Motion will but make it press the
harder, and sit the heavier, as the Lading of a Ship is of less Encumbrance,
when fast, and bestowed in a settled posture; you do a Sick Man more harm than
good, in removing him from place to place; you fix and establish the Disease by
motion, as Stoops dive deeper into the Earth, by being moved up and down in the
place where they are designed to stand. And therefore it is not enough to get
remote from the Public; it is not enough to shift the Soil only, a Man must
fly from the Popular Dispositions that have taken possession of his Soul, he
must Sequester and Ravish himself from himself. -- Rupi jam vincula, dicas,
Nam luctata canis nodum arripit, attamen illa, Perseus. Sat. 5.

Cum fugit, a collo trahitur pars longa catenae.
Thou Wilt say perhaps, that thou have broke the Chain,
Why, so the Dog has gnawed the Knot in 'twain
That ti'd him there, but as he flies, he feels
The ponderous Chain still rattling at his heels.
We still carry our Fetters along with us: it is not an absolute Liberty, we yet
cast back a kind Look upon what we have left behind us; the Fancy is still full
of our old way of Living. Lucret. l. 5.
-- Nisi purgatum est pectus, quae praelia nobis,
Atque pericula tunc ingratis insinuandum?
Quantae conscindunt hominum cupidinis acres
Sollicitum curae, quantique perinde timores?
Quid ve superbia, spurcitia, ac petulantia quantas
Efficient clades, quid luxus, desidiesque?
Unless the Mind be Purged, what Conflicts straight,
And Dangers, will it not insinuate?
The Lustful Man, how many bitter Cares,
Do gall, and fret, and then how many Fears?
What Horrid Mischiefs, what Dire Slaughters too,
Will not Pride, Lust, and Petulancy do?
And what from Luxury can we expect,
And Sloth; but all the ill, ill can effect?
The Mind it self is the Disease, and cannot escape from it self; In culpa est
animus, Hor. l. 1. Ep. 14.
qui se non effugit unquam.
Still in the Mind the Fault does lie,
That never from it self can fly.
and therefore is to be called home, and confined within it self: that is the
true Solitude, and that may be enjoyed even in Populous Cities, and the Courts
of Kings, though more commodiously apart.

Now since we will attempt to Live alone, and to wave all manner of
Conversation amongst Men, let us so Order it, that our Contentation may depend
wholely upon our selves, and dissolve all Obligations that Ally us to others:
Let us obtain this from our selves, that we may Live alone in good earnest, and
Live at our ease too. Stilpo, having escaped from the Fire that Consumed the
City where he Lived, and where he had his Wife, Children, Goods, and all that
ever he was Master of, destroyed by the Flame; Demetrius Poliorcetes seeing him
in so great a Ruin of his Country, appear with so Serene and Undisturbed a
Countenance, asked him, if he had received no Loss? To which he made Answer,
No; and that, thanks be to God, nothing was lost of his; which also was the
meaning of the Philopher Antisthenes, when he pleasantly said, that Men should
only furnish themselves with such things as would Swim, and might with the
Owner escape the Storm; and certainly, a Wise Man never loses any thing, if he
have himself. When the City of Nola was Ruined by the Barbarians, Paulinus, who
was Bishop of that place, having there lost all he had, and himself a Prisoner,
Prayed after this manner, O Lord defend me from being sensible of this Loss;
for thou know, they have yet touched nothing of that which is mine; The
Riches that made him Rich, and the Goods that made him Good, were still kept
entire. This it is to make choice of Treasures, that can secure themselves from
Plunder and Violence, and to hide them in such a place, into which no one can
enter, and that are not to be betrayed by any but our selves. Wives, Children
and Goods, must be had, and especially Health, by him that can get it; but we
are not so to set our Hearts upon them, that our Happiness must have its
dependence upon any of these; we must reserve a Backshop, a Withdrawing-Room,
wholely our own, and entirely free, wherein to settle our true Liberty, our
principal Solitude and Retreat. And in this, we must for the most part,
entertain our selves with our selves, and so privately, that no Knowledge, or
Communication, of any Exotic Concern, be admitted there, there to Laugh, and
to Talk, as if without Wife, Children, Goods, Train, or Attendance, to the end,
that when it shall so fall out, that we must lose any, or all of these, it may
be no new thing to be without them. We have a Mind pliable of it self, that
will be Company, has wherewithal to attack, and to defend, to receive, and to
give: Let us not then fear in this Solitude, to Languish under an uncomfortable
Vacancy. In solis sis tibi turba locis.
In Solitary places be
Unto thy self good Company.
Virtue is satisfied with her self, without Discipline, without Words, without
Effects. In our ordinary actions, there is not one of a thousand that concerns
our selves: He that thou see Scambling up the Ruins of that Wall, Furious,
and Transported, against whom so many Harquebuze Shot are levelled; and that
other all over Scars, Pale, and Fainting with Hunger, and yet resolved rather
to Dye, than to open his Gate to Him, do thou think that these Men are there
upon their own account? No peradventure in the behalf of one whom they never
saw, and that never concerns himself for their Pains, and Danger, but lies
Wallowing the while in Sloth, and Pleasure: This other Slavering, Blear-eyed,
Slovenly Fellow; that thou see come out of his Study after Midnight, do
thou think he has been Tumbling over Books, to Learn how to become a better
Man, Wiser, and more Content: No such matter, he will there end his Days, but
he will teach Posterity the measure of Plautus his Verses, and the Orthography
of a Latin Word: Who is it that does not Voluntarily exchange his Health, his
Repose, and his very Life for Reputation, and Glory? The most Useless,
Frivolous, and false Coin that passes current amongst us: Our own Death does
not sufficiently terrify, and trouble us, let us moreover charge our selves,
with those of our Wives, Children, and Family: Our own affairs do not afford us
anxiety enough, let us undertake those of our Neighbors, and Friends, still
more to break our Brains, and torment us. Ter. Adel. Act. 1. Sc. 1.
Vah quemquamne hominem in animum instituere aut.
Parare, quod sit charius, quam ipse est sibi?
Alas? what mortal will be so unwise
Any thing dearer, than himself to prize?
Solitude seems to me to have the best pretense, in such as have already
employed their most active and flourishing age in the Worlds service; by the
exemple of Thales. We have lived enough for others, let us at least Live out
the small Remnant of Life for our Selves; let us now call in our Thoughts, and
Intentions to our Selves, and to our own Ease, and Repose: It Is no light thing
to make a sure Retreat, it will be enough to do without mixing other
Enterprises, and Designs, since God gives us leisure to prepare for, and to
order our remove, let us make Ready, Truss our Baggage, take leave betimes of
the Company, let us disentangle our selves from those violent importunities
that engage us elsewhere, and separate us from our Selves: We must break the
Knot of our Obligations, how strong soever, and hereafter Love this, or that;
but espouse nothing, but our Selves: That is to say, let the remainder be our
own, but not so joined, and so close, as not to be forced away without flaying
us, or tearing part of the whole piece. The greatest thing in the World is for
a Man to know that he is his own: It Is time to wean our Selves from Society,
when we can no more add any thing to it; and who is not in a Condition to Lend,
must forbid himself to Borrow. Our Forces begin to fail us, and are of no more
use for Foreign Offices; let us call them in, and Lock them up at Home: He that
can within himself cast off, and Disband the Office^ of so many Friendships,
and that tumult of Conversation he has contracted in the busy World, let him do
it: In this decay of nature, which renders him Useless, Burdensome, and
importunate to others, let him have a care of being useless, Burdensome, and
importunate to himself: Let him Sooth, and Caress himself, and above all things
be sure to Govern himself with Reverence to his Reason, and Conscience to that
Degree; as to be ashamed to make a false Step in their Presence. Rarum est
enim, ut satis se quisque vereatur. For it is rarely seen that Men have Respect,
and Reverence enough for themselves. Socrates says, that Boys are to cause
themselves to be Instructed, Pythag.
Men to Exercise themselves in well doing, and Old Men to retire from all
Civil, and Military employments, living at their own Discretion, without the
Obligation to any certain Office. There are some Complexions more proper for
these Precepts of Retirement, than others, such as are of a Soft and Faint
apprehension, and of a tender Will, and Affection, as I am, will sooner incline
to this Advice, than Active and Busy Souls; which embrace all, engage in all,
and are Hot upon every thing, who offer present, and give themselves up to
every occasion. We are to serve our selves with these accidental and extraneous
things; so far as they are pleasant to us, but by no means to lay our principal
Foundation there. This is no true one, neither Nature, nor Reason, can allow it
so to be, and why therefore should we contrary to their Laws, enslave our own
contentment, by giving it into the power of another: To anticipate also the
accidents of Fortune, and to deprive our selves of those things we have in our
own power, as several have done upon the account of Devotion, and some
Philosophers by discourse; to serve a Man's self, to lie hard, to put out our
own Eyes, throw Wealth into the River, and to seek out Grief, (the one by the
uneasiness, and misery of this Life, to pretend to bliss in another; the other
by laying themselves low to avoid the Danger of falling) are acts of an
excessive Nature. The Stoutest, and most obstinate Natures, render even their
most obstruce retirements Glorious, and Exemplary. Hor. l. 1. Ep. 15.
-- tuta, and parvula laudo,
Cum res dificiunt, satis inter vilia fortis:
Verum ubi quid melius contigit, et unctius
Hos sapere, and solos aio been vivere, quorum idem
Conspiciturmitidis fundata pecunia villis.
Where plenty fails,
A secure competency I like well,
And love the Man disaster cannot quell^*
But when good Fortune with a liberal hand
Her gifts bestows; those Men I understand
Alone happy to live, and to be Wise,
Whose Money does in neat built Villa's rise.
A great deal less would serve my turn well enough. It Is enough for me under
Fortunes favor to prepare my self for her Disgrace, and being at my ease to
represent to my self, as far as my imagination can Stretch, the ill to come; as
we do at Justs, and Tiltings, where we counterfeit War in the greatest Calm of
Peace. I do not think Arcesilaus the Philosopher the less Temperate, and
Reformed, for knowing that he made use of Gold, and Silver Vessels, when the
condition of his Fortune allowed him so to do: But have a better Opinion of
him, than if he had denied himself what he used with Liberality, and
Moderation, I see the utmost Limits of Natural necessity, and considering a
Poor Man Begging at my Door, oft-times more Jocund, and more Healthy than I my
self am, I put my self into his place, and attempt to dress my Mind after his
Mode; and running in like manner over other examples, though I fancy Death,
Poverty, Contempt, and Sickness treading on my Heels, I easily resolve not to
be affrighted, forasmuch as a less than I takes them with so much Patience, and
am not willing to believe that a less understanding can do more than a greater;
or that the effects of precept cannot arrive to as great a height, as those of
Custom: And knowing of how uncertain duration these accidental conveniences
are, I never forget, in the height of all my enjoyments, to make it my chiefest
Prayer to Almighty God, that he will please to render me content with my self;
and the Condition wherein I am. I see several Young Men very Gay, and Frolic;
who nevertheless keep a Mass of Pills in their Trunck at home, to take when the
Rhume shall fall, which they fear so much the less, because they think they
have Remedy at hand: Every one should do the same, and moreover if they find
themselves subject to some more violent Disease, should furnish themselves with
such Medicines as may Numme and Stupifie the part: The employment a Man should
choose for a Sedentary Life, ought neither to be a Laborious, nor an unpleasing
one, otherwise it is to no purpose at all to be retired, and this depends upon
every ones liking, and humor; mine has no manner of complacency for Husbandry,
and such as Love it, ought to apply themselves to it with Moderation. Conantur
sibi res, non se submittere rebus. Hoar Ep. 1.

A Man should to himself his Business fit,
But should not to Affairs himself submit.
Husbandry is otherwise a very Servile Employment, as Salust tells us; though
some parts of it are more excusable than the rest, as the Care of Gardens,
which Zenophon attributes to Cyrus; and a mean may be found out betwixt Sordid
and Homely Affection, so full of perpetual Solitude, which is seen in Men who
make it their entire Business and Study, and that stupid and extreme
Negligence, letting all things go at Random, we see in others. Hor. Ep. 12.
-- Democriti pecus edit agellos,
Cultaque, dum peregre est animus sine corpore velox.
Democritus his Cattle spoils his Corn,
Whilst he from thence on Fancy's Wings is born.
But let us hear what Advice the Younger Pliny gives his Friend Caninius Rufus.
Cornelius Rufus, upon the Subject of Solitude; I advise thee, in the plentiful
Retirement wherein thou art, to leave to thy Hinds, and inferior Servants, the
Care of thy Husbandry, and to addict thy self to the Study of Letters, to
extract from thence something that may be entirely and absolutely thine own. By
which, he means Reputation; like Cicero, who says, that he would employ his
Solitude and Retirement, from Public Affairs, to acquire by his Writings an
Immortal Life. -- Vsque adeo ne
Scire tuum nihil est, Per. Sat. 1.
nisi te scire hoc sciat alter?
Is all thy Learning nothing, unless thou,
That thou art Knowing, make all others know?
It appears to be reason, when a Man talks of Retiring from the World, that he
should look quite out of himself. These do it but by halves. They design well
enough for themselves, it is true, when they shall be no more in it; but still
they pretend to extract the fruits of that Design from the World, when absented
from it, by a Ridiculous Contradiction. The Imagination of those who seek
Solitude, upon the account of Devotion, filling their Hopes with certainty of
Divine Promises in the other Life, is much more rationally founded. They
propose to themselves God, an infinite Object in Goodness and Power. The Soul
has there wherewithal, at full liberty, to satiate her Desires. Afflictions and
Sufferings turn to their advantage, being undergone for the acquisition of an
eternal Health, and everlasting Joys. Death is to be wished and longed for,
where it is the passage to so perfect a Condition. And the Tartness of these
severe Rules they impose upon themselves, is immediately taken away by Custom,
and all their Carnal Appetites baffled and subdued, by refusing to humor and
feed them; they being only supported by use and exercise. This sole end
therefore, of another happy and immortal Life, is that which really merits,
that we should abandon the Pleasures and Conveniences of this. And who can
really and constantly inflame his Soul with the Ardour of this Lively Faith and
Hope, does erect for himself in this Solitude, a more Voluptuous and Delicious
Life, than any other sort of Living whatever. Neither the end then, nor the
means of this Advice of Pliny, pleases me, for we often fall out of the
Drying Pan into the Fire. This Book Employment is as painful as any other, and
as great an Enemy to Health, which ought to be the first thing in every Man's
prospect; neither ought a Man to be allured with the pleasure of it, which is
the same that destroys the Wary, Avaricious, Voluptuous and Ambitious Men. The
Wise give us Caution enough, to beware the Treachery of our Desires, and to
distinguish true and entire Pleasures, from such as are mixed and complicated
with greater Pain. For the greatest part of Pleasures, (say they,) Wheedle and
Caress, only to strangle us, like those Thieves the Egyptians called Philiste;
and if the Headache should come before Drunkenness, we should have a care of
Drinking too much: but Pleasure to deceive us, Marches before, and conceals her
Train. Books are pleasant, but if by being over Studious, we impair our Health,
and spoil our good Humor, two of the best Pieces we have, let us give it over;
for I for my part am one of those who think, that no Fruit derived from them,
can recompense so great a Loss. As Men who feel themselves Weakened by a long
Series of Indisposition, give themselves up at last to the Mercy of Medicine,
and submit to certain Rules of Living, which they are for the future never to
Transgress; so he who Retires, weary of, and disgusted, with the common way of
Living, ought to Model this new One he enters into, by the Rules of Reason, and
to Institute and Establish it by Premeditation, and after the best Method he
can contrive. He ought to have taken leave of all sorts of Labor, what
advantage soever he may propose to himself by it, and generally to have shaken
off all those Passions which disturb the Tranquillity of Body and Soul, and then
choose the Way that best suits with his own Humor: Vnusquisque sua noverit ire
via. Propert. lib. Eleg. 25.

Every one best does know,
In his own Way to go.
In Menagery, Study, Hunting, and all other Exercises, Men are to proceed to
the utmost limits of Pleasure, but must take heed of engaging further, where
Solitude and Trouble begin to mix. We are to reserve so much Employment only,
as is necessary to keep us in Breath, and to defend us from the Inconveniences,
that the other Extreme, of a Dull and Stupid Laziness brings along with it.
There are some Steril, Knotty Sciences, and chiefly Hammered out for the
Crow'd; let such be left to them who are Engaged in the Public Service: I for
my part care for no other Books, but either such, as are pleasant and easy, to
delight me, or those, that comfort and instruct me, how to Regulate my Life and
Death. Hor. Ep. 44. lib. 1.
Tacitum sylvas inter reptare salubres,
Curantem quidquid dignum sapiente bonoque est.
Silently Meditating in the Groves,
What best, a Wise and Honest Man behooves.
Wiser Men propose to themselves a Repose wholely Spiritual, as having great
force and vigor of Mind: but for me, who have a very ordinary Soul, I find it
very necessary, to support my self with Bodily Conveniences; and Age having of
late deprived me of those Pleasures that were most acceptable to me, I instruct
and whet my Appetite to those that remain, and are more suitable to this other
season. We ought to hold with all our force, both of Hands and Teeth, the use
of the Pleasures of Life, that our Years, one after another, snatch away from
us. Carpamus dulci^, nostrum est, Perseus. Sat. 5.

Quod vivis, cinis, and manes, and fabula fies.
Let us Enjoy Life's Sweets, for shortly we,
Ashes, Pale Ghost's, and Fables, all shall be.
Now as to the End, that Pliny and Cicero propose to us, of Glory; it is
infinitely wide of my account; for Ambition, is of all other, the most contrary
Humor to Solitude; and Glory and Repose are so inconsistant, that they cannot
possibly Inhabit in one and the same place; and for so much as I understand,
those have only their Arms and Legs disengaged from the Crowd, their Mind and
Intention remains engaged behind more than ever. Tun' vetule auriculis alienis
colligis escas? Perseus. Sat. 1.

Do thou, Old Dotard, at these Years,
Gather fine Tales for others Ears?
They are only Retired to take a better Leap, and by a stronger Motion, to give
a brisker Charge into the Crowd. Will you see how they shoot short? Let us put
into the Counterpoise the Advice of two Philosophers, of two very different
Sects, Writing, the one to Idomeneus, the other to Lucilius, their Friends, to
Retire into Solitude from Worldly Honors, and the Administration of Public
Affairs. You have, say they, hitherto Lived Swimming and Floating, come now,
and Die in the Harbor: You have given the first part of your Life to the
Light, give what remains to the Shade. It is impossible to give over Business,
if you do not also quit the Fruit, and therefore disengage your selves from all
the Concerns of Name and Glory. It Is to be feared, the Luster of your former
Actions will give you but too much Light, and follow you into your most
private, and most obscure Retreat: Quit with other Pleasures, that which
proceeds from the Approbation of another: And as to your Knowledge and Parts,
never concern your selves, they will not lose their effect, if your selves be
ever the better for them. Remember him, who being asked, why he took so much
Pains in an Art, that could come to the Knowledge of but few Persons? A few are
enough for me, replied he, I have enough of one, I have enough of never a one.
He said true, you, and a Companion, are Theater enough to one another, or you
to your self. Let us be to you the whole People, and the whole People to you
but one: It Is an unworthy Ambition, to think to derive Glory from a Man's
Sloth and Privacy: You are to do like the Beasts of Chase, who put out the
Track at the entrance into their Den. You are no more to concern your self, how
the World talks of you, but how you are to talk to your self: Retire your self
into your self, but first prepare your self there to receive your self. It were
a folly to trust your self in your own Hands, if you cannot Govern yourself, a
Man may as well miscarry alone, as in Company, till you have rendered your self
as such, as before whom you dare not Trip, and till you have a Bashfulness and
Respect for your self, Observantur species honestae animo, Let just and honest
things be still Represented to the Mind. Cicero Thus. Quaes. 1.^.
Present continually to your Imagination, Cato, Phocio and Antistides, in whose
presence, the Fools themselves will hide their Faults; and make them
Controulers of all your Intentions. Should they deviate from Virtue, your
Respect to them will again set you right; they will keep you in the way of
being Contented with your self, to Borrow nothing of any other but your self;
to restrain and fix your Soul in certain and limited Thoughts, wherein she may
please her self, and having understood the true and real Goods, which Men the
more enjoy, the more they understand, to rest satisfied, without desire of
prolongation of Life or Memory. This is the Precept of the True and Natural
Philosophy, not of a Boasting and Prating Philosophy, such as that of the two
former.

CHAP. XXXIX. A Consideration upon Cicero.
ONe Word more by way of Comparison, betwixt these two. There are to be
gathered out of the Writings of Cicero, and this Younger Pliny, (but little in
my opinion, resembling his Uncle in his Humor,) infinite Testimonies of a
beyond measure, Ambitious Nature; and amongst others, this for one, that they
both, in the sight of all the World, solicit the Historians of their time, not
to forget them in their Mesmoires; and Fortune, as if in spite, has made the
Vacancy of those Requests Live upon Record down to this Age of ours, when she
has long since Damned the Histories themselves to Oblivion. But this exceeds
all meanness of Spirit in Persons of such Quality, as they were, to think to
derive any great and living Renown from Babbling and Prating; even to the
Publishing of their private Letters to their Friends, and so withal, that
though some of them were never sent, the opportunity being lost, they
nevertheless expose them to the light, with this worthy excuse, that they were
hereafter unwilling to lose their Labors, and have their Lucubrations thrown
away. Was it not very well becoming two Consuls of Rome, Sovereign Magistrates
of the Republic that Commanded the World, to spend their time in contriving
Quaint and Elegant^Missives, thence to gain the Reputation of being Critics,
in their own Mother Tongues: What could a pitiful Schoolmaster have done
worse, whose trade it was to get his Living? If the Acts of Zenophon, and
Caesar, had not far enough transcended their Eloquence, I scarce believe they
would ever have taken the pains, to have writ them. They made it their business
to recommend not their Speaking, but their doing. And could the perfection of
eloquence have added an luster proportionable to the merit of a great Person,
certainly Scipio, and Laelius, had never resigned the honor of their Comedies,
with all the luxuriences, and delicacies of the Latin Tongue, to an Affrican
Slave; for that, that work was theirs, the Beauty and excellency of it do
sufficiently declare; besides, Terence himself confesses as much, and I should
take it ill from any one, that would dispossess me of that belief. It Is a kind
of injurious Mockery, and Offense, to extol a Man for Qualities, misbecoming
his Mertit, and Condition, though otherwise commendable in themselves, but such
as ought not however to be his chiefest Talent: As if a Man should commend a
King, for being a good Painter, a good Architect, a good Marksman, or a good
Runner at the Ring; commendations that add no Honor, unless mentioned
altogether, and in the train of those that are more properly applicable to him,
namely, his Justice, and the Science of Governing, and conducting his People
both in Peace, and War. At this rate agriculture was an Honor to Cyrus, and
Eloquence, and the knowledge of good Letters to Charlemaine. I have in my time
known some, who by that Knack of Writing, have got both their Titles, and
Fortune, disown their Apprenticeage, purposely corrupt their Style, and affect
ignorance in so vulgar a quality (which also our Nation observes, to be rarely
seen in very intelligent hands) to seek a reputation by better qualities.
Demosthenes, his Companions in the Embassy to Philip, extolling that Prince for
Handsome, Eloquent, and a Stout Drinker, Demosthenes replied, that those were
commendations more proper for a Woman; an Advocate, or a Sponge, than for a
King. Imperet bellante prior jacentem Horm. Carm*

Lenis in hostem.
First let his Empire from his valor flow,
And then, by mercy on a prostrate foe.
It Is not his profession to know either how to Hunt, or to Dance well. Orabunt
causas alii, coelique meatus
Describent radio, and fulgentia sydera dicent. Virg. Aen. l. 6.

Hic regere imperio populos sciat.
Let others plead at the litigious Bar
Describe the Spears, point out each twinkling Star,
Let this Man rule, a greater art by far.
Plutarch says moreover, that to appear so excellent in these less necessary
Qualities, is to produce Witness against a Man's self, that he has spent his
time, and applied his Study ill, which ought to have been employed in the
acquisition of more necessary, and more useful things, so that Philip King of
Macedon, having heard that Great Alexander his Son, Sing once at a Feast to the
Wonder, and Envy of the best Musicians there: Art not thou ashamed, said he to
him, to Sing so well? And to the same Philip a Musician, with whom he was
disputing about some things concerning his Art: Heaven forbid? Sir, said he,
that so great a misfortune should ever befall you, as to understand these things
better than I. A King should be able to answer as Iphicrates did the Orator,
who pressed upon him in his invective after this manner: And what art thou, that
thou brav'st it at this rate? art thou a Man at Arms, art thou an Archer, art
thou a Pike? I am none of all this; but I know how to Command all these. And
Antisthenes took it for an argument of little Valor, in Ismenas, that he was
commended for Playing excellently well upon a Flute. I know very well, that
when I hear any one insist upon the Language of Essays, I had rather a great
deal he would say nothing. It Is not so much to elevate the Style as to depress
the Sense, and so much the more offensively, as they do it Disgracefully, and
out of the Way. I am much deceived if many other Essayists, deliver more worth
noting as to the matter, and how well, or ill soever, if any other Writer has
strewed them either much more Material, or thicker upon his Paper than my self.
To bring the more in, I only Muster up the Heads, should I annex the sequel, I
should strangely Multiply this Volume: And how many Stories have I Scattered up
and down, in this Book, that I only touch upon, which should any one more
curiously search into, they would find matter enough to produce infinite
Essays: Neither those Stories, nor my allegations do always serve simply for
Example, Authority, or Ornament, I do not only regard them for the use I make
of them: They carry sometimes besides what I apply them to, the seed of a more
Rich, and a Bolder matter, and sometimes collaterally a more delicate Sound
both to me my self, who will express no more in this Place, and to others who
shall happen to be of my Ear.

But returning to the speaking virtue; I find no great choice betwixt, not
knowing to speak any thing but very ill, and not knowing to speak any thing but
very well. Non est ornamentum virile concimitas. Seneca. Epist. 6.
Neatness of Style, is no Manly Ornament. The Sages tell us, that as to what
concerns Knowledge, there is nothing but Philosophy; and to what concerns
effects, nothing but virtue, that is generally proper to all Degrees, and to
all orders. There is something like this in these two other Philosophers, for
they also promise Eternity, to the Letters they Write to their Friends; but
it is after another manner, and by accommodating themselves, for a good end, to
the vanity of another; for they Write to them, that if the concern of making
themselves known to future Ages, and the Thirst of Glory, do yet detain them in
the management of public affairs, and make them fear the Solitude, and
retirement to which they would persuade them; let them never trouble themselves
more about it, forasmuch as they shall have Credit enough with posterity to
assure them, that were there nothing else but the very Letters thus Writ to
them, those Letters will render their names as known, and famous, as their own
public actions themselves could do. And besides this difference, these are not
Idle, and empty Letters, that contain nothing but a fine Gingle of well chosen
Words, and fine Coucht phrases, but rather repleat, and abounding with Grave,
and Learned Discourses, by which a Man may render himself not more Eloquent,
but more Wise, and that instruct us not to speak, but to do well: A way with
that Eloquence that so enchants us with its Harmony, that we should more Study
it than things. Unless you will allow that of Cicero, to be of so Supreme a
perfection, as to form a complete Body of it self: And of him I shall further
add one Story, we read of him to this purpose, wherein his nature will much
more manifestly be laid open to us: He was to make an Oration in public, and
found himself a little straightned in time, to fit his Words to his Mouth, as
he had a mind to do; when Eros one of his Slaves brought him word, that the
audience was deferred till the next Day, at which he was so ravished with Joy,
that he enfranchised him for the good news.

Upon this subject of Letters, I will add this more to what has been already
said, that it is a kind of Writing, wherein my Friends think I can do
something; and I am willing to confess, I should rather have chose to publish
my Whimsies that way, than any other, had I had to whom to Write; but I wanted
such a settled Correspondency, as I once had to attract me to it, to raise my
Fancy, and to maintain the rest against me. For to Traffic with the Wind, as
some others have done, and to Forge vain Names to direct my Letters to, in a
serious subject, I could never do it but in a Dream, being a sworn Enemy to all
manner of falsification: I should have been more diligent, and more confidently
secure, had I had a Judicious and Indulgent Friend, to whom to address, than
thus to expose my self to various judgments of a whole People, and I am
deceived if I had not succeeded better: I have naturally a Comic, and familiar
Style; but it is a peculiar one, and not proper for Public business, but like
the Language I speak, too Compact, Irregular, Abrubt, and Singular; and as to
Letters of Ceremony, that have no other substance, than a fine contexture of
courteous, and obliging Words, I am wholly to seek, I have neither faculty, nor
relish, for those tedious offers of Service, and Affection; I am not good
natured to that degree, and should not forgive my self, should I offer more,
than I intend, which is very remote from the present practice; for there never
was so abject, and servile prostitution of tenders of Life, Soul, Devotion,
Adoration, Vassal, Slave, and I cannot tell what, as now; all which expressions
are so commonly, and so indifferently Posted to and fro by every one, and to
every one, that when they would profess a greater, and more respective
inclination upon more just occasions, they have not wherewithal to express it:
I hate all air of Flattery to Death, which is the cause that I naturally fall
into a Shy, Rough, and crude way of speaking, that to such as do not know me,
may seem a little to relish of disdain: I Honor those most to whom I show the
least Honor, and Respect, and where my Soul moves with the greatest
Cheerfulness, I easily forget the Ceremonies of Look, and Gesture; I offer my
self Faintly, and Bluntly, to them whose I effectually am, and tender my self
the least to him, to whom I am the most devoted: Methinks they should read it
in my Heart, and that my expression would but injure the Love I have conceived
within. To Welcome, take Leave, give Thanks, Accost, offer my Service, and such
verbal Formalities, as the Laws of our modern civility enjoin, I know no Man so
stupidly unprovided of Language as my self: And have never been employed in
Writing Letters of Favor, and Recommendation, that he, in whose behalf it was,
did not think my mediation Cold, and Imperfect. The Italians are great Printers
of Letters, I do believe I have at least an hundred several Volumes of them; of
all which, those of Hannibal Caro, seem to me to be the best: If all the Paper
I have Scribled to the Ladies all the time, when my Hand was really prompted by
my Passion, were now in being, there might Peradventure be found a Page worthy
to be communicated to our young enamorato's, that are Besotted with that Fury.
I always Write my Letters Post, and so precipitously, that though I Write an
intolerable ill Hand, I rather choose to do it my self, than to employ
another; for I can find none able to follow me, and never transcribe any; but
have accustomed the great ones that know me to endure my Blots, and Dashes, and
upon Paper without Fold, or Margent. Those that cost me the most Pains, are the
worst of mine; when I once begin to draw it in by Head and Shoulders, it is a
sign that I am not there* I fall too without premeditation, or design, the
first word begets the second, and so to the end of the Chapter. The Letters of
this Age consist more in fine Foldings, and Prefaces, than matter; whereas I
had rather Write two Letters, than Close, and Fold up one, and always assign
that employment to some other; as also when the business of my Letter is
dispatched, I would with all my heart transferr it to another Hand, to add those
long Harangues, Offers, and Prayers, that we place at the Bottom, and should be
glad that some new custom would discharge us, of that unnecessary trouble; as
also of superscribing them with a long Ribble-row of Qualities, and Titles,
which for fear of mistakes, I have several times given over Writing, and
especially to Men of the long Robe. There are so many innovations of Offices,
that it is hard to place so many Titles of Honor in their proper, and due
order, which also being so dearly bought, they are neither to be mistaken, nor
omitted without offense. I find the same fault likewise with charging the
fronts, and Title Pages of the Books we commit to the Press, with such a
clutter of Titles.

CHAP. XL. That the Relish of Goods, and Evils, does in a great measure depend
upon the opinion we have of them.
MEn (says an ancient Greek Sentence) are tormented with the Opinions they have
of things, and not by the things themselves. It were a great Victory obtained
for the relief of our miserable Humane Condition, could this proposition be
established for certain, and true throughout. For if evils have no admission
into us; but by the judgment we our selves make of them, it should seem that
it is then in our own power to despise them, or to turn them to good. If things
surrender themselves to our mercy, why do we not convert, and accommodate them
to our advantage? If what we call Evil, and Torment, is neither Evil, nor
Torment of it self, but only that our Fancy gives it that Quality, and makes it
so, it is in us to change, and alter it, and it being in our own choice, if
there be no constraint upon us, we must certainly be very strange Fools, to
take Arms for that side, which is most offensive to us, and to give Sickness,
Want, and contempt, a nauseous taste, if it be in our power to give them a more
graceful Relish, and if Fortune simply providing the matter, it is for us to
give it the form. Now that which we call Evil, is not so of it self, or at
least to that degree that we make it; and that it depends upon us, to give it
another taste or complexion, (for all comes to one) let us examine how that can
be maintained. If the original being of those things we fear, had power to
lodge themselves in us, by their own authority, it would then lodge it self
alike, and in like manner in all; for Men are all of the same kind, and saving
in greater, and less proportions, are all provided with the same utensils and
instruments to conceive and to judge; but the diversity of opinions we have of
those things, does clearly evidence, that they only enter us by composition:
One particular Person, peradventure admits them in their true being; but a
thousand others give them a new, and contrary being in them. We hold Death,
Poverty, and Grief, for our principal Enemies, but this Death which some
repute, the most dreadful of all dreadful things, who does not know that others
call it the only secure Harbor, from the Storms, and Tempests of Life? The
Sovereign good of Nature? the sole Support of Liberty, and the Common, and
sudden Remedy of all Evils? And as the one expect it with Fear, and Trembling,
the other support it with greater Ease than Life. That Blade complains of its
facility, Mors utinam pavidos vitae subducere nolles.
Sed virtus te sola daret! Lucan. lib. 4.

O Death I would thou would the Coward spare,
That but the daring none might the conferr.
But let us leave these Glorious Courages. Theodorus answered Lysimachus, who
threatened to Kill him, thou will do a brave thing, said he, to arrive at the
force of a Cantharides. The greatest part of Philosophers, are observed to have
either purposely prevented, or hastened, and assisted their own Death. How many
ordinary people do we see led to Execution, and that not to a simple Death, but
mixed with Shame, and sometimes with grievous Torments, appear with such
assurance, what through obstinacy, or natural simplicity, that a Man can
discover no change from their ordinary condition? Settling their Domestic
affairs, recommending them to their Friends, Singing, Preaching, and Diverting
the People so much, as sometimes to Sally into Jests, and to Drink to their
Companions, as well as Socrates? One that they were leading to the Gallows,
told them they must not carry him through such a Street, lest a Merchant that
lived there, should Arrest him by the way, for an old Debt. Another told the
Hangman, he must not touch his Neck, for fear of making him Laugh he was so
Ticklish. Another answered his Confessor, who promised him he should that day
Sup with our Lord. Do you go then, said he, in my Room; for I for my part keep
fast to day. Another having called for Drink, and the Hangman having Drank
first, said he would not Drink after him, for fear of catching the Pox. Every
body has heard the Tale of the Picard, to whom being upon the Ladder they
presented a Whore, telling him (as our Law does sometimes permit) that if he
would Marry her, they would save his Life, he having a while considered her,
and perceiving that she Halted, Come tie up, tie up, said he, she limps. And
they tell another Story of the same kind, of a fellow in Denmark, who being
condemned to lose his Head, and the like condition being proposed to him upon
the Scaffold, refused it, by reason the Maid they offered him, had hollow
Cheeks, and too sharp a Nose. A Servant at Toulouse being accused of Heresy,
for the sum of his Belief, referred himself to that of his Master, a young
Student Prisoner with him, choosing rather to dye, than suffer himself to be
persuaded, that his Master could err. We read that of the inhabitants of Arras,
when Lewis the eleventh took that City, a great many let themselves be Hanged,
rather than they would say, God Save the King. And amongst that mean-soul'd
race of Men, the Buffoons, there having been some, who would not leave their
Fooling at the very moment of Death. He that the Hangman turned off the Ladder
cried, Launch the Galley, an ordinary foolish saying of his; and the other,
whom at the point of Death his Friends having laid upon a Pallet before the
Fire, the Physician asking him where his Pain lay, betwixt the Bench and the
Fire, said he, and the Priest, to give him the extreme Unction, Groping for his
Feet, which his Pain had made him pull up to him, you will find them, said he,
at the end of my Legs. To one that being present exhorted him to recommend
himself to God, why who goes thither? said he; and the other replying, it will
presently be your self, if it be his good pleasure; would I were sure to be
there by to morrow Night, said he; do but recommend your self to him said the
other, and you will soon be there: I were best then, said he, to carry my
recommendations my self. In the Kingdom of Narsingua to this day, the Wives of
their Priests, are buried alive with the Bodies of their Husbands; all other
Wives are burnt at their Husbands Funerals, which also they do not only
constantly, but cheerfully undergo: At the death of their King, his Wives, and
Concubines, his Favorites, all his Officers, and Domestic servants, which
make up a great number of people, present themselves so cheerfully to the Fire,
where his Body is burnt, that they seem to take it for a singular honor, to
accompany their Master in death. During our late War of Milan, where there
happened so many takings, and re-takings of Towns, the people impatient of so
many various changes of Fortune, took such a resolution to dye, that I have
heard my Father say, he there saw a List taken of five and twenty Masters of
Families, that made themselves away in one weeks time: An accident somewhat
resembling that of the Zanthians, who being besieged by Brutus, precipitated
themselves, Men, Women, and Children, into such a furious appetite of dying,
that nothing can be done to evade death, they did not put in practice to avoid
life; insomuch, that Brutus had much ado to save but a very small number. Every
opinion is of force enough, to make it self to be espoused at the expense of
life. The first Article of that valiant Oath, that Greece took, and observed in
the Median War, was that every one should sooner exchange life for death, than
their own Laws for those of Persia. What a World of people do we see in the
Wars betwixt the Turks, and the Greeks, rather embrace a cruel death, than to
uncircumcise themselves to admit of Baptism? An example of which no sort of
Religion is incapable. The Kings of Castile, having Banished the Jews out of
their Dominions, John King of Portugal in consideration of eight Crowns a Head,
sold them a retirement into his, for a certain limited time; upon condition,
that the time perfixt coming to expire, they should be gone; and he to furnish
them with Shipping, to transport them into Afric. The limited day came, which
once lapsed, they were given to understand, that such as were afterward found
in the Kingdom should remain Slaves: Vessels were very slenderly provided, and
those who embarkt in them were rudely, and villanously used by the Seamen, who
besides other indignities, kept them cruising upon the Sea, one while forwards,
and another backwards, till they had spent all their provisions, and were
constrained to buy of them at so dear rates, and so long withal, that they set
them not on Shore, till they were all stripped to the very Shirts. The news of
this inhumane usage, being brought to those who remained behind, the greater
part of them resolved upon Slavery, and some made a show of changing Religion.
Emanuel the successor for of John, being come to the Crown, first set them at
liberty; and afterward altering his mind, ordered them to depart his Country,
assigning three Ports for their passage. Hoping (says the Bishop Osorius, no
contemptible Latin Historian of these later times) that the favor of the
liberty he had given them, having failed of convert^ng them to Christianity;
yet the difficulty of committing themselves to the mercy of the Mariners, and
of abandoning a Country they were now habituated to, and were grown very rich
in, to go, and expose themselves in strange and unknown Regions, would
certainly do it: But finding himself deceived in his expectation, and that they
were all resolved upon the Voyage; he cut off two of the three Ports he had
promised them, to the end, that the length and incommodity of the passage,
might reduce some; or that he might have opportunity, by crouding them all into
one place, the more conveniently to execute what he had designed; which was to
force all the Children under fourteen years of Age, from the Arms of their
Fathers and Mothers, to transport them from their sight and conversation, into
a place where they might be instructed, and brought up in our Religion. He says
that this produced a most horrid Spectacle: The natural affection betwixt the
Parents and their Children, and moreover their Zeal to their ancient Belief,
contending against this violent Decree. Fathers and Mothers were commonly seen
making themselves away, and by a yet much more Rigorous Example, precipitating
out of Love and Compassion, their young Children into Wells and Pits, to avoid
the Severity of this Law. As to the remainder of them, the time that had been
prefixed being expired, for want of means to transport them, they again
returned into Slavery. Some also turned Christians, upon whose Faith, as also
that of their Posterity, even to this Day, which is a Hundred Years since, few
Portuguese can yet rely or believe them to be real Converts; though Custom,
and length of time, are much more powerful Counselors in such Changes, than
all other Constraints whatever. In the Town of Castlenau-Darry, Fifty
Heretics, Albegeois, at one time suffered themselves to be Burnt alive in one
Fire, rather than they would renounce their Opinions. Quoties non modo ductores
nostri, dit Cicero, Cicero.
sed universi etiam exercitus, ad non dubiam mortem concurrerunt? How often, have
not only our Leaders, but whole Armies, run to a certain and apparent Death. I
have seen an intimate Friend of mine, run headlong upon Death with a real
affection, and that was rooted in his heart by diverse plausible Arguments,
which he would never permit me to dispossess him of, upon the first Honorable
occasion that offered it self to him, to precipitate himself into it, without
any manner of visible reason, with an obstinate and ardent desire of Dying. We
have several Examples of our own times of those, even so much as to little
Children, who for fear of a Whipping, or some such little thing, have
dispatched themselves. And, what shall we not fear (says one of the Ancients to
that purpose,) if we dread that, which Cowardice it self has chosen for its
Refuge? Should I here produce a tedious Catalogue of those of all Sexes and
Conditions, and of all sorts, even in the most happy Ages, who have either with
great Constancy looked Death in the Face, or voluntarily sought it; and sought
it not only to avoid the Evils of this Life, but some, purely to avoid the
Saciety of Living; and others, for the hope of a better Condition elsewhere, I
should never have done. Nay, the Number is so infinite, that in truth, I should
have a better Bargain on it, to reckon up those who have feared it. This one
therefore shall serve for all; Pyrrho the Philosopher, being one Day in a Boat,
in a very great Tempest, showed to those he saw the most Affrighted about him,
and encouraged them by the Example of a Hog, that was there, nothing at all
concerned at the Storm. Shall we then dare to say, that this advantage of
Reason, of which we so much Boast, and upon the account of which, we think our
selves Masters and Emperors, over the rest of the Creatures, was given us for
a Torment? To what end serves the Knowledge of things, if it renders us more
Unmanly? If we lose the Tranquillity and Repose we should enjoy without it? And
if it put us into a worse Condition, than Pyrrho's Hog? Shall we employ the
Understanding, that was conferred upon us for our greatest Good, to our own
Ruin? Setting our selves against the design of Nature, and the universal Order
of things, which intend, that every one should make use of the Faculties,
Members and Means, he has, to his own best Advantage? But it may peradventure
be Objected against me; Your Rule is true enough, as to what concerns Death:
But what will you say of Necessity? What will you moreover say of Pain, that
Aristippus, Hieronimus, and almost all the Wise Men, have reputed the worst of
Evils? And those who have denied it by word of Mouth, did however confess it in
Effects? Possidonius being extremely Tormented with a sharp and painful
Disease, Pompeius came to Visit him, excusing himself, that he had taken so
unseasonable a time to come to hear him discourse of Philosophy; God forbid,
said Possidonius to him again, that Pain should ever have the power to hinder
me from talking, and thereupon fell imediately upon a discourse of the Contempt
of Pain: But in the mean time, his own Infirmity was playing its part, and
plagued him to the purpose; to which he Cried out, thou may work thy Will
Pain, and Torment me with all the power thou have, but thou shall never make me
say, that thou art an Evil. This Story that they make such a Clutter withal,
what is there in it, I fain would know, to the Contempt of Pain? It only Fights
it with Words, and in the mean time, if the Shootings and Dolours he felt, did
not move him, why did he interrupt his Discourse? Why did he fancy, he did so
great a thing, in forbearing to confess it an Evil? All does not here consist
in the Imagination, our Fancies may work upon other things: But this here is a
certain Science that is playing its part, of which our Senses themselves are
judge. Lucae^. 4.
Qui nisi sunt very, ratio quoque falsa sit omnis.
Which if it be not here most true;
Reason it self must be false too.
Shall we persuade our Skins, that the Jerks of a Whip tickle us? Or our Taste,
that a Potion of Aloes is Graves Wine. Pyrrho's Hog is here in the same
Predicament with us; he is not afraid of Death, it is true, but if you Beat him,
he will Cry out to some purpose: Shall we force the general Law of Nature,
which in every Living Creature under Heaven, is seen to Tremble under Pain? The
very Trees seem to Groan under the Blows they receive. Death is only felt by
Discourse, forasmuch as it is the motion of an instant. Aut fuit, aut veniet,
nihil est presentis in illa, Ovid. Epist. Aniad.

Morsque minus paenae, quam mora mortis habet.
Death's always past, or coming on, in this
There never any thing of present is:
And the delays of Death more painful are,
Than Death it self, and Dying is by far.
A Thousand Beasts, a Thousand Men, are sooner Dead than Threatened. That also
which we principally pretend to Fear in Death, is Pain, the ordinary
forerunner of it: Yet, if we may believe a Holy Father, Malam mortem non
facit, nisi quod sequitur mortem. Nothing makes Death Evil, but what follows
it. And I should yet say more probably, that neither that which goes before,
nor that which follows after, are at all the appendants of Death: We excuse our
selves falsely. And I find by experience, that it is rather the impatience of
the Imagination of Death, that makes us impatient of Pain; and that we find it
doubly grievous, as it Threatens us with Death. But Reason accusing our
Cowardice, for fearing a thing so sudden, so inevitable, and so insensible, we
take the other as the more excusable pretense. All ills that carry no other
danger along with them, but simply the Evils themselves, we despise as things
of no danger. The Toothache, or the Gout, as painful as they are, being yet not
reputed Mortal, who reckons them in the Catalogue of Diseases? But let us
presuppose, that in Death we principally regard the Pain, as also, there is
nothing to be feared in Poverty, but the Miseries it brings along with it, of
Thirst, Hunger, Cold, Heat, Watching, and the other Inconveniences it makes us
suffer, yet still we have nothing to do with any thing but Pain. I will grant,
and very willingly, that it is the worst Accident of our Being, (for I am the
Man upon Earth, that the most Hates, and avoids it, considering, that hitherto
I thank God I have had so little Traffic with it,) but still it is in us, if
not to annihilate, at least, to lessen it by Patience, and though the Body
should Mutiny, to Maintain the Soul nevertheless in a good Temper. And were it
not so, who had ever given Reputation to Virtue, Valor, Force, Magnanimity,
and Resolution? where were their parts to be played, if there were no Pain to be
Defied? Avida est periculi virtus. Seneca.
Virtue is greedy of danger. Were there no lying upon the hard ground, no
enduring, armed at all pieces, the Meridional Heats, no feeding upon the flesh
of Horses, and Asses, no seeing a Man's self hacked and hewed to pieces, no
suffering a Bullet to be pulled out from amongst the shattered Bones, the
sticking up, cauterising, and searching of Wounds, by what means were the
advantage we covet to have over the Vulgar to be acquired? It Is far from flying
Evil and Pain, what the Sages say, that of Actions equally good, a Man should
most covet to perform that wherein there is greater Labor and Pain. Cicero de
^in. l. 2.
Non est enim hilaritate, nec lascivia, nec risu, aut joco comite levitatis,
sed saepe etiam tristes firmitate, and constantia sunt beati. For Men are not
only happy by Mirth and Wantonness, neither by Laughter and Jesting, the
Companion of Levity: But often times, the Graver and more Melancholic sort of
Men, reap Felicity from their Steadiness and Constancy. And for this reason, it
has ever been impossible to persuade our Forefathers, but that the Victories
obtained by dint of Force, and the hazard of War, were still more Honorable,
than those performed in great Security, by Stratagem or Practice. Luc. lib. 9.
Laetius est, quoties magno sibi constat honestum.
A handsome Act more handsome does appear,
By how much more it cost the doer dear.
Besides, this ought to be our comfort, that naturally, if the Pain be violent,
it is but short, and if long, nothing violent. Si gravis, Cicero.
brevis: si longus, levis. Thou will not feel it long, if thou feel'st it too
much, it will either put an end to it self, or to thee; if thou can not
support it, it will export thee. Memineris maximos morte finiri; Cicero de fin.
parvos multa habere intervalla requietis: mediocrium nos esse dominos: ut si
tolerabiles sint, feramus; sin minus, e vita, quum ea non placeat tanquam e
theatro exeamus. Remember, that great ones are terminated by Death, that small,
have long Intermissions of Repose, and that we are Masters of the moderate
sort: so that, if tolerable, we may bear them, if not, we can go out of Life,
as from a Theater, where the Entertainment does not please us; that which makes
us suffer Pain with so much Impatience, is the not being accustomed to repose
our chiefest Contentment in the Soul, that we do not enough rely upon her who
is the sole and sovereign Mistress of our Condition. The Body, saving in
greater or less proportion, has but one and the same Bent and Bias; whereas the
Soul is variable into all sorts of forms; and subjects to her self, and to her
own Empire, all things whatsoever; both the Senses of the Body, and all other
Accidents: and therefore it is, that we ought to study her, to enquire into
her, and to rowse up all her powerful Faculties. There is neither Reason, Form,
nor Prescription, that can any thing prevail against her Inclination and
Choice; of so many Thousands of Biasses that she has at her disposal, let us
give her one proper to our repose and conservation, and then we shall not only
be sheltered and secured from all manner of Injury and Offense, but moreover
gratified and obliged, if we will, with Evils and Offenses. She makes her
profit indifferently of all things. Error and Dreams serve her to good use, as
a Loyal matter to Lodge us in Safety and Contentment. It Is plain enough to be
seen, that it is the sharpness of our Conceit, that gives the Edg to our Pains
and Pleasures. Beasts that have no such thing, leave to their Bodies their own
free and natural Sentiments, and consequently, in every kind very near the
same, as appears by the resembling Application of their Motions. If we would
not disturb, in our Members, the Jurisdiction that appertains to them in this,
it is to be believed, it would be the better for us, and that Nature has given
them a just and moderate Temper, both to Pleasure and Pain; neither can it fail
of being Just, being Equal, and Common. But seeing we have Enfranchised our
selves from these Rules, to give our selves up to the rambling Liberty of our
own Fancies, let us at least help to incline them to the most agreeable side.
Plato fears our too vehemently engaging our selves with Grief and Pleasure,
forasmuch as these too much Knit and Ally the Soul to the Body: whereas I
rather, quite contrary, by reason it too much separates and disunites them. As
an Enemy is made more Feirce by our Flight, so Pain grows Proud to see us
Truckle under it. She will surrender upon much better Terms to them who make
Head against her: A Man must oppose, and stoutly set himself against it. In
retiring and giving ground, we invite, and pull upon our selves the Ruin that
Threatens us. As the Body is more firm in an Encounter, the more stiffly and
obstinately it applys it self to it; so is it with the Soul. But let us come to
Examples, which are the proper Commodity for Fellows of such feeble Reins as my
self; where we shall find, that it is with Pain, as with Stones, that receive a
more spritely, or a more languishing Luster, according to the Foil they are set
upon, and that it has no more room in us, than we are pleased to allow it.
Tantum doluerunt, Aug. de Civit. Dei.
quantum doloribus se inserverunt. They Grieved so much the more, by how much
they set themselves to Grieve. We are more sensible of one little touch of a
Chyrurgeons Lancet, than of Twenty Wounds with a Sword in the heat of Fight.
The Pains of Childbearing, said by the Physician, and by God himself, to be
very great, and which our Women keep so great a Clutter about, there are whole
Nations that make nothing of it. To say nothing of the Lacedemonian Women, what
alteration can you see in our Switzers Wives of the Guard, saving, as they trot
after their Husbands, you see them to Day with the Child hanging at their
Backs, that they carried yesterday in their Bellies? And the counterfeit
Gypsies we have amongst us, go themselves to Wash their's so soon as they come
into the World, in the first River they meet. Besides so many Whores as Daily
steal their Children out of their Womb, as before they stole them in; that fair
and noble Wife of Sabinus, a Patrician of Rome, for another interest, alone,
without help, without crying out, or so much as a Groan, endured the Bearing of
Two Twins. A poor simple Boy of Lacedemon having stole a Fox, (for they more
fear the Shame of their Knavery in stealing, than we do the Punishment of our
Knavery,) and having got him under his Coat, did rather endure the tearing out
of his Bowels, than he would discover his Theft. And another Cursing at a
Sacrifice, suffered himself to be Burnt to the Bone, by a Coal that fell into
his Sleive, rather than disturb the Ceremony. And there have been a great
Number, for a sole Trial of Virtue, following their instructions, who have at
Seven Years old endured to be Whipped to Death, without changing their
Countenance. And Cicero has seen them Fight in Parties, with Fists, Feet and
Teeth, till they have fainted and sunk down, rather than confess themselves
overcome. Custom would never Conquer Nature, for she is ever Invincible, but we
have infected the Mind with Shadows, Delights, Wantonness, Negligence and
Sloth; and with vain Opinions, and corrupt Manners, rendered it Effeminate and
Mean. Every one knows the Story of Scevola, that being slipped into the Enemies
Camp to Kill their General, and having missed his Blow, to repair his fault, by
a more strange Invention, and to deliver his Country, he boldly confessed to
Porsenna, (who was the King he had a purpose to Kill,) not only his design, but
moreover added, that there were then in his Camp a great Number of Romans, his
Accomplices in the Enterprise, as good Men as he; and to show what a one he
himself was, having caused a Pan of Burning Coals to be brought, he saw, and
endured his Arm to Broil and Roast, till the King himself, conceiving Horror
at the sight, commanded the Pan to be taken away. What would you say of him,
that would not vouchsafe to respite his Reading in a Book, whilst he was under
Incision? And of the other that persisted to Mock and Laugh, in Contempt of the
Pains Inflicted upon him; so that the provoked Cruelty of the Executioners that
had him in handling, and all the Inventions of Tortures redoubled upon him, one
after another, spent in vain, gave him the Bucklers? But he was a Philosopher.
What! a Fencer of Caesar's, Endured and Laughing all the while, his Wounds to
be searched, Launc'd and laid open. Quis mediocris gladiator ingenuit? Cicero
Thus. l. 2.
Quis vultum mutavit unquam? Quis non modo stet it, verum etiam decubuit
turbiter? Quis cum decubuisset, ferrum recipere jussus, collum contraxit? What
mean Fencer ever so much as gave a Groan? Which of them ever so much as changed
his Countenance? Which of them standing or falling, did either with Shame?
Which of them, when he was down, and commanded to receive the Blow of the
Sword, ever shrunk in his Neck? Let us bring in the Women too. Who has not
heard at Paris of her that caused her Face to be fley'd, only for the fresher
Complexion of a new Skin? There are who have drawn good and sound Teeth, to
make their Voices more soft and sweet, or to place them in better Order. How
many Examples of the Contempt of Pain have we in that Sex? What can they not
do? What do they fear to do, for never so little hopes of an Addition to their
Beauty? Tib. lib. 1. Eleg. 9.
Vellere queis cura est albos a stirpe capillos,
Et faciem dempta pelle refer novam.
Who pluck their Gray Hairs by the Roots, and try
An old Head, Face, with young Skin to supply.
I have seen some of them swallow Sand, Ashes, and do their utmost to destroy
their Stomachs, to get Pale Complexions. To make a fine Spanish Body, what
Wracks will they not endure of Tweaking and Bracing, till they have Notches in
their Sides, cut into the very quick Flesh, and sometimes to Death? It is an
ordinary thing with several Nations at this Day, to hurt themselves in good
earnest, to gain credit to what they profess; of which, our King relates
notable Examples of what he has seen in Poland, and done toward himself. But
besides this, which I know to have been imitated by some in France, when I came
from that famous Assembly of the Estates at Blois, I had a little before seen a
Maid in Picardy, who to manifest the Ardour of her Promises, as also her
Constancy, give her self, with a Bodkin she wore in her Hair, Four or Five good
lusty Stabs into the Arm, till the Blood gushed out to some purpose. The Turks
make themselves great Skars in Honor of their Mistresses, and to the end they
may the longer remain, they presently clap Fire to the Wound, where they hold
it an incredible time to stop the Blood, and form the Cicatrice; People that
have been Eyewitnesses of it, have both Writ and Sworn it to me. But for Ten
Aspers, there are there every day Fellows to be found, that will give
themselves a good deep slash in the Arms or Thighs. I am willing, though to
have the Testimonies nearest to us, when we have most need of them; for
Christendom does furnish us with enough. And after the Example of our Blessed
Guide, there have been many who would bear the Cross. We Learn by Testimony,
very worthy of belief, that the King St. Lewis wore a Hair-shirt, till in his
old Age his Confessor gave him a Dispensation to leave it off; and that every
Friday he caused his Shoulders to be drubb'd by his Priest with Six small
Chains of Iron, which were always carried about amongst his Night Accoutrements
for that purpose William our last Duke of Guienne, the Father of this Eleanor
who has Transmitted this Duchy into the Houses of France and England,
continually for Ten or Twelve Years before he Died, wore a Suit of Arms under a
Religious Habit, by way of Penance. Fulke Count of Anjou, went as far as
Jerusalem, there to cause himself to be Whipped by Two of his Servants, with a
Rope about his Neck, before the Sepulcher of our Lord: But do we not moreover
every Good Friday, in several places, see great number of Men and Women, Beat
and Whip themselves till they Lacerate and Cut the Flesh to the very Bones? I
have often seen this, and without Enchantment, when it was said, there were
some amongst them, (for they go disguised,) who for Money undertook by this
means to save harmless the Religion of others, by a contempt of Pain, so much
the greater, as the Incentives of Devotion are more effectual, than those of
Avarice. Q. Maximus Buried his Son, when he was a Consul; and M. Cato his, when
Praetor Elect; and L. Paulus both his, within a few Days one after another,
with such a Countenance as expressed no manner of Grief. I said once Merrily of
a certain Person, that he had disappointed the Divine Justice; for the Violent
Death of Three grown up Children of his, being one Day sent him, for a severe
Scourge, as it is to be supposed, he was so far from being Afflicted at the
Accident, that he rather took it for a particular Grace and Favor of Heaven. I
do not follow these Monstrous Humors, though I lost Two or Three at Nurse, if
not without Grief, at least, without Repining, and yet there is hardly any
Accident, that pierces nearer to the quick. I see a great many other occasions
of Sorrow, that should they happen to me, I should hardly feel; and have
despised some when they have befallen me, to which the World have given so
Terrible a Figure, that I should Blush to Boast of my Constancy. Ex quo
intelligitur, non in Natura, sed in opinione esse aegritudinem. By which it is
understood, Cicero.
that the Grief is not in Nature, but Opinion. Opinion is a Powerful Party,
Bold, and without Measure. Who ever so greedily hunted after Security and
Repose, as Alexander and Caesar did after Disturbances and Difficulties? Terez
the Father of Sitalcez, was wont to say, that when he had no Wars, he fancied
there was no difference betwixt him and his Groom. Cato the Consul, to secure
some Cities of Spain from Revolt, only interdicting the Inhabitants from
wearing Arms, a great many (...) themselves: Ferox gens, nullam vitam (...)
sine armis esse. A Fierce People, who though there was no Life without Arms.
How many do we know, who have forsaken the Calms and Sweetness of a Quiet Life
at Home amongst their Acquaintance, t^ seek out the Horror of Inhabitable
D^^sarts; and having precipitated themselves into so Abject a Condition, as to
become the Scorn and Contempt of the World have hugged themselves with the
Conceit even to Affectation. Cardinal Barromeu^ who Died lately at Milan, in
the midst of all the Jollity that the Air of Italy, (...) Youth, Birth and
great Riches invite^ him to, kept himself in so Austere a way of Living, that
the same Robe he wore (...) Summer, served him for Winter too: (...) only Straw
for his Bed, and his Hours o^ vacancy from the Affairs of his Employment, he
continually spent in Study, upon his Knees, having a little Bread and a Glass
of Water set by his Book, which wa^ all the Provision of his Repast, and all
the time he spent in Eating. I know some who consentingly have Acquired both
Profit and Advancement from Cuckoldry, (...) which the bare Name only affrights
so many People. If the Sight be not the most necessary of all our Senses, it is
at least, the most pleasant: But the most pleasant and most useful of all our
Members, seem to ^e those of Generation, and yet a great many have conceived a
Mortal Hatred against them, only for this, that they were (...) Amiable, and
have deprived themselves of them, only for their Value. As much thought he of
his Eyes, that put them out. The generality, and more solid sort of Men, look
upon abundance of Children as a great Blessing; I, and some others, think it as
a great Benefit to be without them. And when you ask Thales, why he does not
Marry, he tells you, because he has no mind to leave any Posterity behind him.
That our Opinion gives the value to things, is very manifest in a great many of
these which we do not so much regard to prize them, but our selves; and never
consider, either their Virtues, or their Use; but only how dear they cost us:
As though that were a part of their substance: And we only repute for value in
them, not what they bring to us, but what we add to them. By which I
understand, that we are great managers of our Expense. As it weighs, it serves
for so much as it weighs; our Opinion will never suffer it to want of its
value. The Price gives valeue to the Diamond, Difficulty to Virtue, Suffering
to Devotion, and Griping to Physic. A certain Person, to be Poor, threw his
Crowns into the same Sea, to which so many came from all parts of the World to
Fish and Rifle for Riches. Epicurus says, That to be Rich, is no Advantage, but
only an alteration of Affairs. In plain truth, it is not Want, but rather
Abundance, that Creates Avarice. Neither will I stick to deliver my own
Experience concerning this Affair.

I have since my Childhood Lived in Three sorts of Conditions; the First,
which continued for some Twenty Years, I past over without any other means, but
what were Accidental, and depending upon the allowance and assistance of
others, without Stint, or certain Revenue. I then spent my Money so much the
more cheerfully, and with so much the less care how it went, as it wholely
depended upon my over-confidence of Fortune; and never Lived more at my ease, I
never had the repulse of finding the Purse of any of my Friends shut against
me, having enjoined my self this Necessity above all other Necessities
whatever, by no means to fail of Payment at the appointed time, which also they
have a Thousand times respited, seeing how careful I was to satisfy them; so
that I practiced at once a Thrifty, and withal, a kind of alluring Honesty. I
naturally feel a kind of pleasure in Paying, as if I eased my Shoulders of a
troublesome Weight, and in freeing my self from that Image of Slavery; as also,
that I find a ravishing kind of satisfaction, in pleasing another by doing a
Just Action. Those kind of payments excepted, where the trouble of reckoning
and dodging are required, and in such cases, where I can meet with no Body to
ease me of that hateful Torment, I avoid them, how scandalously and injuriously
soever, all I possibly can, for fear of those little wrangling Disputes, for
which, both my humor, and way of speaking, are so totally improper and unfit.
There is nothing I hate so much, as driving on a Bargain; it is a mere Traffic
of Couzenage and Impudence: where after an Hours cheapning and dodging, both
Parties abandon their Word and Oath for Five Sols profit, or abatement. And yet
I always borrowed at great disadvantage, for wanting the confidence to speak to
the person my self, I committed my Request to the persuasion of a Ticket, which
usually is no very successful Advocate, and is of very great advantage to him
who has a mind to deny. I in those Days more jocundly and freely referred the
Conduct of my Affairs to the Stars, than I have since done to my own Providence
and Judgment. Most good Husbands look upon it is a horrible thing to Live
always thus in incertainty, and are not aware, in the first place, that the
greatest part of the World Live so. How many Worthy Men have wholely slighted
and abandoned the certainty of their own Estates, and yet Daily do it, to trust
to the inconstant Favor of Princes, and fickle Fortune? Caesar ran above a
Million of Gold, more than he was worth, in Debt, to become Caesar. And how
many Merchants have begun their Traffic by the Sale of their Farms, which they
sent into the Indies. Cat. Epig. 4
Tot per impotentia freta? In so great a Siccity of Devotion, as we see in these
Days, we have a Thousand and a Thousand Colleges, that pass it over
commodiously enough, expecting every Day their Dinner from the Liberality of
Heaven. Secondly, They do not take notice, that this Certitude upon which they
so much rely, is not much less uncertain and hazardous, than Hazard it self. I
see Misery as near beyond Two Thousand Crowns a Year, as if it stood close by
me; for besides, that it is in the power of Chance to make a Hundred Breaches
to Poverty, through the greatest strength of our Riches, (there being very
often no Mean, betwixt the highest and the lowest Fortune.) Fortuna vitrea est:
tum, quum splendent, Seu. Provid.
frangitur.
Fortune is Glass, the brighter it does shine,
More frail, and soonest broken, when most fine.
And to turn all our Barricado's and Bulworks Topsie Turvy; I find that by
diverse Causes, Indigence is as frequently seen to Inhabit with those who have
Estates, as with those that have none; and peradventure, it is then far less
Grievous, when alone, than when accompanied with Riches; which flow more from
good Managery, than Income. Sen. Ep. 47.
Faber est suae qiusque Fortunae. Every one is the Hammerer of his own Fortune,
and an uneasy, necessituos, busy Man, seems to me more Miserable, than he
that is simply Poor. In divitiis in opes, quod genus egestatis gravissimum est.
Poor in the midst of Riches, which is the most insupportable kind of Poverty.
The greatest and most wealthy Princes, are by Poverty and Want driven to the
most extreme Necessity: for can there be any more Extreme, than to become
Tyrants, and unjust Usurpers, of their Subjects Goods and Estates?

My Second Condition of Life was, to have Money of my own; wherein I so ordered
the matter, that I had soon laid up a very notable Sum out of so mean a
Fortune; considering with my self, that that only was to be reputed having,
which a Man reserved from his ordinary Expense, and that a Man could not
absolutely rely upon Revenue to receive, how clear soever his Estate might be.
For what, said I, if I should be surpised by such or such an Accident? And
after such like vain and vicious Imaginations, would very Learnedly, by this
hoarding of Money, provide against all Inconveniences; and could moreover
answer, such as objected to me, that the number of them was too infinite, that
it I could not lay up for all, I could however do it at least for some, and for
many. Yet was not this done without a great deal of Solicitude and Anxiety of
Mind. I kept it very close, and though I dare talk so boldly of my self, never
spoke of my Money, but falsely, as others do, who being Rich, pretend to be
Poor, and being Poor, pretend to be Rich, dispensing with their Consciences for
ever telling sincerely what they have. A ridiculous and shameful Prudence. Was
I to go a Journey? methought I was never enough provided: and the more I loaded
my self with Money, the more also was I loaded with Fear, one while of the
danger of the Roads, another of the Fidelity of him who had the charge of my
Sumpters, of whom, as some others that I know, I was never sufficiently Secure,
if I had him not always in my Eye. If I chanced to leave the Key of my Cabinet
behind me, what strange Jealousies, and Anxiety of Mind did I enter into? And
which was worse, without daring to acquaint any Body with it. My Mind was
eternally taken up with such things as these, so that all things considered,
there is more trouble in keeping Money, than in getting it. And if I did not
altogether so much as I say, or was not effectually so scandalously solicitous
of my Money, as I have made my self; yet it cost me something at least to govern
my self from being so, I reapt little or no advantage by what I had, and my
Expenses seemed nothing less to me, for having the more to spend: For, as Bion
said, The Hairy Men are as angry as the Ball'd to be pulled; and after you are
once accustomed to it, and have once set your heart upon your heap, it is mo
more at your Service, you cannot find in your heart to break it: It Is a
Building that you will fancy, must of necessity all tumble down to Ruin, if
you stir but the least Pibble, Necessity must first take you by the Throat,
before you can prevail upon your self to touch it: And I would sooner have
pawned any thing I had, or sold a House, and with much less constraint upon my
self, than have made the least breach in that beloved Purse, I had so cunningly
laid by. But the danger was, that a Man cannot easily prescribe certain limits
to this desire, (for they are hard to find in things that a Man conceives to be
good,) and to stint this good Husbandry so, that it may not degenerate into
Avarice: Men still being intent upon adding to the heap, and increasing the
stock, from Sum to Sum, till at last they vilely deprive themselves of the
enjoyment of their own proper Goods, and throw all into reserve, without making
any use of them at all. According to this Rule, they are the Richest People in
the World, who are set to guard the Goals, and to defend the Walls of a Wealthy
City. All Mony'd Men I conclude to be Covetous. Plato places Corporal or Humane
Riches in this Order; Health, Beauty, Strength and Riches; and Riches, says he,
is not blind, but very clear sighted, when illuminated by Prudence. Dionysius
the Son, did a very handsome Act upon this subject. He was informed, that one
of the Syracusans had hid a Treasure in the Earth, and thereupon sent to the
Man to bring it to him, which he accordingly did, privately reserving a small
part of it only to himself, with which he went to another City, where being
cured of his Appetite of Hoarding, he began to Live at a more liberal Rate.
Which Dionysius hearing, caused the rest of his Treasure to be restored to him,
saying, that since he had learnt how to use it, he very willingly returned it
back unto him.

I continued some years in this hoarding humor, when I know not what good
Demon fortunately put me out of it, as he did the Syracusan, and made me throw
abroad all my reserve at random; the pleasure of a certain Voyage I took of
very great expense, having made me spurn this fond Love of Money under foot, by
which means I am now fallen into a third way of living, (I speak what I think
of it) doubtless much more pleasant and moderate, which is, that I live at the
height of my Revenue, sometimes the one, sometimes the other may perhaps
exceed, but it is very little, and but rarely that they differ at all; I live
from Hand to Mouth, and content my self in having sufficient for my present,
and ordinary expense; for as to extraordinary occasions, all the laying up in
the World would never suffice; and it is the greatest folly imaginable to
expect, that fortune should ever sufficiently arm us against her self. It Is
with our own arms that we are to fight her, accidental ones will betray us in
the pinch of the business. If I lay up, it is for some near and designed
expense, and not to purchase Lands, of which I have no need, but to purchase
pleasure. Non esse cupidum, Cicero Parad. Ulti.
pecunia est: non esse emacem, vertigal est. Not to be Covetous, is Money, not
to be a Purchaser, is a Tribute. I neither am in any great apprehension of
wanting, nor in any desire of any more; Divinarum fructus est in copia; copiam
declarat satietas. Ibid.
The fruits of Riches lies in abundance, saciety declares abundance. And I am
very well pleased with my self, that this reformation in me, has fallen out in
an age naturally inclined to avarice, and that I see my self cleared of a folly
so common to Old Men, and the most ridiculous of all humane follies. Feraulez a
Man that had run through both fortunes, and found that the increase of
substance, was no increase of appetite, either to Eating, or Drinking,
Sleeping, or the enjoyment of his Wife, and who on the other side, felt the
care of his Economy lie heavy upon his Shoulders, as it does on mine; was
resolved to please a poor Young Man his faithful friend, who panted after
Riches, by making him a gift of all his, which was excessively great, and
moreover of all he was in the daily way of getting by the liberality of Cyrus,
his good master, and and by the War; conditionally that he should take care
handsomely to maintain, and plentifully to entertain him, as his Host, and his
Friend; which being accordingly embract, and performed, they afterward lived
very happily together, both of them equally content with the change of their
condition. An example that I could imitate with all my heart. And very much
approve the fortune of an ancient Prelate, whom I see to have so absolutely
stripped himself of his Purse, his Revenue, and Care; of his Expense; committing
them one while to one trusty Servant, and another while to another, that he has
spun out a long succession of years, as ignorant by this means of his Domestic
affairs, as a mere stranger. The confidence of another Man's virtue, is no light
evidence of a Man's own; besides, God is pleased to favor such a confidence, as
to what concerns him of whom I am speaking, I see no where a better governed
Family, nor a House more nobly, and constantly maintained than his, happy in
this to have stated his affairs to so just a proportion, that his Estate is
sufficient to do it without his care, or trouble, and without any hinderance,
either in the spending, or laying it up; to his other more decent, and quiet
employments, and that are more suitable both to his place, and liking. Plenty
then and indigence depend upon the opinion every one has of them; and Riches no
more than Glory, or Health, have no more either Beauty, or Pleasure, than he is
pleased to lend them, by whom they are possessed. Every one is well, or ill at
ease, according as he finds himself: Not he whom the World believes, but he who
believes himself to be so is content; and in him alone belief gives it self
being, and reality. Fortune does us neither good, nor hurt; she only presents
us the matter, and the seed, which our soul, more powerful than she, turns and
applies as she best pleases; being the sole cause, and Sovereign Mistress of
her own happy, or unhappy condition. All external accessions receive taste and
Color, from the internal constitution, as Clothes warm us, not with their
Heat, but our own, which they are fit to cover and keep in; and who would cover
a cold body, would do the same service for the cold, for so Snow and Ice are
preserved. And after the same manner that Study is a torment to a truant,
abstinence from Wine to a good fellow, frugality to the Spend-thrift, and
exercise to a Lazy tender bred fellow; so it is of all the rest. The things are
not so painful, and difficult of themselves, but our weakness or cowardice
makes them so. To judge of great, and high matters, requires a suitable soul,
otherwise we attribute the vice to them, which is really our own. A straight
Oar seems crooked in the Water: It does not only import that we see the thing,
but how, and after what manner we see it. But after all this, why amongst so
many discourses, that by so many arguments persuade Men to despise death, and
to endure pain, can we not find out one that makes for us? And of so many sorts
of imaginations as have so prevailed upon others, as to persuade them to do so,
why does not every one apply some one to himself, the most suitable to his own
humor? If he cannot away with a strong working Aposence to eradicate the Evil,
let him at least take a Lenitive to ease it. Opinio est quedam effeminata, ac
levis: Cicero. Thus. lib. 2.
nec in dolor magis, quam eadem in voluptate: qua quum liquessimus fluimusque
mollitia, apis aculeum sine clamore far non possumus. Totum in eo est, ut
tibi imperes. There is a certain light, and effeminate opinion, and that not
more in pain, than it is even in pleasure it self; by which, whilst we rest and
Wallow in ease, and wantonness, we cannot endure so much as the stinging of a
Be, without roaring. All that lies in it is only this, to command thy self: As
to the rest, a Man does not trangress Philosophy, by permitting the acrimony of
pains, and humane frailty to prevail so much above measure; for they will at
last be reduced to these invincible replies. If it be ill to live in necessity,
at least there is no necessity upon a man to live in necessity. No man
continues ill long but by his own fault. And who has neither the Courage to
Die; nor the Heart to Live: who will neither resist nor fly, what should a Man
do to him.

CHAP. XLI. Not to Communicate a Man's Honor.
OF all the follies of the World, that which is most universally received, is
the solicitude of Reputation and Glory; which we are fond of to that degree, as
to abandon Riches, Peace, Life, and Health, which are effectual, and
substantial goods, to pursue this vain Phantome, and empty word, that has
neither body; nor hold to be taken of it. Tasso. Can^^ 10.
La fama ch' invaghisce a un dolce suono
Gli superbi mortali, et par' si bella
Eun echo, un Sogno, anzi d'un Sogno un' ombra
Ch' ad ogni vento si dilegua, and sgombra.
Honor, that with such an alluring sound,
Proud mortals charms, and does appear so fair,
An Echo, Dream, shade of a Dream is found,
Dispersed abroad by every breath of air.
And of all the irrational humors of Men, it should seem that even the
Philosophers themselves have the most ado, and do the latest disengage
themselves from this, as the most resty and obstinate of all humane follies.
Quia etiam been proficientes animos tentare non tessat. Aug. de Civet. Dei.
Because it ceases not to attaque even the wisest, and best lettered minds.
There is not any one vice, of which reason does so clearly accuse the vanity,
as of that; but it is so deeply rooted in us, that I dare not determine,
whether any one ever clearly depestred himself from it or no. After you have
said all, and believed all has been said to its prejudice, it creates so
intestine inclination in opposition to your best arguments, that you have
little power, and constancy to resist it: for (as Cicero says) even those who
most controvert it, would yet that the Books they write should visit the light
under their own names, and seek to derive glory from seeming to despise it. All
other things are communicable, and fall into commerce; we lend our goods, and
stake our Lives for the necessity, and service of our friends; but to
communicate a man's Honor, and and to robe another with a man's own Glory, is
very rarely seen. And yet we have some examples of that kind. Catulus Luctatius
in the Cymbrian War, having done all that in him lay to make his flying
Soldiers face about upon the Enemy, ran himself at last away with the rest,
and counterfeited the Coward, to the end his men might rather seem to follow
their Captain, than to fly from the Enemy; which was to abandon his own
reputation, to palliate the shame of others. When Charles the Fifth came into
Provence in the year 1537. it is said, that Antonio de Leva seeing the Emperor
positively resolved upon this expedition, and believing it would redound very
much to his honor, did nevertheless very stiffly oppose it in the Council, to
the end that the entire glory of that resolution should be attributed to his
Master; and that it might be said, his own Wisdom and foresight had been such,
as that, contrary to the opinion of all, he had brought about so great, and so
generous an enterprise; which was to do him honor at his own expense. The
Thracian Ambassadors, coming to comfort Archileonida the Mother of Brasidas
upon the death of her Son, and commending him to that height, as to say he had
not left his like behind him; she rejected this private, and particular
commendation to attribute it to the public: Tell me not that (said she) I know
the City of Sparta has several Citizens both greater, and of greater valor
than he. In the Battle of Cressy, the Prince of Wales, being then very young,
had the Vantguard committed to him, and the main stress of the Battle happened to
be in that place, which made the Lords that were with him, finding themselves
overmatcht, to send to King Edward, that he would please to advance to their
relief; who thereupon enquiring of the condition his Son was in, and being
answered, that he was yet living, and on Horseback: I should then do him wrong
(said the King) now to go, and deprive him of the honor of winning this Battle
he has so long, and so bravely disputed, what hazard soever he runs, it shall
be entirely his own: and accordingly would neither go nor send, knowing that if
he went, it would be said all had been lost without his succor, and that the
honor of the Victory would be wholly attributed to him. Semper enim quod
postremum adjectum est, id rem totam videtur traxisse. For the last stroke to a
business seems to draw along with it the performance of the whole action. Many
at Rome thought, and would usually say, that the greatest of Scipio's Acts,
were in part due to Lelius, whose constant practice it was still to advance,
and Shoulder Scipio's Grandeur and Renown, without any care of his own. And
Theopompus King of Sparta to him who told him the republic could not miscarry
since he knew so well how to command, It Is rather (answered he) because the
people know so well how to obey. As Women succeeding to Peerages, had
notwithstanding their sex the privilege to assist, and give in their Votes in
the Causes that appertained to the jurisdiction of Peers: So the Ecclesiastical
Peers notwithstanding their profession, were obliged to assist our Kings in
their Wars, not only with their friends and servants, but in their own persons.
As the Bishop of Beauvais did, who being with Philip Augustus at the Battle of
Bouvines, had a notable share in that action; but he did not think it fit for
him to participate in the Fruit and Glory of that violent and Bloody Trade. He
with his own Hand reduced several of the Enemy that day to his mercy, whom he
delivered to the first Gentleman he met either to kill or receive them to
Quarter, referring the execution to another hand. As also did William Earl of
Salisbury to Messire Jean de Nesle, with a like subtlety of conscience to the
other we named before, he would Kill, but not wound him, and for that reason
ever fought with a Mace. And a certain person of my time, being reproacht by
the King, that he had laid hands on a Priest, stiffly and positively denied he
had done any such thing: the meaning of which was, he had cudgelled and kicked
him.

CHAP. XLII. Of the Inequality amongst us.
PLutarch says somewhere, that he does not find so great a difference betwixt
Beast and Beast, as he does betwixt Man and Man. Which is said in reference to
the internal Qualities and Perfections of the Soul. And, in truth, I find,
(according to my poor Judgment,) so vast a distance betwixt Epaminondas, and
some that I know, (who are yet Men of common sense,) that I could willingly
enhance upon Plutarch, and say, that there is more difference betwixt such and
such a Man, than there is betwixt such a Man and such a Beast: Hem vir viro
quid praestat! Terenee Phor. Act. 5 S^e. 3.

-- How much alas,
One Man another does surpass!
And that there are as many and innumerable degrees of Wits, as there are
Cubits betwixt this and Heaven. But as touching the Estimate of Men, it is
strange, that, our selves excepted, no other Creature is esteemed beyond its
proper Qualities, we commend a Horse for his Strength, and sureness of Foot,
Juvenal Sat. 8.
-- Volucrem.
Sic laudamus equum, facili cui plurima palma
Fervet, and exultat rauco victoria circo.
So we commend the Horse for being fleet,
Who many Palms by Breath and Speed does get,
And which the Trumpets in the Circle grace,
With their hoarse Levets for his well run Race.
and not for his Rich Caparisons; a Greyhound for his share of Heels, not for
his fine Collar; a Hawk for her Wing, not for her Gests and Bells. Why, in like
manner, do we not value a Man for what is properly his own? He has a great
Train, a beautiful Palace, so much Credit, so many Thousand Pounds a Year, and
all these are about him, but not in him. You will not buy a Pig in a Poke: if
you cheapen a Horse, you will see him stripped of his Housing-cloaths, you will
see him naked and open to your Eye; or if he be Clothed, as they anciently
were wont to present them to Princes to Sell, it is only on the less important
parts, that you may not so much consider the beaty of his Color, or the
breadth of his Crupper, as principally to examine his Limbs, Eyes and Feet,
which are the Members of greatest use: Regibus hic mos est, ubi equos
mercantur, Horace lib. 1. Sat. 2.
opertos
Juspiciunt, ne si facies, ut saepe, decora
Molli fulta pede est, emptorem inducat hiantem.
Quod pulchrae clunes, breve quod caput, ardua cervix.
When Kings Steeds Clothed, as it is their manner, Buy,
They straight examine very Curiously,
Lest a short Head, a thin and well raised Crest,
A broad spread Buttock, and an ample Chest,
Should all be propt with an old beaten Hoof,
To gull the Buyer, when they come to proof.
Why, in giving your Estimate of a Man, do you Prize him wrapped and muffled up
in Clothes? He then discovers nothing to you, but such parts as are not in the
least his own; and conceals those, by which alone one may rightly judge of his
Value. It Is the price of the Blade, that you enquire into, and not of the
Scabbard: You would not peradventure bid a Farthing for him, if you saw him
stripped. You are to judge him by himself, and not by what he wears. And as one
of the Ancients very pleasantly said, do you know why you repute him Tall? You
reckon withal the height of his Chepines, whereas the Pedestal is no part of
the Statue. Measure him him without his Stilts, let him lay aside his Revenues,
and his Titles, let him present himself in his Shirt, then examine if his Body
be sound and spritely, active and disposed to perform its Functions? What Soul
has he? Is it Beautiful, capable, and happily provided of all her Faculties? Is
she Rich of what is her own, or of what she has Borrowed? Has Fortune no hand
in the Affair? Can she, without winking, stand the lightning of Swords; is she
indifferent, whether her Life expire by the Mouth, or through the Throat? Is
she Settled, Even and Content? This is what is to be examined, and by that you
are to judge of the vast differences betwixt Man, and Man. Is he Ed. lib. 2.
Sat. 7.
-- Sapiens, sibique imperiosus
Quem neque pauperies, neque mors, neque vincula terrent,
Responsare cupidinibus, contemnere honores
Fortis, and in seipso totus teres atque rotundus,
Externi ne quid valeat per laeve morari,
In quem manta ruit semper fortuna?
Wife, and commanding over his Appetite,
One whom, nor Want, nor Death, nor Bonds, can Fright,
To check his Lusts, and Honors scorn, so stout,
And in himself so round and clear throughout,
That no External thing can stop his course,
And on whom Fortune vainly tries her force.
such a Man is raised Five Hundred Fathoms above Kingdoms and Dutchies, he is
an Absolute Monarch in and to himself. Sapens Pol ipse fingit fortunam sibi.
Plaut Tri. Act. 2. Sce. 2.

The Wise Man his own Fortune makes.
What remains for him to Covet, or Desire. -- Nonne videmus
Nil aliud sibi naturam latrare, Luere. lib. 2.
nisi ut quoi
Corpore sejunctus dolor absit, mente fruatur,
Jucundo sensu cura, semotus metuque?
We see that Nature to no more aspires;
Nor to her self a greater good requires,
Than that, whose Body is from Dolours free,
He should his Mind with more Serenity,
And a more pleasing Sense enjoy, quite clear
From those two grand Disturbers, Grief and Fear.
Compare with such a one the common Rabble of Mankind, stupid and mean
Spirited, Servile, Instable, and continually floating with the Tempest of
various Passions, that tosses and tumbles them to and fro, and all depending
upon others, and you will find a greater distance, than betwixt Heaven and
Earth; and yet the blindness of common usage is such, that we make little or no
account of it. Whereas, if we consider a Peasant, and a King, a Nobleman, and
a Villain, a Magistrate, and a private Man, a Rich Man, and a Poor, there
appears a vast disparity, though they differ no more, (as a Man may say,) than
in their Breeches. In Thrace, the King was distinguished from his People, after
a very pleasant manner; He had a Religion by himself, a God of his own, and
which his Subjects were not to presume to Adore, which was Mercury, whilst, on
the other side, he disdained to have any thing to do with theirs, Mars, Bacchus
and Diana. And yet they are no other than Pictures, that make no Essential
Dissimilitude; for as you see Actors in a Play, representing the person of a
Duke, or an Emperor, upon the Stage, and immediately after, in the Tiring
Room, return to their true and original Condition; so the Emperor, whose Pomp
and Luster, does so dazzle you in Public, Scilicet, Lucre. lib. 4.
and grandes viridi cum luce smaragdi
Auro includuntur, teriturque Thalassina vestis
Assidue, and veneris sudorem exercita petat.
Great Emeralds richly are in Gold enchast,
To dart Green Luster, and the Sea-greenvest
Continually is worn and rubbed to Frets,
Whilst it Imbibes the Juice that Venus Sweats.
do but peep behind the Curtain, and you will see nothing more than an ordinary
Man, and peradventure, more Contemptible than the meanest of his Subjects. Ille
beatus introrsum est, Senec. Ep. 115.
istius bracteata felicitas est. True Happiness lies within, the other is but a
counterfeit Felicity. Cowardice, Irresolution, Ambition, Spite and Envy, are as
Predominant in him, as in another. Non enim gazae, Horace lib. 2. Ode. 16.
neque consularis
Summovet lictor, miseros tumultus
Mentis, and curas laqueata circum
Tecta volentes.
For neither Wealth, Honors, nor Offices,
Can the wild Tumults of the Mind appease,
Nor chase those Cares, that with unweari'd Wings
Hover about the Palaces of Kings.
Nay, Solitude and Fear, attack him even in the Center of his Battalions.
Lucre. lib. 2.
Re veraque metus hominum, curaeque sequaces,
Nec metuunt sonitus armorum, nec fera tela,
Audacterque inter Reges, rerumque potentes
Versantur, neque fulgorem reverentur ab auro.
For Fears and Cares warring with Humane Hearts,
Fear not the clash of Arms, nor points of Darts;
But with great Kings and Potentates makes Bold,
Maugre their Purple, and their Glittering Gold.
Do Fevers, Gouts and Apoplexies, spare them any more, than one of us? When
Old Age hangs heavy upon a Princes Shoulders, can the Yeomen of his Guard ease
him of the Burden? When he is Astonished with the apprehension of Death, can
the Gentlemen of his Bedchamber comfort and assure him? When Jealousy, or any
other Caprichio swims in his Brain, can our Complements and Ceremonies restore
him to his good Humor? The Canopy Embroidered with Pearl and Gold, he lies
under, has no Virtue against a violent fit of the Stone or Cholick. Nec calidae
citius decedunt corpore febres Idem.

Textilibus si in picturis, estroque rubenti
Jacteris, quam si plebeia in vest cubandum est.
Nor sooner will a Calenture depart,
Although in figured Tissues lodged thou art,
Than if thy homely Couch were meanly spread
With poorest Blankets of the coursest thread.
The Flatterers of Alexander the Great, possessed him, that he was the Son of
Jupiter: But being one Day Wounded, and observing the Blood stream from his
Wound: What say you now, (my Masters,) said he, is not this Blood of a Crimson
Color, and purely Humane? This is not of the Complexion with that which Homer
makes to issue from the Wounded Gods. The Poet Hermedorus had Writ a Poem in
Honor of Antigonus, wherein he called him the Son of the Sun: But who has the
emptying of my Closestool, (said Antigonus) will find to the contrary. He is
but a Man at best, and if he be Deformed, or ill Qualified from his Birth, the
Empire of the Universe, can neither mend his Shape, nor his Nature; Perseus.
Sat. 2.
-- Puellae
Hunc rapiant, quidquid culcaverit hic, rosa fiat.
Though Maids should Ravish him, and where he goes,
In every step he takes, should spring a Rose.
what of all that, if he be a Fool and a Sot! even Pleasure and good Fortune,
are not relished without Vigor and Understanding. Ter. Heart. Act. 1. Sce.
Haec perinde sunt, ut illius animus qui ed possidet,
Qui uti scit, ei bona, illi, qui non utitur recte mala.
Things to the Souls of their Possessors square,
Goods if well used, if ill, they Evils are.
Whatever the Benefits of Fortune are, they yet require a Pallat fit to relish
and taste them: It Is Fruition, and not possession, that renders us Happy.
Horace lib. 1. Epist. 2.
Non domus, and fundus, non aeris acervus and auri,
Aegroto domini deduxit corpore febres,
Non animo curas, valeat possessor oportet,
Qui comportatis rebus been cogitat uti,
Qui cupit, aut metuit, juvat illum sit domus aut res,
Vt lippum pictae Tabulae, fomenta podacram.
Manners, or heaps of Brass and Gold, afford
No ease at all to their Febritick Lord;
Nor can they cure his Cares; it is requisite
The Good's Possessor know the use of it.
Who Fears or Covets, these so help him out,
As Pictures Blind Folks, Cataplasmes the Gout.
He is a Sot, his Taste is palled and flat; he no more enjoys what he has, than
one that has a Cold, relishes the flavor of Canary; or than a Horse is
sensible of his Rich Caparison. Plato is in the right, when he tells us, that
Health, Beauty, Vigor and Riches, and all the other things called Goods, are
equally Evil to the Unjust, as Good to the Just, and the Evil on the contrary
the same. And therefore, where either the Body or the Mind, are in disorder, to
what use serve these external Conveniences? Considering, that the least prick
with a Pin, or the least Passion of the Soul, is sufficient to deprive us of
the pleasure of being sole Monarch of the World. At the first twitch of the
Gout, it signifies much to be called Sir, and your Majesty; Hor. lib. 1. El. 2.
Totus, and argento conflatus, totus, and auro.
Although his Chests are crammed, whilst they will hold,
With immense Sums of Silver Coin and Gold.
does he not forget his Palaces and Grandeurs? If he be Angry, can his being a
Prince, keep him from looking Red, and looking Pale, and grinding his Teeth,
like a Madman? Now if he be a Man of parts, and well descended, Royalty adds
very little to his Happiness: Hor. lib. 1. Ep. 12.
Si ventri been, si lateri est pedibusque tuis, nil
Divitiae poterant regales addere majus.
If thou art right and sound from Head to Foot,
A Kings Revenue can add nothing to it.
He discerns, it is nothing but Counterfeit and Gullery. Nay perhaps, he would
be of King Seleucus opinion, That who knew the weight of a Scepter, would not
daign to stoop to take it up; which he said, in reference to the great and
painful Duty incumbent upon a good King. Doubtless it can be no easy task to
Rule others, when we find it so hard a matter to Govern our selves. And as to
the thing Dominion, that seems so sweet and charming, the frailty of Humane
Wisdom, and the difficulty of choice in things that are new and doubtful, to us
considered, I am very much of opinion, that it is much more pleasant to follow,
than to lead; and that it is a great settlement and satisfaction of Mind, to
have only one Path to walk in, and to have none to answer for, but a Man's
self; Vt satius multo jam sit, parere quietum. Lucret. lib. 5.

Quam regere imperio res velle.
So that it is better Calmly to Obey,
Than in the Storms of State to Rule and Sway.
To which we may add that saying of Cyrus, That no Man was fit to Rule, but he
who in his own Worth was of greater Value, than all those he was to Govern: But
King Hiero in Xenophon, says further, That in the Fruition even of Pleasure it
self, they are in a worse condition, than private Men; forasmuch as the
opportunities and facility they have of commanding those things at Will, takes
off from the Delight. Pinguis amor, nimiumque potens, Ovid. Am^^ l. 2. Ele. 19.
in taedia nobis
Vertitur, and Stomacho dulcis ut esca necet.
Too Potent Love, in Loathing never ends,
As highest Sauce the Stomach most offends.
Can we think, that the Singing-Boys of the Quire, take any great delight in
their own Music? The Saciety does rather render it troublesome and tedious to
them. Feasts, Balls, Masquerades and Tiltings, delight such as but rarely see,
and desire to be at such Solemnities: But having been frequent at such
Entertainments, the relish of them grows flat and insipid: Nay, Women (the
greatest Temptation) do not so much delight those who make a common practice of
the sport. He who will not give himself leisure to be Thirsty, can never find
the true pleasure of Drinking. Farces and Tumbling Tricks, are pleasant to the
Spectators, but a pain to those by whom they are performed. And that this is
effectually so, we see that Princes divert themselves sometimes in disguising
their Quality, a while to depose themselves, and to stoop to the poor and
ordinary way of Living of the meanest of their People. Hor. ear. lib. 3. Ode 29.
Plerumque gratae Principibus vires,
Mundaeque parvo sublare pauperum
Coenae sine aulaeis, and ostro,
Solicitum explicuere frontem.
Even Princes with Variety tempted are,
Which makes them often feed on clean homely Fare,
In a poor Hut, laying aside the State,
Purple and Pomp, which should on Grandeur wait,
In such a Solitude to smooth the Frown
Forced by the weighty Pressure of a Crown.
Nothing is so distastful and disappointing, as Abundance. What Appetite would
not be baffled, to see Three Hundred Women at his Mercy, as the Grand Seigneor
has in his Seraglio? And What Fruition of Pleasure, or Taste of Recreation, did
he of his Ancestors reserve to himself, who never went a Hawking without Seven
Thousand Falconers? And besides all this, I Fancy that this Luster of Grandeur
brings with it no little disturbance and uneasiness upon the Enjoyment of the
most tempting pleasures, they are too conspicuous, and lie too open to every
ones view. Neither do I know to what end a man should any more require them to
conceal their Errors, since what is only reputed indiscretion in us, they know
very well the people in them brand with the names of Tyranny, and contempt of
the Laws; and besides their proclivity to Vice, are apt to censure, that it is
a heightning to pleasure to them, to Insult over the Laws, and to trample upon
Public Ordinances. Plato indeed, in his Gorgeas defines, a Tyrant to be one,
who in a City has License to do whatever his own Will leads him to. And by
reason of this Impunity, the Overtacting and Publication of their Vices, does
oft-times more Mischief, than the Vice it self. Every one fears to be pried
into, and discovered in their Evil Courses; but Princes are, even to their very
Gestures, Looks and Thoughts, the People conceiving they have right and title
to Censure, and be Judges of them: Besides, that the Blemishes of the Great,
naturally appear greater, by reason of the Eminency and Luster of the place
where they are seated; and that a Mole or a Wart appears greater in them, than
the greatest Deformity in others. And this is the reason why the Poets feign
the Amors of Jupiter to be performed in the disguises of so many borrowed
shapes, that amongst the many Amorous Practices they lay to his charge, there
is only one, as I remember, where he appears in his own Majesty and Grandeur.
But let us return to Hiero, who complains of the Inconveniences he found in his
Royalty, in that he could not look abroad, and Travel the World at liberty,
being as it were a Prisoner to the Bounds and Limits of his own Dominion: And
that in all his Actions, he was evermore surrounded with an importunate Crowd.
And in truth, to see our Kings set all alone at Table, environed with so many
People prating about them, and so many strangers staring upon them, as they
always are, I have often been moved, rather to pity, than to envy, their
condition. King Alphonsus was wont to say, that in this, Asses were in a better
condition than Kings, their Masters permitting them to feed at their own ease
and pleasure; a favor that Kings cannot obtain of their Servants. And it would
never sink into my fancy, that it could be of any great benefit to the Life of
a Man of Sense, to have Twenty People prating about him, when he is at Stool;
or that the Services of a Man of Ten Thousand Livers a Year, or that has taken
Casal, or defended Siena, should be either more commodious, or more acceptable
to him, than those of a good Groom of the Chamber, that understands his place.
The Advantages of Sovereignty, are but Imaginary upon the matter: Every degree
of Fortune has in it some Image of Principality. Caesar calls all the Lords of
France, having Free-Franchise within their own Demeans, Roylets; and in truth,
the Name of Sire excepted, they go pretty far toward Kingship; for do but look
into the Provinces remote from Court, as Brittany for example, take notice of
the Attendance, the Vassals, the Officers, the Employments, Service, Ceremony
and State, of a Lord that Lives retired from Court, is constant to his own
House, and that has been bred up amongst his own Tenants and Servants; and
observe withal, the flight of his Imagination, there is nothing more Royal: He
hears talk of his Master once a Year, as of a King of Persia, or Peru, without
taking any further notice of him, than some remote Kindred, his Secretary keeps
in some Musty Record. And, to speak the truth, our Laws are easy enough, so
easy, that a Gentleman of France scarce feels the weight of Sovereignty pinch
his Shoulders above Twice in his Life. Real and effectual Subjection, only
concerns such amongst us, as voluntarily thrust their Necks under the Yoke, and
who design to get Wealth and Honors by such Services: For a Man that loves his
own Fireside, and can Govern his House, without falling by the Ears with his
Neighbors, or engaging in Suits of Law, is as free, as a Duke of Venice.
Paucos servitus, plures servitutem tenent. Servitude seizes of few, but many
seize of her. But that which Hiero is most concerned at, is, that he finds
himself stripped of all Friendship, and deprived of all Natural Society,
wherein the true and most perfect Fruition of Humane Life does consist. For
what Testimony of affection and good will, can I extract from him, that owes
me, whether he will or no, all that he is able to do? Can I form any assurance
of his real Respect to me, from his humble way of speaking, and submissive
Behavior, when they are Ceremonies, it is not in his Choice to deny? The
Honor we receive from those that Fear us, is not Honor, those Respects are
paid to my Royalty, and not to me. Maximum hoc Regni bonum est, Seneca Thiest.
Act. 2. Scae. 1.

Quod facta domini cogitur populus sui
Quam far, tam Laudare.
It Is the great Benefit of Kings, that they
Who are by Law Subjected to their Sway,
Are Bound, in all their Princes say or do,
Not only to Submit, but Praise it too.
Do I not see, that the Wicked, and the good King, he that is hated, and he
that is beloved, has the one as much Reverence paid him, as the other? My
Predecessor was, and my Successor shall be, served with the same Ceremony and
State. If my Subjects do me no harm, it is no Evidence of any good Affection;
why should I look upon it as such, seeing it is not in their Power if they
would? No one follows me, or Obeys my Commands, upon the account of any
Friendship betwixt him and me; there can be no contracting of Friendship, where
there is so little relation and correspondence: My own Height has put me out of
the Familiarity of, and Intelligence with men: There is too great disparity and
disproportion betwixt us; they follow me either upon the account of decency,
and custom; or rather my fortune, than me, to increase their own: All they say
to me, or do for me, is forced and dissembled, their liberty being on all parts
restrained by the great power and authority I have over them. I see nothing
about me but what is dissembled, and disguised. The Emperor Julian being one
day applauded for his exact Justice: I should be proud of these praises, said
he, did they come from persons that durst condemn, or disapprove the contrary,
in case I should do it. All the real advantages of Princes are common to them
with Men of meaner condition: It Is for the Gods to Mount winged Horses, and
feed upon Ambrosia: Earthly Kings have no other Sleep, nor other Appetite, than
we; the Steel they Arm themselves withal, is of no better temper, than that we
also use; their Crowns do neither defend them from the Rain, nor Sun.
Dioclesian who wore a Crown so Fortunate and Revered, resigned it, to retire
himself to the Felicity of a private Life: And some time after the necessity of
Public Affairs, requiring, that he should reassume his Charge, he made Answer
to those who came to Court him to it, You would not offer, (said he) to
persuade me to this, had you seen the fine Order of Trees I have Planted in my
Orchard, and the fair Melows I have Sowed in my Garden. In Anacharsis his
Opinion, the happiest Estate of Government would be, where all other things
being equal, Precedence should be measured out by the Virtues, and Repulses by
the Vices of Men. When King Pyrrhus prepared for his Expedition into Italy, his
Wise Counselor Cyneas, to make him sensible of the Vanity of his Ambition;
Well Sir, (said he,) to what End do you make all this Mighty Preparation? To
make my self Master of Italy, (replied the King). And what after that is done,
(said Cyneas?) I will pass over into Gaul and Spain, said the other. And what
then? I will then go to Subdue Africa; and lastly, when I have brought the
whole World to my Subjection, I will sit down and rest Content at my own Ease.
For God sake, Sir, (replied Cyneas,) tell me what hinders, that you may not, if
you please, be now in the condition you speak of? Why do you not now at this
instant, settle your self in the State you seem to aim at, and spare the Labor
and Hazard you interpose?

Lucret. l. 5.
Nimirum quia non been norat quae esset habendi
Finis and omnino quoad crescat vera voluptas.
The end of being Rich he did not know;
Nor to what pitch Felicity should grow.
I will conclude with an old Versickle, that
I think very pat to the purpose.
Corn. Nep. in vit. A. Hici.
Mores cuique sui fingunt fortunam.
Himself, not Fortune, every one must blame,
Since Men's own Manners do their Fortunes frame.
CHAP. XLIII. Of Sumptuary Laws.
THE way by which our Laws attempt to regulate idle and vain expenses in Meat
and Clothes, seems to be quite contrary to the end designed. The true way would
be to beget in men a contempt of Silks and Gold, as vain, frivolous, and
useless; whereas we augment to them the Honors, and enhance the value of such
things, which sure is a very improper way to create a disgust. For to enact,
that none but Princes shall eat Turbet, shall wear Velvet, or Gold-Lace, and
interdict these things to the people, what is it but to bring them into a
greater esteem, and to set every one more a gog to eat, and wear them? Let
Kings (a Gods name) leave off these Ensigns of Grandeur, they have others
enough besides; those excesses are more excusable in any other, than a Prince.
We may learn by the Example of several Nations, better ways of exterior
distinction of quality (which truly I conceive to be very requisite in a State)
enough, without fostering up this corruption, and manifest inconvenience to this
effect. It Is strange how suddenly, and with how much ease custom in these
indifferent things establishes it self, and becomes authority. We had scarce
worn Cloth a year (in compliance with the Court) for the Mourning of Henry the
Second, but that Silks were already grown into such contempt with every one,
that a man so clad, was presently Concluded a Citizen. The Silks were divided
betwixt the Physicians, and Surgeons, and though all other people almost
went in the same habit, there was notwithstanding in one thing or other,
sufficient distinction of the calling, and conditions of men. How suddenly do
greasy Chamois Doublets become the fashion in our Armies, whilst all neatness
and riches of habit fall into contempt? Let Kings but lead the dance, and begin
to leave off this expense, and in a Month the business will be done throughout
the Kingdom, without an Edict; we shall all follow. It should be rather
proclaimed on the contrary, that no one should wear Scarlet, or Goldsmiths
work, but Whores and Tumblers. Zeleucus with the like invention reclaimed the
corrupted manners of the Locrians. Whose Laws were, that no free woman should
be allowed any more than one Maid to follow her unless she was drunk: nor was
to stir out of the City by night, wear Jewels of Gold about her, or go in an
Embroidred Robe, unless she was a professed and public Whore: The Bravo's, and
Ruffians excepted, no man was to wear a Gold Ring, nor be seen in one of those
effeminate Vests woven in the City of Miletum. By which infamous exceptions, he
discreetly diverted his Citizens, from Superfluities, and pernicious pleasures,
and it was a project of grean Utility to attract men by honor, and Ambition to
their Duty and Obedience. Our Kings may do what they please in such external
Reformations, their own inclinations stands in this case for a Law, Quicquid
Principes faciunt, Quinct. Decla. 4.
precipere videnter. What Princes themselves do, they seem to enjoin others.
Whatever is done at Court passes for a rule through the rest of France. Let the
Courtiers but fall out with these abominable Breeches, that discover so much of
those parts should be concealed: These great Bellied Doublets, that make us
look like I know not what; and are so unfit to admit of Arms; these long
effeminate Locks of Hair: This foolish Custom of Kissing, what we present to
our equals and our Hands in saluting them; a ceremony in former times only due
to Princes: And that a Gentleman shall appear in place of respect without his
Sword, unbuttoned and untrust, as though he came from the House of Office; and
that contrary to the custom of our Forefathers, and the particular privilege
of the Nobless of this Kingdom, we shall stand a long time bare to them in what
place soever, and the same to a hundred others, so many Tierces and Quarts of
Kings we have got now a days, and also other the like innovations, and
degenerate customs; they will see them all presently Vanished and Cried down.
These are, it is true, but superficial Errors; but however of ill consequence,
and it is enough to inform us that the whole Fabric is Crazy and Tottering,
when we see the roughcast of our Walls to cleave and split. Plato in his Laws,
esteems nothing of more pestiferous consequence to his City, than to give
Young Men the liberty of introducing any change in their Habits, Gestures,
Dances, Songs, and Exercises, from one form to another; shifting from this to
that, Hunting after Novelties, and applauding the Inventors; by which means
Manners are corrupted, and the old institutions come to be nauseated and
despised. In all things saving only in those that are evil a change is to be
feared; even the change of Seasons, Winds, Viands, and Humors. And no Laws are
in their true credit, but such to which God has given so long a continuance,
that no one knows their beginning, or that there ever was any other.

CHAP. XLIV. Of Sleep.
REason directs, that we should always go the same way; but not always the same
pace. And consequently though a Wise Man ought not so much to give the Reins to
humane Passions, as to let them deviate him from the right Path; he may
notwithstanding without prejudice to his Duty, leave it to them to hasten, or
to slack his speed, and not fix himself like a motionless, and insensible
Coloss. Could Virtue it self put on Flesh and Blood, I believe the Pulse would
Beat faster going on to an Assault, than in going to Dinner: That is to say,
there is a necessity she should Heat, and be moved upon this account. I have
taken notice, as of an extraordinary thing of some great Men, who in the
highest Enterprises, and greatest Dangers, have detained themselves in so
settled and serene a Calm, as not at all to hinder their usual Gayety, or break
their Sleep. Alexander the Great, on the Day assigned for that furious Battle
betwixt him and Darius, slept so profoundedly, and so long in the Morning, that
Parmenio was forced to enter his Chamber, and coming to his Bedside to call him
several times by his Name, the time to go to Fight compelling him so to do. The
Emperor Otho, having put on a resolution to Kill himself the same night, after
having settled his Domestic affairs, divided his Money amongst his Servants,
and set a good edge upon a Sword he had made choice of for the purpose, and now
staying only to be satisfied whether all his friends were retired in safety, he
fell into so sound a sleep, that the Gentlemen of his Chamber heard him Snore.
The death of this Emperor has in it circumstances parallelling that of the
great Cato, and particularly this before related: For Cato being ready to
dispatch himself, whilst he only staid his hand in expectation of the return of
a messenger he had sent, to bring him news whether the Senators he had sent
away, were put out from the Port of Vtica, he fell into so sound a sleep, that
they had him into the next Room; and he whom he had sent to the Port, having
awaked him to let him know, that the Tempestuous Weather had hindered the
Senators from putting to Sea; he dispatched away another messenger, and
composing himself again in the Bed, settled again to sleep, and did so, till by
the return of the last messenger, he had certain intelligence they were gone.
We may here further compare him with Alexander too, in that great and dangerous
Storm that threatened him by the Sedition of the Tribune Metellus, who
attempting to publish a Decree for the calling in of Pompey with his Army into
the City, at the time of Catilines Conspiracy, was only, and that stoutly
opposed by Cato, so that very sharp language and bitter menaces past betwixt
them in the Senate about that affair; but it was the next day in the Fore-Nune,
that the controversy was to be decided; where Metellus, besides the favor of
the people, and of Caesar, (at that time of Pompeys Faction) was to appear
accompanied with a Rabble of Slaves and Fencers; and Cato only fortified with
his own Courage and Constancy; so that his Relations, Domestics, and several
virtuous people of his Friends were in great apprehensions for him. And to that
Degree, that some there were who past over the whole Night without Sleep,
Eating, or Drinking, for the manifest danger they saw him running into; of
which his Wife and Sisters did nothing but Weep, and torment themselves in his
House; whereas he, on the contrary, Comforted every one, and after having
Supped after his usual manner, went to Bed, and slept profoundly till Morning,
that one of his fellow Tribunes roused him to go to the encounter. The
knowledge we have of the greatness of this Man's Courage by the rest of his
Life, may warrant us securerly to judge, that his indifference proceeded from a
soul so much elevated above such accidents, that he disdained to let it take
any more hold of his Fancy, than any other ordinary adventure. In the Naval
Engagement, that Augustus won of Sextus Pompeius in Sicily, just as they were
to begin the Fight he was so fast asleep, that his Friends were compelled to
wake him to give the Signal of Battle: And this was it that gave Mark Anthony
afterward occasion to reproach him, that he had not the Courage so much as
with open Eyes, to behold the order of his own Squadrons, and not to have dared
to present himself before the Soldiers, till first Agrippa had brought him
news of the Victory obtained. But as to the business of young Marius, who did
much worse (for the day of the last Battle against Sylla, after he had ordered
his Army, given the word and Signal of Battle, he laid him down under the Shade
of a Tree to repose himself, and fell so fast asleep, that the Rout, and Fight
of his Men could hardly wake him, having seen nothing of the Fight) he is said
to have been at that time so extremely spent, and worn out with Labor and want
of Sleep, that Nature could hold out no longer. Now upon what has been said,
the Physicians may determine, whether sleep be so necessary that our lives
depend upon it: for we read that King Perseus of Macedon being Prisoner at
Rome, was waked to Death; but Pliny instances such as have lived long without
sleep. Herodotus speaks of Nations, where the Men sleep and wake by half years:
And they who write the Life of the Wise Epimenides, affirm that he slept seven
and fifty years together.

CHAP. XLV. Of the Battle of Dreux.
OUr Battle of Dreux, is remarkable for several extraordinary accidents: But
such as have no great kindness for the Duke of Guise, nor do much favor his
reputation, are willing to have him thought too blame, and that his making a
Halt and delaying time with this Forces he Commanded, whilst the Constable who
was General of the Army was Rackt through and through with the Enemies
Artillery, his Battalion Routed, and himself taken Prisoner; is not to be
excused: And that he had much better have ran the hazard of charging the Enemy
in the Flank, than staying for the advantage of falling in upon the Rear, to
suffer so great and so important a loss. But, besides what the event
demonstrated, who will consider it without passion or prejudice, will easily be
induced to confess, that the aim and design not of a Captain only, but of every
Private Soldier ought to look at the Victory in general; and that no
particular occurrences, how nearly soever they may concern his own interest,
should divert him from that pursuit. Philopemen in an encounter with
Machanidas, having sent before a good strong party of his Archers, to begin the
Skirmish, which were by the Enemy Routed, and pursued; who pursuing them, and
pushing on the Fortune of their Arms in the heat of Victory; and in that
pursuit passing by the Battalion where Philopemen was, though his Soldiers
were impatient to fall on, yet he was better tempered, and did not think fit to
stir from his post, nor to present himself to the Enemy to relieve his Men, but
having suffered them to be chaste about the Field, and Cut in pieces before his
Face, then charged in upon their Battalion of Foot, when he saw them left Naked
by their Horse; and notwithstanding that they were Lacedaemonians, yet taking
them in the nick, when thinking themselves secure of the Victory, they began to
disorder their Ranks, he did his business with great facility, and then put
himself in pursuit of Machanidas. Which case is very like that of Monsieur de
Guise: In that Bloody Battle betwixt Agesilaus, and the Baeotians, which
Zenophon, who was present at it, reports to be the rudest and most Bloody that
he had ever seen: Agesilaus waved the advantage that Fortune presented him, to
let the Baeotians Battalion pass by, and then to charge them in the Rear, how
certain soever he made himself of the Victory: Judging it would rather be an
effect of Conduct than Valor, to proceed that way: And therefore, to show his
prowess, rather chose with a wonderful ardour of Courage, to charge them in the
Front; but he was well beaten, and wounded for his pains, and constrained at
last to disengage himself, and to take the course he had at first neglected;
opening his Battalion to give way to this torrent of the Baeotians fury and
being past by, taking notice that they marched in disorder, like men that
thought themselves out of danger, he then pursued, and charged them in their
Flanks and Rear; yet could not so prevail as to bring it to so general a Rout,
but that they leisurely retreated, still Facing about upon him, till they were
retired into safety.

CHAP. XLVI. Of Names.
WHat variety of Herbs soever are shuffled together in the Dish, yet the whole
Mass is swallowed up in one name of a Sallet. In line manner, under the
consideration of Names, I will make a hodg-podg of differing Articles. Every
Nation has certain Names, that, I know not why, are taken in no good sense, as
with us, John, William, and Benoist. In the Genealogy of Princes, also there
seems to be certain Names fatally affected, as the Ptolomies of Egypt, the
Henry's of England, the Charles's of France, the Baldwins of Flanders, and the
Williams of our Ancient Aquitaine, from whence, it is said, the Name of Guyenne
has its derivation; which would seem far fetched, were there not as rude
derivations in Plato himself. It Is a very frivolous thing in it self, but
nevertheless worthy to be Recorded for the strangeness of it, which is writ by
an Eyewitness; that Henry Duke of Normandy, Son of Henry the Second, King of
England, making a great Feast in France, the concourse of Nobility and Gentry
was so great, that being, for Sports sake, divided into Troops, according to
their Names, in the first Troop, which consisted of Williams, there were found
an Hundred and Ten Knights sitting at the Table of that Name, without reckoning
the ordinary Gentlemen, and their Servants. It is as pleasant to distinguish
the Tables by the Names of the Guests, as it was in the Emperor Geta, to
distinguish the several Courses of his Meat, by the first Letters of the Meats
themselves, where those that began with B, were served up together, as Brawn,
Beef, Breame, Bustards and Becca-ficos, and so of others. Now there is a
saying, that it is a good thing to have a good Name, that is to say, Credit,
and a good Repute: But besides this, it is really convenient, to have such a
Name as is easy of pronunciation, and easy to be remembered; by reason, that
Kings, and other great Persons, do by that means the more easily know, and the
more hardly forget us; and indeed, of our own Servants, we more frequently call
and employ those, whose Names are most ready upon the Tongue. I my self have
seen Henry the Second, when he could not for his heart hit of a Gentleman's Name
of our Country of Gascony; and moreover, was fain to call one of the Queen's
Maids of Honor, by the general Name of her Family, her own being so difficult
to pronounce or remember. And Socrates thinks it worthy a Fathers Care, to give
fine Names to his Children. It Is said, that the Foundation of Nostre Dame la
Grande, at Poitiers, took its Original from hence, that a Debauched Young
Fellow formerly Living in that place, having got to him a Whore, and at her
first coming in, asking her Name, and being answered, that it was Mary, he felt
himself so suddenly darted through with the Awe of Religion, and the Reverence
to that Sacred Name of the Blessed Virgin, that he not only imediately put his
Lewd Mistress away from him, but became a reformed Man, and so continued the
remainder of his Life: And that in consideration of this Miracle, there was
Erected upon the place, where this Young Man's House stood, first a Chapel
Dedicated to our Lady, and afterward the Church that we now see standing
there. This Auricular Reproof wrought upon the Conscience, and that right into
the Soul: This that follows, insinuated it self merely be the sense. Pythagoras
being in company with some wild Young Fellows, and perceiving that, heated with
the Feast, they complotted to go Violate an Honest House, commanded the Singing
Wench to alter her Wanton Airs; and by a Solemn, Grave and Spondaick Music,
gently enchanted and laid asleep their Ardour. Will not Posterity say, that our
Modern Reformation has been wonderfully exact, in having not only scuffled
with, and overcome Errors and Vices, and filled the World with Devotion,
Humility, Obedience, Peace, and all sorts of Virtue; but to have proceeded so
far, as to quarrel with the Ancient Baptismal Names of Charles, Lewis, and
Francis, to fill the World with Methusalems, Ezekiels, and Malachies, of a more
Scriptural sound? A Gentleman, a Neighbor of mine, a great Admirer of
Antiquity, and who was always preferring the Excellency of preceding Times, in
comparison with this present Age of ours, did not (amongst the rest) forget to
Magnify the Lofty and Magnificent sound of the Gentlemen's Names of those
Days, Don Grumedan, Quadregan, Angesilan, etc. which but to hear Named, he
perceived to be other kind of Men, than Pierre, Guillot and Michel. I am
mightily pleased with Jaques Amiot, for leaving throughout a whole French
Oration, the Latin Names entire, without varying and dissecting them, to give
them a French termination. It seemed a little harsh and rough at first: But
already Custom, by the Authority of Plutarch, (whom he took for his Example)
has overcome that Novelty. I have often wished, that such as write Chronical
Histories in Latin, would leave our Names as they find them, and as they are,
and ought to be, for in making Vaudemont, Vallemontances, and Metamorphosing
Names, to make them suit better with the Greek or Latin, we know not where we
are, and with the persons of the Men, lose the benefit of the Story. To
conclude, it is a scurvy Custom, and of very ill consequence, that we have in
our Kingdom of France, to call every one by the Name of his Manor, or
Seigneury, and the thing in the World that does the most prejudice, and
confound Families and Descents. A Younger Brother of a good Family, having a
Manor left him by his Father, by the Name of which he has been known and
Honored, cannot handsomely leave it; Ten Years after his Decease, it falls
into the hand of a stranger, who does the same: Do but judge whereabouts we
shall be, concerning the knowledge of these Men. We need look no further for
Examples, than our own Royal Family, where every Partage creates a new
Surname, whilst in the mean time the Original of the Family is totally lost.
There is so great liberty taken in these Mutations, that I have not in my time
seen any one advanced by Fortune to any extraordinary condition, who has not
presently had Genealogick Titles added to him, new, and unknown to his Father,
and who has not been innoculated into some illustrious Stem; and by good Luck,
the obscurest Families, are the most proper for Falsification. How many
Gentlemen have we in France, who, by their own talk, are of Royal Extraction?
More I think, than who will confess they are not. Was it not a pleasant passage
of a Friend of mine? There were a great many Gentlemen assembled together,
about the dispute of one Lord of a Manor, with another; which other had in
truth, some pre-eminence of Titles and Alliances, above the ordinary Scheme of
Gentry. Upon the Debate of this Priority of Place, every one standing up for
himself, to make himself equal to him, alleging one one Extraction, another
another, one the near resemblance of Name, another of Arms, another an old
worm-eaten Patent, and the least of them, Great-Granchild to some Foreign King.
When they came to sit down to Dinner, my Friend, instead of taking his place
amongst them, retiring with most profound Congees, entreated the Company to
excuse him, for having hitherto Lived with them at the saucy rate of a
Companion; but being now better informed of their Quality, he would begin to
pay them the Respect due to their Birth and and Grandeur, and that it would ill
become him to sit down among so many Princes; and ended the Farce with a
Thousand Reproaches. Let us in Gods Name satisfy our selves with what our
Fathers were contented, and with what we are: We are great enough, if we
rightly understand how to maintain it: Let us not disown the Fortune and
Condition of our Ancestors, and lay aside these Ridiculous pretenses; that can
never be wanting to any one that has the Impudence to alledg them. Arms have no
more Security, than Sir-names. I bear Azure powdered with Trefoiles, Or, with a
Lions Paw of the same armed gules in Fesse. What privilege to continue
particularly in my House and Name? A Son-in-Law will transport it into another
Family; or some paltry Purchaser will make them his first Arms; there is
nothing wherein there is more change, and confusion. But this consideration
leads me perforce into another subject. Let us pry a little narrowly into, and
in Gods name examine upon what foundation we erect this Glory and Reputation,
for which the World is turned topsy turvy: Wherein do we place this Renown,
that we hunt after with so great flagrancry, and through so many impediments,
and so much trouble? It is in conclusion, Peter or William that carries it,
takes it into his possession, and whom it only concerns. O what a valiant
faculty is hope, that in a mortal subject, and in a moment makes nothing of
usurping infinity and immensity, and of supplying her Masters indigence at her
pleasure with all things he can imagine, or desire! Nature has given us this
passion for a pretty toy to play withal. And this Peter or William, what is it
but a sound when all is done? or three or four dashes with a Pen, so easy to
be varied, that I would fain know to whom is to be attributed the glory of so
many Victories, to Guesquin, to Glesquin, or to Gueaquin? and yet there would
be something of greater moment in the case, than in Lucian, that Sigma should
serve Tau with a process for, -- Non levia, Aeneid. lib. 12.
aut ludicra petuntur Praemia.
To do brave acts, who has the noble Spirit,
Slights mean rewards, as things below his merit.
The chase is there in very good earnest: The question is, which of these
Letters is to be rewarded for so many Sieges, Battles, Wounds, Imprisonments,
and Services done to the Crown of France, by this famous Constable. Nicholas
Denisot never concerned himself further than the Letters of his name, of which
he has altered the whole Contexture to build up by Anagram the Count of
Alsinois, whom he has celebrated with the utmost force, and glory of his
Poetry, and Painting. And the Historian Suetonius could be satisfied with
nothing he Writ, unless it might redound to his own particular honor, which
made him casheer his fathers Surname Leuis, to leave Tranquillus Successor to
the reputation of his writings. Who would believe that Captain Bayard should
have no honor, but what he derives from Peter Terrail; and that Antonio
Escalin should suffer himself to his face, to be Robbed of the honor of so many
Navigations and Commands at Sea and Land by Captain Paulin, and the Baron de la
Guard; These are injuries of the Pen, common to a thousand people. How many are
there in every Family of the same Name and Surname? and how many more in
several Families, Ages, and Countries? History tells us of three of the name of
Socrates, of five Plato's, of eight Aristotle's, of seven Xenophons, of twenty
Demetris, and of twenty Theodores; and how many more she was not acquainted
with we may imagine. Who hinders my Groom from calling himself Pompey the
Great? But after all, by what Virtue, what Authority, or what secret
conveyances are there, that fix upon my deceased Groom, or the other Pompey,
who had his Head cut off in Egypt, this glorious Renown, and these so much
honored flourishes of the Pen, so as to be of any advantage to them?

Aeneid. lib. 4.
Id cinerem, and manes credis cucare sepultos?
Can we believe the dead regard such things?
What sense have the two Colleagues of the greatest esteem amongst men?
Epaminondas of this glorious Verse, that has been so many Ages curren^ in his
praise; Consiliis nostris laus est attrita Laconum:
One Sparta by my Counsels is overthrown.
or Affricanus of this other?

A sole exoriente: supra Maeotis Paludes
Nemo est, qui factis me aequiparare queat.
From early dawn, unto the setting Sun,
No one can match the deeds that I have done.
Survivers indeed tickle themselves with these praises, and by them incited to
jealousy or desire, inconsiderately, and according their own fancy, attribute
to the dead those Virtues themselves pretend to most: God knows how vainly
flattering themselves, that they shall one day in turn be capable of the same
Characters: however -- Ad haec se Juvenal. Saly. 10.

Romanus, Grajusque and Barbarus, Induperator
Erexit, causas discriminis, atque laboris
Inde habuit, tanto major famae sitis est, quam Virtutis.
Greek, Roman and Barbarian Chiefs to these,
Devote their Valor and Contrivances,
And to that Greediness of Glory owe
The Dangers and Fatigues they undergo;
So much more Potent is the Thirst of Fame,
Than that of Virtue.


CHAP. XLVII. Of the Incertainty of our Judgment.
IT was well said of the Poet, (...). Homer Iliads 20.
There is every where liberty of Arguing enough, and enough to be said on both
sides: For Example, Vince Annibal', and non seppe usar' poi
Ben la vittoriosa sua ventura. Petrar. Son. 83.

Hannibal' Conquered; but was not Wise
To make the best use of his Victories.
Such as would improve this Argument, and condemn the oversight of our Leaders
in not pushing home the victory at Moncontour; or accuse the King of Spain of
not knowing how to make his best use of the advantage he had against us at St.
Quintin, may conclude these oversights to proceed from a Soul already drunk
with success, or from a Courage, which being full, and overgorg'd with this
beginning of good fortune, had lost the appetite of adding to it, already
having enough to do to digest what it had taken in: He has his Arms full, and
can embrace no more: unworthy of the benefit conferred upon him, and the
advantage she had put into his hands: for what utility does he reap from it, if
notwithstanding he give his Enemy respite to rally to recover his astonishment,
and to make head against him? What hope is there that he will dare at another
time to attaque an Enemy reunited, and recompos'd, and armed anew with Spite
and Revenge, who did not dare to pursue him when routed, and unmann'd by fear?
Dum fortuna calet, dum conficit omnia terror. Luc. lib. 7.

Whilst Fortune's in the heat, and terror does
More than their sharpest Swords subdue their foes.
But withal, what better opportunity can he expect, than that he has lost? It Is
not here, as in Fencing, where the most hits gain the Prize: For so long as the
Enemy is on foot, the Game is new to begin, and that is not to be called a
Victory, that puts not an end to the War. In the encounter where Caesar had the
worse, near to the City of Oricum, he reproached Pompey's Soldiers, that he
had been lost, had their General known how to overcome; and afterward clawed
him away in turn. But why may not a man also argue on the contrary, that it is
the effect of a precipitous, and insatiate Spirit, not to know how to bound,
and restrain its ardour: that it is to abuse the favors of God to exceed the
measure he has prescribed them: and that again to throw a man's self into
danger, after a Victory obtained, is again to expose himself to the mercy of
Fortune: and that it is one of the greatest discretions in the Rule of War, not
to drive an Enemy to despair. Sylla and Marius in the Associate War having
defeated the Marsians; seeing yet a Body of Reserve, that prompted by Despair,
was coming on like enraged Brutes to charge in upon them, thought it not
convenient to stand their charge. Had not Monsieur de Foix his ardour
transported him so precipitously to pursue the remains of the Victory of
Ravenna, he had not obscured it by his own death. And yet the recent memory of
his Example served to preserve Monsieur d' Anguien from the same misfortune at
the Battle of Serisoles. It Is dangerous to attaque a man you have deprived of
all means to escape, but by his Arms: for necessity teaches violent
resolutions: Porti. Lat. in Decla.
Gravissimi sunt morsus irritatae necessitatis, enraged necessity bites deep.
Vincitur haud gratis jugulo qui provocat hostem. Luc. lib. 4. Maye's Luc.

The foe that meets the Sword near gratis dies.
This was it that made Pharax withhold the King of Lacedemon, who had won a
Battle of the Mantineans, from going to charge a thousand Argians, who were
escaped in an entire Body from the defeat; but rather let them steal off at
liberty, that he might not encounter Valor whetted and enraged by mischance.
Clodomire, King of Aquitaine, after his Victory pursuing Gondemar, King of
Burgundy, beaten, and making off as fast as he could for safety, compelled him
to face about, and make head, wherein his obstinacy deprived him of the fruit
of his Conquest, for he there lost his life.

In like manner, if a Man were to choose, whether he would have his Soldiers
Ainquant, and richly accoutred with Damaskt Arms, or armed only for necessary
defense; this argument would step in, in favor of the first (of which opinion
was Sertorius, Philopemen, Brutus, Caesar, and others) that it is to a Soldier
an enflaming of courage, and a spur to Glory, to see himself brave; and withal
an imitation to be more obstinate in Fight, having his Arms, which are in a
manner his Estate, and whole inheritance to defend, which is the reason (says
Xenophon) why those of Asia, carried their Wives, Concubines, with their
choicest Jewels, and greatest Wealth along with them to the Wars. But then
these arguments would be as ready to stand up for the other side, that a
General ought rather to render his Men careless and desperate, than to increase
their solicitude of preserving themselves: That by this means they will be in a
double fear of hazarding their persons; as it will be a double temptation to
the Enemy, to fight with greater resolution, where so great booty and so rich
spoils are to be obtained: And this very thing has been observed in former
times, notably to encourage the Romans against the Samaites. Antiochus showing
Hannibal the Army he had raised wonderfully splendid, and Rich in all sorts of
Equipage; asked him, if the Romans would be satisfied with that Army? Satisfied?
replied the other, yes doubtless were their avarice never so great. Licurgus
not only forbad his Soldiers all manner of bravery in their Equipage, but
moreover to strip their conquered Enemies, because he would (as he said) that
poverty, and frugality should shine with the rest of the Battle.

At Seiges, and elsewhere, where occasion draws us near to the Enemy, we
willingly suffer our Men to Brave, Rate, and affront the Enemy with all sorts
of injurious Language; and not without some color of reason: For it is of no
little consequence, to take from them all hopes of Mercy, and Composition, in
representing to them, that there is no fair Quarter to be expected from an
Enemy, they have incenc'd to that degree, nor other Remedy remaining, but in
the Victory. And yet Vitellius found himself deceived in this way of
proceeding; for having to do with Otho, weaker in the valor of his Soldiers,
of long unaccustomed to War, and effeminated with the delights of the City; he
so nettled them at last with injurious Language, reproaching them with
cowardice, and the regret of the Mistresses, and entertainments they had left
behind at Rome; that by this means he inspired them with such resolution, as no
exhortation had had the power to have done; and himself made them fall upon
him, with whom their own Captains before could by no means prevail. And indeed
when they are injuries that touch to the quick, it may very well fall out, that
he who went but ill-favour'dly to work in the behalf of his Prince, will fall
to it with another sort of Mettle, when the quarrel is his own.

To consider of how great importance is the preservation of the General of an
Army, and that the Universal aim of an Enemy is levelled directly at the head,
upon which all the others depend; the advice seems to admit of no dispute,
which we know has been taken by so many great Captains of changing their habit,
and disguising their persons upon the point of going to engage. Nevertheless
the inconvenience a Man by so doing runs into, is not less than that he thinks
to avoid: For the Captain by this means being concealed from the knowledge of
his own Men, the courage they should derive from his Presence and Example,
happens by degrees to cool and to decay; and not seeing the wonted As at the
Battle of Ivry, in the person of Henry the Great.
Marks, and Ensigns of their Leader, they presently conclude him either dead,
or that, despairing of the business, he is gone to shift for himself; and
experience shows us that both these ways have been both successful, and
otherwise. What befell Pyrrhus in the Battle he fought against the Consul
Levinus in Italy, will serve us to both purposes: For though by shrouding his
person under the Arms of Demogacles, and making him wear his own, he
undoubtedly preserved his own Life, yet by that very means he was withal very
near running into the other mischief of losing the Battle. Alexander, Caesar,
and Lucullus loved to make themselves known in a Battle, by rich Furnitures,
and Arms of a particular luster and color: Agis, Agesilaus, and that great
Gilippus on the contrary used to Fight obscurely Armed, and without any
imperial attendance, or distinction.

Amongst other oversights Pompey is charged withal, at the Battle of Pharsalia,
he is condemned for making his Army stand still to receive the Enemies charge;
by reason that (I shall hear steal Plutarchs own words, that are better than
mine) he by so doing, deprived himself of the violent impression, the motion of
running adds to the first shock of Arms, and hindered the justle of the
Combatants (who were wont to give great impetuosity, and fury to the first
Encounter; especially when this came to rush in with their utmost vigor, their
courages increasing by the Shouts and the Carreer) rendering the Soldiers
animosity, and ardour, as a man may say, more reserved and cold. This is what
he says: But if Caesar had come by the worse, why might it not as well have
been urged by another, that, on the contrary the strongest, and most steady
posture of Fighting, is that wherein a man stands planted firm without motion;
and that who makes a halt upon their march, closing up, and reserving their
force within themselves for the push of the business, have a great advantage
against those who are disordred, and who have already spent half their breath
in running on precipitously to the charge? Besides, that an Army being a Body
made up of so many individual members, it is impossible for it to move in this
fury with so exact a motion, as not to break the order of Battle, and that the
best of Foot are not engaged, before their fellows can come in to relieve them.
In that unnatural Battle betwixt the two Persian Brothers, the Lacedemonian
Clearchus, who commanded the Greeks of Cyrus party, led them on softly, and
without precipitation to the Charge; but coming within fifty paces hurried them
on full speed, hoping in so short a Carreer, both to look to their order, to
husband their breath, and at the same time to give an advantage of violence,
and impression both to their persons, and their missile Arms: Others have
regulated this question in charging thus; if your Enemy come running upon you,
stand firm to receive him; if he stand to receive you, run full drive upon him.

In the expedition of the Emperor Charles the Fifth into Provence, King
Francis was put to choose either to go meet him in Italy, or to expect him in
his own Dominions; wherein, though he very well considered of how great
advantage it was, to preserve his own territories entire, and clear from the
troubles, and inconveniences of the War, to the end that being unexhausted of
her stores, it might continually supply Men, and Money at need, that the
necessity of War requires at every turn to spoil, and lay waste the Country
before them, which cannot very well be done upon ones own; to which may be
added that the Country people do not so easily digest such a havoc by those of
their own party, as from an Enemy, so that seditions and commotions might by
such means be kindled amongst us; that the License of Pillage and Plunder
(which are not to be tolerated at home) is a great ease and refreshment
against the fatigues, and sufferings of War; and that who has no other prospect
of gain, than his bare pay, will hardly be kept from running home, being but
two steps from his Wife, and his own House: That he who lays the Cloth, is
ever at the charge of the Feast: That there is more alacrity in assaulting than
defending, and that the shock of a Battles loss in our own Bowels, is so
violent as to endanger the disjointing of the whole Body, there being no
passion so contagious as that of fear; that is so easily believed, or that so
suddenly diffuses its Poison; and that the Cities that should hear the Rattle
of this Tempest, that should take in their Captains, and Soldiers yet
trembling and out of breath, would be in danger in this heat and hurry, to
precipitate themselves upon some untoward resolution: Notwithstanding all this,
so it was, that he chose to recall the Forces he had beyond the Mountains, and
to suffer the Enemy to come to him. For he might on the other side imagine,
that being at home and amongst his Friends, he could not fail of plenty of all
manner of conveniences; the Rivers, and Passes he had at his Devotion, would
bring him in both Provisions and Money in all security, and without the trouble
of Convoy; that he should find his subjects by so much the more affectionate to
him, by how much their danger was more near and pressing; that having so many
Cities and stops to secure him, it would be in his power to give the Law of
Battle at his own opportunity and best advantage; and if it pleased him to
delay the time, that under covert, and at his own ease, he might see his Enemy
founder, and defeat himself with the difficulties he was certain to encounter,
being engaged in an Enemies Country, where before, behind, and on every side
War would be made upon him; no means to refresh himself or to enlarge his
Quarters, should diseases infest them, or to lodge his wounded Men in safety:
No Money, no Victuals, but all at the point of the Lance; no leisure to repose
and take breath, no knowledge of the ways, or Country to secure him from
Ambushes and Surprises: And in case of losing a Battle, no possible means of
saving the remains. Neither is their want of Example in both these cases.
Scipio thought it much better to go attacque his Enemies territories in
Afric, than to stay at home to defend his own, and to Fight him in Italy, and
it succeeded well with him: But on the contrary, Hannibal in the same War
ruined himself, by abandoning the conquest of a strange Country, to go defend
his own. The Athenians having left the Enemy in their own Dominions, to go over
into Sicily, were not favored by Fortune in their design; but Agathocles King
of Syracuse, found her favorable to him, when he went over into Afric, and
left the War at home. By which Examples, and diverse others, we are wont to
conclude, and with some reason, that events especially in War, do for the most
part depend upon Fortune, who will not be governed by, nor submit unto humane
prudence; according to the Poet. Et male consultis pretium est, prudentia
fallax, Manil. Astron. lib. 4^

Nec fortuna probat causas, sequiturque merentes:
Sed vaga per cunctos nullo discrimine fertur.
Silicet est aliud quod nos cogatque, regatque
Majus, and in proprias ducat mortalia leges.
Prudence deceitful and uncertain is,
Ill Counsels sometimes hit, where good ones miss;
Nor yet does Fortune the best Cause approve,
But wildly does without distinction Rove.
So that some greater and more constant Cause,
Rules and Subjects us to more powerful Laws.
But if things hit right, it should seem that our Counsels and Deliberations
depend as much upon Fortune, as any thing else we do, and that she engages our
very Reason and Arguments, in her uncertainty and confusion. We Argue rashly
and adventurously, says Timaeus in Plato, by reason that, as well as our
selves, our Discourses have great participation with the Temerity of Chance.

CHAP. XLVIII. Of Horses dressed to the Menage, called Destriers.
I Am now become a Grammarian; I who never Learned any Language but by Rote,
and who do not yet know Adjective, Conjunction, or Ablative. I think I have
Read, that the Romans had a sort of Horses by them called Funales, or
Dextrarios, which were either Led-Horses, or Horses laid in at several Stages,
to be taken fresh upon occasion; and thence it is, that we call our Horses of
Service, Destriers: And our Romances commonly use the Phrase of destrer for
accompagner, to accompany. They also called such as were dressed in such sort,
that running full speed side by side without Bridle or Saddle, the Roman
Gentlemen Armed at all pieces, would shift, and throw themseves from the one to
the other, desultorios equos. The Numidian Men at Arms, had always a Led-Horse
in one Hand, besides that they Rode upon, to change in the heat of Battle:
Livius l. 23
Quibus, desultorum in modum, binos trahentibus equos, inter acerrimum saepe
pugnam in recentem equum ex fesso armatis, transultare, mos erat. Tanta
velocitas ipsis, tamque docile equorum genus. Whose use it was, leading along
two Horses after the manner of the Desultorum, Armed as they were, in the heat
of Fight, to vault from a tired Horse to a fresh one; so Active were the Men
and the Horses to Decile. There are many Horses trained up to help their
Riders, so as to run upon any one that appears with a drawn Sword, to fall both
with Mouth and Heels upon any that front or oppose them: But it often falls out,
that they do more harm to their Friends, than their Enemies; considering that
you cannot loose them from their hold, to reduce them again into order, when
they are once engaged and grappled; by which means you remain at the Mercy of
their senseless Quarrel. It happened very ill to Artibius General of the Persian
Army, Fighting Man to Man with Onesilus King of Salamis, to be Mounted upon a
Horse dressed after this manner, it being the occasion of his Death; the Squire
of Onesilus cleaving him down with a Scyth betwixt the Shoulders, as the Horse
was reared up upon his Master. And what the Italians report, that in the Battle
of Fornoue, King Charles his Horse, with Kicks and Plunges, disengaged his
Master from the Enemy, that pressed upon him, without which he had been Slain,
sounds odly, and he ran a very great hazard, and came strangely off; if it be
true. The Mamalukes made their Boast, that they had the most ready Horses of
any Cavalry in the World; that by nature and custom they were taught to know
and distinguish the Enemy, they were to fall foul upon with Mouth and Heels,
according to a Word or Sign given: As also to gather up with their Teeth Darts
and Lances scattered upon the Field, and present them to their Riders, as they
should have occasion to use them. It Is said, both of Caesar and Pompey, that
amongst other excellent Qualities they were Masters of, they were both
excellent Horsemen, and particularly of Caesar, that in his Youth, being
Mounted on the bare Back, without Saddle, or Bridle, he could make him run,
stop and turn, and perform all his Airs, with his Hands behind him. As Nature
designed to make of his Person, and of Alexander two Miracles of Military Art,
so one would say, she had done her utmost to Arm them after an extraordinary
manner: For every one knows, that Alexander's Horse Bucephalus had a Head
enclining to the shape of a Bull, that he would suffer himself to be Mounted
and Governed by none but his Master, and that he was so Honored after his
Death, as to have a City Erected to his Name. Caesar had also another, who had
Fore-feet like the Hands of a Man, his Hoof being divided in the form of
Fingers, who likewise was not to be Ridden by any but Caesar himself; who after
his Death dedicated his Statue to the Goddess Venus. I do not willingly alight
when I am once on Horseback; for it is the place where, whether well, or sick,
I find my self most at ease. Plato recommends it for health, as also Pliny says
it is good for the Stomach, and the Joints. We Read in Xenophon a Law,
forbidding any one who was Master of a Horse to Travel on Foot. Troglus and
Justinus say, That the Parthians were wont to perform all Offices and
Ceremonies, not only in War, but also all Affairs, whether public or private,
make Bargains, confer, entertain, take the Air, and all on Horseback; and that
the greatest distinction betwixt Freemen and Slaves amongst them, was, that
the one rode on Horseback, and the other went on Foot: An Institution of which,
King Cyrus was the founder. There are several Examples in the Roman History,
(and Suetonius more particularly observes it of Caesar,) of Captains, who in
pressing occasions Commanded their Cavalry to alight, both by that means to
take from them all hopes of Flight, as also for the advantage they hoped for in
this sort of Fight. ^vi. l. 3.
Quo haud dubie superat Romanus. Wherein the Romans did questionless excel: So
says Livie; however the first thing they did to prevent the Mutinies and
Insurrections of Nations of late Conquest, was to take from them their Arms and
Horses: And therefore it is that we so often meet in Caesar: Arma proferri,
jumenta produci, obsides dari jubet. Caesar's Com.
He Commanded the Arms to be produced, the Horses brought out, and Hostages to
be given. The Grand Signior to this Day, suffers not a Christian, or a Jew, to
keep a Horse of his own, throughout his Empire. Our Ancestors, at the time they
had War with the English, in all their greatest Engagements, and pitched
Battles, Fought for the most part on Foot, that they might have nothing but
their own Force, Courage and Constancy, to trust to, in a Quarrel of so great
Concern, as Life and Honor. You stake (whatever Chrysantes in Xenophon says to
the contrary,) your Valor, and your Fortune, upon that of your Horse, his
Wound or Death, brings your Person into the same danger; his Fear or Fury,
shall make you reputed Rash or Cowardly; if he have an ill Mouth, or will not
answer to the Spur, your Honor must answer it: And therefore I do not think it
strange, that those Battles I spoke of before, were more firm and furious, than
those that are Fought on Horseback. Virg. Aneid. lib. 10.
-- Cedebant pariter, pariterque ruebant.
Victores victique, neque his fuga nota, neque illis.
They charged together, and did so retreat
The Victors, and the vanquished; nor yet
The knack of running was unto the one,
Or to the other of the Parties known.
Their Battles were much better disputed: Now adays there are nothing but
Routs: primus clamor, atque impetus rem decernit. The first shout or the first
charge puts an end to the business: And the Arms we choose to make use of in so
great a hazard, should be as much as possible at our own command: Wherefore I
should advise to choose them of the shortest sort, and such of which we are
able to give the best account. A man may repose more confidence in a Sword he
holds in his Hand, than in a Bullet he discharges out of a Pistol, wherein
there must be a concurrence of several executions, to make it perform its
office, the Powder, the Stone, and the Wheel, if any of which fail, it at least
endangers your Fortune: A Man strikes much surer, than the Air directs him.
Lucan. l. 8.
Et quo far velint permittere vulnera ventis,
Ensis habet vires, et gens quecunque virorum est,
Bella gerit gladiis.
-- Far off with Bows
They shoot, Mr. Mrys Trans.
and where it lists the wind bestows
Their wounds: but Fight of Sword does strength require,
All Manly Nations the Sword fight desire.
But of that Weapon I shall speak more sully, when I come to compare the Arms
of the Ancients with those of modern use, though by the way, the astonishment
of the ear abated, which every one grows familiar with in a little time, I look
upon it as a Weapon of very little execution, and hope we shall one day lay it
aside. That missile Weapon which the Italians formerly made use of both with
Fire and without, was much more terrible: They called a certain kind of
Javeline Armed at the point with an Iron three foot long, that it might pierce
through and through an Armed Man, Phalarica, which they sometimes in
Field-service darted by hand; sometimes from several sorts of Engines for the
defense of beleaguered places: The shaft whereof being roul'd round with Flax,
Wax, Rozin, Oil, and other combustible matter, took Fire in its flight, and
lighting upon the Body of a Man, or his Targuet, took away all the use of Arms
and Limbs. And yet coming to close fight, I should think they should also
endammage the Assailant, and that the Camp being as it were planted with these
Flaming Truncheons, should produce a common innonvenience to the whole crowd.
Virg. Aenei. 9.
-- Magnum stridens contorta Phalarica venit
Fulminis acta modo. --
The Comet like Phalarica does fly,
With a huge noise like lightning through the Sky.
They had moreover other devices which custom made them perfect in (which will
seem incredible to us who have not seen them) by which they supplied the
effects of our powder and shot. They darted their Piles with so great violence,
as ofttimes transfixt two Targuets, and two Armed Men at once, and pinned them
together. Neither was the effect of their slings less certain of execution, or
of shorter carriage: Livi. l. 38.
Saxis globosis funda, mare apertum incessantes: coronas modici circuli magno
ex intervallo loci assueti trajicere: non capita modo hostium vulnerabant, sed
quem locum destinassent. Calling round stones from the shore for their slings:
and with them practicing at a great distance to throw through a Circle of very
small circumference, they would not only wound an Enemy in the head; but hit
any other part at pleasure. Their pieces of Battery had not only the execution,
but the thunder of our Canon also: Id. ibid.
ad ictus menium cum terribili sonitu editos, pavor, and trepidatio caepit. At
the Battery of the Walls, which is performed with a dreadful noise, the
defendants began to fear and tremble within. The Gauls our Kinsmen in Asia,
abominated these treacherous missite Arms, it being their use to fight with
greater Bravery Hand to Hand. Non tam patentibus plagis moventur, ubi latior,
quam altior plaga est, Id. ibid.
etiam gloriosius se pugnare putant: iidem quum aculeus sagitte aut glandis
abditae introrsus tenui vulnere in speciem urit: tum in rabium et pudorem tam
parvae perimentis pestis versi; prosternunt corpora humi: They are not so much
concerned at large wounds, when a wound is wider than deep, they think they
have fought with greater glory: But when they find themselves tormented within,
under the aspect of a slight wound, with the point of a Dart, or some concealed
glandulous Body, then transported with fury and shame, to perish by so small,
and contemptible an Officer of death, they fall to ground; an expression of
something very like a harquebuse shot. The ten thousand Greeks in their long
and famous retreat, met with a Nation who very much galled them with great and
strong Bows, carrying Arrows so long, that taking them up one might return them
back like a Dart, and with them pierce a Buckler, and an Armed Man through and
through. The Engines of Dionysius his invention at Syracusa, to shoot vast
massy Darts, and Stones of a prodigious greatness with so great impetuosity,
and at so great a distance, came very near to our modern inventions. But in
this discourse of Horses and Horsemanship, we are not to forget the pleasant
posture of one Maistre Pierre Pol, a Doctor of Divinity, upon his Mule, whom
Menstrelet reports always to have rid aside through the streets of Paris like a
Woman. He says also elsewhere, that the Gascons had terrible Horses, that would
wheel, and make the Pirouette in their full speed, which the French, Picards,
Dutch, and Brabanters looked upon as a Miracle, having never seen the like
before; which are his very words. Caesar speaking of the Swedes; in the charges
they make on Horseback, says he, they often throw themselves off to fight on
foot, having taught their Horses not to stir in the mean time from the place,
to which they presently run again upon occasion; and according to their
custom, nothing is so unmanly, and so base as to use Saddles, or Pads, and
they despise such as make use of those conveniences: insomuch that being but a
very few in number, they fear not to attack a great many. That which I have
formerly wondered at, to see a Horse made to perform all his Airs with a Switch
only, and the Reins upon his Neck, was common with the Massilians, who rid
their Horses without Saddle or Bridle. Et gens quae nudo residens Massilia
dorso, Aeneid. l. 4.

Ora levi flectit, fraenorum nescia virga.
Et numidae infraeni cingunt.
Massilians who on the bare Backs do ride,
And with a Switch, not knowing Bridles, guide
The menag'd Steed, and fierce Numidians too
That use no Rein, begirt us round.
Equi sine fraenis, deformis ipse (...), rigida cervice, and extento capite
currentium. Livel. 35.
The Career of a Horse without a Bridle must needs be ungrateful, his Neck
being extended stiff, and his Nose thrust out. King Alphonso, he who first
instituted the Order des Chevaliers de la Band, or de l' Escharpe in Spain,
amongst other rules of the Order gave them this, that they should never ride
Mule or Mulet, upon penalty of a Mark of Silver; which I had lately out of
Guevara's Letters; which whoever gave them the title of Golden Epistles, had
another kind of opinion of them than I have, and perhaps saw more in them than
I do. The Courtier says, that till his time it was a disgrace to a Gentleman to
ride one of these Creatures: But the Abyssins on the contrary, as they are
nearer advanced to the person of Prester John, do affect to be mounted upon
large Mules, for the greatest dignity and grandeur. Xenophon tells us, that the
Assyrians were fain to keep their Horses fettered in the Stable, they were so
fierce and vicious: and that it required so much time to loose and harness
them, that to avoid any disorder this tedious preparation might bring upon
them, in case of surprise, they never sat down in their Camp, till it was
first well fortified with Ditches and Rampires. His Cyrus, who was so great a
Master in al^ ^^^ner of Horse Service, kept his Horses to their ordinary, and
never suffered them to have any thing to eat till first they had earned it by
the sweat of some kind of exercise. The Scythians when in the Field, and in
scarcity of provisions, used to let their Horses blood, which they drank, and
sustained themselves by that diet. Mart. l. 2.
Venit and epoto Sarmata pastus equo.
The Scythian also comes without remorse,
Having before quafft up his bleeding Horse
Those of Crotta being besieged by Metellus, were in so great necessity for
drink, that they were fain to quench their thirst with their Horses Urine: and
to show how much better cheap the Turkish Armies support themselves than our
European Forces, it is said, that besides that the Soldiers drink nothing but
Water, and eat nothing but Rice and Salt Flesh pulverized (of which every one
may easily carry about with him a months provision) they know how to feed upon
the Blood of their Horses, as well as the Moscovite and Tartar, and salt it for
their use. These new discovered people of the Indies, when the Spaniards first
landed amongst them, had so great an opinion both of the Men and Horses, that
they looked upon the first as Gods, and the other Animals enobled above their
nature. Insomuch that after they were subdued, coming to sue for Peace, and to
bring them Gold and Provisions, they failed not to present of the same to the
Horses, with the same kind of harangue to them, they had made to the other;
interpreting their neighing for a language of Truce and Friendship. In these
nearer Indies, to ride upon an Elephant was the first place of Honor, the
second to ride in a Coach with four Horses, the third to ride upon a Camel, and
the last to be carried, or drawn, by one Horse only. Some one of our late
Writers tells us, that he has been in a Country in those parts, where they ride
upon Oxen with Pads, Stirrups, and Bridles, and very much at their ease.
Quintus Fabius Maximus Rutilianus in a Battle with the Samnites, seeing his
Horse, after three or four Charges, had failed of breaking into the Enemies
Battalion, took this course, to make them unbridle all their Horses, so that
having nothing to check their Career, they might through Weapons and Men, open
the way to his foot, who by that means gave them a bloody defeat. The same
command was given by Quintus Fulvius Flaccus against the Celtiberians: Livi. l.
40.
Id cum majore vi equorum facietis, si effraenatos in hosts equos immittatis:
quod saepe Romanos equites cum laud fecisse memoriae proditum est.
Detractisque fraenis bis ultro citroque cum magna strage hostium, in fractis
omnibus hastis, transcurrerunt. You will do your business with greater
advantage of your Horses strength, if you spur them unbridled upon the Enemy,
as it is recorded the Roman Horse to their great Glory have often done. And
their Bits being pulled off without breaking a Lance, to have charged through
and through, with greater slaughter of the Enemy: The Duke of Muscovie was
anciently obliged to pay this reverence to the Tartars, that when they sent any
one Embassy to him, he went out to meet them on foot, and presented them with a
Mazer, or Goblet of Mares Milk (a beverage of greatest esteem amongst them) and
so great, that if in Drinking, a drop fell by chance upon the Horses Mayn, they
thought themselves indispensably bound to lick it off with their Tongue: The
Army that Bajazet had sent into Russia, was overwhelmed with so dreadful a
Tempest of Snow, that to shelter, and preserve themselves from starving, many
ripped up, and embowell'd their Horses, to creep into their Bellies, and enjoy
the benefit of that Vital heat. Bajazet, after that furious Battle wherein he
was overthrown by Tamerlane, was in a hopeful way of secu^ing his own person by
the fleetness of an Arabian Mare he had under him, had he not been constrained
to let her drink her fill at the ford of a River in his way, which rendered her
so heavy and indisposed, that he was afterward easily overtaken by those that
pursued him: They say indeed that to let a Horse stale takes him off his
mettle, but I should rather have thought that drinking would have refresht her,
and revived her spirits: Craesus marching his Army through certain furrs near
Sardis, met with an infinite number of Serpents, which the Horses devoured with
great appetite, and which Herodotus says was a prodigy of ominous portent to
his affairs. We call a Horse Cheval entier, that has his Mayn, Ears, and other
parts entire, and no other will pass muster^ The Lacedaemonians having defeated
the Athenians in Sicily, returning triumphant from the victory into the City of
Syracusa, amongst other insolences, caused all the Horses they had taken to be
shorn, and led in triumph. Alexander fought with a Nation called Daae; a people
whose Discipline it was to march two and two together, Armed on Horseback to
the War, and being in Fight one always alighted, and so they fought one while
on Horseback and another on Foot, one after another by turns. I do not think
that for graceful riding, any Nation in the World excells the French; though a
good Horseman, according to our way of speaking, seems rather to respect the
Courage of the Man than his Horsemanship and address in riding. Of all that
ever I saw the most knowing in that Art, that had the best seat, and the best
method in breaking Horses, was Monsieur de Carnevalet who served our King Henry
the Second: I have seen a Man ride with both his feet upon the Saddle, take off
his Saddle, and at his return take it up again, refit, and remount it, riding
all the while full speed; having Gallopt over a Bonnet, make at it very good
shoots backwards with his Bow, take up any thing from the ground, setting one
foot down and the other in the Stirrup; with twenty other Apes-tricks, which he
got his living by. There has been seen in my time at Constantinople two Men
upon an Horse, who in the height of his speed would throw themselves off, and
into the Saddle again by turn, and one who Bridled and Saddled his Horse with
nothing but his Teeth. Another who betwixt two Horses, one foot upon one
Saddle, and another upon the other, carrying another upon his Shoulders; would
ride full careeer, the other standing bolt upright upon him, making very good
shoots with his Bow. Several who would ride full speed with their heels upward,
and their Hands upon the Saddle betwixt several Scymiters, with the points
upward fixed in the Harness. When I was a Boy, the Prince of Salmona, riding a
rough Horse at Naples to all his Airs, held Reals under his Knees and Toes; as
if they had been nailed there, to show the firmness of his Seat.

CHAP. XLIX. Of Ancient Customs.
I Should willingly pardon our people for admitting no other pattern, or rule
of perfection, than their own peculiar manners and customs. It being a common
vice, not of the vulgar only, but almost of all Men, to walk in the Beaten
Road, their Ancestors have trod before them: I am content when they see
Fabritius or Lelius, that they look upon their countenance and behavior as
barbarous, seeing they are neither clothed, nor fashioned according to our
mode. But I find fault with their singularity, when it arrives to that degree
of indiscretion, as to suffer themselves to be imposed upon by authority of the
present usance, as every Month to alter their opinion, if custom so require,
and that they should so vary their judgment in their own particular concern:
When they wore the Belly-pieces of their Doublets up as high as their Breasts,
they stiffly maintained that they were in their proper place: some years after
they were slipped down betwixt their Thighs, and then they could laugh at the
former fashion as uneasy and intolerable. The fashion now in use, makes them
absolutely condemn the other two, with so great indignation, and so universal
contempt, that a Man would think, there was a certain kind of madness crept in
amongst them, that infatuates their understandings, to this strange degree. Now
seeing that our change of fashions is so prompt and sudden, that the inventions
of all the Tailors in the World, cannot furnish out new Whim-whams enough to feed
our vanity withal; there will often be a necessity, that the despised ones must
again come in vogue, and even those immediately after fall into the same
contempt, and that the same judgment must in the space of fifteen or twenty
years, take up not only different, but contrary opinions, with an incredible
lightness and inconstancy: There is not any of us so cautelous and discreet,
that suffers not himself to be gulled with this contradiction, and both in
external and internal sight to be insensibly blinded. I will here muster up
some old customs, that I have in memory, some of them the same with ours, the
others different, to the end, that bearing in mind this continual variation of
humane things, we may have our judgments clearer, and more firmly settled: the
thing in use amongst us of fighting with Rapier and Cloak, was in practice
amongst the Romans also, Sinistris sagos involvant, gladiosque distringuunt.
Caesar de bello civili lib. 1.
They wrapped their Cloaks upon the left Arm, and handled the Sword with the
right, says Caesar: And I observe an old vicious Custom of our Nation, which
continues yet amongst us, which is to stop passengers we meet upon the Road, to
compel them to give an account who they are; and to take it for an injury, and
just cause of quarrel, if they refuse to do it: At the Baths, which the
ancients made use of every day before they went to Dinner, and as frequently as
we wash our Hands, they at first only bathed their Arms and Legs; but
afterward, and by a Custom that has continued for many Ages in most Nations of
the World, they bathed stark naked in mixed and perfumed waters, looking upon it
as a great simplicity to bath in mere water: The most delicate and affected,
perfumed themselves all over three or four times a day. They often caused their
hair to be pincht off; as the Women of France have some time since, taken up a
Custom to do their Foreheads. Mart lib. 2. Epig. 62.
Quod pectus, quod crura tibi, quod brachia vellis.
How do thou twitch thy Breast, thy Arms and Thighs.
though they had Ointments proper for that purpose. Id. lib. 6. Epi. 93.
Psilotro nitet, aut arida latet abdita creta.
This in Wild-vine shines, or else does calk
Her rank pores up in a dry crust of chalk.
they delighted to lie soft, and pretended it for a great testimony of
hardness, to lie upon a matrice. They did eat lying upon Beds, much after the
manner of the Turks in this Age. Jude thoro pater Aeneas sic orsus ab alto.
Aeneid. l. 2.

Then thus Aeneas from his Bed of State
Begun Troys woeful Story to relate.
And it is said of the younger Cato, that after the Battle of Pharsalia, being
entered into a melanchollick disposition, at the ill posture of the public
affairs, he took his repose always sitting, assuming a strict and severe course
of Life. It was also their custom to Kiss the Hands of great persons; the more
and better to honor, and caress them: And meeting with their equals, they
always Kissed in salutation, as do the Venetians. Gratatusque darem cum dulcibus
oscula verbis. Ovid. de pont. lib. 4. Eleg. 9.

And kindest words I would with Kisses mix.
In petitioning, or saluting any great Man, they used to lay their Hands upon
his knees. Pasiclez the Philosopher and Brother of Crates, instead of laying
his Hand upon the knee, laid it upon his private parts, and being rudely
repulst by him to whom he made that indecent complement; What said he, is not
that part your own as well as the other? They used to eat their fruits as we do
after Dinner. They whipped their Arses (let the Ladies if they please mince it
smaller) with a Sponge; which is the reason that Spongia is a smutty word in
Latin: Which Sponge was also fastened to the end of a stick, as appears by the
Story of him, who as he was led along to be thrown to the wild beasts in the
sight of the people, asking leave to do his business, and having no other way
to dispatch himself, forced the Sponge and Stick down his own Throat and
choked himself. They used to terge after coition with perfumed Wool. Mart.
lib. 11. Epist. 50.
At tibi nil faciam, sed lota mentula lana.
........................
they used in the streets of Rome, to place certain Vessels and little Tubs,
for passengers to piss in. Lucret. l. 4.
Pusi saepe lacum propter, se ac dolia curta.
Somno de vincti credunt extollere vestem.
Boys dream of Pissing in the Tub and Lake,
And find themselves bepist when they awake.
They used to collation betwixt Meals, and had in Summer, Sellers of Snow to
cool their Wine; and some there were who made use of Snow in Winter, not
thinking their Wine cool enough at that cold season of the year. The Men of
quality had their Cup-bearers, and Carvers, and their Booffoons to make them
sport: They had their meat served up in Winter, upon a sort of Chafing-Dishes;
which were set upon the Table, and had portable Kitchins (of which I my self
have seen some) wherein all their service was carried after them. Has vobis
epulas habete lauti, Mart. l. 7. Epig. 47.

Nos offendimus ambulante Caena.
Those feasts by you indeed are highly prized,
At walking Suppers we are scandalized.
In Summer they had a contrivance, to bring fresh and clear rills through their
lower Rooms, wherein were great store of living fish, which the guests took out
with their own Hands to be dressed; every Man according to his own liking. Fish
has ever had this preeminence, and keeps it still, that the great ones all
pretend to be Cooks in their favor, and indeed the taste is more delicate,
than that of Flesh, at least to me. But in all sorts of magnificence,
debauchery, and voluptuous inventions of effeminacy and expense, we do in truth
all we can to parallel them, for our wills are as corrupt as theirs: but we
want power to reach them; and our force is no more able to reach them in their
vicious, than in their virtuous qualities; for both the one and the other,
proceed from a vigor of soul, which was without comparison greater in them,
than in us: And souls, by how much the weaker they are, by so much have they
less power to do or very well, or very ill: The highest place of honor amongst
them was the middle; the name going before, and that following after, either in
writing or speaking; had no signification of Grandeur, as is evident by their
writings, they will sooner say Oppius and Caesar, than Caesar and Oppius, and
me, and thee, than thee, and me; which is the reason that made me formerly take
notice in the life of Flaminius, in our French Plutarch of one passage, where
it seems as if the Author, speaking of the jealousy of honor, betwixt the
Aetolians and Romans, about the winning of a Battle, they had with their joined
forces obtained, made it of some importance, that in the Greek Songs, they had
put the Aetolians before the Romans: If there be no amphibology, or double
dealing in the words of the French translation; an instance of which I present
you out of Plutarch, though Monsieur de Montaigne did not think it worth
repeating. Here (Friendly Passenger,) we Buried lie, Plut. vit. Tit. Quint.
Flaminius.

Without Friends, Tears, or Funeral Obsequie,
Full Thirty Thousand Men in Battle Slain,
By the Aetolians, on Thesalian Plain,
And Latins, whom Flaminius led on,
And brought from Italy to Macedon.
With his fierce Valor, when faint Philip fled
With greater speed to save his timorous Head,
Than Heart or Hind, when Dogs upon the Trace,
Through Woods pursue them with a full Cry Chase.
The Ladies in their Baths, made no scruple of admitting Men amongst them, and
moreover made use of their Serving-men to Rub and Anoint them: Inguina
succintus nigra tibi servus aluta Mart. lib. ^ Epig. 34.

Stat, quoties calidis nuda foveris aquis.
...
...
They all Powdered themselves with a certain Powder, to moderate their Sweats.
The Ancient Gauls, says Sidonius Apollinaris, wore their Hair long before, and
the hinder part of the Head cut short, a Fashion that begins to be revived in
this Vicious and Effeminate Age. The Romans used to pay the Watermen their
Fare, at their first stepping into the Boat, which we never do till after
Landing. Hor. lib. 1. Sat. 5.
Dum as exigitur, dum mula ligatur,
Tota abit hora.
Whilst the Fare's paying, and the Mule is ti'd,
A whole Hours time at least away does slide.
The Women used to lie on that side the Bed, next the Wall: And for that
reason, they called Caesar, Spondam Regis Nicomedis, one of the greatest
Blemishes in his Life, and that gave occasion to his Soldiers to sing to his
Face, Suet. in vita Cae.
Gallias Caesar subegit, Nicomedes Caesarem.
Caesar the Gauls subdued, it is true,
But Nicomedes, Caesar did subdue.
Ecce Caesar nunc triumphat, qui subegit Gallias,
Id. eod. not quoted by Montaigne.
Nicomedes non triumphat, qui subegit Caesarem.
See Caesar Triumphs now for Conquering Gaul,
For Conqui'ring him, King Nicomede at all
No Triumph has.
They took Breath in their Drinking, and dashed their Wine, -- Quis puer ocius
Hor. lib. 7. Ode. 11.

Restinguet ardentis falerni
Pecula praetereunte lympha?
What pretty Boy's at leisure to come in,
And cool the heat of the Falernian Wine,
With the clear gliding Stream?
And the Roguish Looks and Gestures of our Lacquey's was also in use amongst
them. O Jane, a tergo quem nulla ciconia pinsit,
Nec manus auriculas imitata est mobilis albas, Persius. Sat. 1.

Nec linguae quantum sitiet canis Apula tantum.
O Janus, who both ways a Spy do wear,
So that no Scoffer, though behind thee, dare
Make a Stork's-bill, Ass-ears, or far more long.
Than thirsty panting Curs, shoot out his Tongue.
The Argian and Roman Ladies, always Mourned in White, as ours did formerly
here; and should do still, were I to Govern in this point. But there are whole
Books of this Argument.

CHAP. L. Of Democritus and Heraclitus.
THe Judgment is an utensil proper for all subjects, and will have an Oar in
every thing: which is the reason, that in these Essays I take hold of all
occasions. Where, though it happen to be a subject I do not very well
understand, I try however, sounding it at a distance, and finding it too deep
for my stature, I keep me on the firm shore: and this knowledge that a Man can
proceed no further, is one effect of its Virtue, even in the most inconsidering
sort of men. One while in an idle and frivolous subject, I try to find out
matter whereof to compose a body, and then to prop, and support it. Another
while I employ it in a noble subject, one that has been tossed and tumbled by a
thousand hands, wherein a Man can hardly possibly introduce any thing of his
own, the way being so beaten on every side, that he must of necessity walk in
the steps of another. In such a case, it is the work of the judgment to take the
way that seems best, and of a thousand paths, to determine that this or that,
was the best chosen. I leave the choice of my arguments to Fortune, and take
that the first presents me; they are all alike to me, I never design to go
through any of them; for I never see all of any thing: Neither do they who so
largely promise to show it others. Of a hundred Members and Faces that every
thing has, I take one, one while to look it over only, another while to ripple
up the Skin, and sometimes to pinch it to the Bones: I give a stab, not so
wide, but as deep as I can; and am for the most part, tempted to take it in
hand by some absolute gracefulness I discover in it. Did I know my self less, I
might perhaps venture to handle something or other to the bottom, and to be
deceived in my own inability, but sprinkling here one word, and there another,
Patterns cut from several Pieces, and scattered without design, and without
engaging my self too far, I am not responsible for them, or obliged to keep
close to my subject, without varying at my own liberty and pleasure, and giving
up my self to doubt and incertainty, and to my own governing Method, Ignorance.
All Motion discovers us. The very same Soul of Caesar, that made it self so
Conspicuous in Marshalling and Commanding the Battle of Pharsalia, was also
seen as Solicitous and Busy in the softer Affairs of Love. A Man makes a
Judgment of a Horse, not only by seeing his Menage in his Airs, but by his very
walk, nay, and by seeing him stand in the Stable. Amongst the Functions of the
Soul, there are some of a lower and meaner Form, who does not see her in those
Inferior Offices, as well as those of Nobler Note, never fully discover her;
and peradventure, she is best discovered, where she moves her own natural pace.
The Winds of Passions take most hold of her in her highest flights; and, the
rather, by reason that she wholely applys her self to, and exercises her whole
Virtue upon every particular subject, and never handles more than one thing at
a time, and that not according to it, but according to her self. Things in
respect to themselves, have peradventure their Weight, Measures and Conditions;
but when we once take them into us, the Soul forms them as she pleases. Death
is Terrible to Cicero, Coveted by Cato, and Indifferent to Socrates. Health,
Conscience, Authority, Knowledge, Riches, Beauty, and their contraries, do all
strip themselves at their entering into us, and receive a new Robe, and of
another Fashion, from every distinct Soul, and of what Color, Brown, Bright,
Green, Dark and Quality, Sharp, Sweet, Deep, or Superficial, as best pleases
them, for they are not yet agreed upon any common Standard of Forms, Rules, or
Proceedings; every one is a Queen in her own Dominions. Let us therefore no
more excuse our selves upon the External Qualities of things, it belongs to us
to give our selves an account of them. Our good or ill, has no other
dependence, but on our selves. It Is there that our Offerings and our Vows are
due, and not to Fortune: She has no power over our Manners, on the contrary,
they draw, and make her follow in their Train, and cast her in their own Mould.
Why should not I Censure Alexander, Roaring and Drinking at the prodigious rate
he sometimes used to do? Or, if he played at Chess, what string of his Soul was
not touched by this Idle and Childish Game? I hate and avoid it, because it is
not Play enough, that it is too grave and serious a Diversion, and I am ashamed
to lay out as much Thought and Study upon that, as would serve to much better
uses. He did not more pump his Brains about his Glorious Expedition into the
Indies; and another that I will not name, took not more pains to unravel a
passage, upon which depends the safety of all Mankind. To what a degree then
does this ridiculous Diversion molest the Soul, when all her Faculties shall be
summoned together upon this Trivial Account? And how fair an opportunity she
herein gives every one to know, and to make a right Judgment of himself? I do
not more thoroughly sift my self in any other posture, than this. What Passion
are we exempted from in this insignificant Game? Anger, Spite, Malice,
Impatience, and a vehement desire of getting the better in a concern, wherein
it were more excusable, to be Ambitious of being overcome: For to be Eminent,
and to excel above the common rate in frivolous things, is nothing graceful in
a Man of Quality and Honor. What I say in this Example, may be said in all
others. Every Particle, every Employment of Man, does Exalt or Accuse him,
equally with any other. Democritus and Heraclitus were two Philosophers, of
which, the first finding Humane Condition Ridiculous and Vain, never appeared
abroad, but with a Jeering and Laughing Countenance: Whereas Heraclitus
Commiserating that Condition of ours, appeared always with a Sorrowful Look,
and Tears in his Eyes. -- Alter
Juven. Sat. 10.
Ridebat quoties a limine moverat unum,
Protuleratque pedem, flebat contrarius alter.
One always, when he over his Threshold stepped,
Laughed at the World, the other always Wept.
I am clearly for the first Humor; not because it is more pleasant to Laugh,
than to Weep; but because it is Ruder, and expresses more Contempt, than the
other; because I think we can never be sufficiently despised to our desert.
Compassion and Bewailing, seem to employ some Esteem of, and Value for the
thing Bemoaned: whereas the things we Laugh at, are by that expressed to be of no
Moment or Repute. I do not think that we are so Unhappy, as we are Vain, or
have in us so much Malice, as Folly; we are not so full of Mischief, as
Inanity: Nor so Miserable, as we are Vile and Mean. And therefore Diogenes, who
past away his time in rolling himself in his Tub, and made nothing of the Great
Alexander, esteeming us no better than Flies or Bladders puffed up with Wind, was
a sharper, and more penetrating, and consequently in my opinion, a juster Judge,
than Timon Sir-nam'd the Man-Hater; for what a Man hates he lays to Heart: This
last was an Enemy to all Mankind, did positively desire our Ruin, and avoided
our Conversation as dangerous, proceeding from Wicked and Depraved Natures: The
other valued us so little, that we could neither trouble, nor infect him by our
Contagion; and left us to Herd with one another, not out of Fear, but Contempt
of our Society: Concluding us as incapable of doing good, as ill. Of the same
strain was Statilius his Answer, when Brutus Courted him into the Conspiracy
against Caesar, He was satisfied that the Enterprise was Just; but he did not
think Mankind so considerable, as to deserve a Wise Man's Concern: According to
the Doctrine of Hegesias; who said, That a Wise Man ought to do nothing but for
himself, forasmuch as he only was worthy of it: And to the saying of Theodorus,
That it was not reasonable a Wise Man should hazard himself for his Country,
and endanger Wisdom, for a company of Fools. Our Condition is as Ridiculous, as
Risible.

CHAP. LI. Of the Vanity of Words.
A Rhetorician of times past, said, That to make little things appear great,
was his profession. This is a Shoemaker, who can make a great Shoe for a
little Foot. They would in Sparta have sent such a Fellow to be Whipped, for
making profession of a lying and deceitful Art: And I fancy, that Archidamus
who was King of that Country, was a little surpised at the Answer of
Thucydides, when enquiring of him, which was the better Wrestler, Pericles, or
he* he replied, that it was hard to affirm; for when I have thrown him, said
he, he always persuades the Spectators, that he had no fall, and carries away
the Prize. They who Paint, Pounce and Plaster up the Ruins of Women, filling
up their Wrinckles and Deformities, are less to blame; because it is no great
matter, whether we see them in their Natural Complexions, or no: whereas these
make it their business to deceive not our sight only, but our Judgments, and to
Adulterate and Corrupt the very Essence of things. The Republics that have
maintained themselves in a Regular and well Modeled Government, such as those
of Lacedemon and Creet, had Orators in no very great Esteem. Aristo did wisely
define Rhetoric to be a Science to persuade the People; Socrates and Plato, an
Art to Flatter and Deceive: And those who deny it in the general description,
verify it throughout in their Precepts. The Mahometans will not suffer their
Children to be Instructed in it, as being useless, and the Athenians perceiving
of how pernicious Consequence the Practice of it was, it being in their City of
universal Esteem, ordered the principal part, which is to move Affections, with
their Exordiums and Perorations, to be taken away. It Is an Engine invented, to
manage and govern a disorderly and tumultuous Rabble, and that never is made
use of, but like Physic to the Sick, in the Paroxisms of a discomposed Estate.
In those, where the Vulgar, or the ignorant, or both together, have been all
powerful, and able to give the Law, as in those of Athens, Rodes and Rome, and
where the Public Affairs have been in a continual Tempest of Commotion, to
such places have the Orators always repaired. And in truth, we shall find few
persons in those Republics, who have pushed their Fortunes to any great degree
of Eminence, without the assistance of Elocution: Pompey, Caesar, Crassus,
Lucullus, Lentulus and Metellus, have thence taken their chiefest Spring, to
mount to that degree of Authority, to which they did at last arrive: Making it
of greater use of them, than Arms, contrary to the opinion of better times. For
L. Voluminous speaking publicly in favor of the Election of Q. Fabius, and
Pub. Decius, to the Consular Dignity: These are Men, said he, born for War, and
great in Execution, in the Combat of the Tongue altogether to seek; Spirits
truly Consular. The Subtle, Eloquent and Learned, are only good for the City,
to make Praetors of, to administer Justice. Eloquence Flourished most at Rome,
when the Public Affairs were in the worst condition, and the Republic most
disquieted with intestine Commotions, as a frank and untilled Soil bears the
worst Weeds. By which it should seem, that a Monarchical Government has less
need of it, than any other: For the Brutality, and Facility, natural to the
common People, and that render them subject to be turned and twined, and led by
the Ears, by this charming harmony of words, without weighing or considering
the truth and realty of things by the force of reason: This Facility, I say, is
not easily found in a single person, and it is also more easy by good
Education and Advice, to secure him from the impression of this Poison. There
was never any famous Orator known to come out of Persia, or Macedon.

I have entered into this discourse upon the occasion of an Italian I lately
received into my Service, and who was Clerk of the Kitchen to the late Cardinal
Caraffa till his Death. I put this Fellow upon an account of his Office: where
he fell to discourse of this Palate-Science, with such a settled Countenance,
and Magisterial Gravity, as if he had been handling some profound point of
Divinity. He made a Learned distinction of the several sorts of Appetites; of
that a Man has before he begins to Eat, and of those after the second and third
Service: The means simply to satisfy the first, and then to raise and accuate
the other two: The ordering of the Sawces, first in general, and then proceeded
to the qualities of the Ingredients, and their effects: The differences of
Sallets according to their seasons, which ought to be served up hot, and which
cold: The manner of their Garnishment and Decoration, to render them yet more
acceptable to the Eye: After which he entered upon the order of the whole
Service, full of weighty and important Considerations. Juven. ^at. 5.
-- Nec minimo sane discrimine refert
Quo gestu lepores, and quo gallina secetur.
Nor with less Criticism did Observe
How we a Hare, and how a Hen should Carve.
And all this set out with lofty and magnifick Words; the very same we make use
of, when we discourse of the Regiment of an Empire. Which Learned Lecture of my
Man, brought this of Terence into my Memory. Hoc falsum est, hoc adustum est,
hoc lautum est parum,
Ter. Adelph. Act. 3. Scae. 5.
Illud recte iterum sic memento, sedulo
Moneo quae possum pro mea sapientia.
Postremo tanquam in speculum, in patinas, Demea,
Inspicere jubeo, and moneo quid facto usus sit.
This is too Salt, this Burnt, this is too plain,
That Is well, remember to do so again.
Thus do I still advise to have things fit,
According to the Talent of my Wit.
And then my ( Demea) I command my Cook,
That into every Dish he pry and look,
As if it were a Mirror, and go on
To order all things, as they should be done.
And yet even the Greeks themselves did very much admire, and highly applaud
the order and disposition that Paulus Aemylius observed in the Feast he made
them at his return from Macedon: But I do not here speak of effects, I speak of
words only. I do not know whether it may have the same operation upon other
Men, that it has upon me: But when I hear our Architects thunder out their
Bombast words of Pillasters, Architraves and Coronices, of the Corinthian and
Dorick Orders, and such like stuff, my imagination is presently possessed with
the Palace of Apollidonius in Amadis de Gaul; when after all, I find them but
the palfry pieces of my own Kitchen Door. And to hear Men talk of Metonomies,
Metaphors and Allegories, and other Grammar words, would not a Man think they
signified some rare and exatick form of speaking? And this other is a Gullery
of the same stamp, to call the Offices of our Kingdom by the lofty Titles of
the Romans, though they have no similitude of Function, and yet less Authority
and Power. And this also, which I doubt will one Day turn to the Reproach of
this Age of ours, unworthily and indifferently to confer upon any we think fit,
the most glorious Sir-names with which Antiquity Honored but one or two
persons in several Ages. Plato carried away the Surname of Divine, by so
universal a consent, that never any one repined at it, or attempted to take it
from him: And yet the Italians who pretend, and with good reason, to more
spritely Wits, and founder Discourses, than the other Nations of their time,
have lately Honored Aretine with the same Title; in whose Writings, save a
tumid Phrase, set out with smart Periods, ingenious indeed, but far fetched,
and Fantastic, and the Eloquence (be it what it will) I see nothing in him
above the ordinary Writers of his time, so far is he from approaching the
Ancient Divinity. And we make nothing of giving the Surname of Great to
Princes, that have nothing in them above a Popular Grandeur.

CHAP. LII. Of the Parcimony of the Ancients.
ATtilius Regulus, General of the Roman Army in Africa, in the height of all
his Glory and Victories over the Carthaginians, writ to the Republic to
acquaint them, that a certain Hind he had left in trust with his whole Estate,
which was in all, but Seven Acres of Land, was run away with all his
Instruments of Husbandry, entreating therefore, that they would please to call
him home, that he might take order in his own Affairs, lest his Wife and
Children should suffer by this disaster: Whereupon the Senate appointed another
to manage his Business, caused his Losses to be made good, and ordered his
Family to be maintained at the Public Expense. The Elder Cato returning Consul
from Spain, sold his Horse of Service, to save the Money it would have cost in
bringing him back by Sea into Italy: And being Governor of Sardignia, made all
his Visits on foot, without other Train, than one Officer of the Republic,
that carried his Robe and a Cencer for Sacrifices; and for the most part
carried his Male himself. He bragged, that he had never worn a Gown that cost
above Ten Crowns, nor had ever sent above Ten Pence to the Market for one Days
Provision, and that as to his Country Houses, he had not one that was rough
cast on the outside. Scypio Aemylianus, after two Triumphs, and two
Consul-ships, went an Embassy with no more than Seven Servants in his Train.
It Is said, that Homer had never more than one, Plato three, and Zeno, founder
of the Sect of Stoics, none at all. Tyberius Gracchus was allowed but Five
Pence Halfpenny a Day, when employed as Public Minister about the Public
Affairs, and being at that time the greatest Man of Rome.

CHAP. LIII. Of a Saying of Caesar.
IF we would sometimes bestow a little Consideration upon our selves, and
employ the time we spend in prying into other Men's Actions, and discovering
things without us, in examining our own Abilities, we should soon perceive of
how infirm and decaying Materials this Fabric of ours is composed. Is it not a
singular testimony of Imperfection, that we cannot establish our satisfaction
in any one thing, and that even our own Fancy and Desire, should deprive us of
the power to choose what is most proper and useful for us? A very good proof of
this, is the great Dispute that has ever been amongst the Philosophers, of
finding out a Man's principal and sovereign Good, that continues yet, and will
eternally continue, without Resolution, or Accord. -- Dum abest quod avemus, id
exuperare videtur, Lucret. l. 3.

Caetera, post aliud cum contigit illud avemus,
Et sitis aequa tenet.
The absent thing we covet, best does seem,
The next that comes captivates our Esteem,
At the same rate.
Whatever it is that falls into our knowledge and possession, we find that it
satisfies not, and still pant after things to come, and unknown: By reason the
present do not satiate and glut us, not that, in my judgment, they have not in
them wherewith to do it, but because we seize them with an unruly and
immoderate haste. Nam cum vidit hic ad victum quae flagitat usus, Lucret. l. 6.

Et per quae possent vitam consistera tutam,
Omnia jam firm mortalibus esse parata:
Divitiis homines, and honor and laud potentes
Affluere, atque bona natorum excellere fama,
Nec minus esse domi cuiquam tamen anxia corda,
Atque animum infestis cogi servire querelis:
Intellexit ibi vitium vas facere ipsum,
Omniaque illius vitio corrumpitur intus
Quae collata foris, and commoda quaeque venirent.
For when he saw all things that had regard,
To Life's subsistence for Mankind prepared,
That Men in Wealth and Honors did abound,
Had hopeful Issue set their Tables round;
And yet had Hearts as Anxious as before,
Murmuring amidst their Happiness and Store:
He then perceived the Vessel was to blame,
And gave a smatch to all into it came,
That thither from without him was conveyed,
To have him Happy and Contented made.
Our Appetite is irresolute and fickle, it can neither keep nor enjoy any thing
gracefully, and as it should: And Man concluding it to be the fault of the
things he is possessed of, fills himself with, and feeds himself upon, the Idea
of things he neither knows, nor understands, to which he devotes his hopes, and
his desires, paying them all Reverence and Honor, according to the saying of
Caesar, Communi fit vitio naturae, ut invisis latitantibus atque incognitis
rebus magis confidamus, vehementiusque exterreamur. It Is the common Vice of
Nature, that we repose most confidence, and receive the greatest apprehensions,
from things unseen, concealed and unknown.

CHAP. LIVE. Of Vain Subtilties.
THere are a sort of little Knacks, and frivolous Subtilties, from which Men
sometimes expect to derive Reputation and Applause: As the Poets, who compose
whole Poems, with every Line beginning with the same Letter: We see the shapes
of Eggs, Globes, Wings and Hatchets, cut out by the Ancient Greeks, by the
measure of their Verses, making them longer or shorter, to represent such or
such a Figure. Of this nature was his Employment, who made it his business, to
compute into how many several Orders the Letters of the Alphabet might be
transposed, and found out that incredible number mentioned in Plutarch. I am
mightily pleased with the humor of the Gentleman, who, having a Man brought
before him, that had learned to throw a Grain of Millet with such dexterity and
assurance, as never to miss the Eye of a Needle; and being afterward entreated
to give something for the reward of so rare a performance, he pleasantly, and
in my opinion, ingeniously ordered a certain number of Bushels of the same
Grain to be delivered to him, that he might not want wherewith to exercise so
famous an Art. It Is a strong evidence of a weak Judgment, when Men approve of
things for their being rare and new, or yet for the difficulty; where Virtue
and Usefulness are not conjoined to recommend them. I come just now from
playing with my own Family, at who could find out the most things, that had
their principal force in their two Extremities; as, Sire, which is a Title
given to the greatest person in the Nation, the King, and also to the Vulgar,
as Merchants and Mechanics, but never to any degree of Men between. The Women
of great Quality are called Madams, inferior Gentlewomen, Mademoiselles, and
the meanest sort of Women, Madams, as the first. The Canopy of State over
Tables are not permitted, but in the Palaces of Princes, and Taverns.
Democritus said, that Gods and Beasts, had a more exact and perfect sense, than
Men, who are of a middle Form. The Romans wore the same Habit at Funerals and
Feasts; and it is most certain, that an extreme Fear, and an extreme Ardour of
Courage, do equally trouble and lax the Belly. The Nickname of Trembling, with
which they Sirnam'd Sancho the XII. King of Navarre, sufficiently informs,
that Valor will cause a trembling in the Limbs, as well as Fear. The Friends
of that King, or of some other person, who upon the like occasion was wont to
be in the same disorder, tried to compose him, by representing the danger less,
he was going to engage himself in: You understand me ill, said he, for could my
Flesh know the danger my Courage will presently carry it into, it would sink
down to the ground. The faintness that surprises us from Frigidity, or dislike
in the exercises of Venus, are also occasioned by a too violent desire, and an
immoderate heat. Extreme Coldness, and extreme Heat, Boil and Roast. Aristotle
says, that Sows of Lead will melt, and run with Cold, and the extremity of
Winter, as with a vehement Heat. Desire and Saciety fill all the gradations
above and below Pleasure with Grief. Brutality and Wisdom meet in the same
Center of Sentiment and Resolution, in the suffering of Humane Accidents; the
Wise Control and Triumph over ill, the others know it not: These last are, as
a Man may say, on this side of Accidents, the other are beyond them; who after
having well weighed and considered their Qualities, measured and judged them
what they are, by virtue of a vigorous Soul leap out of their reach. They
disdain and trample them under foot, having a solid and well fortified Soul,
against which the Darts of Fortune coming to strike, they must of necessity
rebound, and blunt themselves, meeting with a Body upon which they can fix no
Impression; the ordinary and middle condition of Men, are lodged betwixt these
two Extremities, consisting of such, who perceive Evils, feel them, and are not
able to support them. Infancy and Decrepitude meet in the imbecility of the
Brain; Avarice and Profusion in the same thirst and desire of getting. A Man
may say with some color of truth, that there is an Abecedarian ignorance that
precedes knowledge, and a Doctoral Ignorance that comes after it; an Ignorance
that knowledge does create and beget, at the same time that she dispatches and
destroys the first. Of mean understandings, little inquisitive, and little
instructed, are made good Christians, who by reverence and obedience
implicitly believe, and are constant in their belief. In the moderate
understandings, and the middle sort of capacities, the error of Opinions is
begot, and they have some color of reason on their side, to impute our walking
on in the old beaten path to simplicity, and brutishness, I mean in us who have
not informed our selves by Study. The higher, and nobler Souls, more solid and
clear sighted, make up another sort of true believers: who by a long and
Religious investigation of truth, have obtained a clearer, and more
penetrating, light into the Scriptures, and have discovered the Mysterious and
Divine secret of our Ecclesiastical Polity. And yet we see some, who by this
middle step, are arrived to that supreme degree with marvelous Fruit, and
Confirmation; as to the utmost limit of Christian intelligence, and enjoying
their victory with great Spiritual consolation, humble acknowledgment of the
Divine favor, examplary reformation of manners, and Singular modesty. I do not
intend with these to rank some others, who to clear themselves from all
suspicion of their former Errors, and to satisfy us, that they are sound and
firm to us, render themselves extreme indiscreet and unjust, in the carrying on
our Cause, and by that means blemish it with infinite Reproaches of Violence
and Oppression. The simple Peasants are good People, and so are the
Philosophers: Men of strong and clear Reason, and whose Souls are enriched with
an ample instruction of profitable Sciences. The Mongrets who have disdained
the first form of the Ignorance of Letters, and have not been able to attain to
the other, (sitting betwixt two Stools, as I, and a great many more of us do,)
are dangerous, foolish and importunate; these are they that trouble the World.
And therefore it is, that I, for my own part, retreat as much as I can toward
my first and natural Station, from whence I so vainly attempted to advance. The
vulgar and purely natural Poesy, has in it certain Proprieties and Graces, by
which she may come into some comparison with the greatest Beauty of a Poesy
perfected by Art: As is evident in our Gascon Villanels and Songs, that are
brought us from Nations that have no knowledge of any manner of Science, nor so
much as the use of Writing. The indifferent and middle sort of Poesy betwixt
these two, is dispis'd, of no Value, Honor or Esteem. But seeing that the Ice
being once broken, and a Path laid open to the Fancy, I have found, as it
commonly falls out, that what we make choice of for a rare and difficult
Subject, proves to be nothing so, and that after the invention is once warm, it
finds out an infinite number of parallel Examples, I shall only add this one;
That were these Essays of mine considerable enough to deserve a Censure, it
might then I think fall out, that they would not much take with common and
vulgar Capacities, nor be very acceptable to the singular and excellent sort of
Men, for the first would not understand them enough, and the last too much, and
so they might hover in the middle Region.

CHAP. LV. Of Smells.
IT has been reported of others, as well as of Alexander the Great, that their
Sweat exhaled an Odoriferous Smell, occasioned by some rare and extraordinary
constitution, of which Plutarch, and others, have been inquisitive into the
cause. But the ordinary constitution of Humane Bodies is quite otherwise, and
their best and chiefest Excellency, is to be exempt from Smells: Nay, the
sweetness even of the purest Breaths, has nothing in it of greater perfection,
than to be without any offensive Smell, like those of healthful Children: which
made Plautus say, Plaut. Mostel. Art. 1. Sce. 3.
Mulier tum been olet, ubi nihil olet.
That Woman we a sweet one call,
Whose Body breathes no Scent at all.
And such as make use of these exatick Perfumes, are with good reason to be
suspected of some Natural Imperfection, which they endeavor by these Odours to
conceal, according to that of Mr. Johnson, which, without offense to Monsieur
de Montaigne, I will here presume to insert, it being at least as well said, as
any of those he quotes out of the Ancient Poets, Ben. Johnson.
Still to be Neat, still to be Dressed,
As you were going to a Feast,
Still to be Powdered, still Perfumed:
Lady it is to be presumed
Though Arts hid causes are not found,
All is not sweet, all is not sound.
As may be judged by these following, Rides nos Coracime nil olentes:
Martial li. 6. Ep. 55.
Malo quam been olere, nil olere.
Because thou Coracinus still do go
With Musk and Ambergris perfumed so,
We under thy Contempt, forsooth, must fall;
I Would rather than smell sweet, not smell at all.
And elsewhere, Posthume non been olet, qui been semper olet. Id. lib. 2. Ep.
12.

He does not Naturally Smell well,
Who always of Perfumes does Smell.
I am nevertheless a strange lover of good Smells, and as much abominate the
ill ones, which also I reach at a greater distance, I think, than other Men:
Namque sagacius unus odoror, Hor. Ep. 12.

Polypus, an gravis hirsutis cubet hircus in alis,
Quam canis acer ubi lateat sus.
For I can Smell a Putrid Polypus,
Or the Rank Armpits of a Red-hair'd Fuss,
As soon as best Nosed Hound, the stinking Stie,
Where the Wild Boar does in the Forest Lie.
Of Smells, the simple and natural seem to be most pleasing. Let the Ladies
look to that, for it is chiefly their concern. In the wildest parts of Barbary,
the Scythian Women, after Bathing, were wont to Powder and Crust their Faces,
and whole Bodies, with a certain Odoriferous Drug, growing in their own
Territories; which being cleans'd off, when they came to have familiarity with
Men, they were found Perfumed and Sleek: It Is not to be believed, how strangely
all sorts of Odours cleave to me, and how apt my Skin is to imbibe them. He
that complains of Nature, that she has not furnished Mankind with a Vehicle to
convey Smells to the Nose, had no reason; for they will do it themselves;
especially to me: My very Mustachio's perform that Office; for if I stroke them
but with my Gloves, or Handkerchief, the Smell will not out a whole Day: They
will Reproach me where I have been; the close, luscious, devouring and melting
Kisses of Youthful Ardour, would in my Wanton Age have left a Sweetness upon my
Lips for several Hours after. And yet I have ever found my self very little
subject to Epidemick Diseases, that are caught, either by conversing with the
Sick, or bred by the contagion of the Air; I have very well escaped from those
of my time, of which there has been several Virulent sorts in our Cities and
Armies. We Read of Socrates, that though he never departed from Athens, during
the frequent Plagues that infested that City, he only was never Infected.
Physicians might (I believe,) if they would extract greater Utility from
Odours, than they do; for I have often observed, that they cause an alteration
in me, and work upon my Spirits according to their several Virtues; which makes
me approve of what is said, namely, that the use of Incence and Perfumes in
Churches, so Ancient, and so universally received in all Nations, and
Religions, was intended to cheer us, and to rouse and purify the Senses, the
better to fit us for Contemplation. I could have been glad, the better to judge
of it, to have tasted the Culinary Art of those Cooks, who had so rare a way of
Seasoning Exatick Odours with the relish of Meats; As it was particularly
observed in the Service of the King of Tunis, who in our Days Landed at Naples,
to have an interview with Charles the Emperor, where his Dishes were far^'d
with Odoriferous Drugs, to that degree of Expense, that the Cookery of one
Peacock, and two Pheasants, amounted to a Hundred Ducats, to dress them after
their Fashion. And when the Carver came to break them up, not only the
Dining Room, but all the Appartments of his Palace, and the adjoining Streets
were filled with an Aromatic Vapor, which did not presently vanish. My
chiefest care in choosing my Lodgings, is always to avoid a thick and stinking
Air; and those Beautiful Cities of Venice and Paris, have very much lessened
the Kindness I had for them, the one by the offensive Smell of her Marshes, and
the other of her Dirt.

CHAP. LVI. Of Prayers.
I proprose formless and undermined Fancies, like those who publish subtle
Questions, to be after disputed upon in the Schools, not to Establish truth,
but to seek it: I submit them to the better Judgments of those, whose Office it
is to regulate, not my Writings and Actions only, but moreover my very Thoughts
and Opinions. Let what I here set down meet with Correction or Applause, it
shall be of equal welcome and utility to me, my self before hand condemning it
for Absurd and Impious, if any thing shall be found through Ignorance or
Inadvertency, couched in this Rhapsody contrary to the Resolutions and
Prescriptions of the Roman Catholic Church, into which I was Born, and in
which I will Die. And yet, always submitting to the Authority of their Censure,
who have an Absolute Power over me, I thus Timerariously venture at every
thing, as upon this present Subject.

I know not, if, or no, I am deceived; but since by a particular favor of the
Divine Bounty, a certain Form of Prayer has been prescribed and dictated to us,
Word by Word, from the Mouth of God himself, I have ever been of Opinion, that
we ought to have it in more frequent use, than we yet have, and if I were
worthy to advise, at the sitting down to, and rising from our Tables, at our
rising, and going to Bed, and in every particular Action, wherein Prayer is
required, I would that Christians always make use of the Lord's Prayer, if not
alone, yet at least always. The Church may lengthen, or alter Prayers,
according to the necessity of our Instruction, for I know very well, that it is
always the same in substance, and the same thing: But yet such a preferrence
ought to be given to that Prayer, that the People should have it continually in
their Mouths; for it is most certain, that all necessary Petitions are
comprehended in it, and that it is infinitely proper for all Occasions. It Is
the only Prayer I use in all Places and Conditions, and what I still repeat
instead of changing; whence it also happens, that I have no other by Heart, but
that only. It just now comes into my Mind, from whence we should derive that
Error of having recourse to God in all our Designs and Enterprises, to call
him to our Assistance in all sorts of Affairs, and in all Places where our
Weakness stands in need of support, without considering whether the occasion be
just, or otherwise, and to Invoke his Name and Power, in what Estate soever we
are, or Action we are engaged in, how Vicious soever: He is indeed our sole and
only Protector, and can do all things for us: But though he is pleased to
Honor us with his Paternal Care, he is notwithstanding, as Just, as he is Good
and Mighty, and does ofter exercise his Justice, than his Power, and favors us
according to that, and not according to our Petitions. Plato in his Laws, makes
Three sorts of Belief Injurious to the Gods; That there is none; That they
concern not themselves about Humane Affairs; and that they never reject or deny
any thing to our Vows, Offerings and Sacrifices. The first of these Errors
(according to his Opinion,) did never continue rooted in any Man, from his
Infancy to his Old Age, the other two he confesses, Men might be Obstinate in.
God's Justice and his Power are inseparable, and therefore in vain we Invoke
his Power in an Unjust Cause: We are to have our Souls pure and clean, at that
Moment at least, wherein we Pray to him, and purified from all Vicious
Passions, otherwise we our selves present him the Rods wherewith to Chastise
us. Instead of repairing any thing we have done amiss, we double the Wickedness
and the Offense, whilst we offer to him, to whom we are to sue for Pardon, an
Affection full of Irreverence and Hatred. Which makes me not very apt to
applaud those whom I observe to be so frequent on their Knees, if the Actions
nearest of Kin to Prayer, do not give me some Evidence of Reformation. -- Si
Nocturnus adulter Juven. Sat. 8.

Tempora Sanctonica velas adoperta Cucullo.
With Night-Adulteries, if being foul,
Thou shad'st thy guilty Forehead with a Cowl.
And the Practice of a Man, that mixes Devotion with an Execrable Life, seems
in some sort more to be Condemned, than that of a Man conformable to his own
Propension, and Dissolute throughout: And for that Reason, it is, that our
Church denies Admittance to, and Communion with Men Obstinate and Incorrigible
in any kind of Impiety. We Pray only by custom, and for fashions sake, or
rather, we read and pronounce our Prayers aloud, which is no better than an
Hypocritical show of Devotion: And I am scandalized, to see a Man Cross himself
Thrice at the Benedicite, and as often, at another saying Grace, (and the
more, because it is a Sign I have in great Veneration, and constant use upon
solemn occasions,) and to Dedicate all the other Hours of the Day to Acts of
Malice, Avarice and Injustice. One Hour to God, the rest to the Devil, as if by
Commutation and Consent. It Is a wonder to me, Actions so various in themselves,
succeed one another with such an Uniformity of Method, as not to interfer, nor
suffer any alteration* even upon the very Confines and Passes from the one to
the other. What a Prodigious Conscience must that be, that can be at Quiet
within it self, whilst it harbors under the same Roof, with so agreeing and so
calm a Society, both the Crime and the Judge? A Man whose whole Meditation is
continually working upon nothing but Impurity, which he knows to be so Odious
to Almighty God, what can he say, when he comes to speak to him? He Reforms,
but immediately falls into a Relapse. If the Object of the Divine Justice, and
the Presence of his Maker, did, as he pretends, Strike and Chastise his Soul,
how short soever the Repentance might be, the very fear of offending that
Infinite Majesty, would so often present it self to his Imagination, that he
would soon see himself Master of those Vices, that are most Natural and
Habitual in him. But what shall we say of those, who settle their whole course
of Life, upon the Profit and Emolument of Sins, which they know to be Mortal?
How many Trades and Vocations have we admitted and countenanced amongst us,
whose very Essence is Vicious? And he that confessing himself to me,
voluntarily told me, that he had all his Life time professed and practiced a
Religion, in his Opinion Damnable, and contrary to that he had in his Heart,
only to preserve his Credit, and the Honor of his Employments, how could his
Courage suffer so Infamous a Confession? What can Men say to the Divine Justice
upon this subject? Their Repentance consisting in a visible and manifest
Reformation and Restitution, they lose the color of alleging it both to God
and Man. Are they so Impudent, as to sue for Remission, without Satisfaction,
and without Penitency, or Remorse? I look upon these as in the same condition
with the first: But the Obstinacy is not there so easy to be overcome. This
contrariety and volubility of Opinion, so sudden and violent as they pretend,
is a kind of Miracle to me. They present us with the state of an indegestible
Anxiety, and doubtfulness of Mind. It seemed to me a Fantastic and Ridiculous
Imagination in those, who these late Years past, were wont to Reproach every
Man they knew to be of any extraordinary Parts, and made profession of the
Roman Catholic Religion, that it was but outwardly, maintaining moreover, to
do him Honor forsooth, that whatever he might pretend to the contrary, he
could not but in his Heart, be of their Reformed Opinion. An untoward Disease,
that a Man should be so Riveted to his own Belief, as to fancy, that others
cannot believe otherwise, than as he does: And yet worse in this, that they
should entertain so Vicious an Opinion of such parts, as to think any Man so
Qualified, should prefer any present advantage of Fortune, before the promises
of Eternal Life, and the means of Eternal Damnation. They may believe me: Could
any thing have tempted my Youth, the Ambition of the danger and difficulties in
the late Commotions, had not been the least Motives.

It is not without very good Reason, in my Opinion, that the Church Interdicts
the Promiscuous, Indiscreet and Irreverent use of the Holy and Divine Psalms,
with which the Holy Ghost Inspired King David. We ought not to mix God in our
Actions, but with the highest Reverence and Caution. That Poesy is too Sacred,
to be put to no other use, than to exercise the Lungs, and to delight our Ears.
It ought to come from the Soul, and not from the Tongue. It is not fit that a
Prentice in his Shop, amongst his vain and frivolous Thoughts, should be
permitted to pass away his time, and divert himself, with such Sacred things.
Neither is it decent to see the Holy Bible, the Rule of our Worship and Belief,
tumbled up and down a Hall, or a Kitchen. They were formerly Mysteries, but are
now become Sports and Recreations. It Is a Book too Serious, and too Venerable,
to be cursorily or slightly turned over. The Reading of the Scripture ought to
be a temperate and premeditated Act, and to which Men should always add this
Devout Preface, Sursum Corda, preparing even the Body to so humble and composed
a Gesture and Countenance, as shall evidence their Veneration and Attention.
Neither is it a Book for every one to fist, but the Study of Select Men set
apart for that purpose, and whom Almighty God has been pleased to call to that
Office, and Sacred Function: The Wicked and Ignorant, Blemish and Deprave it.
It Is not a Story to tell, but a History to fear and adore. Are not they then
pleasant Men, who think they have rendered this fit for the Peoples handling,
by Translating it into the Vulgar Tongue? Does the Understanding of all therein
contained, only stick at Words? Shall I venture to say further, that by coming
so near to understand a little, they are much wider of the whole scope than
before. A total Ignorance, and wholely depending upon the Exposition of other
Qualified Persons, was more knowing and salutiferous, than this vain and verbal
knowledge, which has only proved the Nurse of Temerity and Presumption. And I do
further believe, that the liberty every one has taken, to disperse the Sacred
Writ into so many Idioms, carries with it a great deal more of Danger, than
Utility. The Jews, Mahometans, and almost all others, have Espoused and
Reverence the Language wherein their Laws and Mysteries were first conceived,
and have expressly, and not without color of reason, forbid the version or
alteration of them, into any other. Are we assured, that in Biscay, and in
Brittany, there are enough competent Judges of this affair, to Establish this
Translation into their own Language? Why, the Universal Church has not a more
difficult and solemn Judgment to make. One of our Greek Historians does justly
accuse the Age he Lived in, for that the Secrets of Christian Religion were
dispersed into the Hands of every Mechanic, to Expound and Argue upon,
according to his own Fancy; and that we ought to be much ashamed, we who by
God's especial favor, enjoy the purest Mysteries of Piety, to suffer them to
be Profaned by the Ignorant Rabble; considering, that the Gentiles expressly
forbad Socrates, Plato, and the other Sages, to enquire into, or so much as to
mention the things committed only to the Priests of Delphos; saying moreover,
that the Factions of Princes, upon Theological accounts, are not Armed with
Zeal, but Fury; that Zeal springs from the Divine Wisdom and Justice, and
governs it self with Prudence and Moderation; but degenerates into Hatred and
Envy, producing Tares and Nettles, instead of Corn and Wine, when conducted by
Humane Passions. And it was truly said of another, who advising the Emperor
Theodosius, and told him, that Disputes did not so much Rock the Schisms of the
Church a sleep, as it Roused and Animated Heresies. That therefore all
Contentions, and Logical Disputations, were to be avoided, and Men absolutely
to Acquiess in the Prescriptions and Formulas of Faith, Established by the
Ancients. And the Emperor Androricus having overheard some great Men at high
words in his Palace with Lapodius, about a Point of ours of great Importance,
gave them so severe a Check, as to threaten to cause them to be thrown into the
River, if they did not desist. The very Women and Children now adays, take upon
them to Document the Oldest and most Experienced Men about the Ecclesiastical
Laws: Whereas the first of those of Plato, forbids them to enquire so much as
into the Civil Laws; which were to stand instead of Divine Ordinances. And
allowing the Old Men to confer amongst themselves, or with the Magistrate,
about those things, he adds, provided it be not in the presence of Young or
Profane Persons. A Bishop has left in Writing, that at the other end of the
World, there is an Isle, by the Ancients called Dioscorides, abundantly Fertile
in all sorts of Trees and Fruits, and of an exceeding Healthful Air: The
Inhabitants of which are Christians, having Churches and Altars, only adorned
with Crucifixes, without any other Images, great Observers of Fasts and Feasts:
Exact payers of their Tyths to the Priests, and so Chaste, that none of them is
permitted to have to do with more than one Woman in his Life. As to the rest,
so content with their condition, that environed with the Sea, they know nothing
of Navigation, and so simple, that they understand not one Syllable of the
Religion they profess, and wherein they are so Devout. A thing incredible to
such as do not know, that the Pagans, who are so Zealous Idolaters, know
nothing more of their Gods, than their bare Names and their Statues. The
Ancient beginning of Menalippus, a Tragedy of Euripedes, ran thus, Jupiter, for
that Name alone,
Of what thou art, to me is known.
I have also known in my time some Men's Writings found fault with, for being
purely Humane and Philosophical, without any mixture of Divinity; and yet
whoever should on the contrary say, that Divine Doctrine, as Queen and Regent
of the rest, better, and with greater Decency, keeps her State apart: What, she
ought to be Sovereign throughout, not Subsidiary and Suffragan: And that
peradventure, Grammatical, Rhetorical and Logical Examples, may elsewhere be
more suitably chosen, as also the Arguments for the Stage, and Public
Entertainments, than from so Sacred a matter: That Divine Reasons are
considered with greater Veneration and Attention, when by themselves, and in
their own proper Style, than when mixed with, and adapted to Humane Discourses.
That it is a fault much more often observed, that the Divines Write too
Humanely, than that the Humanists Write not Theologically enough: Philosophy,
says St. Chrysostom, has long been Banished the Holy Schools, as an Handmaid,
altogether useless, and thought unworthy to peep, so much as in passing by the
Door, into the Sacrifice of the Divine Doctrine. And that the Humane way of
speaking is of a much lower form, and ought not to serve her self with the
Dignity and Majesty of Divine Eloquence. I say, whoever on the contrary should
Object all this, would not be without reason on his side. Let who will Verbis
Indisciplinatis, talk of Fortune, Destiny, Accident, Good and Evil Hap, and
other such like Phrases, according to his own Humor; I for my part, propose
Fancies merely Humane, and merely my own, and that simply, as Humane Fancies,
and separately considered, not as determined by any Arrest from Heaven; or
incapable of Doubt, or Dispute. Matter of Opinion, not matter of Faith. Things
which I discourse of according to my own Capacity, not what I believe according
to God; which also I do after a Laical, not Clerical, and yet always after a
very Religious manner. And it were as Rational to affirm, that an Edict,
enjoining all People, but such as are Public Professors of Divinity, to be
very reserved in Writing of Religion, would carry with it a very good color of
Utility and Justice, and me, amongst the rest, to hold my prating. I have been
told, that even those who are not of our Church, do nevertheless amongst
themselves, expressly forbid the Name of God to be used in common Discourse:
Not so much as by way of Interjection, Exclamation, Assertion of a Truth, or
Comparison, and I think them in the right. And upon what occasion soever we
call upon God, to accompany and assist us, it ought always to be done with the
greatest Reverence and Devotion. There is, as I remember, a passage in
Xenophon, where he tells us, that we ought so much the more seldom to call
upon God, by how much it is hard to compose our Souls to such a degree of
Calmness, Penitency and Devotion, as it ought to be in at such time, otherwise
our Prayers are not only vain and fruitless, but Vicious in themselves. Forgive
us (we say) our Trespasses, as we forgive them that Trespass against us. What
do we mean by this Petition, but that we present him a Soul free from all
Rancour and Revenge? And yet we make nothing of Imvoking God's Assistance in
our Vices, and inviting him into our unjust Designs. Quae nisi seductis nequeas
committere divis. Perse. Sat. ^*

Which only to the Gods apart,
Thou have the Impudence to impart.
The Covetous Man Prays for the conservation of his superfluous, and
peradventure, ill got Riches; the Ambitious for Victory, and the Conduct of his
Fortune; the Thief calls God to his Assistance, to deliver him from the Dangers
and Difficulties that obstruct his Wicked Designs: Or returns him thanks for
the Facility he has met with in Robbing a poor Peasant. At the Door of the
House they are going to Storm, or break into by force of a Petarre, they fall
to Prayers for success, having their Instruction and Hopes full of Cruelty,
Avarice and Lust. Hoc ipsum quo tu Jovis aurem impellere tentas,
(...). Ibid.
Dic agedum, Staio, proh, Jupiter, o bone, clamet,
Jupiter, at sese non clamet Jupiter ipse.
The Prayers with which thou do assault Jove's Ear,
Repeat to Staius, whom thou soon wilt hear.
O Jupiter, good Jupiter, Exclaim:
But Jupiter Exclaims not;
Marguarette Queen of Navarre, tells of a Young Prince, (whom though she does
not name, is easily enough by his great Quality to be known,) who going upon an
Amorous Assignation to Lie with an Advocates Wife of Paris, his way thither
being through a Church, he never passed that Holy place, going to, or returning
from, this Godly Exercise, but he always Kneeled down to Pray; wherein he would
employ the Divine Favor, his Soul being full of such Virtuous Meditations, I
leave others to judge, which nevertheless she instances, for a Testimony of
singular Devotion. But it is by this proof only, that a Man may conclude* no
Man not very fit to treat of Theological Affairs. A true Prayer, and Religious
reconciling of our selves to Almighty God, cannot enter into an impure Soul,
and at the very instant subjected to the very Dominion of Satan. He who calls
God to his Assistance, whilst in a Habit of Vice, does, as if a Cutpurse
should call a Magistrate to help him, or like those who introduce the Name of
God to the Attestation of a Lie. -- Tacito mala vota susurro Concipimus. Lucan.
l. 5.

In Whispers we do guilty Prayers make.
There are few Men who durst Publish to the World the Prayers they make to
Almighty God. Haud cuivis promptum est, murmurque humilesque susurros Perseus.
Sat. 2.

Tollere de Templis, and aperto vivere voto.
It Is not convenient for every one
To bring the Prayer he mutters over there,
Out of the Temple to the public Ear.
And ^h^s is the reason why the Pythagoreans would have them always Public, to
be heard by every one, to the end they might not prefer indecent or unjust
Petitions, as he did, who having Hor. lib. 1. Epist. 10.
-- Clare cum dixit, Apollo,
Labra movet metuens audiri: pulcra Laverna
Da mihi fallere, da justum, sanctumque videri.
Noctem peccatis and fraudibus objice nubem.
Apollo's Name pronounced aloud: for fear
Any his Orizons should over-hear,
Mu^t^ed betwixt his Teeth, Laverna great,
Grant me the Talent to Deceive and Cheat
All I shall have to do with every where,
Yet all the while, Holy and Just appear,
And from the sight of Men, be pleased to Shroud,
My Sins with Night, Frauds with a Sable Cloud.
The God did severely punish the Wicked Prayers of Oedipus, in granting them:
He had Prayed, that his Children might amongst themselves Determine the
Succession to his Throne by Arms; and was so miserable, as to see himself taken
at his word. We are not to Pray, that all things may go as we would have them,
but as is most conducing to the good of the World; and we are not in our
Prayers to Obey our Wills, but Prudence. We seem, in truth, to make use of our
Prayers, as of a kind of Gibberish, and as those do who employ Holy Words about
Sorceries and Magical Operations: And as if we made account, the benefit we are
to reap from them, depended upon the contexture, sound and gingle of Words, or
upon the composing of the Countenance. For having the Soul contaminated with
Concupiscence, not touched with Repentance, or comforted by any late
Reconciliation with Almighty God, we go to present him such Words as the Memory
suggests to the Tongue, and hope from thence to obtain the Remission of our
Sins. There is nothing so easy, so sweet, and so favorable, as the Divine
Law: She calls and invites us to her, Guilty and Abominable as we are: Extends
her Arms, and receives us into her Bosom, as foul and polluted as we at
present are, and are for the future to be. But then in return, we are to look
upon her with a respective, and a graceful Eye, we are to receive this Pardon
with all imaginable gratitude and submission, and, for that instant at least,
wherein we Address our selves to her, to have the Soul sensible of the ills we
have committed, and at defiance with those Passions, that seduced her to
offend, for neither the Gods, nor Good Men, (says Plato,) will accept the
present of a Wicked Man.

Hor. l. 3. Ode. 23.
Immunis aram si tetigit manus,
Non sumptuosa blandior hostia
Mollivit aversos Penates,
Far pio, and salienta mica.
The pious Offering of a piece of Bread,
If by a pure Hand on the Altar laid,
Than Costly Hecatombs, will better please
The offended Gods, and their just Wrath appease.
CHAP. LVII. Of Age.
I Cannot allow of the proportion we settle upon our selves, and the space we
allot to the duration of Life. I see that the Wise contract it very much, in
comparison of the common Opinion. What (said the Younger Cato to those who
would stay his Hand from Killing himself,) am I now of an Age to be Reproached,
that I go out of the World too soon? And yet he was but Eight and Forty Years
Old. He thought that to be a mature and competent Age, considering how few
arrive unto it, and such, as soothing their Thoughts with I know not what
course of Nature, promise to themselves some Years beyond it, could they be
priviledg'd from the infinite number of Accidents, to which we are by a natural
subjection exposed, might have some Reason so to do. What an Idle Conceit it
is, to expect to Die of a decay of Strength, which is the last of effects of
the extremest Age, and to propose to our selves no shorter lease of Life than
that, considering it is a kind of Death of all others the most rare, and very
hardly seen? We call that only a Natural Death, as if it were contrary to
Nature, to see a Man break his Neck with a Fall, be Drowned in Shipwreck at
Sea; or snatched away with a Plurisie, or the Plague, and, as if our ordinary
condition of Life did not expose us to these Inconveniences. Let us no more
flatter our selves with these fine sounding Words: We ought rather, at a
venture, to call that Natural, which is Common and Universal. To Die of Old
Age, is a Death rare, extraordinary and singular, and therefore so much less
Natural, than the others: It Is the last and extremest sort of Dying: And the
more remote, the less to be hoped for. It is indeed the Boundary of Life,
beyond which we are not to pass: Which the Law of Nature has pitched for a
Limit, not to be exceeded: But it is withal a Privilege she is rarely seen to
give us to last till then. It Is a Lease she only Signs by particular savor,
and it may be, to one only, in the space of two or three Ages; and then with a
Pass to boot, to carry him through all the Traverses and Difficulties she has
strewn in the way of this long Carreer. And therefore my Opinion is, that when
once Forty Years Old, we should consider it is as an Age to which very few
arrive: For seeing that Men do not usually proceed so far, it is a sign that we
are pretty well advanced, and since we have exceeded the ordinary Bounds, which
make the just measure of Life, we ought not to expect to go much further;
having escaped so many Precipices of Death, whereinto we have seen so many
other Men to fall, we should acknowledge, that so extraordinary a Fortune, as
that which has hitherto rescued us from those Eminent Perils, and kept us alive
beyond the ordinary term of Living, is not likely to continue long. It Is a
fault in our very Laws, to maintain this Error, That a Man is not capable of
managing his own Estate, till he be Five and Twenty Years Old, whereas he will
have much ado to manage his Life so long. Augustus cut off Five Years from the
Ancient Roman Standard, and declared, that Thirty Years Old was sufficient for
a Judge. Survius Tullius superceded the Knights of above Seven and Forty Years
of Age, from the Fatigues of War: Augustus dismissed them at Forty Five: Though
methinks it seems a little unlikely, that Men should be sent to the Fireside,
till Five and Fifty, or Sixty Years of Age. I should be of Opinion, that both
our Vacancy and Employment, should be as far as possible extended for the
Public Good: But I find the fault on the other side, that they do not employ
us Early enough. This Emperor was Arbiter of the whole World at Nineteen, and
yet would have a Man to be Thirty, before he could be fit to bear Office in the
Commonwealth. For my part I believe, our Souls are Adult at Twenty, such as
they are ever like to be, and as capable then as ever. A Soul that has not by
that time given evident earnest of its Force and Virtue, will never after come
to proof. Natural Parts and Excellencies produce, that they have of Vigorous
and Fine, within that Term, or never.

Of all the great Humane Actions I ever Heard, or Read of, of what sort soever,
I have Observed, both in former Ages, and our own, more performed before the
Age of Thirty, than after: And oft-times in the very Lives of the same Men. May
I not confidently instance in those of Hannibal, and his great concurrent
Scipio? The better half of their Lives, they Lived upon the Glory they had
Acquired in their Youth; great Men after, it is true, in comparison of others;
but by no means, in comparison of themselves. As to my own particular, I do
certainly believe, that since that Age, both my Understanding, and my
Constitution, have rather decayed, than improved, and retired, rather than
advanced. It Is possible, that with those who make the best use of their Time,
Knowledge and Experience may grow up and increase with their Years; but the
Vivacity, Quickness and Steadiness, and other pieces of us, of much greater
Importance, and much more Essentially our own, Languish and Decay. -- Vbi jam
validis quassatum est viribus aevi. Lucret. l. 3.

Corpus, and obstusis ceciderunt viribus artus,
Claudicat ingenium, delirat linquaque mensque.
When once the Body's shaken by Times Rage,
The Blood and Vigor Ebbing into Age,
The Judgment then Halts upon either Hip,
The Mind does Dote, Tongue into Nonsense Trip.
Sometimes the Body first submits to Age, sometimes the Soul, and I have seen
enough, who have got a Weakness in their Brains, before either in their Hams, or
Stomach: And by how much the more, it is a Disease of no great pain to the
infected Party, and of obscure Symptoms, so much greater the danger is. And for
this reason it is, that I complain of our Laws, not that they keep us too long
to our Work, but that they set us to work too late. For the Frailty of Life
considered, and to how many Natural and Accidental Rubs it is Obnoxious and
Exposed: Birth, though Noble, ought not to share so large a Vacancy, and so
tedious a course of Education.

The End of the First Book.
MICHEL SEIGNEVR DE MONTAIGNE.


Printed for T. Bassett M. Gilliflower and W. Hensman.

ESSAYS OF MICHAEL SEIGNEUR DE MONTAIGNE.

In Three Books.

With Marginal Notes and Quotations of the cited Authors.

New rendered into English, By CHARLES COTTON Esquire

The Second Volume.

LONDON, Printed for T. Basset, at the George in Fleet Street, and M.
Gilliflower and W. Hensman, in Westminster Hall. 1686.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS OF THE Second Book.
Chap. 1. OF the Inconstancy of our Actions. Page 1 Chap. 2. Of Drunkenness. 14
Chap. 3. The Custom of the Isle of Cea. 30 Chap. 4. To Morrow's a new Day. 55
Chap. 5. Of Conscience. 59 Chap. 6. Use makes Perfectness. 66 Chap. 7. Of
Recompenses of Honor. 84 Chap. 8. Of the Affection of Fathers to their
Children. 90 Chap. 9. Of the Arms of the Parthians. 123 Chap. 10. Of Books. 129
Chap. 11. Of Cruelty. 151 Chap. 12. Apology for Raimond de Sebonde. 159 Chap.
13. Of Judging of the Death of another. 435 Chap. 14. That the Mind hinders it
self. p. 446 Chap. 15. That our Desires are augmented by Difficulties. 447
Chap. 16. Of Glory. 457 Chap. 17. Of Presumption. 479 Chap. 18. Of Giving the
Lie. 532 Chap. 19. Of Liberty of Conscience. 540 Chap. 20. That we taste
nothing pure. 546 Chap. 21. Against Idleness. 551 Chap. 22. Of Posts. 558 Chap.
23. Of ill Means employed to a good End. 560 Chap. 24. Of the Roman Grandeur.
566 Chap. 25. Not to counterfeit being sick. 569 Chap. 26. Of Thumbs. 572 Chap.
27. Cowardice the Mother of Cruelty. 574 Chap. 28. All Things have their
Season. 589 Chap. 29. Of Virtue. 593 Chap. 30. Of a monstrous Child. 605 Chap.
31. Of Anger. 607 Chap. 32. Defense of Seneca and Plutarch. 619 Chap. 33. The
Story of Spurina. 630 Chap. 34. Observation of the Means to carry on a War
according to Julius Caesar. 642 Chap. 35. Of three good Women. 656 Chap. 36. Of
the most excellent Men. 668 Chap. 37. Of the Resemblance of Children to their
Fathers. 680
ESSAYS OF Michael Seigneur de Montaigne.
The Second Book.
CHAP. I. Of the Inconstancy of our Actions.
SUch, as make it their business to control humane Actions, do not find
themselves in any thing so much perplexed, as to reconcile them, and bring them
into the Worlds eye with the same Luster and Reputation; for they do commonly
so strangely contradict one another, that it seems impossible they should
proceed from one and the same Person. We find the younger Marius one while a
Son of Mars, and another the Son of Venus. Pope Boniface the Eighth entered
(says one) into his Papacy like a Fox, behaved himself in it like a Lion, and
died like a Dog. And who could believe it to be the same Nero, the perfect
Image of all Cruelty, who, having the Sentence of a condemned man brought to
him to Sign, cried out, O, that I had never been taught to Write. So much it
went to his heart to condemn a man to Death. All Story is full of such
Examples, and every man is able to produce so many to himself, or out of his
own practice, or observation, Irresolution the most common Vice of our Nature.
that I sometimes wonder to see men of understanding give themselves the
trouble of sorting these pieces, considering that irresolution appears to me to
be the most common and manifest Vice of our Nature; Witness the famous Verse of
the Player Publius, Aulus Gel. ex Pub. Min.
Malum consilium est, quod mutari non potest.
That Counsel's ill, that will admit no change.


There is some possibility of forming a judgment of a man from the most usual
methods of his life; Instability of our manners and opinions.
but, considering the natural Instability of our manners and opinions, I have
often thought even the best Authors a little out, in so obstinately
endeavoring to make of us any constant and solid Contexture. They choose a
general Air of a man, and according to that interpret all his Actions, of
which, if some be so stiff and stubborn, that they cannot bend or writh them to
any uniformity with the rest, they are presently imputed to dissimulation.
Augustus has escapt them, Augustus.
for there was in him so apparent, sudden, and continual variety of Actions,
all the whole course of his life, that he is slipped away clear and undecided
from the most hardy Censurers. I am more hardly induc't to believe a man's
Constancy than any other Virtue, and believe nothing sooner than the contrary.
It is a hard matter, out of all Antiquity, to pick out a dozen men, who have
formed their lives to one certain and constant course, which is the principal
design of Wisdom: For to comprize it all in one word, (says one of the
Ancients) and to contract all the Rules of humane life into one, it is to Will,
and not to Will always one and the same thing: I will not vouchsafe, says he to
add, provided the Will be just, for if it be not just, it is impossible it
should be always one. I have indeed formerly learnt, That Vice is nothing but
Irregularity and want of measure, and therefore it is impossible to fix
constancy to it. It Is a saying of Demosthenes, That the beginning of all virtue
is consultation and deliberation, the end and perfection, constancy. If we
would resolve on any certain course upon mature advice, we should pitch upon
the best, but no body has thought on it.

Hor. l. 1. G. 1.
Quod petiit, spernit, repetit quod nuper omisit,
Aestuat, and vitae disconvenit ordine toto.
He now despises, what he late did crave,
And what he last neglected, now would have:
He fluctuates, and flies from that to this,
And his whole life a Contradiction is.
Our ordinary practice is, to follow the inclinations of our appetite, be it to
the left or right, upwards or downwards, according as we are wafted by the
breath of occasion. We never meditate what we would have, till the instant we
have a mind to have it; and change like that little Creature, that receives its
color from what it is laid upon. What we but just now propose to our selves,
we immediately alter, and presently return again to the first; it is nothing but
shifting, and inconstancy: Id. lib. 2. Sat. 7.
Ducimur ut nervis alienis mobile lignum.
Like Tops with leathern Thongs we are scourged about.
We do not go, we are driven; like things that float, now leisurely, then with
violence, according to the gentleness, or rapidity of the Current. -- nonne
videmus, Lucret. lib. 3.

Quid sibi quisque velit nescire, and quaerere semper,
Commutare locum quasi onus deponere possit?
See we not, up and down men daily trot
For something they would have, but know not what:
Shifting from place to place, as here or there,
They could set down the burden of their care.
Every day a new whimsie, and our humors keep motion with the time. Tales sunt
hominum mentes, Cicero.
quali pater ipse
Juppiter auctifero lustravit lumine terras.
Such are the motions of the inconstant Soul,
As are the days, and weather, fair or foul.
We fluctuate betwixt various inclinations; we Will nothing freely, nothing
absolutely, nothing constantly. In any one, that had prescribed and established
determinate Laws and Rules in his head for his own conduct, we should perceive
an equality of manners, an order, and an infallible relation of one thing, or
action, to another, shine through his whole life, ( Empedocles observed this
discrepancy in the Agregentines, that they gave themselves up to delights, as
if every day was their last, and built, as if they had been to live for ever)
and the judgment would not be hard to make. As is very evident in the person of
the younger Cato, who has found one step, it will lead him to all the rest:
it is a harmony of very according sounds, that cannot jar, nor deceive the ear.
But with us it is quite contrary, every particular Action requires a particular
Judgment, wherein the surest way to steer, in my opinion, would be to take our
measures from the nearest allied Circumstances, without engaging in a longer
inquisition, or without concluding any other consequence. I was told, during
the civil disorders of our poor Kingdom, that a Maid, hard by the place where I
then was, had thrown her self out of a window, to avoid being forced by a
common Soldier, that was quartered in the house: She was not killed by the
fall, and therefore redoubling her attempt, would have cut her own Throat, had
she not been prevented; but having nevertheless wounded her self to some show
of danger, she voluntarily confessed, that the Soldier had not as yet importuned
her otherwise than by Courtship, A Maid threw her self out of a window for fear
of a Rape.
earnest Solicitation, and such little Presents as he was able to procure; but
that she was afraid, that in the end he would have proceeded to violence, all
which she delivered with such a countenance and accent, and withal embrew'd in
her own blood, the highest Testimony of her virtue, that she appeared another
Lucretia; and yet I have since been very well assured, that, both before and
after, she was not so difficult a piece. And, according to my Hosts tale in
Ariosto, be as handsome a man, and as fine a Gentleman as you will, do not
conclude too much upon your Mistresses inviolable Chastity, for having been
repulst; you do not know but she may have a better stomach to your Muletteer.

Antigonus, having taken one of his Soldiers into a great degree of favor and
esteem, for his Virtue and Valor, gave his Physicians strict charge to cure
him of a long and inward disease under which he had a great while languisht;
and observing that after his Cure, he went much more coldly to work than
before, he asked the Fellow, Who had so altered, and cowed him. Your self (Sir)
replied the other, by having eased me of the pains that made me weary of my
life. Lucullus his Soldier, having been rifled by the Enemy, performed upon
them in revenge a brave Exploit, by which having made himself at least a Saver,
Lucullus, who had conceived a good opinion of him, from that action, went about
to engage him in some enterprise of very great danger, with all the plausible
persuasions and promises he could think of, Verbis quae timido quoque possent
addere mentem: Hor. lib. 2. Ep. 2.

Words which the coldest Coward would inspire,
And with brisk mettle set his Blood on Fire.
Pray employ, answered he, some miserable plundered Soldier in that affair, --
quantum vis rusticus ibit,
Id. Ibid.
Ibit eo, quo vis, qui zonam perdidit, inquit.
Some Fool, or poor Knave knapsack't by the foe,
On that design may peradventure go.
and flatly refused to go. When we read, that Mahomet having furiously rated
Chasan, Bassa of the Janissaries, who seeing the Hungarians break into his
Squadrons, had behaved himself very ill in the business, and that Chasan in
stead of any other answer, rushed furiously alone with his Cimitar in his hand
into the first Body of the Enemy, where he was presently cut to pieces: We are
not to look upon that action peradventure, so much designed to vindicate
himself from the reproach of Cowardice as an effect of recollection, nor so
much proceeding from natural Valor as a sudden Despite. The Man you saw
yesterday so adventurous and brave, you must not think it strange to see him as
great a Poltron the next: Anger, Necessity, Company, Wine or the sound of the
Trumpet, had roused his Spirits; this is no Valor formed, and Established by
Meditation; but accidentally created by those circumstances, and therefore it
is no wonder, if by contrary circumstances it apquipear te another thing.

These supple variations, and contradictions so manifest in us, have given Some
occasion to believe, that Man has two Souls; Others, two distinct Powers, that
always accompany and incline us, the one toward Good, and the other toward
Ill according to their own Natures, and Propensions* so sudden a variety of
inclination not being to be imagined to to flow from one and the same Fountain.
For my part I must ingeniously declare, that the puff of every accident not
only carries me a long with it, according to its own proclivity, but that
moreover I discompose, and trouble my self, by the instability of my own
posture; and whoever will look narrowly into his own Bosom, will hardly find
himself twice in the same Condition. I give my Soul sometimes one face, and
sometimes another, according to the side I turn her to. If I speak variously of
my self, it is, because I consider my self variously. All contrarieties are
there to be found, in one corner or another, or after one manner or another.
Bashful, Insolent, Chaste, Lustful, Prating, Silent, Laborious, Delicate,
Ingenious, Heavy, Melancholic, Pleasant, Lying, True, Knowing, Ignorant,
Liberal, Covetous, and Prodigal, I find all this in my self, more or less,
according as I turn my self about; and whoever will sift himself, to the
bottom, will find in himself, even by his own Judgment this volubility and
discordance. In a word, I have nothing to say of my self entirely, simply, and
solidly without mixture, and confusion. Distinguo is the most universal Member
of my Logic. Though I always intend to speak well of good things, and rather
to interpret such things, as may fall out, in the best sense, than otherwise:
Yet such is the strangeness of our condition, that we are sometimes push't on
to do well even by Vice it self, if well doing were not judged by the intention
only. One gallant Action therefore ought not to conclude a man Valiant; if a
man was brave indeed, he would be always so, and upon all occasions. If it were
a Habit of Virtue, and not a Sally, it would render a man equally resolute in
all Accidents; the same Alone, as in Company; the same in Lists, as in a
Battle; for, let them say what they will, there is not one Valor for the
Pavement, and another for the Field. He would bear a Sickness in his Bed, as
bravely as a Wound in the Field, and no more fear Death in his own house, than
at an assault. We should not then see the same man charge into a Breach with a
brave assurance, and afterward torment himself, and pule like a Woman for the
loss of a trial at Law, or the death of a Child. When being a detected Coward
to infamy, he is constant in the necessities of Poverty and Want; when he
starts at the sight of a Barbers Razor, and rushes fearless into the Swords of
the Enemy, the Action is commendable, not the Man.

Many of the Greeks, says Cicero, cannot endure the sight of an Enemy, Cicero.
Tusc. 2.
and yet are courageous in Sickness; the Cimbrians, and Celtiberians quite
contrary. Nihil enim potest esse aequabile, quod non a certa ratione
proficiscatur. Nothing can be equal, that does not proceed from a certain
ground of reason. The Valor of Alexander extreme in its kind.
No Valor can be more extreme in its kind, than that of Alexander: But it is
but one kind; nor full enough throughout. As peerless as it is, it has yet some
blemishes. Of which, his being so often at his wits end, upon every light
suspicion of his Captains conspiring against his life, and the carrying himself
in that Inquisition with so much vehemence and injustice, and a fear that
subverted his natural reason, is one pregnant instance; the Superstition also,
with which he was so much tainted, carries along with it some Image of
Pusillanimity. And the excess of his Penitency, for the Murder of Clytus, is
also a Testimony of the unevenness of his Courage. All we perform is no other
than a Cento, as a man may say, of several pieces, and yet we would acquire
Honor by a false title. Virtue cannot be followed, but for her self, and if one
sometimes borrow her Mask for some other occasion, she presently pulls it away
again. It Is a stamp and lively tincture, which when the soul has once thoroughly
imbibed, it will not out, but with the piece. And therefore to make a right
judgment of a man, we are long, and very observingly, to follow his trace: If
constancy does not there stand firm upon her own proper Base, Cui vivendi via
considerata, atque provisa est, Cicer.
if the variety of occurrences makes him to alter his pace (his path I mean,
for the pace may be faster or slower) let him go, such a one runs before the
wind. It Is no wonder, says one of the Ancients, that chance has so great a
dominion over us, since it is by chance we live. It is not possible for any
one, who has not designed his life for some certain end, to dispose his
particular actions. It is impossible for any one to fit the pieces together,
who has not the whole form already contrived in his imagination. To what use
are colors to him, or to what end should he provide them, that knows not what
he is to paint? No one lays down a certain design for his life, and we only
deliberate by pieces. The Archer ought first to know at what he is to aim, and
then accommodate his Arm, Bow, String, Shaft, and Motion to it. Our Counsel
deviates and wanders, because not levelled to any determinate end. No wind
serves him, who addresses his Voyage to no certain Port. I cannot acquiesce in
the judgment given by one, in the behalf of Sophocles; who concluded him
capable of the management of Domestic affairs, against the accusation of his
son, for having seen one of his Tragedies.

Neither do I allow of the conjecture of the Parians, sent to regulate the
Milesians, sufficient for such a consequence, as they from thence derived.
Coming to visit the Island, they took notice of such grounds as were best
husbanded, and such Country-houses as were best governed; and having taken the
names of the owners, when they had assembled the Citizens, they appointed those
Farmers for new Governors, and Magistrates; concluding, that they, who had been
so provident in their own private concerns, would be so of the public too. We
are all inform lumps, and of so various a contexture, that every piece plays
every moment its own game, and there is as much difference betwixt us and our
selves, as betwixt us and others. Magnam rem puta, Sen. Epist. 120.
unum hominem agere. Since ambition can teach men Valor, Temperance, and
Liberality, and even Justice too; seeing that Avarice can inspire the courage
of a Shop-boy, bred and nursed up in obcurity and ease, with the assurance to
expose himself so far from the Fireside, to the mercy of the Waves in a frail
Boat, that she does farther teach Discretion and Prudence: And that even Venus
can inflate Boys under the discipline of the Rod with boldness, and resolution,
and infuse masculine courage into the Heart of tender Virgins in their Mothers
arms: Hac duce custodes furtim transgressa jacentes Tib. lib. 2. Erg. 1.

Ad juvenem tenebris sola puella venit.
The tender Virgin, dreadless of all harms,
Steals in the dark to her young Lovers arms.
It Is not all the understanding has to do, simply to judge us by our outward
Actions, it must penetrate the very Soul, and there discover by what springs
the motion is guided: But that being a high and hazardous undertaking, I could
wish that fewer would attempt it.

CHAP. II. Of Drunkenness.
THe World is nothing but Variety, and Disproportion, Vices are all alike, as
they are Vices, and peradventure the Stoics understand them so, but although
they are equally Vices, yet they are not equal Vices: And that he who has
transgrest the ordinary bounds a hundred paces, should not be in a worse
condition, than he that has advanced but ten, is not to be believed; or that
Sacrilege is not worse than stealing a Cabbadge, Hor. lib. 1. Sat. 3.
Nec vincet ratio, tantumdem ut peccet idemque,
Qui teneros caules alieni fregerit horti,
Et qui nocturnus divum sacra legerit.
Nor seems it reason, he as much should Sin,
Steals but a Cabbadge Plant, as he who, in
The dead of night, a Temple breaks, and brings
Away from thence the Consecrated things.
There is in this as great diversity, as in any thing whatever: The confounding
of the order and measure of Sins is dangerous: Murderers, Traitors, and
Tyrants are therein so very deep concerned, that it is not reasonable they
should flatter their Consciences, because such another is Idle, Lascivious, or
less assiduous at his Devotion: Every one lays weight upon the Sin of his
Companions, but lightens his own. Our very Instructors themselves rank them
sometimes, in my opinion, very ill. As Socrates, who said, that the principal
office of Wisdom was, to distinguish Goods and Evils. We, whose best faculties
are always vicious, ought also to say of Knowledge, that it is to distinguish
betwixt Vice and Vice, without which, and that very exactly performed, Virtuous
and Wicked will remain confounded and unknown. Now, amongst the rest,
Drunkenness seems, to me, to be a gross and brutish Vice. The Soul has the
greatest interest in all the rest, and there are some Vices, that have
something, if a man may so say, of generous in them. There are Vices, wherein
there is a mixture of Knowledge, Diligence, Valor, Prudence, Dexterity, and
Cunning: The Germans great Drinkers.
This is totally Corporeal and Earthly, and the thickest sculled Nation this
day in Europe, is that, where it is the most in fashion. Other Vices discompose
the understanding, this totally overthrows it, and renders the body stupid.

-- cum vini vis penetravit, Lucret. lib. 3.

Consequitur gravitas membrorum, praepediuntur
Crura vacillanti, tardescit lingua, madet men's,
Nant oculi, clamor, singultus, jurgia gliscunt:
When fumes of Wine do once the Brain possess,
Then follows straight an indisposedness
Throughout, the Legs so fettered in that case
They cannot with the reeling trunck keep pace.
The Tongue trips, Mind droops, Eyes stand full of Water,
Noise, Hiccups, Brawles, and Quarrels follow after.
The worst estate of man is that, wherein he loses the knowledge and government
of himself. And it is said, amongst other things, upon that subject, that, as
the Must, fermenting in a Vessel, works up to the top whatever it has in the
bottom: So the old Wine, in those who have drank beyond their measure, vents
the most inward Secrets, -- tu sapientium
Curas, and arcanum jocoso
Consilium retegis Lyaeo.
Thou in thy Cups, and wild debaucheries,
Blabb'st out the secret Counsel of the Wise.
Josephus tells us, that, by giving an Ambassador, the Enemy had sent to him,
his full dose of Liquor, he worm'd out his secrets. And yet Augustus, commiting
the most inward secrets of his affairs to Lucius Piso, who conquered Thrace,
never found him faulty in the least, no more than Tiberius did Cossus, with
whom he entrusted his whole Counsels, though we know they were both so given to
Drink, that they have often been fain to carry both the one and the other Drunk
out of the Senate. Hesterno inflatum venas de more Lyaeo. Virg. Eg^. 6.

Their head being yet full of the day before.
And the design of Killing Caesar was as safely communicated to Cimber, though
he would sometimes be Drunk, as to Cassius who Drunk nothing but Water. We see
our Germans, when Drunk as the Devil, can know their Post, remember the Word,
and perform their Duty. -- nec facilis victoria de madidis, Juve^. Sat. 13.
and
Blaesis, atque mero titubantibus.
Nor is a Victory easily obtained
Ore men so Drunk, they scarce can speak or stand
I could not have believed there had been so profound, senceless, and dead a
degree of Drunkenness, had I not read in History, that Altalus, having, to put
a notable affront upon him, invited to Supper the same Pausanias, who upon the
very same occasion afterward killed Philip of Macedon, (a King who by these
excellent Qualities gave sufficient Testimony of his Education in the house,
and company of Epaminondas) he made him Drink to such a pitch, that he could
after dispose of his Beauty, as of a Hedg-whore, to the Muletteers and Servants
of the basest Office in the house. And I been further told, by a Lady whom I
highly Honor and Esteem, that near Bourdeaux, and about Castres where she
lives, a Country-woman, a Widow of chaste repute, perceiving in her self the
first symptoms of Breeding, innocently told her Neighbors, that if she had a
Husband she should think her self with child: But the causes of suspicion every
day more and more increasing, and at last growing up to a manifest proof; the
poor Woman was reduced to the necessity of causing it to be Proclaimed at the
Prosne of her Parish Church; that whoever had done that deed, and would frankly
confess it, she did not only promise to Forgive, but moreover to Marry him, if
he liked of the motion. Whereupon a young fellow that served in the quality of
a Labourer, encouraged by this Proclamation, declared; that he had one Holy Day
found her, having taken too much of the Bottle, so fast a sleep in the Chimney,
and in so undecent a posture, that he might conveniently come to do his
business without waking her; and they yet live together Man and Wife. It is
true, that Antiquity has not much decry'd this Vice: The Writings of several
Philosophers speak very tenderly of it, and even amongst the Stoics there are
some, who advise to give themselves sometimes the liberty to Drink to a
debauch, to recreate and refresh the Soul. Hoc quoque virtutum quondam
certamine magnum Cornel. Gall. Epig. 1.

Socratem palmam promeruisse ferunt.
And Socrates the Wise they say of yore,
Amongst Boon-blades the palm of Drinking bore.
That Censor, and Reprover of others, Cato was reproached that he was a
Good Fellow. Narratur and prisci Catonis Horace. lib. 3. Ode. 21.

Saepe mero caluisse virtus.
And of the Elder Cato it is said,
He often went with a hot Pate to Bed.
Cyrus that worthy renowned King, amongst his other qualities, by which he
pretended to be preferred before his Brother Artaxerxes, urged this excellency,
that he could Drink a great deal more than he. And in the best governed
Nations, this trial of skill in Drinking is very much in use. I have heard
Silvius, an excellent Physician of Paris, say, that lest the digestive
faculties of the Stomach should grow idle, Drinking to a debauch in Use amongst
the best governed Nations.
it were not amiss once a month to rouse them by this excess, and to spur them,
lest they should grow dull and resty; and one Author tells us, that the
Persians used to consult about their most important Affairs, after being well
warmed with Wine. My taste and constitution are greater Enemies to this Vice
than I am, for besides that I easily submit my belief to the Authority of
ancient opinions: I look upon it indeed as a stupid and ungraceful Vice, but
less malicious and hurtful than the others, which almost all more directly
justle public Society. And if we cannot please our selves, but it must cost us
something, as they hold; I find this Vice costs a man's conscience less than the
others, besides that it is of no difficult preparation; nor what we look for
hard to be found, a consideration not altogether to be despised. A man well
advanced both in Dignity and Age, amongst three principal Commodities, that he
said remained to him of life, reckoned to me this for one, and where would a
man more justly find it, Delicacy to be avoided in Wine.
than amongst the natural conveniences? But he did not take it right, for
delicacy and the curious choice of Wines, is therein to be avoided. If you
found your pleasure upon Drinking of the best, you condemn your self to the
penance of Drinking of the worst. Your taste must be more indifferent and free.
So delicate a Palate is not required to make a good Toper. The Germans Drink
almost indifferently of all Wines and Liquors with delight, their business is
to power down, and not to taste; and it is so much the better for them, their
pleasure is so much the more constant, and nearer at hand. Now on the other
side, not to Drink (after the French fashion) but at meals, and then very
moderately too, is to be ingrate to this bountiful God of Wine. There is more
time and constancy required than so. The Ancients spent whole nights in this
exercise, and oft-times added the day following to eke it out, and therefore we
are to take greater liberty than so, and stick closer to our work. I have seen
a great Lord of my time, a man of high enterprise and famous success, that
without setting himself to it, and after his ordinary rate of Drinking at meals,
Drank not much less than five quarts of Wine, and at his going away appeared
but too wise and discreet, to the detriment of our affairs. The pleasure we
design the greatest esteem for the whole course of our lives, ought to have a
greater share of our time dedicated to it. We should like Shop-boys and
Laborers, refuse no occasion nor omit no opportunity of Drinking, and always
have it in our minds. But methinks we every day abridg and curtail the use of
Wine; and the Breakfast Drinking and Collations, I used to see in my Fathers
house, when I was a Boy, were more usual and frequent then, than now.

Is it that we pretended to a Reformation? Truly no. But it may be we are more
addicted to Venus, than our Fathers were. They are two exercises that thwart
and hinder one another in their vigor. Letchery has weakened our Stomach on the
one side, and on the other Sobriety renders us more spruce and amorous for the
exercise of Love. It Is not to be imagined what strange Stories I have heard my
Father tell, of the Chastity of that Age wherein he lived. It was for him to
say it, being both by Art and Nature cut out, A Character of the Authors Father.
and finished for the service of Ladies. He spoke well, and little; ever mixing
his Language with some Illustration out of vulgar Authors, especially Spanish,
and, amongst them, Ma^cus Aurelius was very frequent in his mouth. His
behavior was grave, humble, and modest; He was very solicitous of neatness and
decency both in his Person and Clothes, whether on Horseback, or a Foot: He was
exceeding punctual of his Word; and of a Conscience, and Religion generally
tending rather toward Superstition than otherwise. For a Man of little
Stature, very Strong, well Proportioned, and well Knit, of a pleasing
Countenance enclining to Brown, and very Adroit in all noble Exercises. I have
yet in the House to be seen Canes powered full of Lead, with which, they say, he
exercised his Arms, for throwing the Bar, or the Stone; and Shoes with Leaden
Soals, to make him after lighter for Running, or Leaping. Of his Vaulting he
has left little Miracles behind him: I have seen him, when past threescore,
laugh at our Exercises, and throw himself in his Furred Gown into the Saddle,
make the Tour of a Table upon his Thumbs, and scarce ever mount the Stairs into
his Chamber without taking three or four steps at a time. But upon what I was
speaking before, he said, there was scarce one Woman of Quality of ill Fame in
a whole Province. Would tell of strange Privacies, and some of them his own,
with Virtuous Women, without any manner of suspicion: Mavelous Chastity of
the Age wherein the Authors Father lived.
And for his own part, solemnly swore he was a Virgin at his Marriage; and yet
it was after a long practice of Arms beyond the Mountains; of which War he has
left us a Paper-Journal under his own hand, wherein he has given a precise
account from point to point of all passages both relating to the Public, and
to Himself. And was also Married at a well advanced Maturity in the year 1528,
the three and thirtieth year of his Age, upon his way home from Italy. But let
us turn to our Battle.

The incommodities of old Age, that stand in need of some refreshment and
support, might with reason beget in me a desire of this faculty, it being as
were the last pleasure the course of years deprives us of. The natural heat,
(say the Good-fellows,) first seats itself in the Feet, that concerns Infancy,
thence it mounts into the middle Region, where it makes a long abode, and
produces in my opinion the sole true pleasure of humane life; all other
pleasures, in comparison, sleep. Toward the end, like a vapor that still
mounts upward, it arrives at the Throat, where it makes its final residence,
and concludes the progress. I cannot nevertheless understand, how a man can
extend the pleasure of drinking beyond Thirst, and to forge in his imagination
an Appetite artificial, and against Nature. My Stomach would not proceed so
far, it has enough to do to deal with what it takes in for necessity. My
constitution, is, not to care to Drink, but as it follows Eating, and to wash
down my Meat, and for that reason my last Draught is always the greatest: And
seeing that in old Age we have our Palats furred with Phlegmes, or depraved by
some other ill constitution, the Wine tastes better to us, as the Pores are
cleaner washed, and laid more open. At least I seldom taste the first Glass
well. Anacharsis wondered, that the Greeks drunk in greater Glasses toward the
end of a meal, than at the beginning; which was I suppose for the same reason,
the Dutch do the same, who then begin the Battle. Plato forbids Children Wine,
till eighteen years of Age, and being drunk, till forty; but after forty gives
them leave to please themselves, and to mix a little liberally, in their
Feasts, the influence of Dionysius, One of the names of Bacchus.
that good Deity who restores young men their good humor, and old men their
youth, who mollifies the passions of the Soul, as Iron is softened by Fire; and
in his Laws allows such merry meetings, (provided they have a discreet Chief to
govern, and keep them in order) for good and of great utility: Drunkenness
being a true and certain trial of every ones Nature, and withal fit to inspire
old Men with Mettle to divert themselves in Dancing, and Music; things of
great use, and that they dare not attempt when sober. He moreover says, that
Wine is able to supply the Soul with Temperance, and the Body with Health;
nevertheless these Restrictions, in part borrowed from the Carthaginians,
please him: That they forbear excesses in the Expeditions of War; that every
Judge and Magistrate abstain from it, when about the Administrations of his
place, or the Consultations of the Public affairs: That the day is not to be
embeazled with it, that being a time due to other employments, nor that night
he intends to get Children. It Is said, that the Philosopher Stilpo, when
oppressed with Age, purposely hastened his End by drinking pure Wine. The same
thing, but not designed by him, dispatched also the Philosopher Arcesilaus. But
it is an old, and pleasant Question, Whether the Soul of a wise Man can be
overcome by the strength of Wine, Si munitae adhibet vim sapientiae. Hor. lib.
3. Ode. 23.

If it a Head, with its besotting fume,
With Wisdom fortified t'assault presume.


To what vanity does the good opinion we have of our selves push us? The most
regular and most perfect Soul in the World has but too much to do to keep it
self upright, from being overthrown by its own weakness. There is not one of a
thousand that is right, and settled so much as one Minute in a whole Life, and
that may not very well doubt, whether according to her Natural condition she
can ever be. But to join Constancy to it, is her utmost Perfection; I mean
though nothing should justle and discompose her, which a thousand Accidents may
do. It Is to much purpose, that the great Poet Lucretius, keeps such a clutter
with his Philosophy, when behold he is ruined with a Philtre, one poor draught
of Love. Is it to be imagined, that an Apoplexy will not make an Ass of
Socrates, as well as of a Porter. Some have forgot their own names by the
violence of a Disease, and a slight Wound has turned the Judgment of others
topsey-turvey. Let him be as wise as he will, but in fine he is a Man; and than
that, what is there more miserable, or more nothing? Wisdom does not force our
natural dispositions.

Sudores itaque and pallorem existere toto
Lucret. lib. 3.
Corpore, and infringi linguam, vocemque aboriri,
Caligare oculos, sonere aures, succidere artus,
Denique considere ex animi terrore videmus.
Paleness, and Sweat the Countenance confounds,
The Tongue's delivered of Abortive Sounds,
The Eyes grow dim, Ears deaf, the Knees grow lame,
And do refuse to prop the trembling Frame,
And lastly out of fear of mind we all
Things see into a Dissolution fall.
He must shut his Eyes against the blow that threatens him; he must tremble
upon the Margent of a precipice like a Child: Nature having reserved these
light works of her Authority, not to be forced by our Reason and Stoical
virtue, to teach Man his Mortality, and little power. He turns pale with fear,
red with shame, and groans with the Cholick, if not very loud, at least so as
to confess his frailty.

Humani a se nihil alienum putet. Terence.

To any other man what may befall,
Let him not think strange to himself at all.
The Poets, that feign all things at pleasure, dare not acquit their greatest
Hero's of Tears.

Sic fatur lacrimans, classique immittit habenas. Virg. 6.

Thus did he weeping say, and then his Fleet
Did to the mercy of the Sea commit.
It Is sufficient for a man to curb and moderate his inclinations, for totally
to suppress them is not in him to do. Even our great Plutarch, that excellent
and perfect Judge of Humane Actions, when he sees Brutus and Torquatus Murder
their own Children, begins to doubt, whether Virtue could proceed so far; and
to question, whether these persons had not rather been stimulated by some other
Passion. All Actions exceeding the ordinary bounds are liable to Sinister
interpretation: For as much as our liking does no more proceed from what is
above, than from what is below it.

Let us leave this other Sect and make a downright profession of fierceness.
But when even in that Sect, reputed the most quiet and gentle we hear these
Rhodomontades of Metrodorus: Occupavi te, Fortuna, atque cepi: Omnesque aditus
tuos interclusi, ut ad me aspirare non posses. Fortune, Cicero. Tusc. l. 5.
thou art mine, I have thee fast, and have made all the Avenues so sure thou
can not come at me. When Anaxarchus, by the command of Nicocreon the Tyrant
of Cyprus, was put into a Stone-Morter, and laid upon with Mauls of Iron,
ceases not to say, Strike, Batter, Break, it is not Anaxarchus, it is but his
Sheath that you pound and bray so. When we hear our Martyrs cry out to the
Tyrant in the middle of the Flame, this side is Roasted enough, fall to, and
eat, it is enough, fall to work with the other. When we hear the Child in
Josephus, torn piecemeal with biting Pincers, defying Antiochus, and crying
out with a constant and assured Voice, Tyrant, thou losest thy labor, I am
still at ease, where is the the Pain, where are the Torments with which thou
did so threaten me? Is this all thou can do? My Constancy torments thee
more, than thy Cruelty does me: O Pitiful Coward, thou Faintest, and I grow
Stronger, make my Complain, make me Bend, make me Yield if thou can;
Encourage they Guards, Cheer up thy Executioners, see, see they Faint, and can
do no more; Arm them, Flesh them anew, Spur them up. Really a man must confess,
that there is some alteration and fury, how Holy soever, that does at that time
possess those Souls. When we come to these Stoical Sallies: I had rather be
Furious than Voluptuous, a saying of Antisthenes; When Sextius tells us, he had
rather be Fettered with Affliction, than Pleasure: When Epicurus takes upon him
to play with his Gout, and that refusing Health and Ease, he defies all
Torments, and despising the Lesser Pains, as disdaining to contend with them,
he covets and calls out for Sharper, more violent, and more worthy of him:
Spumantemque dari pecora inter inertia votis
Optat aprum, Aenied. l. 4.
aut fulvum descendere monte leonem.
And for ignobler Chaces wishes some
Lion or Boar, would from the Mountain come.


Who but must conclude, that they are pusht on by a Courage, that has broke
loose from its place? Our Soul cannot from her own Seat reach so high, it is
necessary she must leave it, raise her self up, and taking the Bridle in her
Teeth, transport her man so far, that he shall after himself be astonished at
what he has done. As in occasion of War, the Heat of Battle sometimes pushes
the generous Soldiers to perform things of so infinite Danger, as after having
recollected themselves, they themselves are the first to wonder at. As also
fares with the Poets, who are often rapt with admiration of their own Writings,
and know not where again to find the track, through which they performed so
happy a Carreer; which also is in them called Rage, and Rapture: And as Plato
says, it is to purpose for a Sober man to knock at the door of Poesy: And
Aristotle says to the same effect, that no excellent Soul is exempt from the
mixture of Folly; and he has reason to call all Transports, how commendable
soever, that surpass our own Judgment and understanding, Folly,: For as much as
Wisdom is a regular Government of the Soul, which is carried on with Measure
and Proportion, and which she is to her self responsible for. Plato argues
thus, that the Faculty of Prophesying is so far above us, that we must be out
of our selves, when we meddle with it, and our Prudence must either be
obstructed by Sleep or Sickness, or lifted from her place by some Celestial
Rapture.

CHAP. III. The Custom of the Isle of Cea.
To Philosophize, what?
IF to Philosophize, be, as it is defined, to doubt, much more to write at
random, and play the Fool, as I do, ought to be reputed doubting, for it is
for Novices and Fresh-men to inquire and to dispute, and for the Chairman to
moderate and determine. My Moderator is the Authority of the Divine Will, that
Governs us without contradiction, and that is Seated above these vain, and
humane contests. Philip being forceably intred into Peloponnesus, and some one
saying to Damidas, that the Lacedaemonians were likely very much to suffer, if
they did not in time reconcile themselves to his favor: Why you pitiful
Fellow, replied he, what can they suffer, that do not fear to dye? It being
also demanded of Agis, which way a man might live free? Why, said he, by
despising Death. These, and a thousand other sayings to the same purpose, do
distinctly sound something more than the Patient attending the stroke of Death,
when it shall come; for there are several Accidents in Life, far worse to
suffer than Death it self: Witness the Lacedaemonian Boy, taken by Antigonus,
and sold for a Slave, who being by his new Master commanded to some base
Employment, Thou shall see, says the Boy, whom thou have bought, Several
Accidents worse to suffer than Death.
it would be a shame for me to serve, being so near the reach of Liberty, and
having so said, threw himself from the top of the house. Antipater severely
threatening the Lacedaemonians, that he might the better incline them to
acquiesce in a certain demand of his; If thou threatnest us with more than
Death, replied they, we shall the more willingly Dye: And to Philip having writ
them word, that he would frustrate all their Enterprises, What, will thou also
hinder us from dying? This is the meaning of the Sentence, That the Wise man
lives as long as he ought, not so long as he can; and that the most obliging
Present Nature has made us, and which takes from us all color of complaint of
our condition, is, to have delivered into our own custody the Keys of Life. She
has only Ordered one door into life, but a hundred thousand ways out. We may be
straightned for Earth to Live upon, but Earth sufficient to Dye upon can never
be wanting, as Boiocatus answered the Romans: why do thou complain of this
World? It deteins the not; thy own cowardice is the cause if thou live in
Pain: There remains no more to Dye but to be willing to do it.

Senec. The. Act. 1. Sca. 1.
Vbique mors est. Optime hoc cavit Deus,
Eripere Vitam nemo non homini potest:
At nemo Mortem: Mill ad hanc aditus patent.
To Death a man can never want a Gate,
Heaven has provided very well for that,
There Is not so mean a Wretch on earth, but may
Take the most Noble Hero's life away;
But to the willing none can Death refuse,
There are to that a thousand Avenues.
Death depends upon the Will.
Neither is it a Recipe for one Disease, Death is the Infallible Cure of all,
it is a most assured Port, that is never to be feared, and very often to be
sought: It comes all to one, whether a man gives himself his end, or stays to
receive it by some other means; whether he pays before his day, or stay till
his day of payment come: From whencesoever it comes, it is still his: In what
part soever the thread breaks, there is the end of the Clue, the most voluntary
Death, is the most brave. Life depends upon the Pleasure and Discretion of
others, Death upon our own. We ought not to accommodate our selves to our own
Humor in any thing so much as in that. Reputation is not concerned in such an
enterprise; and it is a folly to be diverted by any such apprehension, living is
Slavery, if the liberty of dying be away. The ordinary method of Cures is
carried on at the expense of Life, they torment us with Causticks, Incisions,
and Amputations of limbs, at the same time interdicting Aliments, and
exhausting our Blood; one step father, and we are cured indeed. Why are not the
Jugular Veins as much at our dispose, as the Cephalic, Basilick, or Median
Vein? For a desperate disease, a desperate cure. Servius the Grammarian, being
tormented with the Gout, could advise of no better remedy, than to apply Poison
to his Legs, to deprive them of their sense, then let them be Gouty on Gods
name, so they were insensible of pain. God gives us leave enough, when he is
pleased to reduce us to such a condition, that to live is far worse than to
die. It Is weakness to truckle under infirmities, but it is madness to nourish
them. The Stoics say, that it is living according to Nature in a Wise man to
take his leave of Life, even in the height of prosperity, if he do it
opportunely, and in a Fool to prolong it, though he be miserable, provided he
be indigent of those things, which are reputed the necessaries of human life.
As I do not offend the Law, provided against Thieves, when I embezel my own
Money, and cut my own Purse; nor that against Incendiaries, when I burn my own
Wood; so am I not under the lash of those made against Murderers, for having
deprived my self of my own life. Hegesius said, that as the condition of life
did, so the condition of death ought to depend upon our own choice: And
Diogenes meeting the Philosopher Speucippus, so blown up with an inveterate
Dropsy, that he was fain to be carried in a Litter, and by him saluted with
the complement, of, I wish you good health; no health to thee, replied the
other, who art content to live in such a condition. And in truth, not long
after Speucippus, weary of so languishing an estate of Life, found a means to
dye. But this does not pass without admitting a dispute: For many are of
Opinion, that we cannot quit this Garrison of the World, without the express
command of him, who has placed us in it; and that it appertains to God, who has
placed us here, not for ourselves only, but for his Glory, and the service of
others, to dismiss us when it shall best please him, and not for us to depart
without his License: That we are not born for ourselves only, but for our
Country also, the Laws of which require an account from us, upon the score of
their own interest, and have an action of Manslaughter good against us. Or if
these fail to take cognizance of the Fact, we are punished in the other World,
as deserters of our Duty.

Proxima deinde tenent maesti Loca, Aeneid. lib. 6.
qui sibi lethum
Insontes peperere manu, lucemque perosi
Proiecere animas.
Next these, those Melancholic Souls remain,
Who innocent by their own hands were slain,
And hating light, to voluntary Death
Ecclipst their eye balls, and bequeathed their breath.
There is more Constancy in suffering the Chain we are tied in, than in
breaking it, and more pregnant evidence of fortitude in Regulus, than in Cato.
It Is Indiscretion and Impatience that pushes us on to these precipices. No
accidents can make true Virtue turn her back, she seeks and requires Evils,
Pains and Grief, as the things by which she is nourished and supported. The
menaces of Tyrants, Wracks, and Tortures serve only to animate and rouse her.
Duris ut ilex tonsa bipennibus Hor. lib. 4. Ode. 4.

Nigrae feraci frondis in Algido
Per damna, per caedes, ab ipso
Ducit opes, animumque ferro.
As in Mount Algidus the sturdy Oak,
Even from the injurious Axes wounding stroke,
Derives new vigor, and does further spread
By amputations a more graceful head.
And as another says. Sen. Th. Act. 1. Scen. 1.
Non est ut putas virtus, Pater,
Timere vitam, sed malis ingentibus
Obstare, nec se vertere ac retro dare.
They are mistaken, and do judge amiss,
Who think to fear to live, a Virtue is;
He Is brave, the greatest evils can withstand,
And not retire, nor shift to either hand.
Or as this.

Mart. lib. 11. Epig. 57.
Rebus in adversis facile est contemnere mortem.
Fortius ille facit, qui miser esse potest.
The wretched well may laugh at death; but he
Is braver far can live in misery.
It Is Cowardice not Virtue, to lie squat in furrow under a Tomb to evade the
blows of Fortune. Virtue never stops, nor goes out of her path for the greatest
storm that blows: Hor. lib. 3. Ode. 3.
Si fractus illabatur orbis,
Impavidam ferient ruinae.
Should the World's Axis crack, and Sphere fall down,
The ruins would but crush a fearless Crown.


And for the most part, the flying of other inconveniences brings us to this,
that, endeavoring to evade death, we run into the mouth of it.

Hic, rogo, non furor est, ne moriare, mori? Mar. lib. 2. Epig. 80.

Can there be greater madness, pray reply,
Than that one should for fear of dying, die?
Like those who for fear of a precipice, throw themselves headlong into it.

-- Multos in summa pericula misit Lucan. lib. 7.

Venturi timor ipse mali: Fortissimus ille est,
Qui promptus metuenda pati, si cominus instent,
Et differ potest.
The fear of future ills often makes men run
Into far worse, than those they strive to shun;
But he deserves the noblest Character,
Dare boldly stand the mischeifs he does fear,
When they confront him, and appear in view,
And can defer at least if not eschew.
-- usque adeo mortis formidine, Lucret. lib. 3.
vitae
Percipit humanos odium, lucisque videndae
Vt sibi consciscant maerenti pectore lethum,
Obliti fontem curarum hunc esse timorem.
Death unto that degree does some men fright,
That causing them to hate both life and light,
They kill themselves in sorrow, not aware,
That this same fear's the fountain of that care.
Ignominious sepulture of self homicides.
Plato in his laws assigns an ignominious sepulture to him who has deprived his
nearest and best friend (namely himself) of life, and his destined course of
years, being neither compelled so to do by public judgment, by any sad and
inevitable accident of fortune, nor by any insupportable disgrace, but merely
pusht on by cowardice, and the imbecility of a timorous soul. And the opinion,
that makes so little of life, is ridiculous; for it is our being; it is all we
have. Things of a nobler, and more elevated being, may indeed accuse this of
ours; but it is against nature, for us to contemn, and make little account of
our selves; it is a disease particular to man, and not discerned in any other
creatures, to hate and despise itself. And it is a vanity of the same stamp, to
desire be something else, than what we are. The effects o^ such a desire do not
at all concern us, for as much as it is contradicted, and hindered in it self
and he that desires of a man to be made an An^gel, wishes nothing for himself;
he would b^ never the better for it; for being no more, wh^^ should rejoice, or
be sensible of this benefit for him?

Debet enim misere cui forte aegreque futurum est, Idem Ibid.

Ipse quoque esse in eo tum tempore, cum male possit Accidere.
For it is necessary sure that he,
Who for the future wretched is to be,
Should then be by himself inhabited,
That the events of Fate been frustrated;
But that the ills, he threatened is withal,
Should rightly in their due appointment fall.
Security, indolency, impassibility, and the privation of the evils of life,
which we pretend to purchase at the price of dying, are of no manner of
advantage to us. That man evades war to very little purpose, that can have no
fruition of peace; and as impertinently does he avoid labor and toil, who
cannot enjoy repose. Amongst those of the first of these two opinions, there
has been great debate, what occasions are sufficient to justify the meditation
of self-murder, which they call, (...), a handsome Exit. For though they say,
that men are often to dye for trivial causes, seeing those that deteine us in
life are of no very great weight, yet there is to be some measure. There are
fantastic and senseless humors, that have prompted not only particular men,
but whole Nations to destroy themselves, of which I have elsewhere given some
examples; and we further read of the Milesian virgins, that, by a furious
compact, they hanged themselves, one after another, till the Magistrate took
order in it, enacting, that the bodies of such as should be found so hanged,
should be drawn by the same halter stark naked through the City. When
Threicion persuaded Cleomenes to dispatch himself by reason of the ill posture
of his affairs, and having evaded a death of the most honor in the battle he
had lost, to accept of this the second in honor to it, and not to give the
Conquerors leisure to make him undergo either an ignominious death, or an
infamous life: Cleomenes with a courage truly Stoic, and Lacedaemonian
rejected his Counsel as unmanly and poor; that, said he, is a remedy that can
never be wanting, and which a man is never to make use of, whilst there is an
inch of hope remaining: telling him, that it was sometimes constancy and valor
to live, that he would that even his death should be of use to his Country, and
would make of it an act of honor and virtue. Threicion notwithstanding thought
himself in the right, and did his own business; and Cleomenes after did the
same; but not till he had first tried the utmost malevolence of fortune. All
the inconvenences in the world are not considerable enough that a man should
die to evade them, and besides, there being so many, so sudden, and unexpected
changes in humane things, it is hard, rightly to judge when we are at the end of
our hope.

Sperat and in saeva victus gladiator arena,
Sulpitii Servasti.
Sit licet infesto pollice turba minax.
The fencer conquered in the lists hopes on,
Though the Spectators point that he is gone.
All things (says the old Adage) are to be hoped for by a man whilst he lives:
ay but replies Seneca, why should this rather be always running in a man's head,
that Fortune can do all things for the living man, than this, that Fortune has
no power over him that knows how to dye? Josep. Antiq. Jews. p. 537.
Josephus when engaged in so near and apparent danger, a whole People being
violently bent against him, that there was no visible means of escape,
nevertheless, being, as himself says, in this extremity counseled by Simon
one of his faithful Guards to dispatch himself, it was well for him, that he
yet maintained himself in some hope, for fortune diverted the accident beyond
all humane expectation; so that he saw himself delivered without any manner of
inconvenience. Whereas Brutus and Cassius, on the contrary, threw away the
remains of the Roman liberty, of which they were the sole Protectors, by the
precipitation and temerity wherewith they killed themselves before the due
time, and a just occasion. Monsieur d' Anguien, Montluc Comment.
at the Battle of Cerisolles, twice attempted to run himself through,
despairing of the fortune of the day, which went indeed very untowardly on that
side of the Field where he was engaged, and by that precipitation was very near
depriving himself of the joy and honor of so brave a Victory. I have seen a
hundred Hares escape out of the very teeth of the Greyhounds* Aliquis
carnifici suo superstes fuit. Sen. Ep. 13.
Some have survived their Executioners.

Multa dies, variusque labor mutabilis aevi
Rettulit in melius, multos alterna revisens
Aeneid. lib. 11.
Lusit, and in solido rursus fortuna locavit.
Much time and labor often does translate
Life's mutability t'a better state,
Now fortune turning shows a reverse face,
And then again in solid joy does place.
Pliny says, there are three sorts of diseases, to escape any of which a man
has good title to destroy himself; the worst of which is the stone in the
bladder, when the urine is suppressed. Seneca says, those only, which for a long
time discompose the functions of the Soul; And some there have been, who to
avoid a worse, have chosen one to their own liking. Democritus, General of the
Aetolians, being brought prisoner to Rome, found means to make his escape by
night* but close pursued by his keepers, rather than suffer himself to be
retaken, he fell upon his own sword, and died. Antinous and Theodotus their
City of Epirus being reduct by the Romans to the last extremity, gave the
People counsel generally to kill themselves; but the advice of giving
themselves up to the arms of the Enemy prevayling, they went to seek the death
they desired, rushing furiously upon the Enemy, with an intention to strike
home, but not to defend a blow. The Isle Gosa forced some years ago by the
Turks, a Sicilian, who had two beautiful daughters marriagable, killed them
both with his own hand, and their mother running in to save them, to boot.
Which having done, sallying out of the House with a cros-bow, and a harquebuze,
with those two shoots he killed two of the first Turks nearest to his door, and
drawing his sword charged furiously in amongst the rest, where he was suddenly
enclosed, and cut to pieces. By that means delivering his family, and himself
from slavery, and dishonor. The Jewish women after having circumciz'd their
Children, threw themselves down a Precipice to avoid the cruelty of Antigonus.
I have been told of a prisoner of condition in one of our prisons, that his
friends being informed he would certainly be condemned, to avoid the ignominy
of such a death, suborned a Priest to tell him, that the only means of his
deliverance was, to recommend himself to such a Saint, under such and such
vows, and fast eight days together, without taking any manner of nourishment
what ever, what weakeness or faintness so ever he might find in himself during
the time, he followed their advice, and by that means destroid himself before
he was aware, not dreaming of death, or any danger in the Experiment. Scribonia
advising her Nephew Libo to kill himself, rather than to attend the stroke of
Justice, told him, that it was properly to do others Peoples business to
preserve his life, to put it after into the hands of those who within three or
four days would come fetch him to execution; and that it was to serve his
Enemies to keep hi^ blood to gratify their malice. We read in the Bible that
Nicanor the persecutor of the Law of God, Macchab. l. 2. Cap. 14.
having sent his Soldiers to seize upon the good old man Razis, sirnam'd in
honor of his virtue the Father of the Jews: the good man seeing no other
remedy, his Gates burnt down, and the Enemies ready to seize him, choosing
rather to dye generously, than to fall into the hands of his wicked
adversaries, and suffer himself to be cruelly butchered by them, contrary to
the honor of his rank and quality, he stabbed himself with his own sword, but
the blow for have not having been given home, he ran and threw himself from the
top of a wall headlong among them, who separating themselves, and making room,
he pitched directly upon his head. Notwithstanding which, feeling yet in himself
some remains of life, he renu'd his courage, and starting up upon his feet all
bloody, and wounded as he was, and making his way through the Crowd, through
one of his wounds drew out his bowels, which tearing and pulling to pieces
with both his hands, he threw amongst his pursuers, all the while attesting,
and invoking the Divine vengeance upon them, for their cruelty and injustice.

Of violences offered to the conscience, that against the chastity of woman,
is, in my opinion, most to be evaded, for as much as there is a certain
pleasure naturally mixed with it, and for that reason the dissent cannot therein
be sufficiently perfect and entire, so that the violence seems to be mix't
with a little consent of the forced party. The Ecclesiastical History has
several examples of devout persons, who have embraced death to secure them from
the outrages prepared by Tyrants against their Religion and honor. Pelagia and
Sophronia both Canonized, the first of these precipitated herself with her
mother and sisters into the river to avoid being forced by some Soldiers, and
the last also killed herself to evade being ravished by the Emperor Maxentius.
It may peradventure be an honor to us in future Ages, that a learned Author of
this present time, and a Parisian, takes a great deal of pains to persuade the
Ladies of our age, rather to take any other course, than to enter into the
horrid meditation of such a despair. I am sorry he had never heard (that he
might have inserted it amongst his others stories) the saying of a woman, which
was told me at Tholouze, who had past thorough the handling of some Soldiers.
God be praised, said she, that once at least in my life I have had my fill,
without sin. I must confess these cruelties are very unworthy the French
sweetness, and good nature, and also God be thanked, the air is very well
purged of it, since this good advice: it is enough that they say no in doing it,
according to the Rule of the good Marot.

History is every where full of such, as after a thousand ways have for death
exchanged a painful and irksome Life. Lucius Arruntius killed himself, to fly,
he said, both the future and the past. Granius Silvanus and Statius Proximus,
after having been pardoned by Nero, kill'^ themselves; either disdaining to
live by the favor of so Wicked a man; or that they might not be troubled at
some other time to obtain (...) second Pardon, considering the proclivity and
faculties of his Nature, to suspect and credit accusations against worthy men.
Spargapize's the (...) of Queen Tomyris, being a Prisoner of War (...) Cyrus,
made use of the first favor Cyrus shew'^ him in commanding him to be unbound,
to kill himself, having pretended to no other be^nefit of liberty, but only to
be revenged of himself for the disgrace of being taken. Bogez Governor in Eion
for King Xerxes, being beseige^^ by the Athenian Arms under the conduct (...)
Cimon, refused the conditions offered, that (...) might safe return into Asia
with all his wealth^ impatient to survive the loss of a place his Maste^ had
given him to keep; wherefore having defended the City to the last extremity,
nothin^ being left to eat, he first threw all the Gold and what ever else the
Enemy could make boot^ of, into the River Strymon, and after causing (...)
great pile to be set on fire, and the throats (...) all the Women, Children,
Concubines and Ser^vants to be cut, he threw their Bodies into the fire, and at
last leapt into it himself. Ninache^tuen an Indian Lord, so soon as he heard
the first whisper of the Portugal Viceroy's determi^nation, to dispossess him,
without any apparent cause, of the Command in Malaca, to trans^fer it to the
King of Campar, he took this reso^lution with himself. He caused a scaffold
more long than broad to be erected, supported by Columns, royally adorned with
tapestry, and strewed with flowers, and abundance of perfumes. All which being
thus prepared, in a Robe of cloth of Gold, set full of Jewels of great value,
he came out into the street, and mounted the Steps to the Scaffold, at one
corner of which he had a pile lighted of Aromatic wood. Every body ran to the
novelty, to see to what end these unusual preparations were made. When
Ninachetuen with a manly, but discontented, countenance, began to remonstrate
how much he had obliged the Portuguese Nation, and with how unspotted fidelity
he had carried himself in his Charge; that having so often with his sword in
his hand manifested in the behalf of others, that honor was much more dear to
him than life, he was not to abandon the concern of it for himself: that
Fortune denying him all means of opposing the affront was designed to be put
upon him, his courage at least enjoined him to free himself from the sense of
it, and not to serve for a fable to the People, nor for a triumph to Men less
deserving than himself; which having said, he leapt into the Fire. Sextilia the
wife of Scaurus, and Praxea the wife of Labeo, to encourage their husbands to
evade the dangers that pressed upon them, wherein they had no other share, than
mere conjugal affection, voluntarily exposed their own lives to serve them in
this extreme necessity for company and example. What they did for their
husbands, Cocceius Nerva did for his Country, with less utility, though with
equal affection. This great Lawyer, flourishing in health, riches, reputation
and favor with the Emperor, had no other cause to kill himself, but the sole
compassion of the miserable Estate of the Roman Republic. Nothing can be added
to the nicety of the death of the wife of Fulvius, a familiar favorite of
Augustus. Augustus having discovered, that he had vented an important secret he
had entrusted him withal; one morning that he came to make his Court, received
him very coldly, and looked frowningly upon him. He returns home full of
despair, where he sorrowfully told his wife, that being fallen into this
misfortune, he was resolved to kill himself: To which she roundly replied, it is
but reason you should, seeing that having so often experimented the
incontinency of my tongue, you could not learn, nor take warning: but let me
kill my self first, and without any more dispute ran herself through the Body
with a Sword. Vibius Virius despayring of the safty of his City, beseig'd by
the Romans, and of their mercy: in the last deliberation of his Cities Senate,
after many Remonstrances conducing to that end, concluded, that the most Noble
means to escape Fortune, was by their own hands: telling them that the Enemy
would have them in honor, and Hannibal would be sensible how many faithful
friends he had abandoned; inviting those who approved of his advice, to go take
a good supper he had ready at home, where after they had eaten well, they would
drink together of what he had prepared, a beverage, said he, that will deliver
our Bodies from torments, our Souls from injury, and our Eyes and Ears from the
sense of so many hateful mischiefs, as the Conquered are to suffer from cruel
and implacable Conquerours. I have, said he, taken order for fit persons to
throw our Bodies into a funeral pile before my door, so soon as we are dead.
Enough approved this high resolution, few imitated it, seven and twenty Senators
followed him, who after having tried to drown the thought of this fatal
determination in Wine, ended the feast with the mortal Mess; and embracing one
another, after they had jointly deplored the misfortune of their Country, some
retired home to their own houses, others staid to be burnt with Vibius in his
funeral Pyre; and were all of them so long a dying, the vapor of the Wine
having prepossest the Veins, and by that means deferring the effect of the
Poison, that some of them were within an hour of seeing the Enemy within the
walls of Capua, which was taken the next morning, and of undergoing the
miseries, they had at so dear a rate endeavored to evade. Taurea Jubellius
another Citizen of the same Country, the Consul Fulvius returning from the
shameful butcherie he had made of two hundred twenty five Senators, called him
back feircely by his name, and having made him stop, give the word, said he,
that some body may dispatch me after the Massacre of so many others, that thou
may boast, to have killed a much more valiant Man than thyself Fulvius
disdaining him, as a man out of hi^ wits: as also having received Letters from
Rome contrary to the inhumanity of this Execution, which tied his hands;
Jubellius proceeded, since that my Country being taken, my friends dead, and
having with my own hands slain my wife and children to rescue them from
desolation of this ruin, I am denied to die the death of my fellow-Citizens,
let us borrow from virtue the vengeance of this hated life, and therewithal
drawing a short sword, he carried concealed about him, he ran it thorough his
own Bosom, falling down backward, and expiring at the Consuls feet. Alexander
laying Seige to a City of the Indies, those within finding themselves very
hardly set, put on a vigorou^ resolution to deprive him of the pleasure (...)
his Victory, and accordingly burnt themselves in general together with their
City, in despite of his humanity. A new kind of War, where the Enemies sought
to save them, and they (...) lose themselves, doing, to make themselves sure of
death, all that men do to secure their lives. Astapa a City of Spain finding it
se^^ weak in walls and defense to withstand the Romans, the Inhabitants made a
heap of al^ their riches, and furniture in the public place and having ranged
upon this heap all the wo^men and children, and pil'd them round wit^ wood, and
other combustible matter to take sudden Fire, and left fifty of their young
me^ for the Execution of that whereon they ha^^ resolved: They made a deperate
sally, where for want of power to overcome, they caused themselves to be every
man slain. The fifty after having Massacred every living Soul throughout the
whole City, and put Fire to this Pile, threw themselves lastly into it,
finishing their generous liberty, rather after an insensible, than after a
sorrowful and disgraceful manner, giving the Enemy to understand, that if
fortune had been so pleased, they had as well the courage to snatch from them
Victory, as they had to frustrate and render it dreadful, and even mortal to
those who allured by the splendour of the Gold melting in this flame having
approcht it, a great number were there suffocated and burnt, being kept up from
retiring by the crow'd that followed after. The Abideans, being pressed by King
Philip, put on the same resolution, but being curbed so short, they could not
put it in effect, the King who abhorred to see the temerarious precipitation of
this Execution (the treasure and movables that they had variously condemned to
Fire and water being first seized) drawing off his Soldiers granted them
three days time to kill themselves in, that they might do it with more order,
and at greater ease: which space they filled with Blood and slaughter, beyond
the utmost excess of all hostil cruelty: So that not so much as any one Soul
was left alive, that had power to destroy it self. There are infinite examples
of like Popular conclusions which seem the more feirce, and cruel, by how much
the effect is more universal, and yet are really less, than when singly
executed* What arguments and persuasion cannot make upon every individual man,
they can do upon all, the ardour of Society ravishing particular judgments. The
condemned, who would live to be executed, in the Reign of Tiberius, forfeited
their goods, and were denied the rite^ of Sepulture, those who by killing
themselves did anticipate it, were enterred, and had liberty to dispose of
their Estates by Will.

But men sometimes covet death out of hope of a greater good. I desire (says
St. Paul) to be with Christ, and who shall rid me of these bands? Cleombrotus
Ambraciota, having read Plato's Phaedo, entered into so great a desire (...) the
life to come, that without any other occasion, he threw himself into the Sea.
By which it appears, how improperly we call this voluntary dissolution,
despair, to which the eagerness of hope does often incline us, and often a
calm and temperate desire proceeding from a mature and considerate judgment.
Jacqu^ du Castle Bishop of Soissons, in St. Lewis his foreign expedition, seeing
the King and whole Army upon the point of returning into France leaving the
affairs of Religion imperfect, tool a resolution rather to go into Paradise,
wherefore having taken solemn leave of his friends he charged alone in the
sight of every on^ into the Enemies Army, where he was presently cut to pieces.
In a certain Kingdom (...) the new discovered World, upon a day of so^lemn
Procession, when the Idol they adore is drawn about in public upon a Chariot
of wonderful greatness; besides that several are then seen, cutting of cantells
of their quick flesh to offer to him, there are a number of others who
prostrate themselves upon the place, causing themselves to be crushed and broke
to pieces with the weighty wheels to obtain the veneration of Sanctity after
their death, which is accordingly paid them. The death of the forenamed Bishop
with his sword in his hand has more of generosity in it, and less of feeling,
the ardour of Combat taking away part of the later. There are some Governments,
who have taken upon them to regulate the Justice and opportunity of voluntary
death so much, as in former times, there was kept in our City of Marseilles a
Poison prepared out of Hemlock at the public charge, for those who had a mind
to hasten their end, having first before the six hundred, which were their
Senate, given account of the reasons and motives of their design, and it was not
otherwise Lawful, than by leave from the Magistrate, and upon just occasion to
do violence to themselves. The same Law was also in use in other places. Sextus
Pompeius in his Expedition into Asia touched at the Isle of Cea in Negropont: it
accidentally happened whilst he was there, (as we have it from one that was with
him) that a woman of great quality, having given an account to her Citizens why
she was resolved to put an end to her life, invited Pompeius to her death, to
render it the more honorable: an invitation that he unwillingly accepted: but
having long tried in vai^ by the power of his eloquence (which wa^ very great)
and disswasion to divert her from that design, he acquiese't in the end in her
ow^ will. She had past the age of fourscore an^ ten in a very happy Estate both
of Body an^ mind, but being then laid upon her bed, bette^ dressed than ordinary,
and leaning upon he^ Elbow, the Gods, said she, O Sextus Pompeiu^ and rather
those I leave, than those I go to see^ reward thee, for that thou have not
disdained (...) be both the Counselor of my life, and the Witness of my death.
For my part, havin^ always tried the smiles of fortune, for (...) lest the
desire of living too long may ma^^ me see a contrary face, I am going by a
ha^^py end to dismiss the remains of my So^^ leaving behind two daughters of my
Bo^^ and a Legion of Nephews: which having (...) with some exhortations to her
family to (...) in peace, she divided amongst them her Good and recommending
her domestic Gods (...) her eldest daughter, she boldly took the Bo^^ that
contained the Poison, and having ma^^ her vows and prayers to Mercury, to
co^^duct her to some happy abode in the oth^^ World, she roundly swallowed the
mortal P^^tion, which having don, she entertained (...) company with the
progress of its operati^^ and how the cold by degrees seized the se^^^ral parts
of her body one after another, (...) having in the end told them it began to
seize upon her heart and bowels, she called her daughters to do their last
Office and close her Eyes. Pliny tells us of a certain Hyperborean Nation,
where by reason of the sweet temperature of the Air, Lives did rarely end but
by the voluntary surrender of the Inhabitants, but that being weary of, and
sotted with living, they had a custom at a very old age, after having made good
cheer, to precipitate themselves into the Sea from the top of a certain rock,
destined for that service. Pain and the fear of a worse death seem to me the
most excusable incitements.

CHAP. IV. To morrow's a new Day.
I Give, and I think with good reason, the Palm to Jacques Amiot of all our
French Writers, not only for the propriety and purity of his language, wherein
he excells all others, nor for his constancy in going thorough so long a work,
nor for the depth of his knowledge, having been able so successfully to smooth
and unravel so knotty and intricate an Author (for let People tell me what they
will, I understand nothing of Greek, but I meet with sense so well united and
maintained throughout his whole Translation, that certainly he either knew the
true fancy of the Author, or having, by being long conversant with him,
imprinted a lively and general ^dea of that of Plutarch in his Soul, The
utility of the French Plutarch.
he has delivered us nothing, that either derogates from, or contradicts him)
but above all, I am the most taken with him, for having made so discreet a
choice of a Book so worthy, and of so great utility wherewith to present his
Country. We dunces had been lost, had not this Book raised us out of the dirt,
by this favor of his we dare now speak and write, the Ladies are able to read
to Schoolmasters, it is our Breviary. If this good Man be yet living, I would
recommend to him Xenophon, to do as much by that. It Is a much more easy task
than the other, and consequently more proper for his age. And besides, I know
not how, methinks, though he does briskly, and clearly enough trip over steps
another would have stumbled at, that nevertheless his style seems to be more
his own, where he does not encounter those difficulties and rowles away at his
own ease. I was just now reading this passage, where Plutarch says of himself,
that Rusticus being present at a Declamation of his at Rome, he there received
a Packet from the Emperor, and deferred to open it till all was don: for which,
says he, all the company highly applauded the gravity of this person. It Is
true, that being upon the discourse of that curiosity, and that eager passion
for news, which makes us with so much indiscretion and impatience, leave all to
entertain a new commer and without any manner of respect, or civility tear
open on a sudden, in what company soever, the Letters are delivered to us, he
had reason to applaud the gravity of Rusticus upon this occasion, and might
moreover have added to it the commendation of his civility and courtesy, that
would not interrupt the current of his Declamation. But I doubt, whether any
one can commend his prudence; for receiving unexpected Letters, and especially
from an Emperor, it might have fallen out, that the deferring to read them might
have been of great prejudice. Negligence the opposite vice to Curiosity.
The vice opposite to curiosity is negligence, to which I naturally incline,
and wherein I have seen some Men so extreme, that one might have found the
Letters had been sent them three or four days before, still sealed up in their
pockets. I never open any Letters directed to another, not only those entrusted
with me, but even such as fortune has guided to my hand; and am very angry with
my self, if my Eyes unawares steal any contents of Letters of importance he is
reading, when I stand near a great Man. Never was Man less inquisitive, or less
prying into other men's affairs, than I. In our Fathers days, Monsieur de
Boutieres had like to have lost Turin, for having, being engaged in good
company at supper, deferred to read an Advertisement was sent him of the
Treason was plotted against that City, where he commanded. And this very
Plutarch has given me to understand, that Julius Caesar had preserved himself,
if going to the Senate the day he was assassinated by the Conspirators, he had
read a Ticket was presented to him by the way. He tells also the Story of
Archias the Tyrant of Thebes, that the night before the execution of the design
Pelopidas had plotted to kill him, to restore his Country to liberty, he had an
account sent him in writing by another Archias an Athenian of the whole
conspiracy, and that this packet having been delivered to him while he sat at
supper, he deferred the opening of it, saying, which afterward turned to a
Proverb in Greece, To morrow is a new day. A wise man may, I confess, out of
respect to another, as not to disturb the Company, as Rusticus did, or not to
break off another affair of importance in hand, defer to read, or hear any new
thing that is brought him; but for his own interest, or particular pleasure,
especially if he be a public Minister, that he will not interrupt his dinner,
or break his sleep, he is inexcusable. And there was anciently at Rome, the
Consular place, as they called it, which was the most honorable at the Table,
for being a place of most liberty, and of more convenient access to those who
came in to take with the person seated there. By which it appears, that for
being at meat, they did not totally abandon the concern of other affairs and
accidents. But when all is said, it is very hard in human actions, to give so
exact a Rule upon the best grounds, that fortune will not have a hand in them,
and maintain her own right.

CHAP. V. Of Conscience.
THE Sieur de la Brousse my Brother, and I, traveling one day together during
the time of our Civil Wars, met a Gentleman of good fashion, he was of the
contrary party, though I did not know so much, for he pretended otherwise: and
the mischief on it is, that in this sort of War, the Cards are so shuffled, an
Enemy not being distinguished from a friend, by any apparent mark either of
language or habit, nourisht under the same Laws, air and manners, that it is
very hard to avoid disorder and confusion. This made me afraid my self of
meeting any of our Troops in a Place where I was not known, that I might not be
in fear to tell my name, and peradventure of something worse. As it had befallen
me before, where, by such a mistake, I lost both men and horses, and amongst
others an Italian Gentleman my Page, that I bred with the greatest care and
affection, miserably slain, in whom a promising youth and of great expectation
was unfortunately extinguished. But the Gentleman, my Brother and I met, had so
strange a fear upon him, at the meeting with any horse, or passing by any of
the Towns that held for the King, that I at last discovered them to be alarms
of Conscience, and the poor man seemed to be in such a condition, as if
thorough his visor, and the crosses upon his Cassock, one might have penetrated
into his bosom, and read the most secret intentions of his heart. So wonderful
is the power of Conscience, that makes us betray, accuse and fight against our
selves; and for want of other witnesses, to give evidence against our selves.

Juven. Sat. 13.
Occultum quatiens animo tortore flagellum.
Conscience the tortu'rer of the Soul, unseen
Does feircely brandish a sharp scourge within.
This Story is in every child's mouth, Bessus the Poeonian, being reproch't with
ill nature for pulling down a nest of young sparrowes, and killing them,
replied, that he had reason so to do, seeing that those little birds never
ceast falsely to accuse him of the murder of his Father. Strange discovery of a
Parricide.
This Parricide had till then been concealed and unknown, but the revenging
fury of Conscience caused it to be discovered by him himself, who was justly
to suffer for it. Hesiod corrects the saying of Plato, That punishment closely
follows sin, it being, as he says, born at the same time with it. Whoever
expects punishment, already suffers it, and whoever has deserved it, expects
it. Wickedness contrives torments against it self. Malum consilium consultori
pessimum. Ill designs are worst to the contriver. Erasm. Adag.
As the wasp stings and offends another, but most of all it self; for it there
loses the sting, and the use of it for ever.

-- Vitasque in vulnere ponunt.
And do their own lives stake, Virg. Ge^. lib. 4.

In the small wound they make.
Cantharides have somewhere about them, by a contrariety of nature, a
counterpoison against their poison. In like manner at the same time that men
take delight in vice, there springs in the Conscience a displeasure, that
afflicts us sleeping and waking with several tormenting imaginations.

Quippe ubi se multi per somnia soepe loquentes Lucret. lib. 5.

Aut morbo delirantes procreasse ferantur,
Et celata diu in medium peccata dedisse.
The guilty hardly their own counsel keep,
They either will by talking in their sleep;
Or in a fever raving, will reveal
What they long had, and still meant to conceal.
Apollodorus dreamed, that he saw himself flayed by the Scythians, and after
boiled in a Cauldron, and that his heart muttered these words, I am the cause
of all these mischeifs have befal'n thee. Epicurus said, that no hiding hole
could conceal the wicked, since they could never assure themselves of being
hid, whilst their conscience discovered them to themselves.

-- Prima est hoec ultio, quod se
Juven. Sat. 13.
Judice nemo nocens absoluitur.
-- It Is the first punishment of sin,
That no Man does absolve himself within.
As Conscience fills us with fear when ill, so a good one gives us greater
confidence and assurance; and I can truly say, that I have gone thorough
several hazards with a more steady pace, in consideration of the secret
knowledge I had of my own will, and the innocence of my intentions.

Ovid. Fast. lib. 1.
Conscia men's ut cuique sud est, ita concipit intra
Pectora pro facto spemque metumque suo.
As a Man's Conscience is, so hope within,
Or fear prevails, suiting to his design.
Of this are a thousand examples; but it will be enough to instance three of
one, and the same person Scipio, being one day accused before the People of
Rome of some Crimes of a very high nature, in stead of excusing himself, or
insinuating into the favor of his Judges, The confident innocence of Scipio.
It will become you very well (said he) to sit in Judgment upon a head, by whom
you have the power to judge all the World. And another time, all the answer he
gave to several Impeachments brought against him by a Tribune of the People, in
stead of making his defense; let us go, Citizens, said he, let us go render
thanks to the Gods for the Victory they gave over the Carthaginians as this
day, and advancing himself before toward the Temple, he had presently all the
Assembly and his very Accuser himself following at his heels. And Petilius
having been set on by Cato to demand an account of the money had past through his
hands in the Province of Antioch, Scipio being come into the Senate to that
purpose, produced a Book from under his Robe, wherein he told them was an exact
account of his receipts and disbursments; but being required to deliver it to
the Pronotary to be examined and enrolled, he refused, saying, he would not do
himself so great a disgrace; and in the presence of the whole Senate tore the
Book with his own hands to pieces. I do not believe that the most feared
Conscience could have counterfeited so great an assurance. He had naturally too
high a spirit, and was accustomed to too high a fortune, says Titus Livius, to
know how to be criminal, and to dispose himself to the meanness of defending
his innocence. This putting men to the Rack is a dangerous invention, and
seems to be rather a trial of patience than truth. Both he who has the
fortitude to endure it, conceals the truth, and he who has not: for why should
pain sooner make me to confess what really is, than force me to say what is
not? And on the contrary, if he who is not guilty of that whereof he is
accused, has the courage to undergo those torments, why should not he who is
guilty have the same, so fair a reward as life being in his prospect? I think
the ground of this invention proceeds from the consideration of the force of
Conscience. For to the guilty it seems to assist the Rack to make him confess
his fault, and to shake his resolution, and on the other side, that it
fortifies the innocent against the torture. But when is all is don, it is in plain
truth a trial full of incertainty and danger. What would not a man say, what
would not a man do to avoid so intolerable torments?

Etiam innocents cogit mentiri dolor.
Pub. Sy. min. de dolor.
Pain the most innocent will make to lie.
Whence it comes to pass, that he whom the Judge has rackt, that he may not dye
innocent, he makes him die both innocent and rackt. A thousand and a thousand
have charged their own heads by false confessions. Amongst which I place
Philotas, considering the circumstances of the Trial Alexander put him upon,
and the progress of his torture. But so it is (says one) that it is the least
evil humane weakness could invent; very inhumanely notwithstanding, and to
very little purpose in my opinion. Many Nations less Barbarous in this, than
the Greeks and Romans who call them so, repute it horrible and cruel, to
torment and pull a man to pieces for a fault of which they are yet in doubt.
How can he help your ignorance? Are not you unjust, that, not to kill him
without cause, do worse than kill him? And that this is so, do but observe how
many ways he had rather die without Reason, than undergo this Examination, more
painful than Execution it self; and that oft-times, by its extremity, prevents
Execution, and dispatches him. I know not where I had this Story: but it
exactly matches the Conscience of our Justice in this particular. A Country
woman, to a General of very severe Discipline, accused one of his Soldiers,
that he had taken from her Children the little milk she had lest to nourish
them withal, the Army having consumed all the rest: but of this, Proof there
was none. The General, after having cautioned the woman to take good heed to
what she said, for that she would make herself guilty of a false Accusation, if
she told a lie; and she persisting, he presently caused the Soldiers belly to
be ripped up, to clear the truth of the fact, and the Woman was found to be in
the right. An instructive Sentence.

CHAP. VI. Use makes Perfectness.
IT IS not to be expected, that Argument and Instruction, though we never so
voluntarily surrender our belief to what is read to us, should be of force to
lead us on so far as to Action, if we do not over and above exercise and form
the Soul by Experience to the course for which we design it: it will otherwise
doubtless find it self at a loss, when it comes to the pinch of the business.
This is the reason, why those amongst the Philosophers, who were ambitious to
attain to a greater excellence, were not contented to expect the severities of
fortune in their retirement, and repose of their own habitations, lest she
should have surpised them raw and unexpert in the Combat; but sallied out to
meet her, and purposely threw themselves into the proof of difficulties. Some
of which abandoned Riches to exercise themselves in a voluntary proverty:
others have sought out labor, and an ^usterity of life, to inure them to
hard-ships and inconveniences; others have deprived themselves of their
dearest members, as of their sight and instruments of Generation, left their
too delightful and effeminate service should soften and debauch the stability
of their Souls. But in dying, which is the greatest work we have to do,
Practice is out of doors, and can give us no assistance at all. A man may by
custom fortisie himself against pains, shame, necessity and such like
accidents; but, as to death, we can experiment it but once, and are all
Apprentices when we come to it. There have anciently been men so excellent
managers of their time, that they have tried, even in death it self, to relish
and taste it, and who have bent their utmost faculties of mind to discover, what
this passage is: but they are none of them come back to tell us the news.

-- Nemo expergitus extat, Lucret. lib. 3.

Frigida quem semel est vitai pausa sequuta.
-- No one was ever known to wake,
Who once in deaths cold arms a nap did take.
Canius Julius, a noble Roman, of singular constancy and virtue, having been
condemned to die by that Beast Caligula, besides many admirable testimonies
that he gave of his resolution, as he was just going to receive the stroke of
the Executioner, was asked by a Philosoper, a friend of his; well Canius, said
he, wherabout is your Soul now? What is she doing? What are you thinking of? I
was thinking, replied the other, to keep my self ready and the faculties of my
mind settled and fixed, to try if in this short and quick instant of death, I
could perceive the motion of the Soul when she parts from the body, and whether
she has any resentment at the separation, that I may after come again if I can,
to acquaint my friends with it. This man Philosophizes not unto death only,
but in death self. What a strange assurance was this, and what bravery of
courage, to desire his death should be a lesson to him, and to have leisure to
think of other things in so great an affair?

-- Jus hoc animi morientis habebat.
This mighty power of mind he dying had.
Luc. lib. ^.
And yet I fancy, there is a certain way of making it familiar to us, and in
some sort of making trial, what it is. We may gain experience, if not entire
and perfect, yet such at least, as shall not be totally useless to us; and that
may render us more assured. If we cannot overtake it, we may approach it and
view it, and if we do not advance so far as to the Fort, we may at least
discover it, and make our selves perfect in the Avenues. It is not without
reason that we are taught to consider sleep, as a resemblance of death. With
how great facility do we pass from waking to sleeping, and with how little
concern do we lose the knowledge of light, Sleep the Image of Death.
and of ourselves! Perad^^nture the faculty of sleeping would seem useless and
contrary to nature, being it deprives us of all action and sense, were it not
that by it Nature instructs us, that she has equally made us to die, as to
live, and from life presents us the Eternal Estate, she reserves for us after
it, to accustom us to it, and to take from us the fear of it. But such, as have
by some violent accident fallen into a swoon, and in it have lost all sense,
these, methinks, have been very near seeing the true and natural face of death;
for as to the moment of the passage, it is not to be feared that it brings with
it any pain, or displeasure, for as much as we can have no feeling without
leisure; Our sufferings require time, which in death is so short and so
precipitous, that it must necessarily be insensible. They are the approaches
that we are to fear, and those may fall within the limits of experience. Many
things seem greater by imagination, than they are in effect. I have past a good
part of my age in a perfect and entire health; I say, not only entire; but
moreover spritely and wanton. This estate, so full of verdure, jollity and
vigor, made the consideration of sickness so formidable to me, that when I
came to experiment it, I found the attacques faint, and easy in comparison of
what I had apprehended. Of this I have daily experience; If I am under the
shelter of a warm room, in a stormy and tempestuous night, I wonder how People
can live abroad, and am afflicted for those who are out in the (...): If I am
there my self, I do not wish to be any where else. This one thing of being
always shut up in a chamber I fanc^ed insupportable: but I was presently inured
to be so imprisoned a week, nay a month together. And have found that in the
time of my health, I did much more lament the sick, than I think my self to be
lamented when I am so, and that the force of my imagination enhances near one
half of the essence and reality of the thing. I hope that when I come to die I
shall find the same, and that I shall not find it worth the pains I take, so
much preparation and so much assistance as I call in, to undergo the stroke.
But we cannot give our selves too much advantage at all adventures.

In the time of our third, or second troubles, (I do not well remember which)
going one day abroad to take the air, about a league from my own house, which
is seated in the very Center of all the bustle and mischief of the late Civil
wars of France, thinking my self in all security, and so near to my retreat
that I stood in need of no better Equipage, I had taken a horse that went very
easy upon his pace, but was not very strong. Being upon my return home, a
sudden occasion falling out to make use of this horse, in a kind of service
that he was not acquainted with; one of my train, a lusty proper fellow,
mounted upon a strong German horse, that had a very ill mouth, but was
otherwise vigorous and unfoild; to play the Bravo and appear a better man than
his fellows, comes thundering full speed in the very track where I was, rushing
like a Colossus upon the little man, and the little horse, with such a carreer
of strength and weight, that he turned us both over and over, topsy turvy with
our heels in the air: so that there lay the horse over thrown and stunned with
the fall, and I ten or twelve paces from him stretched out at length, with my
face all battered and broken, my sword which I had in my hand, above ten paces
beyond that, and my belt broke all to pieces, without motion or sense any more
than a stock. 'Twas the only swoon I was ever in till this hour in my life.
Those who were with me, after having used all the means they could to bring me
to my self, concluding me dead, took me up in their arms, and carried me with
very much difficulty home to my house; which was about half a French league
from thence* Having been by the way and two long hours after, given over for a
dead man, I began to move and to fetch my breath; for so great abundance of
blood was fallen into my stomach, that Nature had need to rouse her forces to
discharge it. They then raised me upon my feet, where I threw off a great
quantity of pure Florid blood, as I had also don several times by the way,
which gave me so much ease, that I began to recover a little life, but so
leisurely and by so small advances, that my first sentiments were much near
the approaches of death than life.

Perch dubbiosa anchor del suo ritorna
Non s'assecura attonita la mente. T^sso. Cant. ^^

Because the Soul her mansion half had quit,
And was not sure she was returned to it.
The remembrance of this accident, which is very well imprinted in my memory,
so naturally representing to me the Image and Idea of death, has in some sort
reconciled me to that untoward accident. When I first began to ^pen my eyes
after my trance, it was with so perplex't, so weak and dead a sight, that I
could yet distinguish nothing and could only discern the light.

-- Come quel ch'or apre, or chiude
Tasso. Cant. 8.
Gli occhi, mezzo tra'l sonno e l'esser desto.
As people in the morning when they rise,
'Twixt sleep, and wake open and shut their eyes.
As to the functions of the Soul, they advanced with the same pace and measure
with those of the Body. I saw my self all bloody, my doublet being stained and
spotted all over with the blood I had vomited; and the first thought that came
into my mind, was, that I had a Harquebuze shot in my head: and indeed at the
same time, there were a great many fired round about us. Methought, my life but
just hung upon my lips; and I shut my eyes, to help, methought, to thrust it
out; and took a pleasure in languishing and letting my self go. It was an
imagination that only superficially slo^ed upon my Soul, as tender and weak as
all the rest, but really, not only exempt from pain, but mixed with that
sweetness and pleasure that People are sensible of, when they indulge
themselves to drop into a slumber. I believe it is the very same condition
those People are in, whom we see to swoon with weakness, in she agony of
death, and am of opinion that we lament them without cause, supposing them
agitated with grievous dolours, or that their Souls suffer under painful
thoughts. It has ever been my belief, contrary to the opinion of many and
particularly of Stephen Boethius, that those whom we see so subdued and
stupefied at the approaches of their end, or deprest with the length of the
disease, or by accident of an Apoplexy, or falling Sickness.

(Vi morbi saepe coactus Lucret. lib. 3.

Ante oculos aliquis nostros ut fulminis ictu
Concidit, and spumas agit, ingemit, and fremit artus,
Desipit, extentat nervos, torquetur, anhelat,
Inconstanter et in jactando membra fatigat.)
By the disease compelled so we see some,
As they were thunder-struk, fall, groan and foam
Tremble, stretch, writh, breath short, until at length
In various struglings they tire out their strength.)
Or hurt in the head, whom we hear to mutter and by fits to utter grievous
groans, though we gather from thence some sign by which it seems as if they
had some remains of sense and knowledge, I have always believed, I say, both
the Body and the Soul benumn'd, and asleep.

Vivit and est vitae nescius ipse suae. Ovid Tust. lib. 1. Eleg. 3.

He lives, but does not know,
That he does so.
And could not believe that in so great a stupefaction of the members and so
great a defection of the senses, the ^oul could maintain any force within, to
take cognizance of herself or look into her own condition, and that therefore
they had no tormenting reflections, to make them consider and be sensible of the
misery of their condition, and consequently were not much to be lamented. I can
for my part think of no estate so insupportable and dreadful, as to have the
Soul spritely and afflicted without means to declare it self: as one should say
of such who are sent to Execution, with their tongues first cut out; were it
not that in this kind of dying, the most silent seems to me the most graceful,
if accompanied with a grave and constant countenance; or of those miserable
Prisoners, who fall into the hands of the base bloody Soldiers of this Age, by
whom they are tormented with all sorts of inhumane usage, to compel them to
some excessive and impossible ransom; kept in the mean time in such condition
and place, where they have no means of expressing, or signifying their mind and
misery, to such as they may expect should relieve them. The Poets have feigned
some Gods, who favor the deliverance of such as suffer under a languishing
death.

-- Hunc ego Diti
Sacrum jussa fero, teque isto corpore solvo. Aeneid. lib. 4.

I by command offer to Pluto this,
And from that body do the Soul dismiss.
Both the interrupted words, and the short and irregular answers one gets from
them sometimes, by bawling and keeping a clutter about them; or the motions
which seem to yield some consent to what we would have them do, are no
testimony nevertheless that they live an entire life at least. So it happens
that in the yawning of sleep, before it has fully possessed us to perceive, as in
a dream, what is don about us, and to follow the last things are said with a
perplex't and uncertain hearing, which seem but to touch upon the borders of
the Soul; and make answers to the last words have been spoken to us, which have
more in them of fortune than sense. Now seeing I have effectually tried it, I
make no doubt but I have hitherto made a right judgment. For first, being in a
swoon, I labored with both hands to rip open the buttons of my doublet, (for I
was without arms) and yet I felt nothing in my imagination that hurt me; for we
have many motions in us, that do not proceed from our direction.

Semianimesque micant digiti, ferrumque retractant. Id. lib. 10.

And half-dead fingers grope about and feel,
To grasp again the late abandoned steel.
So falling People extend their arms before them by a natural impulse, which
prompts them to offices and motions, without any Commission from us.

Lucret. lib. 3.
Falciferos memorant currus abscindere membra,
Vt tremere in terra videatur ab artubus, id quod
Decidit abscissum, cum men's tamen atque hominis
Mobilitate mali non quit sentire dolorem.
How limbs syth-bearing Chariots lopt, they tell
Would move and tremble on the ground they fell,
When he himself, from whom the limb was taken,
Could by the swiftness feel no kind of pain.
My stomach was so oppressed with the coagulated blood, that my hands moved to
that part, of their own voluntary motion, as they frequently do to the part
that itches, without being directed by our Will. There are several Animals and
even Men, in whom one may perceive the muscles to stir and tremble after they
are dead. Every one experimentally knows, that there are some members, which
grow stiff and slag without his leave. Now those passions which only touch the
outward Bark of us, as a man may say, cannot be said to be ours: to make them
so, there must be a concurrence of the whole man and the pains, which are felt
by the hand or the foot while we are sleeping, are none of ours. As I drew near
my own house, where the Alarm of my fall was already got before me, and that my
family were come out to meet me, with the hubbub usual in such cases; I did not
only make some little answer to some questions were asked me, but they moreover
tell me, that I had so much sense, as to order that a horse I saw trip and
faulter in the way, which is mountainous and uneasy, should be given to my
wife. This consideration should seem to proceed from a Soul, that retained its
functions; but it was nothing so with me. I knew not what I said or did, and
they were nothing but idle thoughts in the clouds, that were stirred up by the
senses of the eyes and ears, and proceeded not from me. I knew not for all
that, or whence I came, or whither I went, neither was I capable to weigh and
consider what was said to me: these were light effects, that the senses
produced of themselves, as of custom, what the Soul contributed was in a dream,
as being lightly touched, lick't and bedewed by the soft impression of the
senses. Notwithstanding, my condition was in truth very easy and quiet, I had
no afflictions upon me, either for others or my self. It was an extreme
drooping and weekness without any manner of pain. I saw my own house, but knew
it not. When they had put me to bed, I found an inexpressible sweetness in that
repose; for I had been damnably tugged and lugg'd by those poor People, who had
taken the pains to carry me upon their Arms a very great and a very ill way,
and had in so doing all quite tired out themselves twice or thrice one after
another. They offered me several remedies, but I would take none, certainly
beleiving that I was mortally wounded in the head. And in earnest, it had been
a very happy death, for the weakness of my understanding deprived me of the
faculty of discerning, and that of my body from the sense of feeling. I
suffered my self to glide away so sweetly and after so soft and easy a manner,
that I scarce find any other action less troublesome than that was. But when I
came again to my self and to reassume my faculties.

Vt tandem sensus convaluere mei,
Ovid. Trist. lib. 1. Eleg. 3.
As my lost senses did again return,
Which was two or three hours after, I felt my self on a sudden involved in
terrible pain, having my limbs shattered and groun'd to pieces with my fall,
and was so exceeding ill two or three nights after, that I thought once more to
die again, but a more painful death, having concluded my self as good as dead
before, and to this hour am sensible of the bruises of that terrible shock. I
will not here omit, that the last thing I could make them beat into my head,
was the memory of this accident, and made it be over and over again repeated to
me, whither I was going, from whence I came, and at what time of the day this
mischance besel me, before I could comprehend it. As to the manner of my fall,
that was concealed from me in favor to him, who had been the occasion, and
other slimflams were invented to palliate the truth. But a long ^^me a^^er and
the very next day that my memory began to return and to represent to me the
e^^ate wherein I was, at the Instant that I perceived this horse coming full
drive upon me (for I had seen him come thundering at my heels, and gave my self
for gone: But this thought had been so sudden, that fear had had no leisure to
introduce it self) it seemed to me like a flash of lightning that had pierced
thorough my Soul, and that I came from the other World.

This long Story, of so light an accident, would appear vain enough, were it
not for the knowledge I have gained by it for my own use; for I do really find,
that to be acquainted with death, is no more but nearly to approach it. Every
one, as Pliny says, is a good Doctrine to himself, provided he be capable of
discovering himself near at hand. This is not my Doctrine, it is my study; and
is not the lesson of another, but my own, and yet if I communicate it, it ought
not to be ill taken. That which is of use to me, may also peradventure be
useful to another. As to the rest, I spoil nothing, I make use of nothing but
my own; and if I play the fool, it is at my own expense and no body else is
concerned in it: for it is a folly, that will die with me and that no one is to
inherit. We hear but of two or three of the Ancients, who have beaten this
Road, and yet I cannot say, if it be after this manner, knowing no more of them
but their names. Not one since has followed the track: it is a tickle subject
and more nice than it seems, to follow a pace so extravagant and uncertain, as
that of the Soul; to penetrate the dark Profundities of their intricate
internal windings; to choose and lay hold of so many little graces and nimble
motions, and a new and extraordinary undertaking, and that withdraws us from
the common and most recommended emploiments of the World. It Is now many years
since, that my thoughts have had no other aim and level, than my self, and
that I have only pried into and studied my self: Or if I study any other thing,
it is to lay it up for and to apply it to my self. And yet I do not think it a
fault, if, as others do by other much less profitable Sciences, I communicate
what I have learned in this affair: though I am not very well pleased with what
I have writ upon this Subject. There is no description so difficult, nor
doubtless of so great utility, as that of a Man's self. And withal a Man must
curle, set out and adjust himself to appear in public. Now I am perpetually
tricking my self; for I am eternally upon my own description. Custom has made
all speaking of a Man's self vicious and does positively interdict it, in
hatred to the vanity, that seems inseparably joined with the testimony men give
of themselves. I do not know that necessarily follows; but allowing it to be
true, and that it must of necessity be presumption to entertain the people with
Discourses of ones self: I ought not, pursuing my general Design, to forbear an
action that publishes this Infirmity of mine; nor conceal the Fault which I not
only practice, but profess. Notwithstanding, to speak my thought freely, I do
think that the custom of condemning Wine, because some people will be drunk, is
it self to be condemned. A man cannot abuse any thing but what is good in it
self; and I believe that this Rule has only regard to the popular Vice: they
are Bits, with which neither the Saints whom we hear speak so highly of
themselves, nor the Philosophers, nor the Divines will be curbed; neither will
I, who am as little the one as the other: Of what does Socrates treat more
largely, than of himself? To what does he more direct, and address the
Discourses of his Disciples, than to speak of themselves, not of the Lesson in
the Book, but of the Essence and Motion of their Souls? We confess our selves
Religiously to God, and our Confessor; and, as they are our Neighbors to all
the people. But some will answer, and say, that we there speak nothing but
Accusation against our selves: Why then we say all, for our very Virtue it self
is faulty and penitable; my Trade and Art is to live. He that forbids me to
speak according to my own Sense, Experience and Practice, may as well enjoin an
Architect not to speak of Building according to his own knowledge, but
according to that of his Neighbor; according to the knowledge of another, and
not according to his own. If it be Vainglory for a man to publish his own
Virtues, why does not Cicero prefer the Eloquence of Hortensius, and Hortensius
that of Cicero? Peradventure they mean, that I should give testimony of my self
by Works and Effects, not barely by Words: I chiefly paint my Thoughts, an
Inform Subject, and incapable of Operative Production. It Is all that I can do
to couch it in this airery body of the Voice. The Wisest and Devoutest Men have
lived in the greatest Care to avoid all discovery of Works: Effects would more
speak of Fortune, than of me. They manifest their own Office, and not mine; but
uncertainly, and by conjecture: They are but Patterns of some one particular
Virtue I expose my self entire: it is a Skeleton where at one view the Veins,
Muscles, and Tendons are apparent every of them in its proper place. I do not
write my own Acts, but my Self and my Essence: I am of opinion, that a man must
be very wise to value himself, and equally conscientious, to give a true
Report; be it better or worse, indifferently: If I thought my self perfectly
good and wise, I would speak with open mouth, and rattle it out to some
purpose. To speak less of a man's self, than what one really is, is folly, not
modesty; and to take that for current pay, which is under a man's value, is
Pusillanimity and Cowardice, according to Aristotle. No Virtue assists it self
with Falsehood; Truth is never the Master of Error: To speak more of ones self,
than is really true, is not always Presumption, it is moreover very often Folly:
^o be immeasurably pleased with what one is, and to fall into an indiscreet
self-love, is in my opinion the Substance of this Vice. The most Sovereign
Remedy to cure it, is to do quite contrary to what these people direct, who in
forbidding men to speak of themselves, do consequently at the same time
interdict thinking of themselves too. Pride dwells in the Thought, the Tongue
can have but a very little share in it: They fancy, that to think of ones self
is to be delighted with himself; to frequent, and to converse with a man's
self, to be over-indulgent. But this Excess springs only in those, who only
take of themselves a Superficial View, and dedicate their main Inspection to
their Affairs; that call Meditation, raving and idleness, looking upon
themselves as a third person only, and a stranger. If any one be ravished with
his own Knowledge, whilst he looks only on those below him; let him but turn
his Eye upward toward past Ages, and his Pride will be abated, when he shall
there find so many thousand Wits that trample him under foot. If he enter into
a flattering vanity of his personal Valor, let him but recollect the Lives of
Scipio, Epaminondas, so many Armies and Nations that leave him so far behind
them, and he will be cured of his Self-opinion. No particular Quality can make
any man proud, that will at the same time put so many other meek and imperfect
ones as he has in him in the other Scale, and the Nothingness of Humane
Condition to balance the weight: Because Socrates had alone swallowed to
purpose the Precept of his God, To know himself, and by that study was arrived
to the perfection of setting himself at naught; he was only reputed worthy the
Title of a Sage. Whosoever shall so know himself, let him boldly speak it out.

CHAP. VII. Of Recompenses of Honor.
THey who write the Life of Augustus Caesar, observe this in his Military
Discipline, That he was wonderfully liberal of Gifts to Men of Merit; but that
as to the true Recompenses of Honor, he was as sparing. So it is, that he had
himself been gratified by his Uncle with all the Military Recompenses, before
he had ever been in the Field. It was a pretty Invention, and received into
most Governments of the World, to Institute certain vain and insignificant
Distinctions to Honor and recompense Virtue; such as the Crowns of Laurel,
Oak, and Myrrh, the particular Fashion of some Garment, the privilege to ride
in a Coach in the City, or to have a Torch by Night; some peculiar place
assigned in public Assemblies; the Prerogative of certain additional Names and
Titles; certain Distinctions in their bearing of Coats of Arms, and the like:
The use of which, according to the several Humors of Nations, has been
variously received, and do yet continue. We in France, Orders of Knighthood
instituted to reward Military Virtue.
as also several of our Neighbous, have the Orders of Knighthood, that are
instituted only for this end. And it is in earnest a very good and profitable
Custom, to find out an Acknowledgment for the Worth of Rare and Excellent Men;
and to satisfy their Ambition with Rewards, that are not at all Chargeable
either to Prince or People: And that which has been always found both by
ancient Experience; and that we our selves may also have observed in our own
times; that men of Quality have ever been more jealous of such Recompenses,
than of those wherein there was Gain and Profit, is not without very good
ground and reason. If with Reward, which ought to be simply a Recompense of
Honor, they should mix other Emoluments, and add Riches; this mixture in stead
of procuring an increase of Estimation, would vilify and abate it. The Order
of St. Michael, which has been so long in repute amongst us, had no other, The
Order of Saint Michel.
nor greater Commodity, than that it had no communication with any other; which
produced this Effect, that formerly there was no Office, nor Title whatever, to
which the Gentry pretended with so great Desire and Affection, as they did to
that; nor Quality that carried with it more Respect and Grandeur: Virtue more
willingly embracing, and, with greater Ambition, aspiring to a Recompense truly
her own, and rather Honorable than Beneficial: For intruth, the other Rewards
have not so great a Dignity of Usage, by reason they are laid out upon all
sorts of Occasions. With Money a man pays the Wages of a Servant, the Diligence
of a Courrier, Dancing, Vaulting, Speaking, and the vilest Offices we receive;
nay, and reward Vice with it too; as Flattery, Treachery, and Pimping: and
therefore it is no wonder if Virtue does less desire, and less willingly receive
this common sort of Payment, than that which is proper and peculiar to her,
throughout Generous and Noble. Augustus had reason to be a better Husband, and
more sparing of this, than the other; by how much Honor is a Privilege that
extracts its principal Esteem from Rarity, and Virtue its self. Mart. lib. 2.
Epig. 82.
Cui malus est nemo, quis bonus esse potest?
To whom none seems ill, who good can seem?
We do not intend it for a Commendation, when we say, that such a one is
careful in the Education of his Children: by reason it is a common Act, how
just and well done soever; no more than we commend a great Tree, where the
whole Forest is the same. I do not think that any Citizen of Sparta valued
himself much upon his Valor, Valor of the Citizens of Sparta.
it being the universal Virtue of the whole Nation, and as little glorified
himself upon his Fidelity, and contempt of Riches. There is no Recompense due
to Virtue, how great soever, that is once past into a Custom; and I know not
withal, whether we can ever call it Great, being Common. Seeing that these
Remunerations of Honor have no other Value and Estimation, but only this, That
few people enjoy them; it is but to be liberal of them, to bring them down to
nothing. And though there should be now more men found than in former times
worthy of our Order, the estimation of it nevertheless should not be abated,
nor the honor made cheap. And it may easily fall out, that more may merit it;
for there is no Virtue that so easily dilates it self, as that of Military
Valor: There is another true, perfect, and Philosophical, of which I do not
speak, (and only make use of the word in the common acceptance) much greater
than this, and more full, which is a force and assurance of Souls, equally
disposing all sorts of adverse Accidents, equal, uniform, and constant; of
which ours is no more, than one little Ray. Usance, Precept, Example and
Custom, can do all in all to the establishment of that whereof I am speaking,
and with great facility render it vulgar, as by the experience of our Civil War
is manifest enough; and whoever could at this instant unite us Catholic and
Hugonot into one Body, and set us upon some brave Enterprise, we should again
make our ancient Military Reputation to flourish. It is most certain, that in
times past, the Recompense of this Order, had not only a regard to Valor, but
had a further Prospect. It never was the Reward of a Valiant Soldier, but of a
Great Captain. The Science of obeying was not reputed worthy of so honorable a
Guerdon, there was therein a more Universal Military Expertness required, and
that comprehended the most and the greatest Qualities of a Military man; Neque
enim eaedem Militares and Imperatoriae arts sunt. For the Military knowledge
required in a common Soldier and a General, are not the same; as also besides
a Condition suitable to such a Dignit^. But I say, that though more men were
worthy than formerly; yet ought it not to be more liberally distributed, and
that it were better to fall short in not giving it to all to whom it should be
acknowledged due, than for ever to love, as we have lately done, the Fruit of
so profitable an Invention. No man of Spirit will d^ign to advantage himself
with what is in common wi^h many: And such of the present time, as have least
merited this Recompense, make the greater show of didaining it, being thereby
to be rankt with those, to whom so much wrong has been done, by the unworthy
conferring and debasing the Character, which was (...) particular right. Now to
expect that in obliterating and abolishing this suddenly, The Order of the Holy
Ghost.
to create and bring into credit a like new Institution, is not a proper
Attempt for so licentious and so sick a Time as this, wherein we now are* and
it will fall out, that the last will from its birth incur the same
Inconveniences, that have ruined the oth^^. The Rules for the dispensing of
this New Order, had need to be extremely clipped, and bound under great
Restrictions to give it Authority; and this tumultuous Season is incapable of
such a Curb: Besides, that before this can be brought into Repute, it is
necessary that the Memory of the first, and the Contempt into which it is fallen,
be totally buried in Oblivion.

This place might naturally enough admit of some Discourse upon the
Consideration of Valor, and the Difference of this Virtue from others: But
Plutarch having so often handled this Subject, I should give my self an
unnecessary Trouble to repeat what he has said; but this is worth considering,
That our Nation place Valor in the Highest Degree of Virtue; as the very Word
does evidence, being derived from Value, and that according to our Usance when
we decipher a Worthy Man, or a Man of Value; only in our Court style, to say a
Valiant Man, after the Roman way: For the general Appellation of Virtue with
them, takes Etymology from Force. The proper, sole, and essential Method of the
French Nobleness, is the Practice of Arms: And it is likely that the first
Virtue which discovered its self amongst Men, and that has given some Advantage
over others, was this; by which the Strongest and most Valiant have Lorded it
over the Weaker, and Entailed upon themselves a particular Authority and
Reputation: Or else that these Nations being very Warlike, has given the
Pre-eminence to that of the Virtues which was most familiar to them, and that
they thought of the most worthy Character. Just as our Passion and the
Feverish Solicitude we have of the Chastity of Woman, makes that to say, A
good Woman, a Woman of Worth; and a Woman of Honor and Virtue, signify no
more but a Chaste Woman: as if to Oblige her to that one Duty, we were
indifferent as to all the rest, and gave them the Reins to all other Faults
whatever, to compound for that one of Incontinence.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Affection of Fathers to their Children. To Madam D'ESTISSAC.
MAdam, If the Strangeness and Novelty of my Subject which are wont to give
Value to things, do not save me, I shall never come off with Honor from this
foolish Attempt: But it is so Fantastic, and carries a Face so unlike the
common Usance, that that peradventure may make it pass. It Is a Melancholic
Humor, and consequently an Humor very much an Enemy to my Natural Complexion,
engendered by the Pensiveness of the Solitude, into which for some years past I
have retired my self, that first put into my head this idle Fancy of Writing:
Wherein finding my self totally Unprovided and Empty of other Matter, I
presented my Self to my Self for Argument and Subject. It Is the only Book in
the World of its kind, and of a wild and extravagant Design; there is nothing
worth Remark but the Extravagancy in this Affair: for in a Subject so vain and
frivolous, the best Workman in the World could not have given it a Form fit to
recommend it to any manner of Esteem.

Now, Madam, being to draw mine own Picture to the Life, I had omitted the
only graceful Feature, had I not therein represented the Honor I have ever
had for you, and your Merits; which I have purposely chosen to say in the
beginning of this Chapter, by reason that amongst many other Excellent
Qualities you are Mistress of, that of the tender Love you have manifested to
your Children, is worthily seated in one of the highest places. Whoever shall
know at what age Monsieur d'Estissac your Husband left you a Widow, the great
and honorable Matches have since been offered to you, as many as to any Lady
of your Condition in France; the Constancy and steadiness wherein you have
lived so many years, and wherewith you have gone through so many sharp
Difficulties, the Charge and Conduct of their Affairs who have prosecuted you
in every Corner of the Kingdom, and who yet are not weary of tormenting you;
and the happy Direction you have given in all this, either by your single
Prudence, or good Fortune, will easily conclude with me, that we have not so
lively an Example as yours of maternal Affection in our times. I praise God,
Madam, that it has been so well employed; for the great hopes that Monsieur
d'Estissac the Son gives of himself, do advance sufficient assurance, that when
he comes to age, you will reap from him all the Obedience and Gratitude of a
very good man. But forasmuch as by reason of his tender years he has not been
capable of taking notice of those Offices of extremest kindness he has in so
great number received from you; The affection of Parents toward their
Children, greater than that of Children toward them; and why?
I will, if these Papers shall one day happen to fall into his hands, when I
shall neither have Mouth nor Speech left to deliver it to him, that he shall
receive a true account of those things from me, which shall be more effectually
manifested to him by their own Effects, by which he will understand, that there
is not a Gentleman in France, who stands more indebted to a Mothers Care; and
that he cannot for the future give a better, nor more certain Testimony of
himself, of his own Worth and Virtue, than by acknowledging you for that
Excellent Mother you are.

If there be any Law truly Natural; that is to say, any Instinct that is seen
universally and perpetually imprinted in both Beasts and Men, (which is not
without Controversy) I can then say, that in my opinion, next to the Care
every Animal has of his own Preservation, and to avoid that which may hurt him,
the Affection that the Begetter bears to his Offspring, holds the second place
in this File. And seeing that Nature seems to have recommended it to us, having
regard to the Extension and Propagation of the successive Piece of this
Machine: it is no wonder if on the contrary, that of Children toward their
Parents is not so great. To which we may add this other Aristotelian
Consideration, that he who confers a Benefit on any one, loves him better, than
he is beloved by him again: and that every Artificer is fonder of his Work,
than if that Work had Sense, it would be of him; by reason that it is dear to
us to be, and to be consists in moving and action: Therefore every one has in
some sort a being in his Work. Who confers a Benefit, exercises a fair and
honest Action; who receives it, exercises the Vtile only. Now the Vtile is much
less amiable than the Honest: the Honest is stable and permanent, supplying him
who has done it with a continual Gratification. The Vtile loses it self, easily
slides away, and the Memory of it is neither so fresh, nor so pleasing. Those
things are dearest to us that have cost us most, and giving is more chargeable
than receiving. Since it has pleased God to endue us with some Capacity of
weighing and considering things, to the end we may not like Brutes be servilely
subjected and enslaved to the Laws common to both; but that we should by
judgment and a voluntary liberty apply our selves to them: We ought indeed
something to yield to the simple Authority of Nature, but not suffer our selves
to be tyrannically hurried away and transported by her; being that Reason alone
should have the Conduct of our Inclinations. I for my part have a strange
Disgust to those Propensions that are started in us, without the Mediation and
Direction of the Judgment. As upon the Subject I am speaking of, I cannot
entertain that Passion of Dandling and Caressing an Infant scarcely born,
having as yet neither motion of Soul, nor shape of Body distinguishable, by
which they can render themselves amiable; and have not willingly suffered them
to be nursed near me: A true and regular Affection ought to spring and increase
with the knowledge they give us of themselves, and then if they are worthy of
it, the natural Propension walking hand in hand with Reason, to cherish them
with a truly Paternal Love; and to judge and discern also if they be otherwise,
still rendering our selves to Reason, notwithstanding the Inclination of Nature.
It goes through sometimes quite otherwise, and most commonly we find our selves
more taken with the running up and down the Play, and Puerile Simplicity of our
Children, than we do afterward with their most completed Actions; as if we
had loved them for our sport, like Monkies, and not as Men. And some there are,
who are very liberal in buying them Balls to play withal, who are very
close-handed for the least necessary Expense when they come to age. Nay, to
that degree, that it looks as if the jealousy of seeing them appear in, and
enjoy the World, when we are about to leave it, rendered us more niggardly and
stingy toward them. It vexes us that they tread upon our Heels, as if to
solicit us to go out; and if this be to be feared, since the order of things
will have it so that they cannot, to speak the truth, be, nor live, but at the
expense of our Being and Life, we should never meddle with getting Children.
For my part I think it Cruelty and Injustice not to receive them into the share
and society of our Goods, and not to make them Partakers in the Intelligence of
our Domestic Affairs, when they are capable, and not to lessen and contract
our own Expenses to make the more room for theirs, seeing we beget them to that
effect. It Is unjust that an old Fellow, deaf, lame, and half-dead, should alone
in a Corner of the Chimney, enjoy the Goods that were sufficient for the
Maintenance and Advancement of many Children, and to suffer them in the mean
time to lose their best Years, for want of means to put themselves into public
service, and the knowledge of men. A man by this means drives them to desperate
Courses, and to seek out by any means, how unjust or dishonorable soever, to
provide for their own support. As I have in my time seen several young men of
good Extraction, so addicted to stealing, that no Correction could cure them of
it. I know one of a very good Family, to whom, at the request of a Brother of
his, a very honest and brave Gentleman, I once spoke upon this account; who
made answer, and confessed to me roundly, that he had been put upon this dirty
Practice by the Severity and Avarice of his Father: but that he was now so
accustomed to it, he could not leave it. At which time he was trapt stealing a
Ladies Rings, Young men given to filching.
being come into her Chamber, as she was dressing with several others. He put
me in mind of a story I had heard of another Gentleman, so perfect and
accomplished in this gentile Trade in his Youth, that after he came to his
Estate, and resolved to give it over, could not hold his hands nevertheless, if
he past by a Shop where he saw any thing he liked, from catching it up, though
it put him to the shame of sending afterward to pay for it. And I have my self
seen several so habituated to this laudable quality, that even amongst their
Comrades they could not forbear filching, though with intent to restore what
they had taken. I am a Gascon, and yet there is no Vice I so little understand
as that; I hate it something more by Disposition, than I condemn it in my
Discourse: I do not so much as desire any thing of another man's. Gascon 's
generally addicted to stealing.
This Province of ours is, in plain truth, a little more suspected, than the
other parts of the Kingdom; and yet we have often seen in our times men of good
^amilies of other Provinces in the hands of Justice, Convicted of several
abominable The^ts: I fear this Debauch is in some sort to be attributed to the
forementioned Vice of the Fathers; and if a man should tell me, as a Lord of
very good Understanding once did, that he hoarded up Wealth, not to extract any
other fruit and use from his Parsimony, but to make himself honored, and
sought to by his own Relations: and that Age having deprived him of all other
Forces, it was the only remaining Remedy to maintain his Authority in his
Family, and to keep him from being neglected and despised by all the World,
(and in truth, not only old age, but all other imbecility, according to
Aristotle, is the Promoter of Avarice.) This is something, but it is Physic
for a Disease, that a man should prevent. A Father is very miserable, that has
no other hold of his Childrens Affection, than the need they have of his
Amstance, if that can be called Affection; he must render himself worthy to be
respected by his Virtue and Wisdom, and beloved by his Bounty, and the
sweetness of his Manners. Even the very Ashes of a rich Matter have their
Value; and we are wont to have the Bones and Relics of worthy Men in regard
and reverence. No old Age can be so ruinous and offensive in a man who has past
his Life in Honor, but it must be Venerable, especially to his Children; the
Soul of which he must have trained up to their Duty by Reason, not by
Necessity, and the Need they have of him; nor by roughness and force. -- and
errat long, mea quidem sententia, Terence. Adelph. Act. 1. S^e. 1.

Qui imperium credat esse gravius aut stabilius
Vi quod fit, quam illud quod amicitia adjungitur.
And he does mainly vary from my sense,
Who thinks the Empire gained by violence,
More absolute and durable, than that,
Which gentleness and friendship do create.
I condemn all Violence in the Education of a tender Soul, that is designed for
Honor and Liberty. There is, I know not what, of Servile in Rigor and
Restraint; and I am of opinion, that what is not to be done by Reason, Prudence
and Address, is never to be effected by Force. I my self was brought up after
that manner; and they tell me, that, in all my first Age, I never felt the Rod
but twice, and then very easily. I have practiced the same Method with my
Children, who all of them died at Nurse; but Leonor my only Daughter is
arrived to the age of six years, and upward, without other Correction for her
Childish Faults, (her Mothers Indulgence easily concurring) than Words only,
and those very gentle. In which kind of proceeding, though my end and
expectation should be both frustrated, there are other Causes enough to lay the
Fault on, without blaming my Discipline, which I know to be natural and just,
and I should in this have yet been more Religious toward the Males, as born to
less Subjection, and more free; and I should have made it my business to swell
their Hearts with Ingenuity and Freedom. I have never observed other effects of
Whipping, unless to render them more cowardly, or more wilful and obstinate. Do
we desire to be beloved of our Children? Will we remove from them all occasion
of wishing our Death? (though no occasion of so horrid a Wish can either be
just, or excusable; Nullum scelus rationem habet) let us reasonably accommodate
their Lives with that is in our power. In order to this, we should not marry so
young, that our Age shall in a manner be confounded with theirs; for this
inconvenience plunges us into many very great Difficulties: I say, the Gentry
of the Nation, who are of a condition wherein they have little to do, and live
upon their Revenues only: For elsewhere where the Life is dedicated to profit,
the plurality and numbers of Children is an increase to the good husbandry, and
they are as so many new Tools and Instruments wherewith to grow rich. I married
at three and thirty years of Age, and concur in the opinion of thirty five,
which is said to be that of Aristotle. The Age of Marriage.
Plato will have no body marry before thirty; but he has reason to laugh at
those, who undertake the work of Marriage after five and fifty, and condem
their Offspring as unworthy of Aliment and Life. Thales gave to this the
truest Limits, who young, and being importuned by his Mother to Marry,
answered, That it was too soon, and being grown into years, and urged again,
That it was too late. A man must deny opportunity to every importunate Action.
The Use of Women enervates young Men*
The ancient Gauls looked upon it as a very horrid thing, for a man to have had
Society with a woman before twenty years of age; and strictly recommended to
the men, who designed themselves for War, the keeping their Virginity till well
grown in years, forasmuch as Courage is abated and diverted by the use of Women.

Ma hor congiunto a giovinetta sposa,
Tasso. Cant. 10.
Lieto homai, de figli era invilito
Negli affetti di padre, and di marito.
But now being married to a fair young wife,
He Is quite fallen off from his old course of life:
His metle is grown rusty, and his care
His Wife and Children do betwixt them share.
Muleasses King of Tunis, he whom the Emperor Charles the Fifth restored to
his Kingdom, reproacht the Memory of his Father Mahomet with the Frequentation
of Women, styling him Loose, Effeminate, and a Getter of Children. The Greek
History observes of Jecus the Tarentine, of Chryso, Astiplus, Diopompus, and
others, that to keep their Bodies in order for the Olympic Games, and such like
Exercises, they denied themselves, during that preparation, all Commerce with
Venus. In a certain Country of the Spanish Indies, men were not admitted to
marry till after Forty years of Age, and yet the Girls were allowed to go to it
at Ten. It Is not time for a Gentleman of Five and thirty years old to give
place to his Son who is Twenty; he, being himself in a condition to serve both
in the Expeditions of War, and in the Court of his Prince, has himself need of
all his Equipage; and yet doubtless ought to allow his Son a share, but not so
great a one, as wholly to disfurnish himself; and for such a one, the saying
that Fathers have ordinarily in their mouths, That they will not put off their
Clothes, before they go to bed, is proper enough: But a Father over-worn with
Age and Infirmities, and deprived by his weakness and want of health of the
common Society of men, wrongs himself and his, to rake together a great Mass of
useless Treasure. He has lived long enough, if he be wise, to have a mind to
strip himself to go to bed, not to his very Shirt, I confess, but to that, and
a good warm Nightgown; the remaining Pomps of which he has no further use, he
ought voluntarily to surrender to those to whom by the order of Nature they
belong. It Is reason he should refer the use of those things to them, seeing
that Nature has reduced him to such an Estate, that he cannot enjoy them
himself: otherwise there is doubtless ill nature, and envy in the case. The
greatest Act of the Emperor Charles the Fifth was, that, when in imitation of
some of the Ancients of his own Quality, confessing it but reason to strip our
selves when our Clothes encumber and grow too heavy for us, and to lie down
when our Legs begin to fail us; he resigned his Dignity, Grandeur, and Power to
his Son, when he found the vigor and steadiness in the Conduct of his Affairs
to fail in himself, with the Glory he had therein acquired.

Solve senescentem mature sanus equum, Hor. lib. 1. Ep. 1.
ne
Peccet ad extremum ridendus, and ilia ducat.
The old worn Courser in good time dismiss,
Lest failing in the Lists, Spectators hiss.
This fault of not perceiving betimes, and not being sensible of the feebleness
and extreme alteration that Age naturally brings both upon the Body and Mind
(which in my opinion is equal, if the Soul is no more than the half) has lost
the Reputation of most of the Great men in the World. I have known in my time,
and been intimately acquainted with some Persons of very great Quality, whom a
man might easily discern so manifestly lapsed from their former sufficiency, I
was sure they were once endu'd with, by the Reputation they had acquired in
their former years; that I could heartily, for their own sakes, have wished them
at home at their ease, discharged of their Public Military Employments, which
were now grown too heavy for their Shoulders. I have formerly been very
familiar in a Gentleman's House, a Widower, and very old, though healthy and
cheerful enough: This Gentleman had several Daughters to marry, and a Son
already of a ripe age, which brought upon him many Visits, and a great Expense;
neither of which did very well please him, not only out of consideration of
Frugality; but yet more, for having, by reason of his Age, entered into a
course of Life far differing from ours. I told him one day a little boldly, as
I use to do, that he would do better to give us room, and to leave his
principal House, (for he had but that well situated and furnished) to his Son,
and retire himself to an Estate he had hard by, where no body would trouble his
Repose, seeing he could not otherwise avoid being importuned by us, the
Condition of his Children considered. He took my advice afterward, and found
an advantage by so doing: I do not mean, that a man should so instate them, as
not to reserve to himself a liberty to recant; I, who am now arrived to the
age, wherein such things are fit to be done, would resign to them the enjoyment
of my House and Goods, but with a power of Revocation, if they should give me
cause to alter my mind: I would leave to them the Use, they being no longer
proper for me, and, of the general Authority and Power over all, would reserve
as much as I thought good to my self: Having always thought, that it must needs
be a great satisfaction to an aged Father, himself to put his Children into the
way of governing his Affairs, and to have power during his own life to control
their Deportments, supplying them with Instruction and Advice from his own
Experience, and himself to transfer the ancient Honor and Order of his House
into that of those who are to succeed him, and by that means to be responsible
to himself (by the hopes he may conceive) for their future conduct. And in
order to this, I would not avoid their company, I would observe them near at
hand, and partake, according to the condition of my age, of their Feasts and
Jollities. If I did not live amongst them, (which I could not do, without being
a disturbance to them, by reason of the morosity of my age, and the restlesness
of my Infirmities, and without violating also the Rules and Order of living, I
should then have set down to my self) I would at least live near them in some
remote part of my House, not the best in show, but the most commodious. Nor as
I saw some years ago a Dean of St. Hila^re of Pei^iers, by his Melancholy given
up to such a solitude, that at the time I came into his Chamber, it had been
Two and twenty years that he had not stepped one foot out of it, and yet had all
his Motions free, and eat, and was in perfect health, saving a little Rheum
that fell upon his Lungs: He would hardly once in a week suffer any one to come
in to see him; he always kept himself shut up in his Chamber alone, except that
a Servant brought him once a day something to eat, and did then but just come
in, and go out again. His Employment was to walk up and down, and read some
Book, for he was a piece of a Scholar: but as to the rest, obstinately bent to
die in this Retirement, as he presently after did. I would endeavor by a sweet
and obliging Conversation, to create in my Children a lively and unfeigned
friendship and good will, which in well-descended Natures is not hard to do;
for if they be Brutes, of which this Age of ours produces thousands, we are
then to hate and avoid them. I am angry at the Custom, very much in use, of
forbidding Children to call their Father by the name of Father, and to enjoin
them another, as more full of respect and reverence, as if Nature had not
sufficiently provided for our Authority: We call Almighty God Father, and
disdain to have our Children call us so; I have reformed this Error in my
Family. And it is also folly and injustice to deprive Children, when grown up,
of a familiarity with their Father, and to carry a scornful and austere
Countenance toward them, thinking by that to keep them in awe and obedience;
for it is a very idle force, that, in stead of producing the Effect designed,
renders Fathers distastful; and, which is worse, ridiculous to their own
Children. They have Youth and Vigor in possession, and consequently the breath
and favor of the World, and therefore receive these fierce and tyrannical
looks (mere Scar-Crows) of a man without blood, either in his Heart or Veins,
with mockery and contempt. Though I could make my self feared, I had yet much
rather make my self beloved. There are so many sorts of defects in old Age, so
much impuissancy, and it is so liable to contempt, that the best purchase a man
can make, is the kindness and affection of his own Family; Command and Fear are
no more his Weapons: Such a one I have known, who having been very insolent in
his Youth, when he came to be old, though he might have lived at his full ease,
and had his judgment as entire as ever, would yet torment himself, and others;
strike, rant, swear, and curse; the most tempestuous Master in France: fretting
himself with unnecessary suspicion and vigilance; and all this rumble and
clutter, but to make his Family cheat him the sooner, and the more; of his
Barn, his Kitchen, Cellar, nay, and his very Purse too, others had the greatest
use and share, whilst he keeps his Keys in his Bosom, much more carefully than
his Eyes: Whilst he hugs himself with the Frugality of the pitiful pittance of
a wretched and niggardly Table; every thing goes to wrack and ruin in every
Corner of his House, in play, drink, all sorts of profusion; making sports in
their Junkets with his vain Anger and fruitless Parsimony. Every one is a
Sentinel against him, and if by accident any wretched Fellow that serves him is
of another humor, and will not join with the rest, he is presently rendered
suspected to him, a Bait that old Age very easily bites at of its self. How often
has this Gentleman boasted to me, in how great awe he kept his Family, and how
exact an Obedience and Reverence they paid him? How clearly did this man see
into his own Affairs!

Ter. Adel. ac. 4. Scen. 2.
Ille solus nescit omnia. I do not know any one that can muster more Parts both
natural and acquired, proper to maintain such a dominion, than he; yet he is
fallen from it like a Child. For this reason it is, that I have picked out Him
amongst several others that I know of the same humor, for the greatest
Example. It were matter sufficient for a Question in the Schools, Whether he is
better thus, or otherwise. In his Presence all submit to, and bow before him,
and give so much way to his vanity, that no body ever resists him; he has his
belly full of Cringe, and all postures of Fear, Submission and Respect. Does he
turn away a Servant? he packs up his bundle, and is gone; but it is no further,
than just out of his sight: the Pace of old Age is so slow, and the Sense is so
weak and troubled, that he will live and do his old Office in the same House a
year together, without being perceived. And after a fit interval of time,
Letters are pretended to come a great way off, from I know not where, very
humble, suppliant, and full of promises of amendment; by virtue of which he is
again received into favor. Does Monsieur make any Bargain, or send away any
Dispatch that does not please? it is suppressed, and Causes now afterward forged
to excuse the want of Execution in the one, or Answer in the other. No strange
Letters being first brought to him, he never sees any but those that shall seem
fit for his knowledge: If by accident they fall first into his own hand, being
used to trust some body to read them to him, he reads extempore what he thinks
fit, and very often makes such a one ask him pardon, who abuses and rails at
him in his Letter. Finally he sees nothing, but by an Image prepared and
designed beforehand, and the most satisfactory they can invent, not to rouse
and awake his ill Humor and Choler. I have seen enough differing Forms of
Economy, long, constant, and of like effect. Women, especially the perverse
and elder sort, are evermore addicted to cross their Husbands: They lay hold
with both hands on all occasions to contradict and oppose them, and the first
excuse serves for a plenary Justification. I have seen who has grossly purloynd
from her Husband, that, as she told her Confessor, she might distribute the
more liberal Alms: Let who will trust to that Religious Dispensation. No
management of Affairs seems to them of sufficient Dignity, if proceeding from
the Husband's assent; they must usurp either by Insolence, or Cunning, and
always injuriously, or else it has not the Grace of Authority they desire.
When, as in the case I am speaking of, it is against a poor Old man, and for the
Children, than they make use of this Title to serve their Passion with Glory;
and as in a common Servitude, easily monopolize against his Government and
Dominion. If they be Males grown up, and flourishing, they presently corrupt
either by force, or favor, both Steward, Receivers, and all the Rout. Such as
have neither Wife, nor Son, do not so easily fall into this misfortune; but
withal more cruelly, and undeservingly. Cato the elder in his time, said, So
many Servants, so many Enemies. Consider then, whether according to the vast
difference betwixt the purity of the Age he lived in, and the corruption of
this of ours, he does not seem to advertise us, that Wife, Son, and Servant, so
many Enemies to us? It Is well for old Age, that it is always accompanied with
Stupidity, Ignorance, and a facility of being deceived; for should we see how
we are used, and would not acquiesce, what would become of us? especially in
such an Age as this, where the very Judges who are to determine, are usually
partial to the young, in any Cause that comes before them. The Author seems to
hint, that the Judges were young Men themselves.
In case that the discovery of this Cheat escape me, I cannot at least fail to
discern that I am very fit to be cheated; and can a man ever enough speak the
value of a Friend, in comparison with these civil ties? The very Image of it,
which I see so pure and uncorrupted in Beasts, how religiously do I respect it?
If others deceive me, yet do I not at least deceive my self, in thinking I am
able to defend me from them, or in cudgeling my Brains to make my self so? I
protect my self from such Treasons in my own Bosom, not by an unquiet and
tumultuary Curiosity, but rather by Mirth and Resolution. When I hear talk of
any ones Condition, I never trouble my self to think of him, I presently turn
my Eyes upon my self, to see in what condition I am; what ever concerns
another, relates to me, The Accident that has befaln him, gives me Caution,
rouzes me to turn my Defense that way. We every day and every hour say things
of another, that we might more properly say of our selves, could we but revert
our Observation to our own Concerns, as well as extend it to others. And
several Authors have in this manner prejudiced their own Cause, by running
headlong upon those they attack, and darting those Shafts against their
Enemies, that are more properly, and with greater advantage to be returned upon
them. The last Marshall de Monlue, having lost his Son, who was slain at the
Isle of Madera; in truth a very brave Gentleman, and of great expectation, did
to me, amongst his other Regrets, very much insist upon what a Sorrow and
Heartbreaking it was, that he had never made himself familiar and acquainted
with him; and by that humor of Fatherly Gravity and Sowrness, to have lost the
opportunity of having an insight into, and of well knowing his Son; as also of
letting him know the extreme affection he had for him, and the worthy opinion
he had of his Virtue. That poor Boy, said he, never saw in me other, than a
stern and disdainful Countenance, and is gone in a belief, that I neither knew
how to love nor esteem him according to his desert. For whom did I reserve the
discovery of that singular Affection I had for him in my Soul? Was it not he
himself, who ought to have had all the pleasure of it, and all the Obligation?
I forced and racked my self to put on and maintain this vain Disguise, and have
by that means deprived my self of the pleasure of his Conversation, and, I
doubt in some measure, his Affection, which could not but be very cold toward
me, having never other from me than Austerity; nor felt other than a tyrannical
manner of proceeding. I find this Complaint to be rational and rightly
apprehended; for, as I my self know by too cortain Experience, there is no so
sweet Consolation in the loss of Friends, as the conscience of having had no
reserve of secret for them; and to have had with them a perfect and entire
Communication. Oh my Friend, am I the better for being sensible of this; or am
I the worse? I am doubtless much the better. I am consolated and honored in
the sorrow for his death. Is it not a pious and a pleasing Office of my Life to
be always upon my Friends Obsequies? Can there be any joy equal to this
Privation? I open my self to my Family, as much as I can, and very willingly
let them know, in what estate they are in my opinion and good will, as I do
every body else. I make haste to bring out, and expose my self to them; for I
will not have them mistaken in me in any thing. Amongst other particular
Customs of our ancient Gauls, this, as Caesar reports, was one, The ancient
Gauls never permitted their Sons to present themselves before them, till they
came to bear Arms.
That the Sons never presented themselves before their Fathers, nor durst never
appear in their company in public, till they began to bear Arms; as if they
would intimate by that, that it was also time for their Fathers to receive them
into their familiarity and acquaintance. I have observed yet another sort of
Indiscretion in Fathers of my time, That, not contented with having deprived
their Children, during their own long lives, of the share they naturally ought
to have had in their Fortunes, they afterward leave to their Wives the same
Authority over their Estates, and Liberty to dispose of them according to their
own fancy: And have known a certain Lord one of the principal Officers of the
Crown, who having in his prospect, by right of succession, above Fifty thousand
Crowns yearly Revenue, died necessitous, and overwhelmed with debt, at above
fifty years of age; his Mother in his extremest decrepitude, and necessity,
being yet in possession of all his Goods, by the Will of his Father, who had,
for his part, lived till near Fourscore years Old. This appears by no means
reasonable to me: And therefore I think it of very little advantage to a man,
whose Affairs are well enough, to seek a Wife that will charge his Estate with
too great a Jointure: There being no sort of foreign Debt or Encumbrance, that
brings greater and more frequent ruin to Estates and Families, than that. My
Predecessors have ever been aware of that danger, and provided against it, and
so have I: But these who dissuade us from rich Wives, for fear they should be
less tractable and kind, are out in their Advice, to make a man lose a real
Convenience for so frivolous a Conjecture. It costs an unreasonable Woman no
more to pass over one Reason, than another. They love but where they have the
most wrong. Injustice allures them, as the Honor of their virtuous Actions
does the good; and the more Riches they bring with them, they are by so much
the more gentle, and sweet Natured; as women who are fair, are more inclined,
and proud to be chaste. It Is reasonable to leave the administration of Affairs
to the Mothers, during the minority of the Children; but the Father has brought
them up very ill, if he cannot hope, that when they come to Maturity, they will
have more Wisdom and Dexterity in the management of Affairs, than his Wife,
considering the ordinary Weakness of the Sex. It were notwithstanding, to say
the truth, more against Nature, to make the Mothers depend upon the Discretion
of their Children: They ought to be plentifully provided for, to maintain
themselves according to their Quality and Age, by reason that Necessity is much
more indecent and insupportable to them, than to men; and therefore the Son is
rather to be cut short, than the Mother. In general, the most judicious
Distribution of our Goods, when we come to dye, is, in my Opinion, to let them
be distributed according to the Custom of the Country. The Laws have considered
it better than we know how to do, and it is better to let them fail in their
Election, than rashly to run the hazard of miscarrying in ours. Neither are
they properly ours, since, by a Civil Prescription, and without us, they are
all judged to certain Successors. And although we have some liberty beyond
that, yet I think we ought not, without great and manifest cause, to take away
that from one which his Fortune has allotted him, and to which the public
Equity gives him Title; and that it is against reason to abuse this liberty, in
making it to serve our own frivilous and private Fancies. My Destiny has been
kind to me, in not preventing me with Occasions to tempt and divert my
Affection from the common and legitimate Institution. I see well enough, with
whom it is time lost, to employ a long Diligence of Good Offices: A word ill
taken obliterates ten years merit; and he is happy, who is in place to oil
their Good Will at this last Passage. The last Action carries it: Not the best,
and most frequent Offices, but the most recent and present do the Work. These
are people that play with their Wills, as with Apples and Rods, to gratify or
chastise every Action of these, that pretend to an Interest in their Care. It Is
a thing of too great weight and consequence, to be so tumbled and tossed, and
altered every moment: And wherein the Wise men of the World determine once for
all, having therein above all things, a regard to reason, and the public
observance. We also lay these Masculine Substitutions too much to heart,
proposing a ridiculous Eternity to our Names. And are moreover too
superstitious in the vain Conjectures of the future, which we derive from the
little Observations we make of the Words and Actions of Children. Peradventure
they might have done me an injustice, in dispossessing me of my Right, for
having been the most dull and heavy, the most slow and unwilling at my Book,
not of all my Brothers only, but of all the Boys in the whole Province: Whether
about learning my Lesson, or any other bodily Exercise. It Is a folly to make an
extraordinary Election upon the Credit of these Divinations, wherein we are so
often deceived. If the Rule of Primogeniture were to be violated, and the
Destinies corrected in the Choice they have made of our Heirs, one might more
plausibly do it upon the account of some enormous personal Deformity; a
constant and incorrigible Vice, and in the opinion of us French, who are great
admirers of Beauty of important prejudice. The pleasant Dialogue betwixt
Plato's Legislator, and his Citizens, will be an Ornament to this place. What,
said they, feeling themselves about to dye, may we not dispose of our own to
whom we please? Good God, what cruelty! That it shall not be lawful for us,
according as we have been served and attended in our Sickness, in our Old Age,
and other Affairs, to give more or less to those whom we have found most
diligent about us, at our own Fancy and Discretion! To which the Legislator
answers thus; My Friends, who are now without question, very soon to dye, it is
hard for you in the Condition you are, either to know your selves; or what is
yours, according to the Delphick Inscription. I, who make the Laws, am of
opinion, that you neither are your selves your own, neither is that yours of
which you are possessed. Both your Goods, and you belong to your Families, as
well those past, as those to come; but yet both your Family and Goods do much
more appertain to the public. Wherefore lest any Flatterer in your Age, or in
your Sickness, or any Passion of your own, should unseasonably prevail with you
to make an unjust Will, I shall take care to prevent that inconvenience. But
having respect both to the universal Interest of the City, and that of your
particular Family, I shall establish Laws, and make it by lively Reasons
appear, that a particular Convenience ought to give place to the common
Benefit. Go then cheerfully where Humane Necessity calls you. It belongs to me,
who have no more respect to one thing than another; and who, as much as in me
lies, am careful of the public Concern, to take care of what you leave behind
you.

To return to my Subject; It appears to me that such women are very rarely
born, to whom the Prerogative over men, in others excepted, is in any sort due;
unless it be for the Punishment of such, as in some lustful Humor, have
voluntarily submitted themselves to them: but that does nothing concern the Old
ones, of which we are now speaking. This Consideration it is, which has made us
so willingly to forge, and give force to a Law, which was never yet see^ by any
one; The Sa^ick Law never seen by any.
and by which, women are excluded the Succession to this Crown: and there is
hardly a Government in the World where it is not pleaded, as it is here, by mere
reason of the thing that gives it Authority, though Fortune has given it more
Credit in some places, than in others. It Is dangerous to leave the disposal of
our Succession to their Judgment, according to the Choice they shall make of
Children, which is often fantastic and unjust; for the irregular Appetite and
depreav'd Taste they have, during the time of their being with Child, they have
at all other times in the mind. We commonly see them fond of the most weak,
ricketty, and deformed Children; or of those, if they have such, as are hanging
at their Breasts. For not having sufficient force of reason to choose and
embrace that which is most worthy, they the more willingly suffer themselves to
be carried away, where the impressions of Nature are most alone: Like Animals
that know their Young no longer than they give them suck. As to what remains,
it is easy by experience to be discerned, that this Natural Affection to which
we give so great Authority, has but a very weak and shallow Root. For a very
little profit we every day ravish their own Children out of the Mothers Arms,
and make them take ours in their room: We make them abandon their own to some
pitiful Nurse, to which we disdain to commit ours, or to some She Goat;
forbidding them, not only to give them suck, what danger soever they run
thereby, but moreover, to take any manner of care of them, that they may wholly
be taken up with the care of, and attendance upon ours. And we see in most of
them an adulterate Affection, begot by Custom, toward the faster Children, more
vehement than the Natural; and a greater Solicitude for the Preservation of
those they have taken charge of, than their own. And that which I was saying of
Goats, was upon this account; that it is ordinary, all about where I live, to
see the Country-women, when they want* Suck of their own, to call Goats to
their assistance. And I have, at this hour, two Footmen that never sucked
woman's Milk more than eight days after they were born. Goats trained to give
suck to Children.
These Goats are immediately taught to come to suckle the little Children, will
know their Voices when they cry, and come running to them; when if any other
than that they are acquanted with be presented to them, they refuse to let it
suck, and the Child, to another Goat, will do the same. I saw one the other
day, from whom they had taken away the Goat that used to nourish it, by reason
the Father had only borrowed it of a Neighbor; that would not touch any other
they could bring, and doubtless dyed of hunger. Beasts do as easily alter and
corrupt their Natural Affection as we: I believe that in what Herodotus relates
of a certain place of Lybia; there are very many mistake; he says, that the
women are there in common; but that the Child so soon as it can go, finds him
out in the Crowd for his Father, to whom he is first led by his Natural
Inclination. Now, to consider this simple reason for loving our Children, for
having begot them, therefore calling them our Second selves: It appears,
methinks, that there is another kind of Production proceeding from us, that
should no less recommend them to our Love: For that which we engender by the
Soul, the issue of our Understandings, Courage and Abilities, spring from
nobler Parts than those of the Body, and that are much more our own. We are
both Father and Mother in this Generation; these cost us a great deal more, and
brings us more Honor, if they have any thing of good in them. For the Value of
our other Children is much more theirs, than ours; the share we have in them is
very little; but of these, all the Beauty, all the Grace and Value is ours; as
also they more lively represent and resemble us, than the rest. Plato adds,
that these are immortal Children, Books immortal Children.
that immortalize and deify their Fathers, as Lycurgus, Solon and Minos. Now
Histories being full of Examples of the common Affection of Fathers to their
Children, it seems not altogether improper, to introduce some few, also of this
other kind. Heliodorus that good Bishop of Tricea, His Romance of Theagines and
Cariclea.
rather chose to lose the Dignity, Profit and Devotion of so Venerable a
Prelacy, than to lose his Daughter; a Daughter that continues to this day very
Graceful and Comely; but notwithstanding, peradventure a little too curiously
and wantonly trick't, and too amorous for an Ecclesiastical and Sacerdotal
Daughter. There has been one Labienus at Rome, a Man of great Valor and
Authority; and, amongst other good Qualities, excellent in all sorts of
Literature; who was, as I take it, the Son of that great Labienus, the chiefest
of Caesar's Captains in the Wars of Gaul; and who, afterward siding with
Pompey the Great, so valiantly maintained his Cause, till he was by Caesar
defeated in Spain. This Labienus of whom I am now speaking, had several
Enemies, who were emulous of his Virtue; and it is likely the Courtiers and
Minions of the Emperor of his time, who were very angry at, and displeased
with his Freedom, and Paternal Humors, which he yet retained against Tyranny,
with which it is to be supposed, he had tincted his Books and Writings. His
Adversaries before the Magistracy of Rome, prosecuted several Pieces he had
published, and prevailed so far against him, as to have them condemned to the
Fire. It was in him that this new Example of Punishment was begun, which was
afterward continued against several others at Rome, to punish even Writing,
and Studies with Death. There would not be means and matter enough of Cruelty,
did we not mix with them things, that Nature has exempted from all Sense and
Suffering; as Reputation, and the Products of Wit; and communicate Corporal
Punishments to the Learning and Monuments of the Muses. Now Labienus could not
suffer this loss, nor survive these his so dear Issue; and therefore caused
himself to be conveyed and shut up alive in the Monument of his Ancestors,
where he made shift to kill, and bury himself at once. It Is hard to show a more
violent Paternal Affection, than this. Cassius Severus a Man of great
Eloquence, and his very intimate Friend, seeing his Books burnt, cried out,
That by the same Sentence they should as well condemn him to the Fire too,
being that he carried in his Memory all that they contained. The like Accident
befell Geruntius Cordus, Cordus 's Writings condemned to the Fire.
who being accused for having in his Books commended Brutus and Cassius; that
dirty, servile, and degenerated Senate, and worthy a worse Master than
Tiberius, condemned his Writings to the Flame. He was willing to bear them
Company, and killed himself with Fasting. The good Lucan being condemned by that
Beast Nero, at the last gasp of his Life, when the greater part of his Blood
was already gone by the Veins of his Arms, which he had caused his Physician to
open to make him dye, and that the cold had seized of all his Extremities, and
began to approach his Vital Parts; the last thing he had in his Memory, was
some of the Verses of his Battle of Pharsalia, which he repeated, and and dyed
with them in his Mouth. What was this but taking a Tender and Paternal Leave of
his Children, in imitation of the Valedictions and Embraces wherewith we part
with ours, when we come to dye; and an effect of that Natural Inclination, that
suggests to our remembrance in this Extremity, those things which were dearest
to us during the time of our Life? Can we believe that Epicurus, who, as he
says himself, dying of intolerable Pains of the Chollick, had all his
Consolation in the Beauty of the Doctrine he left behind him, could have
received the same satisfaction from many Children, though never so well
educated, had he had them, as he did from the issue of so many rich and
admirable Writings? Or that, had it been in his choice to have left behind him
a deformed and untoward Child, or a foolish and ridiculous Book, he, or any
other Man of his Understanding would not rather have chose to have run the
first Misfortune than the other? It had been (for example) peradventure, an
Impiety in St. Austin, if on the one hand, it had been proposed to him to bury
his Writings, from which Religion has received so great Advantage; or on the
other, to bury his Children, had he had them, had he not rather chose to bury
his Children had he had them, had he not rather chose to bury his Children. And
I know not whether I had not much rather have begot a very Beautiful one,
thorough my Society with the Muses, than by lying with my Wife. To this, such
as it is, what I give it, I give absolutely and irrevocably, as Men do to their
bodily Children. That little I have done for it, is no more at my own dispose.
It may know many things that are gone from me, and from me keep that which I
have not retained: And that, as a Stranger, I might borrow thence, should I
stand in need. If I am wiser than my Book, it is richer than I. There are few
Men addicted to Poetry, who would not be much Prouder to be Father to the
Aeneid, than to the hansomest and best fashioned Youth of Rome, and that would
not much better bear the loss of the one than the other. For according to
Aristotle, the Poet, of all sorts of Artificers, is the fondest of his Work.
It Is hard to believe that Epaminondas, who boasted, that in lieu of all
Posterity, he left two Daughters behind him, which would one day do their
Father Honor (meaning the two Victories he obtained over the Lacedaemonians)
would willingly have consented to exchange those, for the most Beautiful
Creature of all Greece: Or that Alexander, or Caesar ever wished to be deprived
of the Grandeur of their Glorious Exploits in War, for the convenience of
Children and Heirs, how perfect and accomplished soever. Nay, I make a great
Question, whether Phidias, or any other excellent Statuary, would be so
solicitous of the Preservation and Continuance of his Natural Children, as he
would be of a rare Statue, which with long labor and study, he had perfected
according to Art. And to those furious and irregular Passions that have
sometimes flamed in Fathers toward their own Daughters, and in Mothers toward
their own Sons; the like is also found in this other sort of Parentry: Witness
what is related of Pygmalion, who having made the Statue of a Woman of singular
Beauty, fell so passionately in love with this Work of his, that the Gods, in
favor of his Passion, must inspire it with Life.

Tentatum mollescit ebur, positoque rigore, Ovid. Meta. lib. 10.

Subsidit digitis.
The tempted Ivory Pliant grows, and now,
Under his wanton Touch, does yield and bow.
CHAP. IX. Of the Arms of the Parthians.
It Is an ill custom, and a little unmanly, the Gentlemen of our time have got,
not to put on their Arms, but just upon the point of the most extreme
necessity; and to lay them by again, so soon as ever there is any show of the
Danger being a little over; from whence many Disorders arise: For every one
bustling and running to his Arms just when he should go to Charge, has his
Cuirass to buckle on, when his Companions are already put to rout. Our
Ancestors were wont to give their Headpiece, Lance and Gantlets to carry, but
never put off the other Pieces so long as there was any work to be done. Our
Troops are now comber'd and rendered unsightly, with the clutter of Baggage and
Servants, that cannot be from their Masters, Li. lib. 5.
by reason they carry their Arms. Titus Livius speaking of our Nation,
Intolerantissima Laboris Corpora vix Arma Humeris gerebant. Their Bodies were
so impatient of Labor, that they could scarce endure to wear their Arms. Many
Nations do yet, and did anciently, go to War without Defensive Arms; or such,
at least, as were of very little proof. Aeneid lib. 6.
Tegmina queis Capitum raptus de Subere Cortex.
For Helmets they their Temples only bind
With a light Scull, made of the Cork-tree Rind.
Alexander, the most adventurous Captain that ever was, very seldom wore Arms,
and such amongst us as slight them, do not by that much harm to the main
Concern; for if we see some killed for want of them, there are few less whom the
lumber of Arms helps to destroy, either by being over-burthen'd, crush't and
cramp't with their weight by a rude Shock, or otherwise. For, in plain truth,
to observe the weight and thickness of those we have now in use, it seems, as
if we only pretend to defend our selves, and that we are rather loaded, than
secured by them. We have enough to do to support their weight, being so
manacled, and immured, as if we were only to contend with our own Arms; and as
if we had not the same Obligation to defend them, that they have to defend us.
Tacitus gives a pleasant Description of the Men at Arms of our ancient Gauls;
so armed, as only to be able to move, without power to offend, or possibility
to be offended, or to rise again when once beaten down. Lucullus seeing certain
Soldiers of the Medes, that made the Front of Tigranes his Army, heavily armed,
and very uneasy, as if in Prisons of Iron, from thence conceived hopes, with
great ease to defeat them; and by them began his Charge, and Victory. And now
that our Musketeers are come into Credit, I believe some Invention will be
found out to immure us for our Safety, and to draw us to the War in Sconces,
such as those the Ancients loaded their Elephants withal. This Humor is far
differing from that of the younger Scipio, who sharply reprehended his
Soldiers, for having planted Caltrops under Water, in a Graff, by which those
of the Town he held besieged might sally out upon him; saying, That those who
assaulted should think of attacking, and not to fear; suspecting, with good
reason, that this stop they had put to the Enemies, would make them less
vigilant upon their Duty. He said also to a young Man, showing him a fine
Buckler he had, that he was very proud of, It is a very fine Buckler indeed,
but a Roman Soldier ought to repose greater Confidence in his Right Hand, than
his Left.

Now it is nothing but the not being used to wear them, that makes the weight of
our Arms so intolerable.

L'husbergo in dolle haveano, and belmo in testa,
Aristo. Cant. 12.
Due di quelli guerrier di quali je canto.
Ne notte o di doppo ch'entraro in questa
Stanza, gl'haveano may mesi da canto,
Che facile a portar comme la vesta
Era lor, perch in uso l'avean tanto.
Two of these Hero's, that I name, had on
Each his bright Helm, and strong Habergeon,
And Night nor Day, not one poor Minutes space,
Once laid them by, whilst here they were in place.
Those heavy Arms, by a long practice, were
So very easy grown, and light to bear.
Arms of the Roman Infantry, and their Militiary Discipline.
The Emperor Caracalla was wont continually to march on foot, completely armed,
at the Head of his Army. The Roman Infantry always carried not only a Morion, a
Sword, and a Shield; for as to Arms, says Cicero, they were so accustomed to
have them always on, that they were no more trouble to them, than their own
Limbs: Arma enim, membra militis esse dicunt; Cicero: Thus: lib. 2.
but moreover, fifteen days Provision, together with a certain number of Piles,
or Stakes, wherewith to fortify their Camp, to sixty pounds weight. And Marius
his Soldiers, laden at the same rate, were inured to march in Battalia five
Leagues in five hours; and sometimes, upon any urgent occasion, six. Their
Military Discipline was much ruder than ours, and accordingly produced much
greater effects. The younger Scipio, reforming his Army in Spain, ordered his
Soldiers to eat standing, and nothing that was dressed. The Jeer that was given a
Lacedemonian Soldier, is marvellously pat upon this account, who, in an
Expedition of War, was reproached to have been seen under the Roof of a House:
They were so inured to Hardship, that, let the Weather be what it would, it was
a shame to be seen under any other Cover than the Roof of Heaven. We should not
march our People very far at that rate. As to what remains, Marcellinus, a Man
bred up in the Roman Wars, does curiously observe the manner of the Parthians
arming themselves; and the rather, for being so different from that of the
Romans. They had, says he, Arms so artificially woven, Arms of the Parthians.
as to have the Scollops fall over one another like so many little Feathers;
which did nothing hinder the Motion of the Body, and yet were of such
Resistance, that our Darts hitting upon them, would rebound: (Which were the
Coats of Male our Forefathers were so constantly wont to use.) And in another
place; They had (says he) strong and able Horses, covered with thick tanned
Hides of Leather, and were themselves armed Cap a Pie with great Plates of
Iron, so artificially ordered, that in all parts of the Limbs, which required
bending, they assisted Motion. One would have said, that they had been Men of
Iron; having Arms for the Head so neatly fitted, and so naturally representing
the form of a Face, that they were no where vulnerable, save at two little
round Holes, that gave them a little Light; and certain small Chinks about
their Mouth, and Nostrils, through which they did, with great difficulty,
breath. Flexilis inductis animatur lamina membris,
Claud. in Ruff. lib. 2.
Horribilis visu, credas simulacra moveri
Ferrea, cognatoque viros spirare metallo.
Par vestitus equis, ferrata front minantur,
Ferratosque movent securi vulneris armos.
Stiff Plates of Steel over the Body laid,
By Armorers Skill, so flexible were made,
That, dreadful to be seen, you would think these
Not living Men, but moving Images:
The Horse, like-arm'd, Spikeswore in Fronts above
And fearless, on their Iron Shoulders move.
A Description very near resembling the Equipage of the Men at Arms in France,
with their Barded Horses. Plutarch says, that Demetrius caused two complete
Suits of Arms to be made for himself, and for Alcinus, a Captain of the
greatest Note and Authority about him, of six score Pounds weight each, whereas
the ordinary Suits weighed but half so much.

CHAP. X. Of Books.
I Make no doubt, but that I often happen to speak of things that are much
better, and more truly handled by those who are Masters of the Trade. This here
is purely an Essay of my Natural Parts, and not of those acquired: and whoever
shall take me tripping in my Ignorance, will not in any sort displease me; for
I should be very unwilling to become responsible to another for my Writings,
who am not so to my self, nor satisfied with them. Whoever goes in quest of
Knowledge, let him fish for it where it is to be found; there is nothing I so
little profess. These are Fancies of my own, by which I do not pretend to
discover things, but to lay open my self: They may, peradventure, one day be
known to me, or have formerly been, according as my Fortune has been able to
bring me in place where they have been explained; but I have utterly forgot
them: and if I am a Man of some Reading, I am a Man of no Retension: So that I
can promise no Certainty, if not to make known to what certain Mark the
Knowledge I now have does rise. Therefore let no Body insist upon the Matter I
write, but my Method in writing. Let them observe in what I borrow, if I have
known how to choose what is proper to raise, or relieve the Invention, which is
always my own. For I make others say for me, what, either for want of Language,
or want of Sense, I cannot my self well express. I do not number my Borrowings,
I weigh them. And had I designed to raise their Estimate by their Number, I had
made them twice as many. They are all, or within a very few, so famed and
ancient Authors, that they seem, methinks, themselves sufficiently to tell who
they are, without giving me the trouble. In Reasons, Comparisons and Arguments,
if I transplant any into my own Soil, and confound them amongst my own, I
purposely conceal the Author, to awe the Temerity of those precipitous
Censures, that fall upon all sorts of Writings; particularly, the late ones, of
Men yet living, and in the Vulgar Tongue, which put every one into a Capacity
of Censuring, and which seem to convince the Authors themselves of Vulgar
Conception and Design. I will have them wound Plutarch through my Sides, and
rail against Seneca when they think they rail at me. I must shelter my own
Weakness under these great Reputations; I shall love any one that can plume me,
that is, by Clearness of Understanding and Judgment, and by the sole
Distinction of the Force and Beauty of Discourse. For I, who, for want of
Memory, am at every turn at a loss to pick them out of their National Livery,
am yet wise enough to know, by the Measure of my own Abilities, that my Soil is
incapable of producing any of those rich Flowers, that I there find set, and
growing; and that all the Fruits of my own Growth are not worth any one of
them. For this, indeed, I hold my self very responsible, though the Confession
makes against me; if there be any Vanity and Vice in my Writings, which I do
not of my self perceive, nor can discern, when pointed out to me by another;
for many Faults escape the Eye, but the Infirmity of Judgment consists in not
being able to discern them, when, by another, laid open to us. Knowledge and
Truth may be in us without Judgment, and Judgment also without them; but the
Confession of Ignorance is one of the fairest and surest Testimonies of
Judgment that I know: I have no other Officer to put my Writings in Rank and
File, but only Fortune. As things come into my head, I heap them one upon
another, which sometimes advance in whole Bodies, sometimes in single Files: I
am content that every one should see my natural and ordinary Pace, as ill as it
is. I suffer my self to jog on, at my own rate and ease. Neither are these
Subjects, which a Man is not permitted to be ignorant in, or casually, and at a
venture, to discourse of. I could wish to have a more perfect Knowledge of
things, but I will not buy it so dear as it will cost. My design is to pass
over easily, and not laboriously, the Remainder of my Life. There is nothing
that I will cudgel my Brains about; no, not Knowledge, of what price soever. I
seek, in the reading of Books, only to please my self, by an irreproachable
Divertion: Or if I study, it is for no other Science, than what treats of the
Knowledge of my self, and instructs me how to dye, and live well. Prob. lib. 4.
Eleg. 1.
Has meus ad metas sudet oportet equus.
-- I to this only Course
Train up, and in it only breath my Horse.
I do not bite my Nails about the Difficulties I meet with in my Reading; after
a Charge, or two, I give them over. Should I insist upon them, I should both
lose my self, and time; for I have an impatient Understanding, that must be
satisfied at first: What I do not discern at first, is, by Persistency, rendered
more obscure. I do nothing without Gayety; Continuation, and a too obstinate
Endeavor, darkens, stupifies and tires my Judgment. My Sight is confounded and
dissipated with poring; I must withdraw it, and refer my Discovery to new
Attempts: Just, as to judge rightly of the Luster Scarlet, we are taught to
pass it lightly with the Eye, in running it over at several sudden and
reiterated Views and Glances. If one Book do not please me, I take another, and
never meddle with any, but at such times as I am weary of doing nothing. I care
not much for new ones, because the old seem fuller, and of stronger Reason;
neither do I much tamper with Greek Authors, my Knowledge in that Language
being too little to read them with any delight. Amongst those that are simply
pleasant, of the Moderns, Boccace his Decameron, Rabelais, and the Bassa of
Johannes Secundus (if those may be ranged under that Title) are worth Reading.
As to Amadis de Gaul, and such kind of stuff, they had not the Credit to take
me, so much as in my Childish Years. And I will moreover say (whether boldly,
or rashly) that this old, heavy Soul of mine is now no longer delighted with
Ariosto; no, nor with Ovid; and that his Facility and Invention, with which I
was formerly so ravished, are now of no more Relish, and I can hardly have the
patience to read him. I speak my Opinion freely of all things, even of those
that, perhaps, exceed my Capacity, and that I do not conceive to be, in any
wise, under my Jurisdiction. And accordingly, the Judgment I deliver, is to
show the Measure of my own Sight, and not of the things I make so bold to
censure: When I find my self disgusted with Plato's Axiochus, as with a Work
(with due Respect to such an Author be it spoken) without force, my Judgment
does not believe it self: It is not so arrogant as to oppose the Authority of
so many other famous Judgments of Antiquity, which it considers as its Regents
and Masters, and with whom it is rather content to err. In such a Case, it
condemns it self, either for stopping at the outward Bark, not being able to
penetrate to the Heart, or for considering it by some false Light, and is
content with securing it self from Trouble and Error only; and, as to its own
Weakness, does frankly acknowledge and confess it. It thinks it gives a just
Interpretation, according to the Appearances, by its Conceptions presented to
it; but they are weak and imperfect. Most of the Fables of Aesop have in them
several Senses and Meanings, of which, the Mythologists chose some one, that
quadrates well to the Fable; but, for the most part, it is but the first Face
that presents it self, and is Superficial only: There yet remain others more
lively, essential and profound, into which they have not been able to
penetrate; and just so do I.

But, to pursue the business of this Essay, I have always thought, that in
Poesy, Virgil, Lucretius, Catullus and Horace do many degrees excel the rest;
and signally, Virgil in his Georgicks, which I look upon for the most
accomplished piece of Poetry; and, in comparison of which, a Man may easily
discern, that there are some places in his Aeneids, Censure of Virgil*
to which the Author would have given a little more of the File, had he had
leisure: and the fith Book of his Aeneids seems to me the most perfect. I also
love Lucan, And Lucan.
and willingly read him; not so much for his Style, as for his own Worth, and
the Truth and Solidity of his Opinions and Judgments. Of Terence.
As for Terence, I find the Queintness and Eloquencies of the Latin Tongue so
admirable lively to represent our Manners, and the Movements of the Soul, that
our Actions throw me, at every turn, upon him; and cannot read him so often, that
I do not still discover some new Grace and Beauty. Such as lived near Virgil's
time, were scandalized, that some should compare him with Lucretius. Of
Lucretius.
I am, I confess, of Opinion, that the Comparison is, in truth, very unequal; a
Belief that, nevertheless, I have much ado to assure my self in, when I meet
with some excellent Passages in Lucretius. But if they were so angry at this
Comparison, what would they have said of the Brutish and Barbarous Stupidity of
those, who, at this Hour, compare him with Ariosto? Or would not Ariosto
himself say? O Seclum insipiens, and infacetum! Catullus Epig. 40.
I think the Ancients had more reason to be angry with those who compared
Plautus with Terence, than Lucretius with Virgil. It makes much for the
Estimation and Preference of Terence, that the Father of the Roman Eloquence
has him so often in his Mouth; and the Sentence, that the best Judge of Roman
Poets has passed upon the other. I have often observed, that those of our
times, who take upon them to write Comedies (in imitation of the Italians, who
are happy enough in that way of Writing) take in three or four Arguments of
those of Plautus, or Terence, to make one of theirs, Of Terence.
and crowd five or six of Boccace his Novels, into one single Comedy. And that
which makes them so load themselves with Matter, is the Diffidence they have of
being able to support themselves with their own Strength. They must find out
something to lean to; and having not of their own wherewith to entertain the
Audience, bring in the Story, to supply the defect of Language. It is quite
otherwise with my Author; the Elegancy and Perfection of his way of Speaking,
makes us lose the Appetite of his Plot. His fine Expression, Elegancy and
Queintness is every where Taking: He is so pleasant throughout. Liquidus,
puroque simillimus amni.
Liquid, and like a Crystal running Stream.
And does so possess the Soul with his Graces, that we forget those of his
Fable. This very Consideration carries me further: I observe, that the best and
most ancient Poets have avoided the Affectation, and hunting after, not only of
fantastic Spanish, and Petrarchick Elevations, but even the softest, and most
gentle Touches, which are the only Ornaments of succeeding Poesy. And yet
there is no good Judgment that will condemn this in the Ancients, and that does
not incomparably more admire the equal Politeness, and that perpetual
Sweetness, and flourishing Beauty, that appears in Catullus his Epigrams,
Comparison betwixt Catullus and Martial. Mart. prae lib. 8.
than all the Stings with which Martial arms the Tails of his. This is by the
same Reason that I gave before, and as Martial says of himself; Minus illi
ingenio laborandum fuit, in cujus locum materia successerat. These first,
without being moved, or making themselves angry, make themselves sufficiently
felt; they have matter enough of Laughter throughout, they need not tickle
themselves: The others have need of Foreign Assistance; as they have the less
Wit, they must have the more Body; they mount on Horseback, because they are
not able to stand on their own Legs. As in our Balls, those mean Fellows that
teach to dance, not being able to represent the Presence and Decency of our
Nobleness, are fain to supply it with dangerous Leaps, and other strange
Motions, and fantastic Tricks. And the Ladies are less put to it in Dances,
where there are several Coupees, Changes, and quick Motions of Body, than in
some other of a more solemn kind, where they are only to move a natural Pace,
and to represent their ordinary Grace and Presence. And, as I have also seen
good Tumblers, when in their own Every-day-Cloaths, and with the same Face they
always wear, give us all the pleasure of their Art, when their Apprentices, not
yet arrived to such a pitch of Perfection, are fain to meal their Faces, put
themselves into ridiculous Disguises, and make a hundred Mimick Faces, to
prepare us for Laughter. This Conception of mine is no where more demonstrable,
than in comparing the Aeneid with Orlando Furioso; of which, we see the first,
by Dint of Wing, flying in a brave and lofty Place, and always following his
Point; the latter, fluttering and hopping from Tale to Tale, as from Branch to
Branch, not daring to trust his Wings but in very short Flights, and pearching
at every turn, lest his Breath and Force should fail. Excursusque breves
tentat. Virg. Georg. 4.
These then, as to this sort of Subjects, are the Authors that best please me.
As to what concerns my other Reading that mixes a little more Profit with the
Pleasure, and from whence I learn how to marshal my Opinions and Qualities; the
Books that serve me to this purpose, are Plutarch (since translated into
French) and Seneca: The Characters of Plutarch and Seneca.
Both of which have this great convenience suited to my Humor, that the
Knowledge I there seek, is discoursed in loose pieces, that do not engage me in
any great trouble of reading long, of which I am impatient. Such are the
Opusculums of the first, and the Epistles of the latter, which are also the
best, and most profiting of all their Writings. It Is no great attempt to take
one of them in hand, and I give over at pleasure; for they have no sequel or
dependence upon one another. These Authors, for the most part, concur in useful
and true Opinions: And there is this Parallel betwixt them, That Fortune
brought them into the World about the same Age: They were both Tutors to two
Roman Emperors: Both sought out from foreign Countries: Both Rich, and both
Great Men. Their Instruction is the Cream of Philosophy, and delivered after a
plain and pertinent manner. Plutarch is more uniform and constant; Seneca more
various and waving. The last toiled, set himself, and bent his whole Force to
fortify Virtue against Frailty, Fear and Vicious Appetites: The other seems
more to slight their Power, and to disdain to alter his Pace, and to stand upon
his Guard. Plutarch's Opinions are Platonic, sweet, and accommodated to Civil
Society: Those of the other are Stoical and Epicurean, more remote from the
common Usance; but, in my Opinion, more especially proper, and more firm.
Seneca seems to lean a little to the Tyranny of the Emperors of his time, and
only seems; for I take it for granted, that he speak against his Judgment, when
he condemns the Generous Action of those who assassinated Caesar. Plutarch is
frank throughout. Seneca abounds with brisk Touches and Sallies: Plutarch with
things that heats and moves you more; this contents and pays you better. This
guides us, the other pushes us on. As to Cicero, those of his Works that are
most useful to my Design, are they that treat of Philosophy, especially Moral:
But boldly to confess the truth, his way of Writing, and that of all other
Long-winded Authors, appears to me very tedious: For his Prefaces, Definitions,
Divisions and Etimologies take up the greatest part of his Work: Censure of
Cicero.
Whatever there is of Life and Marrow, is smothered and lost in the
Preparation. When I have spent an hour in reading him (which is a great deal
for me) and recollect what I have thence extracted of Juice and Substance; for
the most part I find nothing but Wind; for he is not yet come to the Arguments
that serve to his purpose, and the Reasons that should properly help to loose
the Knot I would untye. For me, who only desire to become more Wise, not more
Learned or Eloquent, these Logical or Aristotelian Dispositions of Parts are of
no use. I would have a Man begin with the main Proposition, and that wherein
the force of the Argument lies: I know well enough what Death and Pleasure are,
let no Man give himself the trouble to anatomize them to me; I look for good
and solid Reasons at the first dash to instruct me how to stand the Shock, and
resist them; to which purpose, neither Grammatical Subtilties, nor the queint
Contexture of Words and Argumentations are of any use at all: I am for
Discourses that gives the first Charge into the Heart of the Doubt; his
languish about his Subjects, and delay our Expectation. Those are proper for
the Schools, for the Bar, and for the Pulpit, where we have leisure to nod, and
may awake a quarter of an hour after time enough to find again the Thread of
the Discourse. It is necessary to speak after this manner to Judges, whom a Man
has a Design, Right or Wrong, to incline to favor his Cause, to Children and
Common People; to whom a Man must say all he can, and try what effects his
Eloquence can produce. I would not have an Author make it his business to
render me attentive: Or that he should cry out fifty times, Oyez, as the Clerks
and Heralds do. The Romans in their Religious Exercises, began with Hoc age: As
we in ours do with Sursum corda, which are so many words lost to me: I come
thither already fully prepared from my Chamber, I need no Allurement, no
Invitation, no Sauce; I eat the Meat Raw, so that, instead of whetting my
Appetite by these Preparatives, they tire, and pall it. Will the License of the
time excuse the Sacrilegious Boldness to censure the Dialogisms of Plato
himself, And of Plato.
for as dull and heavy as the other before named, whilst he too much stifles
his Matter? And to lament so much time lost by a Man who had so many better
things to say, in so many long and needless Preliminary Interlocutions? My
Ignorance will better excuse me in that, I understand not Greek so well, as to
discern the Beauty of his Language. I would generally choose Books that use
Sciences, not such as only lead to them. The two first, and Pliny, and their
like, have nothing of this Hoc age; they will have to do with Men already
instructed; or if they have, it is a substantial Hoc age, and that has a Body by
it self. I also delight in reading his Epistles, ad Atticum; not only because
they contain a great deal of History, and the Affairs of his time; but much
more because I therein discover much of his own private Humor: For I have a
singular curiosity (as I have said elsewhere) to pry into the Souls, and the
Natural and True Judgments of the Authors with whom I converse. A Man may
indeed judge of their Parts, but not of their Manners, nor of themselves, by
the Writings they expose upon the Theater of the World. I have a thousand times
lamented the loss of the Treatise Brutus writ upon Virtue; for it is best
Learning the Theorie of those who best know the Practick. But seeing the thing
preached, and the Preacher are different things, I would as willingly see
Brutus in Plutarch, as in a Book of his own. I would rather choose to be
certainly informed of the Conference he had in his Tent with some particular
Friend of his the night before a Battle, than of the Harangue he made the next
day to his Army; and of what he did in his Closset and his Chamber, than what
he did in the Public Place, and in the Senate. As to Cicero, I am of the
common Opinion that (Learning excepted) he had no great Natural Parts. He was a
good Citizen, of an affable Nature, as all fat, heavy Men, such as he was,
usually are: But given to ease, and had a mighty share of Vanity and Ambition.
Neither do I know how to excuse him for thinking his Poetry fit to be
published. It Is no great Imperfection to make ill Verses; but it is an
Imperfection, not to be able to judge how unworthy his Verses were of the Glory
of his Name. For what concerns his Eloquence, that is totally out of
comparison, and I believe it will never be equaled. The younger Cicero, who
resembled his Father in nothing but in Name, whilst commanding in Asia, had
several Strangers one day at his Table, and, amongst the rest, Caestius seated
at the lower end, as Men often intrude to the open Tables of the Great: Cicero
ask't one of the Waiters who that Man was, who presently told him his Name: But
he, as one that had his Thoughts taken up with something else, and that had
forgot the Answer made him, asking three or four times, over, and over again,
the same Question; the Fellow, to deliver himself from so many Questions, and
to make him know him by some particular Circumstance; It Is that Caestius, said
he, of whom it was told you, that he makes no great Account of your Fathers
Eloquence in comparison of his own. At which, Cicero being suddenly nettled,
commanded poor Caestius presently to be seized, and caused him to be very well
whip't in his own presence; a very discourteous Entertainer! Yet even amongst
those, who, all things considered, have reputed his Eloquence incomparable;
there have been some however, who have not stuck to observe some Faults in his
Writing: As that Great Brutus his Friend for example, who said 'twas a broken
and feeble Eloquence, fractam and elumbem. The Orators also nearest to the Age
wherein he lived, reprehended in him the Care he had of a certain long Cadence
in his Periods, and particularly took notice of these Words, esse videatur,
which he there so often makes use of. For my part, I better approve of a shorter
Style, and that comes more roundly off. He does, though sometimes, shuffle his
Parts more briskly together, but it is very seldom. I have my self taken notice
of this one Passage, Ego vero me minus diu senem mallem, quam esse senem,
Cicero de Sencet.
antequam essem. The Historians are my true Province, for they are pleasant and
easy, where immediately Man in general, the Knowledge of whom I hunt after,
does there appear more lively and entire than any where besides: The Variety
and Truth of his Internal Qualities, in gross and peace-meal, the diversity of
means by which he is united and knit, and the Accidents that threaten him. Now
those that write Lives, by reason they insist more upon Counsels than Events,
more upon what sallies from within, than upon that which happens without, are
the most proper for my reading; and therefore, above all others, Plutarch is
the Man for me. I am very sorry we have not a dozen Laertii, or that he was not
further extended, and better understood: For I am equally curious to know the
Lives and Fortunes of these great Instructors of the World, as to know the
Diversities of their Doctrines and Opinions. In this kind of Study (the reading
of Histories) a Man must tumble over, without distinction, all sorts of
Authors, both Antic and Modern; as well Barbarous and Absolute, as those of
current Language, there to know the things of which they variously treat:
Caesar's Com. commended.
But Caesar, in my Opinion, particularly deserves to be studied, not for the
Knowledge of the History only, but for himself, so great an Excellence and
Perfection he has above all the rest, though Salust be one of the number. In
earnest, I read this Author with more reverence and respect than is usually
allowed to Humane Writings; one while considering him in his Person, by his
Actions and miraculous Greatness, and another in the Purity and inimitable
Neatness of his Language and Style, wherein he not only excels all other
Historians, as Cicero confesses, but peradventure, even Cicero himself;
speaking of his Enemies with so much Sincerity in his Judgment; that, the false
Colors with which he strives to palliate his ill Cause, and the Ordure of his
Pestilent Ambition excepted, I think there is no Fault to be objected against
him, saving this, that he speaks too sparingly of himself, seeing so many great
things could not have been performed under his Conduct, but that his own
Personal Valor must necessarily have had a greater share in the Execution,
than he attributes to himself. I love Historians, who are either very sincere,
or very excellent. The Sincere who have nothing of their own to mix with it,
and who only make it their Business to make a Faithful Collection of all that
comes to their Knowledge, and Faithfully to record all things without Choice or
Prejudice, leaving to us the entire Judgment of discerning the Truth of things.
Such, for example amongst others, as honest Froissard, who has proceeded in his
Undertaking with so frank a Plainness, that having committed an Error,
Froissard.
he is not ashamed to confess, and correct it in the place where the Finger has
been laid, and who represents to us even the Variety of Rumors that were then
spread abroad, and the different Reports that were made to him; which is the
naked and unaffected Matter of History, and of which every one may make his
Profit, according to his proportion of Understanding. The more excellent sort
of Historians have Judgment to pick out what is most worthy to be known; and,
of two Reports, to examine which is the most likely to be true: From the
Condition of Princes, and their Humors, they conclude the Counsels, and
attribute to them Words proper for the Occasion; and such have Title to assume
the Authority of Regulating our Belief to what they themselves believe; but
certainly, this Privilege belongs not to every one. For the middle sort of
Historians (of which, the most part are) they spoil all; they will chew our
Meat for us, they take upon them to judge of, and consequently, to incline the
History to their own Liking; for if the Judgment partially lean to one side, a
Man cannot avoid wresting and writhing his Narrative to that Bias. They
undertage to choose things worthy to be known, and yet very often conceal from us
such a Word, such a private Action, as would much better instruct us; omit, as
incredible, such things as they do not understand, and peradventure some,
because they cannot express them well in good French or Latin. Let them, in
God's Name, display their Eloquence, and judge according to their own fancy:
but let them, withal, leave us something to judge of after them, and neither
alter, nor disguise, by their Abridgments, and at their own Choice, any thing
of the substance of the Matter; but deliver it to us pure and entire in all its
Dimentions. For the most part, and especially in these latter Ages, Persons are
culled out for this Wor^^ from amongst the Common People, upon the sole
Consideration of Well-speaking, as if we were to learn Grammar from thence; and
the Men so chosen have also reason, being hired for no other End, and
pretending to nothing but Babble, not to be very sollicitous of any part but
that, and so, with a fine Gingle of Words, prepare us a pretty Contexture of
Reports, they pick up in the Streets. The only good Histories are those that
have been writ by the Persons themselves who commanded in the Affairs whereof
they write, or who have participated in the Conduct of them, or, at least, who
have had the Conduct of others of the same nature. Such almost, are all the
Greek and Roman (...) For several Eyewitnesses having writ of the (...)
Subject (in the time when Grandeur and Learning frequently met in the same
Person) if there happen to be an Error, it must of necessity be a very slight
one, and upon a very doubtful Accident. What can a Man expect from a Physician,
who will undertake to write of War; or from a mere Scholar, treating upon the
Designs of Princes? If we could take notice how religious the Romans were in
this, there would need but this Example: Asinius Pollio found in the History of
Caesar himself, something mis-reported; a Mistake occasioned, either by reason
he could not have his Eye in all parts of his Army at once, and had given
Credit to some particular Person, who had not delivered him a very true
Account; or else, for not having had too perfect notice given him by his
Lieutenants, of what they had done in his Absence. By which we may see, whether
the Inquisition after Truth be not very delicate, when a Man cannot believe the
Report of a Battle from the Knowledge of him who there commanded, nor from the
Soldiers who were engaged in it, unless, after the Method of a Judiciary
Information, the Witnesses be confronted, and the Challenges received upon the
Proof of the Punctillio's of every Accident. In good earnest, the Knowledge we
have of our own private Affairs, is much more obscure: But that has been
sufficiently handled by Bodin, and according to my own Sentiment. A little to
relieve the weakness of my Memory (so extreme, that it has happened to me more
than once, to take Books again into my hand for new, and unseen, that I had
carefully read over a few Years before, and scribled with my Notes) I have
taken a Custom of late, to fix at the end of every Book (that is, of those I
never intended to read again) the Time, when I made an end on it, and the
Judgment I had made of it, to the end that that might, at least, represent to
me the Air and general Idea, I had conceived of the Author in reading it; and I
will here transcribe some of those Annotations. I writ this, some ten Years
ago, Censure of Guicciardin.
in my Guicciardin (of what Language soever my Books speak to me in, I always
speak to them in my own:) He is a diligent Historiographer, and from whom, in
my Opinion, a Man may learn the truth of the Affairs of his time, as exactly as
from any other; in the most of which he was himself also a personal Actor, and
in honorable Command. It Is not to be imagined, that he should have disguised
any thing, either upon the account of Hatred, Favor, or Vanity; of which, the
liberal Censures he passes upon the Great Ones; and particularly, those by whom
he was advanced, and employed in Commands of great Trust and Honor (as Pope
Clement the Seventh) give ample Testimony. As to that part, which he thinks
himself the best at, namely, his Digressions and Discourses; he has, indeed,
very good ones, and enriched with fine Expressions; but he is too fond of them:
for, to leave nothing unsaid, having a Subject so plain, ample, and almost
infinite, he degenerates into Pedantry, and relishes a little of the
Scholasting Prattle. I have also observed this in him, That of so many Souls,
and so many Effects; so many Motives, and so many Counsels as he judges of, he
never attributes any one to Virtue, Religion, or Conscience; as if all those
were utterly extinct in the World: And of all the Actions, how brave, in
outward show, soever they appear in themselves, he always throws the Cause and
Motive upon some vicious Occasion, or some prospect of Profit. It is impossible
to imagine, but that, amongst such an infinite number of Actions, as he makes
mention of, there must be some one produced by the way of Reason. No Corruption
could so universally have infected Men, that some one would not have escaped
the Contagion: Which makes me suspect, that his own Taste was vicious; from
whence it might happen, that he judged other Men by himself. In my Philip de
Comines, there is this written; And of Philip de Commines.
You will here find the Language sweet and delightful, of a native Simplicity,
the Narration pure, and wherein the Veracity of the Author does evidently
shine; free from Vanity, when speaking of himself; and from Affection or Envy,
when speaking of others: His Discourses and Exhortations more accompanied with
Zeal and Truth, than with any exquisite Sufficiency; and throughout, with
Authority and Gravity, which speak him a Man of Extraction, and nourished up in
great Affairs. Upon the Memoirs of Monsieur du Bellay, I find this; It Is always
pleasant to read things writ by those that have experimented how they ought to
be carried on; but withal, it cannot be denied but there is a manifest
Decadence in these two Lords from the freedom and liberty of Writing, that
shines in the ancient Historians: Such as the Sire de Jovin-ville, a Domestic
to St. Louis; Eginard, Chancellor to Charlemain; and, of latter date, in Philip
de Commines. This here is rather an Apology for King Francis, against the
Emperor Charles the Fifth, than a History. I will not believe that they have
falsified any thing, as to Matter of Fact; but they make a common practice of
wresting the Judgment of Events (very often contrary to Reason) to our
advantage, and of omitting whatsoever is nice to be handled in the Life of
their Master; witness the Relation of Messieurs de Montmorency, and de Brion,
which were here omitted: nay, so much as the very name of Madam d'Estampes is
not here to to be found. Secret Actions an Historian may conceal; but to pass
over in silence what all the World knows, and things that have drawn after them
public Consequences, is an inexcusable defect. In fine, Whoever has a mind to
have a perfect Knowledge of King Francis, amd the Revolutions of his Reign, let
him seek it elsewhere, if my Advice may prevail. The only profit a Man can reap
from hence is, from the particular Narrative of Battles, and other Exploits of
War, wherein these Gentlemen were personally engaged; some Words, and private
Actions of the Princes of their time, and the Practices and Negotiations
carried on by the Seigneur de Langcay; where, indeed, there are, every where,
things worthy to be known, and Discourses above the vulgar Strain.

CHAP. XI. Of Cruelty.
I Fancy Virtue to be something else, Inclinations to Goodness.
and something more noble, than good Nature, and the mere Propension to
Goodness, that we are born into the World withal. Well disposed, and well
descended Souls pursue, indeed, the same Methods, and represent the same Face,
that Virtue it self does: But the word Virtue imports, I know not what, more
great, and active, than merely for a Man to suffer himself, by a happy
Disposition, to be gently and quietly drawn to the Rule of Reason. He who, by a
natural Sweetness and Facility, should despise Injuries received, would,
doubtless, do a very great, and a very laudable thing; but he who, provoked,
and nettled to the Quick, by an Offense, should fortify himself with the Arms
of Reason, against the furious Appetite of Revenge, and, after a great
Conflict, master his own Passion, would, doubtless, do a great deal more. The
first would do well; and the latter virtuously: one Action might be called
Bounty, and the other Virtue; for, methinks, the very name of Virtue
presupposes Difficulty and Contention; and it is for this reason, perhaps, that
we call God Good, Mighty, Liberal and Just; but we do not give him the
Attribute of Virtuous, being that all his Operations are natural, Thai Virtue
cannot be exercised without some difficulty.
and without Endeavor. It has been the Opinion of many Philosophers, not only
Stoics, but Epicureans, that it is not enough to have the Soul seated in a
good place, of a good temper, and well disposed to Virtue. It is not enough to
have our Resolutions fixed above all the power of Fortune, but that we are,
moreover, to seek occasions wherein to put it to the proof: We are to covet
Pain, Necessity and Contempt, to contend with them, and to keep the Soul in
Breath: Multum sibi adjicit virtus lacessita. It Is one of the Reasons why
Epaminondas, who was yet of a third Sect, Sen. Epist. 25.
refused the Riches Fortune presented to him by very lawful means; because,
said he, I am to contend with Poverty: In which Extreme he maintained himself
to the last. Socrates put himself, methinks, upon a rude Trial; keeping for his
Exercise, a confounded scolding Wife, which was fighting at Sharp. Metellus
having, of all the Senators, alone attempted, by the power of Virtue, to
withstand the Violence of Saturninus, Tribune of the People at Rome, who would,
by all means, cause an unjust Law to pass in favor of the Commons; and by so
doing, having incurred the Capital Penalties that Saturninus had established
against the Dissenters, entertained those who, in this Extremity led him to
Execution, with words to this effect: That it was a thing too easy, and too
base, to do ill; and that to do well where there was no danger, was a common
thing; but that to do well where there was danger, was the proper Office of a
Man of Virtue. These words of Metellus do very clearly represent to us, what I
would make out; viz. That Virtue refuses Facility for a Companion; and that
that easy, smooth and descending Way, by which the regular Steps of a sweet
Disposition of Nature are conducted, is not that of a true Virtue: She requires
a rough and stormy Passage; she will have either Exotic Difficulties to
wrestle with, (like that of Metellus) by means whereof Fortune delights to
interrupt the Speed of her Carreer; or internal Difficulties, that the
inordinate Appetites and Imperfections of our Condition introduce to disturb
her. I am come thus far at my ease; but here it comes into my head, that the
Soul of Socrates, The Virtue of Socrates.
the most perfect that ever came to my knowledge, should, by this Rule, be of
very little Recommendation; for I cannot conceive in that Person any the least
Motion of a vicious Inclination: I cannot imagine there could be any
Difficulty, or Constraint, in the Course of his Virtue: I know his Reason to be
so powerful and sovereign over him, that she would never have suffered a
vicious Appetite so much as to spring in him. To a Virtue so elevated, as his,
I have nothing to oppose. Methinks I see him march, with a victorious and
triumphant pace, in Pomp, and at his Ease, without Opposition or Disturbance.
If Virtue cannot shine bright, but by the Conflict of contrary Appetites, shall
we then say, that she cannot subsist without the Assistance of Vice; and that
it is from her, that she derives her Reputation and Honor? What then also
would become of that brave and generous Epicurean Pleasure, which makes account
that it nourishes Virtue tenderly in her Lap, and there makes it play and
wanton, giving it for Toys to play withal, Shame, Fevers, Poverty, Death and
Torments? If I presuppose that a perfect Virtue manifests it self in
Contending, in patient enduring of Pain, and undergoing the uttermost extremity
of the Gout, without being moved in her Seat; if I give her Austerity and
Difficulty for her necessary Objects: what will become of a Virtue elevated to
such a degree, as, not only to despise Pain, but, moreover, to rejoice in it,
and to be tickled with the Daggers of a sharp Cholick, such as the Epicureans
have established, and of which, many of them, by their Actions, have given most
manifest Proofs? As have several others, who I find to have surpassed, in
effects, even the very Rules of their own Discipline: The noble Death of Cato
accompanied with Pleasure.
Witness the younger Cato; when I see him dye, and tearing out his own Bowels,
I am not satisfied simply to believe, that he had then his Soul totally exempt
from all Troubles and Horror: I cannot think that he only maintained himself
in the Steadiness that the Stoical Rules prescribed him; Temperate without
Emotion, and imperturb'd: There was, methinks, something in the Virtue of this
Man, too spritely and youthful to stop there; I do believe that, without doubt,
he felt a pleasure and delight in so noble an Action, and was more pleased in
it, than in any other of his Life: Cicero. Thuse. lib. 1.
Sic abiit e vita, ut causam moriendi nactum se esse gauderet. I believe so
far, that I question whether he would have been content to have been deprived
of the occasion of so brave an Execution. And if the Sincerity that made him
embrace the public Concern more than his own withheld me not, I should easily
fall into an Opinion, that he thought himself obliged to Fortune for having put
his Virtue upon so brave a Trial, and for having favored that Caesar.
Thief, in treading under foot the ancient Liberty of his Country. Methinks I
read, in this Action, I know not what Exaltation in his Soul, and an
extraordinary and manly Emotion of Pleasure, when he looked upon the Generosity
and Height of his Enterprise: Deliberata morte ferocior. Hor. lib. 1. Ode 37.
Not stimulated with any hope of Glory, as the popular and effeminate Judgments
of some have concluded; for that Consideration has been too mean and low to
possess so generous, so haughty, and so obstinate a Heart as his: but for the
very beauty of the thing in it self, which he, who had the handling of the
Springs, discerned more clearly, and in its Perfection, than we are able to do.
Philosophy has obliged me in determining that so brave an Action had been
indecently placed in any other Life, than that of Cato; and that it only
appertained to His, to end so. Notwithstanding, and according to Reason, he
commanded his Son, and the Senators that accompanied him, to take another
Course in their Affairs: Cicero de Offic. lib. 1.
Catoni, quum incredibilem natura tribuisset gravitatem, ^amque ipse perpetua
constantia roboravisset semperque in proposito consilio permansisset, moriendum
potius quam Tyranni vultus aspiciendus erat. Nature having endued Cato with an
incredible Gravity, which he had also fortified with a perpetual Constancy,
without ever flagging in his Resolution, he must of necessity rather dye, than
see the face of the Tyrant. Every Death ought to hold proportion with the Life
before it. We do not become others for dying. I always interpret the Death, by
the Life preceding; and if any one tell me of a Death strong and constant in
appearance, annexed to a feeble Life, I conclude it produced by some feeble
Cause, and suitable to the Life before. The Easiness then of this Death, and
the Facility of Dying, he had acquired by the vigor of his Soul; shall we say,
that it ought to abate any thing of the luster of his Virtue? And who, that has
his Brain never so little tinctured with the true Philosophy, can be content to
imagine Socrates only free from Fear and Passion, in the Accident of his
Prison, Fetters and Condemnation? And that will not discover in him, not only
Stability and Constancy (which was his ordinary Composure) but moreover (I know
not what) new Satisfaction, and a frolic Cheerfulness in his last Words and
Actions? At the Start he gave, with the pleasure of scratching his Leg, when
his Irons were taken off, does he not discover an equal Serenity and Joy in his
Soul for being freed from past Inconveniences, and at the same time to enter
into the Knowledge of things to come? Cato shall pardon me, if he please; his
Death, indeed, is more tragical, and more taken notice of, but yet this is (I
know not how) methinks finer. Aristippus, to one that was lamenting his Death;
The Gods grant me such an one, said he. Virtue turned into Habit in Cato and
Socrates.
A Man discerns in the Souls of these two great Men, and their Imitators (for I
very much doubt, whether there was ever their like) so perfect a Habitude to
Virtue, that it was turned to a Complexion. It is no more a laborious Virtue,
nor the Precepts of Reason, to maintain which, the Soul is so wracked; but the
very Essence of their Souls, their natural and ordinary Habit. They have
rendered it such by a long Practice of Philosophical Precepts, having light upon
a rich and ingenious Nature. The vicious Passions that spring in us, can find
no Entrance into them. The Force and Vigor of their Souls stifle and
extinguish irregular Desires, so soon as they begin to move. Now, that it is
not more noble, by a high and divine Resolution, to hinder the Birth of
Temptations; and to be so formed to Virtue, that the very Seeds of Vice be
rooted out, than to hinder their Progress; and having suffered themselves to be
surprised with the first Motions of Passions, to arm themselves, and to stand
firm to oppose their Progress, and overcome them: And that this second Effect
is not also much more generous, than to be simply endowed with a frail and
affable Nature, of it self, disaffected to Debauchery and Vice, I do not think
can be doubted; for this third and last sort of Virtue seems to render a Man
innocent, but not virtuous; free from doing ill, but not apt enough to do well:
considering also, that this Condition is so near Neighbor to Imperfection and
Cowardice, that I know not very well how to separate the Confines, and
distinguish them: The very name of Good Nature and Innocence are, for this
reason, in some sort grown into Contempt. I very well know, that several
Virtues, as Chastity, Sobriety and Temperance, may come to a Man through
Personal Defects. Constancy in Danger, if it must be so called, the Contempt of
Death, and Patience in Misfortunes, may often times be found in Men, for want of
well judging of such Accidents, and not apprehending them for such as they are.
Want of Apprehension, and Sottishness, do sometimes counterfeit virtuous
Effects: As I have often seen it happen, that Men have been commended for what
really merited Blame. An Italian Lord once said this, Italians subtle and
quick of Apprehension.
in my presence, to the disadvantage of his own Nation; That the Subtilty of
the Italians, and the Vivacity of their Conceptions, were so great, that they
foresaw the Dangers and Accidents that might befall them, so far off, that it
must not be thought strange, if they were often, in War, observed to provide
for their Safety, even before they had discovered the Peril: That we French and
Spaniards, who were not so cunning, went on further; and that we must be made
to see and feel the danger, before we would take the Alarm; and that even then
we had no Apprehension: But the Germans and Swisse, more heavy, Germans and
Suisses Loggerheads.
and thick-skull'd, had not the Sense to look about them, even then when the
Blows were falling about their Ears. Peradventure, he only talked so for Mirths
sake; and yet it is most certain that, in War, raw Soldiers rush into danger
with more Precipitancy, than after they have been well cudgelled. -- Haud
ignarus, quantum nova gloria in armis, Aeneid. 11

Et praedulce decus primo certamine possit.
Not ign'rant in the first Essay of Arms,
How hope of Glory the raw Soldier warms.
For this reason it is, that, when we judge of a particular Action, we are to
consider several Circumstances, and the whole Man by whom it is performed,
before we give it a name. To instance in my self; I have sometimes known my
Friends call that Prudence in me, which was merely Fortune; and repute that
Courage and Patience, which was Judgment and Opinion; and attribute to me one
Title for another, sometimes to my advantage, and sometimes otherwise. As to
the rest, I am so far from being arrived at the first, and most perfect degree
of Excellence, where Virtue is turned into Habit, that even of the second I
have made no great Trial. I have not been very solicitous to curb the Desires,
by which I have been importuned. My Virtue is a Virtue, or rather, an
Innocence, casual and accidental. If I had been born of a more irregular
Complexion, I am afraid I should have made scurvy work; for I never observed
any great Stability in my Soul to resist Passions, if they were never so little
vehement. I have not the knack of nourishing Quarrels and Debates in my own
Bosom, and consequently, owe my self no great Thanks, that I am free from
several Vices: Horat. lib. 1. Sat. 6.
Si vitiis mediocribus, and mea paucis
Mendosa est natura, alioqui recta velut si
Egregio inspersos reprehendas corpore naevos.
If of small Crimes, and few, my Nature be
To be accused, and from the great ones free,
Those Venial Faults will no more spot my Soul,
Than a fair Body's blemished with a Mole.
I owe it rather to my Fortune, than my Reason: She has made me to be descended
of a Race famous for Integrity; and of a very good Father; I know not whether,
or no, he has infused into me part of his Humors; or whether Domestic
Examples, and the good Education of my Infancy has insensibly assisted in the
Work, or if I was otherwise born so; Seu Libra, Horat. lib. 2. Ode. 17.
seu me Scorpius aspicit
Formidolosus, pars violentior
Natalis horae, seu tyrannus
Hesperiae Capricornus unde.
Whether the Balance weighed my future Fate;
Or Scorpio, Lord of my Ascendent sat;
Or Tyrant Capricorn, that rudely sways,
And ruffles up the Occidental Seas.
But so it is, that I have naturally a Horror for most Vices. The Answer of
Antisthenes to him who asked him, Which was the best Apprentisage, To unlearn
Evil, seems to point at this. I have them in Horror, I say, with a Detestation
so Natural, and so much my own, that the same Instinct and Impression I brought
with me from my Nurse, I yet retain, no Temptation whatever had the power to
make me alter it. Not so much as my own Discourses, which in some things
lashing out of the Common Road of modest Speaking, might easily license me to
Actions, that my Natural Inclination makes me hate. I will say a prodigious
thing, but I will say it however. I find my self in many things more curbed and
retained by my Manners than my Opinion, and my Concupiscence less debaucht than
my Reason. Aristippus instituted Opinions so bold, in favor of Pleasure and
Riches, as made all the Philosophers murmur at him: But as to his Manners,
Dionysius the Tyrant, having presented three Beautiful Women before him, to
take his choice; he made answer, That he would choose them all, and that it had
happened ill to Paris to have preferred one before the other two: But having taken
them home to his House, he sent them back untoucht. His Servant finding himself
over-loaden upon the Way, with the Money he carried after him, he ordered him
to pour out, and throw away, that which troubled him. And Epicurus, whose
Doctrines were so irreligious and effeminate, was in his Life very laborious
and devout: He writ to a Friend of his, that he lived only upon Biscuit and
Water, entreating him to send him a little Cheese, to lie by him against he had
a mind to make a Feast. Must it be true, that to be a perfect good Man, we must
be so by an Occult, Natural and Universal Propriety, without Law, Reason or
Example? The Debauches, wherein I have been engaged, have not been (I thank
God) of the worse sort, and I have condemned them in my self, for my Judgment
was never infected by them. On the contrary I accuse them more severely in my
self, than in any other. But that is all, for, as to the rest, I oppose too
little resistance, and suffer my self to incline too much to the other side of
the Balance, excepting that I imoderate them, and prevent them from mixing
with other Vices, which, for the most part, will cling together, if a Man have
not a care. I have contracted and curtal'd mine, to make them as single as I
can: Ju. sat, 8.
Nec ultra
Errorem foveo.


For as to the Opinion of the Stoics, who say, That the Wise Man, when he
Works, Works by all the Virtues together, though one be most apparent according
to the Nature of the Action; (and of this the similitude of a Humane Body might
serve them to some Instance, for the Action of Anger cannot work, but that all
the Humors must assist, though Choler predominate) if from thence they will
draw a like Consequence, that when the Wicked Man does wickedly, he does it by
all the Vices together, I do not believe it to be simple so, or else I
understand them not, for I effectually find the contrary. These are witty and
substantial Subtilties, which Philosophy sometimes insists upon. I follow some
Vices, but I fly others, as much as a Saint would do. The Peripateticks also
disown this indissoluble Connection; and Aristotle is of Opinion, that a
Prudent, and Just Man may be intemperate and lascivious. Socrates confessed to
some, who had discovered a certain inclination to Vice in his Physiognomy, that
it was, in truth, his Natural Propension, but that he had by Discipline
corrected it. And such as were familiar with the Pihlosopher Stilpo has said,
That, being born subject to Wine and Women, he had by Study rendered himself
very abstinent, both from the one, and the other. What I have in me of Good, I
have, quite contrary, by the chance of my Birth; and hold it not either by Law,
Precept, or any other Instruction. The Innocence, that is in me, is a simple
and unexperienced one, little Vigor, and less Art. Amongst other Vices, I
mortally hate Cruelty, both by Nature and Judgment, as the very extreme of all
Vices: But with so much tenderness withal, that I cannot see a Chickens Neck
pulled off, without trouble, and cannot without impatience, endure the Cry of a
Hare in my Dogs Teeth, though the Chase be a violent Pleasure. Such as have
Sensuality to encounter, willingly make use of this Argument, (to show that it
is altogether vicious and unreasonable) that when it is at the height, it
subjects us to that degree, that a Man's Reason can have no access, and
instance our own Experience in the Act of Love. Wherein they conceive, that the
Pleasure does so transport us, that our Reason cannot perform its Office,
whilst we are so benumn'd and extasied in Delight. I know very well, it may be
otherwise, and that a Man may sometimes, if he will, gain this point over
himself to sway his Soul, even in the Critical moment, to think of some thing
else: But then he must leisurely incline, and ply it to that bent. I know, that
a Man may triumph over the utmost effort of this Pleasure: I have experienced
it in my self, and have not found Venus so imperious a Goddess, as many, and
some more reformed than I, declare. I do not consider it as a Miracle, as the
Queen of Navar does in one of the Tales of her Heptameron, (which is a
marvilous pretty Book of that kind) nor for a thing of extreme difficulty, to
pass over whole Nights, where a Man has all the Convenience and Liberty he can
desire, with a long-coveted Mistress, The Pleasure of the Chase, What
and yet be just to his Faith first given to satisfy himself with Kisses, and
innocent Embraces, without pressing any further. I conceive that the Example of
the Pleasure of the Chase would be more proper; wherein though the Pleasure be
less, yet the Ravishment and the Surprise are more, by which the Reason, being
astonished, has not so much leisure to prepare it self for the Encounter, when
after a long Quest, the Beast starts up on a sudden in a place, where,
peradventure, we least expected. Which sudden motion, with the ardour of the
Shouts and Cries of the Hunters, so strikes us, that it would be hard for such
as are eager of the Chase, to turn their Thoughts, upon the instant, another
way; And also the Poets make Diana triumph over the Torch and Shafts of Cupid.
Quis non malarum quas amor curas habet Hor. Ep. 2.

Haec inter obliviscitur?
Who amongst such Delights would not remove
Out of his Thoughts the anxious cares of Love?
But to return to what I was saying before, I am tenderly compassionate of
other's Afflictions, and should easily cry for Company, if upon any occasion
whatever, I could cry at all. Nothing tempts my Tears, but Tears, and not only
those that are real and true, but whatever they are, either feigned or painted:
I do not much lament the Dead, and should envy them rather; but I very much
lament the Dying. The Savages do not so much offend me, in roasting and eating
the Bodies of the Dead, as they do, who torment and persecute the Living. Nay,
I cannot look so much as upon the ordinary Executions of Justice, how
reasonable soever, with a steady Eye. Some one being to give testimony of
Julius Caesar's Clemency, Julius Caesar 's Clemency.
he was, says he, mild and moderate in his Revenges: For having compelled the
Pirates to yield, by whom he had before been taken Prisoner, and put to Ransom;
forasmuch as they had threatened him with the Cross, he indeed condemned them to
it, but it was after they had been first strangled. He punished his Secretary
Philomon, who had attempted to poison him, with no greater severity, than a
single Death. Without naming that Latin Author, that dare allege for a
Testimony of Mercy, the killing only of those by whom we have been offended: It
is easy to guess that he was struck with the horrid and inhumane Examples of
Cruelty, practiced by the Roman Tyrants. For my part, even in Justice it self,
all that exceeds a Simple Death, appears to me perfect Cruelty; especially in
us who ought to have regard to their Souls, to dismiss them in a good and calm
Condition; which cannot be, when we have discomposed them by insufferable
Torments. Not long since, a Soldier, who was a Criminal Prisoner, perceiving
from a Tower, where he was shut up, that the people began to assemble to the
place of Execution, and that the Carpenters were busy, erecting a Scaffold, he
presently concluded, that the Preparation was for him; and therefore entered
into a Resolution to kill himself, but could find no Instrument to assist him
in his Design, saving an old rusty Cart-Nayle, that Fortune presented to him.
With this he first gave himself two great Wounds about his Throat, but finding
those would not do, he presently after gave himself a third in the Belly, where
he left the Nail sticking up to the head. The first of his Keepers that came
in, found him in this Condition; yet alive, but sunk down, and near expiring by
his Wounds. To make use of time therefore, before he should die and defeat the
Law, they made have to read his Sentence: Which having done, and he hearing
that he was only condemned to be Beheaded, he seemed to take new Courage,
accepted of Wine, which he had before refused, and thanked his Judges for the
unhop'd for Mildness of their Sentence; saying, That indeed he had taken a
resolution to dispatch himself for fear of a more severe and insupportable
Death: Having entertained an Opinion by the Preparations he had seen in the
Place, that they were resolved to torment him with some horrible Execution; and
seemed to be delivered from Death, for having it changed from what he
apprehended. I should advise, that these Examples of Severity, by which it is
designed to retain the people in their Duty, might be exercised upon the dead
Bodies of Criminals; for to see them deprived of Sepulture, to see them boiled,
and divided into Quarters, would almost work as much upon the Vulgar, as the
Pain they make the Living to endure; though that in effect be little or
nothing, as God himself says, St. Luke Chap. 12. v. 40.
Who kill the Body, and, after that, have no more that they can do. I happened to
come by one day accidentally at Rome, just as they were upon executing Catena,
a notorious Robber: He was strangled without any Emotion of the Spectators, but
when they came to cut him in Quarters, the Hangman gave not a Blow, that the
People did not follow with a doleful Cry, and with Exclamation, as if every one
had lent his Feeling to the miserable Carcass. Those inhumane Excesses ought to
be exercised upon the Bark, and not upon the Quick. Artaxerxes, The severe Laws
of Persia, moderated by Artaxerxes.
in almost a like case, moderated the Severity of the Ancent Laws of Persia,
Ordaining, that the Nobility, who had committed a Fault, instead of being
whipped, as they were used to be, should be stripped only, and their Clothes whipped
for them; and that, whereas they were wont to tear off their Hair, they should
only take off their High-crown'd Tiara. Hogs Sacrificed in Figure to the Divine
Justice by the Egyptians.
The so devout Egyptians, thought they sufficiently satisfied the Divine
Justice, in Sacrificing Hogs in Effigy and Representation; a bold Invention to
pay God, so Essential a Substance in Picture only, and in show. I live in a
time, wherein we abound in credible Examples of this Vice, thorough the license
of our Civil Wars; and we see nothing in Ancient Histories more extreme, than
what we have proof of every day. I could hardly persuade my self, The Cruelties
exercised in Civil Wars.
before I saw it with my Eyes, that there could be found out Souls so cruel and
fell, who, for the sole Pleasure of Murder would commit, hack, and lop off the
Limbs of others; sharpen their Wits to invent unusual Torments, and new kinds
of Deaths without Hatred, without Profit, and for no other end, but only to
enjoy the pleasant Spectacle of the Gestures and Motions, the lamentable Groans
and Cries of a Man in anguish. For this is the utmost point to which Cruelty can
arrive, Vt hominem non iratus, Sen. de Clem.
non timens, tantum spectaturus occidat. That a Man should kill a Man without
being angry, or without fear, only for the Pleasure of the Spectacle. For my
own part, I cannot, without Grief, see so much as an innocent Beast pursued,
and killed, that has no Defense, and from whom we have received no Offense at
all. And that which frequently happens, that the Stage we hunt, finding himself
weak, and out of breath, seeing no other Remedy surrenders himself to us, who
pursue him, imploring Mercy by his Tears, -- questuque cruentus, Aeneid. l. 7.

Atque imploranti similis,
That Bleeding by his Tears, does Mercy crave.
It has ever been to me a very unpleasing sight; Beasts brought alive by
Pythagoras to turn out.
and I hardly ever take beast alive, that I do not presently turn out.
Pythagoras bought them of Fishermen and Fowlers, to do the same. Ovid. Met.
lib. 15.
-- primoque a caede ferarum,
Incaluisse puto maculatum sanguine ferrum.
I think, 'twas Slaughter of wild beasts that made
Too docile Man first learn the Killing Trade.
Those Natures that are sanguinary toward Beasts, discover a Natural
Propension to Cruelty. After they had accustomed themselves at Rome, to
Spectacles of the Slaughter of Animals, they proceeded to those of the
Slaughter of Men, the Fencers. Nature has her self (I doubt) imprinted in Man a
kind of instinct to Inhumanity; no body takes pleasure in seeing Beasts play,
and caress one another, but every one is delighted with seeing them dismember,
and tear one another to pieces. And that I may not be laughed at for the
simpathy I have with them, Theology it self enjoins us some Favor in their
behalf: And considering that one, and the same Master, has lodged us together
in this Palace, for his Service, and that they, as well as we, are of his
Family, it has reason to enjoin us some affection and regard to them.
Pythagoras his Transmutation of Souls. Id ibid.
Pythagoras borrowed the Metempsycosis from the Egyptians, but it has since
been received by several Nations, and particularly by our Druids. Morte carent
animae, semperque priore relicta
Sede, novis domibus vivunt, habitantque receptae.
Souls never dye, but, having left one Seat,
Into new Houses they Admittance get.
The Religion of our Ancient Gauls maintained, that Souls, being Eternal, never
ceased to remove and shift their places from one body to another: Mixing
moreover, with this Fancy, some Consideration of Divine Justice. For according
to the Deportments of the Soul, whilst it had been in Alexander, they said,
that God ordered it another body to inhabit, more or less painful, and proper
for its Conditions. -- muta ferarum Clad. in Ruff. lib. 2.

Cogit vincla pati, truculentos ingerit ursis,
Pradonesque lupis, fallaces vulpibus addit,
Atque ubi per varios annos per mill figuras
Egit, Lethaeo purgatos flumine tandem
Rursus ad humanae revocat primordia formae.
The silent Yoke of Brutes he made them wear,
The Bloody Souls he did enclose in Bears,
The ravenousin Woolves he wisely shut,
The sly and cunning he in Foxes put,
Where after having, through successive years
And thousand Figures, finished their Carreers,
Purging them well in Lethe's Flood, at last
In humane Bodies he the Souls replac't.
If it had been valiant, he lodged it in the Body of a Lion; if voluptuous, in
that of Hog; if timorous in that of a Heart or Hare, if subtle; in that of a
Fox, and so of the rest, till having purified it by this Chastisement, it again
entered into the Body of some other Man; Ovid. Met. lib. 15.
Ipse ego, nam memini, Trojani tempore Belli
Panthoides Euphorbus eram.
For I my self remember in the days
Of The Trojan War, that I Euphorbus was.


As to the Relation betwixt us and Beasts, I do not much admit of it, Beasts
revered for Gods by some of the Ancients.
nor allow what several Nations, and those the most Ancient and most Noble,
have practiced, who have not only received Brutes into their Society, but have
given them a Rank infinitely above them; Esteeming them one while Familiars and
Favorites of the Gods, and having them in more, than humane, Reverence and
Respect; and others knowing no other, nor other Divinity but they. Belluae a
Barbaris propter beneficium consecratae. The Barbarians consecrated Beasts, out
of Opinion of some Benefit received by them, Juven. sat. 15.
-- Crocodilon adorat
Pars haec, illa pavet saturam serpentibus Ibin,
Effigies sacri hic nitet aurea Cercopitheci.
-- Hic piscem fluminis, illic
Oppida tota canem venerantur.
One Country does adore the Crocodile,
That does inhabit Monster-breeding Nile,
Another does the Long-bild Ibis dread,
With poisonous Flesh of ugly Serpents fed.
And in another place you may behold
The Statue of a Monkey shine in Gold;
Here Men, some monstrous Fishes aid implore,
And there whole Towns a Grinning Dog adore.
And the very Interpretation, that Plutarch gives to this Error, which is very
well taken, is advantageous to them: For he says, that it was not the Cat; or
the Ox (for example) that the Egyptians adored: But that they in those Beasts
adored some Image of the Divine Faculties; in this the Patience and Utility, in
that the Vivacity, or, as our Neighbors, the Burgundians, with the Germans,
the Impatience to see it self shut up; by which, they represented the Liberty
they loved and adored, above all other Divine Faculty, and so of the rest. But
when amongst the more moderate Opinions, I meet with Arguments, that endeavor
to demonstrate the near resemblance betwixt us and Animals, how great a share
they in our greatest Privileges, and with how great probability they compare
and couple us together, in earnest, I abate a great deal of our Presumption,
and willingly let fall the Title of that imaginary Sovereignty, that some
attribute to us over other Creatures. But supposing all this were true, there
is nevertheless a certain Respect, and a general Duty of Humanity, that ties us
not only to Beasts that have Li^e, and Sense, but even to Trees and Plants. We
owe Justice to Men, and Grace and Benignity to other Creatures that are capable
of it. There is a certain Natural Commerce, and Mutual Obligation betwixt them
and us; neither shall I be afraid to discover the Tenderness of my Nature so
childish, that I cannot well refuse to play with my Dog, when he the most
unseasonably importunes me so to do. The Turks have Alms and Hospitals for
Beasts. The Romans had a public regard to the Nourishment of Geese, by whose
Vigilance their Capitol had been preserved: The Athenians made a Decree, that
the Mules and Moyles which had served at the building of the Temple called
Hecatompedon, should be free, and suffered to pasture at their own choice
without hindrance. The Agrigentines had a common usance solemnly to enter the
Beasts, they had a kindness for; as Horses of some rare qualities, Dogs, and
Birds of whom they had had profit, and even those that had only been kept to
divert their Children. And the Magnificence that was ordinary with them in all
other things, did also particularly appear in the Sumptuosity and Numbers of
Monuments, erected to this very end, that remained in their Beauty several Ages
after. The Egyptians buried Wolves, Bears, Crocodiles, Dogs and Cats in Sacred
Places, embalmed their Bodies, and put on Mourning at their Death. Cimon gave
an honorable Sepulture to the Mares, with which he had three times gained the
Prize of the Course at the Olympic Games. The Ancient Xanthippus caused his
Dog to be interred on an Eminence near the Sea, which has ever since retained
the Name. And Plutarch says, That he made Conscience of selling, for a small
profit to the Slaughter, an Ox, that had been long in his Service.

CHAP. XII. Apology for Raimond de Sebonde.
LEarning is, in truth, a very great, and a very considerable quality; and such
as despise it, sufficiently discover their own want of Understanding: But yet I
do not prize it at the excessive rate, some others do; as Herillus the
Philosopher for one, who therein places the Sovereign Good, and maintained,
that it was only in her to render us wise and contented, which I do not
believe; no more than I do, what others have said, That Learning is the Mother
of all Virtue, and that all Vice proceeds from Ignorance, which, if it be true,
is subject to a very long Interpretation. My House has long been open to Men of
Knowledge, and is very well known, so to be; for my Father, who governed it
Fifty years, and more, inflamed with the new ardour, with which, Learning
brought in to esteem by Francis the First in France.
Francis the First embraced Letters, and brought them into esteem, with great
Diligence and Expense hunted after the Acquaintance of Learned Men, receiving
them at his House, as Persons Sacred, and that had some particular Inspiration
of Divine Wisdom; collecting their Sayings and Sentences as so many Oracles,
and with so much the greater Reverence and Religion, as he was the less able to
judge; for he had no Knowledge of Letters, no more than his Predecessors. For
my part, I love them well, but I do not adore them. Amongst others, Peter
Bunel, a Man of great Reputation for Knowledge in his time, having, with some
others of his sort, stayed some days at Montaigne, in my Father's Company; he
presented him, at his departure, with a Book, Entitled, Theologia naturalis;
sive Liber Creaturarum Magistri Raimondi de Sebonde. And being that the Italian
and Spanish Tongues were familiar to my Father; Sebonde.
and that this Book is writ in Spanish, sustian'd with Latin Terminations, he
hoped that, with little help, he might be able to understand it, and therefore
recommended it to him for a very useful piece, and proper for the time wherein
he gave it to him; which was then, when the Novel Doctrines of Martin Luther
began to be in vogue, and in many places to stagger our ancient Belief: Wherein
he was very well adviz'd, wisely, in his own Reason, foreseeing, that the
beginning of this Distemper would easily run into an Execrable Atheism; for the
Vulgar not having the Faculty of judging of things themselves, suffering
themselves to be carried away by appearance, after having once been inspired
with the Boldness to despise and control those Opinions they had before, had
in extremest Reverence, such as those wherein their Salvation is concerned,
and that some of the Articles of their Religion were brought into Doubt and
Dispute; they afterward throw all other parts of their Belief into the same
uncertainty, they having in them no other Authority or Foundation, than the
other they had already discomposed; and shake of all the Impressions they had
received from the Authority of the Laws, or the Reverence of Ancient Custom, as
a Tyrannical Yoke; Nam cupide inculcatur nimis ante metutum.
For with most Eagerness they spurn the Law, Lucr. lib. 5.

By which they were before most kept in awe.
Resolving to admit nothing for the future, to which they had not first
interposed their own Decrees, and given their particular Consent. It happened
that my Father, a little before his death, having accidentally found this Book
under a heap of other neglected Papers, commanded me to translate it for him
into French. What Books are proper to translate.
It is good to translate such Authors as that, where is little but the matter
it self to express; but such wherein the Ornament of a Language and Elegancy of
Style, is the main Endeavor, are dangerous to attempt; especially, when a Man
is to turn them into a weaker Idiom. It was a strange and a new Undertaking for
me; but having, by chance, at that time, little else to do, and not being able
to resist the Command of the best Father that ever was, I did it as well as I
could; and he was so well pleased with it, as to ordered it to be Printed;
which also, after his death, was performed. I found the Imagination of this
Author exceeding fine, the Contexture of his Work well followed, and his Design
full of Piety; and because many People take a delight to read it, and
particularly the Ladies, to whom we owe the most Service, I have often been
ready to assist them, to clear the Book of two principal Objections. His Design
is hardy, and bold; for he undertakes, by Humane and Natural Reasons, to
establish, and make good against the Atheists, all the Articles of Christian
Religion: wherein (to speak the truth) he is so firm, and so successful, that I
do not think it possible to do better upon that Subject; and do believe that he
has been equalled by none. This Work seeming to me to be too beautiful, and too
rich for an Author, whose Name is so little known, and of whom, all that we
know is, that he was a Spaniard who professed Physic at Toulouse about two
hundred Years ago; I enquired of Adrian Turnebus, who knew all things, what he
thought of that Book; who made Answer, That he thought it was some Abstract
drawn from St. Thomas of Aquin; for that, in truth, his Wit, full of infinite
Learning, and absolute Subtilty, was only capable of those Thoughts. So it is,
that, whoever was the Author and Inventor (and it is not reasonable, without
greater occasion, to deprive Sebonde of that Title) he was a Man of great
Sufficiency, Object. against Sebonde 's Book the first.
and most admirable Parts. The first thing they reprehend in his Work is, That
Christians are too blame to repose their Belief upon Humane Reasons, which is
only conceived by Faith, and the particular Inspiration of Divine Grace. In
which Objection, there appears to be something of Zeal to Piety, and therefore
we are to endeavor to satisfy those who put it forth, with the greater
Mildness and Respect. This were a Task more proper for a Man well read in
Divinity, than for me who know nothing of it; nevertheless, I conceive that, in
a thing so divine, so high, and so far transcending all Humane Intelligence, as
this Truth, with which it has pleased the Bounty of Almighty God to enlighten
us, it is very necessary that he should, moreover, lend us his Assistance after
a very extraordinary Method of Favor, to conceive and imprint it in our
Understandings; and do not believe, that Means purely humane, are in any sort
capable of doing it: for, if they were, so many rare and excellent Souls, and
so abundantly furnished with natural Force, in former Ages, had not faild, by
their Reason, to arrive at this Knowledge. It Is Faith alone, that livelily and
certainly comprehends the deep Mysteries of our Religion; but withal, I do not
say, that it is not a brave, and a very laudable Attempt, to accommodate the
Natural and Humane Utensils, that God has endowed us with, to the Service of
our Faith: It is not to be doubted, but that it the most noble use we can put
them to; and that there is not a design in a Christian-Man more noble, than to
make it the Aim and End of all his Thoughts and Studies, to extend and amplify
the truth of his Belief. We do not satisfy our selves with serving God with
our Souls and Understanding only, we moreover owe and render him a Corporal
Reverence, and apply our Limbs, Motions, and external Things, to do him Honor;
we must here do the same, and accompany our Faith with all the Reason we have,
but always with this Reservation, not to fancy that it is upon us that it
depends, nor that our Arguments and Endeavors can arrive at so supernatural
and divine a Knowledge. If it enter not into us by an extraordinary Infusion;
if it only enter, not only by Arguments of Reason, but, moreover, by Human
Ways, it is not in us in its true Dignity and Splendour; and yet, I am afraid we
only have it by this way. If we laid hold upon God by the Mediation of a lively
Faith; The mavelous effects of lively Faith.
if we laid hold upon God by him, and not by us; if we had a Divine Basis and
Foundation, Human Accidents would not have the power to shake us as they do,
our Fortress were not to render to so weak a Battery: the Love of Novelty, the
Constraint of Princes, the Success of one Party, and the rash and fortuitous
Change of our Opinions would not have the power to stagger, and alter our
Belief: We should not then leave it to the Mercy of every novel Argument, nor
abandon it to all the Rhetoric in the World: We should withstand the fury of
these Waves with an immote, and unyielding Constancy. Illisos fluctus rupes ut
vasta refundit, Incerto.

Et varias circum latrantes dissipat undas
Mcle sua.
As a vast Rock repels the rolling Tides,
That foam and bark about her Marble Sides,
From the Strong Mole
If we were but touched with this Ray of Divinity, it would appear throughout;
not only our Words, but our Works also, would carry its Brightness and Luster;
whatever proceeded from us, would be seen illuminated with this noble Light. We
ought to be ashamed, that, in all the Human Sects, there never was any of the
Faction, what Difficulty and strange Novelty soever his Doctrine imposed upon
him, that did not, in some measure, conform his Life and Deportments to it,
whereas so Divine and Heavenly an Institution, does only distinguish Christians
by the Name. Will you see the Proof of this? Compare our Manners to those of a
Mohammedan or Pagan, you will still find, that we fall very short; whereas out
of regard to the Reputation, and Advantage of our Religion, we ought to shine
in Virtue, and that it should be said of us, Are they so Just, so Charitable,
Virtue, the particular mark of Christian Religion.
so Good? Then they are Christians. All other Signs are common to all
Religions; Hope, Trust, Events, Ceremonies, Penance and Martyrs. The peculiar
Mark of our Truth ought to be our Virtue, as it is also the most heavenly and
difficult, and the most Worthy Product of Truth. For this, our good St. Lewis
was in the right; when the King of the Tartars, who was become Christian,
designed to come to Lions, to kiss the Pope's Feet, and there to be an
Eyewitness of the Sanctity he hoped to find in our Manners; immediately to
divert him from his purpose; for fear lest our inordinate way of Living should
on the contrary put him out of conceit with so holy a Belief. And yet it happened
quite otherwise since to this other, who going to Rome to the same End, and
there seeing the Dissolution of the Prelates, and people of that time, settled
himself so much the more firmly in our Religion, considering how great the
Force and Divinity of it must necessarily be, that could maintain its Dignity
and Splendour amongst so much Corruption, and in so Vicious Hands. If we had but
one single Grain of Faith, we should remove Mountains from their places, says
the Sacred Word; our Actions, that would then be directed and accompanied by
the Divinity, would not be mearly Human, they would have in them something of
Miraculous, as well as our Belief. Brevis est institutio vitae honestae,
beataeque, si credas. Some impose upon the World that they believe that which
they do not; others more in Number, make themselves believe that they believe,
not being able to penetrate into what it is to believe. We think it strange, if
in the Civil War, which, at this time, disorders our State, we see Events
float, and vary after a common and ordinary manner; which is because we bring
nothing to it but our own. Justice which is in one Party, is only there for
Ornament and Palliation, it is indeed pretended, but it is not there received,
settled and espoused: It is there, as in the Mouth of an Advocat, not as in the
Heart, and Affection of the Party. God owes his extraordinary Assistance to
Faith and Religion; but not to our Passions. God assists our Faith and
Religion, not our Passions.
Men there are the Conductors, and therein serve themselves of Religion, which
ought to be quite contrary. Observe if it be not by our own Hands, that we
guide and train it, and draw it like Wax into so many contrary Figures, from a
Rule in it self so direct and firm. When and where was this manifest, than in
France in our days? They who have taken it on the Left Hand, they who have
taken it on the Right, they who call it black, they who call it white, a like
employ it to their Violent and Ambitious Designs, conduct it with a Progress so
conform in Riot and Injustice, that they render the Diversity they pretended in
their Opinions, in a thing whereon the Conduct and Rule of our Life depends,
doubtful and hard to believe. Can a Man see, even from the same School and
Discipline, Manners more united, and more the same? Do but observe with what
horrid Impudence we toss Divine Arguments to and fro, Proposition, Whether it
be Lawful to take Arms against the King in defense of Religion.
and how irreligiously we have both rejected and retaken them, according as
Fortune has shifted our Places in these Intestine Storms. This so solemn
Proposition, Whether it be Lawful for a Subject to Rebel, and take up Arms
against his Prince for the Defense of his Religion; Do you remember, in whose
Mouths the last year, the Affirmative of it was the Prop of one Party, and the
Negative the Pillar of another? And hearken now from what Quarter comes the
Vote, and Instruction of both the one, and the other; and if Arms makes less
noise, and rattle for this Cause, than for that. We condemn those to the Fire,
who say, That Truth must be made to bear the Yoke of our Necessity; and how
much more does France, than say it? Let us confess the Truth; whoever should
draw out the Army, lawfully raised by the Kings Authority, those who take up
Arms out of pure Zeal to Religion, and also those who only do it to protect the
Laws of their Country, or for the Service of their Prince, could hardly out of
both these put together, make one complete Company of Gensd'armes. Whence does
this proceed, that there are so few to be found, who have maintained the same
Will, and the same Progress in our Civil Commotions, and that we see them one
while move but a Foot-pace, and another run Fullspeed? And the same Men one
while endamage our Affairs by their violent Heat and Austerity, and another by
their Coldness, Gentleness and Slowness; but that they are pushed on by
particular and causal Considerations, according to the Variety whereof they
move? I evidently perceive, that we do not willingly afford Devotion any other
Offices, but those that best suit with our own Passions. There is no Hostility
so admirable, as the Christian. Our Zeal performs Wonders, when it seconds our
Inclinations to Hatred, Cruelty, Ambition, Avarice, Detraction and Rebellion:
But when it moves against the Hair toward Bounty, Benignity and Temperance,
unless, by Miracle, some rare and virtuous Disposition prompt us to it, we stir
neither hand nor foot. Our Religion is intended to extirpate Vices: Whereas it
skreens, nourishes and incites them. We must not mock God. If we did believe in
him, I do not say by Faith, but with a simple belief, that is to say, (and I
speak it to our great shame,) if we did believe him, as we do any other
History; or as we would do one of our Companions, we should love him above all
other things, for the infinite Bounty and Beauty that shines in him: at least
he would go equal in our Affections, with Riches, Pleasures, Glory, and our
Friends. The best of us is not so much afraid to injure him, as he is afraid to
injure his Neighbor, his Kinsman, or his Master. Is there any so weak
Understanding, that having on one side the Object of one of our vicious
Pleasures, and on the other (in equal knowledge and persuasion) the State of an
Immortal Glory, will dispute for the first, against the other? And yet we
oftimes renounce this out of pure Contempt: For what lust tempts us to
blaspheme, if not, peradventure, the very desire to offend? The Philosopher
Antisthenes, as the Priest was initiating him in the Mysteries of Orpheus,
telling him that those who professed themselves of that Religion, were certain to
receive Perfect and Eternal Felicities after Death; if thou believe that,
answered he, Why do not thou dye thy self? Diogenes more rudely, according
to his manner, and more remote from our purpose, to the Priest that in like
manner preached to him, to become of his Religion, that he might obtain the
Happiness of the other World: What, said he, Thou would have me believe that
Agesilaus and Epaminondas, who, were so Great Men, shall be miserable, and that
thou, who art but a Calf, and can do nothing to purpose, shall be happy,
because thou art a Priest? Did we receive these great Promises of Eternal
Beatitude with the same Reverence and Respect, that we do a Philosophical
Lecture, we should not have Death in so great Horror: Non jam se moriens
dissolvi conquereretur,
Lucret. 13.
Sed magis ire for as, vestemque relinquere ut anguis
Gauderet, praelonga senex aut cornua Cervus.
We should not then dying repine to be
Dissolved, but rather step out cheerfully
From our Old Hut, and with the Snake be glad
To cast the Old uneasy slough we had;
Or with the Old Stag, rejoice to be now clear
From the large Head, too pondrous grown to bear.
I desire to be dissolved we should say, and to be with Jesus Christ. The force
of Plato's Arguments, concerning the Immortality of the Soul, sent some of his
Disciples to untimely Graves, that they might the sooner enjoy the things he
had made them hope for. All which is a most evident sign, that we only receive
our Religion after our own fashion, by our own hands, and no otherwise than
other Religions are received. Either we are come into the Country where it is
in Practice, or we bear a Reverence to the Antiquity of it, or to the Authority
of the Men, who, have maintained it, or fear the Menaces it fulminates against
Miscreants, or are allured by its Promises. These Considerations ought, it is
true, to be applied to our Belief, but as Subsidiaries only, for they are Human
Obligations. Another Religion, other Witnesses, the like Promises and Threats,
might by the same way, imprint a quite contrary Belief. We are Christians by
the same Title, that we are Perigordins and Germans. And what Plato says, that
there are few Men so obstinate in their Atheism, that a pressing Danger will
not reduce to an Acknowledgment of the Divine Power, does not concern a true
Christian; it is for Mortal and Human Religions to be received by Human
Recommendation. What kind of Faith can we expect that should be, that Cowardice
and want of Courage does establish in us? A pleasant Faith that does not
believe what it believes, but for want of Courage to believe it. Can a vicious
Passion, such as Inconstancy and Astonishment cause any regular Product in our
Souls? They are confident in their own Judgment, says he, That what is said of
Hell, and future Torments, is all feigned: But an Occasion of making the
Experiment presenting it self, that Old Age or Diseases bring them to the Brink
of the Grave, the Terror of Death by the Horror of that future Condition,
inspires them with a new Belief. And by reason that such Impressions render
them timorous, he forbids in his Laws all such threatening Doctrines, and all
Persuasion, that any thing of ill can befall a Man from the Gods, excepting for
his great good, when they happen to him, and for a Medicinal effect. They say
of Bion, that infected with the Atheisms of Theodorus, he had long had
Religious Men in great scorn and contempt, but that Death surprising him, he
gave himself up to the most extreme Superstition; as if the Gods withdrew, and
returned according to the Necessities of Bion. Plato, and his Examples, would
conclude, Bion an Atheist.
that we are brought to a Belief of God, What Atheism is.
either by reason, or by force. Atheism being a Proposition, as unnatural and
monstrous, so difficult also, and very hard to sink into Human Understanding,
how arrogant and irregular soever; there are enough seen, out of Vanity and
Pride, to be the Author of extraordinary and reforming Opinions have outwardly
affected the Profession, who, if they are such Fools, have nevertheless not had
the power to plant them in their own Conscience. Yet will they not fail to lift
up their Hands toward Heaven, if you give them a good thrust with a Sword into
the Bosom; and when Fear or Sickness has abated and suppressed the licentious
Fury of this giddy Humor, they will easily reunite, and very discreetly suffer
themselves to be reconciled to the Public Faith and Examples. A Doctrine
seriously disgested is one thing, and those superficial Impressions another;
which springing from the Disorder of an unhinged Understanding, float at random
and great uncertainty in the Fancy. Miserable, and senseless Men, who strive to
be worse, than they can! The Error of Paganism, and the Ignorance of our Sacred
Truth let this great Soul, but great only in Human Greatness, fall yet into
this other Mistake, that Children and Old Men were most susceptible of
Religion, as if it sprung and derived its Reputation from our Weakness. The
Knot that ought to bind the Judgment and the Will, that ought to restrain the
Soul, and join it to the Creator, must be a Knot that derives the Foldings and
Strength, not from our Considerations, from our Reasons and Passions; but from
a Divine and Supernatural Constraint, having but one Form, one Face, and one
Luster, which is the Authority of God, and his Divine Grace. Now the Heart and
Soul being governed and commanded by Faith, it is but reason that they should
muster all their other Faculties, for as much as they are able to perform, to
the Service and Assistance of their Design. Neither is it to be imagined, that
all this Machin has not some Marks imprinted upon it by the Hand of the mighty
Architect, and that there is not in the thing of this World, some Image, that
in some measure resembles the Workman, who has built and formed them. Divinity
imprinted on the outward Fabric of the World.
He has in his stupendous Works, left the Character of his Divinity, and it is
our own Weakness only, that hinders us, we cannot discern it. It Is what he
himself is pleased to tell us, that he manifests his invisible Operations to
us, by those that are visible. Sebonde applied himself to this laudable and
noble Study, and demonstrates to us, that there is not any part or member of
the World, that disclaims or derogates from its Maker. It were to do a Wrong to
the Divine Bounty, did not the Universe consent to our Belief; The Heavens, the
Earth, the Elements, our Bodies and our Souls; all these concur to this, if we
can but find out the way to use them. For this World is a Sacred Temple, into
which, Man is introduced, The World a Sacred Temple.
there to contemplate Statues, not the Works of a Mortal Hand, but such as the
Divine Purpose has made the Objects of Sense, the Sun, the Stars, the Waters
and the Earth, to represent those that are intelligible to us. The invisible
things of God, says St. Paul, appear by the Creation of the World, his Eternal
Wisdom and Divinity being considered by his Works. Manil. l. 4
Atque adeo faciem caeli mon invidet orbi
Ipse Deus, vultusque suus corpusque recludit
Semper volvendo: Seque ipsum inculcat and offert,
Vt been cognosci possit doceatque videndo
Qualis eat, doceatque suas attendere leges.
And God himself envies not Men the Grace
Of seeing, and admiring Heaven's Face:
But rolling it about, does still anew
Object its Face and Body to our view,
And int' our Minds himself inculcates so,
That we may well the mighty Moover know,
Instructing us by seeing him the cause
Of all, to reverence, and obey his Laws.
Now our Prayers, and Humane Discourses are but as Steril and undigested
Matter: The Grace of God is the Form: It Is that, which gives fashion and value
to it. As the virtuous Actions of Socrates and Cato remain vain and fruitless,
for not having had the Love and Obedience of the true Creator of all things for
their End and Object, and for not having known God. So is it with our
Imaginations and Discourses, they have a kind of Body, but it is an inform
Mass, without Fashion, and without Light, if Faith and Grace be not added to
it. Faith coming to tinct and illustrate Sebonde's Arguments renders them firm
and solid, and to that degree, that that they are capable of serving for
Directions, and of being the first Guides to an Elementary Christian to put him
into the way of this Knowledge: They in some measure form him to, and render
him capable of, the Grace of God, by which means he afterward compleats and
perfects himself in the true Belief. I know a Man of Authority, bred up to
Letters, who, has confessed to me, to have been reduced from the Errors of
Miscreancy by Sebonde's Arguments. And should they be stripped of this
Ornament, and of the Assistance and Approbation of the Holy Faith, and be
looked upon as mere Humane Fancies only, to contend with those who are
precipitated into the dreadful and horrible Darkness of Irreligion, they will
even there find them as solid and firm, as any others of the same Quality, than
can be opposed against them; so that we shall be ready to say to our Opponents,
Si melius quid habes, accerse, vel imperium fer.
If you have Arguments more fit,
Produce them, or to these submit.
Let them admit the force of our Reasons; or let them show us others, and upon
some other Subject better woven, and a finer Thread. I am unawares half engaged
in the second Objection, to which I proposed to make answer in the behalf of
Sebonde. Some say, that his Arguguments are weak, and unable to make good what
he intends, and undertake with great ease to confute them. These are to be a
little more roughly handled; for they are more dangerous and malicious, than
the first. Men willingly wrest the sayings of others to favor their own
prejudicate Opinions; to an Atheist all Writings tend to Atheism, he corrupts
the most Innocent Matter with his own Venom; these have their Judgments so
prepossest, that they cannot relish Sebonde's Reasons. As to the rest, they
think we make them very fair play, in putting them into the Liberty of our
Religion with Weapons merely Human, which in her Majesty full of Authority and
Command, they durst not attack. The means that I shall use, and that I think
most proper to subdue this Frenzy, is to crush and spurn under foot Pride, and
Human Fierceness; to make them sensible of the Inanity, Vanity and Vileness of
Man: To wrest the wretched Arms of their Reason out of their Hands, to make
them bow down, and bite the Ground under the Authority and Reverence of the
Divine Majesty. It Is to that alone, that Knowledge and Wisdom appertain, that
alone, that can make a true Estimate of it self, Wisdom only belongs to the
Divinity.
and from which we purloin whatever we value our selves, (...). Heroicum
Adagium.

God not permits, that any one would be
More wise than he.
Let us subdue this Presumption; The first Foundation of this Tyranny of the
Evil Spirit. Deus superbis resistit: Humilibus autem dat gratiam. God resists
the Proud; but gives Grace to the Humble. Understanding is in all the Gods,
(says Plato) and not at all, or very little, in Men. 1 Pet. 55.
Now it is in the mean time a great Consolation to a Christian Man, to see our
Frail and Mortals Parts so fitly suited to our Holy and Divine Faith, that when
we employ them to the Subjects of their own Mortal and Frail Nature, they are
not even there more equally, or more firmly, adjusted. Let us see then, if Man
has in his power other more forcible and convincing Reasons, than those of
Sebonde; That is to say, if it be in him to arrive at any certainty by
Arguments and Reasons. For St. Augustine, disputing against the people, has good
cause to reproach them with Injustice, in that they maintain the part of our
Belief to be false, that our Reason cannot establish. And to show that a great
many things may be, and may have been, of which our Nature could not sound the
Reason and Causes, he proposes to them certain known and undoubted Experiments,
wherein Men confess they see nothing, and this he does, as all other things,
with a curious and ingenious Inquisition. We must do more than this, and make
them know, that to convince the weakness of their Reason, there is no necessity
of culling out rare Examples: And that it is so defective, and so blind that
there is no so clear Facility clear enough for it, that to it the easy and the
hard is all alone; that all Subjects equally, and Nature in general, disclaims
its Authority, and rejects its Mediation. What does Truth mean, when she
preaches to us to fly wordly Philosophy, when she so often inculcates to us,
The Wisdom of the World, folly with God.
That our Wisdom is but Folly in the sight of God. That the vainest of all
Vanities is Man: That the Man who presumes upon his Wisdom, does not yet know
what Wisdom is; and that Man, who is nothing, if he think himself to be any
thing, does seduce and deceive himself? These Sentences of the Holy Ghost do so
clearly and lively express that which I would maintain, that I should need no
other proof against Men, who would with all Humility and Obedience submit to
his Authority: But these will be whipped at their own Expense, and will not
suffer that a Man oppose their Reason, but by it self. Let us then for once
consider a Man alone, without foreign Assistance, armed only with his own
proper Arms, and unfurnished of the Divine Grace and Wisdom, which is all his
Honor, Strength, and the Foundation of his Being. Let us see what certainty he
has, in this fine Equipage. Let him make me understand by the force of his
Reason, upon what Foundations he has built those great Advantages, he thinks he
has over other Creatures: Who has made him believe, that this admirable Motion
of the Celestial Arch, the Eternal Light of those Tapers that roll over his
Head, the wonderful Motions of that infinite Ocean, should be established, and
continue so many Ages, for his Service and Convenience? Can any thing be
imagined so ridiculous, that this miserable and wretched Creature, who is not
so much as Master of himself, but subject to the Injuries of all things, should
call himself Master and Emperor of the World, of which, he has not power to
know the least part, much less to command the whole. And this Privilege which
he attributes to himself, of being the only Creature in this vast Fabric, that
has the Understanding to discover the Beauty, and the Parts of it; the only one
who can return thanks to the Architect, and keep account of the Revenues and
Disbursements of the World; Who, I wonder, sealed him this Patent? Let us see
his Commission for this great Employment. Was it granted in favor of the Wise
only? Few people will be concerned in it. Are Fools and Wicked persons worthy
so extraordinary a Favor? And being the worst part of the World, to be
preferred before the rest? Shall we believe Cicero! Quorum igitur causa quis
dixerit effectum esse mundum? Cicer. de Not. Deo lib. 2.
Eorum cilicet animantium, quae ratione utuntur. Hi sunt Dii and Homines,
quibus profecto nihil est melius. For whose sake shall we therefore conclude,
that the World was made? For theirs who have the use of Reason: These are Gods
and Men, than whom certainly nothing can be better. We can never sufficiently
decry the Impudence of this Conjunction. But wretched Creature, what has he in
himself worthy of such an Advantage? To consider the incorruptible Existency of
the Celestial Bodies, their Beauty, Magnitude, and continual Revolution by so
exact a Rule: Lucret. l. 5.
Cum suspicimus magna Caelestia mundi
Templa super, stellisque micantibus Aethera fixum,
Et venit in mentem Lunae, Solisque viarum:
When we above the Heavn'ly Arch behold,
And the vast Roof studded with Stars of Gold,
And call to mind the Courses, that the Sun
And Moon in their alternate Office run:
To consider the Dominion and Influence those Bodies have, not only over our
Lives and Fortunes; Facta etenim, Manil. l. 3.
and vitas hominum suspendit ab astris.
Men's Lives and Actions on the Stars depend.
But even over our Inclinations, our Thoughts and Wills, which they govern,
incite, and agitate at the Mercy of their Influences, -- Speculataque long
Deprendit tacitis dominantia legibus astra, Id. lib. 1.

Et totum alterna mundum ratione moveri,
Fatorumque vices certis discernere signis.
Contemplating the Stars, he find thaa they
Rule by a secret, and a silent sway;
And that the ennamel'd Spears which rule above,
Do ever by alternate Causes move.
And studying these, he also can forsee,
By certain Signs, the turns of Destiny.
To see that there is not so much as a Man, no, not a King, exempt from this
Dominion, but that Monarchies, Empires, and all this lower World, follow the
Brawl of these Celestial Motions, Id. lib. 4.
Quantaque quam parvi faciant discrimina motus:
Tantum est hoc regnum, quod Regibus imperat ipsis.
How great a change each little motion brings;
So great the Kingdom is, that governs Kings.
If our Virtue, our Vices, our Knowledge, and this very Discourse we are upon,
of the power of the Stars, and the Comparison we are making betwixt them and
us, proceed, as our Reason supposes, from their Favor: Id. ibid.
-- Furit alter amore,
Et pontum tranare potest and vertere Trojam,
Alterius sors est scribendis legibus apta:
Ecce patrem nati perimunt, natosque parents,
Mutuaque armati coeunt in vulnera fratres,
Non nostrum hoc bellum est, coguntur tanta movere,
Inque suas ferri paenas, lacerandaque membra.
One Mad in Love may cross the Raging Seas,
T'oreturn proud Ilium's lofty Palaces;
Another's Fate inclines him more by far,
To spend his time at the litigious Bar.
Sons kill their Fathers, Father kill their Sons,
And one armed Brother against another runs.
This War's not theirs, but Fates that spurs them on,
To shed the Blood, which shed, they must bemoan.
If we derive this little Portion of Reason we have from the Bounty of Heaven,
how is it possible that Reason should ever make us equal to it? How subject its
Essence and Conditions to our Knowledge? Whatever we see in that Body does
astonish us; quae molitio, quae ferramenta, Cic. de Not. Deo. l. 1.
qui vectes, quae machinae, qui ministri tanti operis fuerunt? What
Contrivance, what Tools, what Timber, what Engines were employed about so
stupendous a Work? Why do we deprive it of Soul, of Life and Discourse? Have
we discovered in it any immote or insensible Stupidity, we who have no Commerce
with the Heavens, but by Obedience? Shall we say that we have discovered in no
other Creature, but Man, the use of a reasonable Soul? What, have we seen any
thing like the Sun? Does he cease to be, because we have seen nothing like him?
And do his Motions cease, because there are no other like them? If what we have
not seen, is not, our Knowledge is wonderfully contracted. Quae sunt tantae
animi angustiae? How narrow are our Understandings? Are they not Dreams of
Human Vanity, to make the Moon a Celestial Earth? There to fancy Mountains and
Vales, as Anaxagoras did? There to fix Habitations and Human Abodes, and plant
Colonies for our convenience, as Plato and Plutarch have done? Of our Earth to
make a beautiful and resplendent Star? Sen de ira: lib. 2. cap. 9.
Inter caetera mortalitatis incommoda, and hoc est, caligo mentium: Nec tantum
necessitas errandi, sed errorum amor. Corruptibile corpus aggravat animam, and
deprimit terrena inhabitatio sensum multa cogitantem. Amongst the other
inconveniences of Mortality, this is one, to have the Understanding clouded,
and not only a Necessity of Erring, but a Love of Error. The corruptible Body
stupifies the Soul, and the Earthly Habition dulls the Faculties of the
imagination. Presumption is our Natural and Original Disease. The most wretched
and frail of all Creatures, is Man, and withal the Proudest. He feels, and sees
himself lodged here in the dirt and filth of the World, nayl^d and rivited to
the worst and deadest part of the Universe, in the lowest Story of the House,
and most remote from the Heavenly Arch, with Animals of the worst condition of
three; and yet in his Imagination will be placing himself above the Circle of
the Moon, and bringing the Earth under his Feet. It Is by the same vanity of
Imagination, that he equals himself to God, attributes to himself Divine
Qualities, withdraws and separates himself from the Crowd of other Creatures,
cuts out the shares of Animals his Fellows and Companions, and distributes to
them Portions of Faculties and Force, as himself thinks fit. How does he know
by the Strength of his Understanding, the Secret and internal Motions of
Animals? And from what Comparison betwixt them and us, does he conclude the
Stupidity he attributes to them? When I play with my Cat, who knows whether I
do not make her more sport, than she makes me? We mutually divert one another
with our Play. If I have my hour to begin, or to refuse, she also has hers.
Plato, in his Picture of the Golden Age under Saturn, reckons, amongst the
chief Advantages, that a Man then had, his communication with Beasts, of whom
inquiring and informing himself, he knew the true Qualities and Differences of
them all, by which he acquired a very perfect Intelligence and Prudence, and
led his Life more happily, than we could do. Need we a better Proof to condemn
a Human Impudence in the concern of Beasts? This great Author was of Opinion,
that Nature, for the most part, in the Corporal Form she gave them, had only
regard to the Usance of Prognostics, that were in his time thence derived. The
defect that hinders Communication betwixt them and us, why may it not be on our
part, as well as theirs? It Is yet to determine, where the Fault lies, that we
understand not one another; for we understand them no more, than they do us,
and by the same reason may think us to be Beasts, as we think them. It Is no
great wonder if we understand not them, when we do not understand a Basque. And
yet some have boasted, that they understood them, as Apollonius Thyaneus,
Melampus, Tiresias, Thales, and others. And seeing it is so, as Cosmographers
report, that there are Nations that receive a Dog for their King, they must of
necessity be able to interpret his Voice and Motions. We must observe the
Parity betwixt us: We have some competent Apprehensions of their Sense, and so
have Beasts of ours, and much by the same reason: The caress us, threaten us,
and beg of us, and we do the same to them. As to the rest, we manifestly
discover, that they have a full and absolute Communication amongst themselves,
Communication of Beasts amongst themselves
and that they perfectly understand one another, not only those of the same,
but of diverse kinds. Lucret. l. 5.
Et mutae pecudes, and denique septa ferarum
Dissimiles fuerunt voces, variasque cluere
Cum metus, aut dolor est, aut cum jam gaudia gliscunt.
The tamer Herds, and wilder sorts of Brutes,
Though we, and rightly too, conclude them Mutes,
Yet utter dissonant and various Notes,
From gentler Lungs, or more distended Throats,
As Fear, or Grief, or Anger do them move,
Or as they more approach the Joys of Love.
In one kind of barking of a Dog, the Horse knows he is angry; of another sort
of Bark, he is not afraid. Even in the very Beasts, that have no Voice at all,
we easily conclude from the Society of Offices, we observe amongst them, some
other sort of Communication; their very Motions discover it, Ibid.
Non alia long ratione, atque ipsa videtur
Protrahere ad gestum pueros infantia linguae.
As we may see in Tongue-ty'd Infancy,
Children by Signs, their want of Speech supply.
And why not as well, as our Mutes dispute, contest, and tell Stories by Signs?
Of which I have seen some by practice, so subtle and active that way, that in
earnest, they wanted nothing of the perfection of making themselves understood.
Lovers are angry, reconciled, entreat, thank, appoint, and finally speak all
things, by their Eyes. E'l silentio ancor suole
Haver prieghi, and parole. Aminta del Tasso.

Even silence in a Lover,
Love and Courtship can discover.
What, with the Hands? We require, promise, call, dismiss, threaten, pray,
supplicate, deny, refuse, interrogate, admire, number, confess, repent, fear,
confound, doubt, instruct, command, incite, encourage, swear, testify, accuse,
condemn, absolve, injure, despise, defy, despite, flatter, applaud, bless,
submit, mock, reconcile, recommend, exalt, entertain, congratulate, complain,
grieve, despair, wonder, exclaim, and what not? And all this with a Variation
and Multiplication, even to the Emulation of Speech. With the Head we invite,
remand, confess, deny, give the lie, welcome, honor, reverence, disdain,
demand, rejoice, lament, reject, caress, rebuke, submit, huff, encourage,
threaten, assure and inquire. What, with the Eyebrows? What, with the
Shoulders? There is not a Motion that does not speak, and in an Intelligible
Language without Discipline, and a Public Language that every one understands:
From whence it should follow, the Variety and Usage distinguished from others,
considered; that these should rather be judged the Propriety of Human Nature. I
omit what necessity particularly does suddenly suggest to those who are in
need; the Alphabets upon the Fingers, Grammars in gesture, and the Sciences
which are only by them exercised and expressed with the Nations that Pliny
reports, have no other Language. An Ambassador of the City of Abdera, after a
long Conference with Agis, King of Sparta, demanded of him, Well, Sir, What
Answer must I return to my Fellow-Citizens? That I have given thee leave, (said
he) to say what thou would, and as much as thou would, without ever
speaking a word. Is not this a silent speaking, and very easy to be
understood? As to the rest, what is there in us, that we do not see in the
Operations of Animals? Is there a Polity better ordered, the Offices better
distributed, and more inviolably observed and maintained, than that of Bees?
Can we imagine that such, and so regular a Distribution of Employments, can be
carried on without Consisideration and Prudence? His quidam signis, atque haec
exempla sequuti,
Esse apibus partem divinae mentis, and haustus
Aethereos dixere.
Having contemplated the Working Bees,
Their Civil Regiment, and Polices,
Some have not stuck presently to conclude,
That they in part with reason are endu'd.
The Swallows that we see at the return of the Spring, searching all the
Corners of our Houses for the most commodious places wherein to build their
Nest, do they seek without judgment, and amongst a thousand, choose out the most
proper for their purpose, without discretion? In that elegant and admirable
Contexture of their Building, can Birds rather make choice of a square Figure
than a round, of an obtuse, than of a right Angle without knowing their
Properties and Effects? Do they bring Water, and than Clay, without knowing
that the hardness of the later grows softer by being wet? Do they matt their
Palace with Moss or Down, without foreseeing, that their tender Young will lie
more safe and easy? Do they secure themselves from the Wet and rayny Winds,
and place their Lodgings toward the East, without knowing the different
Qualities of those Winds, and considering, that one is more comfortable than
the other? Why does the Spider make her Web streighter in one place, and
slacker in another? Why now make one sort of Knot, and then another, if she has
not Deliberation, Thought and Conclusion? We sufficiently discover in most of
their Works, how much Animals excel us, and how unable our Art is to imitate
them. We see nevertheless in our more gross Performances, that we employ all
our Faculties, and apply the utmost power of our Souls; why do we not conclude
the same of them? Why should we attribute to I know not what Natural and
Servile Inclination, the Works that excel all we can do by Nature and Art?
Wherein, before we are aware, we give them a mighty Advantage over us, in
making Nature, with a maternal Sweetness, to accompany and lead them, as it
were, by the hand, to all the Actions and Commodities of their Life, whilst she
leaves us to Chance and Fortune, Nature above Art.
and to seek out, by Art, the things that are necessary to our Conservation, at
the same time denying us the means of being able, by any Instruction or
Contention of Understanding, to arrive at the Natural sufficiency of Beasts; so
that their brutish Stupidity surpasses, in all Conveniences, all that our
Divine Intelligence can do. Really, at this rate, we might with great reason
call her an unjust Stepmother: But it is nothing so, our Polity is not so
irregular and deformed. Nature has been generally kind to all her Creatures,
and there is not one, she has not amply furnished with all means necessary for
the Conservation of his Being. For the common Complaints that I hear Men make
(as the Liberty of their Opinions do one while lift them up to the Clouds, and
then again depress them to the Antipodes) that we are the only Animal
abandoned, naked upon the bare Earth, tied and bound, not having wherewithal to
arm and cloth us, but by the spoil of others; whereas Nature has covered all
other Creatures, either with Shells, Husks, Bark, Hair, Wool, Prickles,
Leather, Down, Feathers, Scales and Silk, according to the Necessities of
their Being; has armed them with Talons, Teeth and Horns, wherewith to assault
and defend, and has her self taught them, that which is most proper for them,
to swim, to run, to fly and to sing, whereas Man neither knows how to walk,
speak, eat, or do any thing but weep, without teaching. Tum porro puer ut
saevis projectus ab undis, Lucret. l. 5.

Navita, nudus humi jacet infans, indigus omni
Vitali auxilio, cum primum in luminis oras
Nexibus ex alvo matris natura profudit,
Vagituque locum lugubri complet, aequum est
Cui tantum in vita restet transire malorum:
At variae crescunt pecudes, armenta, feraeque,
Nec crepitacula eis opus est, nec cuiquam adhibenda est
Almae nutricis blanda atque infracta loquela:
Nec varias quaerunt vestes pro tempore caeli:
Denique non armis opus est, non maenibus altis
Queis sua tutentur, quando omnibus omnia large
Tellus ipsa parit, naturaque daedala rerum.
Like to the wretched Mariner, when tossed
By Raging Seas, upon the desert Coast,
The tender Babe lies naked on the Earth,
Of all supports of Life, stripped by his Birth.
When Nature first presents him to the day,
Freed from the Womb where he imprisoned lay,
He fills the ambient Air with doleful Cries,
Foretelling so Life's future Miseries;
But Beasts, both mild and tame, greater and less.
Do of themselves in height and bulk increase:
They need no Rattle, nor the broken Chat,
By which the Nurse first teaches Boys to prate,
They not look out for different Robes to wear,
According to the Seasons of the Year;
And need no Arms nor Walls their Goods to save,
Since Earth and Liberal Nature ever have,
And will, in all abundance still produce,
All things whereof they can have need or use.
Those Complaints are false; The Skin of a Man sufficient proof against Weather.
there is in the Polity of the World a greater Equity, and more uniform
Relation. Our Skins are as sufficient to defend us from the Injuries of the
Weather, as theirs are them; Witness several Nations, that yet know not the use
of Clothes. Our Ancient Gauls were but slenderly clad, no more than the Irish,
our Neighbors, in so cold a Climate: But we may better judge of this by our
selves: For all those parts, that we are pleased to expose to the Air, are
found very able to endure it: If there be a tender part about us, and that
seems to be in danger of cold, it should be the Stomach, where the Digestion
is, and yet our Forefathers wore them always open, and our Ladies as tender
and delicate as they are, The Ancients used to wear their Bosom open. The
swathing of Infants not necessary.
go sometimes bare as low as the Navel. Neither is the binding and swathing of
Infants more necessary; and the Lacedemonian Mothers brought up theirs in all
Liberty of Motion of Members, without any Ligature at all. Our Crying is common
with the greatest part of other Animals, and there are but few Creatures, that
are not observed to groan, and bemoan themselves a long time after they come
into the World; forasmuch as it is a Behavior suitable to the weakness wherein
they find themselves. As to the usage of Eating, it is in us, as in them,
Natural, and without Instruction. Sentit enim vim quisque suam quam possit
abuti. Ibid.

For every one soon finds his Natural Force,
Which he, or better may employ; or worse.
Who doubts but an Infant, arrived to the strength of feeding himself, may make
shift to get his Living? And the Earth produces and offers him wherewithal to
supply his Necessity without other Culture and Artifice, and if not at all
times; no more does she do it to Beasts, witness the Provision, we see Ants,
and other Creatures, hoard up against the dead Seasons of the Year. The late
discovered Nations, so abundantly furnished with Meat, and Natural Drink
without Care, or without Cookery, may give us to understand, that Bread is not
our only Food, and that without Tillage, our Mother Nature has provided us
sufficiently of all we stand in need of; nay, it appears more fully and
plentifully, than she does at present, that we have added our own Industry:
Lucret. l. 2.
Et tellus nitidas fruges, vinetaque laeta
Sponte sua primum mortalibus ipsa creavit,
Ipsa dedit dulces faetus, and pabula laeta,
Quae nunc vix nostro gradescunt aucta labor,
Conterimusque boves, and vires agricolarum.
The Earth spontaneously did first afford
Choice Fruits and Wines to furnish out the Board:
She pretty Ofsprings gave, and verdant Fields,
Which scarce, by Art, a better Harvest yield;
Though Men and Oxen mutually have strove,
With all their utmost Force, the Soil to t'improve.
The Debauchery and Irregularity of our Appetite, outstrip all the Inventions
we can contrive to satisfy it. As to Arms, we have more that are Natural, The
Natural Arms of Men.
than the most part of other Animals, more various Motions of Members, and
naturally, and without Lesson; and extract more Service from them: Those that
are trained up to fight naked, are seen to throw themselves into the like
hazards, that we do. If some Beasts surpass us in this Advantage, we surpass
several others; and the Industry of fortifying the Body, and covering it by
acquired means, we have by instinct and natural Precept. That it is so, the
Elephant sharpens and whets the Teeth he makes use of in War, The Elephants
Teeth.
(for he has particular ones for that Service, which he spares, and never
imploys them at all to any other use) when Bulls go to fight, they toss and
throw the Dust about them: Boars whet their Tuskes, and the Ichneumon, when he
is to engage with the Crocodile, fortifies his Body, covers and crusts it all
over with a certain close wrought and well-tempered Slime, as with a Cuirass;
Why shall we not say, That it is also Natural for us to arm our selves with
Wood and Iron? As to Speech, it is certain, that if it be not natural, it is
not necessary. Nevertheless I believe, that a Child, which had been brought up
in an absolute Solitude, remote from all Society of Men (which would be a trial
very hard to make) would have some kind of Speech to express his Meaning: And
it is not to be supposed, that Nature should have denied that to us, which she
has given to several other Animals: For, what is this Faculty, we observe in
them of complaining, rejoicing, calling to one another for Succor, and the
softer Murmurings of Love, which they perform with the Voice, other, than
Speech? And why should they not speak to one another? They speak to us, and we
to them. In how many several Tones do we speak to our Dogs, and they answer us?
We converse with them, in another sort of Language, and other Appellations,
than we do with Birds, Hogs, Oxen and Horses; and alter the Idiom according to
the kind. Cosi per entro loro schiera bruna
S'ammusa l'una con l'altra formica,
Forse a piar lor via, and lor fortuna.
Of provident Ants thus do the sable Bands
Against one another head, to head make stands,
T'observe each others ways perhaps, and some
Perhaps to spy what Prizes are brought home.
Lactantius seems to attribute to Beasts, Refibility attributed to Beasts.
not only Speech, but Risibility also. And the difference of Language, which is
manifest amongst us, according to the variety of Countries, is also observed in
Animals of the same kind. Aristotle, in proof of this, instances the various
Calls of Partridges, according to the Scituations of Places: Lucret. l. 5.
-- Variaeque Volucres
Long alias alio jaciunt in tempore voces,
Et partim mutant cum tempestatibus una
Raucisonos cantus.
And several Birds do from their warbling Throats,
At several times utter quite different Notes,
And some their hoarse Songs with the Seasons Change.
But it is yet to be known what Language this Child would speak; and of that
what is said by guess, has no great appearance. Why Men naturally deaf, speak
not.
If a Man will allege to me in Opposition to this Opinion, that those who are
naturally deaf, speak not: I answer, That that follows not only because they
could not receive the Instruction of speaking by Ear; but rather because the
Sense of Hearing, of which, they are deprived, relates to that of Speaking, and
hold together by a natural and inseparable Tie; in such manner, that what we
speak, we must first speak to our selves within, and make it first sound in our
own Ears, before we can utter it to others. All this I have said to prove the
resemblance there is in Human things; and to bring us back, and join us to the
Crowd. We are, neither above, nor below the rest. All that is under Heaven
(says the Wise Man) runs one Law, and one Fortune. Indupedita suis fatalibus
omnia vinclis.
-- All things remain, Ibid.

Kept short, and bound in the same fatal Chain.
There is, indeed, some difference, there are several Orders and Degrees; but
it is under the Aspect of one same Nature: -- res quaeque suo ritu procedit,
Ibid.
and omnes
Faedere Naturae certo discrimina servant.
All things by their own rites proceed and draw
Toward their ends by Natures certain Law.
Man must be compelled, and restrained within the Bounds of this Polity.
Miserable Creature, he is not in a condition really to step over the Rayl^* ^he
is fettered, and circumscribed, he is subjected to the same Necessity the other
Creatures of his Rank and Order are; and of a very mean Condition, without any
Prerogative, or true and real Pre-eminence. That which he attributes to himself
by vain Fancy and Opinion, has neither Body, nor Taste: And if it be so, that he
only of all the Animals, has this Privilege of Imagination, and irregularity
of Thoughts representing to him that which is, that which is not, and that he
would have, the False, and the True; it is an Advantage dearly bought, and of
which he has very little reason to be Proud: Seeing that from thence springs
the principal and original Fountain of all the Evils that befall him, Sin,
Sickness, Irresolution, Affliction, and Despair. I say then (to return to my
Subject) that there is no appearance to induce a Man to believe, that Beasts
should by a natural, and forced Inclination, do the same things that we by our
Choice, and Industry do. We ought from like Effects to conclude like Faculties,
and from greater Effects greater Faculties: and consequently confess, that the
same Meditation, and the very same Ways by which we operate, are common with
them, or that they have others that are better. Why should we imagine this
natural Constraint in them, who experiment no such effect in our selves?
Considering that it is more honorable to be guided, and obliged to act
regularly by a natural, and irresistible Disposition, and nearer allied to the
Divinity, than to act regularly by a temerarious, and fortuitous Liberty; and
more safe to entrust the Reins of our Conduct in the Hands of Nature, than our
own. The vanity of our Presumption is the Cause, that we had rather own our
Sufficiency to our own Industry, than to her Bounty, and that we enrich the
other Animals with natural Goods, and abjure them in their Favor, to honor, and
enoble our selves with Goods acquired, very foolishly in my Opinion; so I
should as much value Parts and Virtues naturally, and purely my own, as those I
had begged, and obtained from Education. It is not in our Power to obtein a
nobler Reputation, than to be favored of God, and Nature. For this Reason,
should we see the Fox, the People of Thrace make use of, when they will attempt
to pass over the Ice of some frozen River, and turn him out before them to that
purpose, lay his Ear upon the Banks of the River, down to the Ice, to listen if
from a more remote, or nearer Distance, he can hear the noise of the Waters
Current, and according as he finds by that, the Ice to be of a less or greater
thickness to retire, or advance; had we not a reason to believe from thence,
that he had some thoughts, that we should have upon the like Occasion, and that
it is a Ratiocination, and Consequence drawn from natural Sense; that that
which makes a noise, runs, that which runs is not frozen, what is not frozen is
liquid and that which is liquid, yields to Impression? For to attribute this to
a vivacity of the Sense of Hearing without Meditation, and Consequence is a
Chimera that cannot enter into the Imagination. We are to suppose the same of
so many sorts of Subtleties, and Inventions, with which Beasts secure
themselves from, and frustrate the Enterprises we complot against them. And if
we will make an Advantage even of this, that it is in our power to seize them,
to employ them in our Service, and to use them at our Pleasure, it is but still
the same Advantage we have over one another. We have our Slaves upon these
terms, and the Climacidae, were they not Women in Syria, which being on all
four, served for a Ladder, and half Pace, by which the Ladies mounted the
Coach? And the greatest part of free Persons, surrender for very trivial
Conveniences their Life, and Being, into the Power of another. The Wives, and
Concubines of the Thracians contend who shall be chosen to be slain upon their
Husbands Tomb. Have Tyrants ever failed of finding men enough vowed to their
Devotion: Some of them moreover adding this necessity of accompanying them in
Death, as well as Life? Whole Armies have obliged themselves after this manner
to their Captains. The form of the Oath in the rude School of Fencers who were
to fight it out to the last, was in these Words: We swear to suffer our selves*
to be chained, burnt, hurt, and killed with the Sword, and to endure all that
true Gladiators suffer from their Master; religiously engaging both Bodies, and
Souls in his Service: Ure meum si vis flamma caput, and pete ferro
Corpus, and inorto verbere terga seca. Tib. l. 1. Eleg. 10.

Wound me with Steel, burn off my Head with Fire,
Or scourge my Shoulders with well-twisted Wire.
This was an Obligation indeed, Obsequies of the Scythian Kings.
and yet there were some Years, ten thousand who entered into it, and lost
themselves in it. When the Scythians interred their King, they strangled upon
his Body, the most beloved of his Concubines, his Cupbearer, the master of his
Horse, his Chamberlain, the Usher of his Chamber, and his Cook. And upon his
Anniversary they killed fifty Horses mounted by fifty Pages, that they had
empail'd all up the spine of the Back to the Throat, and there left them sixth
in Triumph about his Tomb. The men that serve us, do it better cheap, and for a
less curious and favorable Usage than that we entertain our Hawks, Horses, and
Dogs withal. To what Solicitude do we not submit for their Convenience? I do
not think, that Servant of the most abject Condition would willingly do that
for their Masters, that Princes think it an Honor to do for these Beasts.
Diogenes seeing his Relations solicitous to redeem him from Servitude: They are
Fools, said he, it is that which treats, and nourishes, and that serves me; and
they who make so much of Beasts, ought rather to be said to serve them, than to
be served by them. And withal, they have this of more generous, that one Lion
never submitted to another Lion; nor one Horse to another, for want of Courage.
As we go to the Chase of Beasts, so do Tigers, and Lions to the Chase of Men;
and do the same Execution upon one another, Dogs upon Hares, Pikes upon
Tenches, Swallows upon Flies, and Sparhawkes upon Blackbirds, and Larks:
Juvenal. Sat. 14.
-- Serpente ciconia pullos
Nutrit, and inventa per devia rura lacerta,
Et leporem, aut capream famulae Jovis, and generosae
In saltu venantur aves.
The Storke her young ones nourishes with Snakes,
And Lizards found in Meadows, and in Lakes.
Joves Eagle trusses Hares, and Birds of Prey,
Hawke in the Woods.
We divide the Quarry, as well as the Pains, and Labor of the Chase with our
Hawks, and Hounds. And above Amphipolis in Thrace, the Hawkers, and wild
Faulcons equally divide the Prey in the middle: As also along the Lake Maeotis,
if the Fishermen do not honestly leave the Wolves an equal Share of what he has
caught, they presently go, and tear his Nets in pieces. And as we have a way of
fishing, that is carried on more by Subtlety, than Force, namely angling with
Lines, and Hooks, there is also the like amongst other Animals. Aristotle
says, that the Cuttle-Fish casts a Gut-out of his Throat as long, as a Line,
which he extends, and draws back at pleasure; and as she perceives some little
Fish approach her, she lets it nibble upon the end of this Gut, lying herself
concealed in the sand, or mud, and by little and little draws it in, till the
little Fish is so near her, that at one spring she may surprise it. As to what
concerns strength, there is no Creature in the World exposed to so many
Injuries, as Man: We need not a Whale, an Elephant, or a Crocodile, nor any
such like Animals, of which one alone is sufficient to defeat a great number of
men, to do our business: Lice are sufficient to vacate Sylla's Dictatorship;
and the heart, and life of a great, and triumphant Emperor, is the breakfast of
a little contemptible Worm. Why should we say, that it is only for man by
Knowledge, improved by Art and Meditation, to distinguish the things commodious
for his being, and proper for the cure of his Diseases, to know the virtues of
Rhubarb, and Polypody: And when we see the Goats of Candie, when wounded with
an Arrow, amongst a million of Plants, choose out Dittanie for their cure, and
the Tortoise, when she has eaten of a Viper, immediately go to look out for
Origanum to puage her, the Dragon to rub, and clear his Eyes with Fennel, the
Storkes to give themselves Clysters of Seawater, the Elephants to draw not
only out of their own Bodies, and those of their Companions, but out of the
Bodies of their Master too (witness the Elephant of King Porus, whom Alexander
defeated) the Dart, and Javelins thrown at them in Battle, and that so
dexterously, that we our selves could not do it with so little pain to the
Patient; why do not we say the same, that this is Knowledge, and Prudence? For
to alledg to their disparagement, that it is by the sole instruction, and
dictate of Nature, that they know all this, is not to take from them the
dignity of Knowledge, and Prudence: But with greater Argument to attribute it to
them, than to us; for the honor of so infallible a Mistrses. Chrysippus, though
in all other things as scornful a Judge of the condition of Animals, as any
other Philosopher whatever, considering the motions of a Dog, who coming to a
place where three ways met, either to hunt after his Master he has lost, or in
pursuit of some Game that flies before him, goes snuffing first in one of the
Ways, and then in another, and after having made himself sure of two, without
finding the Trace of what he seeks, throws himself into the third without
examination; he is forced to confess, that this Consideration is in the Dog, I
have followed my Master by the Foot to this place, he must of necessity be gone
one of these three ways, he is not gone this way, nor that, he must then
infallibly be gone this other: And that assuring himself by this Conclusion, he
makes no use of his Nose, in the third way, nor ever lays it to the ground, but
suffers himself to be carried on by the force of Reason. This Sally, which is
purely Logical, and this manner of stating Propositions divided, and conjoined,
and the right enumeration of Parts, is it not every whit as good, that the dog
know all this of himself, as to have learnt it by rules of Art? And Animals are
not incapable however, of being instructed after our method. We teach
Blackbirds, Ravens, Pies, and Parrats to speak; and the Facility and
Complacency wherewith we see they lend us their Voices, and render both them,
and their Breath so supple, and pliant, to be formed, and confined within a
certain number of Letters and Syllables, does evince, that they have an
Examination of things within, which renders them so docile, and willing to
learn. Every body, I believe, is glutted with the several sorts of Tricks, that
Tumblers teach their Dogs, the Dances where they do not miss any one cadence of
the Sound they hear, the several various motions, and leaps, they make them
perform by the command of a Word: But I observe this Effect with the greatest
Admiration, which nevertheless is very common, of the Dogs, that lead the
Blind, both in the Country, and in Cities: I have taken notice how they stop at
certain doors, where they were wont to receive Alms, how they avoided the
encounter of Coaches, and Carts, even there where they have had sufficient room
to pass; and have seen them by the Trench of a Town, forsake a plain, and even
Path, and take a worse, only to Keep their Masters further from the ditch. How
could a Man have made this Dog understand, that it was his Office to look to
his Masters Safety only, and to despise his own Convenience to serve him? And
how had he the knowledge, that a way was large enough for him, that was not so
for a blind Man? Can all this be apprehended without Ratiocination? I must not
omit what Plutarch says he saw of a dog at Rome, with the Emperor Vespasian the
Father, at the Theater of Marcellus. This dog served a Player, that played a
Farce of several Gestures, and several Persons, and had therein his part. He
was amongst other things to counterfit himself for some time dead, by reason of
a certain Drug he must be supposed to have eaten: After he had swallowed a
piece of Bread, which must pass for the Drug, he began after a while to
tremble, and stagger, as if he was astonished: At last stretching himself out
stiff, as if he had been dead, he suffered himself to be drawn, and dragged from
place to place, as it was his part to do; and afterward, when he knew it to be
time, he began first gently to stir, as if newly awaked out of some profound
Sleep, and lifting up his Head, looked about him after such a manner, as
astonished all the Spectators. The Oxen that served in the royal Gardens of
Susa, to water them, and turn certain great Wheels to draw Water for that
purpose, to which Buckets were fastened (such as there are many in Languedoc)
being ordered every one to draw a hundred turns a day: They were so accustomed
to this Number, that it was impossible by any Force, to make them draw one turn
more, but, their Task being performed, they would suddenly stop, and stand
still. We are almost Men before we can count a hundred, and have lately
discovered Nations that have no knowledge of Numbers at all. There is more
Understanding required in the teaching of others, than in being taught. But
setting aside what Democritus held, and proved, that most of the Arts we have,
were taught us by other Animals: As the Spider, to weave and few, the Swallow
to build, the Swan and Nightingale Music, and several Animals by their
imitation to make Medicines. Aristotle is of Opinion, that the Nightingales
teach their young ones to sing, and spend a great deal of time, and care in it,
from whence it happens, that those we bring up in Cages, and have not had time
to learn of their Dams, want much of the grace of their singing. We may judge by
that, that they improve by Discipline and Study: And even amongst the wild, it
is not all one, and every one alike, every one has learnt to do better, or
worse, according to their Capacity. And so jealous are they of one another,
whilst learning, that they contend with Emulation, and so vigorous a
Contention, that sometimes the vanquished fall dead upon the place, the Breath
rather failing, than the Voice. The younger ruminate pensive, and begin to
mutter some broken Notes; the Disciple listens to the Masters Lesson, and gives
the best account he is able; they are silent by turns, one may hear Faults
corrected, and observe some Reprehensions of the Teacher. I have formerly seen,
says Arius, an Elephant having a Cymbal hung at each Leg, Elephants wearing
Cymbals.
and another fastened to his Trunck, at the sound of which, all the others
danced round about him, rising, and falling at certain Cadences, as they were
guided by the Instrument, and took a delight in Harmony. In the Spectacles of
Rome, there were ordinarily seen Elephants taught to move and dance, Elephants
taught to dance.
to the sound of the Voice, Dances wherein were several Changes, and Steps, and
Cadences very hard to learn. And some have been seen in private, so intent upon
their Lesson, as to practice it by themselves, that they might not be chidden,
nor beaten by their Masters. But this other Story of the Pie, of which we have
Plutarch himself for warrant, it is very strange: She was in a Barbers Shop at
Rome, and did Wonders in imitating with her Voice, whatever she heard. It
happened one day, that certain Trumpeters stood a good while sounding before the
Shop: after that, and all the next day, the Pie was pensive, dumb, and
melancholic; A Story of a Magpye at Rome.
which every body wondered at, and thought that the noise of the Trumpets, had
so stupefied and astonished her, and that her Voice was gone with her Hearing:
But they found at last, that it was a profound Meditation, and a Retiring into
herself, her Thoughts exercising and preparing her Voice to imitate the Sound
of those Trumpets, so that the first Voice she uttered, was perfectly to
imitate their Strains, Stops, and Changes; having by this new Lesson quitted,
and disdained all she had learned before. I will not omit this other Example of
a Dog also, which the same Plutarch says he saw, being on shipboard. The
Cunning of a Dog, to get the Oil out of a Jar.
This Dog being puzzeled how to get the Oil that was in the bottom of a Cruce,
which he could not reach with his Tongue, by reason of the narrow Mouth of the
Vessel, went, and fetched Stones, and let them fall into the Jar, till he made
the Oil rise so high, that he could reach it. What is this but an effect of a
very subtle Capacity? It Is said that the Ravens of Barbary do the same, when
the Water they would drink is too low. This Action is something akin to what
Juba, a King of their Nation, relates of the Elephants; then, when by the Craft
of the Hunter, one of them is trapt in certain deep Pits prepared for them, and
covered over with Brush, to deceive them, all the rest, in great diligence,
bring a great many Stones, The Subtlety of Elephants, to disengage one another.
and Logs of Wood to raise the Bottom so, that they may get out. But this
Animal, in several other Effects comes so near to human Capacity, that should I
particularly relate all that Experience has delivered to us, I should easily
have, what I usually maintain, granted, namely, that there is no more
difference betwixt such and such a Man, than betwixt such a Man and such a
Beast. The Keeper of an Elephant in a private House of Syria, robbed him every
Meal, of the half of his Allowance: One day his Master would himself feed him,
and poured the full measure of Barley he had ordered for his Allowance, An
Elephant discovers the Cheet of his Keeper.
into his Manger; at which, the Elephant casting an angry Look at his Keeper,
with his Trunck separated the one half from the other, and thrust it aside, by
that declaring the Wrong was done him. And another, having a Keeper that mixed
Stones with his Corn, to make up the Measure, came to the Pot where he was
boiling Flesh for his own Dinner, and filled it with Ashes. These are
particular Effects: But that which all the World has seen, and all the World
knows, that in all the Armies of the Levant, one of their greatest Forces
consisted in Elephants, with whom they did, without comparison, much greater
Execution, than we now do with our Artillery; which is, as it were, in their
stead in a day of Battle, (as may easily be supposed by such, as are well read
in ancient History.) Juvenal. sat. p.
-- Siquidem Tyrio servire solebant
Annibali, and nostris ducibus, regique Molosso
Horum Majores, and dorso far Cohortes,
Partem aliquam Belli, and euntem in praelia turmam.
Of these, those of the largest size were wont
The Carthaginian Hannibal to mount:
Our Leaders too these mighty Beasts bestrid;
An Elephant, great King Molossus rid;
Nay more, upon their Backs they used to bear
Whole Bands, and Cohorts when they went to War.
They must necessarily very confidently rely upon the Fidelity, and
Understanding of these Beasts, when they entrusted them with the Vantguard of a
Battle, where the least stop they should have made by reason of the bulk, and
heaviness of their Bodies, and the least Fright that should have made them face
about upon their own People, had been enough to spoil all. And there are but
few Examples where it has happened, that they have fallen foul upon their own
Troops, whereas we our selves, break into our own Battalions, and rout one
another. They had the Commission, not of one simple Motion only, but of many
several things they were to perform in the Battle: As the Spaniards did to
their Dogs in their new Conquest of the Indies, to whom they gave Pay, and
allowed them a share in the Spoil; and those Animals showed as much Dexterity,
and Judgment in pursuing the Victory, and stopping the Pursuit; in charging and
retiring as Occasion required, and in distinguishing their Friends from their
Enemies, as they did Ardour and Feirceness. We more admire, and value things
that are unusual and strange, than those of ordinary Observation. I had not
else so long insisted upon these Examples: For I believe, whoever shall
strictly observe what we ordinarily see in those Animals we have amongst us,
may there find as wonderful Effects, as those we fetch from remote Countries,
and Ages, It Is one same Nature, that rouls her Course, and whoever had
sufficiently considered the present state of things, might certainly conclude
both the future, and the past. I have formerly seen Men brought hither by Sea,
from very distant Countries, whose Language being not understood by us, and
that moreover their Mien, Countenance, and Habit, were quite differing from
ours; which of us did not repute them Savages, and Brutes? Who did not
attribute it to Stupidity, and want of common Sense, to see them mute, ignorant
of the French Tongue, ignorant of our Salutations, and Cringes, our Port, and
Behavior, from which all human Nature must by all means take its Pattern, and
Example. All that seems strange to us, and that we do not understand, we
condemn. The same things happen also in the Judgment we make of Beasts: They
have several Conditions, like to ours; from those we may by Comparison draw
some Conjecture: But those Qualities that are particular to themselves, what
know we what to make of them? The Horses, Dogs, Oxen, Sheep, Birds, and most of
the Animals that live amongst us, know our Voices, and suffer themselves to be
governed by them: So did Crassus his Lamprey, and came when he called it, as
also do the Eeles that are in the Lake Arethusa; and I have seen several Stews,
where the Fishes run to eat at a certain call of those who use to feed them. --
nomen habent, and ad magistri
Mart. l. 4. Epig. 30.
Vocem quisque sui venit citatus.
They every one have their own Names, and all
Straightway appear at their own Masters Call.
We may judge of that; We may also say, that the Elephants have some
participation of Religion, forasmuch as after several Washings, Elephants
participate of Religion.
and Purifications, they are observed to lift up their Truncks like Arms, and
fixing their Eyes toward the rising of the Sun, continue long in Meditation,
and Contemplation, at certain Hours of the Day, of their own Motion, without
Instruction, or Precept. But because we do not see any such Signs in other
Animals, we cannot for that conclude, that they are without Religion; nor make
any Judgment of what is concealed from us. As we discern something in this
Action, which the Philosopher Cleanthes took notice of, because it something
resembles our own. He saw, he says, Ants go from their Ant-hill, carrying the
dead Body of an Ant toward another Ant-hill, from whence several other Ants
came out to meet them, Communication of Ants.
as if to speak, and expostulate with them; where after having been a pretty
while together, the last returned, to consult, you may suppose, with their
fellow Citizens, and so made two or three Journeys, by reason of the difficulty
of Capitulation: In the Conclusion, the last comers brought the first a Worm
out of their Burrow, as it were for the Ransom of the Defunct, which the first
laid upon their Backs, and carried home, leaving the dead Body to the others.
This was the Interpretation that Cleanthes gave of this Transaction, giving us
by that to understand, that those Creatures that have no Voice, are not,
nevertheless, without Practice, and mutual Communication, whereof it is thorough
our own Defect, that we do not participate; and for that reason, foolishly take
upon us to pass our Censure. But they yet produce other Effects, far beyond our
Capacity, to which we are so far from being able to arrive by imitation, that
we cannot so much, as by imitation conceive it. Many are of Opinion, that in
the great, and last naval Engagement, that Anthony lost to Augustus, his
admiral Galley was stayed in the middle of her Course, by the little Fish the
Latins call Remora, by reason of the Property she has of staying all sorts of
Vessels, to which she fastens herself. And the Emperor Caligula, sailing with a
great Navy upon the Coast of Romania, his Galley only was suddenly stayed by
the same Fish; which he caused to be taken, fastened as it was to the Keel of
his Ship, very angry that such a little Animal could resist both the Sea, the
Wind, and the force of all his Oars, by being only fastened by the Beak to this
Galley, (for it is a Shellfish and was moreover, not without great Reason,
astonished, that being brought to him in the Longboat, it had no more the
Strength it had without. A Citizen of Zycicus, formerly acquired the Reputation
of a good Mathematician, for having learnt the Condition of the Hedghog. He has
his Burrow open in diverse verse places, and to several Winds, and foreseeing
the Wind that is to come, stops the Hole on that side, which the Citizen
observing, gave the City certain Predictions of the Wind, which was presently
to blow. Change of color in the Cameleon and Polypus.
The Cameleon takes her Color from the Place upon which it is laid; but the
Polypus, gives himself what Color he pleases, according to Occasion, either to
conceal himself from what he fears, or from that he has a design to seize: In
the Cameleon it is a passive, but in the Polypus it is an active Change. We have
some Changes of Color, as in Fear, Anger, Shame, and other Passions, that
alter our Complexions; but it is by the effect of Suffering, as with the
Cameleon. It is in the Power of the Jaundice indeed, to make us turn Yellow,
but it is not in the Power of our own Will. Now these Effects that we discover
in other Animals, much greater than ours, seem to imply some more excellent
Faculty in them, unknown to us; as it is to be presumed several other Qualities,
and Abilities of theirs are, of which no appearences have arrived at us.
Amongst all the Predictions of Elder times, the most ancient, Augurie the most
certain way of Prediction.
and the most certain, were those taken from the Flights of Birds, we have
nothing like it, not any thing so much to be admired. That rule, and order of
the moving of the Wing, from whence they derived the Consequences of future
things, must of necessity be guided by some excellent means, to so noble an
Operation: For to attribute this great Effect to any natural Disposition,
without the Intelligence, Consent, and Meditation of him by whom it is
produced, is an Opinion evidently False: That it is so, the Cramp-Fish has this
Quality, not only to benumn all the Members that touch her, but even through
the Nets transmit a heavy dullness into the Hands of those that move, and handle
them; nay it is further said, that if one power Water upon her, he will feel
this Numness mount up the Water to the Hand, and stupify the Feeling thorough
the Water. This is a miraculous Force; but it is not useless to the Cramp-Fish,
she knows it, and makes use on it, for to catch the Prey she desires, she will
bury herself in the Mud, that other Fishes, swiming over her, struck and
benumn'd with this Coldness of hers, may fall into her Power. Cranes, Swallows,
and other Birds of Passage, by shifting their Abode, according to the Seasons,
sufficiently manifest the knowledge they have of their divining Faculty, and put
it in use. Huntsmen assure us, that to cull out from amongst a great many
Puppies, that which ought to be preserved for the best, the best way is to
refer the Choice to the Damm, as thus, take them, and carry them out of the
Kennel, and the first she brings back, will certainly be the best: Or if you
make a show as if you would environ the Kennel with Fire, those that she first
catches up to Save. By which it appears they have another sort of Prognostic,
than we have; or that they have some Virtue in judging of their Whelps, other,
and more certain than we have. The manner of coming into the World, of
Engendring, Nourishing, Acting, Moving, Living, and Dying of Beasts, is so near
to ours, that what ever we retrench from their moving Causes, and add to our
own Condition above theirs, can by no means proceed from any Meditation of our
own Reason. For the Regiment of our Health, Physicians propose to us the
Example of the Beasts Manners, and way of living, for this saying, has in all
times, been in the Mouth of the People. Tenez chaud les pieds, and la test,
Plutarch.

Au demeurant vivez en best.
Keep warm thy Feet, and Head, as to the rest,
Live like a Beast.
Generation is the principal of all natural Actions. We have a certain
Disposition of Members, most proper, and convenient for us in that Affair:
Nevertheless, we are ordered to conform to the Posture of Brutes, as the most
effectual. -- more ferarum, Lucret. l. 4.

Quadrupedumque magis ritu, plerumque putantur,
Concipere uxores: quia sic loca sumere possunt,
Pectoribus positis, sublatis semina lumbis.
And condemn as hurtful, those extravagant, and indiscreet Motions the Women
have superadded to the Work, reducing them to the Example, and practice of
Beasts of their own Sex, more Sober, and Modest. Ibid.
Nam mulier prohibet se concipere atque repugnat,
Clunibus ipsa viri Venerem si laeta retractet,
Atque exossato ciet omni pectore fluctus.
Ejicit enim sulci recta regione viaque
Vomerem, atque locis avertit seminis ictum.
If it be Justice to render to every one their Due, the Beasts that Serve,
Love, and Defend their Benefactors, and that Pursue and fall upon Strangers*
and those who Offend them, do in this represent a certain air of our Justice:
As also in observing a very equitable Equality in the distribution of what they
have, to their Young; and as to Friendship, they have it without Comparison
more lively, and constant, than Men have. The love of Dogs to their Masters.
King Lysimachus his Dog Hyracan, his Master being dead, lay upon his Bed,
obstinately refusing either to eat, or drink, and the day that his Body was
burnt, he took a run, and leaped into the Fire, where he was consumed. As also
did the Dog of one Pyrrhus; for he would not stir from off his Masters Bed,
from the time that he died; and when they carried him away, let himself be
carried with him, and at last leaped into the Pile, where they burnt his
Master's Body. There are certain Inclinations of Affection, which sometimes
spring in us, without the consultation of Reason; and by a fortuitous Temerity,
which others call Sympathy: Of which, Beasts are as capable, as we. We see
Horses take such an Acquaintance with one another, that we have much ado to
make them eat or travail, when separated: We observe them to fancy a particular
Color in those of their own kind, and where they meet it, run to it with great
Joy and Demonstrations of Good Will, and have a dislike and hatred for some
other Color. Animals have choice, as well as we, in their Amors, and cull out
their Mistresses; neither are they exempt from our Jealousies and implacable
Malice. Desires are either natural and necessary, as to eat and drink; or
natural and not necessary, as the coupling with Females; or neither natural nor
necessary: Of which last sort, are almost all the Desires of Men: They are all
superfluous and artificial: For it is not to believed, how little will satisfy
Nature, how little she has left us to desire: Our Ragous and Kickshaws are not
of her Ordinary. The Stoics say, that a Man may live of an Olive a day: Our
delicacy in our Wines is no part of her Instruction, nor the over-acting the
Ceremonies of Love. -- neque illa
Magno prognatum deposcit Consule cunnum. Hor. lib. 2. Sat. 2.

These irregular Desires, that the Ignorance of Good, and a false Opinion have
infused into us, are so many, as they almost exclude all the Natural; no
otherwise, than if there were so great a number of Strangers in a City, as to
thrust out the Natural Inhabitants, or usurping upon their Ancient Rights and
Privileges should extinguish their Authority, and introduce new Laws and
Customs of their own. Animals are much more regular than we, Animals more
regular than we.
and keep themselves with greater moderation within the limits Nature has
prescribed; but yet not so exactly, that they have not an Analogy with our
Debauches. And as there have been known furious Desires, that have hurried Men
to the love of Beasts, so there has been examples of Beasts that have fallen in
love with us, and caught with monstrous Affection betwixt different kinds:
Witness the Elephant who was rival to Aristophanes the Grammarian in the love
of a young Herbwench in the City of Alexandrin, who was nothing behind him in
all the Offices of a very passionate Suitor: For going through the Market where
they sold Fruit, he would take some in his Trunck, and carry them to her: He
would as much as possible keep her always in his sight, and would sometimes put
his Trunck under her Hankerchief into her Bosom to feel her Breasts. They tell
also of a Dragon in love with a Maid, and of a Goose enamored of a Child, of a
Ram that was Servant to the Minstrelless Glaucia, and we see with our own eyes,
Baboons furiously in love with Women. We see also certain Male Animals, that
are fond of the Males of their own kind. Oppianus, and others give us some
examples of the Reverence that Beasts have to their Kindred in their
Copulations; but experience often shows us the contrary. -- nec habetur turpe
juvencae
Far patrem tergo: Fit equo sua filia conjux: Ovid. Metam. lib. 10.

Quasque creavit, init pecudes caper: Ipsaque cujus
Semine concepta est, ex illo concepit ales.
The Heifer thinks it not a shame to take
Her curled Sire upon her willing Back:
The Horse his Daughter leaps; Goats scruple not
T'encrease the Heard by those they have begot.
And Birds of all sorts do in common live,
And by the Seed they were conceived conceive.
And for malicious Subtilty, can there be a more pregnant example, than in the
Philosopher Thales's Mule? Who foarding a River laden with Salt, and by
accident stumbling there, so that the Sacks he carried were all wet, perceiving
that by the melting of the Salt, his Burden was something lighter, he never
failed so often as he came to any River to lie down with his Load; till his
Master discovering the Knavery, ordered that he should be laden with Wool,
wherein finding himself mistaken, he ceased to practice that Device. There are
several, that very lively represent the true Image of our Avarice, for we see
them infinitely solicitous to catch all they can, and hide it with exceeding
great Care, though they never make any use of it at all. As to Thrift, they
surpass us not only in the foresight and laying up, and saving for the time to
come, but they have moreover a great deal of the Science necessary thereto. The
Ants bring abroad into the Sun their Grain and Seeds to air, refresh and dry
them, when they perceive them to mould and grow musty, lest they should decay
and rot. But the caution and prevention they use in gnawing their Grains of
Wheat, surpass all Imagination of Human Prudence: For by reason that the Wheat
does not always continue sound and dry; but grows soft, thaws and dissolves, as
if it were steept in Milk, whilst hasting to Germination, for fear lest it
should shoot, and lose the Nature and Property of a Magazine for their
subsistence, they nibble of the end by which it should shoot and sprit. As to
what concerns War, which is the greatest and most magnificent of Human Actions,
I would very fain know, whether we would serve for an Argument of some
Prerogative, or on the contrary for a Testimony of our Weakness and
imperfection; as in truth the Science of undoing and killing one another, and
of ruining and destroying our own kind, has nothing in it so tempting, as to
make it be coveted by Beasts who have it not. -- quando leoni
Fortior eripuit vitam Leo, quo nemore unquam
Expiravit aper majoris dentibus Apris?
-- who ever yet beheld
A weaker Lion by a stronger killed;
Or in what Forest was it ever known
That a small Boar died by a mighty one?
Wars betwixt Bees.
Yet are they not universally exempt, Witness the furious Encounters of Bees,
and the Enterprises of the Princes of the contrary Armies: -- saepe duobus
Virg. Georg. lib. 4.

Regibus incessit magno discordia motu,
Continuoque animos vulgi, and trepidantia bello
Corda licet long praesciscere.
Betwixt two Kings strange Animosities,
With great Commotion often do arise,
When straight the Vulgar sort are heard from far,
Sounding their little Trumpets to the War.
I never read this Divine Observation, but that, methinks, I there see Human
Folly and Vanity represented in their true and lively Colors. For these
Preparations for War that so fright and astonish us with their Noise and
Tumult, this rattle of Guns, Drums and confused Voices: Fulgur ubi ad caelum se
tollit, Lucret. lib. 2.
totaque circum
Aere renidescit tellus, subterque virum vi
Excitur pedibus sonitus, clamoreque montes
Icti rejectant voces ad sidera mundi.
When burnished Arms to Heaven dart their Rays,
And the Earth glows with Beams of shining Brass.
And trampled is by Horses, and by Men,
Until the Center even groans again,
And that the Rocks, struck by the various Cries,
Reverberate the Sound unto the Skies.
In the dreadful embattelling of so many thousands of Armed Men, and so great
Fury, Ardour and Courage, it is pleasant to consider, by what idle occasion they
are excited, and by how light ones appeased. Horat. lib. 2. Epist. 2.
Paridis propter narratur amorem,
Graecia Barbariae diro collisa duello.
Of wanton Paris the illicite Love,
Did Greece and Troy to ten years Slaughter move.
All Asia was ruined and destroyed for the ungoverned lust of one lascivious
Paris. Laws of Asia about the Loves of Paris and Helen.
The Envy of one single Man, a Despite, a Pleasure or a Domestic Jealousy,
Causes, that ought not to set two Oyster-wenches by the Ears, is the mover of
all this mighty Bustle. Shall we believe those who are themselves the Principal
Authors of these Mischiefs? Let us then hear the greatest and most victorious
Emperor, that ever was, making sport of, and, with mavelous Ingenuity,
descanting upon, and turning en ridicule, several Battles fought both by Sea
and Land, the Blood and Lives of five hundred thousand Men that followed his
Fortune, and the Strength and Riches of two parts of the World drained for the
expense of his Expeditions. Quod futuit Glaphyran Antonius, Mart. l. 11. Epig.
21.
hanc mihi paenam
Fulvia constituit, se quoque uti futuam.
Fulviam ego ut futuam? Quid si me Maenius oret
Paedicem, faciam? Non puto, si sapiam.
Aut futue aut pugnemus, ait: Quid si mihi vita
Charior est ipsa mentula? Signa canant.
(I use my Latin with the Liberty of Conscience you are pleased to allow me.)
Now this great Body has so many Fronts, and has so many Motions, as seems to
threaten Heaven and Earth, Quam multi Lybico volvuntur marmore fluctus, Aeneid,
lib. 7.

Saevis ubi Orion hybernis conditur undis:
Vel cum sole novo densae torrentur Aristae,
Aut Hermi campo, aut Lyciae flaventibus arvis,
Scuta sonant, pulsuque pedum tremit excita tellus.
As numerous as the Lybian Waves that roll,
When in those Seas Orion does control;
Or thick-set Ears scorched by the Summers Ray,
On Hermus Banks, or fruitful Lycia,
Are the bright Shields, that dreadfully resound;
And as they march, their Footing shakes the Ground.
This furious Monster with so many Heads and Arms, is yet Man, feeble,
calamitous and miserable Man. It Is but an Ant-hill of Ants disturbed and
provoak'd by a Spurn, It nigrum campis agmen.
Virg. Aen. lib. 4.
The black Troop marches to the Field.
A contrary Blast, the croaking of a flight of Ravens, the Stumble of a Horse,
the casual Passage of an Eagle, a Dream, a Voice, a Sign, a Morning Mist are
any one of them sufficient to beat down and over-turn him. Dart but a Sunbeam
in his Face, he is melted and vanished. Blow but a little Dust in his Eyes, as
our Poet says of the Bees; and all our Ensigns and Legions, with the Great
Pompey himself at the Head of them, are routed and crushed to pieces: For it
was he, as I take it, that Sertorius beat in Spain, with those brave Arms;
which also served Eumenes against Antigonus, and Surena against Crassus: Virg.
Geor. lib. 4.
Hi motus animorum, atque haec certamina tanta
Pulveris exigui jactu compressa quiescent.
This mighty Anger, and these furious Blows,
A handful of Dust thrown, will soon compose.
Let us but slip our Flies after them, and they will have the Force and Courage
to defeat them. Of fresh Memory the Portuguese having beseig'd the City of
Tamly in the Territory of Xiatine, the Inhabitants of the place brought a great
many Hives, The Seige of Tamly raised by Bees.
of which are great plenty in that place, upon the Wall; and with Fire drove
the Bees so furiously upon the Enemy, that they gave over the Enterprise, and
trussed up their Baggage, being not able to stand their Attacks, and endure
their Stings. And so their City, by this new sort of relief, was freed from the
Danger, with so wonderful a Fortune, that at their return from the Pursuit,
they found they had not lost so much as one Man. The Souls of Emperors and
Cobblers are cast in the same Mould. The weight and importance of the Actions of
Princes considered, we persuade our selves that they must be produced by some
as weighty and important Causes: But we are deceived, for they are pushed on,
and pulled back in their Motions, by the same Springs, that we are in our
little Undertakings. The same reason that makes us wrangle with a Neighbor,
causes a War betwixt Princes; the same reason that makes us whip a Lacquay,
falling into the Hands of a King, makes him ruin a whole Province. They are as
prompt, and as easily moved as we, but they are able to do more Mischief. In a
Gnat and an Elephant the Passion is the same. As to what concerns Fidelity,
there is no Animal in the World so treacherous as a Man. Our Histories have
recorded the violent Pursuits that Dogs have made after the Murderers of their
Masters. Dogs revenge the Death of their Masters.
King Pyrrhus observing a Dog that watched a dead Man's Body, and understanding
that he had for three days together performed that Office, commanded that the
Body should be buried, and took the Dog along with him. One day as he was at a
general Muster of his Army, this Dog was aware of his Masters Murderers, and
with great Barking, and extreme signs of Anger, flew upon them, by this first
Accusation, awaking the Revenge of this Murder, which was soon after perfected
by Form of Justice. As much was done by the Dog of the wise Hesiod, who
convinced the Sons of Ganister of Naupactus of the Murder committed in the
person of his Master. Another Dog being to guard a Temple at Athens, having
spied a Sacrilegious Thief, who carried away the fairest Jewels, The Fidelity
of a Dog in persuing a Sacrilegious person.
fell to barking at him with all the force he had; But the Warders not awaking
at the Noise, he followed him, and, day being broke, kept off at a farther
distance, without losing sight of him; if he offered him any thing to eat,
would not take it, but would wag his Tail at all the Passengers he met, and
took whatever they gave him at their hands; and if the Thief laid down to
sleep, he likewise stayed upon the place. The News of this Dog being come to
the Warders of this Church, they put themselves upon the pursuit, inquiring of
the Color of the Dog, and at last found him in the City of Cromyon, and the
Thief also whom they brought back to Athens, where he had his reward: And where
the Judges, taking Cognizance of the good Office, ordered a certain Measure of
Corn for the Dog's daily Sustenance, at the Public Charge, and the Priest's to
take care in it. Plutarch delivers this Story for a most certain truth, and
that happened in the Age wherein he lived. As to Gratitude (for I doubt, we had
need bring this word into a little greater repute) this one example, which
Appion reports himself to have been an Eyewitness of, The Gratitude of a Lion
toward a Slave.
shall suffice. One day (says he) that at Rome they entertained the people with
the pleasure of the fighting of several strange Beasts, and principally of
Lions of an unusual size; there was one amongst the rest, who, by his furious
Deportment, by the strength and largeness of his Limbs, and by his loud and
dreadful Roaring, attracted the Eyes of all the Spectators. Amongst other
Slaves, that were presented to the people in this Combat of Beasts, there was
one Androdus of Dacia, belonging to a Roman Lord of Consular Dignity. This Lion
having seen him at distance, first made a sudden stop, as it were, in a
wondering posture, and then softly approached nearer in a gentle and peaceable
manner, as if it were to enter into acquaintance with him. This being done, and
being now assured of what he sought for, he began to wag his Tail, as Dogs do
when they flatter their Masters, and to kiss and lick the Hands and Thighs of
the poor Wretch, who was besides himself, and almost dead with fear. Androdus
being by this kindness of the Lion, a little come to himself, and having taken
so much heart, as to consider and know him; it was a singular Pleasure to see
the Joy and Caresses that passed betwixt them. At which, the people breaking
into loud Acclamations of Joy, the Emperor caused the Slave to be called, to
know from him the cause of so strange an Event; who, thereupon told him a new
and a very strange Story: My Master (said he) being Proconsul in Africa, I was
constrained by his Severity and cruel Usage, being daily beaten, to steal from
him, and to run away. And to hide my self securely from a person of so great
Authority in the Province, I thought it my best way to fly to the Solitudes,
Sands, and uninhabitable parts of that Country, resolved, that in case the
means of supporting Life should chance to fail me, to make some shift or other
to kill my self. The Sun being excessively hot at Noon, and the Heat
intolerable, I accidentally found a private and almost inaccessible Cave, and
went into it. Soon after there came in to me this Lion with one Foot wounded
and bloody; complaining and groaning with the Pain he endured: At his coming I
was exceedingly afraid, but he having espied me hid in a corner of his Den,
came gently to me, holding out, and showing me his wounded Foot, as if he
demanded my assistance in his distress. I then drew out a great Splinter he had
got there, and growing a little more familiar with him, squeezing the Wound,
thrust out the Dirt and Gravel was got into it, wiped and cleansed it the best
I could: He finding himself something better, and much easied of his Pain, laid
him down to repose, and presently fell asleep with his Foot in my hand. From
that time forward he and I lived together in this Cave three whole years, upon
one and the same Diet; for of the Beasts that he killed in hunting, he always
brought me the best pieces, which I roasted in the Sun for want of Fire, and so
eat it. At last growing weary of this wild and brutish Life, the Lion being one
day gone abroad to hunt for our ordinary Provision, I escaped from thence, and
the third day after was taken by the Soldiers, who brought me from Africa to
this City to my Master, who presently condemned me to dye, and to be thus
exposed to the wild Beasts. Now by what I see, I perceive that this Lion was
also taken soon after, who would now have recompensed me for the Benefit and
Cure that he received at my hands. This is the Story that Androdus told the
Emperor, which he also conveyed from hand to hand to the people: Wherefore at
the general Request, he was absolved from his Sentence, and set at liberty; and
the Lion was by order of the people, presented to him. We afterward saw (says
Appion) Androdus leading this Lion, in nothing but a small Leash, from Tavern
to Tavern at Rome, and receiving what Money every body would give him, the Lion
being so gentle, as to suffer himself to be covered with the Flowers that the
People threw upon him, Weeping of Beasts for the loss of those we love.
every one that met him, saying, There goes the Lion that entertained the Man,
there goes the Man that cured the Lion. We often lament the loss of the Beasts we
love, and so do they the loss of us. Virg. Eneid. lib. 11.
Post bellator equus, positis insignibus, Aethon
It lacrymans, guttisque humectat grandibus ora.
-- The Triumph more to Grace,
Aethon his Horse of War, came next in place,
Who of his Trappings stripped, showed such regret,
That with large Tears his hairy Cheeks were wet.
As some Nations have their Wives in Common, and some others have every one his
own: Is not the same evident amongst Beasts, and Marriages better kept than
ours? As to the Society, and Confederation they make amongst themselves, to
league themselves together, and to give one another mutual Assistance: Society
amongst Beasts.
Is it not manifest, that Oxen, Hogs, and other Animals, at the Cry of any of
their Kind, that we offend, all the Heard run to his Aid, and embody for his
Defense? A Fish that chews.
The Fish Scarus, when he has swallowed the Anglers Hook, his Fellows all crowd
about him, and gnaw the Line in pieces; and if by chance, one be got into the
Leap, or Whele, the others present him their Tayls on the out side, which he
holding fast with his Teeth, they after that manner disengage, and draw him
out. Mullets, when one of their Companions is engaged, cross the Line over
their back, and with a Fin they have there, indented like a Saw, cut and saw it
asunder. As to the particular Offices that we receive from one another, for the
Service of Life, there are several like Examples amongst them. It Is said, that
the Whale never moves, that she has not always before her a little Fish, like
the See-Gudgion, for this reason called the Guide-Fish; whom the Whale Follows,
suffering himself to be led, and turned with as great Facility, as the Stern
guides the Ship: In Recompense of which Service also, whereas all other things,
whether Beast, or Vessel, that enters into the dreadful Gulf of this Monsters
Mouth, is immediately lost, and swallowed up, this little Fish retires into it
in great Security, and there sleeps, during which, the Whale never stirs: But
so soon as ever it goes out, he immediately follows: and if by accident he
loses the sight of his little Guide, he goes wandering here, and there, and
strikes his Sides against the Rocks, like a Ship that has lost her Rudder:
Which Plutarch affirms to have seen in the Island of Anticyra. There is a like
Society betwixt the little Bird called a Wren, and the Crocodile; the Wren
serves for a Sentinel over this great Animal: And if the Ichneumon, his mortal
Enemy, approach to fight him, this little Bird, for fear lest he should
surprise him a sleep, both with his Voice, and Bill, rouses him, and gives him
notice of his Danger. He feeds of this Monsters Leavings, who receives him
familiarly into his Mouth, suffering him to pick in his Jaws, and betwixt his
Teeth, and thence to pick out the Bits of Flesh that remain, and when he has a
mind to shut his Mouth, he first gives the Bird warning to go out, by closing
it by little and little, without bruising, or doing it any harm at all. The
Shellfish, called a Naker, lives also with the Shrimp in the same
Intelligence; a little sort of Animal, of the Lobster kind, serving him in the
Nature of a Porter, sitting at the opening of the Shell, which the Naker keeps
always gaping and open, till the Shrimp sees some little Fish, proper for their
Prey, within the hollow of the Shell, for then she enters too, and pinches the
Naker so to the Quick, that she is forced to close her Shell, where they two
together devour the Prey they have trapt in their Fort. In the manner of living
of the Tunnies, we observe a singular Knowledge of the three parts of
Mathematics. As to Astrology, they teach it Men, for they stay in the Place
where they are surpised by the Brumal Solstice, and never stir from thence
till the next Equinox: For which Reason, Aristotle himself attributes to them
this Science. As to Geometry and Arithmetic, they always form their Body in
the Figure of a Cube, every way Square, and make up the Body of a Battalion,
solid, close, and environed round with six equal Sides: So that swimming in
this square Order, as large behind, as before; whoever in seeing them can count
one Rank, may easily number the whole Troop, by reason that the Depth is equal
to the Breadth, and the Breadth to the Length. As to Magnanimity, it will be
hard to give a better Instance of that, Magnanimity of an Indian Dog.
than in the Example of the great Dog, sent to Alexander the Great, from the
Indies: They first brought him a Stag to Encounter, next a Boar, and after that
a Bear, all which he slighted, and disdained to stir from his place; but when
he saw a Lion, he then immediately roused himself; evidently manifesting, that
he declared that alone, worthy to enter the Lists with him. As to what concerns
Repentance, and the acknowledgment of Faults, it is reported of an Elephant,
that having, Repentance of an Elephant.
in the impetuosity of his Rage, killed his Reeper, he fell into so extreme a
Sorrow, that he would never after Eat, but starved himself to Death. And as to
Clemency, it is said of a Tiger, the most inhuman of all Beasts; that a Kid
having been put in to him, he suffered two days Hunger rather than hurt it, and
the third, broke the Grate he was shut up in, to go seek elsewhere for Prey, so
unwilling he was to fall upon the Kid, his Familiar, and his Guest. And as to
the Laws of Familiarity and Agreement, formed by Conversation, it ordinarily
happens, that we bring up Cats, Dogs, and Hares, tame together: But that which
Seamen experimently know, and particularly in the Cilician Sea, of the Quality
of the Halcyons, Mavelous condition of the Halcyons.
does surpass all human Thought. Of what kind of Animal has Nature ever so much
honored the Sitting, Enlivening, and Disclosing? The Poets indeed say, that
one only I Will of Delos, that before was a floating Island, was fixed for the
Service of Latona's lying in; but God has ordered that the whole Ocean should
be stayed, made Stable and smoothed without Waves, without Winds, or Rain,
whilst the Halcyon broods upon her Young, which is just about the Solstice,
the shortest day of the Year; so that by her Privilege, we have seven Days and
seven Nights, in the very heart of Winter, wherein we may sail without Danger.
Their Females never have to do with any other Male, but their own, whom they
always serve, and assist, without ever forsaking him all their Lives: If he
happen to be weak, and broaken with Age, they take him upon their Shoulders,
carry him from place to place; and serve him to Death. But the most Inquisitive
into the Secrets of Nature, could never yet arrive at the Knowledge of the
wonderful Fabric, and Architecture wherewith the Halcyon builds her Nest for
his little ones, nor guess at the matter. The structure of their Nests, and the
matter whereof they are built.
Plutarch, who has seen, and handled many of them, thinks it is the Bones of
some Fish, which she joines and binds together, interlacing them some
lengthwise, and others across, and adding Ribs, and Hoopes in such manner, that
she forms at last a round Vessel fit to Launch, which being done, and the
Building finished, she carries it to the Wash of the Beach, where the Sea
beating gently against it, shows her where she is to mend what is not well
jointed and knit, and where better to Fortify the Seams that are leaky, and
that open at the beating of the Waves; and on the contrary, what is well built,
and has had the due finishing, the beating of the Waves do so close, and bind
together, that it is not to be broken, or cracked, by Blows either of Stone, or
Iron, without very much ado. And that which is more to be admired, is the
Proportion and Figure of the Cavity within, which is composed, and proportioned
after such a manner, as not possible to receive, or admit any other thing, than
the Bird that built it: For to any thing else, it is so impenetrable, close,
and shut, that nothing can enter, not so much as the Water of the Sea. See here
a very clear Description of this Building, and borrowed from a very good Hand;
and yet, methinks, it does not give us sufficient Light into the Difficulty of
this Architecture. Now from what Vanity can it proceed, to Despise and
disdainfully to Interpret Effects, that we can neither imitate, nor comprehend?
To pursue a little further this Equality, and Correspondence betwixt us, and
Beasts; the Privilege our Soul so much glorifies herself upon, of bringing all
things she conceives to her own Law, of stripping all things that come to her,
of their mortal and corporal Qualities, of ordering and placing things she
conceives worthy her taking notice of, stripping and devesting them of their
corruptible Qualities, and making them to lay aside Length, Breadth, Depth,
Weight, Color, Smell, Roughness, Smoothness, Hardness, Softness, and all
sensible Accidents, and mean and superfluous Vestments, to accommodate them to
her own immortal, and spiritual Condition: As Rome and Paris, for Example, that
I have in my Fancy. Paris that I imagine, I imagine, and conceive it, without
Greatness, and without Place, without Stone, without Plaster, and without
Wood: This very same Privilege, I say, seems to be evidently in Beasts: For a
Courser accustomed to the Danger of Trumpets, the Rattle of Musket Shot, and
the Bustle of Battles, which we see start and tremble in his Sleep, and
stretched upon his Litter as if he were in Fight; it is most certain, that he
conceives in his Soul the beat of Drum without Noise, and an Army without
Arms, and without Body. Lucret. l. 4.
Quippe videbis equos fortes, cum membra jacebunt
In somnis, sudare tamen, spirareque saepe,
Et quasi de Palma summas contendere vires.
You shall see managed Horses in their Sleep,
Sweat, Snort, Start, Tremble, and a Clutter keep,
As if with all their Force they striving were,
The Victors Palm proudly away to bear.
The Hare, that a Grayhound imagines in his Sleep, after which we see him pant
so whilst he sleeps, stretch out his Tail, shake his Legs, and perfectly
represent all the Motions of a Course, is a Hare without Wool, and without
Bones. Venantumque canes in molli saepe quiet Ibid.

Jactant crura tamen subito, vocesque repent
Mittunt, and crebras reducunt naribus auras,
Vt vestigia si teneant inventa ferarum:
Expergefactique sequuntur inania saepe
Cervorum simulacra, fugae quasi dedita cernant:
Donec discussis redeant erroribus ad se.
And Hounds stir often in their quiet Rest,
Spending their Mouths, as if upon a Quest,
Snuff, and breath quick, and short, as if they went,
In a full Chase upon a burning Scent:
Nay being waked, imagined Stags pursue,
As if they had them in their real View,
Till having shook themselves more broad awake,
They do, at last, discover the Mistake.
The Bandogs, that we often observe to snarle in their Dreams, and afterward
bark out, and start up on a sudden, as if they perceived some Stranger at
hand. This Stranger that the Soul discerns, is a spiritual Man, and
Imperceptible, without Dimension, without Color, and without Being. Consueta
domi catulorum blanda propago
Degere, Ibid.
saepe levem ex oculis volucremque soporem
Discutere, and corpus de terra corripere instant,
Proinde quasi ignotas facies, atque ora tueantur.
The fawning Issue of House-Dogs will rise,
And shaking the soft Slumber from their Eyes,
Often wildly stare at every one within,
As upon Faces they had never seen.
As to the Beauty of the Body, before I proceed any further, I should know
whether, or no, we are agreed about the Description: It Is likely we do not well
know what Beauty is in Nature; and in general, since to our own human Beauty we
give so many diverse Forms; of which, were there any natural Rule, and
Prescription, we should know it in common, as the Heat of the Fire. But we
fancy the Forms according to our own Appetite, and Liking. Propert. lib. 2.
Eleg. 13.
Turpis Romano Belgicus ore color.
The fair Complexion of a German Lass,
Would be thought ugly in a Roman Face.
Indians paint it black and tawny, with great swelled Lips, Beauty of the
Indians.
great and flat Noses, and load the Cartilage betwixt the Nostrils with great
Rings of Gold, to make it hang down to the Mouth; as also the nether Lip with
great Circles, enriched with Stones, that weigh them down to fall upon the
Chin, it being with them a singular Grace to show their Teeth, even below the
Roots. In Peru, the greatest Ears are the most Beautiful, which they stretch
out as far as they can by Art. And a Man now living says, that he has seen in
an Eastern Nation, this care of enlarging them in so great Repute, and the Ear
laden with so ponderous Jewels, that he did with great ease, put his Arm,
Sleeve, and all, thorough the hole of an Ear. There are elsewhere Nations, that
take great care to black their Teeth, and hate to see them white; White Teeth
despised.
and others that paint them re^* The Women are reputed more Beautiful, not only
in Biscay, but elsewhere, for having their Heads shaved: And which is more, in
certain frozen Countries, as Pliny reports. The Mexicans esteem a low Forehead
a great Beauty, and tho they shave all other Parts, they nourish Hair on the
Forehead, and increase it by Art; and have great Breasts in so great
Reputation, that they affect to give their Children suck over their Shoulders.
We should paint Deformity so. The Italians fashion it Gross and Massy: The
Spaniards, Gaunt and Slender; and amongst us, one has made it White, another
Brown: One Soft and Delicate; another Strong and Vigorous: One will have his
Mistress Soft and Gentle; others Scornful and Proud. Just as the Preference in
Beauty, that Plato attributes to the spherical Figure, the Epicureans give
rather to the Pyramidal, or Square; and cannot swallow a God in the form of a
Bowl. But be it how it will, Nature has no more privileged us in this from
these common Laws, than in the rest. And if we will judge our selves aright, we
shall find, that if there be some Animals less favored in this, than we; there
are others, and in great number, that are more. A multis animalibus decore
vincimur; Senec. Epist. 124.
even the Terrestrial, our Compatriots. For as to those of the Sea, setting the
Figure aside, which cannot fall into any manner of Proportion, being so much
another thing: In Color, Cleanness, Smoothness, and Disposition, we
sufficiently give place to them; and no less in all Qualities to the Aereal.
And this Prerogative that the Poets make such a mighty matter of, our erect
Stature, looking toward Heaven our Original, Prondque cum spectent animalia
caetera terram,
Ovid. Met. lib. 2.
Os homini sublime dedit, caelumque videre
Jussit, and erectos ad sydera tollere vultus.
And whereas other Animals do bow,
Their prone abjected Looks to Earth below,
He gave Men Looks erected, to behold
The Heavenly Arch studded with Stars of Gold.
is truly Poetical: For there are several little Beasts, who have their Sight
absolutely turned toward Heaven; and I find the Countenances of Camels, and
Ostriges, much higher raised, and more erect than ours. What Animals have not
their Faces above, and not before, and do not look opposite as we do: And that
do not in their natural Posture discover as much of Heaven and Earth, as Man?
And what Qualities of our bodily Constitution in Plato and Cicero, may not
indifferently serve a thousand sorts of Beasts? Those that most resemble us,
are the most Despicable, and deformed of all the Heard: For those in outward
appearance and form of Visage, are Baboones and Monkies: Simia quam similis,
turpissima bestia nobis?
How like to Man in Visage, and in Shape, Cic. de Not. Deor. lib. 1. ex Ennio.

Is, of all Beasts the most deformed, the Ape?
For the Internal, and Vital Parts, the Hog. In earnest, when I imagine Man
stark naked, (even in that Sex, that seems to have the greatest share of
Beauty) his Defects, natural Subjection, and Imperfections, I find that we have
more reason than any other Animal, to cover our selves; are to be excused for
borrowing of those, that Nature has in this been kinder, than to us, to trick
our selves with their Beauties, and hide our selves under their Spoils, their
Wool, Feathers, Hair, and Silk. Let us observe as to the rest, that Man is the
sole Animal, whose Nudities offend his own Companions, and the only one, who in
his natural Actions withdraws, and hides himself from his own Kind. And really,
it is also an Effect worth Consideration, that they, who are Masters in the
Trade, prescribe as a Remedy for amorous Passions, the full, and free View of
the Body a Man desires, so that to cool the Ardour, there needs no more, but at
liberty to see, and contemplate the Parts he loves. Ovid. de Rem. Amor. l. 2.
Ille quod obscaenas in aperto corpore parts
Viderat, in cursu qui fuit, haesit amor.
The Loves that is tilting, when those Parts appear
Open to View, flags in the hot Carreer.
And although this Receipt may peradventure proceed from a nice and cold Humor: It
is notwithstanding, a very great sign of our want of Strength and Mettle, that
Use and Acquaintance should make us disgust one another. It is not Modesty so
much as Cunning and Prudence, that makes our Ladies so Circumspect, to refuse
us Admittance into their Cabinets, before they are painted and trickt up for
the public View. Nec Veneres nostras hoc fallit, quo magis ipsae
Omnia summopere hos vitae post scenta celant,
Quos retinere volunt adstrictoque esse in amore.
Of this, our Ladies are full well aware,
Which makes them with such Privacy and Care,
Behind the Scene all those Defects remove,
Should check the Flame of those, they most do love.
Whereas in several Animals there is nothing that we do not love, and that does
not please our Senses: So that from their very Excrements, we do not only
extract wherewith to heighten our Sawces; but also our richest Ornaments and
Perfumes. This Discourse reflects upon none, but the ordinary sort of Women,
and is not so Sacrilegious, as to comprehend those Divine, Supernatural and
extraordinary Beauties, which we see shine amongst us, like Stars under a
Corporeal and Terrestial Veil. As to the rest, the very Share that we allow to
Beasts, of the bounty of Nature, by our own Confession, is very much to their
Advantage. We attribute to our selves imaginary and fantastic Goods, future
and absent Goods, for which human Capacity cannot of her self be Responsible:
Or Goods, that we falsely attribute to our selves by the License of Opinion, as
Reason, Knowledge, and Honor: And leave to them for their Divident, Essential,
Maniable, and Palpable Goods, as Peace, Repose, Security, Innocence, and
Health: Health, I say, the fairest and richest Present that Nature can make us.
Health the best and richest Gift of Nature.
Insomuch that the Philosopher, even the Stoic, is so bold as to say, that
Heraclytus and Pherecides, could they have truck'd their Wisdom for Health, and
have delivered themselves, the one of his Dropsy, and the other of the lowsy
Disease that tormented him by the bargain, they had done well. By which they
set a greater Value upon Wisdom, comparing and putting it in the Balance with
Health, than they do in this other Proposition, which is also theirs. They say,
that if Circe had presented Ulysses with two Potions, Cicero 's two Potions.
the one to make a Fool become a Wiseman, and the other to make a Wiseman
become a Fool, that Ulysses ought rather to have chosen the last, than to
consent that Circe had changed his human Figure into that of a Beast: And say
that Wisdom it self would have spoke to him after this manner. Forsake me, let
me alone, rather than lodge me under the Body and Figure of an Ass. How? The
Philosophers then will abandon this great and divine Wisdom, for this corporal
and terrestrial Covering? It is than no more by Reason, by Discourse, and by
the Soul, that we excel Beasts: It Is by our Beauty, our fair Complexion, and
our fine symmetry of Parts, for which we must quit our Intelligence, our
Prudence, and all the rest. Well, I accept this natural and free Confession:
Certainly they knew, that those Parts upon which we so much value our selves,
are no other than mere Fancy. If Beasts then had all the Virtue, Knowledge,
Wisdom and Stoical Perfection; they would still be Beasts, and would not be
comparable to Man, Miserable, Wicked, and a Madman. For, in fine, whatever is
not as we are, is nothing considerable: And God, to procure himself an Esteem
amongst us, must put himself into that Shape, as we shall show anon. By which
it does appear, that it is not upon any true ground of Reason, but by a foolish
Pride and vain Opinion, that we prefer our selves before other Animals, and
separate our selves from their Society and Condition. But, to return, to what I
was upon before, we have for our part, Inconstancy, Irresolution, Incercitude,
Sorrow, Superstition, Solicitude of things to come, even after we shall be no
more, Ambition, Avarice, Jealousy, Envy, Irregular, Frantic and Untamed
Appetites, War, Lying, Disloyalty, Detraction and Curiosity. Doubtless, we have
strangely overpay'd this Fine, upon which we so much glorify our selves, and
this Capacity of Judging and Knowing, if we have bought it at the Price of this
infinite number of Passions, to which we are eternally subject. Unless we shall
yet think fit, as Socrates does, to add to the Counterpoise, that notable
Prerogative above Beasts, that whereas Nature has prescribed them certain
Seasons and Limits for the Delights of Venus, she has given us the Reins at all
Hours, and all Seasons. Vt vinum aegrotis quia prodest raro, nocet saepissime,
melius est non adhibere omnino, quam, Cicero de Not. Deor. l. 3. simile.
spe dubiae salutis in apertam perniciem incurrere: Sic haud scio, an melius
fuerit humano generi motum istum celerem, cogitationis acumen, solertiam, quam
rationem vocamus, qoniam pestifera sint multis, admodum paucis salutaria, non
dari omnimo, quam tam munifice and tam large dari. As it falls out, that Wine
often hurts the Sick, and very rarely does them good, it is better not to give
them any at all, than to run into an apparent Danger, out of hope of an
uncertain Benefit: So I know not, whether it had not been better for Mankind,
that this quick Motion, this penetrancy of Imagination, this Subtlety, that we
call Reason, had not been given to Man at all; considering how pestiferous it
is to many, and healthful but to few, than to have been conferred in so
abundant manner, and with so liberal a Hand. Of what Advantage can we conceive
the Knowledge of so many things was to Varro, and Aristotle? Did it exempt them
from human Inconveniences? Were they by it freed from the Accidents, that ly
heavy upon the Shoulders of a Porter? Did they extract from their Logic any
Consolation for the Gout? Or, for knowing that the Humor is lodged in the
Joints, did they feel it the less? Have they compounded with Death, by knowing
that some Nations rejoice at his Approach: Or with Cuckoldry, by knowing, that
in some part of the World, Wives are in Common? On the contrary; having been
reputed the greatest Men for Knowledge, the one amongst the Romans, and the
other amongst the Greeks, and in a time when Learning did most flourish, we
have not heard nevertheless, that they had any particular Excellence in their
Lives: Nay, the Greek had enough to do, to clear himself from some notable
Blemishes in his. Have we observed that Pleasure and Health have had a better
relish with him that understands Astrology and Grammar, than with others?
Horat. Ep. 8.
Illiterati number minus nervi rigent?
The illiterate Plough-Man is as Fit,
For Venus Service as the Wit.
And Shame and Poverty less troublesome to the first, than the last? Scilicet
and morbis, and debilitate carebis, Juv. Sat. 14.

Et luctum and curam effugies, and tempora vitae
Longa tibi post haec fato meliore dabuntur.
-- Thou shall be free
Both from Disease, and from Infirmity,
From Care and Sorrow, and thy Life shall be
Prolonged under a better Destiny.
I have known in my time a hundred Artizans, and a hundred Laborers wiser and
more happy, than the Rectors of the University, and whom I had much rather have
resembled. Learning methinks, has its Place amongst the necessary things of
Life, as Glory, Nobility, Dignity, or at the most, as Riches, and such other
Qualities, which indeed are useful to it; but remotely, and more by Opinion,
than by Nature. We stand very little more in need of Offices, Rules, and Laws
of living in our Society, than Cranes and Emmets do in theirs. And yet we see
that they carry themselves very regularly, and without Erudition. If Man was
Wise, he would take the true value of every thing according as it was more
utile, and proper to his Life. Whoever will number us by our Actions and
Deportments, will find many more excellent Men amongst the Ignorant than the
Learned: I say, in all sort of Virtue. The old Rome seems to me, to have been
of much greater Value, both for Peace and War, than that learned Rome that
ruined it self. And tho all the rest should be equal; yet the Prowess,
Integrity, and Innocence would remain to the Ancients, for they cohabit
singularly well with Simplicity. But I will leave this Discourse, Humility and
Submission the Parents of Virtue.
that would lead me farther than I am willing to follow; and shall only say
this farther, it is only Humility and Submission, that can make a complete good
Man. We are not to leave the Knowldg of his Duty to every Man's own Judgment:
We are to prescribe it to him, and not suffer him to choose it at his own
Discretion: Otherwise, according to the Imbecility and infinite Variety of our
Reasons and Opinions, we should at last forge ourselves Duties, that would (as
Epicurus says) enjoine us to eat one another. The first Law that ever God gave
to Man, was a Law of pure Obedience: It was a Commandment naked and simple,
wherein Man had nothing to enquire after, or to dispute, forasmuch as to obey,
is the proper Office of a Rational Soul, ackowledging a heavenly Superior and
Benefactor. From Obedience and Submission, spring all other Virtues, as all Sin
does from Self-Opinion. And on the contrary, the first Temptation, that by the
Devil was offered to human Nature, its first Poison insinuated it self by the
Promises was made us of Knowledge and Wisdom: Eritis sicut Dii, scientes bonum
and malum. Ye shall be as Gods, knowing Good and Evil. Genesis 3.
And the Sirens in Homer, to allure Ulysses, and draw him within the danger of
their Snares, offered to give him Knowledge. The Plague of Man, is the Opinion
of Wisdom. And for this reason it is, that Ignorance is so recommended to us by
our Religion, as proper to Faith and Obedience. Cavete, ne quis vos decipiat
per Philosophiam, and inanes seductiones, Coloss. c. 2.
secundum elementa mundi. Take heed, lest any Man deceive you by Philosophy and
vain Deceit, after the Tradition of Men, and the Rudiments of the World. There
is in this a general Consent amonst all sorts of Philosophers, that the
sovereign Good consists in the Tranquillity of the Soul and Body: But where
shall we find it? Ad summum sapiens uno minor est Jove, Horat. l. 1. Epist. 1.
dives
Liber, honoratus, pulcher, rex denique regum:
Praecipue sanus, nisi cum pituita molesta est:
He that is Wise, inferior is to none,
If he be Wise indeed, but Jove alone.
Rich, Free, and Graceful, these do Reverence bring,
And lastly of the Greates, Kings, a King:
And cheifely sound, unless sometimes there flow
A trickling Rheum upon his Lungs, or so.
It seems, in truth, that Nature, for the Consolation of our miserable and
wretched Estate, has only given us Presumption for our Inheritance. It Is as
Epictetus says, That Man has nothing properly his own, but the use of his
Opinions: We have nothing but Wind and Smoke for our Portion. The Gods have
Health in Essence, says Philosophy, and Sickness in Intelligence. Man, on the
contrary, posses his Goods by Fancy, his Ills in Essence. We have had Reason to
magnify the Power of our Imagination; for all our Goods are only in Dream. Hear
this poor calamicous Animal Huff. There is nothing, says Cicero, so charming as
the Knowledge of Letters; of Letters I say, by means whereof the Infinity of
things, the immense grandeur of Nature, the Heavens, even in this World, the
Earth, and the Seas are discovered to us: It Is they that have taught us
Religion, Moderation, and the grandeur of Courage, and that have rescued our
Souls from Obscurity, to make her see all things, high, low, first and last,
and indifferent: it is they, that furnish us wherewith to live happily and well,
and conduct us to pass over our Lives without Displeasure, and without Offense.
Does not this Man seem to speak of the Condition of the Ever-living and
Almighty God? And as to the Effect, a thousand little Country-Women have lived
Lives more equal, more sweet and constant than his. -- Deus ille fuit Deus,
inclute Memmi,
Lucr. l. 5.
Qui princeps vitae rationem invenit eam, quae
Nunc appellatur sapientia, quique per artem
Fluctibus e tantis vitam tantisque tenebris,
In tam tranquilla, and tam clara luce locavit.
That God, great Memmus, was a God no doubt,
Who, Prince of Life, first found that Reason out,
Now Wisdom called, and by his Art, who did
That Life in Tempests tossed, and Darkness hid,
Place in so great a Calm, and clear a Light.
Here are brave ranting Words: But a very light Accident put this Man's
Understanding in a worse Condition, Temerity, and Presumption of some
Philosophers.
than that of the meanest Shepherd: Notwithstanding this Instructing God, this
Divine Wisdom. Of the same stamp of Impudence is the Promise of Democritus his
Book: I am going to speak of all things. And that foolish Title that Aristotle
prefixes to one of his, of the Immortal Gods: And the Judgment of Chrysippus,
That Dion was as Virtuous, as God. And my beloved Seneca does indeed
acknowledge, that God has given him Life: But that to live well, is his own.
According to this other, In virtute vere gloriamur: quod non contingeret, si id
donum a Deo non a nobis haberemus. Cicero de Not. Deor. l. 3.
We truly glory in our Virtue: Which would not be, if it was given us of God,
and not by our selves. This is also Seneca's saying, That the Wise Man has
Fortitude equal with God; but in human Frailty, wherein he surmounts him. There
is nothing so ordinary as to meet with Sallies of the like Temerity: There is
none of us, who takes so much Offense to see himself equal to God, as he does,
to see himself undervalued by being rancked with other Creatures; so much more
are we jealous of our own Interest, than that of our Creator. But we must
trample under foot this foolish Vanity, and briskly and boldly shake the
ridiculous Foundation, upon which these false Opinions are founded. So long as
Man shall believe he has any Means and Power of himself, he will never
acknowledge what he owes to his Maker, his Eggs shall always be Chickens, as the
saying is: We must therefore strip him to his Shirt. Let us see some notable
Example of the Effects of his Philosophy. Possidonius being tormented with a
Disease so painful, as made him Writh his Arms, and Gnash his Teeth; thought
he sufficiently baffell'd the Dolor, by crying out against it: Thou do
exercise thy Malice to much Purpose, I will not Confess that thou art an Evil.
He is as sensible of the Pain as my Footman, but he mightily values himself,
upon brideling his Tongue at least, and restraining it within the Laws of his
Sect. Re succumbere non oportebat verbis gloriantem. It did not become him that
spoke so big, Cic. Tusc. l. 2.
to confess his Frailty when he came to the Test. Archesilaus, being ill of the
Gout, and Carneades coming to see him, was returning troubled at his Condition,
whom having called back, and showing him his Feet and his Breast: There is
nothing come from thence hither, said he. This has something a better Grace,
for he feels himself in Pain, and would be disengaged from it: But his Heart,
notwithstanding, is not Conquered, nor Subdued by it. The other stands more
obstinately to his Work; but I fear, rather verbally than really. And Dionysius
Heracleotes, afflicted with a vehement smarting in his Eyes, was reduced, and
made to quit these stoical Resolutions. But tho Knowledge should, in effect, do
as they say, and could blunt the Point, and dull the Edge of the Misfortunes
that attend us, what does she yet more, than what Ignorance does more purely,
and evidently do? The Philosopher Pyrrho, being at Sea in very great Danger, by
reason of a mighty Storm, presented nothing to those who were with him, to
imitate in this Extremity, but the Security of a Hog they had aboard, that was
Fearless and unconcerned at the Tempest. Philosophy, when she has said all she
can, refers us at last, to the Example of a Wrestler, or a Muletteer, in which
sort of People we commonly observe much less apprehension of Death, sense of
Pain, and other Infirmities, and more Constancy, than ever Knowledge furnished
any one withal, that was not born with those Infirmities, and of himself
prepared by a natural Habit. What is the Cause, that we make Incisions, and cut
the tender Limbs of an Infant, and those of a Horse, more easily than ours, but
Ignorance only? How many has mere force of Imagination made sick? Diseases
caused by Imagination.
We often see Men cause themselves to be let Blood, Purged and Physick'd, to be
cured of Diseases they only feel in Opinion. When real Infirmities fail us,
Knowledge lends us hers: That Color, that Complexion, portend some Defluxion:
This hot Season threatens us with a Fever: This breach in the life-Line of
your left Hand, gives you notice of some near and dangerous Indisposition, and
at last roundly attacks Health it self; saying, this spriteliness and vigor of
Youth, cannot continue in this Posture, there must be Blood taken, and the Heat
abated, lest it turn to your Prejudice. Compare the Life of a Man subjected to
such Imaginations, to that of a Labourer that suffers himself to be led by his
natural Appetite, measuring things only by the present Sense, without Knowledge,
and without Prognostic, that feels no Pain nor Sickness, but when he is really
tormented, or sick: Whereas the other has the Stone in his Soul, before he has
it either in his Reins or Bladder: As if it were not time enough to suffer the
Evil when it shall come, he must anticipate it by Fancy, and run to meet it.
What I say of Physic may generally serve in Example for all other Sciences:
From thence is derived that ancient Opinion of Philosophers, that placed the
sovereign Good, in the discovery of the weakness of our Judgment. My Ignorance
affords me as much occasion of Hope, as of Fear: And having no other Rule for
my Health, than that of the Examples of others, and of Events I see elsewhere
upon the like Occasion; I find of all sorts, and rely upon the Comparisons are
most favorable to me. I receive Health with open Arms, free, full, and entire,
and by so much the more whet my Appetite to enjoy it, by how much it is at
present less ordinary, and more rare: So far I am from troubling its Repose and
Sweetness, with the bitterness of a new and constrained manner of Living.
Beasts sufficiently show us, how much the agitation of the Soul brings
Infirmities and Diseases upon us. That which is told us of those of Brazile,
that they never died but of old Age, is attributed to the Serenity and
tranquillity of the Air they live in; but I rather attribute it to the serenity
and tranquillity of their Souls, free from all Passion, Thought or Employments,
Tenter'd or Unpleasing, as People that pass over their Lives in an admirable
Simplicity and Ignorance, without Letters, without Law, without King, or any
manner of Religion. And whence comes that, which we find by Experience, that
the greatest and most rough-hewn Clowns are the most able, and the most to be
desired in amorous Performances? And that the Love of a Muletter, often renders
it self more acceptable than that of a well-bred Man? If it be not, that the
Agitation of the Soul, in the later, disturbs his natural Ability, dissolves
and tires it, as it also troubles and tires it self. What puts the Soul besides
it self, and more usually throws it into Madness, but her own Promptness, Vigor
and Agility, and finally, her own proper Force? Of what is the most subtle
Folly made, but of the most subtle Wisdom? As great Friendships spring from
great Enmities, and vigorous Healths from mortal Diseases: So from the rare and
quick Agitations of our Souls, proceed the most wonderful and most depraved
Frenzies; it is but a half turn of the Toe from the one to the other. In the
Actions of mad Men, we see how infinitely that Madness resembles the most
vigorous Operations of the Soul. Who does not know how indiscernable the
difference is betwixt Folly, and the Elevations of a spritely Soul, and the
Effects of a supreme and extraordinary Virtue? Plato says, that melancholic
persons are the most capable of Discipline, and the most excellent, nor indeed
is there in any so great a propension to madness. Infinite Wits are ruined by
their own proper force and quickness. Ariosto.
What a condition, through his own agitation, and promptness of Fancy is one of
the most judicious, ingenious, and the best formed Souls to the ancient and
true Poesy of any other Italian Poet that has been these very many years,
lately fallen into? Has he not great obligation to this Vivacity that has
destroyed him? To this Light that has blinded him? To this exact and subtle
apprehension of Reason, that has put him besides his Reason? To his curious and
laborious Scrutiny after Sciences, that has reduced him to a Brute? And to this
rare aptitude to the Exercises of the Soul, that has rendered him without
Exercise, and without Soul? I was more angry, if possible, than compassionate,
to see him at Ferrara in so pitiful a condition survive himself; forgetting
both himself and his Works; which without his knowledge, though before his
Face, have been published, deformed and incorrect. Would you have a Man sound,
would you have him regular, and in a steady and secure posture? Muffle him up
in the shades of Stupidity and Sloth. We must be made Beasts to be made wise,
and Hoodwinked before we are fit to be led. And if one shall tell me that the
advantage of having a cold and stupid Sense of Pains and other Evils, brings
this disadvantage along with it, to render us consequently less sensible also
in the fruition of Goods and Pleasure: This is true: But the misery of our
condition is such, that we have not so much to enjoy, as to avoid, and that the
extremest pleasure does not affect us to the degree that a light Grief does:
Segnius homines bona, quam mala sentiunr. We are not so sensible of the most
perfect Health, as we are of the least Sickness. -- pungit. Lucret.

In cute vix summa violatum plagula corpus,
Quando valere nihil quemquam movet. Hoc juvat unum
Quod me non torquet latus, aut pes: Caetera quisquam
Vix queat, aut sanum sese, aut sentire valentem.
The Body with a little stripe is grieved,
When the most perfect Health is not perceived.
This only pleases me, that Spleen nor Gout
Either offend my Side, or wring my Foot,
Excepting these, scarce any one can tell,
Or does observe, when he is in Health and Well.
Our Well-being is nothing but the privation of Evil. Which is the reason why
that Sect of Philosophers, who sets the greatest value upon Pleasure, has yet
fixed it chiefly in Insensibility of Pain. To be freed from Ill, is the greatest
Good that Man can hope for or desire: According to Eunius. Nimium boni est, cui
nihil est mali. For that very tickling and sting, which are in certain
Pleasures, and that seem to raise us above simple Health and Insensibility;
that active, moving, and, I know not how, itching and biting Pleasure; even
that very Pleasure it self levels at nothing but Insensibility, as its mark.
The Lust that carries us headlong to Women's Embraces, is directed for no other
end, but only to cure the Torment of our ardent Desires, and only requires to
be glutted and laid at rest, and delivered from that Fever. And so of the
rest. I say then, that if Simplicity conducts us to an Estate free from Evil,
she leads us to a very happy one, according to our condition. And yet we are
not to imagine it so stupid an Insensibility, as to be totally without Sense:
For Crantor had very good reason to controvert the Insensibility of Epicurus;
if founded so deep, that the very first Attack and Birth of Evils were not to
be perceived. I do not approve such an Insensibility, as is neither possible,
nor to be desired. I am very well content not to be sick: But if I am, I would,
know that I am so; and if a Caustic be applied, or Incisions made in any part,
I would feel them. In truth, whoever would take away the knowledge and Sense of
Evil, would at the same time eradicate the Sense of Pleasure, and finally
annihilate Man himself. Istud nihil dolere, non sine magna mercede contingit
immanitatis in animo, stuporis in cord. Cicer. Thus. l. 2.
An Insensibility, that is, not to be purchased, but at the Price of the
Humanity of the Soul, and of Stupidity in the Body. Evil appertains to Man in
turn. Neither is Grief and Pains always to be avoided, nor Pleasure always
pursued. It Is a great advantage to the Honor of Ignorance, that Knowledge it
self throws us into its Arms; when she finds her self puzzel^d to fortify us
against the weight of Evil, she is constrained to come to this Composition, to
give us the Reins, and permit us to fly into the Lap of the other, and to
shelter our selves under her Protection from the Strokes and Injuries of
Fortune. For what else is her meaning, when she instructs us to divert our
Thoughts from the Ills that press upon us, and entertain them with the
Meditation of Pleasures past and gone, to comfort our selves in present
Afflictions, with the remembrance of fled Delights, and to call to our succor,
a vanished satisfaction, to oppose it to that which lies heavy upon us?
Levationes aegritudinum in avocatione a cogit and a molestia, Cicer. Thus. l. 3.
and revocatione ad contemplandas voluptas ponit; If it be not that where her
power fails, she will supply it with policy, and make use of Slight, and a
cunning Trip, where the force of Limbs will not serve her turn? For not only to
a Philosopher, but to any Man in his right Wits, when he has upon him the
Thirst of a burning Fever, what satisfaction can it be to remember the
Pleasure of drinking Greek Wine? It would rather be a greater torment to him,
Che ricordar si il ben doppia la nosa.
Proverb.
Who so remembers, all he Gains,
Is, that he doubles his own Pains.
Of the same stamp is this other Counsel that Philosophy gives, only to
remember good Fortunes past, and to forget the Misadventures we have undergone;
as if we had the Science of Oblivion in our own Power and Counsel, wherein we
are yet more to seek. Cicero de Fin. l. 2.
Suavis est laborum praeteritorum memoria. The Memory of past Evil is sweet.
How? Does Philosophy that should arm me to contend with Fortune, and steel my
Courage to trample all Human Adversities under foot, is she arrived to this
degree of Cowardice, to make me hide my head at this rate, and save my self by
these pitiful and ridiculous Shifts? For the Memory represents to us, not what
we choose, but what she pleases; nay, there is nothing that so much imprints
any thing in our Memory, as a desire to forget it: And it is a good way to
retinue and keep any thing safe in the Soul to solicit her to lose it. Cic. de
Fin. lib. 1.
And this is false. Est situm in nobis ut and adversa quasi perpetua oblivione
obruamus, and secunda jucunde and suaviter meminerimus. And it is in our power
to bury, as it were, in a perpetual Oblivion all adverse Accidents, and to
retein a pleasant and delightful Memory of our Successes. And this is true,
Memini etiam quae nolo: Oblivisci non possum quae volo. I do also remember what
I would not; but I cannot forget what I would. And whose Counsel is this? His,
qui se unus sapientem profiteri fit ausus. Who only durst profess himself a
Wise Man. Qui genus humanum ingenio superavit, Lucr. l. 3.
and omnes
Praestrinxit Stellas, exortus uti aetherius Sol.
Who from Mankind the prize of Knowledge won,
And put the Stars out like a rising Sun.
To empty and disfurnish the Memory, is not this the true way to Ignorance?
Iners malorum remedium ignorantia est. Senec. Oed. Act. 3.

Ignorance is but a dull remedy for Evils.
We find several other like Precepts, whereby we are permitted to borrow
frivolous apparences from the Vulgar, where we find the greatest reason cannot
do the Feat: Provided they administer Satisfaction and Comfort. Where they
cannot cure the Wound, they are content to palliate and benumn it. I believe
they will not deny this, that if they could add Order and Constancy in an
estate of Life that could maintain it self in Ease and Pleasure by some
Debility of Judgment they would accept it: Horat. Ep. ib. 1.
-- potare, and spargere flores
Incipiam, patiarque vel inconsultus haberi.
I Will drink and revel like a jovial Lad,
Though for my pains, the World repute me mad.
There would be a great many Philosophers of Lycas his Mind: This Man being
otherwise of very gentle Manners, living quietly and contentedly in his Family,
and not failing in any Office of his Duty, either toward his own or Strangers,
and very carefully preserving himself from hurtful things, was nevertheless, by
some Distemper in his Brains, possessed with a Conceit, that he was perpetually
in the Theater a Spectator of the finest sights, and the best Comedies in the
World; and being cured by the Physicians of his Frenzy, had much ado to
forbear endeavoring by Suit to compel them to restore him again to his
pleasing Imaginations. Horat. l. 2. Epist. 2.
-- pol me occidistis amici
Non servastis, ait, cui sic extorta voluptas,
Et demptus per vim mentis gratissimus error.
By Heaven you have killed me Friends outright,
And not preserved me, since my dear delight
And pleasing error, by my better sense
Unhappily returned, is banished hence.
With a madness like that of Thrasylaus, the Son of Pythodorus, who made
himself believe that all the Ships that weighed Anchor from the Port of Pyreum,
and that came into the Haven, only made their Voyages for his Profit:
Congratulating them for their happy Navigation, and receiving them with the
greatest Joy, whom his Brother Crito having caused to be restored to his better
Understanding, he infinitely regretted that sort of condition, wherein he had
lived with so much delight, and free from all Anxiety of Mind. It Is according
to the Old Greek Verse, that there is a great deal of convenience in not being
over-wise. (...). And Ecclesiastes, In much Wisdom, Learning and Wisdom
accompanied with Trouble.
there is much Sorrow: And who gets Wisdom, gets Labor and Trouble. Even that
to which Philosophy consents in general, that last Remedy which she applys to
all sorts of Necessities, to put an end to the Life, we are not able to endure
it. Placet? Pare: Non placet? Quacunque vis exi? Cicer. Thus. l. 2.
Pungit dolor? Fodiat sane: Si nudus es, da jugulum: Sin tectus armis vulcanis,
id est fortitudine, resist. Does it please? Obey it. Not please? Go out how
thou will. Does Grief prick thee? Nay, if it stab thee too: If thou art naked,
present thy Throat: If covered with the Arms of Vulcan, that is Fortitude,
resist it. And this word so used in the Greek Festivals, aut bibat, aut abeat,
That sounds better upon the Tongue of a Gascon, who naturally change the V.
into B. than upon that of Cicero; Horat. l. 2. Epist. 2.
Vivere si recte nescis, decede peritis.
Lusisti satis, edisti satis, atque bibisti:
Tempus abire tibi est, ne potum largius aequo
Rideat, and pulset lasciva decentius aetas.
If to live well, and right thou do not know,
Give place, and leave thy Room to those that do,
Thou Have eaten, drank, and played to thy content,
It Is time to make thy parting Complement,
Least, being over-dos't, the younger sort
Laugh at thee first, and than exclude thee for it.
What is it other than a Confession of his Impotency, and a sending back not
only to Ignorance, to be there in safety, but even to Stupidity, Insensibility,
and Nonentity? Luc. l. 3.
Democritum postquam matura vetustas
Admonuit memorem, motus languescere mentis:
Sponte sua letho caput obvius obtulit ipse.
Soon as through Age Democritus did find
A manifest Decadence in his Mind,
He thought he now survived to his own wrong.
And went to meet his Death that stayed too long.
It Is what Antisthenes said, That a Man must either make provision of Sense to
understand; Or of a Halter to hang himself: And what Crysippus alleged upon
this Saying of the Poet Tyrteus, De la virtue, ou de mort approcher. Plutarch.

Or to arrive at Virtue, or at Death.
And Crates said, How Love is to be cured.
That Love would be cured by Hunger, if not by time: And whoever disliked these
two Remedies, by a With. That Sextius of whom both Seneca and Plutarch speak
with so high an Encomium, having applied himself (all other things set aside)
to the Study of Philosophy, resolved to throw himself into the Sea, seeing the
Progress of his Studies too tedious and slow. He ran to find Death, since he
could not overtake Knowledge. These are the words of the Law upon this Subject.
If peradventure some great inconvenience happen, for which there is no remedy,
the Haven is near, and a Man may save himself by swimming out of his Body, as
out of a leaky Skiff; for it is the Fear of Dying, and not the Love of Life,
that ties the Fool to his Body. As Life renders it self by Simplicity more
pleasant, so more innocent and better, as I was saying before. The simple and
ignorant, says St. Paul, raise themselves up to Heaven, and take possession of
it, and we with all our Knowledge, plunge our selves into the infernal Abyss. I
am neither swaid by Valentinian, a professed Enemy to all Knowledge and
Literature; nor by Licinius, both Roman Emperors, who called them the Poison
and Pest of all Politic Governments: Nor by Mahomet, who (as it is said)
interdicted all manner of Learning to his Followers: But the Example of the
Great Lycurgus, The Lacedemonian Policy without Letters.
and his Authority, with the Reverence of the Divine Lacedemonian Policy, so
great, so admirable, and so long flourishing in Virtue and Happiness without
any Institution or Practice of Letters, ought certainly to be of very great
weight. Such as return from the new World, discovered by the Spaniards in our
Fathers days, can testify to us, how much more honestly and regularly those
Nations live without Magistrate, The new World without Law or Magistrate.
and without Law, than ours do, where there are more Officers and Laws, than
there are of other sorts of Men, and Business. Ariosto. Can. 15.
Dicittatorie and di libelli,
D'esamine and di carte, di procure
Hanno le mani and il seno, and gran fastalli
Di chiose, di consigli and di letture,
Percui le faculta de poverelli
Non seno may ne le citta sicure,
Hanno dietro and dinanzi and d'ambi i lati,
Notai procuratori and advocati.
Sir John Harrrington Trans.
Her Lap was full of Writs and of Citations,
Of process of Actions and Arrest,
Of Bills, of Answers, and of Replications,
In Courts of Delegates and of Requests,
To grieve the simple sort with great Vexations:
She had resorting to her as her Guests,
Attending on her Circuits and her Journeys.
Scriv'ners and Clerks, and Lawyers and Attorneys.
It was what a Roman Senator said of the later Ages, that their Predecessors
Breath stunk of Garlic, but their Stomachs were perfumed with a good
Conscience: And that on the contrary, those of his time were all sweet Odor
without, but stunk within of all sorts of Vices, that is to say, as I interpret
it, that they abounded with Learning and Eloquence, but were very defective in
moral Honesty. Incivility, Ignorance, Simplicity and Roughness, are the Natural
Companions of Innocence: Curiosity, Subtlety and Knowledge bring Malice in
their Train: Humility, Fear, Obedience and Affability (which are the principal
things that support and maintain Human Society) require an empty and docile
Soul, and little presuming upon it self. Christians have a particular
Knowledge, how Natural and Original an evil Curiosity is in Man. The Thirst of
Knowledge, and the Desire to become more Wise, was the first ruin of
Human-kind, and the way by which he precipitated himself into Eternal
Damnation. Pride was his ruin and corruption: 'is Pride that diverts from the
Common Path, and makes him embrace Novelties, and rather choose to be Head of a
Troop, lost and wandering in the Path of Error, to be Regent and a Teacher of
Lies, than to be a Disciple in the School of Truth, suffering himself to be led
and guided by the hand of another, in the right and beaten Road. It Is,
peradventure, the meaning of this old Greek saying, (...). Socrates apud
Stobaeum.
That Superstition follows Pride, and obeys it as if it were a Father. O
Presumption, how much do thou hinder us! After that, Socrates was told, That
the God of Wisdom had attributed to him the Title of a Sage, he was astonished
at it, and searching and examining himself throughout, could find no Foundation
for this Divine Sentence. He knew others as just, temperate, valiant and
learned as himself: And more eloquent, more handsome, and more profitable to
their Country, than he. At last he concluded, that he was not distinguished
from others, nor wise, but only because he did not think himself so. And that
his God considered the Opinion of Knowledge and Wisdom as a singular Brutality
in Man; and that his best Doctrine was the Doctrine of Ignorance, and
Simplicity the best Wisdom. The Sacred Word declares those Miserable, who have
an Opinion of themselves: Dust and Ashes, says it to such, What have thou
wherein to Glorify thy self? And in another place, God has made Man like unto
a Shadow, of whom, who can judge, when by the removing of the Light, it shall
be vanished? Man is a thing of nothing, whose Force is so far from being able
to comprehend the Divine Height: That of the Works of our Creator, those best
bear his Mark, and are with better Title, his, which we the least understand.
To meet with an incredible thing, is an Occasion to Christians to believe; and
it is so much the more according to reason, by how much it is against Human
Reason. If it were according to reason, it would be no more a singular thing.
Melius scitur Deus nesciendo, says St. Austin, Div. Aug. l. 2. de ord.
God is better known by not knowing. And Tacitus, Tacit. de mor. Germ.
Sanctius est ac reverentius de actis Deorum credere quam scire. It is more
Holy and Reverend to believe the Works of God, than to know them. And Plato
thinks there is something of Impiety in it, to require too curiously into God,
the World, and first Causes of things. Atque illum quidem parentem hujus
Viversitatis invenire, difficile: Et, quum jam inveneris, indicare in vulgus,
nefas, says Cicero. Cice in Freg.
To find out the Parent of the World, is very hard. And when found out to
reveal him to the Vulgar, is Sin. We pronounce indeed Power, Truth and Justice,
which are words that signify some great thing; but that thing we neither see,
nor conceive at all. We say that God fears, that God is angry, and that God
loves: Immortalia mortali sermon notantes. Lucr. l. 5.

Giving to things immortal mortal Names.
Which are all Agitations and Emotions, that cannot be in God according to our
Form, nor we imagine it according to his; it only belongs to God to know
himself, and to interpret his own Works; and he does it in our Language,
improperly, to stoop and descend to who grovel upon the Earth. How can
Prudence, which is the Choice betwixt Good and Evil, be properly attributed to
him, whom no Evil can touch? How the Reason and Intelligence which we make use
of, by obscure to arrive at apparent things: Seeing that nothing is obscure to
him? And Justice which distributes to every one what appertains to him, a thing
begot by the Society and Community of Men, how is that in God? How Temperance?
Which is the Moderation of Corporal Pleasures, that have no place in the
Divinity? Fortitude to support Pain, Labor, and Dangers as little appertains
to him as the rest, these three things having no access to him. For which
reason, Aristotle holds him equally exempt from Virtue and Vice. Neque gratia,
neque ira teneri potest, quod quae talia essent, Cicer. de Not. Deorum.
imbecilla essent omnia. He can neither be affected with Favor nor
Indignation, because both those are the effects of Frailty. The Participation
we have in the knowledge of Truth, such as it is, is not acquired by our own
^orce. God has sufficiently given us to understand that, by the Witness he has
chosen out of the common people, simple and ignorant Men, that he has been
pleased to employ, to instruct us in his admirable Secrets: Our Faith is not of
our own acquiring, it is purely the Gift of an others Bounty. It Is not by
Meditation, or by Virtue of our own Understanding, that we have acquired our
Religion, but by Foreign Authority and Command, wherein the Imbecility of our
Judgment does more assist us than the Force, and our Blindness more than our
Clearness of Sight. It Is more by the Meditation of our Ignorance than our
Knowledge, that we know any thing of the Divine Wisdom. It Is no wonder, if our
Natural and Earthly parts cannot conceive that Supernatural and heavenly
Knowledge: Let us bring nothing of our own, but Obedience and Subjection. For,
as it is written, 1 Cor. Chapter 1. Ver. 19, 20, 21.
I will destroy the Wisdom of the Wise, and will bring to nothing the
Understanding of the Prudent. Where is the Wise? Where is this Scribe? Where is
the Disputer of this World? Has not God made Foolish the Wisdom of this World.
For after that in the Wisdom of God, the World knew not God, it pleased God by
the Foolishness of preaching to save them that believe. Finally, should I
examine whether it be in the power of Man to find out that which he seeks, and
if that Quest, wherein he has busied himself so many Ages, has enriched him
with any new Force, or any solid Truth: I believe he will confess, if he speaks
from his Conscience, that all he has got by so long an Inquisition, is only to
have learned to know his own Weakness. We have only by a long Study confirmed
and verified the Natural Ignorance we were in before. The same has fallen out
to Men truly Wise, which befalls Ears of Corn; they shoot and raise their heads
high and pert, whilst empty; but when full and swelled with Grain in Maturity,
begin to flag and droop. So Men having tried and sounded all things, and not
having found that Mass of Knowledge, and Provision of so many various things,
nothing massy and firm, and nothing but Vanity, have quitted their Presumption,
and acknowledged their Natural Condition. It Is that, Velleius reproaches Cotta
withal and Cicero, that they learned of Philo, they had learned nothing.
Pherecydes, one of the seven Sages, writing to Thales upon his Deathbed; I
have, said he, given order to my people, after my enterment to carry my
Writings to thee. If they please thee, and the other Sages, publish, if not,
suppress them. They contain no certainty with which I my self am satisfied.
Neither do I pretend to know the truth, or to attain unto it. I more open, than
discover things. The wisest Man that ever was, being asked what he knew, made
answer, He knew this, that he knew nothing. By which, he verified what has been
said, that the greatest part of what we know, is the least of what we do not
know; that is to say, that even what we think, we know, is but a piece, and a
very little one, of our Ignorance. We know things in Dreams, Cicer. Acad. lib.
1.
says Plato, and are ignorant of them in Truth. Omnes pene Veteres nihil
cognosci, nihil percipi, nihil sciri posse dixerunt: Angustos sensus,
imbecilles animos, brevia curricula vitae. Almost all the Ancients have
declared, that there is nothing to be known, nothing to be understood: The
Senses are too weak; Men's Minds too weak, and the little course of Life too
short. And of Cicero himself, who stood indebted to his Learning for all he was
worth, Valerius says, that he began to disrelish Letters in his old Age. And
when most incumbent upon his Studies, it was with great Independency upon any
one Party; following what he thought probable, now in one Sect, and then in
another, evermore wavering under the Doubts of the Academy. Dicendum est, sed
ita ut nihil affirmem, quaeram omnia, dubitans plerumque, Cicero Acad.
and mihi diffidens. I am to speak, but so as to affirm nothing: I shall
enquire into all things, but for the most part in doubt and distrust of myself.
I should have too fair a Game, should I consider Man in his common way of
Living and in Gross: And might do it however by his own Rule; who judges Truth,
not by Weight, but by the number of Votes. Let us let the People alone, -- Qui
vigilans stert it. Lucret* l. 3.

Mortua cui vita est, prope jam atque videnti.
Who waking snore; whose life is but a Dream:
Who only living and awake do seem.
who neither feel nor judge; and let most of their natural Faculties lie idle. I
will take man in his highest Station. Let us consider him in that little number
of men, excellent and culled out from the rest, who having been endowed with a
remarkable and particular natural Force, have moreover hardened and whetted it
by Care, Study and Art, and raised it to the highest Pitch of Wisdom, to which
it can possibly arrive. They have adjusted their Souls to all Senses, and all
Biasses; have propt and supported them with all foreign Helps proper for them,
and enriched and adorned them with all they could borrow for their Advantage,
both within and without the World: Those are they that are placed in the utmost
and most supreme height, to which human Nature can attain. They have regulated
the World with Polities and Laws. They have instructed it with Arts and
Sciences, and do yet instruct it by the Example of their admirable Manners. I
shall make account of none but such men as these, and only make use of their
Testimony and Experience. Let us examine how far they have proceeded, and on
what they reposed their surest hold. The Maladies and Defects that we shall
find amongst these men, the world may boldly declare to be purely their own.
Whoever goes in search of any thing, must come to this, either to say that he
has found it out, or that it is not to be found out, or that he is yet upon the
Quest. All Philosophy is divided into these three Kinds. All her Design is to
seek out Truth, Knowledge and Certainty. The Peripateticks, Epicureans, Stoics
and others, have thought they have found it. These have established the
Sciences, and have treated of them, as of certain Knowledges. Clitomachus,
Carneades, and the Academicks, have despaired in their Quest, and concluded
that Truth could not be conceived by our Understandings. The result of these
are Weakness and human Ignorance. This Sect has had the most, and most noble
Followers. Pyrrho and other Scepticks, whose Doctrines were held by many of the
Ancients, taken from Homer, the seven Sages, Archilocus, Euripides, Zeno,
Democritus and Xenophones, say, that they are yet upon the Search of Truth.
These conclude, that the other, who think they have found it out, are
infinitely deceived; and that it is too daring a Vanity in the second sort, to
determine that human Reason is not able to attain unto it. For this
establishing a Standard of our Power, to know and judge the Difficulty of
things, is a great and extreme Knowledge, of which they doubt whether or no man
can be capable. Nil sciri quisquis putat, id quoque nescit,
An sciri possit, quo se nil scire fatetur. Lucret. l. 4.

He that says, nothing can be known, Mr. Creech
o'rethrows
His own Opinion, for he nothing knows,
So knows not that.
The Ignorance that knows itself, judges and condemns itself, is not an
absolute Ignorance: Which to be, it must be ignorant of itself. So that the
Profession of the Pyrrhonians is to waver, doubt and enquire, not to make
themselves sure of, or responsible to themselves for any thing. Of the three
Actions of the Soul, the Imaginative, Appetitive, and the Consenting, they
receive the two first; the last they keep ambiguous, without Inclination or
Approbation, either of one thing or another, so light and voluble it is. Zeno
represented the Motion of his Imagination, upon these divisions of the
Faculties of the Soul, an open and expanded Hand signified Appearance: A Hand
half shut, and the Fingers a little bending, Consent: A clutch'd Fist,
Comprehension: When with the left he yet thrust the Fist closer, Knowledge. Now
this situation of their Judgment upright and inflexible, receiving all Objects
without Application, or Consent, lead them to their Ataraxie, which is a
peaceable Condition of Life, Ataraxie what.
temperate and exempt from the Agitations we receive by the Impression of
Opinion and Knowledge, that we think we have of things. From whence spring F^ar,
Avarice, Envy, immoderate Desires, Ambition, Pride, Superstition, love of
Novelty, Rebellion, Disobedience, Obstinacy, and the greatest part of bodily
Ills: Nay, and by that they are exempt from the Jealousy of their Discipline.
For they debate after a very gentle manner. They fear no Revenge in their
Disputes. Doubt and suspense of Judgment, the principal Effect of Pyrrhonisme.
When they affirm that heavy things descend; they would be sorry to be
believed, and love to be contradicted, to engender doubt and suspense of
Judgment, which is their End. They only put out Propositions to contend with
those they think we have in our Belief. If you take their Arguments, they will
as readily maintain the contrary: It Is all one to them, they have no Choice. If
you maintain that Snow is Black, they will argue on the contrary that it is
White; if you say it is neither the one nor the other, they will maintain that
it is both. If you hold by a certain Judgment that you know nothing, they will
maintain that you do. Yes, and if by an affirmative Axiom you assure them that
you doubt; they will argue against you, that you doubt not; or that you cannot
judge and determine that Doubt. And by this extremity of Doubt, which justles it
self, they separate and divide themselves from many Opinions, even of those
they have several ways maintained, both concerning Doubt and Ignorance. Why
shall not they be allowed, say they, as well as the Dogmatists, one to say
Green, another Yellow, and even of those to doubt? Can any thing be proposed to
us to grant, or deny, which it shall not be permitted to consider as Ambiguous?
And where others are carried away, either by the Custom of their Country, or by
the Instruction of Parents, or by Accident, as by a Tempest, without Judgment,
and without Choice; nay, and for the most part, before the Age of Discretion to
such or such an Opinion, to the Sect of the Stoics or Epicureans, with which
they are prepossest, Cicer. Acad.
enslaved and fast Bound, as to a thing they cannot forsake: Ad quamcumque
disciplinam, velut tempestate, delati, ad eam, tanquam ad saxum, adhaerescunt.
Every one cleaves to his Principles, as to a Rock against which he had been
thrown by Tempest. Why shall not these likewise be permitted to maintain their
Liberty, and consider things without Obligation or Slavery? Hoc liberiores and
solutiores, quod integra illis est iudicandi potestas. In this more
unconstrained and free, because they have the greater Power of Judging. Is it
not of some Advantage, to be disengaged from the Necessity that curbs others?
Is it not better to remain in Suspense, than to entangle himself in the
innumerable Errors that human Fancy has produced? Is it not much better to
suspend the Persuasion, than to intermeddle with these wrangling and seditious
Divisions? What shall I choose? What you please, provided you will choose. A
very foolish Answer: But such a one nevertheless, as all Doctrine seems to
point at, and by which we are not permitted to be ignorant of what we are
ignorant. Take the most eminent Side, that of the greatest Reputation; it will
never be so sure, that you shall not be forced to attack and contend with a
hundred and a hundred Adversaries to defend it. Is it not better to keep out of
this Hurly-burly? You are permitted to embrace Aristotle's Opinion of the
Immortality of the Soul, The Immortality of the Soul maintained by Aristotle.
with as much Zeal as your Honor and Life, and to give the Lie to Plato, and
shall they be interdicted to doubt him? If it be lawful for Panetius to
maintain his Opinion about Augury, Dreams, Oracles, Vaticinations; of which the
Stoics make no doubt at all; why may not a wise Man dare to do the same in all
things, that he dared to do in those he had learned of his Masters, established
by the common Consent of the School, whereof he is a Professor and a Member? If
it be a Child that judges, he knows not what it is: If a wise Man, he is
Prepossest. They have reserved for themselves a mavelous Advantage in Battle,
having eased themselves of the care of Defense. If you strike them they care
not, provided they strike too, and they turn every thing to their own
Advantage. If they overcome, your Argument is Lame; if you, theirs: If they
fall short, they verify Ignorance; if you fall short, you do it: If they prove,
that nothing is known, it goes well; if they cannot prove it, it is as well: Vt
quum in eadem re paria contrariis in partibus momenta inveniuntur, facilius ab
utraque part Assertio sustineatur. That when like Sentiments happen pro and
con in the same thing, the Assertion may on both sides be more easily
suspended. And they make account to find out with much greater Facility why a
thing is false, than why it is true, that which is not, than that that is, and
what they do not believe, than what they do. Their way of speaking is, I assert
nothing, it is no more so, than so, or than neither one nor the other: I
understand it not. Apparences are every where equal: The Law of speaking pro or
con, is the same. Nothing seems true, that may not seem false. Their
Sacramental Word is (...), that is to say, I hold, I start not. This is the
burden of their Song, and others of like stuff. The effect of which is a pure,
entire, perfect and absolute suspension of Judgment. They make use of their
Reason to enquire and debate, but not to fix and determine. Whoever shall
imagine a perpetual Confession of Ignorance, a Judgment without Bias,
Propension or Inclination, upon any Occasion whatever, conceives a true Idea of
Pyrrhonisme. I express this Fancy as well as I can, by reason, that many find
it hard to conceive, and Authors themselves represent it a little variously and
obscurely. As to what concerns the Actions of Life, they are in this of the
common Fashion. They yield and give up themselves to their natural
Inclinations, to the Power and Impulse of Passions, to the Constitution of Laws
and Customs, and to the Tradition of Arts. Cicer. de Divin. l. 61.
Non enim nos Deus ista scire sed tantummodo uti voluit. For God would not have
us know, but only use those things. They suffer their ordinary Actions to be
guided by those things, without any Dispute or Judgment. For which Reason I
cannot consent to what is said of Pyrrho. They represent him stupid and
immoovable, leading a kind of Savage and Insociable Life, standing the justle
of Carts, going upon Precipices, and refusing to accommodate himself to the
Laws. This is to enhaunce upon his Discipline. He would never make himself a
Stock or a Stone, he would show himself a living Man, Discoursing, Reasoning,
Enjoying all natural Conveniences and Pleasures, employing and making use of
all his corporal and spiritual Faculties in Rule and Reason. The fantastic,
imaginary and false Privileges that Man has usurped of Lording it, Ordaining
and Establishing, he has utterly quitted and renounced. Yet there is no Sect
but is constrained to permit her Sage to follow several things, not
Comprehended, Perceived, or Consented to, if he means to live. And if he goes
to Sea, he follows that Design, not knowing whether his Voyage shall be
successful or no; and only insists upon the Tightness of the Vessel, the
Experience of the Pilot, and the Convenience of the Season, and such probable
Circumstances. After which he is bound to go, and suffer himself to be governed
by Apparences, provided there be no express and manifest Contrariety in them.
He has a Body, he has a Soul, the Senses push them, the Mind spurs them on. And
although he do not find in himself this proper and singular sign of Judging, and
that he does perceive that he ought not to engage his Consent, considering that
there may be some false, equal to these true Apparences, yet does he not for
all that fail of carrying on the Offices of his Life with great Liberty and
Convenience. How many Arts are there that profess to consist more in Conjecture
than Knowledge? That decide not true and false, and only follow that, which
seems the one or the other? There are, say they, true and false, and we have in
us wherewith to seek it; but not to make it stay when we touch it. We are much
more prudent, in letting our selves be carried away by the swing of the World
without Inquisition. A Soul clear from Prejudice, has a marvailous Advance
toward Tranquillity and Repose. Men that judge and control their Judges, do
never duly submit to them. How much more docile and easy to be governed, both
in the Laws of Religion and civil Polity, are simple and incurious Minds, than
those over-vigilant Wits, that will still be prating of Divine and Human
Causes? There is nothing in human Invention, that carries so great a show of
likelihood and utility as this. This present Man, naked and empty, confessing
his natural Weakness, fit to receive some foreign Force from above, unfurnished
of Human, and therefore more apt to receive into him the Divine Knowledge,
undervaluing his own Judgment, to make more Room for Faith: Neither beleiving
amiss, nor establishing any Doctrine against the Laws and common Observances,
Humble, Obedient, Disciplinable, Studious, a sworn Enemy of Heresy; and
consequently, freeing himself from vain and irreligious Opinions, introduced by
false Sects, Sectarys and Heretics. It Is a blank Paper prepared to receive
such Forms from the Finger of God, as he shall please to write upon it. The
more we resign and commit our selves to God, and the more we renounce our
selves, of the greater value we are. Take in good part, says Eclesiastes, the
things that present themselves to thee, as they seem and taste from Hand to
Mouth: The rest is out of thy Knowledge. Dominus novit cogitationes hominum,
quoniam vanae sunt. Psalm. 94.
The Lord knows the Heart of Men, that they are but Vanity. Thus we see, that
of three general Sects of Philosophy, two make open profession of Doubt and
Ignorance, and in that of the Dogmatists, which is the third, it is easy to
discover, that the greatest part of them only assume this face of Confidence
and Assurance, that they may have the better Grace. They have not so much
thought to establish any Certainty for us, as to show us how far they have
proceeded in their search of Truth, quam docti fingunt magis quam norunt. Which
the learned rather feign than know. Timaeus being to in^^ruct Socrates in what
he knew of the Gods, the World and Men, proposes to speak to him as a Man to a
Man, and that it is sufficient, if his Reasons are probable, as those of
another: For that exact Reason were neither in his, nor any other mortal Hand.
Which one of his Followers has thus imitated: Vt potero, explicabo; nec tamen
^t Pythius Apollo, certa ut sint, and fixa, Cicero Thus lib. 1.
quae dixero: Sed ut homunculus, probabilia conjectura sequens. I will, as well
as I am able, explain; yet not as Pythius Apollo, that what I say, should be
fixed and certain, but like a Man that follows Probabilities by Conjecture. And
that other, upon the natural and common Subject of the Contempt of Death, he
has elsewhere translated from the very Words of Plato. Si forte, de Diorum
natura ortumque Mundi disserentes, Cicero in Timaeo.
minus id quod habemus in animo consequimur, haud erit mirum. Aequum est enim
meminisse, and me qui disseram, hominem esse, and vos qui judicetis: Vt si
probabilia dicentur, nihil ultra requiratis. If perchance, when we discourse of
the Nature of Gods, and the Worlds Original, we cannot do it as we desire, it
will be no great Wonder. For it is just you should remember, that both I who
speak, and you who are to judge are Men: So that if probable things are
delivered, you should require and expect no more. Aristotle does ordinarily
heap up a great number of other Opinions and Beliefs, to compare them with his
own, and to let us see how much he has gone beyond them, and how much nearer he
approaches to Possibility and likelihood of Truth. For Truth is not to be
judged by the Authority and Testimony of others; which made Epicurus
religiously avoid quoting them in his Writings. This is the Prince of all
Dogmatists, and yet we are told by him, that much Knowledge does administer many
Occasions of doubting more. In earnest, we see him sometimes so shroud and
muffle up himself in so thick and so inexplicable Obscurity, that we know not
what use to make of his Advice. It is in effect a Pyrrhonisme under a
concluding and determining Form. Hear Cicero's Protestation, who expounds to us
another Fancy by his own. Qui requirunt, quid de quaque re ipsi sentiamus:
Cicero de Not. Deo. lib. 1.
curiosius id faciunt, quam necesse est. Haec Philosophiae ratio, contra omnia
disserendi, nullamque rem aperte judicandi, profecta a Socrates, repetita ab
Arcesilao, confirmata a Carneade, usque ad nostram viget aetatem. Hi sumus, qui
omnibus veris falsa quaedam adjuncta esse dicamus, tanta similitudine, ut in
iis nulla insit judicandi, and assentiendi nota. They who desire to know what
we think of every thing; are therein more inquisitive than is necessary. This
Practice in Philosophy, of disputing against every thing, and of absolutely
concluding nothing, begun by Socrates, repeated by Arcesilaus, and confirmed by
Carneades, has continued in use even to our own times. We are they, who declare
that there is so great a Mixture of things false, amongst all that are true,
and they so resemble one another, that there can be in them no certain Mark to
direct us, either to judge or assent. Why have not Aristotle only, but the most
of Philosophers, affected Difficulty, if not to set a greater Value upon the
Vanity of the Subject, and amuse the Curiosity of our Wits, by giving them this
Bone to Pick. Clitomachus affirmed, that he could never discover by Carneades
Writings, what Opinion he was of. This was it that made Epicurus affect to be
Abstruse, and that procured Heraclitus the Epithete to his Name of (...),
Obscure.
Difficulty is a Coin the Learned make use of, like Juglers, to conceal the
Vanity of their Art, and which human Sottishness easily takes for current Pay.
Clarus ob obscuram linguam, magis inter inanes: Lueret. l. 1.

Omnia enim stolida magis admirantur amantque,
Inversis quae sub verbis latitantia cernunt.
Bumbast and Riddle, best do Puppies please,
For Fools admire and love such things as these.
And a dull Quibble wrapped in dubious Phrase;
That to the height does their wise Wonder raise.
Cicero reprehends some of his Acquaintance and Friends, for giving more of
their Time to the Study of Astrology, Law, Logic, and Geometry, than they
were really worth; saying, that they were by those diverted from the Duties of
Life, and from more profitable and gentile Studies. The Cyrenaick Philosophers
did equally despise natural Philosophy and Logic. Zeno, in the very beginning
of the Books of the Commonwealth, The liberal Art despised.
declared all the liberal Arts of no use. Chrysippus said, that what Plato and
Aristotle had writ concerning Logic, they had only done it in Sport, and by
way of Exercise: And could not believe, that they spoke in earnest of so vain a
thing. Plutarch says the same of Metaphysics: And Epicurus would have said as
much of Rhethorick, Grammar, Poesy, Mathematics, and ( Natural Philosophy
excepted) of all the other Sciences; and Socrates of them all, excepting that
of Manners and of Life. Whatever any one required to be instructed in by him,
he would ever, in the first place, demand an account of the Conditions of his
Life present and past, which he examined and judged; esteeming all other
Learning subsequent to that, and supernumerary. Sal. de Bello Jug.
Parum mihi placeant eae literae, quae ad virtutem Doctoribus nihil profuerunt.
That Learning is in small repute with me, which nothing profited the Teachers
themselves to Virtue. Most of the Arts have been in like manner decry'd by the
same Knowledge. But they did not consider that it was from the purpose, to
exercise their Wits in those very matters wherein, there was no solid
Advantage. As to the rest: Some have looked upon Plato as a Dogmatist, others
as a Doubter, others in some things the one, and in other things the other.
Socrates, the Introducer of Dialogismes, is eternally upon Questions and
stirring up Disputes, never determining, never satisfying: And professes to
have no other Science but that of opposing himself. Homer, their Author, has
equally laid the Foundations of all the Sects of Philosophy, to show how
indifferent it was, which way we should choose. It Is said, that ten several
Sects sprung from Plato; and in my Opinion, never did any Instruction hault and
stumble, if his does not: Socrates said, that Called Wise Women in French.
Midwives in taking upon them the trade of helping others to bring forth, left
the Trade of bringing forth themselves; and that he by the Title of a wise Man
or Sage, that the God's had conferred upon him, was disabled in his virile and
mental Love, of the Faculty of bringing forth, consenting to help and assist
those that could; to open their Nature, anoint the Passes, and facilitate their
Birth: To judge of the Infant, Kiss, Nourish, Fortify, Swath, and Circumcise
it, exercising and employing his Understanding in the Perils and Fortunes of
others. It is so with the most part of this third sort of Authors, as the
Ancients have observed in the Writings of Anaxagoras, Democritus, Parmenides,
Zenophanes and others. They have a way of Writing, doubtful in Substance and
Design, rather enquiring than teaching; though they mix their Style with some
Dogmatical Periods. Is not the same thing seen in Seneca and Plutarch? How many
Contradictions are there to be found, if a Man pry narrowly into them? So many,
that the reconciling Lawyers ought first to reconcile them every one to
themselves. Plato seems to have affected this Method of Philosophizing in
Dialogues; to the end, that he might with greater Decency from several Mouths,
deliver the Diversity and Variety of his own Fancies. To treat variously of
things, is as well to treat of them, as conformably, and better, that is to
say, more copiously, and with greater Profit. Let us take Example from our
selves. Judgments are the utmost Period of all Dogmatical and determinative
speaking: And yet those Arrests that our Parliaments give the People, the most
exemplary of them, and those are most proper to nourish in them the Reverence
due to that Dignity, principally through the Sufficiency of the Persons Acting,
derive their Beauty, not so much from the Conclusion, which with them is
quotidien and common to every Judge, as from the Dispute and Heat of diverse and
contrary Arguments, that the matter of Law and Equity will permit. And the
largest Field for Reprehension, that some Philosophers have against others, is
drawn from the Diversities and Contradictions, wherein every one of them finds
himself Perplexed: Either on purpose to show the Vacillation of human Wit
concerning every thing; or ignorantly compelled by the Volability and
Incomprehensibility of all Matter. What means this Clinck in the Close? In a
slippery and sliding place let us suspend our Belief: For as Euripedes says.
Plutarch.
Les oeuures de Dieu en diverses
Facons, nous donnent des Traverses.
The works of God in sundry wise,
Do puzzle Men's Capacities.
Like that which Empedocles; as if rapt with a Divine Fury, and compelled by
Truth, often strewn here and there in his Writings. No no, we feel nothing, we
see nothing, all things are concealed from us; there is not one thing, of which
we can positively say, it is this: According to the Divine saying, Cogitationes
mortalium timidae, and incertae adinventiones nostrae, and providentiae. For
the Thoughts of mortal Men are Miserable; Wisdom c. 9. v. 14.
and our Devices are but uncertain. It is not to be thought strange, if Men,
despairing to overtake what they hunt after, have not however lost the Pleasure
of the Chase; Study being of it self so pleasant an Employment, and so
Pleasant, that amongst other Pleasures, the Stoics forbid that also which
proceeds from the Exercise of the Wit, will have it curbed, and find a kind of
Intemperance in thirsting too much after Knowledge. Democritus having eaten Figs
at his Table that tasted of Honey, fell presently to Considering with himself,
from whence they should derive this unusual Sweetness; and to be satisfied in
it, was about to rise from the Table, to see the place from whence the Figs had
been gathered? Which his Maid observing, and having understood the Cause, she
smilingly told him, that he need not trouble himself about that, for she had
put them into a Vessel, in which there had been Honey. He was vexed at this
Discovery, and that she had deprived him of the Occasion of this Inquisition,
and robbed his Curiosity of Matter to work upon. Go thy way, said he, thou has
done me an Injury; but for all that, I will seek out the Cause as if it were
natural; and would willingly have found out some true Reason, for a false and
imaginary Effect. This Story of a famous and great Philosopher does very
clearly represent to us the studious Passion, that puts us upon the pursuit of
things, of the Acquisition of which we despair. Plutarch gives a like Example
of some one, who would not be satisfied in that whereof he was in Doubt, that
he might not lose the Pleasure of enquiring into it: Like the other, who would
not that his Physician should allay the Thirst of his Fever, that he might not
lose the Pleasure of quenching it by drinking. Satius est supervacua discere,
Seneca. Epist. 89.
quam nihil. It Is better to learn more than is necessary, than nothing at all.
As in all sorts of feeding, the Pleasure of eating is very often single and
alone, and that what we take, which is acceptable to the Palate, is not always
nourishing or wholesome: So that which our Understandings extract from Science,
does not cease to be Pleasant, though there be nothing in it, either nutritive
or healthful. Thus, they say, the consideration of Nature is a Diet proper for
our Minds, it raises and elevates us, makes us disdain low and terrestrial
Things, by comparing them with those that are Celestial and high: Even the
Inquisition of great and occult things is very Pleasant, even to those who
acquire no other Benefit, than the Reverence and Fear of judging it. This is
what they Profess. The vain Image of this sickly Curiosity is yet more manifest
in this other Example, that they so often urge. Eudoxus wished and begged of
the Gods, that he might once see the Sun near at Hand, to comprehend the Form,
Greatness and Beauty of it; on the Condition to be immediately burned. He would
at the Price of his Life purchase a Knowledge, of which the Use and Possession
should at the same time be taken from him: And for this sudden and vanishing
Knowledge, lose all the other Knowledges he had in present, or might afterward
have acquired. I cannot easily persuade myself, that Epicurus, Plato and
Pythagoras, have given us their Atoms, Ide^s and Numbers for current Pay. They
were too wise to establish their Articles of Faith upon things so Disputable
and so Uncertain: But in the Obscurity and Ignorance the World then was, every
one of these great Men endeavored to present some kind of Image or Reflection
of Light; and worked their Brains for Inventions, that might have a pleasant
and subtle Appearance; provided, that false as they were, they might make good
their Ground against those that would oppose them. Vnicuique ista pro ingenio
singuntur, non ex scientiae vi. These things every one fancies according to his
Wit, and not by any power of Knowledge. One of the Ancients, who was reproached,
That he professed Philosophy, of which he nevertheless in his own Judgment made
no great Account. Made Answer, That that was truly to Philosophize: They would
consider all, and balance every thing, and have found that an Employment well
suited to our natural Curiosity. Some things they have writ for the benefit of
public Society, as their Religions, and for that Consideration it was but
reasonable, that they should not examine public Opinions to the Quick, that
they might not disturb the common Obedience to the Laws and Customs of their
Country. Plato treats of this Mystery with a Raillery manifest enough. For
where he writes according to his own Method; he gives no certain Rule. When he
plays the Legislator, he borrows a magisterial and positive Style, and boldly
there foists in his most fantastic Inventions, as fit to persuade the Vulgar,
as impossible to be believed by himself: Knowing very well, how fit we are to
receive all sorts of Impressions, especially the most immoderate and wicked.
And yet in his Laws, he takes singular Care that nothing be sung in Public but
Poetry; of which, the Fiction and fabulous Relations tend to some advantageous
End: It being so easy to imprint all sorts of Phantasmes in human Minds, that
it were Injustice not to feed them rather with profitable Untruths, than with
Untruths that are unprofitable and hurtful. He says very plainly in his
Commonwealth, that it is very often necessary for the profit of Men, to deceive
them. It is very easy to distinguish, that some of the Sects have more followed
Truth, and the others Vtility, by which the last have gained their Reputation.
It Is the misery of our Condition, that often that which presents it self to our
Imagination for the most true, does not appear the most utile to Life. The
boldest Sects, as the Epicurean, Pyrrhonian, and the new Academick, are yet
constrained to submit to the Civil Law, at the end of the Account. Other
Subjects there are, that they have tumbled and tossed some to the right, and
others to the left, every one endeavoring, right or wrong, to give them some
kind of Color; for having found nothing so Abstruse, they would not venture to
speak to: They are very often forced to forge weak and ridiculous Conjectures;
not that they themselves looked upon them as any Foundation, or establish any
certain Truth, but merely for Exercise. Non tam id sensisse, quod dicerent,
Incerto.
quam exercere ingenia materiae difficultate videntur voluisse: Not so much,
that they themselves believed what they said, as that they seem to have a mind
to exercise their Wits in the Difficulty of the matter. And if we did not take
it thus, how should we palliate so great Inconstancy, Variety, and Vanity of
Opinions, as we see have been produced by those excellent and admirable Souls?
For for Example, what can be more Vain than to imagine to guess at Almighty God
by our Analogies and Conjectures? To direct and govern him and the World, by
our Capacities and our Laws? And to serve our selves at the Expense of the
Divinity, with that small Portion of Knowledge he has been pleased to impart to
our natural Condition? And because we cannot extend our Sight to his glorious
Throne, to have brought him down to our Corruption, and our Miseries? Of all
human and ancient Opinions concerning Religion, that seems to me the most
likely, and most excusable, that acknowledged God an Incomprehensible Power;
the Original and Preserver of all things, all Bounty, all Perfection, receiving
and taking in good part the Honor and Reverence that Man paid unto him, under
what Method, Name or Ceremonies soever. Jupiter omnipotens rerum, regumque
Deumque,
Progenitor, Genitrixque --
This Zeal has universally been looked upon from Heaven with a gracious Eye.
All Governments have reaped Fruit from their Devotion: Men, and impious
Actions, have every where had suitable Events. What the Knowledge of God was
amongst the Pagans.
Pagan Histories acknowledge Dignity, Order, Justice, Prodiges and Oracles,
employed for their Profit and Instruction in their fabulous Religions. God,
peradventure, through his Mercy vouchsafing by these temporal Benefits, to
cherish the tender Principles of a kind of a brutish Knowledge, that natural
Reason gave them of him, through the deceiving Images of their Dreams. Not only
deceiving and false, but impious also; and injurious are those that Man has
forged from his own Invention. And of all the Religions that St. Paul found in
Repute at Athens, that which they had dedicated to an unknown Divinity, seemed
to him the most to be excused. Pythagoras shadowed the Truth a little more
closely: The unknown God adored at Athens.
Judging that the Knowledge of this first Cause, and Being of Beings, ought to
be indefinite, without Limitation, without Declaration: That it was nothing
else, than the extreme Effort of our Imagination toward Perfection; Numa 's
Religion.
every one amplifying the Idea according to the Talent of his Capacity. But if
Numa attempted to conform the Devotion of his People to this Project; to ty
them to a Religion purely mental, without any prefixed Object and material
Mixture, he undertook a thing of no use. Human Wit could never support it self
floating in such an infinity of inform Thoughts, there is required some certain
Image to be presented, according to its own Model. The Divine Majesty has thus,
in some sort, suffered himself to be circumscribed in corporal Limits, for our
Advantage: His supernatural and celestial Sacraments have Signs of our earthly
Condition: His Adoration is by sensible Offices and Words; for it is Man that
Believes and Prays. I shall omit the other Arguments upon this Subject: But a
Man would have much ado to make me believe, that the sight of our Crucifixes,
that the Picture of our Saviors Passion, that the Ornaments and Ceremonious
Motions of our Churches, that the Voices accommodated to the Devotion of our
Thoughts, and that Emotion of Senses do not warm the Souls of the People with a
Religious Passion of very advantageous Effects. Of those, to whom they have
given a Body as Necessity required in that universal Blindness, I should, I
fancy, most incline to those, who Adored the Sun. -- la lumiere commune,
Ronsard.
L'aeil du monde; and si Dieu au chef port des yeux,
Les rayons du soleil sont ses yeux radeux,
Qui donnent vie a tous, nous maintiennent, and gardent,
Et les faits des humains en ce monde regardent:
Ce beau, ce grand soleil, qui nous fait les saisons,
Selon qu'il enter, ou sort de ses douze maisons:
Qui remplit l'univers de ses vertus cogneues:
Qui d'vn traict de ses yeux nous dissipe les nues:
L'esprit, bame du monde ardant, and flamboyant,
En la course d'un jour tout le Ciel tournoyant,
Plein d'immense grandeur, rond, vagabond, and ferme:
Lequel tient dessoubs luy tout le monde pour term:
En repos, sans repos, oysif, and sans sejour,
Fills aisne de Nature, and le Pere du jour.
The common Light that Shines indifferently
On all alike, the Worlds enlightening Eyes,
And if the Almighty Ruler of the Skies
Has Eyes, the Sunbeams are his radiant Eyes,
That Life to all impart, maintain and guard,
And all Men's Actions upon Earth regard.
This Great, this Beautiful, and glorious Sun,
That Seasons gives by Revolution:
That with his Influence fills the Universe,
And with one Glaunce does sullen Shades disperse.
Life, Soul oth' World, that flaming in his Sphere,
Surrounds the Heavens in one Days carreer,
Immensly great, moving, yet firm and round,
Who the whole World below has fixed his Bound,
At Rest without Rest, Idle without Stay,
Natures first Son, and Father of the Day.
Forasmuch as besides this Grandeur and Beauty of his, it is the only piece of
this Machin that we discover at the remotest distance from us; and by that
means so little known, that they were pardonable, for entering into so great
admiration and reverence of it. Thales, who first inquired into this sort of
matter, believed God to be a Spirit, that made all things of Water.
Anaximander, that the Gods were always dying, and entering into Life; and that
there were an infinite number of Worlds. Anaximines, that the Air was God, that
he was procreated and immense, always moving. Anaxagoras the First, was of
Opinion, that the description and manner of all things were conducted by the
Power and Reason of an infinite Spirit. Alcmaeon gave the Divinity to the Sun,
Moon and Stars, and to the Soul. Pythagoras has made God a Spirit sprinkled
over the Nature of all things, from whence our Souls are extracted. Parmenides,
a Circle surrounding the Heaven, and supporting the World by the Ardour of
Light. Empedocles pronounced the four Elements, of which all things are
composed, to be Gods. Protagoras had nothing to say, whether they were or were
not, or what they were. Democritus was one while of Opinion, that the Images
and their Circuitions were Gods, another this Nature that darts out those
Images, and then our Science and Intelligence. Plato devides his Belief into
several Opinions. He says in his Timaeus, That the Father of the World cannot
be named; In his Laws, That Men are not to inquire into his Being. And
elsewhere in the very same Books, he makes the World, the Heavens, the Stars,
the Earth, and our Souls, Gods, admitting moreover those which have been
received by Ancient Institution in every Republic. Xenophon reports a like
Perplexity in Socrates his Doctrine. One while that Men are not to inquire into
the Form of God, and presently makes him maintain that the Sun is God, and the
Soul, God; and the first, that there is but one God, and afterward that there
are many. Speucippus the Nephew of Plato makes God a certain Power governing
all things, and that he has a Soul. Aristotle one while says, it is the Spirit,
and another, the World; one while he gives this World another Master, and
another makes God the Ardour of Heaven. Zenocrates makes eight, five named
amongst the Planets, the sixth composed of all the fixed Stars, as of so many
Members, the seventh and the eighth, the Sun and the Moon. Heraclides Ponticus
does nothing but float in his Opinion, and finally deprives God of Sense, and
makes him shift from one Form to another, and at last says, that it is Heaven
and Earth. Theophrastus wanders in the same Irresolution amongst his Fancies,
attributing the Superintendency of the World, one while, to the Understanding,
another while to Heaven, and another to the Stars. Strato, that it is Nature,
she having the power of Generation, Augmentation and Diminuition, without Form
and Sentiment. Zeno says, it is the Law of Nature commanding Good, and
prohibiting Evil; which Law is an Animal, and takes away the accustomed Gods,
Jupiter, Juno and Vesta: Diogenes Apolloniates, this it is Age. Zenophanes makes
God round, seeing and hearing, not breathing, and having nothing in common with
Human Nature. Aristo thinks the Form of God to be incomprehensible, deprives
him of Sense, and knows not whether he be an Animal, or something else.
Cleanthes one while supposes it to be Reason; another while, the World;
another, the Soul of Nature; and then the supreme Heat rouling about, and
environing all. Perseus, Zeno's Disciple, was of Opinion, that Men have given
the Title of Gods to such as have been useful, and have added any advantage to
Human Life, and even to profitable things themselves. Crysippus made a confused
heap of Old Sentences, and reckons amongst a thousand Forms of Gods that he
makes, the Men also that have been Deified. Diagoras and Theodorus flatly
denied, that there were any Gods at all. Epicurus makes the Gods shining,
transparent and perflable, lodged, as betwixt two Forts, betwixt the two
Worlds, secure from blows, clothed in a Human Figure, and with such Members as
we have; which Members are to them of no use. Cicer. de Divin. l. 2. ex Ennio.
Ego Deum genus esse semper duxi and dicam caelitum,
Sed eos non curare opinor, quid agat humanum genus.
I ever thought that Gods above there were,
But do not think they care what Men do here.
Trust to your Philosophy, my Masters: And brag, that you have found the Bean
in the Cake; What a Rattle is here with so many Philosophical Heads! The
perplexity of so many Worldly Forms have gained this over me, that Manners and
Opinions contrary to mine, do not so much displease as instruct me; nor so much
make me proud, as they humble me in comparing them. And all other choice, than
what comes from the Express and immediate Hand of God, seems to me a Choice of
very little Privilege. The Policies of the World are no less opposite upon
this Subject, than the Schools, by which we may understand, that Fortune it
self is not more variable and inconstant, nor more blind and inconsiderate than
our Reason. The things that are most unknown, are most proper to be deified;
wherefore to make Gods of our selves, as the Ancients did, exceeds the
extremest Weakness of Understanding. I should much rather have gone along with
those who adored the Serpent, the Dog, or the Ox: Forasmuch as their Nature
and Being is less known to us, and that we have more Authority to imagine what
we please of those Beasts, and to attribute to them extraordinary Faculties.
But to have made Gods of our own condition, of whom we ought to know the
Imperfections; and to have attributed to them Desire, Anger, Revenge,
Marriages, Generation, Alliances, Love and Jealousy; our Members and Bones,
our Fevers and Pleasures, our Death and Obsequies; this must needs proceed
from a marvelous Intoxication of Human Understanding. Que procul usque adeo
divino ab numine distant, Lucret. lib. 5.

Inque Deum numero quae sint indigna videri.
From Divine Natures, which so distant were,
They are unworthy of that Character.
Formae, aetates, vestitus, ornatus noti sunt: Genera, Cicer. de Not. Deo. lib.
2.
conjugia, cognationes, omnidque traducta ad similitudinem imbecillitatis
humanae; nam and perturbatis animis inducuntur: Accipimus enim Deorum
cupiditates, aegritudines, iracundias. Their Forms, Ages, Clothes and Ornaments
are known: Their Descents, Marriages and Kindred, and all appropriated to the
similitude of Human Weakness; for they are represented to us with anxious
Minds, and we read of the Lusts, Sickness and Anger of the Gods. As having
attributed Divinity not only to Faith, Virtue, Honor, Concord, Liberty,
Victory and Piety; but also to Voluptuousness, Fraud, Death, Envy, Old Age;
Misery; to fear, Fever, ill Fortune, and other Injuries of our frail and
transitory Life. Per. Sat. 2.
Quid juvat hoc, templis nostros inducere mores?
O curvae in terris an^mae, and caelestium inanes!
Into our Temples, to what end or use,
Do we our Ceremonies introduce?
Oh crooked Souls, that to the Earth bow low,
And naught of Heavenly Mysteries do know!
The Egyptians with an impudent Prudence, interdicted upon pain of hanging,
that any one should say, that their Gods, Serapis and Isis, had formerly been
Men: And yet no one was ignorant, that they had been such. And their Effigies
represented with the Finger upon the Mouth, signified, says Varro, that
mysterious Decree to their Priests, to conceal their mortal Original, as it
must by necessary Consequence cancel all the Veneration paid to them. Seeing
that Man so much desired to equal himself to God; he had done better, says
Cicero, to have attracted those Divine Conditions to himself, and have drawn
them down hither below, than to send his Corruption and Misery up on high: But
to take it right, he has several ways done both the one and the other, with
like vanity of Opinion. When Philosophers search narrowly into the Hierarchy of
their Gods, and make a great bustle about distinguishing their Alliances,
Offices and Power, I cannot believe they speak as they think. When Plato
describes Pluto's Verger to us, and the bodily Conveniences or Pains that
attend us after the ruin and annihilation of our Bodies, and accommodate them
to the resentment we have in this Life. Secreti celant colles, Aeneid. l. 6.
and myrtea circum
Sylva tegit, curae non ipsa in morte relinquunt.
In Vales, and myrtle Groves they pensive lie,
And their Cares do not leave them when they dye.
When Mahomet promises his Followers a Paradise hung with Tapestry, gilded and
enameled with Gold and precious Stones, furnished with Wenches of excelling
Beauty, rare Wines, and delicate Dishes, it is easily discerned that these are
Deceivers that accommodate their Promises to our Sensuality, to attract and
allure us by Hopes and Opinions suitable to our mortal Appetite. And yet some
amongst us are fallen into the like Error, promising to themselves, after the
Resurrection, a Terrestial and Temporal Life, accompanied with all sorts of
Worldly Conveniences and Pleasures. Can we believe that Plato, he who had so
heavenly Conceptions, and was so well acquainted with the Divinity, as thence
to derive the Name of the Divine Plato, ever thought that the poor Creature,
Man, had any thing in him applicable to that incomprehensible Power? And that
he believed that the weak Holds we are able to take, were capable, or the Force
of our Understanding sufficient to participate of Beatitude, or Eternal Pains?
We should then tell him from Human Reason; If the Pleasures thou do promise
us in the other Life, are of the same kind that I have enjoyed here below, this
has nothing in common with Infinity: Though all my five Natural Senses should
be even loaded with Pleasure, and my Soul full of all the Contentment it could
hope or desire, we know what all this amounts to, all this would be nothing: If
there be any thing of mine there, there is nothing Divine; if this be no more
than what may belong to our present Condition, it cannot be of any value. All
Contentment of Mortals is mortal. Even the Knowledge of our Parents, Children
and Friends, if that can effect and delight us in the other World, if there
that still continue a satisfaction to us, we still remain in earthly and finite
Conveniences. We cannot, as we ought, conceive the greatness of these High and
Divine Promises, if we could in any sort conceive them: To have a worthy
Imagination of them, we must imagine them inimaginable, inexplicable and
incomprehensible, and absolutely another thing, than those of our miserable
experience. 1 Cor. 2.9.
Eye has not seen, says St. Paul, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the
Heart of Man, the things that God has prepared for them that love him. And if
to render us capable, our being be reformed and changed (as thou Plato say in
thy Purifications) it ought to be so extreme and total a Change, that by
Physical Doctrine, it will be no more. Hector erat tunc cum bello certabat,
Ovid. Trist. l. 3. El. 11.
at ille
Tractus ab Aemonio non erat Hector equo.
He Hector was, whilst he could fight, but when
Dragged by Achilles Steeds, no Hector then.
It must be something else that must receive these Recompenses. -- quod
mutatur, dissolvitur, interit ergo: Lucret. l. 1*

Trajiciuntur enim parts atque ordine migrant.
What Is changed dissolved is, and does therefore dye,
For parts are mixed, and from their Order fly.
For in Pythagoras his Metempsycosis, and the change of Habitation that he
imagined in Souls, can we believe that the Lion, in whom the Soul of Caesar is
enclosed, does espouse Caesar's Passions, or that the Lion is he? For if it was
still Caesar, they would be in the right, who, controverting this Opinion with
Plato, reproach him, that the Son might be seen to ride his Mother transformed
into a Mule, and the like Absurdities. And can we believe, that in the
Mutations that are made of the Bodies of Animals into others of the same kind,
that the new Comers are not other, than their Predecessors? From the Ashes of
a Phoenix, a Worm they say is engendered, and from that, another Phoenix, who
can imagine that this second Phoenix, is not other than the first? We see our
Silkworms, as it were, dye and wither; and from this withered Body, a
Butterfly is produced, and from that, another Worm; how ridiculous would it
be, to imagine, that this were still the first? That which has once ceased to
be, is no more: Ibid.
Nec si materiam nostram collegerit aetas
Post obitum, rursumque redegerit, ut sit a nunc est.
Atque iterum nobis fuerint data lumina vitae,
Pertineat quidquam tamen ad nos id quoque factum,
Interrupta semel cum sit repetentia nostra.
Neither though time should gather and restore
Our Matter to the Form it was before,
And give again new Light to see withal,
Would that new Figure us concern at all;
Or we again ever the same be seen,
Our Being having interrupted been.
And Plato when thou say in another place, that it shall be the Spiritual
part of Man, that will be concerned in the Fruition of the Recompenses of
another Life, thou tellest us a thing wherein there is as little appearance of
Truth. Ibid.
Scilicet avolsis radicibus, ut neque ullam
Dispicere ipse oculus rem seorsum corpore toto.
No more than Eyes once from their Optics torn.
Can ever after any thing discern.
For by this account, it would no more be Man, nor consequently us, who should
be concerned in this Enjoyment: For we are composed of two principally
Essential Parts, the separation of which is the Death and Ruin of our Being.
Inter enim jacta est vitai pausa, Ibid.
vageque
Deerarunt passim motus ab sensibus omnes.
When Life's extinct, all Motions of Sense
Are taken away, dispersed and banished thence.
We cannot say, that the Man suffers much when the Worms feed upon his Members,
and that the Earth consumes them: Et nihil hoc ad nos, qui coitu conjugioque
Corporis atque animae consistimus uniter apti. Ibid.

What Is that to us who longer feel not Pain,
Than Body and Soul united do remain.
Moreover upon what Foundation of their Justice can the Gods take notice of, or
reward Man after his Death, for his good and virtuous Actions, since it was
they themselves that put them in the way and mind to do them? And why should
they be offended at, or punish him for wicked ones, since themselves have
created him in so frail a condition, and what with one Glaunce of their Will,
they might prevent him from falling? Might not Epicurus with great color of
Human Reason object that to Plato, did he not often save himself with this
Sentence, That it is impossible to establish any thing certain of the immortal
Nature by the Mortal? She does nothing but err throughout, but especially when
she meddles with Divine things. Who does more evidently perceive this, than we?
For although we have given her certain and infallible Principles; and though we
have enlightened her Steps with the Sacred Lamp of Truth, that it has pleased
God to communicate to us; we daily see nevertheless, that if she swerve never
so little from the ordinary Path, and that she strays from, or wander out of
the way, set out and beaten by the Church, how soon she loses, confounds and
fetters her self, tumbling and floating in this vast, turbulent and waving Sea
of Human Opinions, without restraint, and without any determinate end. So soon
as she loses that Great and Common Road, she enters into a Labyrinth of a
thousand several Paths. Man cannot be any thing but what he is, nor imagine
beyond the reach of his Capacity: It Is a greater Presumption, says Plutarch, in
them who are but Men, to attempt to speak and discourse of the Gods and
Demigods, than it is in a Man, utterly ignorant of Music, to judge of
Singing; or in a Man who never saw a Camp, to dispute about Arms and Martial
Affairs, presuming by some light Conjecture to understand the effects of an Art
he is totally a Stranger to. Antiquity, I believe, thought to put a Complement
upon, and to add something to the Divine Grandeur, in assimilating it to Man,
investing it with his Faculties, and adorning it with his ugly Humors, and more
shameful Necessities: Offering it our Aliments to eat, presenting it with our
Dances, Masquerades and Farces to divert it; with our Vestments to cover it,
and our Houses to inhabit, caressing it with the Odors of Incense, and the
Sounds of Music, Festons and Nosegayes: And to accommodate it to our vicious
Passions, flattering his Justice with inhuman Vengeance, that is delighted with
the Ruin and Dissipation of things by it created and preserved: As Tiberius
Sempronius, who burnt the rich Spoils and Arms he had gained from the Enemy in
Sardignia, fer a Sacrifice to Vulcan: And Paulus Emylius, those of Macedonia to
Mars and Minerva: And Alexander arriving at the Indian Ocean, threw several
great Vessels of Gold into the Sea, in Favor of Thetis; and moreover loading
her Altars with a slaughter, not of innocent Beasts only, but of Men also; as
several Nations, and ours amongst the rest, were ordinarily used to do: And I
believe there is no Nation under the Sun, that has not done the same. --
Sulmone creatos Aeneid. lib. 10.

Quatuor hic juvenes, totidem quos educat Vfens
Viventes rapit, inferias quos immolet umbris.
At Sulmo born he took of young Men four;
Of those at Vfens bred, as many more,
Of these alive, in most inhuman wise,
To offer an infernal Sacrifice.
The Getes hold themselves to be Immortal, and that their Death is nothing but
a Journey toward Zamolxis, Once in five Years they dispatch some one amongst
them to him, Zamolxis the God of the Getes.
to entreat of him such Necessaries as they stand in need of: Which Envoy is
chosen by Lot, and the form of his Dispatch, after having been instructed by
Word of Mouth what he is to deliver, is, that of the Assistants, three hold out
so many Javelins, against which the rest throw his Body with all their Force.
If he happen to be wounded in a mortal Part, and that he immediately dye, it is
reputed a certain Argument of Divine Favor; but if he escape, he is looked upon
as a wicked and execrable Wretch, and another is dismissed after the same manner,
in his stead. Sacrifice of 14* young men.
Amestris, the Mother of Xerxes, being grown old, caused at once fourteen young
Men, of the best Families of Persia, to be buried alive, according to the
Religion of the Country, to gratify some infernal Deity. And yet to this Day,
the Idols of Temixtitan are cemented with the Blood of little Children, and
they delight in no Sacrifice, but of these pure and infantine Souls; a Justice
thirsty of innocent Blood. Lucr. l. 1.
Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum.
Such impious Use was of Religion made,
So many Ills and Mischiefs to persuade.
The Carthaginians immolated their own Children to Saturn; Carthaginian
Children sacrificed to Saturn.
and who had none of their own, bought of others, the Father and Mother being
in the mean time obliged to assist at the Ceremony, with a gay and contented
Countenance. It was a strange Fancy, to gratify the Divine Bounty with our
Affliction; like the Lacedaemonians, who regaled their Diana with the tormenting
of young Boys, which they caused to be whipped for her Sake, very often to
Death. It was a savage Humor, to think to gratify the Architect by the
Subversion of his Building, and to think to take away the Punishment due to the
Guilty, by punishing the Innocent: And that poor Iphigenia, at the Port of
Aulis, should by her Death and being Sacrificed, acquit toward God the whole
Army of the Greeks, from all the Crimes they had committed: Et casta inceste
nubendi tempore in ipso Ibid.

Hostia concideret mactatu maesta parentis.
And that the chaste, should in her nuptial Band,
Dye by a most unnatural Fathers Hand.
And that the two noble and generous Souls of the two Decii the Father and the
Son, to incline the Favor of the Gods to be propitious to the Affairs of Rome,
should throw themselves headlong into the thickest of the Enemy. Cicero de Not.
Deo. lib. 3.
Quae fuit tanta Deorum iniquitas, ut placari populo Romano non possent, nisi
tales viri occidissent? How great an Injustice in the Gods was that, that they
could not be reconciled to the People of Rome, unless such Men perished? To
which may be added, that it is not in the Criminal to cause himself to be
scourged according to his own Measure, nor at his own time; but that it purely
belongs to the Judge; who considers nothing as Chastisements, but the Penalty
that he appoints; and cannot call that Punishment, which proceeds from the
Consent of him that suffers. The Divine Vengeance presupposes an absolute
Dissent in us, both from its Justice, and our own Penalty. And therefore it was
a ridiculous Humor of Polycrates the Tyrant of Samos, who, to interrupt the
continued Course of his good Fortune, and to balance it, went and threw the
dearest and most precious Jewel he had into the Sea; beleiving that by this
voluntary and antedated Mishap, he bribed and satisfied the Revolution and
Vicissitude of Fortune; and she, to delude his Folly, ordered it so, that the
same Jewel came again into his Hands, found in the Belly of a Fish. And then to
what end are those Tearings and Demembrations of the Corybantes, the Menades*
and in our times of the Mahometans, who slash their Faces, Bosoms, and their
Limbs, to gratify their Prophet: Seeing that the Offense lies in the Will, not
in the Breast, Eyes, Genitories, in the Beauty, the Shoulders, or the Throat?
Tantus est perturbatae mentis, and sedibus suis pulsae, Div. Aug. de Cicitat.
Dei. lib. 6. cap. 10.
furor, ut sic dii placentur, quemadmodum ne homines quidem saeviunt. So great
is the Fury and Madness of troubled Minds, when once displaced from the Seat of
Reason: As if the Gods should be appeased, with what even Men are not so mad as
to approve. The use of this natural Contexture has not only respect to us, but
also to the Service of God, and other Men. And it is unjust, willingly to wound
or hurt it; as to kill our selves upon any Pretense whatever. It seems to be
great Cowardice and Treason to exercise Cruelty upon, and to destroy the
Functions of the Body, that are stupid and servile, to spare the Soul the
Solicitude of Governing them according to Reason. Vbi iratos Deos timent, qui
sic propitios habere merentur. In regiae libidinis voluptatem castrati sunt
quidam, sed nemo sibi, ne vir esset, jubente Domino, manus intulit. Where are
they, so afraid of the anger of the Gods, as to merit their Favor at that
rate? Some indeed have been made Eunuchs for the Lust of Princes: But no Man at
his Masters Command, has put his own Hand to unman himself: So did they fill
their Religion with several ill Effects. -- saepius olim
Religio peperit scelerosa, atque impia facta. Lucr. l. 1.

-- In elder times
Religion did commit notorious Crimes.
Now nothing of ours can in any sort be compared, or likened unto the Divine
Nature, which will not blemish and smut it with so much Imperfection. How can
that infinite Beauty, Power and Bounty, admit of any Correspondence, or
Similitude, to so abject things as we are, without extreme Wrong, and manifest
Dishonor to his Divine Greatness? Infirmum Dei fortius est hominibus: 1. Cor.
c. 1. v. 25.
Et stultum Dei sapientius est hominibus. For the Foolishness of God is wiser
than Men, and the Weakness of God is stronger than Men. Stilpo the Philosopher
being asked, whether the Gods were delighted with our Adorations and
Sacrifices: You are Indiscreet, answered he, let us withdraw apart, if you talk
of such things. Nevertheless we prescribe him Bounds, we keep his Power
besieged by our Reasons, (I call our Ravings and Dreams Reason, with the
Dispensation of Philosophy, which says, that the wicked Man, and even the Fool,
go Mad by Reason; but by a particular form of Reason.) We will subject him to
the feeble Apparences of our Understanding; him, who has made both us and our
Knowledge. Because that nothing is made of nothing, God therefore could not make
the World without Matter. What, has God put into our Hands the Keys and most
secret Springs of his Providence? Is he obliged not to exceed the Limits of our
Knowledge? Put the Case, O Man, that thou have been able here to mark some
Footsteps of his Effects: Do thou therefore think that he has employed all he
can, and has crowded all his Forms and Idea's in this Work? Thou see nothing
but the Order and Revolution of this little Vault, under which thou art lodged,
if thou do see so much: Whereas his Divinity has an infinite Jurisdiction
beyond: This Part is nothing in Comparison of the Whole. Lucr. l. 6.
-- omnia cum caelo, terraque marique
Nil sunt ad summam summai totius omnem.
All things, both Heaven, Earth, and Sea, do fall
Short in the Account with the great All of All.
It Is a municipal Law that thou alledgest, thou know not what is Universal.
Tie thyself to that to which thou art subject, but not him; he is not of thy
Brotherhood, thy Fellow-Citizen, or Companion: If he has in some sort
communicated himself unto thee; it is not to debase himself to thy littleness,
nor to make thee Comptroler of his Power. A human Body cannot fly to the
Clouds: It Is for thee, the Sun runs every day his ordinary Course: The Bounds
of the Seas and the Earth cannot be confounded: The Water is Unstable and
without Firmness: A Wall, unless it be broken, is impenetrable to a solid Body:
A man cannot preserve his Life in the Flames; he cannot be both in Heaven and
upon Earth, and corporally in a thousand places at once. It Is for thee, that he
has made these Rules; it is thee, that they concern. He has manifested to
Christians, that he has enfranchised them all when it pleased him. And in truth
why, Almighty as he is, should he have limited his Power within any certain
Bounds? In favor of whom should he have renounced his Privilege? Thy Reason
has in no other thing more of likelihood and Foundation, than in that wherein
it persuades thee that there is a plurality of Worlds. Terramque and solemn,
lunam, mare, caetera quae sunt, Lucr. l. 2.

Non esse unica sed numero magis innumerali.
That Earth, Sun, Moon, Sea, and the rest that are,
Not single, but innumerable were.
The most eminent Wits of elder times believed it; and some of this Age of
ours, compelled by the apparences of human Reason, do the same: Forasmuch as in
this Fabric, that we behold, there is nothing single and one, Ibid.
-- cum in summa res nulla sit una,
Vnica quae gignatur: Et unica solaque crescat:
Since nothing's single in this mighty Mass,
That can alone beget, alone increase:
And that all the kinds are multiplied in some number: By which it seems not to
be likely, that God should have made this Work only without a Companion: And
that the Matter of this Form should have been totally drained in this sole
Individual. Ibid.
Quare etiam, atque etiam tales fateare necesse est,
Esse alios alibi congressus materiai,
Qualis hic est avido complexu quem tenet ether.
Wherefore it is necessary to confess,
That there must elsewhere be the like congress
Of the like matter, which the airy space
Conteins and holds with a most strict Embrace.
Especially if it be a living Creature, which its motions renders so credible,
that Plato affirms it, and that many of our People do either confirm, or dare
not deny: No more than that ancient Opinion, that the Heaven, the Stars, and
other Members of the World, are Creatures composed of Body and Soul: Mortal in
respect of their Composition, but Immortal by the determination of the Creator.
Now if there be many Worlds, as Democritus, Epicurus, and almost all Philosophy
has believed, what do we know but that the Principles and Rules of this of
ours, may in like manner concern the rest? They may peradventure have another
Form, and another Policy. Epicurus supposes them either like or unlike. We see
in this World an infinite difference and variety, only by distance of Places.
Neither the Corn, Wine, nor any of our Animals are to be seen in that new
corner of the World discovered by our Fathers, it is all there another thing.
And in times past, do but consider in how many parts of the World they had no
Knowledge either of Bacchus or Ceres. If Pliny and Herodotus are to be believed,
there are in certain Places a kind of Men very little resembling us. And there
are mungrel and ambiguous Forms, betwixt the human and brutal Natures. There
are Countries, where men are born without Heads, having their Mouth and Eyes in
their Breast: Where they are all Hermaphodrites; where they go on all four;
where they have but one Eye in the Forehead, and a Head more like a Dog than
one of us: Where they are half Fish, the lower part, and live in the Water:
Where the Women bear at five years old, and live but eight: Where the Head and
Skin of the Forehead is so hard, that a Sword will not touch it, but rebounds
again: Where Men have no Beards: Nations that know not the use of Fire, and
others that eject Seed of a black Color. What shall we say of those that
naturally change themselves into Woolves, Colts, and then into men again? And
if it be true as Plutarch says, that in some place of the Indies, there are men
without Mouths, who nourish themselves with the smell of certain Odours, how
many of our Descriptions are false? He is no more risible nor peradventure,
capable of Reason and Society: The disposition and cause of our internal
Composition would then for the most part be to no purpose, nor of no use;
moreover how many things are there in our own Knowledge, that oppose those fine
Rules we have cut out for, and prescribed to Nature? And yet we must undertake
to circumscribe God himself! How many things do we call miraculous and contrary
to Nature? This is done by every Nation, and by every Man, according to the
Proportion of his Ignorance. How many occult Properties and Quintessences do we
daily discover? For, for us to go according to Nature, is no more but to go
according to our Intelligence, as far as that is able to follow, and as far as
we are able to see into it: All beyond that must be monstrous and irregular.
Now by this Account, all things shall be monstrous to the wisest and most
understanding men; for human Reason has persuaded them, that there was no
manner of Ground or Foundation, not so much as to be assured that Snow is
white; and Anaxagoras affirmed it to be black: If there be any thing, or if
there be nothing: If there be Knowledge or Ignorance; which Metrodorus Chius
denied that Man was able to determine: Or whether we live, as Euripides doubts,
whether the Life we live is Life, or whether that we call Death be not Life:
Who knows if Life been't that which we call Death,
And Death the thing that we call Life.
And not without some appearance. For why do we from this Instant derive the
Title of Being, which is but a Flash in the infinite Course of an eternal
Night, and so short an Interruption of our perpetual and natural Condition?
Death possessing all that past before, and all the future of this moment, and
also a good part of the moment it self. Others swear there is no motion at all,
as the Followers of Melissus, Motion of things below denied.
and that nothing stirs. For if there be but one, neither can that Spherical
Motion be of any use to him, nor the Motion from one place to another, as Plato
proves, That there is neither Generation nor Corruption in Nature. Protagoras
says, That there is nothing in Nature but Doubt: That a man may equally dispute
of all things; and even of this, whether a man can equally dispute of all
things: Mansiphanes, that of things which seem to be, nothing is, more than it
is not. That there is nothing certain, but incertainty. Parmenides, that of
that which seems, there is no one thing in general. That there is but one
thing. Zeno, that one same is not; and that there is nothing. If there were one
thing, it would either be in another, or in it self. If it be in another, they
are two: If it be in it self, they are yet two; the comprehending, and the
comprehended. According to these Doctrines the Nature of things, is no other
than a Shadow, either false or vain. This way of speaking in a Christian Man,
has ever seemed to me very Indiscreet and Irreverent. God cannot dye; God
cannot contradict himself; God cannot do this, or that, I do not like to have
the divine Power so limited by the Laws of Men's Mouths. And the appearance which
presents itself to us in those Propositions, ought to be more religiously and
reverently expressed. Our speaking has its Failings and Defects, as well as all
the rest. Grammar is that which creates most Disturbance in the World. Our
Suits only spring from the Debate of the interpretation of Laws: And most Wars
proceed from the Inability of Ministers, clearly to express the Conventions and
Treaties of Amity of Princes. How many Quarrels, and of how great Importance,
has the doubt of the meaning of this Syllable Hoc created in the World? Let us
take the clearest Conclusion that Logic it self presents us with. If you say
it is fair, and that you say true, it is then fair Weather. Is not this a very
certain form of speaking? And yet it will deceive us: That it will do so, let
us follow the Example. If you say you lie, and that you say true, then you do
lie. The Art, the Reason, and Force of the Conclusion of this, are the same
with the other, and yet we are gravelled. The Pyrrhonian Philosophers, I
discern, cannot express their general Conception in any kind of speaking: For
the World requires a new Language on purpose. Ours is all formed of affirmative
Propositions, which are totally antartick to them. Insomuch that when they say
I doubt, they are presently taken by the Throat, to make them confess, that at
least they know, and are assured that they do doubt. By which means they have
been compelled to shelter themselves under this medicinal Comparison, without
which, their Humor would be inexplicable. When they pronounce, I know not: Or,
I doubt; they say, that this Proposition carries off it self with the rest, no
more, nor less than Rubarb, that drives out the ill Humors, and carries it self
off with them. This Fancy will be more certainly understood by Interrogation:
What do I know? (as I bear it in the Emblem of a Balance.) See what use they
make of this irreverend way of speaking. In the present Disputes about our
Religion, if you press the Adversaries to it too hard, they will roundly tell
you, that it is not in the Power of God, to make it so, that his Body should be
in Paradise and upon Earth, and in several Places at once. And see what
Advantage the old Scoffer makes of this? At least, says he, it is no little
Consolation to Man, to see that God cannot do all things: For he cannot kill
himself, though he would; which is the greatest Privilege we have in our
Condition: He cannot make Mortals Immortal, nor revive the Dead: Nor make it
so, that he who has lived, has not; nor that he, who has had Honors, has not
had them, having no other right to the past, than that of Oblivion. And that
the Comparison of a Man to God may yet be made out by pleasant Examples, he
cannot order it so, he says, that twice ten shall not be twenty. This is what
he says, and what a Christian ought to take heed shall not escape his Lips.
Whereas on the contrary, it seems, as if all Men studied this impudent kind of
blasphemous Language, to reduce God to their own measure. -- cras vel atra
Hor. Car. l. 3. Ode. 29.
Nube polum pater occupato,
Vel sole puro non tamen irritum
Quodcumque retro est efficiet, neque
Diffinget infectumque reddet
Quod fugiens semel hora vexit.
To morrow let it shine, or rain,
Lord Fanshaw.
Yet cannot this the past make vain:
Nor uncreate and render void,
That which was yesterday enjoyed.
When we say, that the infinity of Ages, as well past as to come, are but one
Instant with God: That his Bounty, Wisdom and Power are the same with his
Essence: Our Mouths speak it, but our Understandings apprehend it not. And yet
such is our vain Opinion of our selves, that we must make the Divinity to pass
through our Seive: And from thence proceed all the Dreams and Errors with which
the World abounds, whilst we reduce and weigh in our Balance a thing so far
above our Poize. Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 2.
Mirum quo procedat improbitas cordis humani, parvulo aliquo invitata successu.
It Is a wonder to what the wickedness of Man's Heart will proceed, if elevated
with the least Success. How magisterially and insolently does Epicurus reprove
the Stoics from maintaining that the truly good and happy Being appertained
only to God, and that the wise Man had nothing but a shadow and resemblance of
it? How temerariously have they bound God by Destiny, (a thing, that, by my
consent, none that bears the Name of a Christian shall ever do again) and both
Thales, Plato, and Pythagoras have enslaved him to Necessity. This Arrogance of
attempting to discover God with our weak Eyes, has been the Cause that an
eminent Person of our Nation, has attributed to the Divinity a corporal Form;
and is the reason of what happens amongst us every day, of attributing to God
important Events, by a particular Assignation: Because they sway with us, they
conclude that they also sway with him, and that he has a more intent and
vigilant Regard to them, than to others of less Moment, or of ordinary Course.
Magna Dii curant, parva negligunt. Cicero de Not. Deor. lib. 3.
The Gods are concerned at great matters, but slight the small. Observe his
Example, he will clear this to you by his Reason: Nec in regnis quidem Reges
omnia curant. Neither indeed do Kings in their Administration take notice of
all the least Concerns. As if to that King of Kings it were more and less to
subvert a Kingdom, or to move the Leaf of a Tree: Or as if his Providence acted
after another manner in enclining the Event of a Battle, than in the leap of a
Flea. The hand of his Government is laid upon every thing after the same
manner, with the same Power and Order: Our Interest does nothing toward it;
our Inclinations and Measures sway nothing with him. Deus ita artifex magnus in
magnis, ut minor non sit in parvis. God is so great an Artificer in great
things, that he is no less in the least. Our Arrogance sets this blasphemous
Comparison ever before us. Because our Enployments are a Burden to us, Strato
has courteously been pleased to exempt the Gods from all Offices, as their
Pirests are. He makes Nature produce and support all things; and with her
Weights and Motions makes up the several parts of the World* discharging human
Nature from the awe of divine Judgments. Cicer. de Not. Deo. lib. 1.
Quod beatum, aeternumque sit, id nec habere negotii quicquam, nec exhibere
alteri. What is Blessed and Eternal, has neither any Business it self, nor
gives any to another. Nature will that in like things there should be a like
Relation. The infinite number of Mortals, therefore, concludes a like number of
Immortals; the infinite things that kill and destroy, presuppose as many that
preserve and profit. As the Souls of the Gods without Tongue, Eyes, or Ear, do
every one of them feel amongst themselves, what the other feel, and judge our
Thoughts. So the Souls of Men, when at liberty, and loosed from the Body,
either by Sleep, ore some Ecstasy, divine, foretell, and see things, which
whilst joined to the Body they could not see. Romans 1. v. 22, 23.
Men (says St. Paul) professing themselves to be wise, they became Fools; and
changed the Glory of uncorruptible God, into an Image made like corruptible
Man. Do but take notice of the juggling in the Ancient Deifications. After the
great and stately Pomp of the Funeral, so soon as the Fire began to mount to
the top of the Pyramid, and to catch hold of the Hearse where the Body lay,
they at the same time turned out an Eagle, which flying upward, signified that
the Soul went into Paradise. We have yet a thousand Medals, and particularly of
that virtuous Fostina, where this Eagle is represented carrying these deified
Souls with their Heels upwards, toward Heaven. It Is pity that we should fool
our selves with our own Fopperies and Inventions, Quod finxere timent. Luan. l.
1.
Like Children who are frighted with the same Face of their Play-fellow, that
they themselves had smeared and smutted. Quasi quicquam infelicius sit homine,
cui sua figmenta dominantur. As if any thing could be more unhappy than Man,
who is insulted over by his own Imagination. It Is far from honoring who made
us, to honor him that we have made. Augustus had more Temples than Jupiter,
served with as much Religion, and belief of Miracles: The Thracians, in return
of the Benefits they had received from Agesilaus, coming to bring him word,
that they had canonized him: Has your Nation, said he to them, that Power to
make Gods of whom they please? Pray first deifie some one amongst your selves,
and when I shall see what Advantage he has by it, I will thank you for your
Offer. Man is certainly stark mad; he cannot make a Flea, and yet he will be
making Gods by Dozens. Hear what Trismegestus says in praise of our
Sufficiency: Of all the wonderful things, it surmounts all Wonder, that Man
could find out the divine Nature and make it. And take here the Arguments of
the School of Philosophy it self. Lucan. l. 1.
Nosse cui Divos, and caeli numina, soli
Aut soli nescire datum.
To whom to know the Deities of Heaven,
Or know he knows them not, alone it is given.
If there is a God, he is a living Creature; if he be a living Creature, he has
some Sense; and if he has Sense, he is subject to Corruption. If he be without
a Body, he is without a Soul, and consequently without Action: And if he has a
Body, it is perishable. Is not here a Triumph? We are incapable of having made
the World; there must then be some more excellent Nature, that has put a Hand
to the Work. It were a foolish and ridiculous Arrogance, to esteem our selves
the most perfect thing of the Universe. There must then be something that is
better and more perfect, and that must be God. When you see a stately and
stupendous Edifice, though you do not know who is the Owner of it, you would
yet conclude it was not built for Rats. And this divine Structure that we
behold of the Celestial Palace, Heaven God's Palace.
have we not reason to believe that it is the Residence of some Possessor, who
is much greater than we? Is not the most Supreme always the most Worthy? And we
are subjected to him. Nothing without a Soul and without Reason, can produce a
living Creature capable of Reason. The World produces us, the World then has
Soul and Reason. Every part of us is less than we. We are part of the World,
the World therefore is endued with Wisdom and Reason, and that more abundantly
than we. It Is a fine thing to have a great Government. The Government of the
World.
The Government of the World then appertains to some happy Nature. The Stars do
us no harm, they are then full of Bounty. We have need of Nourishment, then so
have the Gods also, and feed upon the Vapors of the Earth. Wordly Goods are
not Goods to God; therefore they are not Goods to us: Offending, and being
Offended, are equally Testimonies of Imbecility: It Is therefore folly to fear
God. God is good by his Nature; Man by his Industry, which is more. The divine
and human Wisdom have no other Distinction, but that the first is Eternal. But
Duration is no accession to Wisdom, therefore we are Companions. We have Life,
Reason and Liberty; we esteem Bounty, Charity and Justice: These Qualities are
in him. In conclusion, the building and destroying, and the conditions of the
Divinity, are forged by Man according as they relate to himself. What a
Pattern, and what a Model! let us stretch, let us raise and swell human
Qualities as much as we please. Puff up thy self, vain Man, yet more and more,
and more. Non si te ruperis, inquit.
Hor. l. 2. Sat. 3.
Swell till thou burst, said he,
Thou shall not match the Deity.
Profecto non Deum, quem cogitare non possunt, sed semet ipsos pro illo
cogitantes, non illum, sed seipsos, non illi, sed sibi comparant. Certainly
they do not Imagine God, whom they cannot imagine; but they imagine themselves
in his stead: They do not compare him, but themselves, not to him, but to
themselves. In natural things the Effects do but half relate to their Causes.
What Is this to the Purpose? His Condition is above the order of Nature, too
elevate, too remote, and too mighty to permit himself to be bound and fettered
by our Conclusions. It Is not through our selves, that we arrive at that place:
Our ways lie too low. We are no nearer Heaven on the top of Mount Senis, than
in the bottom of the Sea: Take the Distance with your Astrolable. They debate
God even to the carnal Knowledge of Women, to so many times and so many
Generations. Paulina the Wife of Saturninus, a Matron of great Reputation at
Rome, thinking she lay with the God Serapis, found her self in the Arms of an
Amoroso of hers, through the Pandarisme of the Priests of his Temple. Varro,
the most subtle and most learned of all the latin Authors, in his Book of
Theology writes, That the Secton of Hercules his Temple, throwing Dice with
one hand for himself, and with the other for Hercules, played after that manner
with him for a Supper and a Whore: If he won, at the expense of the Offerings;
if he lost, at his own. The Sexton lost, and paid the Supper and the Whore. Her
Name was Laurentina, who saw by night this God in her Arms; who moreover told
her that the first she met the next Day, should give her a heavenly Reward:
Which proved to be Taruncius, a rich young Man, who took her home to his House,
and in time left her his Inheritrix. She on the other side, thinking to do a
thing that would be pleasing to this God, left the people of Rome Heir to her;
and therefore had divine Honors attributed to her. As if it had not been
sufficient that Plato was originally descended from the Gods by a double Line,
and that he had Neptune for the common Father of his Race: It was certainly
believed at Athens, that Aristo having a mind to enjoy the fair Perictione,
could not, and was warned by the God Apollo, in a Dream, to leave her
unpolluted and untouched, till she should first be brought to Bed. These were
the Father and Mother of Plato. How many ridiculous Stories are of like
Cuckoldings committed by the Gods against poor mortal Men? And how many Husbands
injuriously scandall'd in favor of their Children? In the Mohammedan Religion,
there are enough Merlins found by the Belief of the People, that is to say,
Children without Fathers, spiritual, divinely conceived in the Wombs of
Virgins, and carry Names that signify so much in their Language. We are to
observe, that to every thing, nothing is more dear and estimable than its being
(the Lion, the Eagle and the Dolphin, prize nothing above their own Kind) and
that every thing assimilates the Qualities of all other things to its own
proper Qualities, which we may indeed extend or contract, but that is all; for
beyond that Relation and Principle, our Imagination cannot go, can guess at
nothing else, nor possibly go out thence, or stretch beyond it: From whence
spring these ancient Conclusions. Of all Figures, the most beautiful is that of
Man; therefore God must be of that Form. No one can be happy without Virtue,
nor Virtue be without Reason, and Reason cannot inhabit any where but in a
human Shape: God is therefore clothed in a human Figure. Ita est informatum,
anticipatumque mentibus nostris, Cicero de Not. Deor. lib. 1.
ut homini, quum de Deo cogitet, forma occurrat humana. It is so imprinted in
our Minds, and the Fancy is so prepossessed with it, that when a Man thinks of
God, a human Figure ever presents it self to the Imagination. Therefore it was,
that Xenophanes pleasantly said, That if Beasts do frame any Gods to
themselves, as it is likely they do, they make them certainly such as themselves
are, and glorify themselves in it, as we do. For why may not a Goose say thus,
All the part of the Universe I have an Interest in, the Earth serves me to walk
upon, the Sun to light me, the Stars have their Influence upon me: I have such
Advantage by the Winds, and such Conveniences by the Waters: There is nothing
that yond heavenly Roof looks upon so favorably as me; I am the Darling of
Nature? Is it not Man that treats, lodges, and serves me? It Is for me that he
both sows and grinds: If he eats me, he does the same by his fellow Man, and
so do I the Worms that kill^ and devour him. As much might be said by a Crane
and with greater Confidence, upon the account of the liberty of his Flight, and
the Possession of that high and beautiful Region. Tam bl^nda conciliatrix, and
tam sui est lena ipsa natura. Ibid.
So flattering and wheedling a Baud is Nature to herself. Now by the same
Consequence the Destinies are then for us; for us the World, it shines, it
thunders for us, and the Creator and Creatures are all for us. It Is the Mark
and Point to which the Universality of things does aim. Look into the Records
that Philosophy has kept, for two thousand Years and more, of the Affairs of
Heaven: The Gods all that while have neither acted nor spoken but for Man: She
does not allow them any other Consultation or Vacation. See them here against
us in War. -- Domitosque Herculea manu
Telluris juvenes, unde periculum Hor. l. 2. Ode. 12.

Fulgens contremuit domus
Saturni veteris --
The brawny Sons of Earth, subdued by hand
Of Hercules, on the Phlegraean Strand,
Where the rude Shock did such a rattle make,
As made old Saturn's sparkling Palace shake.
And here you shall see them participate of our Troubles, to make a return for
our having so often shared in theirs. Neptunus muros magnoque emota tridenti
Fundamenta quatit, totamque a sedibus urbem Aeneid. l. 2.

Eruit: hic Juno scaeas saevissima portas
Prima tenet. --
Whilst Neptune with his massy Trident struck,
He made the VValls of the Foundations shake,
And the whole City from its Platform thr^w;
Here, to befriend the Greeks, fair Juno drew
Into the Scaean Ports. --
The Caunians, jealous of the Authority of their own peculiar Gods, arm
themselves on the Days of their Devotion, and the whole Power of their
Precincts run cutting and slashing the Air with their Swords, by that means to
drive away and banish all foreign Gods out of their Territory. Their Powers
are limited according to our Necessity. That cures Horses, that cures Men, that
cures the Plague, the Scurf, the Tissick; one to cure one sort of Itch, another
another: Adeo minimis etiam rebus prava Religio insertit Deos: Live. l. 27.
At such a rate does false Religion create Gods for the most contemptible Uses:
That makes the Grapes to grow, the Waters to flow. That has the Presidence
over Letchery, the Superintendency over Merchandise; for every sort of Artizan
a God: That has his Province and Reputation in the East, and that has his in
the West. Aen. l. 1.
Hic illius arma. -- Hic currus fuit.
Here she her Arms, here she her Chariot had.
Cicero de Div. l. 2.
O sancte Apollo, qui umbilicum certum terrarum obtinens:
O sacred Phoebus who with glorious Ray,
Over the Navel of the Earth do sway.
Ovid. Fast. lib. 3.
Pallada Cecropdae, Minoia Creta Dianam.
Vulcanum tellus Hipsipylaea colit.
Junonem spartae, Pelopeiadesque Mycenae,
Pinnigerum Fauni maenalis ora caput.
Mars Latio venerandus.
The Athenians Pallas, Cynthia, Creete adore.
Vulcan is worshipped on the Lemnian Shore.
Proud Juno's Altars are by Spartans fed,
The Arcadians worship Faunus; and it is said
That Mars at Latium is adored.
That has only one Town, or one Family in his Possession: That lives alone, or
in company, either Voluntary, or upon Necessity. Juntaque sunt magno templa ne
potis avo. Ibid. l. 1.

And Temples to the Nephew joined are,
To those were reared to the Great-Grandfather.
There are some so wretched and mean (for the Number amounts to six and thirty
Thousand) that they must pack five or six together, to produce one Ear of Corn,
and thence take their several Names. Three to a Door: That of the Plank, that
of the Hing, and that of the Threshold. Four to a Child; Protectors of his
swathing Clouts, his Drink, Meat and Sucking. Some certain, some uncertain and
doubtful, and some that are not yet entered Paradise. Quos, quoniam Caeli
nondum dignamur honor, Ovid. Met. lib. 1.

Quas dedimus certe terras habitare sinamus.
Whom, since we yet not worthy think of Heaven,
We suffer to inhabit the Earth we have given.
There are amongst them Physicians, Poets and Civilians. Some mean ones,
betwixt the divine and human Nature, Mediators betwixt God and us: Adored with
a certain second and diminutive sort of Adoration: Those are infinite in Titles
and Offices: Some good and others ill, some old and decrepit, and some that are
mortal. For Chrysippus was of Opinion, that in the last Conflagration of the
World, all the Gods were to dye but Jupiter: Man makes a thousand pretty
Societies betwixt God and him. Is he not his Countryman? Ovid. Me. l. 8.
Jovis incunabula Creten. And this is the Excuse, that upon consideration of
this Subject, Scaevola a High Priest, and Varro a great Divine in their times,
make us: That it is necessary the People should be ignorant of many things that
are true, and believe many things that are false. Aug. de Civit. Dei. l. 4.
cap. 27.
Quum veritatem, qua liberetur, inquirat: credatur ei expedire, quod fallitur.
Seeing he enquires into the Truth, by which he would be made free, it is thought
fit he should be deceived. Human Eyes cannot perceive things, but by the Forms
they know. And we do not remember what a leap miserable Phaeton took, for
attempting to govern the Reins of his Fathers Horses with a mortal Hand. The
Mind of Man falls into as great a Profundity, and is after the same manner
bruised and shattered by its own Temerity. If you ask Philosophy, of what
matter the Sun is, what Answer will she return, if not, that it is of Iron and
Stone, or some other Matter that she makes use of? If a Man enquire of Zeno,
what Nature is? A Fire, says he, an Artisan proper for Generation, and
regularly proceeding. Archimedes, Master of that Science, which attributes to
it self the Precedence before all others, for Truth and Certainty. The Sun,
says he, is a God of red-hot Iron. Was not this a fine Imagination extracted
from the inevitable Necessity of Geometrical Demonstrations? Yet not so
inevitable and utile, but that Socrates thought it was enough to know so much
of Geometry only, Geometry how far useful.
as to measure the Land a man bought or sold; and that Polyaenus, who had been
a great and famous Master in it, despised it, as full of Falsity and manifest
Vanity, after he had once tasted the delicate Fruits of the Garden of Epicurus.
Socrates in Xenophon, concerning this Affair, says of Anaxagoras, reputed by
Antiquity learned above all others in celestial and divine Matters, that he had
cracked his Brain, as all other men do, who too immoderately search into
Knowledges, which nothing appertain unto them. When he made the Sun to be a
burning Stone, he did not consider, that a Stone does not shine in the Fire;
and which is worse, that it will there consume. And in making the Sun and Fire
one, that Fire does not turn Complexions black in shining upon them: That we
are able to look fixtly upon Fire: And that Fire kills Herbs and Plants. It Is
Socrates his Opinion, and mine too, that it is the best Judge of Heaven, not to
judge of it at all. Plato, having occasion in his Timeus to speak of Demons:
This Undertaking, says he, exceeds my Ability. We are therefore to believe
those Ancients, who have pretended to have been begotten by them. It Is against
all Reason to refuse to a man's Faith to the Children of the Gods, though what
they say should not be proved by any necessary or very probable Reasons; seeing
they engage to speak of Domestic and Familiar things. Let us see if we have a
little more light in the Knowledge of human and natural Things. Is it not a
ridiculous Attempt, for us to forge for those, to whom by our own Confession,
our Knowledge is not able to attain, another Body, and to lend a false Form of
our own Invention: As is manifest in this motion of the Planets; to which,
seeing our Wits cannot possibly arrive, nor conceive their natural Conduct, we
lend them material, heavy and substantial Springs of our own, by which to move?
Ovid. Met. lib. 2.
-- Temo aureus, aurea summae
Curvatura rotae, radiorum argenteus ordo.
A golden Beam, Wheels tired with golden Strokes,
About the Ring, with sets of silver Spokes.
You would say, that we had had Coach-makers, Wheele-wrights and Painters, that
went up on high to make Engines of various Motions, and to range the Carriages
and Interlacings of the heavenly Bodies of differing Colors about the Axis of
Necessity, according to Plato. Varro in Catal.
Mundus domus est maxima rerum,
Quam quinque altitonae fragmine Zonae
Cingunt, per quam limbus pictus bis sex signis
Stellimicantibus, altus in obliquo aethere, lunae
Bigas acceptat. --
The Worlds a Mansion that does all things hold,
Which thundering Zones in number five enfold,
Through which a Girdle painted with twelve Signs,
And that with sparkling Constellations shines,
In th'oblique Roof, marks the Diurnal Course,
For the Suns Chariot, and his fiery Horse.
These are all Dreams and fantastic Follies. Why will not Nature please once
for all to lay open her Bosom to us, and plainly discover to us the Means and
Conduct of her Movements, and prepare our Eyes to see them? Good God, What
Abuse, What Mistakes should we discover in our poor Science! I am mistaken, if
that weak Knowledge of ours hold any one thing, as it really is, and I shall
depart hence more ignorant of all other things than my own Ignorance. Have I
not read in Plato this Divine Saying, That, Nature is nothing but an
aenigmatick Poesy? As if a Man might peradventure say, a veiled and shady
Picture, breaking out here and there with an infinite variety of false Lights
to puzzle our Conjectures. Cicero in Academ.
Latent ista omnia crassis occultata and circumfusa tenebris: Vt nulla acies
humani ingenii tanta sit, quae penetrare in Caelum, terram intrare possit. All
those things lie concealed and involved in so caliginous an Obscurity; that no
point of Human Wit can be so sharp, as to pierce Heaven, or penetrate the
Earth. And certainly Philosophy is no other than a falsified Poesy. From
whence do the Ancient Writers extract their Authorities, but from the Poets?
And the first of them were Poets themselves, and writ accordingly. Plato is but
a Poet unript. All super-human Sciences make use of the Poetic Style. Just as
Women make use of Teeth of Ivory, where the Natural are wanting, and instead of
their true Complexion, make one of some artificial Matter; as they stuff
themselves with Cotton to appear plump, and in the sight of every one, paint,
patch, and trick up themselves with an adulterate and borrowed Beauty: So does
Science, (and even our Law it self has, they say, Legitimate Fictions, whereon
it builds the Truth of its Justice) she gives us in Presupposition, and for
current pay, things which themselves inform us were invented: For these
Epicycles, Excentricks and Concentricks, which Astology makes use of to carry
on the Motions of the Stars, she gives us for the best she could contrive upon
that Subject; as also in all the rest, Philosophy presents us, not that which
really is, or what she does really believe, but what she has contrived with the
greatest and most plausible likelihood of Truth, and the quaintest Invention.
Plato upon the Discourse of the State of Human Bodies, and those of Beasts, I
should, know that what I have said is truth, says he, had I the Confirmation of
an Oracle: But this I will affirm, that, what I have said, is the most likely
to be true of any thing, I could say. It Is not to Heaven only that Art sends
her Ropes, Engines and Wheels; let us consider a little what she says of us our
selves, and of our Contexture. There is not more Retrogradation, Trepidation,
Accession, Recession, and Astonishment in the Stars and Celestial Bodies, than
they have found out in this poor little Human Body. In earnest, they have very
good reason upon that very account, to call it a little World, so many Tools
and Parts have they employed to erect and build it. To assist the Motions they
see in Man, and the various Functions that we find in our selves, into how many
parts have they divided the Soul? In how many places lodged it, into how many
Orders have they divided, and to how many Stories have they raised this poor
Creature Man, besides those that are natural, and to be perceived? And how many
Offices and Vocations have they assigned him? They make an Imaginary of a
Public thing. It Is a Subject that they hold and handle: And they have full
power granted to them, to rip, place, displace, piece and stuff it every one
according to his own Fancy, and yet they possess it not. They cannot, not in
reality only, but even in Dreams, so govern it, that there will not be some
Cadence or Sound that will escape their Architecture as enormous as it is, and
botch'd with a thousand false and fantastic Patches* And it is not reason to
excuse them; for though we are satisfied with Painters when they paint Heaven,
Earth, Seas, Mountains and remote Islands, that they give us but some slight
mark of them, and, as of things unknown, are content with a faint and obscure
Description: Yet when they come to draw us by the Life, or any other Creature
which is known and familiar to us, we then require of them a perfect and exact
Representation of Lineaments and Colors, and despise them if they fail in it.
I am very well pleased with the Milesian Girl, who observing the Philosopher
Thales to be always contemplating the Celestial Arch; and to save his Eyes
still gazing upward, laid something in his way that he might stumble at, to put
him in mind, that it would be time to take up his Thoughts about things that
are in the Clouds, when he had provided for those that were under his Feet.
Doubtless she advised him very well, rather to look to himself than to gaze at
Heaven. For, as Democritus says, by the Mouth of Cicero, Cicero de Divinat.
lib. 2.
Quod est ante pedes, nemo spectat: Caeli scrutantur plagas. No Man regards
what is under his Feet, they are always prying toward Heaven. But our
condition will have it so, that the Knowledge of what we have in hand is as
remote from us, and as much above the Clouds, as that of the Stars: As Socrates
says in Plato, That, whoever tampers with Philosophy, may be reproached as
Thales was by the Woman, that he sees nothing of that which is before him. For
every Philosopher is ignorant of what his Neighbor does: Yes, and of what he
does himself, and is ignorant of what they both are, whether Beasts or Men. And
these people who find Sebonde's Arguments too weak, that are ignorant of
nothing, that govern the World, and that know all: Quae mare compescant causae,
quid temperet annum, Hor. lib. 1. Epist. 12.

Stellae sponte sua, jussaeve vagentur, and errent:
Quid premat obscurum Lunae, quid proferat orbem,
Quid velit, and possit rerum concordia discors,
What governs swelling Tides, what rules the Year.
Whether of Force, or Will, the Planets err,
What wax and wain to Cynthia's dark Orb brings,
What the concording Discord of all things,
Or would or can effect.
Have they not sometimes in their Writings scattered the Difficulties they have
met with of knowing their own Being: We see very well that the Finger moves,
that the Foot moves, that some parts assume a voluntary Motion of themselves
without our leaves and consent, and that others work by our direction; that one
sort of apprehension occasions blushing; another, paleness, such an Imagination
works upon the Spleen only, another upon the Brain, one occasions Laughter,
another Tears, another stupifies and astonishes all our Senses; at one Object
the Stomach will rise, at another a Member that lies something lower. But how a
Spiritual Impression should make such a breach into a massy and solid Subject,
and the Nature of the Connection and Contexture of these admirable springs and
movements never Man ye^ knew: Omnia incerta ratione, Plin. l. 2. Cap. 37.
and in naturae majestate abdita. All uncertain in Reason, and concealed in the
Majesty of Nature, says Pliny. And St. Austin, St. Aug. de spir. and anim.
Modus, quo corporibus adhaerent Spiritus, omnino mirus est, nec comprehendi ab
homine potest: and hoc ipse homo est. The manner whereby Souls adhere to
Rodies, is altogether wonderful, and cannot be conceived by Man, and yet this
is Man. And yet it is not so much as doubted: For the Opinions of Men are
received according to ancient Belief, by Authority and upon Trust, as if it
were Religion and Law* It Is received as a Gibberish which is commonly spoken;
this Truth with all its clutter of Arguments and Proofs is admitted as a firm
and solid Body, that is no more to be shaken, no more to be judged of. On the
contrary, every one according to the utmost of his Talent, corroborates and
fortifies this received Belief with the utmost power of his Reason, which is a
supple Utensile, pliable and to be accommodated to any Figure. And thus the
World comes to be filled with Lies and Fopperies. The reason that Men do not
doubt of many things, is, that they never examine common Impressions; they do
not dig to the Root, where the Faults and Defects lies; they only debate upon
the Branches: They do not examine whether such and such a thing be true, but if
it has been so, and so understood. It is not inquired into, whether Galen has
said any thing to purpose, but whether he has said so or so. In truth it was
very good reason, that this Curb to the Liberty of our Judgments, and this
Tyranny over our Opinions, should be extended to the Schools and Arts. The God
of Scholastic Knowledge is Aristotle: It Is Irreligion to question any of his
Decrees, as it was those of Lycurgus at Sparta: His Doctrine is a Magisterial
Law, which peradventure is as false as another. I do not know, why I should not
as willingly embrace either the Ideas of Plato, or the Atoms of Epicurus, or
the Plenum and Vacuum of Leucippus and Democritus, or the Water of Thales, or
the Infinity of Nature of Anaximander, or the Air of Diogenes, or the Members
and Symmetry of Pythagoras; or the Infinity of Parmenides: or the One of
Musaeus, or the Water and Fire of Apollodorus, or the Similar Parts of
Anaxagoras, or the Discord and Friendship of Empedocles, or the Fire of
Heraclitus, or any other Opinion, (of that infinite Confusion of Opinions and
Determinations, which this fine Human Reason does produce by its Certitude and
Clear-sightedness in every thing it meddles withal) as I should the Opinion of
Aristotle upon this Subject of the Principles of Natural things: Which
Principles he builds of three pieces, Matter, Form and Privation. And what can
be more vain, than to make Inanity it self cause of the Production of things?
Privation is a Negative: Of what Humor could he than make the Cause and
Original of things that are: And yet that were not to be controverted, but for
the exercise of Logic. There is nothing disputed neither to bring it into
doubt, but to defend the Author of the School from Foreign Objections: His
Authority is the non ultra, beyond which it is not permitted to inquire. It is
very easy upon approved Foundations to build whatever we please; for according
to the Law, and ordering of this beginning, the other parts of the Structure
are easily carried on without any failure. By this way we find our Reason
well-grounded, and discourse at a venture; for our Masters prepossess and gain
before hand as much room in our Belief, as is necessary toward concluding
afterward what they please: As Geometricians do by their granted Demands: The
Consent and Approbation we allow them, giving them power to draw us to the
Right and Left, and to whirle us about at their own pleasure. Whatever springs
from these Presuppositions, is our Master and our God: He will take the Level
of his Foundations so ample and so easy, that by them he may mount us up to
the Clouds, if he so please. In this Practice and Negotiation of Science we
have taken the saying of Pythagoras, That every expert person ought to be
believed in his own Art, for current pay. The Logician refers the signification
of words to the Grammarian, the Rhetorician borrows the State of Arguments from
the Logician: The Poet his measure from the Musician, the Geometrician his
Proportions from the Arithmetician, and the Metaphysicians take Physical
Conjectures from their Foundations. For every Science has its Principles
presupposed, by which Human Judgment is everywhere limited. If you come to rush
against the Bar where the principle Error lies; they have presently this
Sentence in their Mouths, That there is no disputing with persons, who deny
Principles. Now Men can have no Principles, if not revealed to them by the
Divinity, of all the rest the beginning, the middle and the end, is nothing but
dream and vapor. To those that contend upon Presupposition, we must on the
contrary presuppose to them the same Axiom upon which the dispute is. For every
Human Presupposition and Declaration has as much Authority one as another, if
reason do not make the difference. Wherefore they are all to be put into the
Balance, and first the Generals, and those that tyrannize over us. The
Persuasion of Certainty is a certain Testimony of Folly and extreme
Incertainty; and there are not a more foolish sort of Men, nor that are less
Philosophers, than the Philodoxes of Plato. We must inquire, whether Fire be
hot, whether Snow be white, if there be any such things as hard or soft. And as
to those Answers of which they make old Stories, as he that doubted if there
were any such thing as heat, whom they bid throw himself into the Fire, and he
that denied the coldness of Ice, whom they bad to put a Cake of Ice into his
Bosom, they are pitiful things unworthy of, and much below the Profession of
Philosophy. If they had let us alone in our Natural Being, to receive the
appearance of things without us, according as they present themselves to us by
our Senses; and had permitted us to follow our own Natural Appetites, and
governed by the Condition of our Birth, they might then have reason to talk at
that rate; but it is from them, that we have learned to make our selves Judges
of the World: It Is from them that we derive this Fancy, that Human Reason is
Controller General of all that is without and within the Roof of Heaven, that
comprehends every thing, that can do every thing: By the means of which, every
thing is known and understood. This Answer would be good amongst Cannibals, who
enjoy the happiness of a long, quiet and peaceable Life without Aristotle's
Precepts, and without the knowledge of the Name of Physics. This Answer would
peradventure be of more value, and greater force than all those they borrow
from their Reason and Invention. Of this, all Animals, and all, where the power
of the Law of Nature is yet pure and simple, but those they have renounced,
would be as capable as we. They need not tell us, it is true, for we see and
feel it to be so: They must tell me whether I really feel what I think I do;
and if I do feel it, they must then tell me why I feel it, and how, and what:
Let them tell me the Name, Original, the Part and Junctures of Heat and Cold,
the Qualities of the Agent and Patient: Or let them give up their Profession,
which is not to admit or approve of any thing, but by the way of Reason, that
is, their Test in all sorts of Essays. But certainly it is a Test full of
Falsity, Error, Weakness and Defect. Which way can we better prove it, than by
it self? If we are not to believe her when speaking of her self, she can hardly
be thought fit to judge of Exotic things; if she know any thing, it must at
least be her own Being and Abode. She is in the Soul, and either a part or an
effect of it: For true and essential Reason, from which we by a false Color
borrow the Name, is lodged in the Bosom of the Almighty. There is her
Habitation and Recess, and it is from thence that she imparts her rays, when God
is pleased to impart any beam of it to Mankind, as Pallas issued from her
Father's Head, to communicate her self to the World. Now let us see what Human
Reason tells us of her self, and of the Soul: Not of the Soul in general, of
which almost all Philosophy makes the Celestial and first Bodies Participants:
Nor of that which Thales attributed to things, which themselves are reputed
inanimate, drawn on so to do by the Consideration of the Lodestone: But of
that which appertains to us, and that we ought the best to know, Ignoratur enim
quae sit natura animai, Lucret. lib. 1.

Nata sit, an contra nascentibus insinuetur,
Et simul intereat nobifcum morte dirempta,
An tenebras Orci visat, vastasque lacunas
An pecudes alias divinitus insinuet se.
For none the Nature of the Soul does know,
Whether that it be born with us, or no;
Or be infused into us at our Birth,
And dies with us when we return to Earth,
Or does descend to the black Shades below,
Or into other Animals does go.
Crates and Dicaearchus were of Opinion, that there was no Soul at all; but
that the Body thus stirs by a Natural Motion: Plato, that it was a Substance
moving of it self; Thales, a Nature without repose: Asclepiades, an exercising
of the Senses: Hesiod and Anaximander, a thing composed of Earth and Water:
Parmenides, of Earth and Fire: Empedocles, of Blood: Aeneid. lib. 9.
Sanguineam vomit ille animam.
He vomits up his bloody Soul.
Possidonius, Cleanthes and Galen, that it was heat, or a hot Complexion;
Aeneid. lib. 9.
Igneus est ollis vigor, and caelestis origo.
Their Vigor is of Fire, and does prove
It self descended from the Gods above.
Hippocrates, a Spirit difus'd all over the Body: Varro, that it was an Air
received at the Mouth, heated in the Lungs, moistened in the Heart, and diffused
throughout the whole Body. Zeno, the Quintessence of the four Elements:
Heraclitus Ponticus, that it was the Light: Xenocrates and the Egyptians, a
Mobile Number: The Chaldaeans, a Virtue without any determinate Form. Lucret.
lib. 6.
Habitum quendam vitalem corporis esse,
Harmoniam Graeci quam dicunt.
A vital Habit in Man's Frame to be,
Which by the Greeks is called a Harmony.
Let us not forget Aristotle, who held the Soul to be that which naturally
causes the Body to move, which he calls Entelechia, with as cold an Invention
as any of the rest: For he neither speaks of the Essence, nor of the Original,
nor of the Nature of the Soul, only takes notice of the Effect. Lactantius,
Seneca, and most of the Dogmatists, have confessed, that it was a thing they
did not understand. And after all this enumeration of Opinions: Cicero in
Philos.
Harum sententiarum quae vera fit, Deus aliquis viderit: Says Cicero: Of these
Opinions, which is the true, let some God determine. I know by my self, says
St. Bernard, how incomprehensible God is, seeing I cannot comprehend the part
of my own being. Heraclitus, who was of Opinion, that every place was full of
Souls and Demons, did nevertheless maintain, that no one could advance so far
toward the knowledge of his Soul, as ever to arrive at it, so profound was the
Essence of it. Neither is there less controversy and debate about seating of
it. Hippocrates and Hierophilus place it in the Ventricle of the Brain:
Democritus and Aristotle throughout the whole Body: Vt bona saepe valetudo cum
dicitur esse Lucret. lib. 3.

Corporis, and non est tamen haec pars ulla valentis.
As when the Bodies Health they do it call,
When of a sound Man, that is no part at all.
Epicurus, in the Stomach; Hic exultat enim pavor, ac metus, haec loca circum
Laetitiae mulcent. Ibid.

For this the Seat of Horror is and Fear,
And Joys in turn do likewise triumph here.
The Stoics, about and within the Heart: Erasistratus, adjoining the Membrane
of the Epicranion: Empedocles, in the Blood, as also Moses, which was the
reason why he interdicted eating the Blood of Beasts, because the Soul is their
seated: Galen thought, that every part of the Body had its Soul: Strato has
placed its betwixt the Eyebrows: Cicer. Thus. l. 1.
Qu^ facie quidem sit animus, aut ubi habitet, ne quaerendum quidem est: What
Figure the Soul is of, or what part it inhabits, is not to be inquired into,
says Cicero. I very willingly deliver this Author to you in his own words: For
should I go about to alter Eloquence it self? Besides it were but an easy
prize to steal the Matter of his Inventions. They are neither very frequent,
nor of any great weight, and sufficiently known. But the reason why Chrysippus
argues it to be about the Heart, as all the rest of that Sect do, is not to be
omitted. It is, says he, because when we would affirm any thing, we lay our
hand upon our Breasts: And when we will pronounce (...), which signifies I, we
let the lower Mandable fall toward the Stomach. This place ought not to be
over-slipt without a Remark upon the Vanity of so great a Man: For besides that
these Considerations are infinitely light in themselves, the last is only a a
proof to the Greeks, that they have their Souls lodged in that part. No Human
Judgment is so spritely and vigilant, that it does not sometimes sleep. Why
should we be afraid to speak? We see the Stoics, who are the Fathers of Human
Prudence, have found out, that the Soul of Man crushed under a ruin, does long
labor and strive to get out, like a Mouse caught in a Trap, before it can
disingage it self from the Burden. Some hold, that the World was made to give
Bodies, by way of Punishment, to the Spirits fallen, by their own Fault, from
the Purity wherein they had been created: The first Creation having been no
other than incorporeal: And that according as they are more or less depraved
from their Spirituality, so are they, or more or less jocundly or dully
incorporated. And that thence proceeds all the Variety of so much created
Matter. But the Spirit that, for his Punishment, was invested with the Body of
the Sun, must certainly have a very rare and particular Measure of Thirst. The
extremities of our Perquisition do all fall into, and terminate in,
Astonishment and Blindness. As Plutarch says of the Testimony of Histories;
that, according to Charts and Maps, the utmost Bounds of known Countries are
taken up with Marshes, impenetrable Forests, Deserts and uninhabitable places.
And this is the reason why the most gross and childish Ravings were most found
in those Authors who treat of the most elevated Subjects, and proceed the
furthest in them: Losing themselves in their own Curiosity and Presumption. The
beginning and end of Knowledge, are equally reputed Foolish. Observe to what a
pitch Plato flies in his Poetic Clouds: Do but take notice there of the
Gibberish of the Gods. But what did he dream of when he defined a Man to be a
two begged Animal without Feathers: Giving those who had a mind to deride him,
a pleasant occasion? For having pulled a Capon alive, they called it the Man of
Plato. And what did the Epicureans think of, out of what simplicity did they
first imagine, that their Atoms, that they said were Bodies, The Atoms of the
Epicureans. What.
having some weight and a natural motion downwards, had made the World: Till
they were put in mind by their Adversaries, that, according to this
Description, it was impossible they should unite and join to one another, their
fall being so direct and perpendicular* and many, so many parrallel Lines
throughout? Wherefore there was a necessity that they should since add a
fortuitous and side-ways motion, and that they should moreover accoutre their
Atoms with hooked Tails, by which they might afterward unite and cling to one
another. And even then do not those that attack them upon this Second
Invention, put them hardly to it? If the Atoms have by chance formed so many
sorts of Figures, why did it never fall out that they made a House or a Shoe?
Why at the same rate should we not believe, that an infinite Number of Greek
Letters, strow'd all over a certain place, might possibly fall into the
Contexture of the Iliad? Whatever is capable of Reason, says Zeno, is better
than that which is not capable: There is nothing better than the World: The
World is therefore capable of Reason. Cotta, by this way of Argumentation,
makes the World a Mathematician: And it is also made a Musician and an
Organist, by this other Argumentation of Zeno: The Whole is more than a Part;
we are capable of Wisdom, and are part of the World: Therefore the World is
wise. There are infinite like Examples, not only of Arguments that are false in
themselves, but silly ones, that do not hold in themselves, and that accuse
their Authors not so much of Ignorance, as Impudence in the Reproaches, the
Philosophers dash one another in the Teeth withal, upon the Dissentions in
their Sects and Opinions. Whoever should bundle up a lusty Faggot of the
Fooleries of Human Wisdom, would produce wonders. I willingly muster up these
few for a Pattern, by a certain meaning not less profitable, than the most
moderate Instructions. Let us judge by these, what Opinion we are to have of
Man of his Sense and Reason; when in these great persons, and that have raised
Human Knowledge so high, so many gross and manifest Errors and Mistakes are to
be found. For my part, I am apt to believe, that they have treated of Knowledge
casually; and like a Toy, with both hands, and have contended about Reason, as
of a vain and frivolous Instrument, setting on foot all sorts of Fancies and
Inventions, sometimes more sinewy, and sometimes weaker. This same Plato, who
defines Man, as if he were a Cock, says elsewhere, after Socrates, that he does
not in truth, know what Man is, and that he is a Member of the World the
hardest to understand. By this variety and instability of Opinions, they
tacitly lead us, as it were, by the hand to this Resolution of their
Irresolution. They profess not always to deliver their Opinions barefaced and
apparent to us; they have one while disguised them in the fabulous Shadows of
Poesy, and another in some other Vizor: For our Imperfection carries this also
along with it, that crude Meats are not always proper for our Stomachs; they
must dry, alter and mix them: They do the same: They often conceal their real
Opinions and Judgments, and falsify them to accommodate themselves to the
Public Usance: They will not make an open Profession of Ignorance, and of the
Imbecility of Human Reason, that they may not fright Children: But they
sufficiently discover it to us under the appearance of a troubled and
inconstant Science. I advised a Person in Italy, who had a great mind to speak
Italian, that provided he only had a desire to make himself understood, without
being ambitious to excel, that he should only make use of the first words that
came to the Tongues end, whether Latin, French, Spanish or Gascon, and that in
adding the Italian Terminations, he could not fail of hitting upon some Idiom
of the Country either Thuscan, Roman, Venetian, Piedmentois or Neapolitan, and
to apply himself to some one of those many Forms. I say the same of Philosophy,
she has so many Faces, so much Variety, and has said so many things, that all
our Dreams and Ravings are there to be found. Humane Fancy can conceive nothing
good or bad that is not there: Cicero de Divin. l. 1.
Nihil tam absurd dici potest, quod non dicatur ab aliquo Philosophorum.
Nothing can be so absurdly said, that has not been said before by some of the
Philosophers. And I am the more willing to expose my Whimsies to the Public:
Forasmuch as, though they are spun out of my self, and without any Pattern, I
know they will be found related to some ancient Humor, and some will not stick
to say, See, whence he took it: My Manners are Natural, I have not called in
the assistance of any Discipline to erect them: But weak as they are, when it
came into my head to lay them open to the Worlds view, and that to expose them
to the Light in a little more decent Garb, I went about to adorn them with
Reasons and Examples: It was a wonder to my self, accidentally to find them
conformable to so many Philosophical Discourses and Examples. I never knew what
Regiment my Life was of, till after it was near worn out and spent. A new
Figure: An unpremeditate and accidental Philosopher. But to return to the Soul,
in that Plato has placed the Reason in the Brain, the Anger in the Heart, and
the Concupiscence in the Liver; it is likely that it was rather an
Interpretation of the Movements of the Soul, than that he intended a Division
and Separation of it, as of a Body into several Members: And the most likely of
their Opinions is, that it is always a Soul, that by its Faculty, Reasons,
remembers, comprehends, judges, desires and exercises all its other Operations
by diverse Instruments of the Body, as the Pilot guides his Ship according to
his Experience, one while straining or slacking the Cordage, one while hoisting
the Mainyard, or removing the Rudder, by one and the same strength carrying on
so many several effects: And that it is lodged in the Brain, which appears in
that the Wounds and Accidents that touch that part, do immediately offend the
Faculties of the Soul: And it is not incongruous, that it should thence diffuse
it self into the other parts of the Body: Claud. in Paneg. de Consal. Hon.
-- medium non diserit unquam
Caeli Phoebus iter radiis tamen omnia lustrat.
Phoebus never deviates from the Zodiack's way;
Yet all things does illustrate with his Ray.
As the Sun sheds from Heaven's Light and Influence, and fills the World with
them. Lucret. lib. 3.
Caetera pars animae per totum dissita corpus
Paret, and ad numen mentis, nomenque movetur.
The other part of the Soul diffused all over
The Body, does obey the Reasons lore.
Some have said, that there was a General Soul, as it were a great Body, from
whence all the particular Souls were extracted, and thither again return,
always restoring it self to that Universal Matter. -- Deum namque ire per omnes
Virg. Geor. lib. 4.
Terrasque tractusque maris, caelumque profundum:
Hinc pecudes, armenta, viros, genus omne ferarum:
Quemque sibi tenues nascentem arcessere vitas,
Scilicet huc reddi deinde, ac resoluta referri
Omnia: Nec morti esse locum:
-- For they suppose
That God through Earth, the Sea and Heavens goes.
Hence Men, Beasts, Reptiles, Insects, Fishes, Fouls
Take all their issue to the Light, their Souls;
And there again restore them when they dye,
They being not subject to Mortality.
Others, that they only rejoined and reunited themselves to it, others that
they were produced from the Divine Substance: Others by the Angels of Fire and
Air: Others that they were from all Antiquity; and some that they were created
at the very Article of time, the Bodies wanted them: Others make them to
descend from the Orb of the Moon, and to return thither. The generality of the
Ancients, that they were begot from Father to Son, after a like manner, and
produced with all other Natural things; raising their Argument from the
likeness of Children to their Fathers. Instillata patris virtus tibi, Hor. lib.
4* Ode. 4.

Fortes creantur fortibus, and bonis.
Thou have thy Fathers Virtues with his Blood;
For the Brave still spring from the Brave and Good.
And that we see descend from Fathers to their Children, not only Bodily Marks,
but moreover a Resemblance of Humors, Complexions and Inclinations of the
Soul. Denique cur acrum violentia triste leonum Lucret. lib. 3.

Seminium sequitur, dolus vulpibus, and fuga cervis
A patribus datur, and patrius pavor incitat artus,
Si non certa suo quia semine seminioque,
Vis animi pariter crescit cum corpore toto?
For why should Rage from the fierce Lyon's Seed,
Or from the subtle Foxes Craft proceed,
Or why the timorous and flying Heart
His fear and trembling to his Race impart,
But that a certain Force of Mind does grow,
And still increases, as the Bodies do?
That thereupon the Divine Justice is grounded, punishing in the Children, the
Faults of their Fathers: Forasmuch as the Contagion of Paternal Vices is in
some sort imprinted in the Soul of Children, and that the ill government of
their Will extends to them. Moreover that if Souls had any other Derivation
than a Natural Consequence, and that they had been some other thing out of the
Body, they would retain some Memory of their first Being, the Natural Faculties
that are proper to them of discoursing, reasoning and remembering, considered.
Ibid.
-- Si in corpus nascentibus insinuatur,
Cur superantes actam aetatem meminisse nequimus,
Nec vestigia gestarum rerum ulla tenemus?
For at our Birth if it infused be,
Why do we then retain no Memory
Of our foregoing Life, and why no more
Remember any thing we did before?
For to make the condition of our Souls such as we would have it to be, we must
suppose them all knowing, even in their Natural Simplicity and Purity. By these
means they had been such, being free from the Prison of the Body, as well
before they entered into it, as we hope they shall be after they are gone out of
it. And from this knowledge it should follow, that they should remember being
get in the Body, as Plato said, That what we learn is no other than a
remembrance of what we knew before; a thing which every one by experience may
maintain to be false. Forasmuch, in the first place, as that we do not justly
remember any thing, but what we have been taught: And that if the Memory did
purely perform its Office, it would at least suggest to us something more than
what we have learned. Secondly, That which she knew being in her Purity, was a
true Knowledge, knowing things as they are by her Divine Intelligence: Whereas
here we make her receive Falsehood and Vice, when we instruct her; wherein she
cannot employ her Reminiscence, that Image and Conception having never been
planted in her. ^o say, that the Corporal Prison does in such sort suffocate
her Natural Faculties, that they are there utterly extinct, is first, contrary
to this other Belief of acknowledging her Power to be so great, and and the
Operations of it, that Men sensibly perceive in this Life so admirable, as to
have thereby concluded this Divinity, and past Eternity, and the Immortality to
come: Ibid.
Nam si tantopere est animi mutata potestas,
Omnis ut actarum exciderit retinentia rerum,
Non ut opinor ea ab letho jam longior errat.
For if the Mind be changed to that degree,
As of past things to lose all Memory,
So great a Change as that, I must confess,
Appears to me than Death but little less.
Furthermore it is here with us, and not elsewhere, that the Forces and Effects
of the Soul ought to be considered: All the rest of her Perfections are vain
and useless to her; it is by her present condition, that all her Immortality is
to be rewarded and paid, and of the Life of Man only that she is to render an
account: It had been Injustice to have stripped her of her Means and Powers, and
to have disarmed her, only from the time of her Captivity and Imprisonment in
the Flesh, of her Weakness and Infirmity from the time wherein she was forced
and compelled to extract an infinite and perpetual Sentence and Condemnation,
and to insist upon the Consideration of so short a time, peradventure but an
hour or two, or at the most but an Age, (which have no more proportion with
Infinity, than an Instant) for this Momentary Interval to ordain, and
definitively to determine of her whole Eternity. It were an unreasonable
disproportion to extract an eternal Recompense in consequence of so short a
Life. Plato, to defend himself from this inconvenience, will have future
Rewards limited to the term of a hundred years, relatively to Human Duration:
And of us our selves there are enough, who have given them Temporal Limits. By
this they judged, that the Generation of the Soul followed the common condition
of Human things: As also her Life according to the Opinion of Epicurus and
Democritus, which has been the most received, in consequence of these fine
apparences, that they saw it born, and that according as the Body grew more
capable, they saw it increase in Vigor, as the other did; that its feebleness
in Infancy was very manifest, and in time its better Strength and Maturity, and
after that its Declension and Old Age, and at last its decripitude: -- gigni
pariter cum corpore, Ibid.
and una
Crescere sentimus, pariterque senescere mentem.
Souls with the Bodies to be born we may
Discern with them to increase, with them decay.
They perceived it to be capable of diverse Passions, and agitated with several
painful Motions, from whence it fell into lassitude and uneasiness, capable of
Alteration and Change, of Cheerfulness and Stupidity, and Faintness, and
subject to Diseases and Injuries, as the Stomach or the Foot: -- Mentem sanari,
Ibid.
corpus ut aegrum
Cernimus, and flecti medicina posse videmus.
Sick Minds as well as Bodies we do see,
By Medicines Virtue often restored to be.
Dazzled and intoxicated with the Fumes of Wine; justled from her Seat by the
Vapors of a burning Fever, laid asleep by the application of some
Medicaments, and roused awake by others. -- Corpoream naturam animi esse
necesse est, Ibid.

Corporis quoniam telis ictuque laborat.
There must be of necessity, we find,
A Nature that is corporal of the Mind,
Because we evidently see it smarts,
And wounded is with Shafts the Body darts.
They saw it in Astonishment, and such a one as overthrow all its Faculties
through the mere Contagion of a mad Dog, and in that condition to have no
Stability of Reason, no Sufficiency, no Virtue, no Philosophical Resolution, no
resistance that could exempt it from the subjection of Accidents; The slaver of
a contemptible Curr, shed upon the hand of Socrates, to shake all his Wisdom,
and all his great and regular Imaginations, and so to annihilate them, as that
there remained no Tracen or Footstep of his former Knowledge: Ibid.
-- vis animai
Conturbatur -- and divisa seorsum
Disjectatur eodem illo distracta veneno.
The power of the Souls disturbed, and when
That once is but sequestered from her, then
By the same Poison it is dispersed abroad.
And this Poison to find no more resistance in that great Soul, than in that of
an Infant of four years old: A Poison sufficient to make all Philosophy, if it
were incarnate, to become furious and mad; insomuch that Cato, who ever
disdained Death and Fortune, could not endure the sight of a Looking-glass, or
of Water, confounded with Horror and Affright at the thought of falling by the
Contagion of a mad Dog, into the Disease called by Physicians, Hydrophobia.
Ibid.
-- vis morbi distracta per artus
Turbat agens animam, spumantes aequore falso
Ventorum ut validis fervescunt viribus undae.
Throughout the Limbs diffused, the fierce Disease
Disturbs the Soul, as in the briny Seas,
The foaming Waves to swell and boil we see
Stirred by the Winds impetuosity.
Now as to this particular, Philosophy has sufficiently armed Man to encounter
all other Accidents, either with Patience; or if the Search of that costs too
dear, by an infallible Defeat, in totally depriving himself of all sentiment:
But these are Expedients, that are only of use to a Soul being it self, and in
its full power, capable of Reason and Deliberation: But not at all proper for
this Inconvenience, where even in a Philosopher, the Soul becomes the Soul of a
Madman, troubled, overturned, and lost. Which many Occasions may produce, as a
too vehement Agitation that any violent Passion of the Soul may beget in it
self; or a Wound in a certain part of the Person, or Vapors from the Stomach,
any of which may stupify the Understanding and turn the Brain. -- Morbis in
corporis auius errat
Saepe animus, dementit enim deliraque fatur, Ibid.

Interdumque gravi lethargo fertur in altum
Aeternumque soporem, oculis nutuque cadenti.
For when the Body's sick, and ill at ease,
The Mind does often share in the Disease;
Wanders, grows wild, and raves, and sometimes by
A heavy and a stupid Lethargy,
Is overcome and cast into a deep,
A most profound and everlasting, Sleep.
The Philosophers, methinks, have not much touched this string, no more than
another of the same Importance: They have this Dilemma continually in their
Mouths to consolate our mortal Condition: The Soul is either mortal or
immortal; if mortal, it will suffer no pain; if immortal, it will change for
the better, they never touch the other Branch; what if she change for the
worse, and leave to the Poets the menaces of future Torments. But thereby they
make themselves a good Game. They are two Omissions, that I often meet with in
their Discourses: I return to the first. This Soul loses the use of the
sovereign stoical Good, so constant and so firm. Our fine human Wisdom must
here yield, and give up her Arms. As to the rest, they did also consider by
the vanity of human Reason, that the mixture and association of two so contrary
things as mortal and immortal, was unimaginable: Ibid.
Quippe etenim mortale aeterno jungere, and una est,
Consentire putare, and fungi mutua posse,
Desipere est. Quid enim diversus esse putandum
Aut magis inter se disjunctum, discrepitansque,
Quam mortale quod est, immortali atque perenni
Junctum in concilio, saevas tolerare procellas?
To join the mortal then and the aetern
And think they can agree in one concern,
Is Madness. For what things more differing are
Unlike betwixt themselves, and fit to jarr?
How can it then be thought, that these should bear,
When thus conjoined, of Storms an equal share?
Moreover, they perceived the Soul tending toward death, as well as the Body.
Simul aevo fessa fatiscit. Which, Ibid.
according to Zeno, the Image of Sleep does sufficiently demonstrate to us. For
he looks upon it as a fainting and fall of the Soul, as well as of the Body.
Cicero de Div. l. 2.
Contrahi animum, and quasi labi putat, atque decidere. He thinks the Mind is
transported, and that it slips and falls. And what they perceived in some, that
the Soul maintained its force and vigor to the last gasp of Life, they
attributed to the variety of Diseases, as it is observable in Men at the last
Extremity, that some retain one Sense, and some another, one the Hearing and
another the Smell, without any manner of Defects or Alteration; and that there
is no so universal a Deprivation, that some parts do not remain vigorous and
entire: Non alio pacto quam si pes cum dolet agri,
In nullo caput intera sit forte dolor.
As if a sick Man's Foot in pain should be
And yet his Head perhaps from Dolours free. Ibid.

The sight of our Judgment is to Truth, the same that the Owls Eyes are to the
Sun, says Aristotle: By what can we better convince him, than by so gross
Blindness in so apparent a Light? For the contrary Opinion of the immortality
of the Soul, which Cicero says, was first introduced (by the Testimony of the
Authors at least) by Pherecides Syrius in the time of King Tullus; (though
others attribute it to Thales, and others to others) it is the part of human
Science, that is treated of with the most doubt and the greatest reservation.
The most positive Dogmatists, are in this point, principally to fly to the
Refuge of Academy. No one knows what Aristotle has established upon this
Subject, no more than all the Ancients in general, who handle it with a
wavering Belief: Rem gratissimam promittentium magis quam probantium: A thing
more acceptable in the Promisers, than the Provers. He conceals himself in
clouds of Words of difficult and unintelligible Sense, and has left to those of
his Sect as great a Dispute about his Judgment, as the matter it self. Two
things rendered this Opinion plausible to them: One, that without the
immortality of Souls, there would be nothing whereon to ground the vain Hopes
of Glory, which is a Consideration of wonderful Repute in the World: The other,
that it is a very profitable Impression, Vice punished by the Divine Justice
after Death.
as Plato says, that Vices, when they escape the Discovery and Cognizance of
human Justice, are still within the reach of the Divine, which will pursue them
even after the Death of the Guilty. Man is excessively solicitous to prolong
his Being, and has to the utmost of his Power provided for it. Monuments are
erected, and embalming in use, for the Conservation of the Body, and glory to
preserve the Name. He has employed all his Wit and Opinion to the rebuilding of
himself (impatient of his Form) and to prop himself by his Inventions. The Soul
by reason of its Anxiety and Impotence, being unable to stand by it self,
wanders up and down to seek out Consolations, Hopes and Foundations, and alien
Circumstances, to which she adheres and fixes. And how light or fantastic
soever Invention delivers them to it, relies more willingly and with greater
Assurance upon them, than it self. But it is wonderful to observe, how short the
most constant and obstinate Maintainers of this just and clear Persuasion of
the Immortality of the Soul do fall, and how weak their Arguments are, when
they go about to prove it by human Reason. Somnia sunt non docentis, sed
optantis. Cic. Acad. lib. 4.
They are Dreams not of the Teacher but Wisher, says one of the Ancients. By
which Testimony Man may know, that he owes the Truth he himself finds out to
Fortune and Accident; since that even then, when it is fallen into his Hand, he
has not wherewith to hold and maintain it, and that his Reason has not Force to
make use of it. All things produced by our own Meditation and Understanding,
whether true or false, are subject to Incertitude and Controversy. 'Twas for
the Chastisement of our Pride, and for the Instruction of our Misery and
Incapacity, that God wrought the Perplexity and Confusion at the Tower of
Babel. Whatever we undertake without his Assistance, whatever we see without
the Lamp of his Grace, is but Vanity and Folly. We corrupt the very Essence of
Truth, which is uniform and constant by our Weakness, when Fortune puts it into
our Possession. What Course soever Man takes of himself, God still permits it
to come to the same Confusion, the Image whereof he so lively represents to us
in the just Chastisement wherewith he crushed Nimrod's Presumption, and
frustrated the vain Attempt of his proud Structure. Perdam sapientiam
sapientium, and prudentiam prudentium reprobabe. 1 Cor. 1.^19.
I will destroy the Wisdom of the Wise, and will bring to nothing the
Understanding of the Prudent. The Diversity of Idiomes and Languages with which
he disturbed this work, what are they other, than this infinite and perpetual
alteration and discordance of Opinions and Reasons, which accompany and
confound the vain Building of human Wisdom? And it is to very good effect, that
they do so. For what would hold us if we had but the least grain of Knowledge?
This Saint has very much obliged me. Ipsa utilitatis occultatio, aut
humilitatis exercitatio est, aut elationis attritio. The very concealment of
the Vtility, is either an exercise of Humility, or a quelling of Presumption.
To what a pitch of Presumption and Insolence do we raise our Blindness and
Folly? But to return to my Subject, it was truly very good Reason, that we
should be beholding to God only, and to the favor of his Grace, for the Truth
of so noble a Belief, since from his sole Bounty we receive the Fruit of
Immortality, which consists in the Enjoyment of eternal Beatitude. Let us
ingeniously confess, that God alone has dictated it to us and the Faith: For
it is no Lesson of Nature and our own Reason. And whoever will enquire into his
own Being and Power, both within and without, without this divine Privilege:
Whoever shall consider Man impartially, and without Flattery, will see nothing
in him of Efficacy, nor any kind of Faculty, that relishes of any thing but
Death and Earth. The more we give and confess to owe and render to God, we do
it with the greater Christianity. That which this Stoic Philosopher says, he
holds from the fortuitous Consent of the popular Voice, had it not been better,
that he had held it from God? Cum de animorum aeternitate disserimus, non leve
momentum apud nos habet consensus hominum, Seneca. Epist. 117.
aut timentium inferos, aut colentium. Vtor hac publica persuasione. When we
discourse of the Immortality of Souls, the consent of Men, that either fear or
adore the infernal Power, is of no small Advantage. I make use of this public
Persuasion. Now the weakness of human Arguments upon this Subject, is
particularly manifested by the fabulous Arguments they have superadded as
Consequences of this Opinion, to find out of what Condition this Immortality of
ours was. Let us omit the Stoics, Vsuram nobis largiuntur, tanquam cornicibus;
Cicero. Thus. l. 1.
diu mansuros aiunt animos; semper, negant. They give us a long Life, as also
they do to Crows; they say our Soul shall continue long, but that it shall
continue always, they deny. Who give to Souls a Life after this, but finite.
The most universal and received Fancy, and that continues down to our Times, is
that, of which they make Pythagoras the Author; (not that he was the original
Inventor, but because it received a great deal of Weight and Repute by the
Authority of his Approbation,) is, that Souls at their departure out of us, did
nothing but shift from one Body to another, from a Lion to a Horse, from a
Horse to a King, continually travailing at this rate from Habitation to
Habitation. And he himself said, that he remembered he had been Aethalides,
since that Euphorbus, and afterward Hermotimus; and finally from Pyrrhus, was
past into Pythagoras, having a Memory of himself of two hundred and six Years.
And some have added that these very Souls sometimes remount to Heaven and come
down again. O pater, Virg. l. 6.
anne aliquas ad Coelum hinc ire putandum est
Sublimes animas iterumque ad tarda reverti
Corpora? quae lucis miseris tam dira cupido?
Is it to be believed, that some sublime,
And high-flown Souls, should hence from Heaven climb,
And thence return t'immure themselves in slow,
And heavy Prisons of dull Flesh below?
Origin makes them eternally to go and come, from a better to a worse Estate.
The Opinion that Varro makes mention of, is, that after four hundred and forty
Years Revolution, they should be reunited to their first Bodies. Chrysippus
held, that that would happen after a certain space of time unknown and
unlimited. Plato (who professes to have embraced this Belief from Pindar and
the ancient Poets) thinks they are to undergo infinite Vicissitudes of
Mutation, for which the Soul is prepared, having neither Punishment nor reward
in the other World, but what is Temporal, as its Life here is but Temporal,
concludes that it has a singular Knowledge of the Affairs of Heaven, of Hell, of
the World, through all which it has past, repast, and made stay in several
Voyages; fit matters for her Memory. Observe her Progress elsewhere; the Soul
that has lived well is reunited to the Star, to which it is assigned: That
removes into a Woman, and, if it do not there reform, is again removed into a
Beast of Condition suitable to its vicious Manners, and shall see no end of its
punishments, till it be returned to its natural Constitution, and that it has
by the force of Reason purged it self from those gross, stupid, and elementary
Qualities it was polluted with. But I will not omit the Objection the
Epicureans make against this Transmigration from one Body to another, and it is
a pleasant one. They ask, what Expedient would be found out, if the number of
the dying should chance to be greater, than that of those who are coming into
the World. For the Souls, turned out of their old Habitation, would scuffle and
crowd which should first get Possession of this new Lodging. And they further
demand, how they should pass away their time, whilst waiting till a new Quarter
were made ready for them: Or on the contrary, if more Animals should be born,
than dye, the Body, they say, would be but in an ill Condition, whilst in
expectation of a Soul to be infused into it; and it would fall out, that some
Bodies would dye, before they had been alive. Denique connubia adveneris,
partusque ferarum, Lucret. lib. 3.

Esse animas praesto deridiculum esse videtur,
Et spectare immortales mortalia membra
Innumero numero, certareque praeproperanter
Inter se, quae prima potissimaque insinuetur.
It seems ridiculous, that Souls should be
Always attending on Beast's Venery,
And being immortal, mortal Bodies should,
Covet to have, and in vast numbers crowd,
Strive and contend with heat and eagerness,
Which should the first and most desired possess.
Others have arrested the Soul in the Body of the Deceased, with it to animate
Serpents, Worms, and other Beasts, which are said to be bred out of the
Corruption of our Members, and even out of our Ashes; Others divide them into
two parts, the one mortal, and the other immortal. Others make it Corporeal,
and nevertheless Immortal. Some make it Immortal without Science or Knowledge.
And there are even of us our selves who have believed, that Devils were made of
the Souls of the Damned; as Plutarch thinks, that Gods we made of those that
were saved. For there are few things which that Author is so positive in, as he
is in this; maintaining elsewhere a doubtful and ambiguous way of Expression.
We are to hold, says he, and steadfastly to believe, that the Souls of Virtuous
Men, both according to Nature and the divine Justice, become Saints, and from
Saints Demy-Gods, and from Demy-Gods, after they are perfectly, as in
Sacrifices of Purgation, cleansed and purified, being delivered from all
Passibility, and all Mortality, they become not by any civil Decree, but in
real Truth, and according to all probability of Reason, entire and perfect
Gods, in receiving a most happy and glorious End. But who desires to see him,
him, I say, who is the most sober and moderate of the whole Gang of
Philosophers, lay about him with greater Boldness, and relate his Miracles upon
this Subject, I refer him to his Treatise of the Moon, and his Demon of
Socrates, where he may as evidently as in any other place whatever, satisfy
himself and affirm, that the Mysteries of Philosophy have many strange things
in common with those of Poesy; human Understanding losing it self, in
attempting to sound and search all things to the Bottom: Even as we, tired and
worn out with a long course of Life, return to Infancy and Dotage. See here the
fine and certain Instructions, which we extract from human Knowledge, concerning
the Soul. Neither is there less Temerity in what they teach us touching our
corporal Parts. Let us choose out one or two Examples; for otherwise we should
lose our selves in this vast and troubled Ocean of Medicinal Errors. Let us
first know, whether at least they agree about the Matter, whereof Men produce
one another. For as to their first Production, it is no wonder if in a thing so
high, and so long since past, human Understanding finds it self puzzled and
perplexed. Archelaus the Physician, whose Disciple and Favorite Socrates was,
according to Aristoxenus, said, that both Men and Beasts were made of a
lacteous Slime, expressed by the Heat of the Earth. Pythagoras says, that our
Seed is the Foam or Cream of our better Blood. Plato, that it is the
Distillation of the Marrow of the Backbone, and raises his Argument from this,
that that part is first sensible of being weary of the Work. Alcmeon, that it
is part of the Substance of the Brain, and that it is so, says he, it causes
weakness of the Eyes in those who are over-immoderately addicted to that
Exercise: Democritus, that it is a Substance extracted from the whole Mass of
the Body: Epicurus, extracted from Soul and Body: Aristotle, an Excrement drawn
from the Aliment of the last Blood which is diffused over all our Members:
Others, that it is a Blood concocted and digested by the heat of the
Genitories, which they judge, by reason that in excessive Endeavors a Man voids
pure florid Blood: Wherein there seems to be the most likelihood, could a Man
extract any appearance from so infinite a Confusion. Now to bring this Seed to
do its Work, how many contrary Opinions do they set on Foot? Aristotle and
Democritus are of Opinion, that Women have no Sperm, and that it is nothing but
a Sweat that they distill in the heat of Pleasure and Motion, that contributes
nothing at all to Generation. Galen on the contrary, and his Followers, believe
that without the Concurrence of Seeds, there can be no Generation. Here are the
Physicians, the Philosophers, the Lawyers, and Divines, by the Ears with our
Wives, about the Dispute, upon what Terms Women conceive their Fruit. And I for
my part, by the Example of myself, stickle with those that maintain a Woman
going eleven Months with Child. The World is built upon this Experience; there
is not so pitiful a little Female that cannot give her Judgment in all these
Controversies; and yet we cannot agree. Here is enough to evidence, that Man is
no better instructed in the Knowledge of himself, in his corporal, than in his
spiritual Part. We have proposed himself to himself, and his Reason to his
Reason, to see what she could say, and, I think, I have sufficiently
demonstrated how little she understands her self in her self. And who
understands not himself in himself, in what can he possibly understand? Plin.
Not. Hist. lib. 2. cap. 1.
Quasi vero mensuram ullius rei possit agere, qui sui nesciat. As if he could
understand the Measure of any other thing, that knows not his own. In earnest,
Protagoras told us a pretty Flam, in making Man the measure of all things, that
never knew so much as his own. If it be not he, his Dignity will not permit,
that any other Creature should have this Advantage. Now he being so contrary in
himself, and one Judgment so incessantly subverting another, this favorable
Proposition was but a Mockery, which induced us necessarily to conclude the
Nullity of the Compass and the Compasser; when Thales reputes the knowledge of
Man very difficult for Man to Comprehend, he at the same time gives him to
understand, that all other Knowledge is impossible. You, for whom I have taken
the Pains, contrary to my Custom, to write so long a Discourse, will not refuse
to maintain your Sebonde, by the ordinary Forms of Arguing, wherewith you are
every day instructed, and in this will exercise both your Wit and Learning: For
this f^ncing trick, is never to be made use of, but as an extreme Remedy. It Is
a desperate Thrust wherein you are to quit your own Arms, to make your
Adversary abandon his: And a secret Slight, which must be very rarely, and then
very reservedly, put in Practice. It Is great Temerity to lose your self, that
you may destroy another, you must not die to be revenged, as Gobrias did: For
being hotly grappled in Combat with a Lord of Persia, Darius coming in with his
Sword in his Hand, and fearing to strike least he should kill Gobrias; he
called out to him boldly to fall on, though he should run them both through at
once. I have known the Arms and Conditions of single Combat to the utmost, and
wherein he, that offered them, put himself and his Adversary upon Terms of
inevitable Death to them both, censured for unjust. The Portuguese in the
Indian Sea took certain Turks Prisoners, who, impatient of their Captivity,
resolved, and it succeeded, by striking the Nails of the Ship against one
another, and making a Spark to fall into the Barrels of Powder (that were set
in the place, where they were guarded) to blow and reduce themselves, their
Masters, and the Vessel to Ashes. We have touched the out-Pale and utmost
Limits of Sciences; wherein the Extremity is Vicious, as in Virtue. Keep your
selves in the common Road, it is not good to be so subtle and cunning. Remember
the Thuscan Proverb. Proverb.
Chi troppo s'assottiglia, si scavezza.
Who makes himself too Wise, becomes a Fool.
I advise you, that, in all your Opinions and Discourses, as well as in your
Manners, and all other things, you keep your selves moderate and temperate, and
to avoid all Novelty. I am an Enemy to all extravagant Ways. You, who by the
Authority of your Grandeur, and yet more by the Advantages which those
Qualities give you that are most your own, may with the twinck of an Eye
command whom you please, ought to give this Caution to some one who made
Profession of Letters, who might after a better manner have proved and
illustrated these things to you. But here is as much as you will stand in need
of. Epicurus said of the Laws, that the worst were necessary for us, and that
without them Men would devour one another. And Plato affirms, that without
Laws, we should live like Beasts. Our Spirit is a wandering, dangerous, and
temerarious Utile, it is hard to couple any Order or Measure to it. In those of
our own time, who are endued with any rare Excellence above others, or any
extraordinary Vivacity of Understanding, we see them almost all lash out into
License of Opinions and Manners; and it is almost a Miracle to find one
Temperate and Sociable. It Is all the Reason in the World to limit human Wit
within the strictest Limits imaginable. In Study, as in all the rest, we ought
to have its Steps and Advances numbered and fixed, and that the Limits of its
Inquisition be bounded by Act. It is curbed and fettered by Religions, Laws and
Customs, by Sciences, Precepts, mortal and Immortal Penalties: and yet we see,
that it escapes from all these Bounds by its Volubility and Dissolution. It Is a
vain Body which has nothing to lay hold on, or to seize, a various and difform
Body, incapable of being either bound or held. In earnest, there are few Souls
so regular, firm, and well descended, that are to be trusted with their own
Conduct; and that can with Moderation, and without Temerity sail in the Liberty
of their own Judgments, beyond the common and received Opinions. It Is more
expedient to put them under Pupillage. Wit is a dangerous Weapon, even to the
Possessor, if he knows not discreetly how to use it, and there is not a Beast
to whom a Head-board is more justly to be given, to keep his Looks down and
before his Feet, and to hinder him from wandering here and there out of the
Tracks, which Custom and the Laws have laid before him. And therefore it will
much better become you to keep your selves in the beaten Path, let it be what
it will, than to fly out at a venture with this unbridled Liberty, But if any
of these new Doctors, will pretend to be ingenious in your Presence, at the
Expense both of your Soul and his own, to avoid this dangerous Plague, which is
every day laid in your way to infect you, this Preservative, in the extremest
Necessity, will prevent the Danger, and hinder the Contagion of this Poison
from offending either you or your Company. The Liberty then, and frolic
Forwardness of these ancient Wits, produced in Philosophy and human Sciences,
several Sects of different Opinions, every one undertaking to judge and make
choice of what he would stick to and maintain. But now that Men go all one way:
Qui certis quibusdam destinatisque sententiis addicti and consecrati sunt,
Cicero.
ut etiam, quae non probant, cogantur defendere. Who are so tied and obliged to
certain Beliefs, that they are bound to defend even those they do not approve:
and that we receive the Arts by civil Authority and Decree: So that the Schools
have but one Pattern, and a like circumscribed Institution and Discipline, we
no more take notice what the Coin weighs, and is really worth; but every one
receives it according to the Estimate that common Approbation puts upon it: The
Alloy is not disputed, but how much it is current for; and in like manner all
things pass. We take Physic as we do Geometry aad Tricks of Hocus-pocus,
Enchantments, Codpiece-Points, the Correspondence of the Souls of the Dead,
Prognostications, Domifications, and so much as this ridiculous pursuit of the
Philosophers Stone, all things pass for current Pay, without any manner of
Scruple or Contradiction. We need to know no more, but that Mars his House is
in the middle of the Triangle of the Hand, that of Venus in the Thumb, and that
of Mercury in the little Finger, that when the Table-Line cuts the Tubercle of
the Fore-Fingers, it is a sign of Cruelty; that when it falls short of the
middle Finger, Sign of Cruelty,
and that the natural Median-Line makes an Angle with the Vital in the same
side, Of a miserable Death,
it is a sign of a miserable Death. That if in a Woman the natural Line be open,
and does not close the Angle with the Vital, denotes that she shall not be very
Chaste. Of Unchastity.
I leave you to judge, whether a Man, thus qualified, may not pass with
Reputation and Esteem in all Companies. Theophrastus said, that human Knowledge,
guided by the Senses, might judge of the Causes of things to a certain degree;
but that being arrived to first and extreme Causes, it Must stop short and
retire, by reason either of its own infirmity, or the difficulty of things.
It Is a moderate and gentle Opinion, that our own Understandings may conduct us
to the knowledge of some things, and that it has certain Measures of Power,
beyond which, it is Temerity to employ it. This Opinion is plausible, and
introduced by Men of well-compos'd Minds; but it is hard to limit our Wit, it is
curious and greedy, and will no more stop at a thousand, than at fifty Paces.
Having my self experimentally found, that wherein one has failed, the other has
hit, and that what was unknown to one Age, the Age following has explained; and
that Arts and Sciences are not cast in a Mould, but are formed and perfected by
degrees, by often handling and polishing, as Bears leisurely lick their Cubs
into shape; what my Force cannot discover, I do not yet desist to sound and to
try: But handling and kneading this new Matter over, and over again, by turning
and heating it, I lay open to him, that shall succeed me, a kind of Facility to
enjoy it more at his ease, and make it more maniable and supple for him: -- ut
Hymettia sole Ovid. Met. lib. 10.
Cera remollescit, tractataque pollice multas
Vertitur in facies, ipsoque fit utilis usu.
As Wax does softer in the Sun become,
Simile.
And tempered 'twixt the Finger and the Thumb,
Will various Forms, and several Shapes admit,
Till for the present use it is rendered fit.
As much will the second do to the third, which is the cause that the
difficulty ought not to make me despair, and my own Imbecility, as little; for
it is nothing, but my own. Man is as capable of all things, as of some: And if
he confesses, as Theophrastus says, the ignorance of first Causes, let him hard
by surrender to me all the rest of his Knowledge: If he is defective in
Foundation, his Reason is on the Ground: Disputation and Inquisition have no
other aim, nor stop but Principles, if this do not stop his Carreer, he runs
into an infinite Irresolution. Non potest aliud alio magis minusve comprehendi,
quoniam omnium rerum una est definitio comprehendendi: One thing can no more be
comprehended than another, because the definition of comprehending all things
is the same. Now it is very likely, that if the Soul knew any thing, it would in
the first place know it self, and if it knew any thing out of it self, it would
be its own Body and Case, before any thing else. If we see the Gods of Physic
to this very day debating about our Anatomy. -- Mulciber in Trojam, pro Troja
stabat Apollo: Ovid. Tr. lib. 1. El. 2.

Vulcan against, for Troy Apollo stood.
When are we to expect, that they will be agreed? We are nearer Neighbors to
our selves, than the whiteness of Snow, or the weight of Stone are to us. If
Man does not know himself, how should he know his Forces and Functions? It is
not peradventure, that we have not some real Knowledge in us; but it is by
chance; and forasmuch as Errors are received into our Soul by the same way,
after the same manner, and by the same Conduct, it has not wherewithal to
distinguish them, nor wherewithal to choose the Truth from Falsehood. The
Academicks admitted a certain Partiality of Judgment; and thought it too crude
to say, that it was not more likely, that Snow was white, than black, and that
we were no more assured of the motion of a Stone, thrown by the hand, than of
that of the eighth Sphere. And to avoid this difficulty and strangeness, that
can, in truth, hardly lodge in our Imagination; though they did conclude, that
we were in no sort capable of Knowledge, and that Truth is ingulfed in so
profound an Abyss, as is not to be penetrated by Human Sight: Yet do they
acknowledge something to be more likely than others, and received into their
Judgment this Faculty, that they had a power to incline to one appearance more
than another. They allowed him this propension, interdicting all Resolution.
The Pyrrhonians Opinon is more bold, and also more likely. For this Academick
Inclination, and this Propension to one Proposition rather than another; what
is it other, than a Discovery of some more apparent Truth in this, than in
that? If our Understanding be capable of the Form, Lineaments, Comportment and
Face of Truth, it might as well see it entire, as by halves, springing and
imperfect. This appearance of likelihood, which makes them rather take the Left
hand, than the Right, augments it: Multiply this Ounce of Verisimilitude, that
turns the Scales to a hundred, to a thousand Ounces, it will happen in the end,
that the Balance will it self end the Controversy, and determine one Choice,
and entire Truth. But why do they suffer themselves to incline to, and be
swayed by Verisimilitude, if they know not the Truth? How should they know the
Similitude of that, whereof they do not know the Essence: Either we can
absolutely judge, or absolutely we cannot. If our intellectual and sensible
Faculties are without Foot or Foundation; if they only hull and drive, it is to
no purpose that we suffer our Judgments to be carried away with any thing of
their Operation, what appearance soever they may seem to present us. And the
surest and most happy Seat of our Understanding would be that, where it kept it
self temperate, upright and inflexible, without tottering, or without
agitation. Cic. Acad. lib. 4.
Inter visa, vera, aut falsa, ad animi assensum, nihil interest. Amongst things
that seem, whether true or false, it signifies nothing to the assent of the
mind. That things do not lodge in us in their Form and Essence, and do not
there make their entry by their own Force and Authority, we sufficiently see.
Because if it were so, we should receive them after the same manner: Wine would
have the same relish with the sick, as with the healthful. He who has his
Finger chapt or benumbed, would find the same hardness in Wood or Iron that he
handles, that another does. Strange Subjects then surrender themselves to our
Mercy, and are seated in us as we please. Now if on our part we did receive any
thing without alteration, if Human Grasp were capable and strong enough to
seize on Truth by our own means, being common to all Men, this Truth would be
conveyed from hand to hand from one to another; and at least there would be
some one thing to be found in the World amongst so many as there are, that
would be believed by Men with an universal Consent. But this, that there is no
one Proposition, that is not debated and controverted amongst us, or that may
not be, makes it very manifest, that our Natural Judgment does not very clearly
discern what it embraces: For my Judgment cannot make my Companions approve of
what it approves: Which is a sign that I seized it by some other means, than by
a Natural Power that is in me, and in all other Men. Let us lay aside this
infinite Confusion of Opinions, which we see even amongst the Philosophers
themselves, and this perpetual and universal Dispute about the knowledge of
things. For this is truly presupposed, that Men, I mean the most knowing, the
best born, and of the best parts, are not agreed about any one thing: Not that
Heaven is over our heads: For they that doubt of every thing, do also doubt of
that; and they who deny that we are able to comprehend any thing* say, that we
have not comprehended, that the Heaven is over our heads, and these two
Opinions are without comparison the stronger in number. Besides this infinite
Diversity and Division, through the Trouble that our Judgment gives our selves,
and the Incertainty that every one is sensible of in himself, it is easy to
perceive that its Seat is very unstable and unsecure. How variously do we judge
of things? How often do we alter our Opinions? What I hold and believe to day,
I hold and believe with my whole Belief: All my Instruments and Engines seize
and take hold of this Opinion, and become responsible to me for it, at least as
much as in them lies; I could not embrace, nor conserve any Truth with greater
confidence and assurance* than I do this. I am wholly and entirely possessed
with it: But has it not befallen me not only once, but a thousand times every
day to have embraced some other thing with all the same Instruments, and in the
same condition, which I have since judged to be false? A Man must at least
become wise at his own expense. If I have often found my self betrayed under
this color, if my Touch prove ordinarily false, and my Balance unequal and
unjust, what assurance can I now have more, than at other times? Is it not
stupidity and madness to suffer my self to be so often deceived by my Guide?
Nevertheless let Fortune remove and shift us five hundred times from place to
place, let her do nothing but incessantly empty and fill into our Belief, as
into a Vessel, other and other Opinions; yet still the present and the last is
the certain and infallible: For this we must abandon Goods, Honor, Life,
Health and all. -- posterior res illa reperta Lucret. lib. 5.

Perdit, and immutat sensus ad pristina quaeque.
The last thing we find out is always best,
And makes us to disrelish all the rest.
Whatever is preached to us, and whatever we learn, we should still remember,
that it is Man that gives, and Man that receives; it is a mortal Hand that
presents it to us, it is a mortal Hand that accepts it. The things that come to
us from Heaven, have the sole Right and Authority of Persuasion, the sole mark
of Truth: Which also we do not see with our own Eyes, nor receive by our own
means: That Great and Sacred Image could not abide in so wretched a Habitation,
if God for this end did not prepare it, if God did not by his particular and
supernatural Grace and Favor, fortify and reform it: At least our frail and
defective condition ought to make us comport our selves with more reservedness
and moderation in our Innovations and Change. We ought to remember, that
whatever we receive into the Understanding, we often receive things that are
false, and that it is by the same Instruments that so often gives themselves
the Lie, and are so often deceived. Now it is no wonder they should so often
contradict themselves, being so easy to be turned and swayed by very light
Occurrences. It is certain that our Apprehensions, our Judgment, and the
Faculties of the Soul in general, suffer according to the Movements and
Alterations of the Body; which Alterations are continual. Are not our Wits more
spritely, our Memories more prompt and quick, and our Meditations more lively
in Health, than in Sickness? Do not Joy and Gayety make us receive Subjects
that present themselves to our Souls, quite otherwise that Care and Melancholy?
Do you believe that Catellus his Verses, or those of Sappho please an old
doting Miser, as they do a vigorous and amorous Young Man? Cleomenes the Son of
Anaxandridas being sick, his Friends reproached him, that he had Humors and
Whimsies that were new and unaccustomed; I believe it, said he, neither am I
the same Man now, as when I am in health: Being now another thing, my Opinions
and Fancies are also other than they were before. In our Courts of Justice,
this word which is spoken of Criminals, when they find the Judges in a good
Humor, gentle and mild, Gaudeat de bona fortuna, Let him rejoice in his good
Forune, is much in use. For it is most certain that Men's Judgments are
sometimes more prone to Condemnation, more sharp and severe; and at others more
facile, easy, and inclined to excuse. He that carries with him from his House,
the pain of the Gout, Jealousy or Theft by his Man, having his whole Soul
possessed with Grief and Anger, it is not to be doubted but that his Judgment
will lean this way. That venerable Senate, of the Areopagites, was want to hear
and determine by night, for fear lest the sight of the Parties might corrupt
their Justice. The very Air it self, and the Serenity of Heaven, will cause
some mutation in us, according to these Greek Verses in Cicero. Tales sunt
hominum mentes, Cicero ex Incerto.
quali pater ipse
Juppiter, auctifera lustravit lampade terras.
The Minds of Men do in the Weather share,
Dark or serene, as the day's foul or fair.
It Is not only Fevers, Debauches, and great Accident^ that overthrow our
Judgments; the least things in the World will do it. We are not to doubt,
though we are not sensible of it, but that if a continued Fever can overwhelm
the Soul, a Tertian will in some proportionate measure alter it. If an Apoplexy
can stupifie, and totally extinguish the sight of our Understanding, we are not
to doubt but that a great Cold will dazzle it. And consequently there is hardly
one single hour in a Man's whole Life, wherein our Judgment is in its due place
and right condition, our Bodies being subject to so many continual mutations,
and stuffed with so many several sorts of Springs and Devices, that I believe
Physicians how hard it is, but that there must be always some one or other out
of order. As to what remains, this Malady does not very easily discover it
self, unless it be extreme and past remedy: Forasmuch as reason goes always
lame, halting, and that as well with Falsehood, as with Truth; and therefore
it is hard to discover her Deviations and Mistakes. I always call that
appearance of meditation which every one forges in himself, reason: This
reason, of the condition of which, there may be a hundred contrary ones about
one and the same Subject, is an Instrument of Lead and of Wax, ductile, pliable
and accommodable to all sorts of Bias's, and to all Measures; so that nothing
remains but the Art and Skill, how to turn and mould it. How uprightly soever a
Judge may resolve to demean himself, if he be not well looked to himself, which
few are careful to do, his Inclination to Friendship, to Relation, to Beauty or
Revenge, and not only things of that weight, but even the fortuitous instinct,
that makes us favor one thing more than another, and that without the Reasons
leave, puts the Choice upon us in two equal Subjects; or some Shadow of like
Vanity, may insensibly insinuate into his Judgment, the recommendation or
disfavour of a Cause, and make the Balance dip. I, that watch my self as
narrowly as I can, and that have my Eyes continually bent upon my self, like
one that has no great business elsewhere to do; Hor. l. 2. Ode. 26.
-- quis sub Areto
Rex gelidae mettatur orae,
Quid Tyridatem terreat, unice
Securus. --
-- secure whatever King
Does rule the stubborn North, or whatso'ere
The mighty Tiridates puts in fear.
Dare hardly tell the Vanity and Weakness I find in my self. My Foot is so
unstable, and stands so tickle, I find myself so apt to totter and reele, and
my Sight so disordered, that fasting I am quite another Man, than when full; if
Health and a fair Day smile upon me, I am a very honest good natured Man, if a
Corn trouble my Toe, I am sullen, out of Humor, and not to be seen. The same
Pace of a Horse seems to me one while hard, and another easy, and the same way
one while shorter, and another more long: And the same Form, one while more,
and another less taking. I am one while for doing every thing, and another for
doing nothing at all; and what pleases me now, would be a trouble to me at
another time. I have a thousand senceless and casual Actions within myself.
Either I am possessed by Melancholy, or swayed by Choler; now by its own private
Authority, Sadness predominates in me, and by and by I am as merry as a
Cricket. When I take a Book in hand, I have then discovered admirable Graces in
such and such Passages, and such as have struck my Soul, let me light upon them
at another time, I may turn and toss, tumble and rattle the Leaves to much
purpose, it is then to me an inform and undiscovered Mass. Even in my own
Writings, I do not always find the Air of my first Fancy: I know not what I
would have said, but am often put to it to correct and pump for a new Sense,
because I have lost the first that was better. I do nothing but go and come: my
Judgment does not always advance, it floates and romes, -- velut minuta magno
Catullus.

Deprensa navis in mari vesaniente vento.
Like a small Bark upon the swelling Main,
When Winds does ruffle up the liquid Plain.
Very often (as I am apt to do) having for Sports sake undertaken to maintain
an Opinion contrary to my own, my Mind bending and applying it self that way,
does so rarely engage me in the Quarrel, that I no more discern the Reason of
my former Belief, and forsake it. I am as it were mislead by the Side to which
I incline, be it what it will, and carried away by my own Weight. Every one
would almost say the same of himself, if he considered himself as I do.
Preachers very well know, that the Emotions which steals upon them in speaking,
does animate them toward Belief; and that in Passion we are more stiff in the
Defense of our Proposition, take our selves a deeper Impression of it, and
embrace it with greater Vehemence and Approbation, than we do in our colder and
more temperate Sense. You only give your Council a simple Breviate of your
Cause, he returns you a dubious and uncertain Answer, by which you find him
indifferent, which side he takes: Have you fed him well that he may relish it
the better, does he begin to be really concerned, and do you find him truly
interested and zealous in your Quarrel? His Reason and Learning will by degrees
grow hot in your Cause, behold an apparent and undobted Truth presents itself
to his Understanding, he discovers a new Light in your Business, and does in
good earnest Believe, and persuade himself that it is so. Nay I do not know
whether the Ardour that springs from Spite and Obstinacy, against the Power and
Violence of the Magistrate and Danger; or the Interest of Reputation, may it
not have made some Men even to the Stake maintain the Opinion, for which at
Liberty, and amongst Friends, he would not have burned his Finger. The Shocks
and Justles, that the Soul receives from the Bodies Passions* can do much in
it, but its own can do a great deal more: To which it is so subjected, that
peradventure it is to be made good, that it has no other Pace and Motion, but
from the Breath of those Winds, without the Agitation of which, it would be
becalmed and without Action, like a Ship in the middle of the Sea, to which the
Winds have denied their Assistance. And whoever should maintain this, siding
with the Peripatetick, would do us no great Wrong. Seeing it is very well
known, that the greatest and most noble Actions of the Soul proceed from, and
stand in need of, this Impulse of Passions. Valor, they say, cannot be perfect
without the assistance of Anger. Semper Ajax fortis, fortissimus tamen in
furore. Cicero. Thus. l. 4.

Ajax was always brave, but most when mad.
Neither do we encounter the Wicked and the Enemy vigorously enough, if we be
not angry: Nay the Advocate is to inspire the Judges with Indignation, to
obtain Justice. Illicite Desires disordered Themistocles and Demosthenes, and
have pushed on the Philosophers to Watching, Fasting, and Pilgrimages; and lead
us to Honor, Learning and Health, which are all very useful Ends. And this
meanness of Soul in suffering Anxiety and Trouble, serves to breed Penitency
and Repentance in the Conscience, and to make us sensible of the Scourge of
God, and politic Correction for the Chastisement of our Offenses. Compassion
is a Spur to Clemency and Prudence; and the Prudence of preserving and
governing our selves is roused by our Fear; and how many brave Actions by
Ambition? How many by Presumption? Finally there is no brave and spiritual
Virtue, without some irregular Agitation. Should it not be one of the Reasons
that moved the Epicureans to discharge God from all Care and solicitude of our
Affairs, because even the E^fects of his Bounty could not be exercised in our
Behalf, without disturbing his Repose, by the Means of Passions, which are as
so many Spurs and Instruments pricking on the Soul to virtuous Actions? or have
they thought otherwise, and taken them for Tempests, that shamefully hurry the
Soul from her Tranquillity? Cicero. Ibid. l. 5.
Vt maris tranquillitas intelligitur, nulla ne minima quidem, aura fluctus
commovente: Sic animi quietus and placatus status cernitur; quum perturbatio
nulla est qua moveri queat. As it is understood to be a Calm at Sea, when there
is aot the least Breath of Air stirring: So the State of the Soul is discerned
to be quiet and appeased, when there is no Perturbation to move it. What
varietys of Sense and Reason, what contrariety of Imaginations does the
Diversity of our Passions inspire us with? What Assurance than can we take of a
thing so mobile and unstable, subject by its Condition to the Dominion of
Trouble, and never going other than a forced and borrowed Pace? If our Judgment
be in the Power even of Sickness and Perturbation: If it be from Folly and
Temerity, that it is held to receive the Impression of things, what Assurance
can we expect from it? Is it not a great Boldness in Philosophy, to believe
that Men perform the greatest Actions, and nearest approaching the Divinity,
when they are Furious, Mad, and besides themselves? We better our selves by the
Astonishment and Privation of Reason. The two natural Ways to enter into the
Cabinet of the Gods, and there to foresee the Course of Destiny are Fury and
Sleep. This is pleasant to consider. By the Dislocation that Passions cause in
our Reason, we must become Virtuous: By its Extirpation occasioned by Madness,
as the Image of Death, we become Diviners and Prophets. I was never so willing
to believe Philosophy in any thing, as this. It Is a Pure Enthusiasme, wherewith
Sacred Truth has inspired the Spirit of Philosophy, which makes it confess
contrary to its own Proposition, that the most calm, composed, and healthful
Estate of the Soul, that Philosophy can seat it in, is not its best Condition.
Our waking is more asleep, than Sleep it self; our Wisdom less Wise than Folly:
Our Dreams are worth more than our Meditation; and the worst Place we can take
is in our selves. But does not Philosophy think that we are Wise enough to
consider, that the Voice that the Spirit utters, when dismissed from Man, so
clear-sighted, so great, and so perfect, and whilst it is in Man so terrestrial
Ignorant and dark, is a Voice proceeding from the Spirit of a dark, terrestrial
and ignorant Man; and for this Reason a Voice not to be trusted and believed? I
have no great Experience of these vehement Agitations, being of a soft and
heavy Complexion, the most of which surprise the Soul on a sudden, without
giving it leisure to recollect it self. But the Passion, that is said to be
produced by Idleness in the Hearts of young Men, though it proceed leisurely, and
with a measured Progress, does evidently manifest to those who have tried to
oppose its Power, the Violence our Judgment suffers in this Alteration and
Conversion. I have formerly attempted to withstand and repel it. For I am so
far from being one of those who invite Vices, that I do not so much as follow
them, if they do not hale me along: I perceived it to spring, grow and increase
in despite of my Resistance; and at last, living and seeing as I was, wholly to
seize and possess me; so that, as if newly roused frum Drunkenness, the Images
of things began to appear to me quite other than they were wont to be: I
evidently saw the Person, I desired, grow and increase in Advantages of Beauty,
and to expand and blow fairer by the influence of my Imagination, the
Difficulties of my Attempt to grow more easy and smooth; and both my Reason and
Conscience to be laid aside: But this Fire being evaporated in an Instant, as
from a flash of Lightning, I was aware that my Soul resumed another kind of
Sight, and another sort of Estate, and another Judgment. The Difficulties of my
Retreat appeared great and invincible, and the same things had quite another
Taste and Aspect, than the heat of Desire had presented them to me. Than which
Pyrrho himself knows nothing more truly. We are never without Sickness. Agues
have their hot and cold Fits; from the Effects of an ardent Passion, we fall
again to shivering. As much as I had advanced, so much I retired. Aeneid. lib.
11.
Qualis ubi alterno procurrens gurgite pontus,
Nunc ruit ad terras scopulisque superjacit undam,
Spumeus, extremamque sinu perfundit arenam:
Nunc rapidus retro, atque aestu revoluta resorbens
Sixa fugit, littusque vado labente reliquit.
As spumy Neptune with repeated Waves,
Now the pale Shore, and craggy Beaches laves,
And like a Drunckard vomits up the Sand,
That deepest lay in heaving Tides to Land;
And now retiring thence, as loud does roar,
Sucking in Pebbles from the new washed Shore.
Now from the Knowledge of this Volubility of mine, I have accidentally begot in
myself a certain Constancy of Opinions, and have not much altered those that
were first and natural in me. For what Appearance soever there may be in
Novelty, I do not easily change, for fear of losing by the Bargain: And
besides, I am not capable of choosing, I take other Men's Choice, and keep myself
in the Station wherein God has placed me, I could not otherwise keep myself
from perpetual rouling. Thus have I, by the Grace of God, preserved my self
entire, without Anxiety or trouble of Conscience, amidst so many Sects and
Divisions, as our Age has produced. The Writings of the Ancients, the best
Authors I mean, being full and solid, tempt and carry me which way almost they
will: He, that I am reading, seems always to have the most Force, and I find
that every one has Reason, though they contradict one another. The Facility that
good Wits have of rendering every thing likely they would recommend; and that
nothing is so strange, to which they do not undertake to give Color enough to
deceive such a Simplicity as mine, this does evidently show the Weakness of
their Testimony. The Heaven and the Stars have been three thousand Years in
Motion, and all the World were of that Belief, till Cleanthes the Samian, or
(according to Theophrastus) Nicetas of Siracusa unbethought him to maintain
that it was the Earth that moved, turning about the Axis by the oblique Circle
of the Zodiac. And Copernicus has in our times so grounded this Doctrine, that
it very regularly serves to all Astrological Consequences. What use can we make
of this, if not, that we ought not much to care, which is the true Opinion? And
who knows but that a third, a thousand Years hence, may overthrow the two
former? Lucr. l. 5.
Sic volvenda aetas commuta tempora rerum,
Quodque fuit in pretio, fit nullo denique honor,
Porro aliud succedit, and e contemptibus exit,
Inque dies magis appetitur, floretque repertum
Laudibus, and miro est mortales inter honor.
Things are so changed by Revolution,
That what had Credit once, had after none,
To which some other things despised, before,
Suceeds, and grows in Vogue still more and more,
And once received, all Praise too little seems,
So highly it is raised in Men's Esteems.
So that when any new Doctrine presents it self to us, Why new Opinions are to
be rejected.
we have great Reason to mistrust; and to consider that before that was set on
foot, the contrary had been generally received; and that as that has been
overthrown by this, Aristotle's Principles in Vogue.
a third Invention in time to come, may start up which may damn the second.
Before the Principles that Aristotle introduced were in Reputation, other
Principles contented human Reason, as these satisfy us now. What Patent have
these People, what particular Privilege, that the Carreer of our Invention must
be stoped by them, and that to them should appertain the Possession of our
whole future Belief? They are no more exempt from being thrust out of Doors
than their Predecessors were. When any one presses me with a new Argument, I
ought to believe, that what I cannot answer, another can: For to believe all
Likelyhoods that a Man cannot confute, is great Simplicity: It would by that
means come to pass, that all the Vulgar, (and we are all of the Vulgar, would
have their Belief as turnable as a Weathercock: For the Soul being so easy to
be imposed upon, and without any Resistance, must of force incessantly receive
other and other Impressions, the last still effacing all Footsteps, of that
which went before. He that finds himself weak, ought to answer according to
Practice, that he will speak with his Council, or refer himself to the Wise,
from whom he received his Instruction. How long is it that Physic has been
practiced in the World? It Is said, that a new Commer, called Paracelsus,
changes and overthrows the whole Order of ancient Rules, and maintains that
till now, it has been of no other use, but to kill Men. I do believe that he
will easily make this good: But I do not think it were Wisdom to venture my
Life in making trial of his own Experience. We are not to believe every one,
(says the Precept) because every one can say all things. A Man of this
Profession of Novelties and Physical Reformations, not long since told me, that
all the Ancients were notoriously mistaken in the Nature and Motions of the
Winds, which he would evidently demonstrate to me, if I would give him the
hearing. After I had with some Patience heard his Arguments, which were all
full of likelihood of Truth: What then said I, did those that failed according
to Theophrastus, make way Westward, when they had the Prow toward the East!
did they go Sideward or Backward? That Is Fortune, answered he; but so it is,
that they were mistaken. I then replied, that I had rather follow Effects than
Reason. Now these are things that often interfere, and I have been told that in
Geometry, (which pretends to have gained the highest Point of Certainty of all
Science) there are Demonstrations found so inevitable, as subvert the Truth of
all Experience. As Jaques Pelletier told me at my own House, that he had found
out two Lines stretching themselves one toward the other to meet, which
nevertheless he affirmed, though extended to all Infinity, could never happen
to touch one another; and the Pyrrhonians make no other use of their Arguments
and their Reason, than to ruin the Appearance of Experience; and it is a wonder,
how far the suppleness of our Reason has followed them in this Design of
controverting the Evidence of Effects. For they affirm, that we do not move,
that we do not speak, and that there is neither Weight nor Heat, with the same
force of Argument, that we verify the most likely things. Ptolomy, who was a
great Man, had established the Bounds of this World of ours: All the Ancient
Philosophers thought they had the Measure of it, excepting some remote Isles,
that might escape their Knowledge: It had been Pyrrh^nism a thousand Years ago,
to doubt the Science of Cosmographie, and the Opinions that every one had
thence received: It was Heresy to hold the Antipodes; and behold in this Age of
ours there is an infinite Extent of firm Land discovered, not an Island, or a
particular Country; but a part very near equal in Greatness to that we knew
before. The Geographers of our times stick not to assure us, that now all is
found, all is seen; Nam quod adest praesto, placet, and pollere videtur. Ibid.

What present is does please, and seems the best.
But the Question is, whether, if Ptolomy was therein formerly deceived, upon
the Foundations of his Reason, it were not very foolish to trust now in what
these People say: And whether it is not more like, that this great Body, which
we call the World, is not quite another thing, than what we imagine. Plato
says, that it changes Countenance in all Respects: That the Heavens, the Stars,
and the Sun, have all of them sometimes Motions retrograde to what we see,
changing East into West. The Egyptian Priests told Herodotus, that from the
time of their first King, Several Opinions concerning the World.
which was eleven thousand and od Years (and they showed him the Effigies of
all their Kings in Statues taken by the Life) the Sun had four times altered
his Course: That the Sea and the Earth did alternately change into one another.
Aristotle and Cicero, both say, that the Beginning of the World is
undetermined. And some amongst us are of Opinion, that it has been from all
Eternity, is mortal, and renewed again by several Vicissitudes; calling Solomon
and Isaiah to witness: To evade those Oppositions, that God has once been a
Creator without a Creature; that he has had nothing to do, that he has
contradicted that Vacancy, by putting his Hand to this Work; and that
consequently he is subject to Change. In the most famous of the Greek Schools,
the World is taken for a God, made by another God greater than he, and is
composed of a Body and a Soul, fixed in his Center, and dilating himself by
musical-Numbers to his Circumference: Divine, infinitely Happy, and infinitely
Great, infinitely Wise and Eternal. In him are other Gods, the Sea, the Earth,
the Stars, who entertain one another with a harmonious and perpetual Agitation,
and divine Dance: Sometimes meeting, sometimes retiring from one another;
concealing and discovering themselves, changing their Order, one while before,
and another behind. Heraclytus was positive that the World was composed of
Fire, and by the order of Destiny was one Day to be enflamed and consumed in
Fire, and then to be again renewed. Apuleius.
And Apuleius says of Men: Sigillatim mortales, cunctim perpetui. That they are
Mortal in particular, and Immortal in general. Alexander writ to his Mother the
Narration of an Egyptian Priest drawn from their Monuments, testifying the
Antiquity of that Nation to be infinite, and comprizing the Birth and Progress
of other Countries. Cicero and Diodorus say, that in their time the Chaldees
kept a Register of four hundred thousand and odd Years. Aristotle, Pliny, and
others, that Zoroaster flourished six thousand Years before Plato's time. Plato
says, that they of the City of Sais have Records in Writing of eight thousand
Years: And that the City of Athens was built a thousand Years before the said
City of Sais. Epicurus, that at the same time things are here in the Posture we
see, they are alike and in the same manner in several other Worlds. Which he
would have delivered with greater Assurance, had he seen the Similitude and
Concordance of the new discovered World of the West Indies, with ours present,
and past in so many strange Examples. In earnest, considering what is arrived
at our Knowledge from the Course of this terrestrial Policy, I have often
wondered to see in so vast a Distance of Places and Times, such a Concurrence of
so great a number of popular and wild Opinions, and of savage Manners and
Beliefs, which by no means seem to proceed from our natural Meditation, Human
Wit is a great Worker of Miracles. But this Relation has moreover, I know not
what of Extraordinary in it, it is found to be in Names also, and a thousand
other things. For they found Nations there, (that for ought we know) never
heard of us) where Circumcision was in use: Circumcision.
Where there were States and strict Civil Goverments maintained by Women
only, without Men: Where Feasts and Lent were represented, to which was added
the Abstinence from Women: Where our Crosses were several ways in Repute:
Where they were made use of to Honor and adorn their Sepultures, where they
were erected, and namely that of St. Andrew, St. Andrew his Cross.
to protect themselves from Nocturnal Visions, and to lay upon the Cradles of
the Infants against Enchantments: Elsewhere there was found one of VVood of
very great Stature, which was adored for the God of Rain, A Cross adored for
the God of Rain.
and that a great way into the firm Land, where there was seen an express Image
of our Shriving-Priests, with the use of Miters, the Coelibacy of Priests, the
Art of Divination by the Entrails of Sacrificed Beasts, Abstinence from all
sorts of Flesh and Fish in their Diet, the manner of Priests Officiating in a
particular and not a vulgar Language: And this Fancy, that the first God was
dishonored by a second, his younger Brother: That they were Created with all
sorts of Necessaries and Conveniences, The Creation of the World.
which have since been taken from them for their Sins, their Territory changed,
and their natural Condition made worse: That they were of old overwhelmed by
the Inundation of Water from Heaven, that but few Families escaped, who
retired into Caves of high Mountains, the Mouths of which they so stopped, that
the Waters could not get in, having shut up, together with themselves, several
sorts of Animals, that when they perceived the Rain to cease, they sent out
Dogs, which returning clean and wet, they judged that the Water was not much
abated: Afterward sending out others, and seeing them return durty, they issued
out to re-people the World, which they found only full of Serpents. In one
place they met with the persuasion of a day of Judgment; The day of Judgment.
insomuch that they were marvelously displeased at the Spaniards for
discomposing the Bones of the Dead, in rifling the Sepultures for Riches,
saying that those Bones so disordered, could not easily rejoyn: The Traffic by
Exchange, and no other way, Fairs and Markets for that end: Dwarfs and deformed
people for the Ornament of the Tables of Princes: Dwarfs at the Tables of
Princes.
The use of Falconry according to the Natures of their Hawks; tyrannical
Subsidies: Curiosity in Gardens, Dances, tumbling Tricks, Music of
Instruments, Armories, Tennis Courts, Dice and Lotteries, Diverse sorts of Games.
wherein they are sometimes so eager and hot, as to stake and play themselves
and their liberty: Physic, no otherwise, than by Charms: And the way of
writing in Cipher: The belief of only one first Man, the Father of all Nations:
The Adoration of one God, who formerly lived a Man in perfect Virginity,
Fasting and Penitence preaching the Law of Nature, Adoration of one God made
man.
and the Ceremonies of Religion; and that vanished from the World without a
Natural Death: The Opinion of Giants; the Custom of making themselves drunk
with their Beverages, and drinking to the utmost: The religious Ornaments
painted with Bones and dead Men's Sculls: Surplices, Holy Water sprinkled; Wives
and Servants who present themselves with Emulation, to be burnt and interred
with the dead Husband or Master: A Law by which the Eldest succeeds to all the
Estate, no other Provision being made for the Younger, but Obedience: The
Custom that upon Promotion to a certain Office of great Authority, the Promoted
is to take upon him a new Name, and to leave that he had before: Another to
strew Lime upon the Knee of the Newborn Child; with those Words, From Dust
thou came, and to Dust thou must return: As also the Art of Augury: These
vain ^hadows of our Religion, which are observable in some of these Examples,
are Testimonies of its Dignity and Divinity. Its is not only in some sort
insinuated into all the Infidel Nations one this side of the World, by a
certain Imitation, but into the fore-nam'd Barbarians also, as by a common and
supernatural Inspiration: For we find there the Belief of Purgatory, A new sort
of Purgatory.
but of a new Form; that which we give to the Fire, they give to the Cold, and
imagine that the Souls are both purged and punished by the rigor of an
excessive Coldness. And this Example puts me in mind of another pleasant
diversity: For as there were in hat place some people, who, took a Pride to
strip and unmuffle the Glances of their Instruments and clipped off the Prepuce
after the Mohammedan and Jewish manner; there were others, who made so great
conscience of laying it bare, that they carefully purs'd it up with little
Strings, to keep that end from peeping into the Air. And of this other
diversity, that whereas we to honor Kings and Festivals, put on the best
Cloths we have: In some Religions to express their Disparity and Submission to
their King, his Subjects present themselves before him in their vilest Habits,
and entering his Palace, throw some old tattered Garment over their better
Apparel, to the end that all the Luster and Ornament may solely remain in him.
But to proceed; if Nature enclose within the Bounds of her ordinary Progress,
the Beliefs, Judgments and Opinions of Men, as well as all other things: If
they have their Revolution, their Season, their Birth and Death, like Cabage
Plants: If the Heavens agitate and rule them at their pleasure, what
Magisterial and Permanent Authority do we attribute to them? If we
experimentally see, that the Form of our Being depends upon the Air, upon the
Climat, and upon the Soil where we are born: And not only the Color, the
Stature, the Complexion and the Countenances, but moreover the very Faculties
of the Soul it self: Et plaga Caeli non solum ad robur corporum, Veget. l. 1.
cap. 2.
sed etiam animorum facit: The Climate is of great Efficacy, not only to the
strength of Bodies, but to that of Souls also, says Vegetius: And that the
Goddess who founded the City of Athens chose to situate it in a temperature of
Air fit to make Men prudent, Cicero. de Fato.
as the Egyptian Priests told Solon: Athenis tenue Caelum: Ex quo etiam
cutiores putantur Attici: Crassum Thebis: Itaque pingues Thebani, and valentes:
The Air of Athens is subtle and thin: From whence also the Athenians are
reputed to be more acute: And at Thebes more gross and thick, wherefore the
Thebans are looked upon as more heavy-witted, and more strong: In such sort
that as the Fruits and Animals differ, the Men should also be more or less
warlike, just, temperate and docile, here given to Wine, elsewhere to Theft or
Uncleanness: Here inclined to Superstition; elsewhere to Miscreancy: In one
place to Liberty, in another to Servitude; capable of one Science, or of one
Art, Dull or Ingenious, Obedient or Mutinous, Good or Ill, according as the
place where they are seated inclines them, and assume a new Complexion, if
removed, like Trees: Which was the reason, why Cyrus would not grant the
Persians leave to quit their rough and craggy Country to remove to another more
pleasant and plain: Saying, that fertile and tender Soiles made Men effeminate
and soft. If we see one while one Art, and one Belief flourish, and another
while another, thorough some Celestial Influence: Such an Age to produce such
Natures, and to incline Mankind to such and such a Propension: The Spirits of
Men one while gay, and another grum; like our Feilds, what becomes of all those
fine Prerogatives we so sooth our selves withal? Seeing that a wise Man may be
mistaken, a hundred Men, a hundred Nations, nay that even Human Nature it self,
as we believe, is many Ages wide in one thing or another, what assurance have
we that she sometimes is not mistaken, or not in this very Age of ours?
Methinks, that amongst others Testimonies of our Imbecility, this ought not to
be forgotten, that Man cannot, by his own Wish and Desire, find out what is
necessary for him, that not in Fruition only, but in Imagination and Wish, we
cannot agree about what we would have to satisfy and content us. Let us leave
it to our own Thought to cut out and make up at pleasure: It cannot so much as
covet what is proper for it, and satisfy it self. Juv. stat. 10.
-- quid enim ratione timemus
Aut cupimus? Quid tam dextro pede concipis, ut te
Conatus non poeniteat, votique peracti?
For what with Reason does Man wish or fear,
Or undertake upon a Ground so clear,
That afterward he may not well repent
Both the Attempt, and the desired Event.
And therefore it was, Socrates his Prayer.
that Socrates begged nothing of the Gods, but what they knew to be best for
him. And the both private and public Prayers of the Lacedaemonians were only
simply to obtain good and useful things, referring the Choice and Election of
them, to the Discretion of the Supreme Power. Ibid.
Conjugium petimus, partumque Vxoris, at illis
Notum qui pueri, qualisque futura sit Vxor.
We pray for Wives and Children, they above
Know only when we have them, what they will prove.
And Christians, pray to God, that his Will may be done: That they may not fall
into the Inconvenience the Poet feigns of King Midas. He prayed to the Gods,
that all he touched might be turned into Gold: His Prayer was heard, his Wine
was Gold, his Bread was Gold, and the Feathers of his Bed, his Shirt, and
Clothes were turned into Gold; so that he found himself ruined and overwhelmed
with the Fruition of his Desire, and being enriched with an inollerable Wealth,
was fain to unpray his Prayers: Attonitus novitate mali divesque miserque, Ovid
Metam. lib. 11.

Effugere optat opes, and quae modo voverat odit.
Astonished at the strangeness of the ill,
To be so rich, yet miserable still;
He wishes now he could his wealth evade,
And hates the thing for which before he prayed.


To instance in my self; Being young, I desired of Fortune above all things the
Order of St. Michel; The Order of St. Michel of high esteem in France.
which was then the utmost distinction of Honor amongst the French Nobless,
and very rare. She pleasantly gratified my longing. Instead of raising me, and
lifting me up from my own place to attain to it, she was much kinder to me, for
she brought it so low, and made it so cheap, that It stoopt down to my
Shoulders, and lower. Cleobis and Biton, Trophonius and Agamedes, having
requested the first of their Goddess, the last of their God; a Recompense
worthy of their Piety, had Death for a Reward: so differing are the heavenly
Opinions concerning what is fit for us, from ours. God might grant us Riches,
Honors, Life and Health sometimes to our own hurt: for every thing that is
pleasing to us, is not always good for us, if he sends us Death, or an increase
of Sickness instead of a Cure. Virga tua, Psalm. 23.
and baculus tuus ipsa me consolata sunt: Thy Rod, and thy Staff have comforted
me: He does it by the Rule of his Providence, which better and more certainly
discerns what is proper for us, than we can do; and we ought to take it in good
part, as coming from a wise, and most amicable Hand.

Juven. Sat. 10.
Si consilium vis,
Permittes ipsis expendera numinibus, quid
Conveniat nobis, rebusque sit utile nostris;
Charior est illis homo, quam sibi.
If thou wilt be ruled, leave to the Gods in Prayers
To weigh what is fit for us, and our Affairs,
For Man to them, by infinite degrees,
Than he is to himself, far dearer is.
For to require Honors and Commands, is to require that he may throw you into
a Battle, set you upon a cast at a Dice, or something of the like nature,
whereof the issue is to you unknown, and the Fruit doubtful. There is no so
sharp and violent Dispute amongst the Philosophers, as about the Question of
the sovereign good of Man: From whence, by the calculation of Varro* two
hundred and fourscore Sects. Qui autem de summo bono dissentit, Cicero de
finibus. lib. 5.
de tota Philosophiae ratione disputat. For, whoever enters into Controversy
concerning the supreme good, disputes upon the whole reason of Philosophy. Hor.
lib. 1. Epist. 2.
Tres mihi convivae prope dissentire videntur,
Poscentes vario multum diversa palato,
Quid them? Quid non them? renuis tu quod jubet alter:
Quod petis, id sane est invisum, acidumque duobus.
T'invite three Guests of differing Palate home
To a Man's Table, sure is troublesome;
What one likes, thou dislik'st: What shall I do?
And what thou like, dislikes the other two.
Nature should say the same to their Contests and Debates. Some say that our
well being lies in Virtue, others in Pleasure, others in our submitting to
Nature: one in Knowledge, another in being exempt from Pain, another in not
suffering our selves to be carried away by Apparences: and this Fancy seems to
have some relation to that of the Ancient Pythagoras. Nil admirari prope res
est una Numaci, Hor. lib. 1. Epist. 6.

Solaque quae possit facere, and servare beatum.
Nothing t'admire's the only thing I know
Can make us happy, and can keep us so.
Which is the drift of the Pyrrhonian Sect. Aristotle attributes the admiring
of nothing to Magnanimity. And Archesilaus said, that Constancy, and a right
and inflexible state of Judgment, were the true Goods: but that consent, and
application the Evils; and there it is true, in being thus positive, and
establishing it by a certain Axiom, he quitted Pyrrhonism. For the
Pyrrhonians, when they say that the Ataraxy, which is the immobility of
Judgment, is the sovereign Good; do not design to speak it affirmatively; but
that the same motion of Soul which makes them avoid Precipices, and take
shelter from the old, presents them such a Fancy, and makes them refuse
another. How much do I wish, that whilst I live, either some other, or Justus
Lipsius, Character of Justus Lipsius.
the most learned Man now living, of a most polite and judicious Understanding,
and truly resembling my Turnebus; had both the Will, and Health, and Leisure
sufficient, sincerely to collect into a Register, according to their Divisions
and Classes, as many as are to be found of the Opinions of the ancient
Philosophers, about the subject of our Being and Manners, their Controversies,
the Succession and Reputation of Sects; with the Application of the Lives of
the Authors and their Disciples to their own Precepts in memorable Accidents,
and upon exemplary Occasions. What a beautiful and useful Work that would be!
As to what remains, if it be from our selves that we are to extract the Rules
of our Manners, upon what a Confusion do we throw our selves? For that which
our Reason advises us to, as the most probable, is generally for every one to
obey the Laws of his Country, as it was that of Socrates, inspired, as he
pretends himself, by a Divine Council. And by that what would it say, if not
that our Duty has no other Rule but what is accidental? Truth ought to have
alike and universal Visage: If man could know Equity and Justice, that it had a
Body and a true Being, he would not fetter it to the Conditions of this Country
or that; it would not be from the whimsies of the Persians or Indians that
Virtue would receive its Form. There is nothing more subject to perpetual
Agitation than the Laws. Since the time that I was born, I have known those of
the English, our Neighbors, three or four times changed, not only in matters
of Civil Regiment, which is the only thing wherein Constancy is dispensed with,
but in the most important Subject that can be, namely Religion. At which I am
the more troubled, and of which I am the more ashamed, because it is a Nation,
with whom those of my Province have formerly had so great Familiarity and
Acquaintance; that there yet remains in my House some footsteps of our ancient
Kindred. And here with us at home, I have known a thing that was Capital, to
become Lawful; and we that hold others are likewise according to the chance of
War, in a possibility of being found one day guilty of High Treason, both
Divine and Humane; should the Justice of our Arms fall into the Power of
Injustice: and after a few years Possession, taking a quite contrary Being.
Apollo.
How could that ancient God more clearly accuse the ignorance of humane
Knowledge concerning the Divine Being, and give men to understand, that their
Religion was but a thing of their own Contrivance, useful as a bound to their
Society, than in declaring as he did to those who came to his Tripod for
Instruction: that every ones true Worship was that which he found in Use in the
place where he chanced to be? O God, what infinite Obligation have we to the
bounty of our Sovereign Creator, for having disabus'd our Belief from wandering
and arbitrary Devotions, and for having seated it upon the eternal foundation
of the Holy Word? But what will then Philosophy say to us in this necessity?
Why, that we follow the Laws of our Country, that is to say, this floating Sea
of the Opinions of a Republic, or a Prince, that will paint out Justice for me
in as many colors, and reform it as many ways as there are changes of Passions
in themselves. I cannot suffer my Judgment to be so flexible. What a kind of
bounty is that which I shall see one day in repute, and that too morrow shall
be in none, and that the crossing of a River shall be made a Crime? What Truth
is it that these Mountains impale, and keep it from the World beyond them? But
they are pleasant, when to give some certainty to the Laws, Natural Laws.
they say, that there are some firm, perpetual, and immovable, which they call
Natural, that are imprinted in humane kind by the condition of their own proper
Being, and those some reckon three, some four, some more, and some less, a sign
that it is a mark as doubtful as the rest. Now they are so unfortunate (for
what can I call it else but misfortune) that of so infinite a number of Laws,
there should not be found one at least, that Fortune, and the temerity of
Chance, has suffered to be universally received by the consent of all Nations?
They are, I say, so miserable, that of these three or four select Laws, there
is not so much as one that is not contradicted and disowned, not only by one
Nation but by many. Now the only likely sign by which they can argue or infer
some Laws to be Natural, is, the universality of Approbation; for we should
without doubt follow that which Nature had truly ordained us; and not only
every Nation, but every particular man would resent the Force and Violence that
any one should do him, who would tempt him to any thing contrary to this Law.
Let them produce me but one of this Condition: Protagoras and Aristo, gave no
other Essence to the Justice of Laws, than the Authority and Opinion of the
Legislator, and, that these laid aside, the honest and the good would lose
their Qualities, and remain empty Names of indifferent things. Thrasymachus in
Plato is of Opinion, that there is no other Right but the Convenience of the
Superior. There is not any thing wherein the World is so various, as in Laws
and Customs; such a thing is abominable here, which is elsewhere in Esteem, as
in Lacedemonia, the dexterity of stealing. Marriages within the forbidden
Degrees are capitally interdicted amongst us, they are elsewhere in Honor.

Gentes esse feruntur, Ovid. Met. lib. 10.

In quibus and nato genitrix, and nata Parenti,
Jungitur, and pietas geminato crescit amore.
There are some Nations in the World, it is said,
Where Fathers Daughters, Sons their Mothers wed,
And their affections still do higher rise
More firm and constant by these double ties.
The murder of Infants, murder of Fathers, communication of Wives, traffic
of Robberies, license in all sorts of Voluptuousness: Finally, there is nothing
so extreme, that is not allowed by the Custom, and the common Usance of some
Nation or other. It is credible, that there are natural Laws, but they are lost
in us; this fine humane Reason every where so insinuating it self to govern and
command, as to shuffle and confound the face of things, according to it is own
vanity and inconstancy. Nihil itaque amplius nostrum est; quod nostrum dico,
artis est. Therefore nothing is any more truly ours: what we call ours belongs
to Art. Subjects have diverse lusters, and diverse considerations; and from
thence the diversity of Opinions principally proceed. One Nation considers a
Subject in one aspect, and stops there, another takes it from another prospect.
There is nothing of greater horror to be imagined, than for a man to eat his
Father; and yet the People, whose ancient Custom it was so to do, looked upon
it as a testimony of Piety and natural Affection, seeking thereby to give their
Progenitors the most worthy and honorable Sepulture; storing up in themselves,
and as it were in their own Marrow, The bodies of their deceased Fathers eaten
by some People, and why.
the Bodies and Relics of their Fathers; and in some sort regenerating them by
Transmutation into their Living flesh, by means of nourishment and digestion.
It is easy to consider what a Cruelty and Abomination it must have appeared to
be to men possessed, and imbute with this superstition, to throw their Fathers
remains to the corruption of the Earth, and the nourishment of Beasts and
Worms. Lycurgus considered in Theft, Theft allowed by Lycurgus, and why.
the vivacity, diligence, boldness, and dexterity, of purloining any thing from
our Neighbors, and the Utility that redounded to the Public, that every one
might look more narrowly to the conservation of what was his own, and believed,
that from his double Institution of Assaulting and Defending, advantage was to
be made for Military Discipline (which was the principal Science and Virtue, to
which he would inure that Nation) of greater consideration than the disorder
and injustice of taking another man's Goods. Dionysius the Tyrant, offered
Plato a Robe of the Persian fashion, long, A perfumed Robe refused by Plato,
and accepted by Aristippus.
damask'd, and perfumed, Plato refused it, saying, That being born a man, he
would not willingly dress himself in Woman's Cloths; but Aristippus accepted it,
with this Answer, That no Accoustrement could corrupt a chaste Courage. His
Friends reproaching him with meanness of Spirit, for laying it no more to
heart, that Dionysius had spit in his Face; Fishermen, said he, suffer
themselves to be dashed with the waves of the Sea from head to foot to catch a
Gudgeon. Diogenes was washing Cabidges, and seeing him pass by; If thou could
live on Cabidge, said he, thou would not fawn upon a Tyrant. To whom
Aristippus replied; And if thou knew how to live amongst men, thou would
not be washing Cabidges. Thus Reason finds appearance for diverse effects. It Is a
Pot with two Ears, that a man may take by the right or left.

Aeneid. lib. 3.
bellum o terra hospiti portas,
Bello armantur equi, bellum haec armenta minantur:
Sed tamen iidem olim curru succedere sueti
Quadrupedes, and fraena jugo concordia far,
Spes est pacis.
O Earth, it is thy Womb, that War does bear,
Horses are armed for; Herds does threaten War:
And yet these Brutes having with patience bore
The yoke, and yielded to the Reins before
There Is hopes of Peace.
Solon's Tears for the death of his Son.
Solon, being importuned by his Friends not to shed powerless and unprofitable
Tears for the death of his Son: It is for that reason, that I the more justly
shed them, said he, because they are powerless and unprofitable. The mourning
of Socrates his Wife.
Socrates his Wife, exasperated her grief by this Circumstance, Oh, how
unjustly do these wicked Judges put him to Death! Why, replied he, had thou
rather they should justly execute me? We have our Ears bored; the Greeks looked
upon that as a mark of slavery. We retire in private to enjoy our Wives, the
Indians do it in public: The Scythians immolated Strangers in their Temples,
elsewhere Temples were a Refuge.

Juven. Sat. 15.
Inde furor vulgi, quod numina vicinorum
Odit quisque locus, cum solos credat habendos
Esse Deos; quos ipse colit.
This it is the popular Fury that creates,
That all their Neighbors Gods each Nation hates.
And that the more, because conceive they do
None but their own should be reputed so.
I have heard of a Judge, that where he met with a sharp conflict betwixt
Bartolus and Baldus, and some point controverted with many Contrarieties, writ
in the Margent of his Book; A question for a Friend, that is to say, that Truth
was there so controverted and disputed, that in a like Cause he might favor
which of the Parties he thought fit: 'Twas only for want of wit, that he did
not write, A question for a Friend, throughout. The Advocates and Judges of our
times, find Biass enough in all Causes to accommodate them to what they
themselves think fit: In so infinite a Science, depending upon the authority of
so many Opinions, and so arbitrary a Subject, it cannot be, but that of
necessity, an extreme confusion of Judgments must arise. There is also hardly
any Suit so clear, wherein Opinions do not very much differ; what one Court has
determined, another determines quite contrary, and it self contrary to that at
another time. Of which we see very frequent Examples, which is a mavelous
blemish to the Ceremonious Authority and luster of our Justice, not to stick to
positive Sentences, but to run from Judge to Judge, and Court to Court, to
decide one and the same Cause. As to the liberty of Philosophical Opinions
concerning Vice and Virtue, it is not necessary to be insisted upon; and wherein
are found many Opinions that are better concealed than published to weak
Spirits: Archesilaus said, that in Fornication it was no matter where, or with
whom it was committed. Et obscoenas voluptates, Cicero, Thus. lib. 5.
si natura requirit, non genere, aut loco, aut ordine, sed forma, aetate,
figura metiendas Epicurus putat, ne amores quidem sanctos a sapiente alienos
esse arbitrantur. Quaeramus ad quum usque aetatem juvenes amandi sint. And
obscene Pleasures, if nature requires, Epicurus thinks are not to be measured,
either by kind, place, or order, but by Age and Beauty. Neither are Holy Loves
thought to be stranger to wise Men; we are to enquire till what age young men
are to be loved. These two last Stoical Quotations, and the reproach that
Diogarchus threw in the teeth of Plato himself upon this Account, show how much
the soundest Philosophy indulges Licenses and Excess, very remote from the
common Usance. Laws derive their Authority from Possession and Usance: It Is
dangerous to trace them backward to their beginning; they grow great, and
ennoble themselves like our Rivers by running, Laws authorized by Customs.
but follow them upward to their Source, it is but a little Spring, scarce
discernable, that swells thus, and thus fortifies it self by growing old. Do
but consult the ancient Considerations that gave the first motion to this
famous Torrent so full of Dignity and Reverence; you will find them so light
and weak, that it is no wonder if these People, who weigh and reduce every
thing to Reason, and who admit nothing by Authority, or upon Trust; have their
Judgments very remote and differing from those of the Public. It is no wonder
if People, who take their pattern from the first Image of Nature, should in
most of their Opinions swerve from the common path: As for Example, few amongst
them would have approved of the strict Conditions of our Marriages, and most of
them have been for having Wives in Common, and without Obligation: They would
refuse our Ceremonies. Chrysippus said, that a certain Philosopher would have
made a dozen Somersaults, and turned up his Tail without his Breeches, for a
dozen of Olives. That Philosopher would hardly have advised Calisthenes to have
refused Hippoclides the fair Agarista his Daughter, for having seen him stand
on his Head upon a Table. Metrocles let a Fart a little indiscreetly in
Disputation, in the presence of a great Auditory in his School, and kept
himself hid in his own House for shame, till Crates coming to visit him, and
adding to his Consolations and Reasons, the Example of his own Liberty, falling
to Fart with him who should let most, cured him of that scruple, and withal
drew him to his own Stoical Sect, more free than that more reserved one of the
Peripateticks, of which he had been till then. That which we call Decency, not
to dare to do that in public which it is decent enough to do in private, the
Stoics call foppery, and to mince it, and be so modest as to conceal and
disown what Nature, Custom, and our desires publish and proclaim of our
Actions, they reputed a Vice. The other thought it was to undervalue the
mysteries of Venus, to draw them out of her private Oratory, to expose them to
the view of the People: And that to bring them out from behind the Curtain, was
to loose them. Modesty is a thing of weight; Secrecy, Reservation, and
Circumscription are Parts of Esteem. Pleasure did very ingeniously, when under
the visor of Virtue, she sued not to be prostituted in the open Streets,
trodden under foot, and exposed to the public View, wanting the dignity and
convenience of her private Cabinets. Hence some say, that to put down public
Stews, is not only to disperse Fornication into all Places that was a sign for
one, but moreover, by the difficulty, to incite wild and wanton People to this
Vice. Moechus es Aufidiae qui vir Corvine fuisti,
Mart. lib. 3. Epig. 68.
Rivalis fuerat qui tuus ille vir est.
Cur altena placet tibi, quae tua non placet Vxor?
Nunquid securus non potes arrigere?
This Experience diversifies it self in a thousand Examples.

Nullus in Vrbe fuit tota, qui tangere vellet
Vxorem gratis Caeciliane tuam,
Mart. lib. 1. Epig. 74.
Dum licuit: sed nunc positis custodibus, ingens
Turba fututorum est. Ingeniosus homo es.
A Philosopher being taken in the very act, and asked what he was doing, coldly
replied, I am planting a Man; no more blushing to be so caught, than if they
had found him planting Garlic. It is, I suppose, out of tenderness and respect
to the natural Modesty of Mankind, that a great and religious Author is of
Opinion, that this act is so necessarily bound to Privacy and Shame, that he
cannot persuade himself there could be any absolute performance in those
impudent embraces of the Cynicks, The Embraces of the Cynicks impudent, and in
open Sight.
but that they only made it their Business to represent the lascivious Gestures
of Lust; to maintain the impudence of their Schools Profession, and that to
eject what Shame had withheld, it was afterward necessary for them to withdraw
into the Shade. But he had not thoroughly examined their Debauches, for
Diogenes, playing the beast with himself in public, wished in the presence of
all that saw him, that he could fill his Belly by that Exercise. To those who
asked him why he did not find out a more commodious place to eat in, than the
open Street; he made answer, because I am hungry in the open Street. The Women
Philosophers, who mixed with their Sect, mixed also with their Persons in all
Places without Reservation: and Hipparchia was not received into Crates his
Society, but upon Condition, that she should in all things follow the Usances
and Customs of his Rule. These Philosophers set a great price upon Virtue, and
renounce all other Discipline but the Moral: and yet in all their Actions, they
attributed the Sovereign Authority to the Election of their Sage, and above the
Laws, and gave no other curb to Voluptuousness, but Moderation only, and the
Conservation of the Liberty of others. Heraclitus and Protagoras, forasmuch as
Wine seemed bitter to the Sick, and pleasant to the sound, the Rudder crook'd
in the Water, and strait when out, and such like contrary apparences as are
found in Subjects, argued from thence, that all Subjects had in themselves the
Causes of these Apparences; and that there was some bitterness in the Wine,
which had some sympathy with the sick man's Taste, and the Rudder some bending
Quality, sympathizing with him that looks upon it in the Water. And so of all
the rest, which is to say, that all is in all things, and consequently nothing
in any one, for where all is there is nothing. This Opinion put me in mind of
the Experience we have, that there is no sense nor aspect of any thing whether
bitter or sweet, strait or crooked, that humane Wit does not find out in the
Writings he undertakes to tumble over. Into the cleanest, purest, and most
perfect Speaking that can possibly be, The purest way of Speaking, capable of
various Interpretations.
how many Lies and Falsities have we suggested? What Heresy has not there
found Ground and Testimony sufficient to make it self embraced and defended?
It Is for this, that the Authors of such Errors will never depart from proof of
the Testimony of the interpretation of Words. A Person of Dignity, who would
prove to me by Authority, the search of the Philosophers Stone, The
Philosophers Stone approved.
wherein he was over head and ears engaged; alleged to me at last five or six
Passages in the Bible, upon which he said he first founded his attempt, for the
discharge of his Conscience; (for he is a Divine) and in truth the Invention
was not only pleasant, but moreover very well accomodated to the Defense of
this fine Science. By this way the Reputation of divining Fables is acquired.
There is no Fortune Tellers, if he have this Authority, but, if a Man will take
the Pains to tumble and toss, and narrowly to peep into all the folds and
glosses of his Words, he may make him, like the Sibils, say what he will. There
are so many ways of Interpretation, that it will be hard but that, either
obliquely, or in a direct Line, an ingenious Wit will find out in every
Subject, some Air that will serve for his Purpose. Therefore there is a cloudy
and ambiguous Style in this so frequent and ancient use; let the Author but
make himself Master of that, he may attract and busy Posterity about his
Predictions; which not only his own Parts, but the accidental Favor of the
Matter it self, may as much or more assist him to obtain. That, as to the rest,
he express himself after a foolish, or a subtle manner, whether obscurely, or
contradictorily, it is no matter; a number of Wits shaking and sifting him, will
bring out a great many several Forms, either according to his meaning, or
collateral, or contrary to it, which will all redound to his Honor. He will
see himself enriched by the means of his Disciples, like the Regents of
Colleges, by their Pupils yearly Presents. This is it which has given
Reputation to many things of no worth at all; that has brought several Writings
in Vogue, and given them the Fame of containing all sorts of Matter can be
desired; one and the same thing receiving a thousand and a thousand Images and
various Considerations, nay, even as many as we please. Is it possible that
Homer could design to say all that we make him: and that he designed so many,
and so various Figures, as that the Divines, Lawgivers, Captains,
Philosophers, and all sorts of Men who treat of Sciences, Homer the general
Leader of all sorts of People.
how variously and oppositely soever, should indifferently quote him, and
support their Arguments by his Authority, as the Sovereign Lord and Master of
all Offices, Works and Artizans, and Councellor General of all Enterprises?
Whoever has had occasion for Oracles and Predictions, has there found
sufficient to serve his turn. It Is a Wonder how many, and how admirable
Concurrences an intelligent Person, and a particular Friend of mine, has there
found out in Favor of our Religion; and cannot easily be put out of the
Conceit that it was Homer's Design: and yet he is as well acquainted with this
Author, as any Man whatever of his Time. And what he has found out in Favor of
ours, very many anciently have found in Favor of theirs. Do but observe how
Plato is tumbled and tossed, every one ennobling his own Opinions by applying him
to himself, make him take what side they please. They draw him in, and engage
him in all the new Opinions the World receives; and make him, according to the
different course of things, differ from himself: every one makes him according
to his own Sense, the Manners and Customs lawful in his Age, because they are
unlawful in ours; and all this with Vivacity and Power, according to the force
and spriteliness of the Wit of the Interpreter. From the same Foundation that
Heraclitus and this Sentence of his had, That all things had in them those
forms that we discerned, Democritus drew a quite contrary conclusion; namely,
That Subjects had nothing at all in them of what we there find: and that
forasmuch as Honey is sweet to one, and bitter to another, he thence argued,
that it was neither sweet nor bitter. The Pyrrhonians would say, that they knew
not whether it is sweet or bitter, or neither the one or the other, or both;
for those always gain the highest point of Dubitation. The Cyrenaicks held,
that nothing was perceptible from without, and that that only was perceptible,
that internally touched us, as Grief and Pleasure; acknowledging neither Sound,
nor Color, but certain Affections only that we receive from them, and that
man's Judgment had no other Seat. Protagoras believed, that what seemed to every
one was true to every one. The Epicureans lodged all Judgment in the Senses,
and in the Knowledge of things, and in Pleasure. Plato would have the Judgment
of Truth, and Truth it self derived from Opinions, and the Senses to appertain
to the Wit and Cogitation. This Discourse put me upon the Consideration of the
Senses, in which lies the greatest Foundation and Proof of our Ignorance.
Whatsoever is known, is doubtless known by the Faculty of the knower; for
seeing the Judgment proceeds from the Operation of him that judges, it is Reason
that this Operation performs it by his means, and will not by the constraint of
another; as it would happen, if we knew things by the Power, and according to
the Law of their Essence. Now all Knowledge is conveyed to us by the Senses,
they are our Masters: -- via qua munita fidei
Lucret. l. 5.
Proxima fert humanum in pectus, templaque mentis.
It is the surest Path that Faith can find
By which to enter humane Heart, and Mind.
Science begins by them, and is resolved into them. After all, we should know
no more than a Stone, if we did not know that there is Sound, Odor, Light,
Taste, Measure, Weight, Softness, Hardness, Sharpness, Color, Smoothness,
Breadth and Depth. These are the Platform and Principles of all the Structure
of all our Knowledge. And, according to some Science, is nothing else but
Sense. He that could make me contradict the Senses, would have me by the
Throat, he could not make me go further back. The Senses are the beginning and
the end of humane Knowledge.

Ibid. l. 4.
Invenies primus ab sensibus esse creatam
Notitiam very, neque sensus posse refelli.
Quid majore fide porro quam sensus haberi
Debet?
You Will find of Truth, that all discoveries made,
Are first by Senses to the Soul conveyed;
Neither will Sense be baffled, and on what
Can we rely more safely than on that?
Let us attribute to them the least we can, we must however of necessity grant
them this, that it is by their means and mediation that all our Instruction is
directed. Cicero says, that Chrysippus, having attempted to extenuate the force
and virtue of Senses, presented to himself Arguments, and so vehement
Oppositions to the contrary, that he could not be satisfied in himself therein:
Whereupon Carneades, who maintained the contrary side, boasted, that he would
make use of the same Words and Arguments that Chrysippus had done, with them to
controvert and confute him, and therefore thus cried out against him: O
Miserable! thy force has destroyed thee. There can be nothing absurd to a
greater Degree, than to maintain that Fire does not warm, that Light does not
shine, and, that there is no weight nor solidity in Iron, which are
Advertisements conveyed to us by the Senses; neither is there Belief nor
Knowledge in Man, that can be compared to that for certainty. The first
Consideration I have upon the Subject of the Senses is, Doubt whether man have
all his Senses.
that I make a doubt whether or no Man be furnished with all natural Senses. I
see several Animals who live an entire and perfect Life, some without Sight,
others without Hearing: Who knows whether to us also, one, two, or three, or
many other Senses may not be wanting? For if any one be wanting, our
Examination cannot discover the defect. It Is the privilege of the Senses to be
the utmost limit of our discovery: There is nothing beyond them that can assist
us in Exploration, not so much as one Sense in the discovery of another. Ibid.
An poterunt oculos aures reprehendere, an aures
Tactus, an hunc porro tactum sapor arguet oris,
An confutabunt nares, oculive revincent?
Can Ears the Eyes, the Touch the Ears correct;
Or is that Touch by Tasting to be checked:
Or the other Senses shall the Nose, or Eyes
Confute in their peculiar faculties?
They all make the extremest limits of our ability.

-- seorsum cuique potestas
Ibid.
Divisa est, sua vis cuique est.
Each has it is power distinctly, and alone
And every Sense's power is it is own.
It is impossible to make a man, naturally blind, conceive that he does not
see, impossible to make him desire Sight, or to be sensible of his defect. For
which Reason, we ought not to derive any assurance from the Soul's being
contented and satisfied with those we have: considering that it cannot be
sensible herein of it is Infirmity and Imperfection, if there be any such thing.
It is impossible to say any thing to this blind Man, either by Argument or
Similitude, that can possess his Imagination with any Apprehension of Light,
Color, or Sight. There nothing remains behind that can push on the Senses to
Evidence. Those that are born Blind, whom we hear to wish they could see, it is
not that they understand what they desire: They have learned from us that they
want something, that there is something to be desired that we have, which they
can name indeed, and speak of it is Effects and Consequence, but yet they know
not what it is, nor apprehend it not at all. I have seen a Gentleman of a good
Family, who was born Blind, or at least Blind from such an Age that he knows
not what Sight is; who is so little sensible of his defect, that he makes use
as we do of Words proper for Seeing, and applies them after a manner wholly
particular, and his own. They brought him a Child to which he was Godfather,
which having taken into his Arms: Good God (said he) what a fine Child is this,
how beautiful to look upon, what a pretty Face it has! He will say, like one of
us, this Room has a very fine Prospect, it is clear Weather, the Sun shines
bright. And moreover, being that Hunting, Tennis, and Butts, are our Exercises,
and that he has heard so, he has taken a liking to them, will Ride a Hunting;
and believes he has as good a share of the Sport as we have; and will express
himself as angry or pleased as the best of us all, and yet knows nothing of it,
but by the Ear. One cries out to him, here is a Hare, when he is upon some even
Plain where he may safely Ride; and afterward, when they tell him the Hare is
killed, he will be as overjoyed, and proud of it, as he hears others say they
are. He will take a Tennis Ball in his left hand, and strike it away with the
Racket: He will shoot with a Musket at random, and is contented with what his
People tell him, that he is over or wide. Who knows whether all humane kind
commit not the like absurdity, for want of some Sense, and that through this
Default, the greatest part of the face of things is concealed from us? What do
we know but that the difficulties which we find in several effects of Animals
which exceed our Capacity, are not produced by faculty of some sense that we
are defective in? And whether some of them have not by this means a Life more
full and entire than ours? We seize an Apple as it were with all our Senses: We
there find Redness, Smoothness, Odor, and Sweetness: But it may have other
Virtues besides these, as to heat, or bind, which no sense of ours can have any
reference unto. Is it not likely that there are sensitive faculties in Nature
that are fit to judge of, and to discern those which we call the occult
Proprieties in several things, as for the Lodestone to attract Iron; and that
the want of such faculties is the cause that we are ignorant of the true
Essence of such things? It Is peradventure some particular Sense that gives
Cocks to understand what hour it is of Midnight, and when it grows to be
toward Day, and that makes them to Crow accordingly; that teaches Chickens,
before they have any Experience of what they are, to fear a Spar-hawk, and not
a Goose, or a Peacock, though Birds of a much larger Size: That cautions them
of the hostil Quality the Cat has against them, and makes them not to fear a
Dog: To arm themselves against the meawing (a kind of flattering Voice) of the
one, and not against the barking, a shrill, and threatening Voice of the other.
That teaches Wasps, Ants, and Rats, to fall upon the best Pear, and the best
Cheese, before they have tasted them, and inspires the Stag, Elephant, and
Serpents, with the knowledge of a certain Herb proper for their Cure. There is
no Sense that has not a mighty Dominion, and that does not by it is power
introduce an infinite number of Knowledges. If we were defective in the
intelligence of sounds of Music, and of the Voice, it would cause an
inimaginable confusion in all the rest of our Science. For, besides what
appertains to the proper effect of every Sense, how many Arguments,
Consequences, and Conclusions do we draw to other things, by comparing one
Sense with another? Let an Understanding Man imagine humane Nature originally
produced without the Sense of Seeing, and consider what Ignorance and Trouble
such a Defect would bring upon him, what a Darkness, and Blindness in the Soul;
he will then see by that of how great Importance to the knowledge of Truth, the
privation of such another Sense, or of two, or three, should we be so deprived,
would be. We have formed a Truth by the Consultation and Concurrence of our
five Senses, but peradventure, we should have the consent and contribution of
eight or ten, to make a certain discovery of our own Being. The Sects that
controvert the Knowledge of man, do it principally by the incertainty and
weakness of our Senses. For since all Knowledge is by their means and mediation
conveyed unto us, if they fail in their report, if they corrupt, or alter what
they bring us from without, if the Light which by them creeps into the Soul be
obscured in the passage, we have nothing else to hold by. From this extreme
difficulty all these fancies proceed, that every subject has all we there find
in it self: That it has nothing in it of what we think we there find; and that
of the Epicureans, that the Sun is no bigger than it is judged by our sight to
be: Lucret. lib. 5.
Quicquid id est nihilo fertur majore figura,
Quam nostris oculis quam cernimus esse videtur.
But be it what it will in our esteems,
It is no bigger than to us it seems.
That the apparences, which represent a Body great to him that is near, and
less to him that is more remote, are both true: Nec tamen hic oculis falli
concedimus hilum;
Id. lib. 4.
Proinde animi vitium hoc oculis adsingere noli.
Yet that the Eye's deluded we deny;
Charge not the Soul's fault therefore on the eye.
and resolutely, that there is no deceit in the Senses; that we are to lie at
their Mercy, and seek elsewhere Reasons to salve and excuse the Difference and
Contradictions we there find; even to the inventing of Lies and other slams,
(if it come to that) rather than accuse the Senses. Timagoras vowed, that by
pressing or turning his Eye, he could never perceive the light of the Candle to
double, and that the seeming so, proceeded from the Vice of Opinion, and not
from the Instrument. The most absurd of all the Epicureans Absurdities, is, in
denying the force and effect of the Senses.

Proinde quod in quoque est his visum tempore, verum est. Ibid.

Et si non potuit ratio dissolvere causam,
Cur ea quae fuerint juxtim quadrata, procul sint
Visa rotunda: tamen praestat rationis egentem
Reddere mendose causas utriusque figurae,
Quam manibus manifesta suis emittere quoquam,
Et violare fidem primam, and convellere tota
Fundamenta, quibus nixatur vita salusque.
Non modo enim ratio ruat omnis, vita quoque ipsa.
Concidat extemplo, nisi credere sensibus ausis,
Praecipitesque locos vitare, and caetera quae sint
In genere hoc fugienda.
Whatever, and whenever seen, is true,
And if our Reason cannot the Knot undo,
Why things seem to be square when very near,
And at a greater distance round appear;
It Is better yet for him that is at a pause
To give of either Figure a false cause,
Than to permit things manifest to go
Out of his Hands, to give the lie unto
His first belief, and the Foundations rend
On which all Life and Safety do depend.
For not alone Reason, but Life and all
Together will with sudden Ruin fall;
Unless we dare our Senses trust to miss
The danger of a dreadful precipice,
And other such like Dangers, that with Care
And Wariness to be evaded are.
This so desperate and unphilosophical Advice, expresses only this, that humane
Knowledge cannot support it self but by Reason, that is unreasonable, foolish
and mad; but that it is yet better, that man, to set a greater value upon
himself, make use of any other Remedy, how fantastic soever, than to confess
his necessary Ignorance; a truth so disadvantageous to him. He cannot avoid
owning, that the Senses are the sovereign Lords of his Knowledge; but they are
uncertain, and falsifiable in all Circumstances. It Is there that he is to fight
it out to the last; and if his just Forces fail him, as they do, to supply that
Defect with Obstinacy, Temerity and Impudence. In case that what the Epicureans
say be true, viz. That we have no Knowledge if the Senses apparences be false;
and if that also be true, which the Stoics say, That the apparences of the
Senses are so false, that they can furnish us with no manner of Knowledge: We
shall conclude, to the Disadvantage of these two great Dogmatical Sects, that
there is no Science at all. As to what concerns the Error and uncertainty of
the Operation of the Senses, every one may furnish himself with as many
examples as he pleases; so ordinary are the Faults and Tricks they put upon us.
In the Echo of a Valley, the sound of the Trumpet seems to meet us, which
comes from a place behind.

Extantesque procul medio de gurgite montes Ibid.

Idem apparent long diversi licet.
Et fugere ad puppim colles, campique videntur
Quos agimus propter Navim.
And Rocks in the Seas that proudly raise their Head, Mr. Creech.

Tho far disjoined, tho Royal Navies spread
Their Sails between; yet if from distance shown,
They seem an Island all combined in one.
Thus Ships, though driven by a prosperous Gale,
Seem fixed to Saylors, those seem under Sail
That ride at Anchor safe; and all admire,
As they row by, to see the Rocks retire.
-- Vbi in medio nobis equus acer obhaesit Ibid.

Flumine, equi corpus transversum far videtur
Vis, and in adversum Flumen contrudere raptim.
Thus, when in rapid Streams my Horse has stood,
And I looked downward on the rolling Flood; Mr. Creech.

Though he stood still, I thought he did divide
The headlong Streams, and strive against the Tide,
And all things seemed to move on every side.
Like a Musket Bullet, under the Forefinger, the middle Finger being lap'd
over it, which feels so like two, that a Man will have much ado to persuade
himself there is but one; the end of the two Fingers feeling each of them one
at the same time. For that the Senses are very often Masters of our Reason, and
constrain it to receive Impressions which it judges and knows to be false, is
frequently seen. I set aside the Sense of feeling, that has its Functions
nearer, more lively and substantial; that so often by the effect of the Pains
it helps the Body to, subverts and overthrows all those fine Stoical
Resolutions, and compells him to cry out of his Belly, who has resolutely
established this Doctrine in his Soul, that the Cholick, and all other Pains
and Diseases are indifferent things; not having the Power to abate any thing of
the Sovereign Felicity, wherein the wise man is seated by his Virtue. There is
no Heart so effeminate, that the rattle and sound of our Drums and Trumpets
will not inflame with Courage; nor so sullen, that the Harmony of our Music
will not rouse and cheer; nor so stubborn Soul, that will not feel it self
struck with some Reverence, in considering the gloomy vastness of our Churches,
the variety of Ornaments, and Order of our Ceremonies, and to hear the solemn
Music of our Organs, and the Grace and devout Harmony of our Voices. Even
those that come in with Contempt, feel a certain shivering in their Hearts, and
something of dread that makes them begin to doubt their Opinions. For my part,
I do not think my self strong enough to hear an Ode of Horace or Catullus Sung
by a beautiful young Mouth without emotion. And Zeno had reason to say, The
Voice, the flower of Beauty.
That the Voice was the flower of Beauty. One would once make me believe, that
a certain Person, whom all we Frenchmen know, had imposed upon me, in repeating
some Verses that he had made; that they were not the same upon the Paper that
they were in the Air, and that my Eyes would make a contrary Judgment to my
Ears: So great a Power has Pronuntiation to give fashion and value to Works
that are left to the Efficacy and Modulation of the Voice. And therefore
Philoxenus was not so much too blame, hearing one give an ill Accent to some
Composition of his, for spurning and breaking certain Earthen Vessels of his,
saying, I break what is thine, because thou corrupt'st what is mine. To what
end did those Men, who have with a positive Resolution destroyed themselves,
turn away their Faces that they might not see the blow that was by themselves
appointed? and that those, who for their Health desire and command Incisions to
be made, and Cauteries to be applied to them, cannot endure the sight of the
Preparations, Instruments, and Operations of the Chyrurgeon; being that the
Sight is not any way to participate in the Pain? Are not these proper Examples
to verify the authority the Senses have over the Imagination? It Is to much
purpose that we know these Tresses were borrowed from a Page, or a Lacquey;
that this Vermilion came from Spain, and this Cerus from the Ocean Sea: our
Sight will nevertheless compel us to confess that Subject more agreeable and
more lovely against all Reason. For in this there is nothing of it is own.
Anferimur cultu, gemmis, auroque teguntur
Ovid. de Remedio Amo. l. 1.
Crimina, pars minima est ipsa puella sui.
Saepe ubi sit quod ames inter tam multa requiras
Decipit hac oculos, Aegide dives amor.
Faults are with Jewels hid, we are gulled by Art,
The Girl is of her self the smallest part.
When amongst so many things, we seek for her
We love, our Eyes often deceived are.
What a strange Power do the Poets attribute to the Senses, that make Narcissus
so desperately in Love with his own Shadow? Cunctaque miratur, quibus est
mirabilis ipse,
Ovid. Met. lib. 3.
Se cupit imprudens, and qui probat, ipse probatur,
Dumque petit, petitur: pariterque accendit and ardet.
Mr. Sandys.
Admireth all; for which to be admired:
And inconsiderately himself desired.
The Praises which he gives, his Beauty claimed,
Who seeks, is sought, the Enflamer is inflamed.
And Pygmalion's Judgment so troubled by the Impression of the sight of his
Ivory Statue, that he loves and adores it as if it were a living Woman.

Oscula dat, reddique putat, sequiturque tenetque, Ovid. Met. lib. 10.

Et credit tactis digitos insidere membris,
Et metuit prestos veniat ne livor in artus.
He kisses, and believes he is kissed again,
Seizes, and twixt his arms his Love does strain,
And thinks the polished Ivory thus held,
Does to his fingers amorous pressure yield,
And has a tender Fear, lest black and blue
Should in the Parts with ardour pressed ensue.
Let a Philosopher be put into a Cage of small thin set Bars of Iron, and hang
him on the Top of the high Tower of Nostre Dame of Paris; He will see by
manifest Reason, that he cannot possibly fall, and yet he will find (unless he
have been used to the Plummers Trade) that he cannot help, but that the
excessive height will fright and astonish him. For we have enough to do to
assure our selves in the Galleries of our Steeples, if they are made with Rail
and Baluster, although they are of Stone; and some there are that cannot endure so
much as to think of it. Let there be a Beam thrown over betwixt these two
Towers, of breadth sufficient to walk upon, there is no Philosophical Wisdom so
firm that can give us the courage to walk over it, as we should do upon the
Ground. I have often tried this upon our Mountains in these Parts; and yet I am
one who am not the most subject to be afraid, that I was not able to endure to
look into that infinite Depth without horror and trembling, though I stood
above my length from the edge of the Precipice, and could not have fallen down
if I would. Where I also observed, that what height soever the Precipice were,
provided there were some Tree, or some jutting out of a Rock, a little to
support and divide the Sight, it a little eases our Fears, and gives greater
Assurance; as if they were things by which in falling we might have some
relief: But that direct Precipices we are not able to look upon without being
giddy; ut despici sine vertigine simul oculorum animique non possit. Which is a
manifest imposture of the Sight. And therefore it was, that the fine
Philosopher put out his own Eyes, to free the Soul from being diverted by them,
and that he might Philosophise at greater liberty. But by the same Rule, he
should have damm'd up his Ears, that Theophrastus says are the most dangerous
Instruments about us, for receiving violent Impressions to alter and disturb
us; and finally, should have deprived himself of all his other Senses, that is
to say, of his Life and Being; For they have all the power to command our Soul
and Reason. Fit etiam saepe specie quadam, saepe vocum gravitate and cantibus,
Cicero de Divin. lib. 1.
ut pellantur animi vehementius: saepe etiam cura and timore. For it often falls
out that minds are more vehemently struck by some fight, by the quality and
sound of the Voice, or by Singing; and often times also by Grief and Fear.
Physicians hold, that there are certain Complexions that are agitated by some
Sounds, and Instruments, even to Fury. I have seen some, who could not hear a
Bone gnawed under the Table without impatience; and there is scarce any man,
who is not disturbed at the sharp and shrill noise that the File makes in
grating upon the Iron; as also to hear chewing near them, or to hear any one
speak, who has any impediment in the Throat or Nose, will move some People even
to anger and hatred. Of what use was that piping prompter of Gracchus, who
softened, raised, and moved his Master's Voice, whilst he declaimed at Rome, if
the movements and quality of the sound had not the power to move and alter the
Judgments of the Auditory? In earnest, there is wonderful reason to keep such a
clutter about the firmity of this fine piece, that suffers it self to be turned
and twined by the motion and accidents of so light a wind. The same cheat that
the Senses put upon our Understanding, they have in turn put upon them. The
Soul also sometimes has its revenge, they lie and contend which should most
deceive one another. What we see and hear when we are transported with Passion,
we neither see nor hear as it is. Et solemn geminum, and duplices se ostendere
Thebas. Aeneid. l.

The Sun did seem as if two Suns it were,
And Thebes a double City did appear.
The Object that we love appears to us more beautiful than it really is:
Lucret. l. 4.
Multimodis igitur pravas, turpesque videmus,
Esse in deliciis, summoque in honor vigere.
Hence it is that ugly things in fancied dress,
Mr. Creech.
Seem gay, look fair to Lovers Eyes, and please.
and that we hate more ugly. To a discontented and afflicted Man, the Light of
the Day seems dark and overcast. Our Senses are not only depraved, but very
often stupefied by the Passions of the Soul. How many things do we see, that we
do not take notice of, if the Mind be taken up with other Thoughts?

Ibid.
-- in rebus quoque apertis noscere possis.
Si non advertas Animum proinde esse, quasi omni
Tempore semotae fuerint, longeque remotae.
Mr. Creech.
Nay even in plainest things, unless the Mind
Take heed, unless she sets her self to find,
The thing no more is seen, no more beloved,
Than if the most obscure, and most removed.
It appears that the Soul retires within, and amuses the Powers of the Senses.
And so both the inside, and the outside of man is full of Infirmities and
Mistakes. They who have compared our Lives to a Dream, The Life of a Man
compared to a Dream.
were peradventure more in the right than they were aware of; when we dream,
the Soul lives, works, and exercises all its Faculties, neither more nor less,
than when awake; but more largly and obscurely; Yet not so much neither, that
the difference should be as great as betwixt Night and the Meridional
Brightness of the Sun, but as betwixt Night and Shade; there she sleeps, here
she slumbers; but whether more or less, it is still dark and Cymmerian Darkness.
We wake sleeping, and sleep waking. I do not see so clearly in my Sleep; but as
to my being awake, I never found it clear enough, and free from Clouds.
Moreover, Sleep, when it is profound, sometimes rocks even Dreams themselves
asleep, but our awaking is never so spritely, that it does rightly, and as it
should, purge and dissipate those Ravings and Whimsies, which are waking
Dreams, and worse than Dreams. Our Reason and Soul receiving those Fancies and
Opinions that come in Dreams, and authorizing the Actions of our Dreams, with
the like Approbation that they do those of the Day; wherefore do we not doubt,
whether our Thought and Action is another sort of Dreaming, and our waking a
certain kind of sleep? If the Senses be our first Judges, it is not ours that
we are to consult; for in Faculty Beasts have as great, or greater right than
we. It is certain that some of them have the Sense of Hearing more quick than
Man; others that of Seeing, others that of Feeling, others that of Touch and
Taste. Democritus said, that the Gods and Brutes had the sensitive Faculties
more perfect than Man. But betwixt the Effects of their Senses and ours, the
difference is extreme. Our Spittle cleanses and dries up our Wounds, it kills
the Serpent.

Ibid.
Tantaque in his rebus distantia, differitasque est,
Vt quod aliis cibus est, aliis fuat acre venenum.
Saepe etenim serpens, hominis contacta saliva,
Dispersit, ac sese mandendo conficit ipsa.
And in those things the difference is so great,
That what is ones Poison, is another Meat;
For Serpents often have been seen, it is said,
When touched with humane Spittle, to go mad,
And bite themselves to Death.
What Quality do we attribute to our Spittle, either in respect to our selves,
or to the Serpent? By which of the two Senses shall we prove the true Essence
that we seek for? Pliny says, that there are certain Sea-Hares in the Indies
that are Poison to us, and we to them; insomuch that with the least touch we
kill them. Which shall be truly Poison, the Man, or the Fish? Which shall we
believe, the Fish of the Man, or the Man of the Fish? One Quality of the Air
infects a Man, that does the Ox no harm; some other infects the Ox, but hurts
not the Man: Which of the two shall in Truth and Nature be the pestilent
Quality? To them who have the Jaundies, all things seems yellow and paler than
to us: Ibid.
Lurida praeterea fiunt quaecunque tuentur Arquati. --
Mr. Creech. Jaundies.
Besides whatever Jaundice Eyes do view
Look pale as well as those, and yellow too:
For lurid parts fly off with nimble Wings,
And meet the distant coming forms of things;
And others lurk within the Eyes, and seize,
And strain with pale the entering Images.


They who are troubled with the Disease that the Physicians call Hyposphragma,
Hyposphragma.
which is a suffusion of Blood under the Skin; see all things red and bloody.
What do we know but that these Humors which thus alter the Operations of
Sight, predominate our Beasts; and are usual with them? For we see some whose
Eyes are yellow, like our People who have the Jaundies; and others of a bloody
Color. It Is likely that the color of Objects seems other to them, than to us;
which of the two shall make a right Judgment? For, it is not said, that the
Essence of things have a Relation to Man only; Hardness, Whiteness, Depth and
Sharpness, have reference to the Service and Knowledge of Animals as well as to
us; and Nature has equally designed them for their use. When we press down the
Eye, the Body that we look upon, we perceive to be longer, and more extended;
many Beasts have their Eyes so pressed down: this length therefore is
peradventure the true form of that Body, and not that which our Eyes give it in
their usual state. If we close the lower part of the Eye, things appear double
to us.

Bina Lucernarum florentia lumina Flammis,
Et duplices hominum facies, and corpora bina. Ibid.

One Lamp seems two, and each man does appear
Upon a double Bulk two Heads to bear.
If our Ears be hindered, or the Passage stopped with any thing, we receive the
sound quite otherwise, than we usually do; the Animals likewise, who have
either the Ears hairy, or but a very little hole instead of an Ear, do not
consequently hear as we do; but another kind of sound. We see at Festivals and
Theaters, that opposing a painted Glass of a certain Color to the Light of the
Flambeaus, all things in the Room appear to us green, yellow, or violet.

Ibid.
Et vulgo faciunt id lutea, russaque vela,
Et ferruginea, cum magnis intenta Theatris
Per malos vulgata trabesque trementia pendent:
Namque ibi concessum caveai subter, and omnem
Scenai speciem, patrum matrumque deorumque
Inficiunt, coguntque suo volitare color.
Mr. Creech.
Thus when pale Curtains, or the deeper red,
Over all the spacious Theater are spread,
Which mighty Masts, and sturdy Pillars bear,
And the loose Curtains wanton in the Air;
Whole Streams of Colors from the top do flow,
The Rays divide them in their Passage through;
And strain the Scenes, and Men, and Gods below.
It Is likely that the Eyes of Animals, which we see to be of diverse colors, do
produce the appearance of Bodies the same with their Eyes. We should therefore,
to make a right Judgment of the operations of the Senses, be first agreed with
Beasts, and secondly, amongst our selves, which we by no means are, but enter
at every turn into Dispute; forasmuch as one Hears, Sees, or Tastes something
otherwise than another does, and contests as much as upon any other thing, of
the diversity of the Images that the Senses represent to us. A Child, by the
ordinary rule of Nature, Hears, Sees, and Tastes otherwise than a Man of thirty
years old, and he, than one of threescore. The Senses are in some more obscure
and dusky, and more open and quick in others; and we receive things variously
according as we are, and accordingly as they appear to us. Now our Perception
being so uncertain and controverted, it is no more a wonder if we are told that
we may declare that Snow appears white to us, but that to affirm that it is in
it is own Essence really so, is more than we are able to justify: and this
foundation being shaken, all the Knowledge in the World must of necessity fall
to ruin. What do our Senses themselves hinder one another? A Picture seems
raised and embossed to the Sight, in the handling it seems flat to the Touch:
Shall we say that Musk, which delights the Smell, and is offensive to the
Taste, is agreeable or no? There are Herbs and Unguents, proper for one part of
the Body, that are hurtful to another: Honey is pleasant to the Taste, but
offensive to the Sight. They, who to assist their Lust, were wont in ancient
times to make use of Magnifying Glasses, to represent the Members they were to
employ, bigger, by that ocular Tumidity, to please themselves the more; to
which of their Senses did they give the Prize, whether to the Sight, that
represents the Members as large and great as they would desire; or to their
Feeling, which represents them little and contemptible? Are they our Senses
that supply the Subject with these different Conditions, and have the Subjects
themselves nevertheless but one? As we see in the Bread we eat, it is nothing
but Bread, but by being eaten, it becomes Bones, Blood, Flesh, Hair, and Nails.
Id. lib. 3.
Vt cibus in membra, atque artus cum diditur omnes
Disperit, atque aliam naturam sufficit ex se.
Mr. Creech.
As Meats diffused through all the the Members lose
Their former Nature, and different things compose.
The humidity sucked up by the root of a Tree, becomes Trunk, Leaf, and Fruit:
and the Air being but one, is modulated in a Trumpet to a thousand sorts of
Sounds. Are they our Senses, I would fain know, that in like manner form these
Subjects into so many diverse Qualities, or have they them really such in
themselves? And upon this doubt, what can we determine of their true Essence?
Moreover, since the accidents of Diseases, of Raving, or Sleep, makes things
appear otherwise to us than they do to the Healthful, the Wise, and those that
are awake: Is it not likely, that our right posture of Health and
Understanding, and our natural Humors, have also wherewith to give a Being to
things that have relation to their own Condition, and accommodate them to
themselves, as well as when they are disordered; and our Health as capable of
giving them an Aspect as Sickness? Why has not the Temperate a certain form of
Objects relative to it as well as the Intemperate: and why may it not as well
stamp it with it is own Character as the other? He, whose mouth is out of Taste,
says the Wine is flat, the healthful Man commends it is flavor, and the thirsty
it is briskness. Now our Condition always accommodating things to it self, and
transforming them according to it is own posture; we cannot know what things
truly are in themselves, being that nothing comes to us but what is falsified
and altered by the Senses. Where the Compass, the Square, and the Rule are
crooked, all Propositions drawn from thence, and all Buildings erected by those
Guides, must of necessity be also defective. The incertainty of our Senses
renders every thing uncertain that they produce.

Denique ut in fabrica, si prava est regula prima, Id. l. 4.

Normaque si fallax rectis regionibus exit,
Et libella aliqua si ex part claudicat hilum,
Omnia mendose fieri, atque obstipa necessum est,
Prava, cubantia, prona, supina, atque absona tecta,
Jam ruere ut quaedam videantur velle ruantque
Prodita judiciis fallacibus omnia primis
Hic igitur ratio tibi rerum prava necesse est,
Falsaque sit falsis quaecumque a sensibus orta est.
But lastly, as in Building, if the Line
Mr. Creech.
Be not exact and straight, the Rule decline,
Or Level false, how vain is the Design!
Uneven, an ill shaped, and tottering Wall
Must rise, this part must sink, that part must fall,
Because the Rules were false that fashioned all:
Thus Reasons Rules are false, if all commence,
And rise from failing, and from erring Sense.
As to what remains, who can be fit to judge of, and to determine these
Differences? As we say in Controversies of Religion, that we must have a Judge,
neither inclining to the one side nor the other, free from all Choice and
Affection, which cannot be amongst Christians; just so it falls out in this;
for if he be old, he cannot judge of the sense of old Age, being himself a
Party in the Case: if Young, there is the same Exception; if Healthful, Sick,
Asleep, or Awake, he is still the same incompetent Judge: We must have some one
exempt from all these Propositions, as of things indifferent to him; and by
this Rule we must have a Judge that never was. To judge of the appearance that
we receive of Subjects, we ought to have a deciding Instrument, to prove this
Instrument, we must have Demonstration, to verify this Demonstration, an
Instrument, and here we are upon the Wheel. Seeing the Senses cannot determine
our Dispute, being full of incertainty themselves, it must then be Reason that
must do it; but no Reason can be erected upon any other foundation than that of
another Reason, and so we run back to all Infinity. Our fancy does not apply it
self to things that are strange, but is conceived by the mediation of the
Senses, and Senses do not comprehend a foreign Subject, but only their own
Passions, by which means fancy and appearance are no part of the Subject, but
only of the Passion and Sufferance of Sense, which Passion and Subject are
several things; wherefore, whoever judges by Apparences, judges by another
thing than the Subject. And to say that the Passions of the Senses convey to
the Soul the quality of strange Subjects by Resemblance: how can the Soul and
Understanding be assured of this Resemblance, having of it self no Commerce
with foreign Subjects? As they who never knew Socrates, cannot, when they see
his Picture, say it is like him. Now, whoever would notwithstanding judge by
Apparences, if it be by all, it is impossible, because they hinder one another
by their Contrarieties and Discrepancies, as we by Experience see. Shall some
select Apparences govern the rest? You must verify this Select by another
Select, the second by the third, and consequently there will never be any end
on it. Finally, there is no constant Existence neither of the Objects Being, nor
our own. Both we, and our Judgments, and all mortal things, are evermore
incessantly running and rolling, and consequently, nothing certain can be
established from the one to the other, both the judging and the judged being in
a continual Motion and Mutation: We have no Communication with Being, by reason
that all humane Nature is always in the midst, betwixt being Born and Dying,
giving but an obscure Appearance and Shadow, a weak and uncertain Opinion of it
self. And if peradventure you fix your thought to apprehend your Being, it
would be but like grasping Water, for the more you clutch your hand to squeeze
and hold what is in it is own nature flowing, so much more you lose of what you
would grasp and hold: So seeing that all things are subject to pass from one
change to another, Reason, that there looks for a real Substance, finds it self
deceived, not being able to apprehend any thing that is Subsistent and
Permanent, because that every thing is either entering into Being, and is not
yet wholly arrived at it, or begins to Dye before it is Born. Plato said, that
Bodies had never any Existence, but only Birth; conceiving that Homer had made
the Ocean, and Thetis, Father and Mother of the Gods, to show us, that all
things are in a perpetual Fluctuation, Motion, and Variation; the Opinion of
all the Philosophers, as he says, before his time, Parmenides only excepted,
who would not allow things to have Motion, of the Power whereof he sets a
mighty Value. Pythagoras was of Opinion, that all Matter was flowing and
unstable: The Stoics, that there is no time present, and that what we call so,
is nothing but the juncture, and meeting of the future and the past:
Heraclitus, that never any man entered twice into the same River: Epicharmus;
that who borrowed Money but an hour ago, does not owe it now; and, that he, who
was invited overnight to come the next day to Dinner, comes nevertheless
uninvited, considering, that they are no more the same men, but are become
others; and, that there could not a mortal Substance be found twice in the same
Condition: for, by the suddenness and quickness of Change, it one while
disperses, and another reassembles; it comes and goes after such a manner, that
what begins to be Born, never arrives to the Perfection of Being; forasmuch as
that Birth is never finished, and never stays, as being at an end, but from the
Seed is evermore changing and shifting from one to another. As humane Seed is
first in the Mothers Womb made a formless Embrio, after delivered thence a
sucking Infant; afterward it becomes a Boy, then consequently a Youth, after
that a full Man, then a middle-ag'd Man, and at last a decrepid old Man. So
that Age and subsequent Generation is always destroying and spoiling that which
went before. Mutat enim Mundi naturam totius aetas, Idem. lib. 5.

Ex alioque alius status excipere omnia debet,
Nec manet illa sui similis res, omnia migrant,
Omnia commutat natura and vertere cogit.
For Time the Nature of the World translates,
And gives all things new from preceding states:
Naught like it self remains, but all do range,
And Nature forces every thing to change.
And yet we foolishly fear one kind of Death, whereas we have already past, and
do daily pass so many other. For not only, as Heraclitus said, the Death of the
Fire is the Generation of the Air, and the Death of Air the Generation of
Water: but moreover, we may more manifestly discern it in our selves: The
Flower of Youth dies, and passes away when Age comes on, and youth is
terminated in the Flower of Age of a full grown Man; Infancy in Youth, and the
first Age dies in Infancy: Yesterday died in to Day, and to Day will die in to
Morrow; and there is nothing that remains in the same state, or that is always
the same thing. And that it is so, let this be the Proof; If we are always one
and the same, how comes it then to pass, that we are now pleased with one
thing, and by and by with another? How comes it to pass that we love contrary
things, that we praise or condemn them? How comes it to pass that we have
different Affections, and no more retain the same Sentiment in the same
Thought? For it is not likely that without mutation we should assume other
Passions; and that which suffers Mutation does not remain the same, and if it
be not the same, it is not at all: But the same that the Being is, does, like
it, unknowingly change and alter, becoming evermore another from another thing:
And consequently the natural Senses abuse and deceive themselves, taking that
which seems, for that which is, for want of well knowing what that which is,
is. But what is it then that truly is? That which is Eternal: that is to say,
that never had beginning, nor never shall have ending, and to which Time can
bring no mutation. Time a moving thing without permanency.
For Time is a mobile thing, and that appears as in a shadow, with a matter
evermore flowing and running, without ever remaining stable and permanent: and
to which those words appertain, before, and after, has been, or shall be: Which
at the first sight evidently show, that it is not a thing that is; and it were
a great folly, and an apparent falsity, to say that that is, which is not yet
in being, or that has already ceased to be. And as to these words, present,
instant, and now, by which it seems that we principally support and found the
intelligence of Time, Reason discovering, does presently destroy it; for it
immediately divides and splits it into the future and past, being of necessity
to consider it divided in two. The same happens to Nature, that is measured, as
to Time that measures it; for she has nothing more subsisting and permanent
than the other, but all things are either born, bearing, or dying. By which
means, it were a sinful saying, to say of God, who is He who only is, that He
was, or that He shall be: for those are Terms of declension, transportation,
and vicissitude, of what cannot continue, nor remain in Being. Wherefore we are
to conclude, that God only is, not according to any measure of Time, but
according to an immutable and immovable Eternity, not measured by Time, nor
subject to any Declension: before whom nothing was, and after whom nothing
shall be, either more new, or more recent, but a real Being, that with one sole
Now fills the for ever, and that there is nothing that truly is, but He alone;
without being able to say, He has been, or shall be, without beginning, and
without end. To this Religious conclusion of a Pagan, I shall only add this
testimony of one of the same condition, for the close of this long and tedious
Discourse, which would furnish me with endless matter. What a vile and abject
thing, says he, is man, if he do not raise himself above Humanity? It Is a good
word, and a profitable desire, but withal absurd; For to make the handle
bigger than the Hand, and the Cubit longer than the Arm, and to hope to stride
further than our Legs can reach, is both impossible and monstrous; or that Man
should rise above himself and Humanity: for he cannot see but with his Eyes,
nor seize but with his Power. He shall be exalted, if God will lend him his
extraordinary hand; he shall exalt himself, by abandoning and renouncing his
own proper means, and by suffering himself to be raised and elevated by means
purely Celestial; It belongs to our Christian Faith, and not to the Stoical
Virtue, to pretend to that Divine and miraculous Metamorphosis.

CHAP. XIII. Of judging of the Death of another.
WHen we judge of another's assurance in Death, which without doubt is the most
remarkable action of humane Life; we are to take notice of one thing, which is,
that men very hardly believe themselves to be arrived to that period. Few men
dye in an opinion that it is their latest hour, and there is nothing wherein
the flattery of Hope does more delude us. It never ceases to whisper in our
Ears, No very resolute assurance at the article of death.
Others have been much sicker without dying; my condition is not so desperate
as it is thought, and at the worst, God has done other Miracles. Which happens,
by reason that we set too much value upon our selves. It seems as if the
Universality of things were in some measure to suffer by our dissolution, and
that it did commiserate our condition. For as much as our depraved sight
represents things to it self after the same manner, and that we are of opinion
they stand in as much need of us as we do of them; like People at Sea, to whom
Mountains, Fields, Cities, Heaven and Earth are tossed at the same rate they
are: Provehimur portu, terraeque, urbesque recedunt. Aeneid. l. 3.

Out of the Port with a brisk gale we speed,
And making way, Cities and Lands recede.
Whoever saw old Age that did not applaud the past, and condemn the present
time, laying the fault of his Misery and Discontent upon the World, and the
Manners of Men?

Lucret. l. 1.
Jamque caput quassans grandis suspirat arator,
Et cum tempora, temporibus praesentia confert
Praeteritis, laudat fortunas saepe parentis,
Et crepat antiquum genus ut pietate repletum.
Now the old Ploughman sighs and shakes his Head,
And present times comparing with those fled,
His predecessors happiness does praise,
And the great Piety of that old Race.
We will make all things to go along with us: whence it follows, that we
consider our Death as a very great thing, and that does not so easily pass, nor
without the solemn Consultation of the Stars: Tot circa unum Caput tumultuantes
Deos, and so much the more think it, as we more value our selves. What shall so
much Knowledge be lost, with so much damage to the World without a particular
concern of the Destinies? Does so rare and exemplary a Soul cost no more the
killing than one that is mean, and of no use to the public? This Life that
protects so many others, upon which so many other Lives depend, that employs so
vast a number of men in his Service, and that fills so many places, shall it
drop off like one that hangs but by its own simple Thread? None of us lays it
enough to Heart, that we are but one. Thence proceeded those Words of Caesar to
his Pilot, more tumid than the Sea that threatened him.

-- Italiam si coelo authore recusas Lucan. l. 1^

Me pete: sola tibi causa haec est justa timoris,
Victorem non nosce tuum, perrumpe procellas
Tutela secure mei --
If thou to sail to Italy decline
Under the Gods Protection, trust to mine;
The only just cause that thou have to fear,
Is that thou do not know thy Passenger;
But, I being aboard, slight Neptunes braves,
And fearless cut thorough the swelling Waves.
And these, -- credit jam digna pericula Caesar
Fatis esse suis, tantusque evertere (dixit)
Me superis labor est, parva quem puppe sedentem,
Tam magno petiere mari --
These Dangers, worthy of his Destiny,
Caesar did now believe, and then did cry,
What is it for the Gods a task so great
To overthrow me, that to do the feat
In a poor little Bark they must be fain
Here to surprise me on the swelling Main?
And that idle Fancy of the Public, The Suns Mourning for the Death of Caesar.
that the Sun carried in his Face the Mourning for his Death a whole Year. Ille
etiam extincto miseratus Caesare Romam,
Cum Caput obscura nitidum ferrugine texit. Virgil. Georg. l. 1.

And pitying Rome, Great Caesar being dead,
In mourning Clouds Sol veiled his shining Head.
and a thousand of the like; wherewith the World suffers it self to be so
easily imposed upon, believing that our interests alter the Heavens, and that
they are concerned at our ordinary Actions. Non tanta Coelo societas nobiscum
est, Plin. Not. Hist. lib. 2^ c. 8.
ut nostro fato mortalis sit ille, quoque siderum fulgor. There is no such
Alliance betwixt us and Heaven, that the Brightness of the Stars should be made
Mortal by our Death. Now to judge of the Constancy and Resolution in a Man that
does not yet believe himself to be certainly in Danger, though he really is, is
no Reason; and it is not enough that he dies in this posture, unless he did
purposely put himself into it for this effect. It most commonly falls out in
most men, that they set a good Face upon the Matter, and speak with great
Indifferency, to acquire Reputation, which they hope afterward living to enjoy.
Of all that I have seen dye, Fortune has disposed their Countenances, and no
design of theirs; and even of those who in ancient times have made away
themselves, there is much to be considered, whether it were a sudden, or a
lingering Death. That cruel Roman Emperor would say of his Prisoners, That he
would make them feel Death, and if any one killed himself in Prison, That
Fellow has made an escape from me; he would say he would spin out Death, and
make it felt by Torments.

Vidimus and toto quamvis in Corpore caeso, Lucan. l. 2.

Nil animae lethale datum, moremque nefandae
Durum saevitiae, percunctis parcere morti.
And in tormented Bodies we have seen,
Amongst those Wounds none that have mortal been,
Inhumane Method of dire Cruelty,
That means to kill; yet will not let men dye.
In plain truth, it is no such great Matter for a Man in Health and in a
temperate state of Mind, to resolve to kill himself; it is very easy to give
ill sign^ before one comes to the push: insomuch that Heliogabalus, the most
effeminate Man in the World, amongst his most sensual Pleasures, could forecast
to make himself dye delicately, when he should be forced thereto. And that his
Death might not give the lie to the rest of his Life, had purposely built a
sumptuous Tower, the Front and Base whereof was covered and laid with Planks
enriched with Gold and precious Stones, thence to precipitate himself; and also
caused Cords twisted with Gold and Crimson Silk to be made, wherewith to
strangle himself; and a Sword with the blade of Gold to be hammered out to fall
upon: and kept Poison in Vessels of Emerald and Topaze wherewith to poison
himself, according as he should like to choose one of these ways of dying.

Id. l. 4.
Impiger, and fortis virtute coacta.
By a forced Valor resolute and brave.
Yet, for so much as concerns this Person, the effeminacy of his Preparations
makes it more likely that he would have thought better on it, had he been put to
the test. But in those who with greater Resolution have determined to dispatch
themselves, we must examine, whether it were with one blow which took away the
leisure of feeling the Effect: for it is to be questioned, whether perceiving
Life by little and little to steal away, the sentiment of the Bod^^ mixing it
self with that of the Soul, and the means of repenting being offered, whether,
I say, Constancy and Obstinacy in so dangerous a will is to be found. In the
Civil Wars of Caesar, Lucius Domittus being taken in Prussia, and thereupon
poisoning himself, afterward repented. It has happened in our time, that a
certain Person being resolved to dye, and not having gone deep enough at the
first thrust, the sensibility of the Flesh opposing his Arm, gave himself three
or four Wounds more, but could never prevail upon himself to thrust home.
Whilst Plantius Sylvanus was upon his Trial, Virgulantia his Grand Mother sent
him a Poignard, with which not being able to kill himself, he made his Servants
to cut his Veins. Albucilla in Tiberius his Time, having, to kill himself,
struck with too much tenderness, gave his Adversaries Opportunity to imprison,
and put him to Death their own way: and that great Leader Demosthenes, after
his Rout in Sicily did the same; and C. Fimbria, having struck himself too
weakly, entreated his Servant to dispatch him, and to kill him out. On the
contrary, Ostorius, who could not make use of his own Arm, disdained to employ
that of his Servant to any other use, but only to hold the Poignard straight
and firm; and running his Breast full drive against it, thrust himself through.
It Is in truth a morsel that is to be swallowed without chewing, unless a man be
thoroughly resolved* and yet Adrian the Emperor made his Physi^ian mark and
incircle in his Pap the mortal place wherein he was to stab, to him he had
given order to kill him. For this reason it was, that Caesar being asked what
Death he thought to be the most desired, made Answer, The least premeditated,
and the shortest. If Caesar dared to say it, it is no Cowardice in me to
believe it. A short Death, says Pliny, is the sovereign good hap of humane
Life. They do not much care to discover it: No one can say that he is resolved
for Death, who fears to trifle with it, and that cannot undergo it with his
Eyes open. They that we see in exemplary Punishments run to their Death, hasten
and press their Execution, do it not out of Resolution, but they will not give
themselves leisure to consider it; it does not trouble them to be dead, but to
dye.

Cice. Thus. lib. 1.
Emori nolo, sed me esse mortuum, nihili aestimo.
I would not dye, but care not to be dead.
It Is a degree of Constancy to which I have experimented, that I can arrive to
do like those who plunge themselves into Dangers, as into the Sea, with their
Eyes shut. There is nothing, in my Opinion, more illustrious in the Life of
Socrates, The constant and resolute Death of Socrates.
than that he had thirty whole days wherein to ruminate upon the Sentence of
his Death; to have digested it all that time with a most assured hope, without
care, and without alteration, and with Words and Actions rather careless and
indifferent, than any way stirred or discomposed by the weight of such a
Thought. That Pomponius Atticus, The death of Pomponius Atticus, by Fasting.
to whom Cicero writes so often, being sick, caused Agrippa his Son-in-law, and
two or three more of his Friends, to be called to him, and told them, That
having found all means practiced upon him for his Recovery to be in vain, and
that all he did to prolong his Life, did also prolong and augment his Pain; he
was resolved to put an end both to the one and the other, desiring them to
approve of his Deliberation, or at least, not to lose their labor in
endeavoring to dissuade him. Now having chosen to destroy himself by
Abstinence, his Disease was accidentally so cured, and the Remedy that he had
made use of wherewith to kill himself, restored him to his perfect Health. His
Physicians and Friends rejoicing at so happy an Event, and coming to
congratulate him, found themselves very much deceived, it being impossible for
them to make him alter his Purpose; he telling them, that he must one day dye,
and that being now so far on his way, he would save himself the labor of
beginning again another time. This Man, having discovered Death at leisure, was
not only not discouraged at the approach of it, but provokes it: for being
satisfied that he had engaged in the Combat, he considered it as a piece of
Bravery, and that he was obliged in Honor to see the end. It Is far beyond not
fearing Death, to taste and relish it. The Story of the Philosopher Cleanthes
is very like this. He had his Gums swelled and rotten; his Physicians advised
him to great Abstinence: having fasted two days, he was so much better, that
they pronounced him cured, and permitted him to his ordinary course of Diet:
he, on the contrary, already tasting some sweetness in this Faintness of his,
would not be persuaded to go back, but resolved to proceed, and to finish what
he had so far advanced. Tullius Marcellinus, a Young Man of Rome, having a mind
to anticipate the hour of his Destiny, to be rid of a Disease that was more
trouble to him than he was willing to endure; though his Physicians assured him
of a certain, tho not sudden Cure, called a Council of his Friends, to consult
about it; of which, some, says Seneca, gave him the Counsel, that out of
Unmanliness they would have taken themselves, others, out of Flattery, such as
they thought he would best like: but a Stoic said thus to him, Do not concern
thy self, Marcellinus, as if thou did deliberate of a thing of Importance;
it is no great matter to live, thy Servants and Beasts live, but it is a great
thing to dye handsomely, wisely, and constantly: do but think how long thou have
done the same thing, eat, drink, and sleep, drink, sleep, and eat. We
incessantly wheel in the same circle: not only ill and insupportable Accidents,
but even the saciety of living, inclines a man to desire to dye. Marcellinus
did not stand in need of a man to advise, but of a man to assist him; his
Servants were afraid to meddle in the Business: but this Philosopher gave them
to understand, that Domestics are suspected, even when it is in doubt, whether
the Death of the Master were voluntary, or no; otherwise, that it would be of
as ill example to hinder him, as to kill him, forasmuch as, Horat. in Art Poet.
Invitum qui servat, idem facit occidenti.
Who makes a man to live against his Will,
As cruel is, as if he did him kill.


He afterward told Marcellinus, that it would not be indecent, as the
remainder of Tables, when we have done, is given to the Assistants; so Life
being ended, to distribute something to those who have been our Servants. Now
Marcellinus was of a free and liberal Spirit; he therefore divided a certain
sum of Money amongst his Attendants, and conforted them. As to the rest, he had
no need of Steel, nor of Blood. He was resolved to go out of this Life, and not
to run out of it; not to escape from Death, but to essay it. And to give
himself leisure to trifle with it, having forsaken all manner of Nourishment,
the third day following, after having caused himself to be sprinkled with warm
Water, he fainted by degrees, and not without some kind of Pleasure, as he
himself declared. In earnest, such as have been acquainted with these
Faintings, proceeding from weakness, do say that they are therein sensible of
no manner of Pain, but rather feel a kind of Delight, as in a Passage to Sleep
and Rest. These are studied and digested Deaths. But to the end that Cato only
may furnish out the whole Example of Virtue, Death bravely confronted by Cato.
it seems as if his good Destiny had put his ill one into his hand, with which
he gave himself the Blow; seeing he had the leisure to confront and struggle
with Death, reinforcing his Courage in the greatest danger, instead of letting
it go less. And if I had been to represent him in his supreme Station, I should
have done it in the posture of tearing out his bloody Bowels, rather than with
his Sword in his hand, as did the Statuaries of his time: for, this second
Murder was much more furious than the first.

CHAP. XIV. That the Mind hinders it self.
IT IS a pleasant Imagination to fancy a Mind exactly balanced betwixt two equal
desires: for doubtless it can never pitch upon either, forasmuch as the Choice
and Application would manifest an inequality of esteem; and were we set betwixt
the Bottle and the Hamme with an equal Appetite to drink and eat, there would
doubtless be no remedy, but we must dye of Thirst and Hunger. To provide
against this Inconvenience, the Stoics, when they are asked whence this
Election in the Soul of two indifferent things does proceed, (and that makes us
out of a great number of Crowns rather take one than another, there being no
reason to incline us to such a preference) makes Answer, That this movement of
the Soul is extraordinary and irregular, that enters into us by a strange,
accidental, and fortuitous Impulse. It might rather methinks be said, that
nothing presents it self to us wherein there is not some difference, how little
soever; and that either by the Sight or Touch there is always some choice,
that, tho it be imperceptibly, tempts and attracts us. Whoever likewise shall
presuppose a packthread equally strong throughout, it is utterly impossible it
should break; for, where will you have the breaking to begin? and that it
should break altogether is not in nature. Whoever also should hereunto join the
Geometrical Propositions, that by the certainty of their Demonstrations
conclude the Contained to be greater than the Containing, the Center also to be
as great as the Circumference, and that find out two Lines incessantly
approaching each other, and that yet can never meet, and the Philosopher's
Stone, and the Quadrature of Circle, where the Reason and the Effect are so
opposite; might peradventure find some Argument to second this bold Saying of
Pliny, Solum certum nihil esse certi, Plin. l. 2. c. 7.
and homine nihil miserius aut superbius. That it is only certain there is
nothing certain, and that nothing is more miserable, or more proud than Man.

CHAP. XV. That our Desires are augmented by difficulty.
THere is no Reason that has not his contrary, say the wisest of Philosophers:
which puts me upon ruminating on the excellent Saying one of the Ancients
alleges for the contempt of Life; No Good can bring Pleasure, if not that for
the loss of which we are beforehand prepared: In aequo est dolor amissae rei,
Senec. Ep. 98.
and timor amittendae, The grief of losing a thing, and the fear of losing it,
are equal. Meaning by that, that the Fruition of Life cannot be truly pleasant
to us, if we are in fear of losing it. It might however be said on the
contrary, that we hug and embrace this Good by so much the more tenderly, and
with so much greater Affection, by how much we see it the less assured, and
fear to have it taken from us; for, as it is evident, that Fire burns with
greater Fury when Cold comes to mix with it, so our Wills are more obstinate by
being opposed: Ovid. Am. lib. 2. El. 19.
Si nunquam Danaen habuisset ahenea turris,
Non esset Danae de Jove facta parens.
A brazen Tower if Danae had not had,
She never by Jove had been a Mother made.
and that there is nothing naturally contrary to our Taste but Saciety, which
proceeds from facility; nor any thing that so much whets it, as Rarity and
Difficulty. Sen. de Ben. lib. 7. cap. 9.
Omnium rerum voluptas ipso quo debet fugare periculo crescit. The pleasure of
all things increases by the same danger that should deterr it.

Mart. lib. 4. Epig. 38.
Galla nega* satiatur amor nisi gaudia torquent.
Galla deny, be not too easily gained,
For Love will glut with Joys too soon obtained.
To keep Love in breath, Lycurgus made a Decree, that the married People of
Lacedaemonia should never enjoy one another but by stealth; and that it should
be as great a shame to take them in bed together as committing with others. The
difficulty of Assignations, the danger of Surprise, and the Shame of the
Morning, and languor, and silentium, Hor. Epod. 11.

Et latere petitus imo spiritus.
The languor, silence, and the far-fetched Sighs,
That fearing to be heard do trembling rise.
these are they that give the Haut-gout to the Sauce. How many very wantonly
pleasant Plays are made from the cleanly and modest way of speaking of the
Works of Love? Even Pleasure it self would be heightened with Pain. It is much
sweeter when it smarts, and has the Skin rippled. The Courtezan Flora said she
never lay with Pompey, but that she made him wear the Prints of her Teeth.

Quod petiere, premunt arete, Lucret. l. 4.
faciuntque dolorem
Corporis, and dentes incidunt saepe labellis:
Et stimuli subsunt, qui instigant laedere ad ipsum
Quodcunque est, rabies unde illae germina surgunt.
And so it is in every thing: Difficulty gives all things their Estimation.
Those of the Marque of Ancona, most cheerfully make their Vows to St. James,
and those of Galicia to our Lady of Loretta, they make wonderful Boasts at
Liege of the Baths of Luques, and in Tuscany of those of Aspa: there are few
Romans seen in the Fencing-Schools of Rome, which is full of French. The great
Cato also, as well as we, nauseated his Wife whilst she was his, and longed for
her when in the Possession of another. I was fain to turn out an old Stallion
into the Paddock, being he was vicious, and not to be governed when he smelt a
Mare: the facility presently sated him, as toward his own, but toward strange
Mares, and the first that past by the Pale of his Pasture, he would again fall
to his importunate Neighings and his furious Heats, as before. Our Appetite
contemns, and passes by what it has in possession, to run after that it has not.

Hor. l. 1. sat. 2.
Transvolat in medio posita, and fugientia captat.
Thou scorn'st that Lass thou may with ease enjoy, Mr. Alex. Brom.

And court'st those that are difficult and coy.
To forbid us any thing, is to make us have a mind to it.

nisi tu servare puellam
Ovid. Amo. l. 2. El. 19.
Incipis, incipiet desinere esse mea.
If thou no better guard that Girl of thine,
She Will soon begin to be no longer mine.
To give it wholly up to us, is to beget in us Contempt, Want, and abundance
fall into the same Inconvenience.

Terence.
Tibi quod superest, mihi quod desit, dolet.
Thy Superfluities do trouble thee,
And what I want, and pant for, troubles me.
Desire and Fruition do equally afflict us. The rigours of Mistresses are
troublesome, but facility, to say truth, is more, forasmuch as Discontent and
Anger spring from the esteem we have of the thing desired, heat and actuate
Love, but Saciety begets disgust; it is a blunt, dull, stupid, tired, and
slothful Passion.

Si qua volet regnare diu, contemnat amentem. Ovid. Amo.
contemnite amantes.
Sic hodie veniet, si qua negavit heri. Propert.

The Lady that would keep her Servant still,
Must in discretion sometimes use him ill;
And the same Policy with Men will do,
If they sometimes do slight their Misses too;
By which means she that yesterday said nay,
Will come and offer up her self to day.
Why did Poppea invent the use of a Mask to hide the Beauties of her Face, but
to enhance it to her Lovers? Why have they veiled, even below the Heels, those
Beauties that every one desires to show, and that every one desires to see? Why
do they cover, with so many Hindrances one over another, the Parts where our
desires and their own have their principal Seat? And to what serve those great
Bastion Farthingals, with which our Ladies fortify their Haunches, but to
allure our Appetite, and to draw us on by removing them farther from us?

Et fugit ad salices, and se cupit ante videri. Virg. Eg. 3.

And to the Osiers flies her self to hide,
But does desire to have her flight decry'd.
Propert. l. 2. ^leg. 12.
Interdum tunica duxit operta moram.
Things being laid too open to the Sight,
Do sometimes put a stop to the Delight.
To what use serves the artifice of this Virgin Modesty? this grave Coldness,
this severe Countenance, this profession to be ignorant of things that they
know better than we who instruct them in them, but to increase in us the desire
to overcome, control, and trample under foot at pleasure, all this Ceremony,
and all these Obstacles? For there is not only Pleasure, but moreover, Glory,
to conquer and debauch that soft Sweetness, and that childish Modesty, and to
reduce a cold and Matronlike Gravity to the Mercy of our ardent Desires: It Is a
glory, say they, to triumph over Modesty, Chastity, and Temperance; and whoever
disswades Ladies from those Qualities, betray both them and themselves. They
are to believe, That their Hearts tremble with affright, that the very sound of
our Words offends the purity of their Ears, that they hate us for talking so,
and only yield to our Importunity by a compulsive force. Beauty, as powerful as
it is, has not wherewithal to make it self relished, without the Mediation of
these little Arts: look into Italy, where there is the most and the finest
Beauty to be sold, how it is nevertheless necessitated to have recourse to
other means and other artifices to render it self charming, and if in truth,
whatever it may do being venal and public, it does not remain feeble and
languishing in it self. Even as in Virtue it self, of two like effects, we
notwithstanding look upon that as the best and most worthy, wherein the most
trouble and hazard is proposed. It Is an effect of the divine Providence to
suffer the holy Church to be afflicted, as we see it, with so many Storms and
Troubles, by this opposition to rouse pious Souls, and to awake them from that
drowsy Lethargy whereinto, by so long Tranquillity, they had been immerg'd. If
we should lay the loss we have sustained in the number of those who have gone
astray, in the Balance against the Benefit we have had by being again put in
breath, and by having our Zeal and Forces exercised by reason of this
Opposition; I know not whether the Utility would not surmount the Damage. We
have thought to tie the Nuptial Knot of our Marriages more fast and firm, for
having taken all means of dissolving it; but the Knot of the Will and Affection
is so much the more slackned and made loose, by how much that of Constraint is
drawn closer together. And on the contrary, that which kept the Marriages at
Rome so long in honor and inviolate, was the liberty every one that would had
to break them. They kept their Wives the better, because they might part with
them if they would: and in the full liberty of Divorces they lived fifty years
and more, before any one made use on it.

Ovid. Amo. lib. 2. El. 19.
Quod licet, ingratum est, quod non licet, acrius urit.
What Is free we are disgusted at, and slight,
What is forbidden whets the Appetite.
We might here introduce the Opinion of an Ancient upon this occasion, That
Executions rather whet than dull the edge of Vices: That they do not beget the
care of doing well, that being the work of Reason and Discipline; but only a
care not to be taken in doing ill.

Rutilius in Itinerario.
Latius excisae pestis contagia serpunt.
The Plague Sore being launc'd, the Infection spreads.
I do not know that this is true; but I experimentally know, that never Civil
Government was by that means reformed. The order and regiment of Manners depend
upon some other expedient. The Greek Histories make mention of the Agrippians,
Neighbors to Scythia, who live without either rod or stick to offend; that not
only no one attempts to attack them, but whoever can fly thither is safe, by
reason of their Virtue and Sanctity of Life, and no one is so bold as there to
lay hands upon them; and they have Applications made to them to determine the
Controversies that arise betwixt Men of other Countries. There is a certain
Nation, where the Enclosures of Gardens and Fields they would preserve, is made
only of a string of Cotton-yarn; and so fenced, is more firm and secure than
our Hedges and Ditches. Furem signata solicitant. Aperta effractarius
praeterit. Senec. Epist. 68.
Things sealed up invite a Thief. House-breakers pass by open doors.
Peradventure the facility of entering my House, amongst other things, has been a
means to preserve it from the Violence of our Civil Wars. Defense allures
Attempt, and Defiance provokes an Enemy. I enervated the Soldier's design, by
depriving the Exploit of Danger, and all matter of Military Glory, which is
wont to serve them for pretense and excuse. Whatever is bravely, is ever
honorably done, at a time when Justice is dead. I render them the Conquest of
my House cowardly and base; it is never shut to any one that knocks. My Gate
has no other Guard than a Porter, and that of ancient Custom and Ceremony; who
does not so much serve to defend it, as to offer it with more decency, and the
better grace. I have no other Guard nor Sentinel than the Stars. A Gentleman
would play the Fool to make a show of Defense, if he be not really in a
Condition to defend himself. He that lies open on one side, is every where so.
Our Ancestors did not think of building frontier Garrisons. The means of
assaulting, I mean without Battery, or Army, and of surprising our Houses,
increase every day above the means to guard them. Men's Wits are generally bent
that way. Invasion every one is concerned in, none but the Rich in Defense.
Mine was strong for the time when it was built, I have added nothing to it of
that kind, and should fear that its strength should turn against my self; to
which we are to consider, that a peaceable time would require it should be
dismantled. There is danger never to be able to regain it, and it would be very
hard to keep. For in intestine Dissentions your man may be of the Party you
fear; and where Religion is the Pretext, even a man's nearest Relations becomes
unfaithful with a color of Justice. The public Exchequer will not maintain
our domestic Garrisons; they would exhaust it. We our selves have not means to
do it without ruin, or which is more inconvenient and injurious, without
ruining the People. As to the rest, you there lose all, and even your Friends
will be more ready to accuse your want of Vigilance, and your Improvidence,
than to lament you. That so many garrisoned Houses have been lost, whereas this
of mine remains, makes me apt to believe, that they were only lost, by being
guarded. This gives an Enemy both an Invitation and color of reason. All
defense shows a face of War. Let who will come to me in God's Name; but I shall
not invite them. It Is the Retirement I have chosen for my repose from War. I
endeavor to withdraw this corner from the public Tempest, as I also do
another corner in my Soul. Our War may put on what forms it will, multiply, and
diversify it self into new Parties; for my part I shall not budge. Amongst so
many garrisoned Houses, I am the only Person of my Condition, that I know of,
who have purely entrusted mine to the Protection of Heaven; without removing
either Plate, Deeds, or Hangings. I will neither fear, nor save my self by
halfs. If a full acknowledgment can acquire the Divine Favor, it will stay
with me to the end: if not, I have however continued long enough, to render my
continuance remarkable and fit to be recorded. How? Why, I have lived thirty
Years.

CHAP. XVI. Of Glory.
THere is the Name and the thing: the Name is a Voice which denotes and
signifies the thing; the name is no part of the thing, or of the Substance;
it is a foreign piece joined to the thing; and without it, God, who is all
fullness in himself, and the height of all Perfection, cannot augment or add
any thing to himself within; but his Name may be augmented and increased by the
Blessing and Praise we attribute to his exterior Works. Which Praise, seeing
we cannot incorporate it in him, forasmuch as he can have no accession of good,
we attribute it to his Name; which is the part out of him, that is nearest to
us. Thus is it, that to God alone Glory and Honor appertain; and there is
nothing so remote from Reason, as that we should go in quest of it for our
selves; for being indigent and necessitous within, our Essence being imperfect,
and having need of Melioration, it is to that, that we ought to employ all our
endeavor. We are all hollow and empty: it is not with wind and voice that we
are to fill our selves; we want a more solid substance to repair us: a man
starved with hunger, would be very simple to seek rather to provide himself of
a gay Garment, than a good Meal: we are to look after that whereof we have most
need. As we have it in our ordinary Prayers, Gloria in excelsis Deo, in Terra
pax hominibus. St. Luke, chap. 2.
Glory be to God on high, and in Earth Peace, etc. We are in great want of
Beauty, Health, Wisdom, Virtue, and such like essential Qualities: exterior
Ornaments should be looked after when we have made Provision for necessary
things. Divinity treats amply and more pertinently of this Subject, but I am
not much versed in it. Chrisippus and Diogenes were the first and the most
constant Authors of the contempt of Glory: and maintained, that amongst all
Pleasures, there was none more dangerous, nor more to be avoided, than that
which proceeds from the Approbation of others. And in truth, Experience makes
us sensible of many very hurtful Treasons in it. There is nothing that so
poisons Princes, as flattery, nor any thing whereby wicked men more easily
obtain Credit and Favor with them: nor Pandarism so proper and usually made
use of to corrupt the Chastity of Women, than to wheedle and entertain them
with their own Prayers. The first Charm the Sirens made use of to allure
Ulysses, is of this Nature.

Deca verse nous, deca, o tres-louable Ulysse, Plutarch.

Et le plus grand honneur don't la Greece fleurise.
To us, noble Ulysses, this way, this
Thou greatest Ornament and pride of Greece.
These Philosophers said, that all the Glory of the World was not worth an
understanding man's holding out his Finger to obtain it; Gloria quantalibet quid
erit, si Gloria tantum est? Juven. Sat. 7.

What Is Glory in the highest degree
If it no more but Glory be?
I say for it alone: for it often brings several commodities along with it, for
which it may justly be desired: it acquires us good will, and renders us less
subject and exposed to the injuries of others, and the like. It was also one of
the principal Doctrines of Epicurus; for this Precept of his Sect, Conceal thy
Life, that forbids men to incumber themselves with Offices and public
Negotiations, does also necessarily presuppose a contempt of Glory, which is
the worlds approbation of those actions we produce in public. He that bids us
conceal our selves, and to have no other Concern but for our selves, and that
will not have us known to others, would much less have us honored and
glorified. He advises Idomeneus also, not in any sort to regulate his Actions
by the common reputation, or opinion; if not to avoid the other accidental
inconveniences that the contempt of men might bring upon him. Those Discourses
are in my opinion very true and rational: but we are, I know not how, double in
our selves, which is the cause that what we believe we do not believe, and
cannot disengage our selves from what we condem. Let us see the last, and dying
words of Epicurus; they are great, and worthy of such a Philosopher, and yet
they carry some marks of the recommendation of his name, and of that humor he
had decried by his Precepts. Here is a Letter that he dictated a little before
his last gasp.

Epicurus to Hermachus, health.
WHilst I was passing over the happy, and last day of my Life, I writ this; but
at the same time, afflicted with such a pain in my Bladder and Bowels, that
nothing can be greater. But it was recompensed with the Pleasure the
remembrance of my Inventions and Doctrines suggested to my Soul. Now, as the
affection thou have ever from thy Infancy borne toward me, and Philosophy does
require, take upon thee the Protection of Metrodorus his Children.

This is the Letter. And that which makes me interpret that the Pleasure he
says he had in his Soul, concerning his Inventions, has some reference to the
Reputation he hoped for after his Death, is the manner of his Will. In which he
gives order, that Aminomachus and Timocrates, his Heirs, should every January
defray the Expense for the Celebration of his Nativity, that Hermachus should
appoint; and also the expense that should be made the twentieth of every Moon
in entertaining of the Philosophers, his Friends, who should assemble in Honor
of the Memory of him and Metrodorus. Carneades was Head of the contrary
Opinion: and maintained that Glory was to be desired for it self, even as we
embrace our Posthumes for themselves, having no Knowledge nor Enjoyment of
them. This Opinion was more universally followed, as those commonly are that
are most suitable to our Inclinations. Aristotle gives it the first place
amongst eternal Goods: and avoids, as too extreme Vices, the immoderate either
seeking or evading it. I believe that if we had the Books Cicero has writ upon
this Subject, we should there find fine Stories, for he was so possessed with
this Passion, that if he had dared, I think he could willingly have fallen into
the excess that others did, that Virtue it self was not to be coveted, Cicero
very ambitious of Glory.
but upon the account of the Honor that always attends it. Paulum sepultae
distat inertiae Hor. l. 4. Ode. 9.

Celata virtus --
Virtue, if concealed, does
Little differ from dead Sloth.
Which is an Opinion so false, that I am vexed it could ever enter into the
Understanding of a man that was honored with the name of a Philosopher. If
this was true, Men should not be Virtuous but in public, and he should be no
further concerned to keep the operation of the Soul, which is the true seat of
Virtue, regular and in order, than as they are to arrive at the knowledge of
others. Is there no more in it then but only slily, and with Circumspection to
do ill? If thou know, says Carneades, of a Serpent lurking in a place, where
without suspicion, a Person is going to sit down, by whose Death thou expect'st
an Advantage, thou do ill, if thou do not give him caution of his Danger;
and so much the more because the Action is to be known by none but thy self. If
we do not take up of our selves a rule of well doing, if Impunity passes with
us for Justice, to how many sorts of Wickedness shall we every day abandon our
selves? I do not find what Sp. Peduceus did, in faithfully restoring the
Treasure that C. Plotius had committed to his sole Secrecy and Trust; (a thing
that I have often done my self) so commendable, as I should think it an
execrable baseness had we done otherwise. And think it of good use in our days
to introduce the Example of P. Sextilius Ruffus, whom Cicero accuses to have
entered upon an Inheritance contrary to his Conscience, not only not against
Law, but even by the Determination of the Laws themselves. And M. Crassus, and
Q. Hortensius, who, by reason of their Authority and Power, having been called
in by a Stranger to share in the Succession of a forged Will, that so he might
secure his own part; satisfied themselves with having no hand in the Forgery,
and refused not to make their Advantage, and to come in for a share: secure
enough if they could shroud themselves from Accusations, Witnesses, and the
Cognizance of the Laws. Meminerint Deum se habere testem, Cicero de off. l. 3.
id est (ut ego arbitror) mentem suam. Let them consider they have God to
witness, that is (as I interpret it) their own Consciences. Virtue is a very
vain and frivolous thing, if it derives its recommendation from Glory. And it is
to no purpose that we endeavor to give it a Station by it self, and separate
it from Fortune; for what is more accidental than Reputation? Profecto Fortuna,
in omni re dominatur: ea res cunctas ex libidine, Salust.
magis quam ex vero celebrat, obscuratque. Fortune rules in all things, and
does advance and depress things more out of her own Will, than Right and
Justice. So to order it that Actions may be known and seen, is purely the work
of Fortune; it is Chance that helps us to glory, according to its own temerity.
I have often seen her go along with Merit, and often very much exceed it. He
that first liken'd Glory to a shadow, did better than he was aware of. They are
both of them things excellently vain. Glory also, like a shadow, goes sometimes
before the Body, and sometimes in length infinitely exceeds it. They that
instruct Gentlemen only to employ their Valor for the obtaining of Honor:
Quasi non sit honestum, Cicero de off. l. 1.
quod nobilitatum non sit. As though it were not a Virtue unless ennobled. What
do they intend by that, but to instruct them never to hazard themselves if they
are not seen, and to observe well, if there be Witnesses present, who may carry
News of their Valor; whereas a thousand Occasions of well doing present
themselves, when we cannot be taken notice of? How many brave Actions are
buried in the crowd of a Battle? Whoever shall take upon him to censure
another Behavior in such a Confusion, is not very busy himself; and the
Testimony he shall give of his Companions Deportments, will be Evidence against
himself. Vera, and sapiens Animi magnitudo honestum illud quod maxim naturam
sequitur, in factis positum, non in Gloria judicat. The true and wise
magnanimity judges, that the bravery which most follows Nature, more consists
in Act than Glory. All the Glory that I pretend to derive from my Life, is that
I have lived it in quiet. In quiet, not according to Metrodorus, Archesilans,
or Aristippus, but according to my self; for seeing Philosophy has not been
able to find out any way to tranquillity that is good in common, let every one
seek it in particular. To what do Caesar and Alexander owe the infinite
grandeur of their Renown, but to Fortune? How many Men has she extinguished in
the beginning of their Progress, of whom we have no Knowledge; who brought as
much Courage to the Work as they, if their adverse hap had not cut them off in
the first sally of their Arms? Amongst so many and so great Dangers, I do not
remember I have any where read, that Caesar was ever wounded; a thousand have
fallen in less Dangers, than the least of those he went through. A great many
brave Actions must be expected to be performed without Witness, and so lost,
before one turn to account. A man is not always on the top of a Breach, or at
the head of an Army in the sight of his General, as upon a Scaffold. A man is
often surprised betwixt the Hedge and the Ditch, he must run the hazard of his
Life against a Hen-roost, he must bolt four rascally Musketeers out of a Barn,
he must prick out single from his Party, and alone make some Attempts,
according as Necessity will have it. And whoever will observe, will, I believe,
find it experimentally true, that Occasions of the least Luster, are ever the
most dangerous: and that in the Wars of our own Times there have more brave Men
been lost in Occasions of little moment, and in the dispute about some little
paltery Fort, than in Places of greater Importance, and where their Valors
might have been more honorably employed. Who thinks his Death unworthy of him,
if he do not fall in some signal Occasions; instead of illustrating his Death,
does wilfully obscure his Life, suffering in the mean time many very just
Occasions of hazarding himself to slip out of his Hands. And every just one is
illustrious enough: every man's Conscience being a sufficient Trumpet to him.
Gloria nostra est, Testimonium Conscientiae nostrae. Corin. 2. chap. 1. ver. 12.
For our rejoicing is this, the Testimony of our Conscience. Who is only a good
Man that Men may know it, and that he may be the better esteemed when it is
known; who will not do well, but upon Condition that his Virtue may be known to
Men, is one from whom much Service is not to be expected.

Orlando. Canto. 11.
Credo ch' el resto di quel verno, cose
Facesse degne di tener ne conto,
Ma fur fin a quel tempo si nascose,
Che non e colpa mia s'hor 'nor le conto,
Porche Orlando a far 'opre virtuose
Piu ch'a narra le poi sempre era pronto,
Ne may fu alcun' de li suoi fatti espresso,
Senon quando hebbei testimonii appresso.
The rest o'th Winter I presume was spent
In Actions worthy of eternal Fame;
Which at the end was so, in Darkness pent,
That if I name them not, I Am not to blame,
Orlando's noble Mind being more bent
To do great Acts, than boast him of the same;
So that no Deeds of his were ever known,
But those that luckily had lookers on.
A Man must go to the War upon the account of Duty, and expect the Recompense
that never fails brave and worthy Actions, how private and concealed soever,
not so much as Virtuous Thoughts; It Is the Satisfaction that a well disposed
Conscience receives in it self, to do well. A Man must be valiant for himself,
and upon the account of the Advantage it is to him, to have his Courage seated
in a firm and secure place against the Assaults of Fortune.

Virtus repulsae nescia sordidae,
Intaminatis fulget honoribus.
Nec sumit, aut ponit secures
Arbitrio popularis aurae.
Virtue, that n'ere Repulse admits, By Sir Tho* Hawkins,

In taintless honors glorious sits,
Nor takes, or leaves Dignities
Raised with the Noise of vulgar Cries.
It is not for outward show that the Soul is to play its part, but for our
selves within, where no Eyes can pierce but our own; there she defends us from
the fear of Death, of Pains, and Shame it self: she there arms us against the
loss of our Children, Friends, and Fortunes: and when Opportunity presents it
self, she leads us on to the Hazards of War. Non emolumento aliquo, Cicero*
sed ipsius honestatis decore. Not for any Profit or Advantage, but for the
Decency of Virtue. A much greater Advantage, and more worthy to be coveted and
hoped for, than Honor and Glory; Honor what is it.
which is no other than the favorable Judgment is given of us. A dozen men
must be called out of a whole Nation to judge of an Acre of Land, and the
Judgment of our Inclinations and Actions, the hardest, and most important thing
that is, we refer to the Voice, and determinations of the Rabble, the Mother of
Ignorance, Injustice, and Inconstancy. Is it reasonable that the Life of a wise
Man should depend upon the Judgment of Fools? An quidquam stultius, Elian.
Varro.
quam quos singulos contemnas, eos aliquid putare esse universos? Can any thing
be more foolish, than to think that those you despise single, can be any other
when joined together? He that makes it his Business to please them, will have
enough to do, and never have done; it is a Mark that never is to be reached or
hit. Nil tam inestimabile est, quam animi multitudinis. Nothing is to be so
little esteemed, as the Minds of the Multitude. Demetrius pleasantly said of
the Voice of the People, that he made no more account of that which came from
above, than of that which sum'd from below. Cic. de Fin.
Cicero says more, Ego hoc judico, si quando turpe non sit, tamen non esse non
turpe, quum id a multitudine landatur. I am of Opinion, that though a thing be
not foul in it self, yet it cannot but become so when commended by the
Multitude. No Art, no activity of Wit could conduct our steps so as to follow
so wandering and so irregular a Guide. In this windy Confusion of the Noise of
vulgar Reports and Opinions that drive us on, no way worth any thing can be
chosen. Let us not propose to our selves so floating and wavering an end; let
us follow constantly after Reason, let the public Approbation follow us there,
if it will, and it wholly depending upon Fortune, we have no Reason sooner to
expect it by any other way than that. Though I would not follow the right way
because it is right, I should however follow it for having experimentally
found, that at the end of the reckoning, it is commonly the most happy, and of
greatest Utility. Dedit hoc providentia hominibus munus, ut honesta magis
juvarent. This Gift Providence has given to men, that honest things should be
the most delightful. The Mariner said thus to Neptune, O God, thou may save
me if thou will, and if thou will thou may destroy me; but however I will
steer my Rudder true. I have seen in my time a thousand Men of easy and
ambiguous Natures, and that no one doubted but they were more worldly wise than
I, throw themselves away, where I have saved one.

Risi successus posse carere dolos. Ovid Epist. penult.

I have laughed I must confess,
To see cunning want Success.
Paulus Aemylius, going in the glorious Expedition of Macedonia, above all
things charged the People of Rome, not to speak of his Actions during his
Absence. O, the License of Judgments is a great disturbance to great Affairs!
Forasmuch as every one has not the Constancy of Fabius against common adverse
and injurious ways: who rather suffered his Authority to be dissected by the
vain Fancies of Men, than to go less in his Charge with a favorable Reputation
and the popular Applause. There is, I know not what natural sweetness in
hearing a man's self commended; but we are a great deal too fond of it.

Laudari haud metuam, Perseus Sat. 1.
neque enim mihi cornea fibra est,
Sed recti finemque extremumque esse recuso
Euge tuum, and belle. --
I love to be commended I confess,
My Heart is not of Horn, but nevertheless
I must deny the only end and aim
Of doing well is to hear men exclaim,
O worthy Man! O noble Act!
I care not so much what I am in the Opinion of others, as what I am in my own.
I would be rich of my self, and not by borrowing. Strangers see nothing but
Events and outward Apparences; every body can set a good Face on the matter,
when they have trembling and terror within. They do not see my Heart, they see
but by my Countenance. It Is with good Reason that Men decry the Hypocrisy that
is in War; for what is more easy to an old Soldier, than to shift in a time
of Danger, and to counterfeit the brave, when he has no more Heart than a
Chicken? There are so many ways to avoid hazarding a man's own Person, that we
have deceived the World a thousand times, before we come to be engaged in a
real Danger: and even then, finding our selves in an inevitable necessity of
doing something, we can make shift for that time to conceal our Apprehensions
with setting a good Face on the Business, though the Heart beats within; and
whoever had the use of the Platonic Ring, which renders those invisible that
wear it, if turned inward toward the palm of the Hand; a great many would very
often hide themselves when they ought most to appear; and would repent being
placed in so honorable a post, where Necessity must make them brave.

Falsus honor juvat, Hor. lib. 1. Epist. 16.
and mendax infamia terret
Quem nisi mendosum, and mendacem?
False Honor pleases, R. F.
and false Infamy
Affrights, whom? those that love to hear a lie.
Thus we see how all the Judgments that are founded upon external Apparences,
are marvellously uncertain and doubtful; and that there is no so certain
Testimony as every one is to himself. In these other, how many Pedy's are made
Companions of our Glory? He that stands firm in an open Trench, what does he in
that do more than fifty poor Pioneers, who open him the way, and cover it with
their own Bodies for five pence a day pay, have done before him?

-- non quicquid turbida Roma Perseus Sat. 1.

Elevet, accedas, examenque improbum in illa
Castiges trutina, nec te quaesiveris extra.
Don't follow turbid Rome's blind senceless ways
Of loading every thing is done with Praise;
Of that false Balance trust not to the test,
And out of thee make of thy self no quest.
The dispersing and scattering our names into many Mouths, we call making them
more great; we will have them there well received, and that this increase turn
to their Advantage, which is all that can be excusable in this Design; but the
excess of this Disease proceeds so far, that many covet to have a Name be it
what it will. Trogus Pompeius says of Herostratus and Titus Livius of Manlius
Capitolinus, that they were more ambitious of a great Reputation, than a good
one. This Vice is very common. We are more sollicitous that Men speak of us,
than how they speak; and it is enough for us that our Names are often mentioned,
be it after what manner it will. It should seem, that to be known, is in some
sort to have a Man's Life and its duration in another's keeping. I for my part
hold, that I am not but in my self, and of that other Life of mine which lies
in the Knowledge of my Friends, to consider it naked and simply in it self, I
know very well that I am sensible of no Fruit nor Enjoyment, but by the Vanity
of a fantastic Opinion; and when I shall be dead, I shall be much less
sensible of it; and shall withal absolutely lose the use of those real
Advantages that sometimes accidentally follow it; I shall have no more handle
whereby to take hold of Reputation; neither shall it have any whereby to take
hold of, or to cleave to me. For, to expect that my Name should be advanced by
it, in the first place, I have no Name that is enough my own; of two that I
have, one is common to all my Race, and even to others also. There are two
Families at Paris and Montpellier, whose surname is Montaigne; another in
Brittany, and another Montaigne in Xaintonge. The Transposition of one Syllable
only is enough to ravel our Affairs, so that I shall peradventure share in
their Glory, and they shall partake of my Shame; and moreover, my Ancestors
have formerly been surnamed Eyquem, a Name wherein a Family well known in
England, is at this day concerned. As to my other Name, every one may take it
that will. And so perhaps I may honor a Porter in my own stead. And besides,
though I had a particular Distinction by my self, what can it distinguish when
I am no more? Can it point out, and favor Inanity? -- nunc levior cippus non
imprimit ossa, Ibidem.

Laudat posteritas, nunc non e manibus illis,
Nunc non e tumulo fortunataque favilla
Nascuntur violae? --
Will a less Tomb, composed of smaller Stones,
Press with less weight upon the under Bones?
Posterity may praise them, why, what tho?
Can yet their Manes such a Gift bestow,
As to make Violets from their Ashes grow?
But of this I have spoken elsewhere. As to what remains, in a great Battle
where ten thousand Men are maimed or killed, there are not fifteen that are
taken notice of. It must be some very eminent greatness, or some consequence of
great Importance, that Fortune has added to it, that must signalize a private
Action, not of a Harquebuser only, but of a great Captain; for to kill a man,
or two, or ten, to expose a Man's self bravely to the utmost Peril of Death, is
indeed something in every one of us, because we there hazard all; but for the
Worlds concern, they are things so ordinary, and so many of them are every day
seen, and there must of Necessity be so many of the same kind to produce any
notable Effect, that we cannot expect any particular Renown.

Juven. sat. 13.
-- casus multis hic cognitus, ac jam
Tritus, and e medio fortunae ductus acervo.
The action once was famed, but now worn old,
With common acts of Fortune is enrolled.
Of so many thousands of valiant men that have died within these fifteen years
in France, with their Swords in their hands, not a hundred have come to our
knowledge. The memory, not of the Commanders only, but of Battles and Victories
is buried and gone. The Fortunes of above half of the world, for want of a
Record, stir not from their place, and vanish without duration. If I had
unknown Events in my possession, I should think with great ease to outdo those
that are recorded in all sorts of Examples. Is it not strange, that even of the
Greeks and Romans, amongst so many Writers, and Witnesses, and so many rare and
noble Exploits, so few are arrived at our knowledge? Aeneid. l. 7.
Ad nos vix tenuis famae perlabitur aura.
An obscure rumor scarce is hither come.
It will be much if a hundred years hence it be remembered in gross, that in our
times there were Civil Wars in France. The Lacedaemonians entering into Battle,
The Muses sacrificed unto by the Lacedaemonians, and why.
sacrificed to the Muses, to the end that their Actions might be well and
worthily writ; looking upon it as a Divine, and no ordinary favor, that brave
Acts should find Witnesses that could give them Life and Memory. Do we expect
that at every Musket shot we receive, and at every hazard we run, there must
be a Register ready to record them? and besides, a hundred Registers may enroll
them, whose Commentaries will not last above three days, and they shall never
come to the sight of any one. We have not the thousandth part of ancient
Writings; it is fortune that gives them a shorter or longer Life according to
her favor; and it is lawful to doubt whether those we have be not the worst,
having not seen the rest. Men do not write Histories of things of so little
moment: a man must have been General in the Conquest of an Empire, he must have
won two and fifty set Battles, and always the weaker in number, as Caesar did.
Ten thousand brave Fellows, and several great Captains lost their lives bravely
in his Service, whose Names lasted no longer than their Wives and Children
lived: Quos fama obscura recondit. Aeneid. l. 5.
Even those we see behave themselves the best; three months, or three years
after they have been knocked on the Head, they are no more spoken of than if
they had never been. Whoever will justly consider, and with due proportion, of
what kind of men, and of what sorts of actions Glory supports it self, in the
Records of History will find, that there are very few Actions, and very few
Persons of our times who can there pretend any right. How many worthy men have
we seen survive their own Reputation, who have seen and suffered the Honor and
Glory most justly acquired in their Youth, extinguished in in their own
presence? And for three years of this fantastic and imaginary Life, we must go
and throw away our true and essential Life, and engage our selves in a
perpetual Death? The Sages propose to themselves a nobler and more just end in
so important an Enterprise. Recte facti, Seneca.
fecisse merces est: officii fructus, ipsum officium est. The reward of a thing
well done is to have done it: the fruit of a good Office, is the Office it
self. It were peradventure excusable in a Painter, or any other Artizan, or yet
in a Rhetorician, or a Grammarian, to endeavor to raise themselves a Name by
their Works; but the actions of Virtue are too noble in themselves, to seek any
other reward than from their own value, and especially to seek it in the vanity
of Humane Judgments. If this false Opinion nevertheless be of that use to the
Public, as to keep men in their duty; if the People are thereby stirred up to
Virtue; if Princes are touched to see the world bless the memory of Trajan, and
abominate that of Nero; if it moves them to see the name of that great Beast,
once so terrible, and feared by every Schoolboy, so freely cursed and reviled,
let it in the name of God increase, and be as much as possibly, nurss'd up,
cherished, and countenanced amongst us. And Plato, bending his whole Endeavor
to make his Citizens Virtuous, does also advise them not to despise the good
esteem of the People; and says, that it falls out by a certain Divine
Inspiration, that even the wicked themselves oft-times, as well by Word as
Opinion, can rightly distinguish the Virtuous from the Wicked. This Person and
his Tutor are both mavelous bold Artificers, every where to add Divine
Operations and Revelations where humane force is wanting. And peradventure for
this Reason it was, that Timon, railing at him, called him the great forger of
Miracles. Cicero de Not. Deor.
Vt trajici Poetae confugiunt ad Deum, cum explicare argumenti exitum non
possunt. As tragic Poets fly to some God, when they cannot explain the issue
of their Argument. Seeing that Men by their insufficiency cannot pay themselves
well enough with current Money, let the counterfeit be superaded. It Is a way
that has been practiced by all the Legislators; and there is no Government that
has not some mixture either of ceremonial Vanity, or of false Opinion, that
serves for a curb to keep the People in their Duty. It Is for this that most of
them have their fabulous Originals and Beginnings, and so enriched with
supernatural Mysteries. It Is this that has given Credit to Bastard Religions,
and caused them to be countenanced by men of Understanding; and for this that
Numa and Sextorius, to possess their Men with a better Opinion of them, fed
them with this Foppery; one, That the Nympth Egeria, the other, That his white
Hind, brought them all their Resolutions from the Gods. And the Authority that
Numa gave to his Laws under the Title of a Patronage of this Goddess;
Zeroaster, Legislator of the Bactrians and Persians, gave to his under the name
of Oromazis: Trismegistus Legislator of the Egyptians, under that of Mercury;
Xamobxis Legislator of the Scythians, under that of Vesta: Charondas Legislator
of the Chalcedonians, under that of Saturn: Minos Legislator of the Candiots,
under that of Jupiter: Licurgus Legislator of the Lacedaemonians, under that of
Apollo: and Draco, and Solon, Legislators of the Athenians, under that of
Minerva. And every Government has a God at the head of it; others falsely, that
truly which Moses set over the Jews at their departure out of Egypt. The
Religion of of the Bedoins, as the Sire de Joinville reports, amongst other
things, enjoined a Belief, that the Soul of him amongst them who died for his
Prince, went into another more happy Body, more beautiful, and more robust than
the former; by which means they much more willingly ventured their Lives:
Lucan. lib. 1.
In ferrum men's prona viris, animaeque capaces
Mortis, and ignavum est rediturae parcere vitae.
Men covet wounds, and strive Death to embrace,
To save a Life, that is to return, is base.
This is a very comfortable, however an erroneous Belief. Every Nation has many
such Examples of it is own: but this Subject would require a Treatise by it
self. To add one word more to my former Discourse, I would advise the Ladies no
more to call that Honor, which is but their Duty, Cicero de fin. lib. 2.
Vt enim consuetudo loquitur, id solum dicitur honestum, quod est populari fama
gloriosum: According to the vulgar Chat, which only approves that for laudable,
that is glorious by the public Voice; their Duty is the mark, their Honor but
the outward rind. Neither would I advise them to give that excuse for payment
of their denial: for I presuppose that their Intentions, their Desire, and
Will, which are things wherein their Honor is not at all concerned, forasmuch
as nothing appears without, are much better regulated than the effects.

Quae quia non liceat, non facit, illa facit. Ovid. Amo. l. 3. El. 4.

She, who not sins, 'cause it unlawful is,
In being therefore Chaste has done amiss.
The Offense both toward God, and in the Conscience, would be as great to
desire as to do it. And besides, they are Actions so private and secret of
themselves, as would be easily enough kept from the Knowledge of others wherein
the Honor Consists, if they had not another respect to their Duty, and the
Affection they bear to Chastity for it self. Every Woman of Honor, will much
rather choose to lose her Honor, than to hurt her Conscience.

CHAP. XVII. Of Presumption.
THere is another sort of Glory, which is the having too good an opinion of our
own Worth. It Is an inconsiderate Affection, with which we flatter our selves,
and that represents us to our selves other than we truly are. Like the passion
of Love, that lends beauties and graces to the Person it does embrace; and that
makes those who are caught with it, with a depraved and corrupt Judgment,
consider the thing they love, other and more perfect than it is. I would not
nevertheless for fear of failing on the other side, that a man should not know
himself aright, or think himself less than he is, the Judgment ought in all
things to keep it self upright and just: it is all the reason in the world he
should discern in himself, as well as in others, what Truth sets before him; if
it be Caesar, let him boldly think himself the greatest Captain in the world.
We are nothing but Ceremony; Ceremony carries us away, and we leave the
Substance of things: we hold by the Branches, and quit the Trunk. We have
taught the Ladies to blush when they hear that but named, that they are not at
all afraid to do: we dare not call our members by their right names, and are
not afraid to employ them in all sorts of Debauches. Ceremony forbids us to
express by words things that are lawful and natural, and we obey it: Reason
forbids us to do things unlawful and ill, and no body obeys it. I find my self
here fettered by the Laws of Ceremony; for it neither permits a man to speak
well of himself, nor ill. We will leave her there for this time. They whom
fortune (call it good or ill) has made to pass their Lives in some eminent
degree, may by their public Actions manifest what they are: but they whom she
has only employed in the crowd, and of whom no body will say a word unless they
speak themselves, are to be excused if they take the boldness to speak of
themselves to such whose Interest it is to know them; by the Example of
Lucilius, Ille velut fidis arcana sodalibus olim Hor. lib. 2. Sat. 1.

Credebat libris, neque si male cesserat, usquam
Decurrens alio, neque si been: quo fit ut omnis*
Votiva pateat veluti descripta tabella
Vita senis. --
His way was in his Books to speak his mind Sir Richard Fenshaw.

As freely, as his Secrets he would tell
To a tried Friend, and took it ill, or well
He held his Custom. Hence it came to pass
The old man's Life is there as in a Glass.
He always committed to Paper his Actions and Thoughts, and there portrayed
himself, such as he found himself to be. Nec id Rutilio, Tacitus.
and Scauro citra fidem, aut obtrectationi fuit. Nor were Rutilius or Scaurus
misbeliev'd, or condemned for so doing. I remember then, that from my Infancy
there was observed in me I know not what kind of Carriage and Behavior, that
seemed to relish of Pride and Arrogance. I will say this by the way, that it is
not inconvenient to have Propensions so proper and incorporated into us, that
we have not the means to feel and be aware of them. And of such natural
Inclinations the Body will retain a certain bent, without our Knowledge or
Consent. It was an Affectation confederate with his Beauty, that made Alexander
carry his Head on one side, and Alcibiades to lisp; Julius Caesar scratched his
Head with one Finger, which is the fashion of a Man full of troublesome
Thoughts: and Cicero, as I remember, was wont to tweak his Nose, a sign of a
Man given to scoffing. Such Motions as these may imperceptibly happen in us:
there are other artificial ones which I meddle not with; as Salutations and
Congees, by which Men for the most part unjustly acquire the Reputation of
being humble and courteous; or perhaps, humble out of Pride. I am prodigal
enough of my Hat, especially in Summer, and never am so saluted, but I pay it
again, from Persons of what quality soever, unless they be in my own
dependence. I should make it my Request to some Princes that I know, that they
would be more sparing of that Ceremony, and bestow that Courtesy where it is
more due; for being so indiscreetly and indifferently conferred on all, they are
thrown away to no purpose, if they be without respect of Persons, they lose
their Effect. Amongst irregular Countenances, let us not forget that severe one
of the Emperor Constantius, that always in public held his Head upright and
steady, without bending or turning on either side, not so much as to look upon
those who saluted him on one side, planting his Body in a stiff immovable
posture, without suffering it to yield to the Motion of his Coach; not daring
so much as to spit, blow his Nose, or wipe his Face before People. I know not
whether the Gestures that were observed in me were of this first quality, and
whether I had really any secret propension to this Vice, as it might well be;
and I cannot be responsible for the Motions of the Body: but as to the Motions
of the Soul, I must here confess that I am sensible of something of that kind
there. Presumption divided into two parts.
This Glory consists of two parts, the one in setting too great a value upon
our selves, and the other in setting too little a value upon others. As to the
one, methinks these Considerations ought in the first place to be of some
force. I feel my self importuned by an Error of the Soul that displeases me,
both as it is unjust, and as it is troublesome. I attempt to correct it, but I
cannot root it out, which is, that I lessen the just value of things that I
possess, and overvalue others, because they are foreign, absent, and none of
mine. This Humor spreads very far. As the prerogative of the Authority which
makes Husbands look upon their own Wives with a vicious disdain, and many
Fathers their Children, so do I: and betwixt two equal Merits should always be
swayed against my own. Not so much that the jealousy of my Preferment, and the
bettering of my Affairs does trouble my Judgment, and hinders me from
satisfying my self, as that Dominion of it self begets a Contempt of what is
our own, and over which we have an absolute Command. Foreign Governments,
Manners, and Languages, insinuate themselves into my esteem; and I am very
sensible that Latin allures me by the Favor of it is Dignity, to value it above
it is due, as it does Children, and the common sort of People. The Economy,
House, and Horse of my Neighbor, though no better than my own, I prize above
my own, because they are not mine. Besides that, I am very ignorant in my own
Affairs; I am astonished at the assurance that every one has of himself:
whereas there is not almost any thing that I am sure I know, or that I dare be
responsible to my self that I can do: I have not my means of doing any thing
stated and ready, and am only instructed after the effect, as doubtful of my
own force as I am of another; whence it comes to pass, that if I happen to do
any thing commendable, I attribute it more to my Fortune than Industry:
forasmuch as I design every thing by chance, and in fear. I have this also in
general, that of all the Opinions Antiquity has held of men in gross, I most
willingly embrace, and most adhere to those that most contemn and undervalue
us. Methinks Philosophy has never so fair a Game to play as when it falls upon
our Vanity and Presumption; when it most lays open their Irresolution,
Weakness, and Ignorance. I look upon the too good Opinion that Man has of
himself to be the nursing Mother of all the most false, both public and
private Opinions. Those People, who ride astride upon the Epicicle of Mercury,
who see so far into the Heavens, are worse to me than a Tooth-drawer that comes
to draw my Teeth: for in my Study, the Subject of which is Man, finding so
great a variety of Judgments, so great a Labyrinth of Difficulties one upon
another, so great diversity and incertainty, even in the School of Wisdom it
self, you may judge, seeing those People could not resolve upon the knowledge
of themselves, and their own condition, which is continually before their Eyes,
and within them, seeing they do not know how that moves which they themselves
move, nor how to give us a Description of the Springs they themselves govern
and make use of; how can I believe them about the ebbing and flowing of Nile.
The curiosity of knowing things, has been given to Man for a Scourge, says the
holy Scripture. But to return to what concerns my self; I think it very hard,
that any other should have a meaner Opinion of himself, nay, that any other
should have a meaner Opinion of me than I have of my self. I look upon my self
as one of the common sort, saving in this, that I have no better an Opinion of
my self; guilty of the meanest and most popular defects, but not disowned or
excused; and do not value my self upon any other account than because I know my
own value. If there be any Glory in the case, it is superficially infused into
me by the treachery of my Complexion, and has no Body that my Judgment can
discern. I am sprinkled, but not tincted. For in Truth, as to the effects of
the Mind, there is no part of me, be it what it will, with which I am
satisfied: and the Approbation of others makes me not think the better of my
self; my Judgment is tender and tickle, especially in things that concern my
self; I feel my self float and waver by reason of my weakness. I have nothing
of my own that satisfies my Judgment: my sight is clear and regular enough, but
in opening it, it is apt to dazzle; as I most manifestly find in Poesy. I love
it infinitely, and am able to give a tolerable Judgment of other men's Works:
but in good earnest, when I apply my self to it, I play the Child, and am not
able to endure my self. A Man may play the fool in every thing else, but not in
Poetry.

Horace de Art Poet.
-- Mediocribus esse Poetis
Non dii, non homines, non concessere columnae.
Ben Johnson.
But neither Men, nor Gods, nor Pillars meant
Poets should ever be indifferent.
I would to God this Sentence was writ over the Doors of all our Printers, to
forbid the entrance of so many Rimers.

Mart. l. 12. Epig. 64.
-- verum
Nihil securius est malo Poeta.
-- but the truth is this --
Naught more secure than a bad Poet is.
Why have not we such People? Dyonysius the Father valued himself so much upon
nothing as his Poetry. At the Olympic Games, with Chariots surpassing the
others in Magnificence, he sent also Poets and Musicians to present his Verses,
with Tents and Pavillions royally gilt and hung with Tapistry. When his Verses
came to be recited, the excellency of the Pronunciation did at first attract
the attention of the People; but when they afterward came to poise the
meanness of the Composition, they first entered into disdain, and continuing to
nettle their Judgments, presently proceeded to Fury, and ran to pull down, and
tear to pieces all his Pavilions: and in that his Chariots neither performed
any thing to purpose in the course; and that the Ship which brought back his
People failed of making Sicily, and was by the Tempest driven and wracked upon
the Coast of Tarantum, they did certainly believe was thorough the Anger of the
Gods, incensed, as they themselves were, against that paltry Poem; and even the
Mariners who escaped from the wrack, seconded this Opinion of the People: to
which also the Oracle that foretold his Death seemed to subscribe; which was,
That Dionysius should be near his end, when he should have overcome those who
were better than himself, which he interpreted of the Carthaginians, who
surpassed him in Power; and having War with them, often declined the Victory,
not to incur the Sense of this Prediction. But he understood it ill; for the
God pointed at the time of the Advantage that by Favor and Injustice he
obtained at Athens over the Tragic Poets, better than himself, having caused
his own Play called the Leineicus to be acted in Emulation. Presently after
which Victory he died, and partly of the excessive Joy he conceived at the
Success. What I find tolerable of mine, (...) not so really, and in it self:
but in comparion of other worse things, that I see are well enough received. I
envy the Happiness of those that can please and hug themselves, in what they
do, for it is a very easy thing to be so pleased, because a Man extracts that
pleasure from himself, especially if he be constant in his self-conceit. I know
a Poet, against whom both the Intelligent in Poetry, and the Ignorant, abroad
and at home, both Heaven and Earth, exclaim, that he understands very little in
it; and yet for all that, he has never a whit the worse opinion of himself: but
is always falling upon some new Piece, always contriving some new Invention,
and still persists; by so much the more obstinate, as it only concerns him to
stand up in his own Defense. My Works are so far from pleasing me, that as often
as I review them they disgust me: Ovid de Ponto, lib. 1. Eleg. 6.
Cum relego, scripsisse pudet, quia plurima cerno,
Me quoque qui feci, judice digna lini.
When I peruse, I blush at what I Have Writ,
Seeing it is only for the Fire fit.
I have always an Idea in my Soul, which presents me a better Form than that I
have made use of; but I cannot catch it, nor fit it to my purpose; and yet even
that Idea is but of the meaner sort, by which I conclude, that the productions
of those great Souls of former times, as very much beyond the utmost stretch of
my Imagination, or my wish: their Writings do not only satisfy and fill me,
but they astonish me, and ravish me with Admiration. I judge of their Beauty, I
see it, if not to the utmost, yet so far at least as it is possible for me to
aspire. Whatever I undertake, I owe a Sacrifice to the Graces, as Plutarch says
of some one, to make a return for their Favor. -- si quid enim placet,
Si quid dulce hominum sensibus influit,
Debentur lepidis omnia gratiis.
If any thing does please that I do write,
Into Men's Minds if it infuse delight,
All Is to the lovely Graces due.
They abandon me throughout: all I write is rude, polishing and Beauty are
wanting: I cannot set things off to any advantage, my handling adds nothing to
the Matter; for which Reason I must have it forcible, very full, and that has
luster of its own. If I pitch upon Subjects that are popular and gay, it is to
follow my own Inclination, who do not affect a grave and ceremonious Wisdom, as
the World does; and to make my self more spritely, but not to make my style
more wanton, Montaigns Style.
which would rather have them grave and severe, at least, if I may call an
inform and irregular way of speaking, a vulgar jargon, and a proceeding without
Definition, Division, and without Conclusion, perplexed like that of Amafanius
and Raberius, a Style. I can neither please nor delight, much less ravish any
one: the best Story in the World would be spoiled by my handling. I cannot
speak but in earnest; and am totally unprovided of that Facility which I
observe in many of my Acquaintance, of entertaining the first comers, and
keeping a whole company in Breath, or taking up the care of a Prince with all
sorts of Discourse, without being weary: they never wanting Matter, by reason
of the Faculty and Grace they have in taking hold of the first thing is
started, and accommodating it to the Humor and Capacity of those with whom they
have to do. Princes do not much affect solid Discourses, nor I to tell Stories.
The first and easiest Reasons, which are commonly the best taken, I know not
how to employ. I am an ill Orator to the common sort. I am apt of every thing
to say the utmost that I know. Cicero is of Opinion, that in Treatises of
Philosophy the exordium is the hardest part: which, if it be true, I am wise in
sticking to the Conclusion. And yet we are to know how to wind the string to
all Notes, and the sharpest is that which is the most seldom touched. There is
at least as much perfection in elevating an empty, as in supporting a weighty
thing. A man must sometimes superficially handle things, and sometimes push
them home. I know very well, that most Men keep themselves in this lower form,
for not conceiving things otherwise than by this outward bark: but I likewise
know, that the greatest Masters, and Xenophon and Plato are often seen to stoop
to this low and popular manner of speaking and treating of things, and
maintaining them with Graces, which are never wanting to them. As to the rest,
my Language has nothing in it that is facile and fluent: it is rough, free, and
irregular: and therefore best pleases not my Judgment, but Inclination. But I
very well perceive, that I sometimes give my self too much rein, and that by
force of endeavor to avoid Art and Affectation, I fall into the other
Inconvenience.

-- brevis esse laboro, Hor. Ar. Poet.

Obscurus fio. --
I strive Prolixity t'evade,
And by that means obscure am made.
Plato says, that the long, nor the short are not Proprieties, that either
take away, or give luster to Language. Should I attempt to follow the other
more moderate and united style, I should never attain unto it: and though the
short round Periods of Salust best suit with my Humor, yet I find Caesar much
greater, and harder to imitate; and though my Inclination would rather prompt
me to imitate Seneca's way of Writing, yet do I nevertheless more esteem that
of Plutarch. Both in silence and speaking I simply follow my own natural way;
from whence peradventure it falls out, that I am better at speaking than
writing. Motion and Action animate Words, especially in those who lay about
them briskly, as I do, and grow hot. (...) Comportment, the Countenance, the
Voice, the (...) and the Tribunal, will set off some things, (...) of
themselves, and so considered, would appe^^ no better than prating. Messalla
complains (...) Tacitus of the straightness of some Garmen^ in his time, and of
the fashion of the Pew^ where the Orators were to declaim, that wen^ a
disadvantage to their Eloquence. My French Tongue is corrupted both in the
Pronuntiation and elsewhere, by the Barbarism of my Country. I never saw a Man
who was a Native of any of the Provinces on this side, of the Kingdom, who had
not a twang of his place of Birth, and that was not offensive to Ears that were
purely French. And yet it is not that I am so perfect in my Perigourdin: for I
can no more speak it than high Dutch, nor do I much care. It Is a Language, as
the rest about me on every side, of Poitou, Xaintonge, Angoulesme, Limosin, and
Auvergne, are a scurvy, drawling, durty Language. There is indeed above us
toward the Mountains a sort of Gascon spoke, that I am mightily taken with,
blunt, brief, significant, and in truth a more Manly and Military Language than
any other I am acquainted with; as sinewy, insinuating, and pertinent, as
French is graceful, neat, and luxuriant. As to the Latin, which was given me
for my Mother Tongue, I have by discontinuance lost the use of speaking it, and
indeed of writing it too, wherein I formerly had a particular Reputation; by
which you may see how inconsiderable I am on that side. Beauty is a thing of
great recommendation in the correspondency amongst men; it is the principal
means of ^^quiring the favor and good liking of one another, and no man is so
barbarous and morose, that does not perceive himself in some sort struck with
it is Attraction. The Body has a great share (...) our Being, has an eminent
place there, and therefore it is Structure and Symmetry are of very just
consideration. They who go about to disunite, and separate our two principal
parts from one another are to blame: we must on the contrary reunite and rejoyn
them. We must command the Soul, not to withdraw to entertain it self apart, not
to despise and abandon the Body, (neither can she do it, but by some ridiculous
counterfeit) but to unite her self close to it, to embrace, cherish, assist,
govern, and advise it, and to bring it back, and set it into the true way when
it wanders; in sum, to espouse, and be a Husband to it; forasmuch as their
effects do not appear to be diverse and contrary, but uniform and concurring.
Christians have a particular instruction concerning this Connection, for they
know that the Divine Justice embraces this Society, and juncture of Body and
Soul, even to the making the Body capable of eternal Rewards; and that God has
an Eye to every man's ways, and will that he receive entire, the chastisement
or reward of his Demerits. The Sect of the Peripateticks, of all others the
most Sociable, does attribute to Wisdom this sole care, equally to provide for
the good of these two associate Parts: and the other (...) in not sufficiently
applying themselves to (...) Consideration of this mixture, show themselves to
be divided, one for the Body, and the other for the Soul, with equal Error: and
to have (...) their Subject, which is Man, and their Guide which they generally
confess to be Nature. The first distinction that ever was amongst men, and the
first Consideration that gave some Pre-eminence over others, it is likely was
the Advantage of Beauty.

Lucret. l. 5.
-- agros divisere, atque dedere
Pro facie cujusque, and viribus, ingenioque:
Nam facies multum valuit, viresque vigebant.
Then Cattle too was shared, and steady bounds
Mr. Creech.
Marked out to every man his proper Grounds;
Each had his proper share, each what was fit,
According to his Beauty, Strength, or Wit;
For Beauty then, and Strength had most Command,
Those had the greatest share in Beasts and Land.
Now I am of something lower than the middle stature, a Defect that not only
borders upon Deformity, but carries withal a great deal of Inconvenience along
with it, especially those who are in command; for the Authority which a
graceful Presence, and a majestic mien beget, is wanting. C. Marius did not
willingly list any Soldiers that were not six foot high. The Courtier has
indeed reason to desire a moderate Stature in the Person he is to make, rather
than any other; and to reject all strangeness that should make him be pointed
at. But in choosing, he must have a care in this Mediocrity, to have him rather
below, than above the common standard: I would not do so in a Soldier. Little
men, says Aristotle, are pretty, but not handsome: and greatness of Soul is
discovered in a great Body, as Beauty is in a conspicuous stature. The
Ethiopians and Indians, says he, in choosing their Kings and Magistrates, had a
special regard to the Beauty and Stature of their Persons. They had Reason: for
it creates respect in those that follow them, and is a Terror to the Enemy, to
see a Leader of a brave and goodly Stature march in the Head of a Battalion.

Ipse inter primos praestanti corpore Turnus Virgil. Aeneid. l. 7.

Vertitur, arma tenens, and toto vertice supra est.
The graceful Turnus, tallest by the Head,
Shaking his Arms, himself the Van up lead.
Our holy and heavenly King, of whom every Circumstance is most carefully, and
with the greatest Religion and Reverence to be observed, has not himself
refused bodily Recommendation, Speciosus forma prae filiis hominum. He is
fairer than the Children of Men. And Plato, Psalm. 4.8.
together with Temperance and Fortitude, requires Beauty in the Conservators of
his Republic. It would vex you that a man should apply himself to you amongst
your Servants to enquire where Monsieur is, and that you should only have the
remainder of the Complement of the Hat that is made to your Barber, or your
Secretary: as it happened to poor Philopaemen, who, arriving the first of all his
Company at an Inn where he was expected, the Hostess, who knew him not, and saw
him an unsightly Fellow, employed him to go help her Maids a little to draw
Water, or make a Fire against Philopaemen's coming: the Gentlemen of his Train
arriving presently after, and surpised to see him busy in this fine
Employment (for he failed not of obeying his Landladies Command) asked him what
he was doing there, I am, said he, paying the Penalty of my Vgliness. The other
Beauties belong to Women, the Beauty of Stature is the only Beauty of Men.
Where there is a contemptible Stature, neither the largeness and roundness of
the Forehead, nor the whiteness and sweetness of the Eyes, nor the moderate
proportion of the Nose, nor the littleness of the Ears and Mouth, nor the
evenness and whiteness of the Teeth, nor the thickness of a well-set brown
Beard shining like the Husk of a Chestnut, nor curled Hair, nor the just
proportion of the Head, nor a fresh Complexion, nor a pleasing Air of a Face,
nor a Body without any offensive scent, nor the just proportion of Limbs, The
Authors Stature.
can make a handsome Man. I am, as to the rest, strong, and well knit, my Face
is not puffed, but full, and my Complexion betwixt jovial and melancholic,
moderately sanguine and hot. Vnde rigent setis mihi crura, and pectora villis.
Mart.

Whence it is my Thighs so rough and bristled are,
And that my Breast is so thick set with Hair.
my Health vigorous and spritely, even to a well advanced age, and rarely
troubled with Sickness. Such I was, for I do not now make any reckoning of my
self, now I say, that I am engaged in the Avenues of Age, being already past
forty, -- minutatem vires, Lucret. l. 2.
and robur adultum
Frangit, and in partem pejorem liquitur aetas.
Thence by degrees our Strength melts all away. Mr. Creech.

And treacherous age creeps on, and things decay.
What shall be from this time forward, will be but a half Being, and no more
me; I every day escape and steal away from my self: Singula de nobis anni
praedantur euntes. Hor. lib. 2. Epist. 2.

I find I Am growing old, J. D.
and every year
Steals something from me --
Agility and address I never had; and yet am the Son of a very active and
spritely Father, and that continued to be so to an extreme old age. I have
seldom known any man of his Condition, his equal in all bodily Exercises: as I
have seldom met with any who have not excelled me, except in running, at which
I was pretty good. In Music or Singing, for which I have a very unfit Voice,
or to play on any sort of Instrument, they could never teach me any thing. In
Dancing, Tennis, or Wrestling, I could never arrive to more than an ordinary
pitch; in Swimming, Fencing, Vaulting, and Leaping, to none at all. My Hands
are so clumsie, that I cannot so much as write so as to read it my self, so
that I had rather do what I have scribled over again, than to take upon me the
trouble to correct it, and do not read much better than I write. I cannot
handsomely fold up a Letter, nor could ever make a Pen, or carve at Table worth
a Pin, nor saddle a Horse, nor carry a Hawk and fly her, nor hunt the Dogs,
nor lure a Hawk, nor speak to a Horse. In fine, my bodily Qualities are very
well suited to those of my Soul, there is nothing spritely, only a full and
firm Vigor. I am patient enough of Labor and Pains, but it is only when I go
voluntary to the Work, and only so long as my own desire prompts me to it.

Id. lib. 2. Sat. 2.
Molliter austerum studio fallente laborem.
Whilst the Delight makes you never mind the Pain. Alexander Brom.

Otherwise, if I am not allured with some pleasure, or have other guide than my
own pure and free Inclination, I am there good for nothing: for I am of an
Humor, that Life and Health excepted, there is nothing for which I will bite
my Nails, and that I will purchase at the price of the Torment of Mind and
constraint; -- tanti mihi non sit opaci
Omnes arena Tagi, Juven* Sat. 3.
quodque in Mare volvitur Aurum.
Rich Tagus Sands so dear I would not buy,
Nor all the Gold that in the Sea does lie.
extremely idle, and extremely given up to my own Inclination both by Nature
and Art. I would as willingly lend a Man my Blood, as my Pains. I have a Soul
free and entirely its own, and accustomed to guide it self after its own
fashion; having hitherto never had either Master or Governor imposed upon me.
I have walked as far as I would, and the pace that best pleased my self. This
is it that has rendered me unfit for the Service of others, and has made me of
no use to any one but my self; and for that there was no need of forcing my
heavy and lazy Disposition; for being born to such a Fortune, as I had Reason
to be contented with, (a Reason nevertheless that a thousand others of my
Acquaintance would have rather made use of for a planck upon which to pass over
to a higher Fortune, to tumult and disquiet) I sought for no more, and also got
no more: Non agimur tumidi ventis Aquilone secundo, Horace. l. 2. Epist. 2.

Non tamen adversis aetatem ducimus austris,
Viribus, ingenio, specie, virtute, loco, re,
Extremi priorum, extremis usque priores.
J. D.
I neither am oppressed
With storms, nor flat at all with calms; my Sails
Are filled with equal, and indifferent gales;
For Health, Wit, Virtue, Honor, Wealth, I Am placed
Short of the foremost, but before the last.
I had only need of what was sufficient to content me: which nevertheless is a
Government of Soul, to take it right, equally difficult in all sorts of
Conditions, and that by Custom, we see more easily found in want than
abundance: forasmuch, peradventure, as according to the course of others
Passions, the desire of Riches is more sharp'ned by the use we make of them,
than by the need we have of them: and the virtue of Moderation more rare than
that of Patience. And never had any thing to desire, but happily to enjoy the
Estate that God by his Bounty had put into my Hands: I have never known any
thing of Trouble, and have had little to do in any thing but the management of
my own Affairs: or, if I have, it has been upon Condition to do them at my own
leisure, and after my own Method, committed to my trust by such as had a
confidence in me, that did not importune me, and that knew my Humor. For good
Horsemen will make shift to get service out of a rusty and broken winded Jade.
Even my Infancy was trained up after a gentle and free manner, and even then
exempt from any rigorous Subjection: all which have helped me to a Complexion
delicate and incapable of Solicitude, even to that degree, that I love to have
my Losses, and the Disorders wherein I am concerned, concealed from me; so that
in the account of my Expenses, I put down what my Negligence costs me in
feeding and maintaining my self. -- hae nempe supersunt, Hor. l. 1. Epist. 6.

Quae dominum fallunt, quae prosint furibus.
The House is much unfurnished where there are Alexander Brom.

Not many things superfluous, and to spare;
Goods which the Owner knows not of, but may
Be unconcerned when they are stole away.
I do not love to know what I have, that I may be less sensible of my Loss. I
entreat those that serve me, where Affection and Integrity are wanting, to
deceive me with something that may look tollerably handsome. For want of
Constancy enough to support the shock of the adverse Accidents, to which we are
subject, and of patience seriously to apply my self to the management of my
Affairs; I nourish as much as I can this in my self, wholly leaving all to
Fortune; to take all things at the worst, and to resolve to bear that worst
with Temper and Patience. That is the only thing I aim at, and to which I apply
my whole Meditation. In a Danger, I do not so much consider how I shall escape
it, as of how little importance it is whether I escape it or no: should I be
left dead upon the place, what matter? Not being able to govern Events, I
govern my self, and apply my self to them, if they will not apply themselves to
me. I have no great art to evade, escape from, or to force Fortune, and by
Prudence to guide and incline things to my own Biass. I have the least Patience
of all to undergo the troublesome and painful Care therein required; and the
most uneasy condition for me is to be suspended in urgent Occasions, and to be
agitated betwixt Hope and Fear. Deliberation, even in things of lightest
moment, is very troublesome to me; and I find my Mind more put to it to undergo
the various tumbling and tossing of Doubt and Consultation, than to set up it is
rest, and to acquiesce in what ever shall happen after the Die is thrown. Few
Passions break my sleep, but of deliberations, the least will do it. As in
Ways, I willingly avoid those that are sloping and slippery, and put my self
into the beaten track how durty or deep soever, where I can fall no lower, and
there seek my safety: so I love Misfortunes that are purely so, that do not
torment and teaze me with the incertainty of their growing better; but that at
the first push plunge me directly into the worst can be expected. Seneca.
Agamemnon.
dubia plus torquent mala.
Doubtful ills do plague us worst.
In Events, I carry my self like a Man, in the Conduct, like a Child. The fear
of the Fall more astonishes me than the Fall it self. It will not quit cost.
The covetous Man has a worse account of his Passion than the poor, and the
jealous Man than the Cuckold; and a man ofttimes loses more by defending his
Vineyard than if he gave it up. The lowest walk is the safest; it is the Seat
of Constancy: you have there need of no one but your self, it is there founded,
and wholly stands upon it is own Basis. Has not this Example of a Gentleman very
well known some air of Philosophy in it? He married, being well advanced in
years, having spent his Youth in Good-fellowship, a great Talker and a great
Jeerer; calling to mind how much the subject of Cuckoldry had given him
occasion to talk and scoff at others, to prevent them from paying him in his
own coin, he married a Wife from a Place where any may have flesh for his
money: Good morrow Whore, Good morrow Cuckold; and there was not any thing
wherewith he more commonly and openly entertained those that came to see him
than with this design of his, by which he stopped the private muttering of
Mockers, and defended himself from this Reproach. As to Ambition, which is
Neighbor, or rather Daughter to Presumption, Fortune, to advance me, must have
come and taken me by the hand; for to trouble my self for an uncertain Hope,
and to have submitted my self to all the Difficulties that accompany those who
endeavor to bring themselves into Credit in the beginning of their progress, I
could never have done it.

Terence.
-- spem pretio non emo.
I will not purchase Hope with Money.
I apply my self to what I see, and to what I have in my Hand, and go not very
far from the Shore: Prop. l. 1. Eleg. 2.
Alter remus aquas, alter tibi radat arenas.
Into the Sea I plung one Oar,
And with the other rake the Shore.
and besides, a Man rarely arrives to these Advancements, but in first
hazarding what he has of his own: and I am of Opinion, that if a Man have
sufficient to maintain him in the Condition wherein he was born and brought up,
it is a great folly to hazard that upon the incertainty of augmenting it. He to
whom Fortune has denied whereon to set his Foot, and to settle a quiet and
composed way of living, is to be excused if he does venture what he has,
because, happen what will, Necessity puts him upon shifting for himself.
Seneca. Agara.
Capienda rebus in malis praeceps via est.
A desperate case must have a desperate course.
And I rather excuse a younger Brother to expose what his Friends have left him
to the Courtesy of fortune, than him with whom the Honor of his Family is
entrusted, that cannot be necessitous, but by his own Fault. I have found a
much shorter and more easy way, by the Advice of the good Friends I had in my
younger days, to free my self from any such Ambition, and to sit still. Cui sit
conditio dulcis, sine pulvere palmae. Horace. l. 1. Epist. 1.

Whose Sword has won him Honor in true Fights, Sir Richard Fenshaw.

Dusty Olympic Laurels that Man slights.
Judging rightly enough of my own Forces, that they were not capable of any
great Matters; and calling to mind the saying of the late Chancellor Oliver,
that the French were like Monkies, that swarm up a Tree from Branch to Branch,
and never stop till they come to the highest; and there show their ugly bald
Breech. Turpe est quod nequeas capiti committere pondus, Prope^

Et pressum inflexo mox dare terga genu.
It is a shame to load the Shoulders so,
That they the Burden cannot undergo;
And the Knees bending with the weight, to quit
The ponderous load, and turn the Back to it.
I should find the best Qualities I have useless in this Age. The Facility of
my Manners would have been called Weakness and Negligence, my Faith and
Conscience, if such I have, Scrupulosity and Superstition; my Liberty and
Freedom would have been reputed troublesome, inconsiderate and rash. Ill luck
is good for something. Proverb.
It is good to be born in a very depraved Age; for so in comparison of others,
you shall be reputed virtuous good cheap. He that in our days is but a
Parricide, and a sacrilegious Person, is an honest Man, and a Man of Honor.
Juven. sat. 13.
Nunc si depositum non inficiatur amicus,
Si reddat veterem cum tota aerugine follem,
Prodigiosa fides, and Thuscis digna libellis,
Quaeque coronata lustrari debeat agna.
Now if a Friend does not deny his Trust,
But does the old Purse restore with all it is rust;
It Is a prodigious Faith, that ought in Gold
Amongst the Thuscan Annals be enrolled,
And a crowned Lamb should sacrificed be
To such an exemplary Integrity.
And never was time or place wherein Princes might propose to themselves more
certain Rewards for their Virtue and Justice. The first that shall make it his
business to get himself into favor and esteem by those ways, I am much
deceived if he do not, and by the best Title outstrip his Concurrents. Force
and Violence can do something, but not always all: We see Merchants, Country
Justices, and Artizans, go cheek by joul with the best Gentry in Valor and
Military Knowledge. They perform honorable Actions both in public Engagements
and private Quarrels, they fight Duels, and defend Towns in our present Wars. A
Prince stifles his Renown in this crowd. Let him shine bright in Humanity,
Truth, Loyalty, Temperance, and especially in Justice; marks rare, unknown, and
exiled; it is by no other means but by the sole good will of the People that he
can do his business, and no other Qualities can attract their good will like
those, as being of greatest Utility to them. Nil est tam populare quam bonitas.
Cicero.
Nothing is so popular as goodness. By this proportion I had been great and
rare, as I find my self now a Pigmee, and popular by the proportion of some
past Ages; wherein, if other better Qualities did not concur, it was ordinary
and common to see a Man moderate in his Revenges, gentle in resenting Injuries,
in absence religious of his Word, neither double nor too supple, nor
accomodating his Faith to the will of others, or the turns of Times: I would
rather see all Affairs go to wrack and ruin than falsify my Faith to secure
them. For as to this Virtue of Dissimulation, which is now in so great request,
I mortally hate it; and of all Vices, find none that does evidence so much
baseness and meanness of Spirit. It Is a cowardly and servile Humor to hide and
disguise a man's self under a Vizor, and not to dare to show himself what he
is. By that our followers are trained up to Treachery. Being brought up to
speak what is not true, they make no Conscience of a Lie. A generous Heart
ought not to belie its own Thoughts, but will make it self seen within, all
there is good, or at least manly: Aristotle reputes it the Office of
Magnanimity, openly and profess'dly to love and hate, to judge and speak with
all freedom; and not to value the approbation or dislike of others in
comparison of Truth: Apollonius said, it was for Slaves to lie, and for
Freemen to speak truth. It Is the chief and fundamental part of Virtue, we must
love it for it self. He that speaks truth, because he is obliged so to do, and
because he serves; and that is not afraid to lie when it signifies nothing to
any body, is not sufficiently true. Lying condemned.
My Soul naturally abominates Lying, and hates the thought of it. I have an
inward bashfulness, and a sharp remorse, if sometimes a Lie escape me, as
sometimes it does, being surpised by Occasions that allow me no Premeditation.
A Man must not always tell all, for that were folly: but what a man says should
be what he thinks, otherwise it is knavery. I do not know what advantage men
pretend to by eternally counterfeiting and dissembling, if not, never to be
believed when they speak the truth. This may once or twice pass upon men; but
to profess concealing their Thoughts, and to brag, as some of our Princes have
done, that they would burn their Shirts if they knew their true Intentions;
which was a saying of the Ancient Metellus of Macedon; and, that who knows not
how to dissemble, knows not how to Rule: is to give warning to all who have any
thing to do with them, that all they say is nothing but Lying and Deceit.
Cicero. de off. l. 1.
Quo quis versutior, and callidior est, hoc invisior and suspectior, detracta
opinione probitatis. By how much any one is more subtle and cunning, by so much
is he hated and suspected, the Opinion of his Integrity being lost and gone. It
were a great simplicity in any one to lay any stress either on the Countenance
or word of a man, that has past on a Resolution to be always another thing
without than he is within, as Tiberius did; and I cannot conceive what Interest
such can have in the Conversation with men, seeing they produce nothing that is
current and true. Whoever is disloyal to Truth, is the same to Falsehood also.
Those of our time, who have considered in the establishment of the duty of a
Prince, the good of his Affairs only, and have preferred that to the care of
his Faith and Conscience; might say something to a Prince whose Affairs Fortune
had put into such a posture, that he might for ever Establish them by only once
breaking his Word: but it will not go so, they often buy in the same Market,
they make more than once Peace, and enter into more than one Treaty in their
lives. Gain tempts them to the first breach of Faith, and almost always
presents it self, as in all other ill Acts, Sacrileges, Murders, Rebellions,
Treasons, as always undertaken for some kind of Advantage. But this first Gain
has infinite mischievous Consequences; throws this Prince out of all
Correspondence and Negotiation, by this Example of Infidelity. Soliman, of the
Ottoman Race, a Race not very sollicitous of keeping their Words or Articles,
when in my Infancy he made his Army land at Otranto, being informed that
Mercurino de Gratinare, and the Inhabitants of Castro were detained Prisoners,
after having surrendered the Place, contrary to the Articles of their
Capitulation, sent order to have them set at Liberty, saying, That having other
great Enterprises in hand in those Parts, the disloyalty, though it carried a
show of present Utility, would for the future bring on him a disrepute and
diffidence of infinite prejudice. Now, for my part, I had rather be troublesome
and indiscreet, than a Flatterer and a Dissembler. I confess that there may be
some mixture of Pride and Obstinacy in keeping my self so upright and open as I
do without any Consideration of others; and methinks I am a little too free,
where I ought least to be so, and that I grow hot by the opposition of Respect;
and it may be also, that I suffer my self to follow the Propension of my own
Nature for want of Art; using the same liberty of Speech and Countenance
toward great Persons, that I bring with me from my own House: I am sensible
how much it declines toward Incivility and Indiscretion: but besides that, I
am so bred, I have not a Wit supple enough to evade a sudden Question, and to
escape by some Evasion, nor to feign a Truth, nor Memory enough to retain it so
feigned; nor truly assurance enough to maintain it, and play the brave out of
Weakness. And therefore it is that I abandon my self to Candor, always to speak
as I think, both by Complexion and Design, leaving the event to Fortune.
Aristippus was wont to say, that the principal benefit he had extracted from
Philosophy was, that he spoke freely and openly to all. Memory very useful to
the Judgment.
Memory is a faculty of wonderful use, and without which the Judgment can very
hardly perform its Office: for my part I have none at all. What any one will
propose to me, he must do it by parcels, for to answer a speech consisting of
several heads, I am not able. I could not receive a Commission by word of
mouth, without a Note-book: and when I have a Speech of Consequence to make, if
it be long, I am reduced to the miserable Necessity of getting it Word for Word
what I am to say by Heart; I should otherwise have neither fashion nor
assurance, being in fear that my Memory would play me a slippery trick. But
this way is no less difficult to me than the other. I must have three hours to
learn three Verses. And besides, in a Work of a man's own, the Liberty and
Authority of altering the Order, of changing a Word, incessantly varying the
matter, makes it harder to stick in the Memory of the Author. The more I
mistrust it, the worse it is, it serves me best by chance, I must negligently
solicit it, for if I press it, it is astonished, and after it once begins to
stagger, the more I sound it, the more it is perplexed; it serves me at it is
own hour, not at mine. And the same defect I find in my Memory, I find also in
several other Parts. I fly command, obligation, and constraint. That which I
can otherwise naturally and easily do; if I impose it upon my self by an
express and strict Injunction, I cannot do it. Even the members of my Body,
over which a man has a more particular jurisdiction, sometimes refuse to obey
me, if I enjoin them a necessary service at a certain hour. This tyrannical and
compulsive Appointment baffles them, they shrink up either through fear or
spite, and fall into a Trance. Being once in a Place where it is looked upon as
the greatest discourtesie imaginable not to pledge those who drink to you,
though I had there all liberty allowed me, I tried to play the good Fellow, out
of respect to the Ladies that were there, according to the Custom of the
Country; But there was sport enough, for this Threatening and Preparation, that
I was to force my self contrary to my Custom and Inclination, did so stop my
Throat, that I could not swallow one drop, and was deprived of drinking so much
as to my Meat. I found my self gorged, and my Thirst quenched by so much Drink
as my Imagination had swallowed. This Effect is most manifest in such as have
the most vehement and powerful Imagination: but it is natural notwithstanding,
and there is no one that does not in some measure find it. They offered an
excellent Archer, condemned to dye, to save his Life, if he would show some
notable proof of his Art; but he refused to try, fearing lest the too great
Contention of his Will should make him shoot wide, and that instead of saving
his Life, he should also lose the Reputation he had got of being a good
Marks-man. A Man that thinks of something else, will not fail to take over and
over again the same number and measure of steps, even to an inch, in the place
where he walks: but if he makes it his Business to measure and count them, he
will find that what he did by Nature and Accident, he cannot so exactly do by
Design. My Library, which is of the best sort of Country Libraries, is
situated in a corner of my House, if any thing comes into my Head that I have
a Mind to look on or to write; lest I should forget it in but going cross the
Court, I am fain to commit it to the Memory of some other. If I venture in
speaking to digress never so little from my Subject, I am infallibly lost,
which is the reason that I keep my self in Discourse strictly close. I am
forced to call the Men that serve me either by the Names of their Offices, or
their Country; for Names are very hard for me to remember. I can tell indeed
that there are three Syllables, that it has a harsh sound, and that it begins
or ends with such a Letter, but that is all: and if I should live long, Memory
quite lost.
I do not think but I should forget my own Name, as some others have done.
Messala Corvinus, was two years without any trace of Memory, which is also said
of Georgius Trapezuntius. For my own interest, I often meditate what a kind of
Life theirs was, and if, without this Faculty, I should have enough left to
support me with any manner of ease, and prying narrowly into it, I fear that
this Privation, if absolute, destroys all the other functions of the Soul.

Plenus rimarum sum, hac atque illac perfluo. Ter. Eunu. act. 1. sc. 2.

I Am full of chinks, and lead out every way.
It has befallen me more than once to forget the Word I had three hours before
given or received, and to forget where I had hid my Purse, whatever Cicero is
pleased to say: I help my self to lose what I have a particular care to lock
safe up. Memoria certe non modo Philosophiam, Cicero.
sed omnis vitae usum, omnesque arts, una maxim continet. The Memory is the
receptacle and sheath of all Science; and therefore mine being so treacherous,
if I know little, I cannot much complain; I know in general the Names of the
Arts, and of what they treat, but nothing more. I turn over Books, I do not
study them; what I retain I do not know to be another, and is only what my
Judgment has made it is advantage of; the Discourses and Imaginations in which
it has been instructed. The Author's Memory.
The Author, Place, Words, and other Circumstances, I immediately forget, and
am so excellent at forgetting, that I no less forget my own Writings and
Compositions than the rest. I am very often quoted to my self, and am not aware
of it; and whoever should enquire of me where I had the Verses and Examples
that I have here huddled together, would puzzle me to tell him, and yet I have
not borrowed them but from famous and known Authors, not satisfying my self
that they were rich; if I moreover had them not from rich and honorable Hands,
where there is a concurrence of Authority as well as Reason. It is no great
wonder if my Book run the same fortune that other Books do, and if my Memory
lose what I have writ as well as what I have read, and what I give, as well as
what I receive. Beside the defect of Memory, I have others which very much
contribute to my ignorance; His Apprehension.
I have a slow and heavy Wit, the least cloud stops it is progress, so that, for
Example, I never proposed to it any never so easy a Riddle that it could find
out. There is not the least idle subtilty, that will not gravel me. In Games,
where Wit is required, as Chess, Draughts, and the like, I understand no more
but the motions of the men, without being capable of any thing of design. I
have a slow and perplexed Apprehension, but what it once apprehends, it
apprehends well, for the time it retains it. My Sight is perfect, entire, His
Sight.
and discovers at a very great Distance, but is soon weary, which makes me that
I cannot read long, but am forced to have one to read to me. The younger Pliny
can inform such as have not experimented it themselves, what, and how important
an Impediment this is to those who addict themselves to study. There is no so
wretched and illiterate a Soul, wherein some particular Faculty is not seen to
shine; no Soul so buried in sloth and ignorance but it will sally at one end or
another. And how it comes to pass that a Man blind and asleep to every thing
else, shall be found spritely, clear, and excellent in some one particular
Effect, we are to enquire of our Masters: but the beautiful Souls are they that
are Universal, Open, and Ready for all things, if not instructed, at least
capable of being so. Which I say to accuse my own; for whether it be through
Infirmity or Negligence, (and to neglect that which lies at our feet, which we
have in our hands, and what nearest concerns the use of Life, is far from my
Doctrine) there is not a Soul in the World so awkward as mine, and so ignorant
of several vulgar things, and such as a man cannot without shame be ignorant
of. I must give some Examples: I was born and bred up in the Country, and
amongst Husbandmen; I have had Business and Husbandry in my own Hands ever
since my Predecessors, who were Lords of the Estate I now enjoy, left me to
succeed them: and yet I can neither cast account, nor reckon my Counters: most
of our current Money I do not know, nor the difference betwixt one Grain and
another, either growing or in the Barn, if it be not too apparent; and scarcely
can distinguish the Cabidge and Lettuce in my Garden. I do not so much as
understand the Names of the chief Instruments of Husbandry, nor the most
ordinary Elements of Agriculture, which the very Children know; much less the
mechanic Arts, Traffic, Merchandise, the variety and Nature of Fruits, Wines
and Vines: nor how to make a Hawk fly, nor to physic a Horse, or a Dog. And,
since I must publish my whole shame, it is not above a Month ago, that I was
trapt in my ignorance of the use of leaven to make Bread, or to what end it was
to keep Wine in the Vat. They conjectured of old at Athens, an aptitude to the
Mathematics in him they saw ingeniously bavin up a Burden of Brush-wood. In
earnest, they would draw a quite contrary Conclusion from me, for give me the
whole Provision and Necessaries of a Kitchen, I should starve. By these
features of my Confession Men may imagine others to my Prejudice: but whatever I
deliver my self to be, provided it be such as I really am, I have my end;
neither will I make any excuse for committing to Paper such mean and frivolous
things as these: the meanness of the Subject compells me to it. They may if
they please accuse my Project, but not my Progress. So it is, that without any
bodies needing to tell me, I sufficiently see of how little weight and value
all this is, and the Folly of my Design. It Is enough that my Judgment does not
contradict it self, of which these are the Essays. Nasutus sis usque licet, sis
denique nasus, Mart. l. 13. Epig. 2.

Quantum noluerit far rogatus Atlas;
Et possis ipsum tu deridere Latinum,
Non potes in nugas dicere plura meas,
Ipse ego quam dixi: quid dentem dente juvabit
Reddere? carne opus est, si satur esse velis.
Ne perdas operam, qui se mirantur, in illos
Virus habe, nos haec novimus esse nihil.
Be nosed, be all Nose, till thy Nose appear
So great, that Atlas it refuse to bear;
Though even against Latinus thou inveigh,
Against my Trifles thou no more can say
Than I have said my self: then to what end
Should we to render tooth for tooth contend,
You must have flesh if you will be full my Friend.
Lose not thy Labor then; on those that do
Admire themselves thy utmost venom throw,
That these things nothing are full well we know.
I am not obliged to utter no Absurdities, provided I am not deceived in them,
and know them to be such: and to trip knowingly, is so ordinary with me, that I
seldom do it otherwise, and rarely trip by chance. It Is no great matter to add
ridiculous Actions to the temerity of my Humor, since I cannot ordinarily help
supplying it with those that are vicious. I was present one day at Barledue,
when King Francis the Second, for a Memorial of Rene King of Sicily, The
picture of Rene King of Sicily drawn by himself.
was presented with a Picture he had drawn of himself. Why is it not in like
manner lawful for every one to draw himself with a Pen as he did with a Crayon?
I will not therefore omit this blemish, though very unfit to be published,
which is Irresolution; a very great Defect, and very incommodious in the
Negotiations of the Affairs of the World; in doubtful Enterprises, I know not
which to choose.

Ne si ne no, nel cormi suona intero. I can maintain an Opinion, but I cannot
choose one, by reason that in Humane things, to what Sect soever a man
inclines, many Apparences present themselves that confirm us in it; and the
Philosopher Chrysippus said, that he would of Zeno and Cleanthes his Masters
learn their Doctrines only: for as to Proofs and Reasons, he should find enough
of his own: which way soever I turn, I still furnish my self with Causes, and
likelihood enough to fix me there, which makes me detain doubt, and the liberty
of choosing, till occasion presses; and then, to confess the Truth, I, for the
most part, throw the Feather into the Wind, as the saying is, and commit my
self to the mercy of Fortune; a very light Inclination and Circumstance carries
me along with it.

Dum in dubio est animus, Paulo momento huc atque illuc impellitur. Terence.
Andr. Act. 1. Scen. 3.

My mind being in doubt, in a short space,
With nimble turns, this way and that way sways.
The incertainty of my Judgment is so equally balanced in most Occurrences,
that I could willingly refer it to be decided by the chance of a Dye. And
observe, with great consideration of our Humane Infirmity, the Examples that
the Divine History it self has left us of this custom of referring to Fortune
and Chance the determination of Elections in doubtful things: Sors cecidit
super Matthiam, Act. 1.
The Lot fell upon Matthias. Humane Reason is a two edged and a dangerous
Sword: observe in the hand of Socrates, her most intimate and familiar Friend,
how many several points it has. I am also good for nothing but to follow and
suffer my self to be easily carried away with the Crowd; I have not Confidence
enough in my own Strength to take upon me to Command and Lead. I am very glad
to find the way beaten before me by others. If I must run the hazard of an
uncertain Choice, I am rather willing to have it under such a one as is more
confident in his Opinions than I am in mine, whose Ground and Foundation I find
to be very slippery and unsure, and yet I do not easily change, by reason that
I discern the same weakness in contrary Opinions. Cicero. acad. lib. 4.
Ipsa consuetudo assentiendi periculosa esse videtur, and lubrica. The very
custom of assenting seems to be dangerous and slippery. Especially in politic
Affairs, there is a large Field open for Contestation. Tibullus. l. 4.
Justa pari premitur velati cum pondere libra,
Prona nec hac plus part sedet, nec surgit ab illa.
Like a just Balance pressed with equal weight
Nor dips, nor rises, but the Beam is straight
Machiavel's Writings, for Example, were solid enough for the Subject, yet were
they easy enough to be controverted; and they who have taken up the Cudgels
against him, have left as great a Facility of controverting theirs. There was
never wanting in that kind of Argument, replies upon replies, and as infinite a
contexture of Debates, as our wrangling Lawyers have extended in Favor of long
Suits. Horace. l. 2. Epist. 2.
Caedimur, and totidem plagis consumimus hostem.
This is a War,
Wherein by turns we beat, and beaten are.
the Reasons having little other foundation than Experience, and the variety of
humane Events, presenting us with infinite Examples of all sorts of Forms. An
understanding Person of our Times says. That whoever would in Contradiction to
our Almanacks write cold, where they say hot, and wet where they say dry, and
always put the contrary to what they foretell; if he were to lay a Wager, he
would not care which side he took, excepting where no incertainty could fall
out; as to promise excessive heats at Christmas, or extremity of cold at
Midsummer, which cannot possibly be. I have the same Opinion of these politic
Controversies; be on which side you will, you have as fair a Game to play as
your Adversary, provided you do not proceed so far as to justle Principles that
are too manifest to be disputed. And yet, in my Conceit, in public Affairs,
there is no Government so ill, provided it be ancient, and has been constant,
that is not better than change and alteration. Our manners are infinitely
corrupted, and wonderfully incline to the worse: of our Laws and Customs there
are many that are barbarous and monstrous: nevertheless, by reason of the
difficulty of Reformation, and the Danger of stirring things, if I could put
something under to stop the Wheel, and keep it where it is, I would do it with
all my Heart. Numquam adeo faedis adeoque pudendis Juvenal.

Vtimur exemplis, ut non pejora supersint.
The Examples we produce, are not so plain
And smutty, but behind far worse remain.
The worst thing I find in our State, is the instability of it, and that our
Laws, no more than our Clothes cannot settle in any certain Form. It is very
easy to accuse a Government of Imperfection, for all mortal things are full of
it: it is very easy to beget in a People a contempt of Ancient Observances,
never any man undertook it but he did it; but to establish a better Regiment in
the stead of that a man has overthrown, many who have attempted that have been
foundered in the attempt. I very little consult my Prudence in my Conduct; I am
willing to let it be guided by the public Rule. Happy People, who do what they
are commanded better than they who command, without tormenting themselves with
the causes, who suffer themselves gently to roll after the Celestial
Revolution. Obedience is never pure nor calm in him who argues and disputes. In
fine, to return to my self; the only thing by which I esteem my self to be
something, is, that wherein never any man thought himself to be defective; my
recommendation is vulgar and common, for who ever thought he wanted Sense? It
would be a Proposition that would imply a Contradiction in it self, it is a
Disease that never is where it is discerned, it is tenacious and strong, but
that the first ray of the Patients Sight does nevertheless pierce through and
disperse as the Beams of the Sun do thick and obscure Mists. To accuse one's
self would be to excuse in this case, and to condemn to absolve. There never
was Porter, or the silliest Girl, that did not think they had sense enough to
do their business. We easily enough confess an advantage of Courage, Strength,
Experience, Activity and Beauty in others; but an Advantage in Judgment we
yield to none, and the Reasons that simply proceed from the natural arguing of
others, we think, if we had but turned our Thoughts that way, we should our
selves have found out as well as they. Knowledge, Style, and such Parts as we
see in others works, we are soon aware of, if they excel our own: but for the
simple Products of the Understanding, every one thinks he could have found out
the like, and is hardly sensible of the weight and difficulty, if not, (and
then with much ado) in an extreme and incomparable distance. And whoever should
be able clearly to discern the height of another Judgment, would be also able
to raise his own to the same pitch. So that it is a sort of Exercise, from
which a Man is to expect very little Praise, a kind of Composition of small
Repute. And besides, for whom do you write? The Learned, to whom the Authority
appertains of judging Books, know no other value but that of Learning, and
allow of no other proceeding of Wit, but that of Erudition and Art: if you have
mistaken one of the Scipios for another, what is all the rest you have to say
worth? Whoever is ignorant of Aristotle, according to their Rule, is in some
sort ignorant of himself. Heavy, ill bred, and vulgar Souls, cannot discern the
Grace of a delicate Style. Now these two sorts of Men take up the World. The
third sort, into whose hands you fall, of Souls that are regular and strong of
themselves, is so rare, that it justly has neither Name nor Place amongst us;
and it is so much time lost to aspire unto it, or to endeavor to please it.
It Is commonly said, that the justest divident Nature has given of her Favors,
is that of Sense; for there is no one that is not contented with his share: is
it not Reason? for whoever should discern beyond that, would see beyond his
sight. I think my Opinions are good and sound, but who does not think the same
of his? one of the best Proofs I have that mine are so, is the small esteem I
have of my self; for had they not been very well assured, they would easily
have suffered themselves to have been deceived by the peculiar Affection I have
to my self, as one that place it almost wholly in my self, and do not let much
run by. All that others distribute amongst an infinite number of Friends and
Acquaintance, to their Glory and Grandeur, I dedicate to the repose of my own
mind and to my self. That which escapes thence is not properly by my direction.
Plaut.
Mihi nempe valere, and vivere doctus.
To love my self I very well can tell,
So as to live content, and to be well.
Now I find my Opinions very bold and constant, in condemning my own
Imperfection; and to say the truth, it is a Subject upon which I exercise my
Judgment, as much as upon any other. The World looks always opposite, I turn my
sight inwards, there fix and employ it: Every one looks before him, I look into
my self, I have no other business but my self, I am eternally meditating upon
my self, control and taste my self; other men's Thoughts are ever wandering
abroad, if they set themselves to thinking, they are still going forward, Nemo
in sese tentat descendere. Perseus. sat. 4.

No man attempts to dive into himself.
for my part, I circulate in my self: and this free Humor of not over easily
subjecting my Belief, I owe principally to my self; for the strongest and most
general Imaginations I have, are those, that as a man may say, were born with
me; they are natural and entirely my own. I produced them crude and simple,
with a strong and bold Production, but a little troubled and imperfect; I have
since established and fortified them with the Authority of others, and the
sound Examples of the Ancients, whom I have found of the same Judgment: they
have given me faster hold, and a more manifest Fruition and Possession of that
I had before embraced; the Reputation that every one pretends to, of vivacity
and promptness of Wit, I speak in Regularity; the Glory they pretend to from a
brave and honorable Action, or some particular Excellency, I claim from order,
correspondence, and tranquillity of Opinions and Manners. Omnino si quidquam
est decorum, Cicero de offic. lib. 1.
nihil est profecto magis quam aequabilitas universae Vitae, tum singularum
actionum: quam conservare non possis, si aliorum naturam imitans, omittas tuam.
If any thing be entirely decent, nothing certainly can be more, than an
equability in the whole Life, and in every particular Action of it: which thou
can not possibly observe and keep, if imitating other men's Natures, thou
layest aside thy own. Here then you see to what degree I find my self guilty of
this first part, that I said was in the Vice of Presumption. As to the second,
which consists in not having a sufficient esteem for others; I know not whether
or no I can so well excuse my self; but whatever comes on it, I am resolved to
speak the Truth. And whether peradventure it be, that the continual
frequentation I have had with the Humors of the Ancients, and the Idea of those
great Souls of past Ages, put me out of taste both with others and my self; or
that, in truth, the Age we live in does produce but very indifferent things;
yet so it is, that I see nothing worthy of any great admiration. Neither indeed
have I so great an intimacy with many Men, as is requisite to make a right
Judgment of them: and those with whom my Condition makes me the most frequent,
are, for the most part, Men that have little care of the culture of the Soul;
but that look upon Honor as the sum of all blessings, and Valor as the height
of all Perfection. What I see that is handsome in others, I very readily
commend, and highly esteem: nay, I often say more in their Commendation, than I
think they really deserve, and give my self so far leave to lie; for I cannot
invent a false Subject. My Testimony is never wanting to my Friends in what I
conceive deserves Praise: and where a foot is due, I am willing to give them a
foot and a half; but to attribute to them Qualities that they have not, I
cannot do it, nor openly defend their Imperfections. Nay, I frankly and
ingeniously give my very Enemies their due Testimony of Honor. My Affection
alters, my Judgment does not; and I never confound my Animosity with other
Circumstances that are foreign to it: and am so jealous of the libertyof my
Judgment, that I can very hardly part with it for any Passion whatever. I do my
self a greater injury in lying, than I do him of whom I tell a Lie. This
commendable and generous Custom is observed of the Persian Nation, Enemies
honored by the Persians for their Virtue.
that they spoke of their mortal Enemies, and with whom they were at deadly
Wars, as honorably and justly as their Virtues did deserve. I know Men enough,
that have several fine Parts; one Wit, another Courage, another Address,
another Conscience, another Language, one, one Science, another, another; but a
generally great Man, and that has all these brave Parts together, or any one of
them to such a degree of Excellence that we should admire him, or compare him
with those we honor of times past, my Fortune never brought me acquainted
with; and the greatest I ever knew, I mean for the natural parts of the Soul,
was Stephen Boethius; Praise of Stephen Boethius.
his was a full Soul indeed, and that had every way a beautiful aspect: a Soul
of the old stamp, and that had produced great Effects, had Fortune been so
pleased: having added much to those great natural Parts by learning and study.
But how it comes to pass I know not, and yet it is certainly so, there is as
much vanity and weakness of Judgment in those who profess the greatest
Abilities, who take upon them learned Callings, and bookish Employments, as in
any other sort of Men whatever: either because more is required and expected
from them, and that common defects are inexcusable in them; or because the
Opinion they have of their own Learning makes them more bold to expose and lay
themselves too open, by which they lose and betray themselves. As an Artificer
more betrays his want of Skill in a rich Matter he has in hand, if he disgrace
the Work by ill handling, and contrary to the Rules required, than in a Matter
of less value; and Men are more displeased at a Disproportion in a Statue of
Gold, than in one of Alabaster; so do these, when they exhibit things that in
themselves and in their place would be good: for they make use of them without
discretion, honoring their Memories at the expense of their Understandings,
and making themselves ridiculous to honor Cicero, Galen, Vlpian and St.
Hierom. I willingly fall again into the Discourse of the Vanity of our
Education; the end of which is not to render us good and wise, but learned; and
she has obtained it. She has not taught us to follow and embrace Virtue and
Prudence, but she has imprinted in us their Derivation and Etymology. We know
how to decline Virtue, we know not how to love it. If we do not know what
Prudence is really, and in effect, and by Experience, we have it however by
heart. We are not content to know the Extraction, Kindred and Alliances of our
Neighbors, we will moreover have them our Friends, and will establish a
Correspondency and Intelligence with them: but this Education of ours has
taught us Definitions, Divisions, and Partitions of Virtue, as so many Surnames
and Branches of a Genealogy, without any further care of establishing any
Familiarity or Intimacy betwixt her and us. She has culled out for our initiary
Instruction, not such Books as contain the soundest and truest Opinions, but
those that speak the best Greek and Latin; and by these queint Words has
instilled into our Fancy the vainest Humors of Antiquity. A good Education
alters the Judgment and Manners; as it happened to Polemon, a young lewd and
debauched Greek, who going by chance to hear one of Xenocrates his Lectures,
did not only observe the Eloquence and Learning of the Reader, and not only
brought away the knowledge of some fine matter; but a more manifest and a more
solid Profit, which was the sudden Change and Reformation of his former Life.
Who ever found such an Effect of our Discipline? -- faciasne quod olim Horace.
l. 2. Sat. 3.

Mutatus Polemon, ponas insignia morbi
Fasciolas, cubital, focalia, potus ut ille
Dicitur ex collo furtim carpsisse coronas,
Postquam est impransi correptus voce Magistri.
Mr. Alexander Brom.
Pray tell me, can you do like Polemon?
Who, being drunk, ran with a Garland on
Into the School of grave Xenocrates,
With Ribons, Cushions, Handkerchiefs; all these
He privately took off, and threw away,
When he heard what that temperate Man did say.
That seems to me to be the least contemptible Condition of Men, which by its
plainness and simplicity is seated in the lowest degree, and invites us to a
more regular Conversation. I find the manner and clownish Language of Country
People commonly better suited to the Rule and Prescription of true Philosophy,
than those of our Philosophers themselves. Lactant. Instit. l. 2.
Plus sapit vulgus, quia tantum, quantum opus est, sapit. The vulgar are so
much the wiser, because they only know what is needful for them to know. The
most remarkable Men, as I have judged by outward appearance (for to judge of
them according to my own Method, I must penetrate a great deal deeper) for
Soldiers and military Conduct, were the Duke of Guise, who died at Orleance,
and the late Marshall Strozzy. And for Gunmen of great Ability, and no common
Virtue, Olivier, and de l'Hospital, Chancellours of France. Poesy too in my
Opinion has flourished in this Age of ours. We have abundance of very good
Artificers in the Trade, Aurat, Beze, Buchanan, l'Hospital, Montdore, and
Turnebus. As to the French Poets, I believe they have raised it to the highest
pitch to which it can ever arrive; and in those Parts of it wherein Ronsard and
du Bellay excel, I find them little inferior to the Ancient Perfection.
Adrian Turnebus knew more, and what he did know, better than any Man of his
Time, or long before him. The Lives of the last ^^^ke of Alva, and of our
Constable de M^^^^orency, were both of them Great and Nobl^* and that had many
rare resemblances of F^^^une: but the beauty and glory of the ^^^th of the
last, in the sight of Paris and of (...) King, against his nearest Relations,
in their S^^vice, at the head of an Army, through his Conduct victorious, and
by a blow of hand in so extreme an old Age, merits methinks to be recorded
amongst the most remarkable Events of our Times. As also the constant Virtue,
sweetness of Manners, and Conscientious Facility of Monsieur de la Noue, in so
great an Injustice of armed Parties (the true School of Treason, Inhumanity,
and Robbery,) wherein he always kept up the reputation of a good Man, and a
great and experienced Captain. I have taken a delight to publish in several
Places the hopes I have of Mary de Gournay le Jars, my Daughter of Alliance;
and certainly beloved by me with more than a Paternal Love, and mewd up in my
Solitude and Retirement as one of the best parts of my own Being. I have no
regard to any thing in this World but her; and if a man may presage from her
Youth, her Soul will one day be capable of very great things; and amongst
others, of the Perfection of that Sacred Friendship, to which we do not read
that any of her Sex could ever yet arrive; the sincerity and solidity of her
Manners are already sufficient for it, and her Affection toward me more than
superabundant, and such as that there is nothing more to be wished, if not that
the Apprehension she has of my End, being now five and fifty years old, might
not so much afflict her. The Judgment she made of my first Essays, being a
Woman so young, and in this Age, and alone in her own Country, and the famous
vehemence wherewith she loved, and desired me upon the sole Esteem she had of
me, before she ever saw my Face, is an Accident very worthy of Consideration.
Other Virtues have had little or no credit in this Age; but Valor is become
popular by our Civil Wars: and in this, we have Souls brave, even to
Perfection, and in so great number, that the Choice is impossible to be made.
This is all of extraordinary, and not common, that has hitherto arrived at my
knowledge.

CHAP. XVIII. Of giving the Lie.
WEll, but some one will say to me, this design of making a man's self the
subject of his writing, were indeed excusable in rare and famous Men, who by
their Reputation had given others a curiosity to be fully informed of them. It
is most true, I confess it, and know very well, that a Tradesman will scarce
lift his Eyes from his work to look at an ordinary man, when they will forsake
their Business and their Shops to stare at an eminent Person when he comes to
Town: it misbecomes any other to give his own Character, but such a one who has
Qualities worthy of imitation, and whose Life and Opinions may serve for
Example. Caesar and Xenophon had whereon to found their Narrations in the
greatness of their own Performances, as a just and solid Foundation. And it
were also to be wished, that we had the Journal Papers of Alexander the Great,
the Commentaries that Augustus, Cato, Sylla, Brutus, and others have left of
their Actions. Men love and contemplate the very Statues of such Men both in
Copper and Marble. This Remonstrance therefore is very true; but it very little
concerns me. Non recito cuiquam, nisi amicis, idque rogatus; Hor. lib. 1. sat.
4.

Non ubivis, coramve quibuslibet: In medio qui
Scripta foro recitant sunt multi, quique laventes.
I seldom do Rehearse, and when I do
It Is to my Friends, and with Reluctance too, Mr. Alexander Brom.

Not before every one, and every where;
We have too many that Rehersers are,
In public Bath, and open Markets too.
I do not here form a Statue to erect in the most eminent Place of a City, in a
Church, or any public Place; Perseus. sat. 5.
Non equidem hoc studio bullatis ut mihi nugis:
Pagina turgescat:
Secreti loquimur.
I study not to make my Pages swell
With mighty trifles, secret things I tell.
it is for some corner of a Library, or to entertain a Neighbor, a Kinsman, or
a Friend, that has a mind to renew his Acquaintance and Familiarity with this
Image I have made of my self. Others have been encouraged to speak of
themselves, because they found the Subject worthy and rich; I, on the contrary,
am the bolder, by reason the Subject is so poor and steril, that I cannot be
suspected of Ostentation. I judge freely of the Actions of others, I give
little of my own to judge of, because they are nothing: I do not find so much
good in my self as to tell it without blushing. What contentment would it be to
me to hear any one thus relate to me the Manners, Faces, Countenances, the
ordinary Words and Fortunes of my Ancestors? how attentively should I listen to
it! In earnest, it would be ill Nature to despise so much as the Pictures of
our Friends and Predecessors, the fashion of their Cloths and Arms. I preserve
my Father's Writing, his Seal, and one peculiar Sword of his, and have not
thrown long Staves he used to carry in his hand out of my Closet. D. August. de
Civit. l. 1. cap. 1.
Paterna vestis, and annulus, tanto charior est posteris, quanto erga parents
major affectus. A Father's Garment and Ring, is by so much dearer to his
Posterity, as they had the greater affection toward them. If my Posterity
nevertheless shall be of another mind, I shall be revenged on them; for they
cannot care less for me, than I shall then do for them. All the Traffic that I
have in this with the Public, is, that I borrow those Utensils of their
Writing, which are more easy and most at hand, and in Recompense, shall
peradventure keep a pound of Butter in the Market from melting in the Sun. Ne
toga cordyllis, Mart. Catullus*
ne penula desit olivis
Et laxas scombris saepe dabo tunicas.
I Will furnish Plaice and Olives with a Coat,
And cover Mackarel when the Sun shines hot.
And though no body should read me, have I lost my time in entertaining my self
so many idle hours, in so pleasing and useful Thoughts? In moulding this Figure
upon my self, I have been so often constrained to temper and compose my self in a
right posture, that the Copy is truly taken, and has in some sort formed it
self. But painting for others, I represent my self in a better coloring than
my own natural Complexion. I have no more made my Book than my Book has made
me. It Is a Book consubstantial with the Author, of a peculiar Design: a Member
of my Life, and whose Business is not designed for others, as that of all other
Books is. In giving my self so continual, and so exact an account of my self,
have I lost my time? For they who sometimes cursorily survey themselves only,
do not so strictly examine themselves, nor penetrate so deep, as he who makes
it his Business, his Study, and his whole Employment, who intends a lasting
Record, with all his Fidelity, and with all his Force. The most delicious
Pleasures do so digest themselves within, that they avoid leaving any trace of
themselves, and avoid the sight not only of the People, but of any particular
Man. How often has this Meditation diverted me from troublesome Thoughts? and all
that are frivolous should be reputed so. Nature has presented us with a large
faculty of entertaining our selves alone: and often calls us to it, to teach us,
that we owe our selves in part to Society, but chiefly and mostly to our
selves. That I may habituate my Fancy, even to meditate in some Method, and to
some end, and to keep it from losing it self, and roving at random; it is but to
give it a Body, and to Book all the little Thoughts that present themselves to
it. I give ear to my Whimsies, because I am to record them. It often falls out,
that being displeased at some Actions that Civility and Reason will not permit
me openly to reprove; do I here disgorge my self without design of public
Instruction: And also these Poetical Lashes Zon sus l' aeil, zon sur le groin,
Mar^t contre Sagoin.
Zon sur le dos du sagoin,
A Jerk over the Eye, over the Snowt,
Let Sagoin be jerk'd throughout.
imprint themselves better upon Paper, than upon the most sensible Flesh. What
if I listen to Books a little more attentively than ordinary, since I watch if
I can purloin any thing that may adorn or support my own? I have not at all
studied to make a Book; but I have in some sort studied because I had made it,
if it be studying to scratch and pinch now one Author, and then another, either
by the head or foot; not with any design to steal Opinions from them; but to
assist, second, and fortify those I already have embraced. But who shall we
believe in the report he makes of himself in so corrupt an Age? considering
there are so few, if any at all, whom we can believe, when speaking of others,
where there is less interest to lie. The first thing that is done in order to
the corruption of Manners, is banishing of Truth; for, as Pindar says, to be
sincerely true, is the beginning of a great Virtue, and the first Article that
Plato requires in the Governor of his Republic. The truth of these days is
not that which really is, but what every man persuades himself, or that he is
made to believe; as we generally give the name of Money, not only to pieces of
the just alloy, but even to the false also, if they are current, and will pass.
Our Nation has long been reproached with this Vice; for Salvianus Massiliensis,
who lived in the time of the Emperor Valentinian, says, that lying and
forswearing themselves is not a Vice in the French, but a way of speaking. He
that would enhaunce upon this Testimony, might say, that it is now a Virtue in
them. Men form and fashion themselves to it, as to an Exercise of Honor; for
Dissimulation is one of the most notable Qualities of this Age. I have often
considered whence this Custom that we so religiously observe should spring, of
being more highly offended with the reproach of a Vice so familiar to us than
any other, and that it should be the highest injury can in Words be done us, to
reproach us with a Lie; and upon Examination, find, that it is natural to
defend the part that is most open, and lies exposed to the greatest Danger. It
seems as if by resenting, and being moved at the Accusation, we in some sort
acquitted our selves of the Fault; though we confess it in Effect, we condemn
it in outward appearance. May it not also be, that this reproach seems to imply
Cowardice and meanness of Courage? of which, can there be a more manifest sign,
than to eat a Man's own Words? What, to lie against a Man's own Knowledge?
Lying is a base unworthy Vice; a Vice that one of the Ancients pourtrays in the
most odious colors, when he says, that it is to manifest a contempt of God,
Lying an Argument of the Contempt of God.
and withal a fear of Men. It is not possible more excellently to represent
the Horror, Baseness, and Irregularity of it; for what can a man imagine more
hateful and contemptible than to be a Coward toward Men, and Valiant against
his Maker? Our Intelligence, being by no other way to be conveyed to one
another but by speaking, who falsifies that, betrays public Society. It Is the
only way by which we communicate our Thoughts and Wills; it is the Interpreter
of the Soul, and if that deceive us, we no longer know, nor have no farther tie
upon one another. If that deceive us, it breaks all our Correspondence, and
dissolves all the ties of Government. Certain Nations of the new discovered
Indies (no matter for naming them, being they are no more; for by a wonderful
and unheard of Example, the Desolation of that Conquest has extended to the
utter abolition of Names, and the ancient knowledge of Places) offered to their
Gods Humane Blood, but only such as was drawn from the Tongue and Ears, to
expiate for the Sin of Lying, as well heard as pronounced. The good Fellow of
Greece was wont to say, that Children were amused with Toys, and Men with
Words. As to the diverse usage of our giving the Lie, and the Laws of Honor in
that Case, and the alterations they have received, I shall refer saying what I
know of them to another time, and shall learn, if I can, in the mean time, at
what time the Custom took beginning of so exactly weighing and measuring Words,
and of making our Honors so interested in them; for it is easy to judge, that
it was not anciently amongst the Greeks and Romans; and I have often thought it
strange to see them rail at, and give one another the Lie without any farther
Quarrel. Their Laws of Duty steered some other course than ours. Caesar is
sometimes called Thief, and sometimes Drunkard to his Teeth. We see the liberty
of Invectives they practiced upon one another; I mean the greatest Chiefs of
War of both Nations, where words are only revenged with words, and never
proceed to any farther Quarrel.

CHAP. XIX. Of Liberty of Conscience.
It Is usual to see good Intentions, if carried on without Moderation, push men
on to very vicious Effects. In this Dispute, which has at this time engaged
France in a Civil War, the better and the soundest Cause no doubt is that which
maintains the ancient Religion and Government of the Kingdom. Nevertheless,
amongst the good men of that Party, (for I do not speak of those that only make
a pretense, either to execute their own particular Revenges, or to gratify
their Avarice, or to pursue the Favor of Princes; but of those who engage in
the quarrel out of true Zeal to Religion, and a virtuous Affection to maintain
the Peace and Government of their Country) of these I say, we see many whom
Passion transports beyond the bounds of Reason, and sometimes inspires them
with Counsels that are unjust and violent, Plaut.
and moreover inconsiderate and rash. It is true, that in those first times
when our Religion began to gain Authority with the Laws, Zeal armed many
against all sorts of Pagan Books, by which the learned suffered an exceeding
great loss. A disorder that I conceive did more prejudice to Letters, than all
the Flames of the Barbarians. Of this Cornelius Tacitus is a very good
Testimony; for though the Emperor Tacitus, his Kinsman, had by express Order
furnished all the Libraries in the World with it, nevertheless one entire Copy
could not escape the curious examination of those who desired to abolish it,
for only five or six idle Clauses that were contrary to our belief. They had
also the trick easily to lend undue Praises to all the Emperors who did any
thing for us, and universally to condemn all the Actions of those who were our
Adversaries, as is evidently manifest in the Emperor Julian, surnamed the
Apostate; who was in truth a very great and a rare Man, The Character of the
Emperor Julian the Apostate.
a Man in whose Soul Philosophy was imprinted in the best Characters, by which
he professed to govern all his Actions; and in truth there is no sort of Virtue
of which he has not left behind him very notable examples. In Chastity, (of
which the whole course of his Life has given manifest Proof) we read the same
of him, His Chastity.
that was said of Alexander and Scipio, that being in the Flower of his age,
for he was slain by the Parthians at one and thirty, of a great many very
beautiful Captives, he would not so much as look upon one. As to his Justice,
he took himself the Pains to hear the Parties, and although he would out of
Curiosity enquire what Religion they were of, nevertheless the hatred he had to
ours, never gave any counterpoise to the Balance. He made himself several good
Laws, and cut off a great part of the Subsidies and Taxes imposed and levied by
his Predecessors. We have two good Historians who were eye Witnesses of his
Actions: one of which, Marcellinus, in several Places of his History, sharply
reproves an Edict of his whereby he interdicted all Christian Rhetoricians and
Grammarians to keep School, or to teach, and says he could wish that Act of his
had been buried in Silence. It is very likely, that had he done any more severe
things against us, he, so affectionate as he was to our party, would not have
passed it over in silence. He was indeed sharp against us; but yet no cruel
Enemy: for our own People tell this Story of him, that one day, walking about
the City of Chalcedon, Maris, Bishop of the Place, was so bold as to tell him
that he was impious, and an Enemy to Christ, at which, say they, therein
affecting a philosophical Patience, he was no further moved, than to reply, Go
Wretch, and lament the loss of thy Eyes, to which the Bishop replied again, I
thank Jesus Christ for taking away my sight, that I may not see thy impudent
Face. So it is, that this Action of his savours nothing of the Cruelty that he
is said to have exercised toward us. He was (says Eutropius, my other Witness)
an Enemy to Christianity, but without putting his Hand to Blood. And to return
to his Justice, His Justice.
there is nothing in that whereof he can be accused, the severity excepted he
practiced in the beginning of his Reign, against those who had followed the
Party of Constantius, his Predecessor. As to his Sobriety, he lived always a
Soldier's kind of Life; His Sobriety.
and kept a Table in the most profound Peace, like one that prepared and inured
himself to the austerities of War. His Vigilance was such, His Vigilance.
that he divided the Night into three or four parts, of which, always the least
was dedicated to sleep, the rest was spent either in visiting the estate of his
Army and Guards, in Person, or in Study; for, amongst other rare Qualities, he
was very excellent in all sorts of Learning. It Is said of Alexander the Great,
that being in Bed, for fear lest sleep should divert him from his Thoughts and
Studies, he had always a Basin set by his Bedside, and held one of his hands
out with a Ball of Copper in it, to the end, that beginning to fall asleep, and
his Fingers leaving their hold, the Ball by falling into the Basin might awake
him. But the other had his mind so bent upon what he had a mind to do, and so
little disturbed with Fumes, by reason of his singular Abstinence, that he had
no need of any such Invention. His Military Experience.
As to his Military Experience, he was excellent in all the Qualities of a
great Captain, as it was likely he should, being almost all his Life in a
continual exercise of War, and most of that time with us in France, against the
Germans and Franes: We hardly read of any Man that ever saw more Dangers, or
that made more frequent Proofs of his personal Valor. His Death has something
in it parallel with that of Epaminondas, for he was wounded with an Arrow, and
tried to pull it out, and had done it, but that being edged, it cut and
disabled his Hand. He incessantly called out, that they would carry him again
in this condition into the heat of the Battle to encourage his Soldiers, who
very bravely disputed the Battle without him, till Night parted the Armies. We
stood obliged to his Philosophy for the singular contempt he had for his Life,
and all Humane things. He had a firm Belief of the immortality of the Soul. In
matter of Religion, he was vicious throughout, and was surnamed the Apostate,
for having relinquished ours: though methinks, it is more likely that he had
never thoroughly embraced it, but had dissembled out of obedience to the Laws,
till he came to the Empire. He was in his own so superstitious, that that he
was laughed at for it by those of the same Opinion of his own time, who
jeeringly said, that had he got the Victory over the Parthians, he had
destroyed the breed of Oxen in the World to supply his Sacrifices: He was
moreover besotted with the Art of Divination, and gave Authority to all sorts
of Predictions. He said, amongst other things, at his Death, that he was
obliged to the Gods, and thanked them, in that they would not cut him off by
Surprise, having long before advertised him of the Place and Hour of his Death,
nor by a mean and unmanly Death, more becoming lazy and delicate People, nor
by a Death that was languishing, long, and painful; and that they had thought
him worthy to Dye after that noble manner, in the progress of his Victories, in
the flower of his Age, and in the height of his Glory. The remakable Death of
the Emperor Julian.
He had a Vision like that of Marcus Brutus, that first threatened him in Gaul,
and afterward appeared to him in Persia just before his Death. These Words,
that some make him say when he felt himself wounded, Thou have overcome
Nazaren; or as others, Content thy self Nazaren; would hardly have been
omitted, had they been believed by my Witnesses, who being present in the Army,
have set down to the least motions and words of his end, no more than certain
other Miracles that are recorded of him. And to return to my Subject, he long
nourished, says Marcellinus, Paganism in his Heart; but all his Army being
Christians, he durst not own it. But in the end, seeing himself strong enough
to dare to discover himself, he caused the Temples of the Gods to be thrown
open, and did his utmost to set on foot and to encourage Idolatry: Which the
better to effect, having at Constantinople found the People disunited, and also
the Prelates of the Church divided amongst themselves, having convened them all
before him, he gravely and earnestly admonished them to calm those civil
Dissentions, and that every one might freely, and without fear follow his own
Religion. Which he did the more sedulously solicit, in hope that this License
would augment the Schisms and Faction of their Division, and hinder the People
from reuniting, and consequently fortifying themselves against him by their
unanimous Intelligence and Concord; having experimented by the cruelty of some
Christians, that there is no Beast in the World so much to be feared by Man, as
Man. These are very near his Words, wherein this is very worthy of
consideration, that the Emperor Julian made use of the same Receipt of Liberty
of Conscience to inflame the civil Dissentions, that our Kings do to extinguish
them. So that a man may say on one side, that to give the People the Reins to
entertain every man his own Opinion, Liberty of Conscience.
is to scatter and sow Division, and, as it were, to lend a hand to augment it,
their being no fence nor correction of Law to stop and hinder their Carreer;
but on the other side, a Man may also say, that to give the People the Reins to
entertain every Man his own Opinion, is to mollify and appease them by
Facility and Toleration, and dull the point which is whetted and made sharper
by variety, novelty, and difficulty. And I think it is better for the Honor of
the Devotion of our Kings, that not having been able to do what they would,
they have made a show of being willing to do what they could.

CHAP. XX. That we taste nothing pure.
THE imbecility of our Condition is such, that things cannot in their natural
simplicity and purity fall into our Use; the Elements that we enjoy are
changed, even Metals themselves, and Gold must in some sort be debased to fit
it for our Service. Neither has Virtue, so simple as that which Aristo, Pyrro,
and also the Stoics have made the principal end of Life; nor the Cerenaick and
Aristippick Pleasure, been without mixture useful to it. Of the Pleasure and
Goods that we enjoy, there is not one exempt from some mixture of ill and
inconvenience. -- medio de fonto leporum, Lucret. l. 4^

Surgit amari aliquid, quod in ipsis floribus angat.
Something that is bitter will arise
Even amidst our jollities.
Our extremest Pleasure has some Air of groaning and complaining in it. Would
you not say that it is dying of Pain? Nay, when we forge the Image of it, we
stuff it with sickly and painful Epithets; Languor, Softness, Feebleness,
Faintness, Morbidezza, a great Testimony of their Consanguinity and
Consubstantiality. The most profound Joy has more of Severity than Gayety in
it. The most extreme and most full contentment, more of the grave and temperate
than of the wanton. Ipsa faelicitas, se nisi temperat premit. Even Felicity,
unless it moderate it self, Seneca. Ep. 74.
oppresses. Delight chews and grinds us; according to the old Greek Verse,
which says, that the Gods sell us all the Goods they give us; that is to say,
that they give us nothing Pure and Perfect, and that we do not purchase them
but at the price of some evil. Labor and Pleasure, very unlike in Nature,
associate nevertheless by I know not what natural Conjunction. Socrates says,
that some God tried to mix in one mass, and to confound Pain and Pleasure, but
not being able to do it, he unbethought him, at least to couple them by the
Tail. Metrodorus said, that in Sorrow there is some mixture of Pleasure: I know
not whether or no he intended any thing else by that saying: but for my part, I
am of Opinion, that there is design, consent, and complacency in giving a Man's
self up to Melancholy. I say, that besides Ambition, which may also have a
stroke in the Business; there is some shadow of Delight and Delicacy which
smiles upon and flatters us even in the very lap of Melancholy. Are there not
some Complexions that feed upon it? Ovid. Trist.
-- est quaedam flere voluptas.
A certain kind of Pleasure it is to weep.
And one Attalus in Seneca says, that the Memory of our lost Friends is as
grateful to us, as bitterness in Wine too old is to the Palate, Catullus. Ep. 14.
Minister veteris puer falerni
Ingere mi calices amariores.
Thou Boy, that fill'st the old Falernian Wine,
The bitt'rest pour into the Boul that is mine.
and as Apples that have a sweet tartness. Nature discovers this confusion to
us. Painters hold, that the same Motions and screwings of the Face that serve
for weeping, serve for laughter too; and indeed, before the one or the other be
finished, do but observe the Painters manner of handling, and you will be in
doubt to which of the two the design does tend. And the extremity of Laughter
does at last bring Tears. Nullum sine auctora mente malum est. No evil is
without its Compensation. Senec. Ep. 70.
When I imagine man abounding with all the pleasure and conveniences that are
to be desired, let us put the case that all his Members were always seized with
a pleasure like that of Generation in its most excessive height; I feel him
melting under the weight of his delight, and see him utterly unable to support
so pure, so continual, and so universal a pleasure. Indeed he is running away
whilst he is there, and naturally makes haste to escape, as from a place where
he cannot stand firm, and where he is afraid of sinking. When I the most
strictly and religiously confess my self, I find that the best Virtue I have
has in it some tincture of Vice: and am afraid that Plato, in his purest
Virtue, (I who am as sincere and perfect a lover of Virtue of that stamp, as
any other whatever) if he had list'ned, and laid his ear close to himself (and
he did so) he would have heard some jarring sound of Humane mixture: but faint
and remote, and only to be perceived by himself. Man is wholly and throughout
but patch and motly. Even the Laws of Justice themselves cannot subsist without
mixture of Injustice: insomuch that Plato says, they undertake to cut off the
Hydra's head, who pretend to clear the Law of all inconvenience. Tacit. Annal.
lib. 14.
Omne magnum exemplum habet aliquid ex iniquo, quod contra singulos utilitate
publica rependitur. Every great example has in it some mixture of Injustice,
which recompenses the wrong done to particular men by the public utility, says
Tacitus. It is likewise true, that for the usage of Life, and the service of
public Commerce, there may be some excesses in the purity and perspicacity of
our minds; that penetrating light has in it too much of subtilty and curiosity:
we must a little stupifie, and blunt, and abate them, to render them more
obedient to example and practice; and a little veil and obscure them, the
better to proportion them to this dark and earthly Life. And yet common, and
less speculative Souls are found to be more proper, and more successful in the
management of Affairs; and the elevated and exquisite Opinions of Philosophy
more unfit for business. This sharp vivacity of Soul, and the supple and
restless volubility attending it, disturb our Negotiations. We are to manage
humane Enterprises more superficially and rudely, and leave a great part to
Fortune. It is not necessary to examine Affairs with so much subtlety, and so
deep: a man loses himself in the consideration of so many contrary lustres, and
so many various forms. Livie.
Voluntatibus res inter se pugnantes, obtorpuerant animi. Whilst they
considered of things so indifferent in themselves, they were astonished, and
knew not what to do. It Is what the Ancients say of Simonides, that by reason
his imagination suggested to him, upon the question King Hiero had put to him,
(to answer which he had had many days to meditate in) several witty and subtle
considerations, whilst he doubted which was the most likely, he totally
despaired of the truth. Who dives into, and in his inquisition comprehends all
circumstances and consequences, hinders his election: a little Engine well
handled, is sufficient for executions of less or greater weight and moment. The
best Husbands are those who can worst give account how they are so; and the
greatest Talkers for the most part do nothing to purpose. I know one of this
sort of men, and a most excellent director in all sorts of good husbandry, who
has miserably let an hundred thousand Livers yearly Revenue slip through his
hands. I know another, who says, that he is able to give better advice than any
of his Counsel; and there is not in the world a fairer show of a Soul, and of
great understanding, than he has; nevertheless, when he comes to the test, his
Servants find him quite another thing; not to make any further mention of his
misfortune.

CHAP. XXI. Against Idleness.
THe Emperor Vespasian, being sick of the Disease whereof he died, did not for
all that neglect to enquire after the Estate of the Empire; and even in bed
continually dispatched very many Affairs of great consequence; for which, being
reproved by his Physician, as a thing prejudicial to his health, An Emperor,
said he, must dye standing. A fine saying in my Opinion, and worthy a great
Prince. The Emperor Adrian since made use of the same Words, and Kings should
be often put in mind of it, to make them know, that the great Office conferred
upon them of the command of so many men, is not an Employment of ease; and that
there is nothing can so justly disgust a Subject, and make him unwilling to
expose himself to Labor and Danger for the Service of his Prince, than to see
him in the mean time devoted to his Ease and unmanly Delights: and to be
sollicitous of his Preservation, who so much neglects that of his People.
Whoever will take upon him to maintain, that it is better for a Prince to carry
on his Wars by others, than in his own Person; Fortune will furnish him with
Examples enough of those whose Lieutenants have brought great Enterprises to a
happy Issue, and of those also whose Presence has done more hurt than good. But
no virtuous and valiant Prince, can with Patience endure so dishonorable
Councils, under color of saving his Head, like the Statue of a Saint, for the
Happiness of his Kingdom; they degrade him from, and declare him incapable of
his Office, which is Military throughout. I know one who had much rather be
beaten, than to sleep whilst another fights for him; and who never without
jealousy heard of any brave thing done even by his own Officers in his
Absence. And Selimus said, with very good Reason, in my Opinion, That Victories
obtained without the Master, were never complete. Much more would he have said,
that that Master ought to blush for shame, to pretend to any share in the
Honor, having contributed nothing to the work, but his Voice and thought; nor
even so much as those, considering that in such work as that, the Direction and
Command that deserve Honor are only such as are given upon the place, and in
the heat of the Business. No Pilot performs his Office by standing still. The
Princes of the Ottoman Family, the chiefest in the World in Military Fortune,
have warmly embraced this Opinion, and Bajazet the second, with his Son that
swerved from it, spending their time in Sciences and other retired Employments,
gave great blows to their Empire: and Amurath the third, now reigning,
following their Example, begins to find the same. Was it not Edward the Third
King of England, who said this of our Charles the Fifth? There never was King
who so seldom put on his Arms, and yet never King who cut me out so much Work.
He had reason to think it strange, as an effect of Chance more than of Reason.
And let those seek out some other to join with them than me, who will reckon
the Kings of Castile and Portugal amongst the warlike and magnanimous
Conquerors, because at the distance of twelve hundred Leagues from their lasie
abode, by the Conduct of their Captains, they made themselves Masters of both
Indies; of whom it would be known, if they have but the Courage to go and in
Person enjoy them. The Emperor Julian said yet further, that a Philosopher,
and a brave man, ought not so much as to breathe; that is to say, not to allow
any more to bodily Necessities, than what we cannot refuse; keeping the Soul
and Body still intent and busy about honorable, great, and virtuous things:
he was ashamed if any one in public saw him spit, or sweat, (which is said by
some also of the Lacedemonian young men, and that Xenophon says of the Persian)
forasmuch as he conceived that Exercise, continual Labor, and Sobriety, ought
to have dried up all those Superfluities. What Seneca says will not be unfit
for this Place; which is, that the ancient Romans kept their Youth always
standing, and taught them nothing that they were to learn sitting. It Is a
generous desire to wish to dye usefully, and like a Man, but the Effect lies
not so much in our Resolution as good Fortune. A thousand have proposed to
themselves in Battle, either to overcome, or dye, who have failed both in the
one and the other: Wounds and Imprisonment crossing their Design, and
compelling them to live against their Wills. There are Diseases that overthrow
so much as our Desires, and our Knowledge. Fortune ought not to second the
Vanity of the Roman Legions, who bound themselves by Oath, either to overcome*
or dye. Victor, Marce Fabi, revertar ex acie: si fallo, Jovem patrem
Gradivumque Martem, aliosque iratos invoco Deos. I will return (Marcus Fabius)
a Conqueror from the Army: and if I fail, I wish the Indignation of Jove,
Mars, and the other offended Gods, may light upon me. The Portuguese say, that
in a certain Place of their Conquest of the Indies, they met with Soldiers who
had damned themselves with horrible Execrations, to enter into no other
Composition, but either to cause themselves to be slain, or to remain
Victorious; and had their Heads and Beards shaved in token of this Vow. It Is to
much purpose for us to hazard our selves, and to be obstinate. It seems as if
blows avoided those that present themselves too briskly to Danger; and do not
willingly fall upon those who too willingly seek them, and so defeat them of
their Design. Such there have been, after having tried all ways, not having
been able with all their Endeavor to obtain the Favor of dying by the hand of
the Enemy, have been constrained to make good their Resolution of bringing home
the Honor of Victory, or of losing their Lives, to kill themselves even in the
heat of Battle. Of which there are other Examples, but this is one. Philistus,
General of the naval Army of Dionysius the younger against those of Syracusa,
presented them Battle, which was sharply disputed, their Forces being equal. In
which Engagement he had the better at the first, through his own Valor: but
the Syracusans drawing about his Admiral Gally to environ him, after having
done great things in his own Person to disengage himself, hoping for no relief,
with his own hand took away that Life he had so liberally, and in vain, exposed
to the Fury of the Enemy. Muley Moluck King of Fez, who won the Battle against
Sebastian King of Portugal, so famous for the Death of three Kings, and by the
transmission of that great Kingdom to the Crown of Castile; was extremely sick
when the Portuguese entered in an hostile manner into his Dominions; and from
that day forward grew worse and worse, still drawing nearer to, and foreseeing
his end: Yet never did man better employ his own sufficiency more vigorously
and bravely than he did upon this Occasion. He found himself too weak to
undergo the Pomp and Ceremony of entering into his Camp, which after their
manner is very Magnificent, and therefore resigned that Honor to his Brother;
but that was also all of the Office of a General that he resigned, all the rest
of greatest Utility and Necessity he most exactly and gloriously performed in
his own Person; his body lying upon a Couch, but his Judgment and Courage
upright and firm to his last gasp, and in some sort beyond it. He might have
defeated his Enemy, indiscreetly advanced into his Dominions without striking a
Blow; and it was a very unhappy Occurrence, that for want of a little Life or
some body to substitute in the Conduct of this War, and the Affairs of a
troubled State, he was compelled to seek a doubtful and bloody Victory, having
another by a better and surer way already in his hands. Notwithstanding he
wonderfully managed the continuance of his Sickness in consuming the Enemy, and
in drawing them far from the assistance of the Naval Army they had in the Ports
of Afric, even till the last day of his Life, which he designedly reserved
for this furious Battle. He ordered his Battle in a circular Form, environning
the Portugal Army on every side, which round coming to close in the Wings, and
to draw up close together, did not only hinder them in the Conflict (which was
very sharp through the Valor of the young invading King) considering they were
every way to make a Front, but prevented their Flight after the Defeat, so that
finding all Passages possessed and shut up by the Enemy, they were constrained to
close up together again; coacervanturque non solum caede, sed etiam fuga, and
there they were slain in heaps upon one another, leaving to the Conqueror a
very bloody and entire Victory. Dying, he caused himself to be carried and
hurried from place to place where most need was, and passing through the Files,
encouraged the Captains and Soldiers one after another. But a corner of his
Battle being broken, he was not to be held from mounting on Horseback with his
Sword in his hand. He did his utmost to break from those about him, and to rush
into the thickest of the Battle, they all the while withholding him, some by
the Bridle, some by his Robe, and others by his Stirrups. This last Effort
totally overwhelmed the little Life he had left, they again lay him upon his
Bed; but coming to himself again, and starting out of his Swoon, all other
faculties failing, to give his People notice that they were to conceal his
Death (the most necessary command he had then to give, that his Soldiers might
not be discouraged with the news) he exposed with his Finger upon his Mouth the
ordinary sign of keeping silence. Who ever lived so long and so far in Death?
whoever died more like a Man? The most extreme degree of entertaining Death,
and the most natural, is to look upon it not only without astonishment but
without care, continuing the wonted course of Life even into it. As Cato did,
who entertained himself in study, and went to sleep, having a violent and
bloody one in his Heart, and the Weapon in his hand, with which he was resolved
to dispatch himself.

CHAP. XXII. Of Posts.
I Have been none of the least able in this Exercise, which is proper for men
of my pitch, short and well knit; but I give it over, it shakes us too much to
continue long. I was just now reading, Posthorses first set up by Cyrus.
that King Cyrus, the better to have News brought him from all parts of the
Empire, which was of a vast extent; caused it to be tried how far a Horse could
go in a day without baiting, and at that distance appointed Stages and Men,
whose business it was to have Horses always in readiness, to mount those who
were dispatched away to him. And some say, that this swift way of posting, is
equal to that of the flight of Cranes. Caesar says, that Lucius Vibulus Rufus,
being in great haste to carry Intelligence to Pompey, rid Day and Night, still
taking fresh Horses for the greater Diligence and Speed; and himself, as
Suetonius reports, traveled a hundred miles a day in a hired Coach; but he was
a furious Courrier, from where the Rivers stopped his way, he always past them by
swimming, without turning out of his way to look for either Bridge or Ford.
Tiberius Nero, going to see his Brother Drusus, who was sick in Germany,
traveled two hundred miles in four and twenty hours, having three Coaches. In
the War the Romans had against King Antiochus, T. Sempronius Gracchus, says
Livie, Livius.
Per dispositos equos prope incredibili celeritate ab Amphissa tertio die
Pellam pervenit. Upon Horses purposely laid in, he by an almost incredible
speed, rid in three days from Amphissa to Pella. And it appears there, that
they were established Posts, and not Horses purposely laid in upon this
Occasion. Cecinna's Invention to send back News to his Family, was much more
quick, for he took Swallows along with him from home, and turned them out
toward their Nests when he would send back any News; setting a mark of some
color upon them to signify his meaning, according to what he and his People
had before agreed upon. At the Theater at Rome, Pigeons taught to carry
Letters.
Masters of Families carried Pigeons in their Bosoms, to which they tied
Letters, when they had a mind to send any Orders to their People at home; and
the Pigeons were trained up to bring back an Answer. D. Brutus made use of the
same Device, when besieged in Mutina, and others elsewhere have done the same.
In Peru, they rid post upon men's shoulders, who took them upon their shoulders
in a certain kind of Litter made for that purpose, and ran with such Agility,
that in their full speed, the first Couriers throw their load to the second,
without making any stop; and so on. I understand that the Valachians, who are
the grand Signiors Couriers, perform wonderful Diligences, by reason they have
Liberty to dismount the first they meet upon the road, giving him their own
tired Horses; to preserve themselves from being weary, they gird themselves
straight about the middle with a broad Girdle, but I could never find any
benefit by it.

CHAP. XXIII. Of ill means employed to a good end.
THere is wonderful Relation and Correspondence in this universal Government of
the Works of Nature, which very well makes it appear that it is neither
accidental, nor carried on by diverse Masters. The Diseases and Conditions of
our Bodies is in like manner manifest in Estates, and the various Governments
of the World. Kingdoms and Republics are founded, flourish, and decay with Age
as we do. We are subject to a repletion of Humors either useless or dangerous,
either of those that are good (for even those the Physicians are afraid of: and
being that we have nothing in us that is permanent, they say that a too brisk
and vigorous perfection of Health, must be abated by Art, lest being that our
Nature cannot rest in any certain condition, and not having whither to rise to
mend it self, it makes too sudden and too disorderly a Retreat; and therefore
prescribe Wrestlers to purge and bleed, to qualify that superabundant Health)
or else a Repletion of evil Humors, which is the ordinary cause of Sickness.
Estates are very often sick of the like Repletion, and therefore sorts of
Purgations have commonly been used. Sometimes a great multitude of Families are
turned out to clear the Country; who seek out new Abodes elsewhere, and
encroach upon others. After this manner our ancient Francs came from the
remotest part of Germany to seize upon Gaul, and to drive thence the first
Inhabitants; so was that infinite deluge of Men made up that came into Italy
under the Conduct of Brennus, and others: so the Goths and Vandals; also the
People who now possess Greece, left their native Country, to go settle
elsewhere where they might have more room; and there is scarce two or three
little corners of the World that have not felt the effect of such Removals. The
Romans by this means erected their Colonies, for perceiving their City to grow
immeasurably populous, they eased it of the most unnecessary People, and sent
them to inhabit and cultivate the Lands by them conquered: sometimes also they
purposely maintained Wars with some of their Enemies, not only to keep their
men in action, for fear lest Idleness, the Mother of Corruption, should bring
upon them some worse inconvenience; Juvenal. sat. 6.
Et patimur longae pacis mala, saevior armis
Luxuria incumbit.
We suffer the ills of a long Peace, by far
Greater, and more pernicious than War.
but also to serve for a Blood-letting to their Republic, and a little to
evaporate the too vehement heat of their Youth, to prune and cleanse the
Branches from the Stock too luxuriant in Wood; and to this end it was, that
they formerly maintained so long a War with Carthage. In the Treaty of
Bretigny, Edward the third, King of England, would not, in the general Peace he
then made with our King, comprehend the Controversy about the Duchy of
Brittany, that he might have a Place wherein to discharge himself of his
Soldiers, and that the vast number of English he had brought over to serve him
in that Expedition, might not return back into England. And this also was one
reason why our King Philip consented to send his Son John that Foreign
Expedition, that he might take along with him a great number of hot Young Men
that were then in his Pay. There are many in our Times who talk at this rate,
wishing that this hot Emotion that is now amongst us, might discharge it self
in some neighboring War, for fear lest all the peccant Humors that now reign
in this politic Body of ours, may not diffuse themselves farther, keep the
Fever still in the height, and at last cause our total Ruin; and in truth a
Foreign is much more supportable than a Civil War; but I do not believe that
God will favor so unjust a design, as to offend and quarrel others for our own
advantage. Nil mihi tam valde placeat Rhamnusia virgo, Catullus.

Quod temere invitis suscipiatur heris.
In War that does invade another's right,
Whose end is plunder, I take no delight.
And yet the weakness of our condition does often push us upon the necessity of
making use of ill means to a good end. Lycurgus, the most virtuous and perfect
Legislator that ever was, invented this unjust practice of making the Helotes,
who were there Slaves, drunk by force, by so doing to teach his People
Temperance, to the end that the Spartiates seeing them so overwhelmed and
buried in Wine, might abhor the excess of this beastly Vice. And yet they were
more too blame, who of old gave leave that Criminals, to what sort of death
soever condemned, should be cut up alive by the Physicians, that they might
make a true discovery of our inward parts, and build their Art upon greater
certainty: for if we must run into excesses, it is more excusable to do it for
the health of the Soul, than that of the Body; as the Romans trained up the
People to Valor, and the contempt of Dangers, and Death, by those furious
Spectacles of Gladiators and Fencers, who being to fight it out to the last,
cut, mangled, and killed one another in their Presence: Prudentius.
Quid vesani aliud sibi vult ars impia ludi,
Quid mortes juvenum, quid sanguine pasta voluptas?
Of such inhumane sports what further use?
What Pleasure can slaughters of men produce?
and this custom continued till the Emperor Theodosius his time. Ibid.
Arripe dilatam tua dux in tempora famam,
Quodque patris superest successor laudis habeto:
Nullus in Vrbe cadat, cujus sit poena Voluptas,
Jam solis contenta feris infamis arena,
Nulla cruentatis homicidia ludat in armis.
Prince, take the Honors destined for thy Reign,
Inherit of thy Father those remain,
Henceforth let none at Rome for sport be slain.
Let beast's Blood stain the infamous Theater,
And no more Homicides be acted there.
It was in truth a wonderful Example, and of great advantage for the training
up the People, to see every day before their Eyes a hundred, two hundred, nay,
a thousand couples of Men armed against one another, cut one another to pieces
with so great a constancy of Courage, that they were never heard to utter so
much as one syllable of Weakness or Commiseration; never seen to turn their
back, nor so much as to make one cowardly step to evade a Blow, but rather
expose their Necks to the Adversaries Sword, and present themselves to receive
the stroke. And many of them, when wounded to Death, have sent to ask the
Spectators if they were satisfied with their behavior, before they lay down to
dye upon the Place. It was not enough for them to Fight and to Dye bravely, but
cheerfully too; insomuch that they were hissed and cursed if they made any
Dispute about receiving their Death. The very Maids themselves set them on. --
consurgit ad ictus: Idem.

Et quoties victor ferrum jugulo inserit, illa.
Delicias ait esse suas, pectusque jacentis
Virgo modesta jubet converso pollice rumpi.
The modest Virgin is delighted so
With the fell sport, that she applauds the blow,
And when the Victor baths his bloody brand
In's fellow's Throat, and lays him on the sand,
Then she is most pleased, and shows by signs she would fain
Have him rip up the bosom of the slain.
The first Romans only condemned Criminals to this Example: but they have since
employed innocent Slaves in the work, and even Freemen too, who sold themselves
to this effect: nay moreover, Senators and Knights of Rome: and also Women;
Nunc caput in mortem vendunt, and funus arenae, Manil.

Atque hostem sibi quisque parat cum bella quiescunt.
They sell themselves to death, and since the Wars
Are ceased, each for himself a Foe prepares.
Statius.
Hos inter fremitus, novosque lusus,
Stat sexus rudis, insciusque ferri,
Et pugnat capit improbus viriles.
Amidst these Tumults and Alarms
The tender Sex, unskilled in Arms,
Immodestly will try their mights,
And now engaged in manly Fights.
which I should think strange and incredible, if we were not accustomed every
day to see in our own Wars many thousands of men of other Nations, for Money to
stake their Blood and their Lives in Quarrels wherein they have no manner of
concern.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Roman Grandeur.
I will only say a word or two of this infinite Argument, to show the
simplicity of those who compare the pitiful Grandeurs of these Times to that
of Rome. In the seventh Book of Cicero's Familiar Epistles (and let the
Grammarians put out that surname of Familiar if they please, for in truth it is
not very proper; and they who in stead of familiar have substituted ad
familiares, may gather something to justify them for so doing, out of what
Suetonius says in the Life of Caesar, that he had a Volume of Letters of his ad
familiares) there is one directed to Caesar, being then in Gaul, wherein Cicero
repeates these words, which were in the end of another Letter that Caesar had
writ to him: As to what concerns Marcus Furius, whom you have recommended to
me, I will make him King of Gaul, and if you would have me advance any other
Friend of yours send him to me. It was no new thing for a simple Citizen of
Rome, as Caesar then was, to dispose of Kingdoms, for he took away that of King
Deiotarus from him, to give it to a Gentleman of the City of Pergamum, called
Mithridates. And they who writ his Life, record several Cities by him sold; and
Suetonius says, that he had once from King Ptolomy three millions and six
hundred thousand Crowns, which was very near selling him his own Kingdom. Tot
Galatae, tot Pontus, tot Lidia nummis. Claud.

Such sums of Money did he raise as these
From Pontus, Lidia, and the Galatees.
Marcus Antonius said, that the Grandeur of the People of Rome was not so much
seen in what they took, as in what they gave. And indeed some Ages before
Antonius, they had dethroned one amongst the rest with so wonderful Authority,
that in all the Roman History I have not observed any thing that more denotes
the height of their Power. Antiochus possessed all Egypt, and was moreover
ready to conquer Cyprus, and other Appendixes of that Empire; when being upon
the progress of his Victories, C. Popilius came to him from the Senate, and at
their first meeting refused to take him by the Hand, till he had first read his
Letters, which after the King had read, and told him he would consider of them,
Popilius made a Circumference about him with the stick he had in his hand,
saying, Return me an Answer, that I may carry it back to the Senate before thou
stirrest out of this Circle. Antiochus, astonished at the roughness of so
positive a Command, after a little Pause, replied, I will obey the Senates
Command; and then it was that Popilius saluted him as a Friend to the People of
Rome. After having quitted Claim to so great a Monarchy, and in such a Torrent
of successful Fortune, upon three words in writing, in earnest he had Reason,
as he afterward did, to send the Senate word by his Ambassadors, that he had
received their Order with the same respects, as if he had been sent by the
Immortal Gods. All the Kingdoms that Augustus gained by the right of War, he
either restored to those who had lost them, or presented them to strangers. And
Tacitus, in reference to this, speaking of Cogidunus King of England, gives us
a very brisk touch of that infinite Power: The Romans, says he, were from all
Antiquity accustomed to leave the Kings they had subdued in possession of their
Kingdoms under their Authority, that they might have even Kings to be their
Slaves: Vt haberent instrumenta servitutis, and reges. It Is like that Solomon,
whom we have seen make a Gift of Hungary, and other Principalities, had therein
more respect to this consideration, than to that he was wont to allege, viz.
that he was glutted and overcharged with so many Monarchies, and so much
Dominion, as his own Valor, and that of his Ancestors had acquired.

CHAP. XXV. Not to counterfeit being sick.
THere is an Epigram in Martial of very good Sense, for he has of all sorts,
where he pleasantly tells the story of Celius, who, to avoid making his Court
to some great Men of Rome, to wait their rising, and to attend them abroad,
pretended to have the Gout; and the better to color this Pretense, anointed
his Legs, and had them lap'd up in a great many Clouts and Swathings, and
perfectly counterfeited both the Gesture and Countenance of a gouty Person;
till in the end, Fortune did him the kindness to make him one indeed. Tantum
cura potest and ars doloris, Mart. Epig. 28. lib. 1.

Desiit fingere Caelius podagram.
The power of counterfeiting is so great,
Caelius has ceased the Gout to counterfeit.
I think I have read somewhere in Appian a story like this, of one who to
escape the Proscriptions of the Triumviri of Rome, and the better to be
concealed from the discovery of those who pursued him, having shaded himself in
a Disguise, would yet add this Invention to counterfeit having but one Eye; but
when he came to have a little more liberty, and went to take off the Plaster
he had a great while worn over his Eye, he found he had totally lost the Sight
of it indeed, and that it was absolutely gone. It Is possible that the Action of
Sight was dulled, for having been so long without exercise, and that the Optic
power was wholly retired into the other Eye: For we evidently perceive, that
the Eye we keep shut, sends some part of its virtue to its fellow, so that the
remaining Eye will swell and grow bigger; as also Idleness, with the heat of
Ligatures and Plasters, might very well have brought some gouty Humor upon
this dissembler of Martial. Reading in Froisard the Vow of a Troop of young
English Gallants, to carry their left Eyes bound up till they were arrived in
France, and had performed some notable Exploit upon us; I have often been tickled
with the conceit of it, in befalling them as it did the before named Roman, and
that they had returned with but an Eye a piece to their Mistrisses, for whose
sakes they had entered into this ridiculous Vow. Mothers have reason to rebuke
their Children when they counterfeit having but one Eye, Squinting, Lameness,
or any other Personal defect; for besides that their Bodies being then so
tender may be subject to take an ill bent, Fortune, I know not how, sometimes
seems to delight in taking us at our word; and I have heard several Examples
related of People who have become really sick, by only feigning to be so. I
have always used, whether on Horseback, or on foot, to carry a stick in my
hand, and so as to affect doing it with a Grace. Many have threat'ned that this
wantonness would one day be turned into necessity, that is, that I should be
the first of my Family that should have the Gout. But let us a little lengthen
this Chapter, and eech it with a piece of another color, concerning Blindness.
Pliny reports of one, that once dreaming he was Blind, finding himself in the
Morning so indeed, without any preceding infirmity in his Eyes. The force of
Imagination might assist in this Case, as I have said elsewhere, and Pliny
seems to be of the same Opinion; but it is more likely that the motions which
the Body felt within (of which Physicians if they please may find out the
cause,) which took away his Sight, were the occasions of his Dream. Let us add
another story, not very improper for this Subject, which Seneca relates in one
of his Epistles. You know, says he, writing to Lucullus, that Harpate, my Wives
Fool, is thrown upon me as an hereditary charge, for I have naturally an
aversion to those Monsters; and if I have a mind to laugh at a Fool, I need not
seek him far, I can laugh at my self. This Fool has suddenly lost her sight. I
tell you a strange, but a very true thing; she is not sensible that she is
blind, but eternally importunes her keeper to take her abroad, because she says
the House is dark: I pray believe, that what we laugh at in her, happens to
every one of us: no one knows himself to be avaricious. Besides, the blind call
for a Guide, but we stray of our own accord. I am not ambitious, we say, but a
man cannot live otherwise at Rome: I am not wastful, but the City requires a
great expense: it is not my fault if I am choleric, and if I have not yet
established any certain course of Life, it is the fault of Youth. Let us not
seek our Disease out of our selves, it is in us, and planted in our Bowels. And
even this, that we do not perceive our selves to be sick, renders us more hard
to be cured. If we do not betimes begin to dress our selves, when shall we have
done with so many Wounds and Evils wherewith we abound? And yet we have a most
sweet and charming Medicine of Philosophy; for of all the rest we are sensible
of no Pleasure till after the Cure: this pleases and heals at once. This is
what Seneca says, that has carried me from my Subject, but there is advantage
in the change.

CHAP. XXVI. Of Thumbs.
TAcitus reports, that amongst certain Barbarian Kings, their manner was, when
they would make a firm Obligation, to join their hands close to one another,
and twist their Thumbs, and when by force of straining the Blood it appeared in
the ends, they lightly pricked them with some sharp Instrument, and mutually
sucked them. Physicians say, that the Thumbs are the master Fingers of the
Hand, and that their Latin Etymology is derived from Pollere. The Greeks
called them (...), as who should say, another hand. And it seems that the
Latins also sometimes take it in this sense for the whole hand; Sed nec vocibus
excitata blandis, Mart. l. 12. Epig

Molli pollice nec rogata surgit.
It was at Rome a Signification of Favor to depress and clap in the Thumbs;
Fautor utroque tuum laudabit pollice ludum. Hora. l. 1. Ep. 18.

Thy Patron, when thou make thy sport,
Will with both Thumbs applaud thee for it.
and of disfavour to elevate and thrust them outward: -- converso pollice vulgi
Juven. Sat. 3.

Quemlibet occidunt populariter.
The Vulgar with reverted Thumbs,
Kill each one that before them comes.
The Romans exempted from War all such as were maimed in the Thumbs, as having
no more sufficient strength to hold their Arms. Augustus confiscated the Estate
of a Roman Knight, who had maliciously cut off the Thumbs of two young Children
he had, to excuse them from going into the Armies: and before him, the Senate,
in the time of the Italick War, had condemned Caius Valienus to perpetual
Imprisonment, and confiscated all his Goods, for having purposely cut off the
Thumb of his left hand, to exempt himself from that Expedition. Some one, I
have forgot who, having won a Naval Battle, cut off the Thumbs of all his
vanquished Enemies, to render them incapable of fighting, and of handling the
Oar. The Athenians also caused the Thumbs of those of Aegina to be cut off, to
deprive them of the preference in the Art of Navigation. And in Lacedemonia,
Pedagogues chastised their Scholars by biting their Thumbs.

CHAP. XXVII. Cowardice the Mother of Cruelty.
I Have often heard it said, that Cowardice is the Mother of Cruelty: and I have
found by experience, that that malicious and inhumane animosity and fierceness,
is usually accompanied with a feminine faintness. I have seen the most cruel
People, and upon very frivolous occasions, very apt to cry. Alexander, the
Tyrant of Pheres, durst not be a Spectator of Tragedies in the Theater, for
fear lest his Citizens should see him weep at the Misfortunes of Hecuba and
Andromache; who himself caused so many People every day to be murdered without
pity. Is it not meanness of Spirit that renders them so pliable to all
Extremities? Valor (whose Effect is only to be exercised against resistance)
Claud.
Nec nisi bellantis gaudet cervice juvenci.
-- neither unless he fight
In conquering a Bull does take delight.
stops when it sees the Enemy at its mercy; but Pusillanimity, to say that it
was also in the Action, not having dared to meddle in the first act of Danger,
rushes into the second of Blood and Massacre. For the execution in Victories is
commonly performed by the rascality and hangers on of an Army, and that which
causes so many unheard of Cruelties in domestic Wars, is, that the hottest of
the People are fleshed in being up to the Elbows in Blood, and ripping up
Bodies that lie postrate at their feet, having no sense of any other Valor. Et
Lupus, and turpes instant morientibus ursi, Ovid Trist. lib. 3. Eleg. 5.

Et quaecunque minor nobilitate fera est.
None but the Wolves, the filthy Bears, and all
The baser Beasts, will in the dying fall.
Like cowardly House-curs, that in the House worry and tear the Skins of wild
Beasts they durst not come near in the Field. What is it in these times of ours
that causes our mortal quarrels? And that whereas our Fathers had some degree
of revenge in their days, we now begin with the last in ours, and that at the
first meeting nothing is to be said but kill? What is this but Cowardice? Every
one is sensible, that there is more bravery and disdain in subduing an Enemy,
than in cutting his Throat; and in making him yield, than in putting him to the
Sword: besides that, the appetite of Revenge is better satisfied and pleased
because it is only aim ^s to make it self felt. And this is the reason why we do
not fall upon a Beast or a Stone when they hurt us, because they are not
capable of being sensible of our Revenge; and therefore to kill a man, is to
defend him from the Injury and Offense we intend him. And as Bias cried out to
a wicked Fellow, I know that sooner or later thou will have thy Reward, but I
am afraid I shall not see it. And as the Orchomenians complained, that the
Penitence of Lyciscus for the Treason committed against them, came in season,
because there was no one remaining alive of those who had been interested in
the Offense, and whom the Pleasure of this Penitency should affect: so Revenge
is to be repented of, when the Person on whom it is executed is deprived of
means of suffering under it: for as the Avenger will look on to enjoy the
Pleasure of his Revenge, so the Person on whom he takes Revenge, should be a
Spectator too, to be afflicted, and to repent. He will repent it, we say, and
because we have given him a Pistol-shot through the Head, do we imagine he will
repent? On the contrary, if we but observe, we shall find, that he makes a
Mouth at us in falling: and is so far from penitency, that he does not so much
as repine at us. And we do him the kindest Office of Life, which is to make him
die insensibly, and soon. We are afterward to hide our selves, and to shift
and fly from the Officers of Justice, who pursue us whilst he is at rest.
Killing is good to frustrate an Offense to come, not to revenge one that is
already past: and more an Act of Fear than Bravery; of Precaution, than
Courage, and of Defense than of attempt. It is manifest that by it we quit both
the true end of Revenge, and the care of our Reputation; we are afraid if he
lives he will do us another injury as great as the first; it is not out of
Animosity to him, but care of thy self, that thou rid'st him out of the way.
Duels common in the Kingdom of Narsingua.
In the Kingdom of Narsingua this expedient would be useless to us, where not
only Soldiers, but Tradesmen also end their Differences by the Sword. The
King never denies the Field to any that will fight; and sometimes when they are
Persons of Quality, looks on, rewarding the Victor with a Chain of Gold; but
for which any one that will may fight with him again: by which means, by having
come off from one Combat, he has engaged himself in many. If we thought by
Virtue to be always Masters of our Enemies, and to triumph over them at
pleasure, we should be sorry they should escape from us as they do, by dying:
but we have a mind to conquer more with Safety than Honor, and in our quarrel,
more pursue the end than the Glory. Asinius Pollio, who, Pollio's Libel against
Plancus.
for being a worthy man, was the less to be excused, committed a like Error,
who having writ a Libel against Plancus, forbore to publish it, till he was
first dead: which is to bite a man's Thumb at a blind man, to rail at one that
is deaf, and to wound a man that has no feeling, rather than to run the hazard
of his Resentment. And it was also said in his behalf, that it was only for
Hobgoblins to wrestle with the dead. He that stays to see the Author dye, whose
Writings he intends to question, what does he say, but that he is foolish and
troublesome? It was told Aristotle, that some one had spoken ill of him: let
him do more, said he, let him whip me too, provided I am not there. The Lie
revenged with a box of the Ear.
Our Fathers contented themselves to revenge an Injury with the lie, the lie
with a box of the Ear, and so forward; they were valiant enough not to fear
their Adversary both living, and provoked: We tremble for fear, so long as we
see them on foot. And that this is so, does not our noble practice of these
days, equally to prosecute to death both him that has offended us, and him we
have offended, make it out? It Is also a kind of Cowardice that has introduced
the custom of having seconds, thirds, and fourths in our Duels. They were
formerly Duels, they are now Skirmishes, Rencontres, and Battles. Solitude was
doubtless terrible to those who were the first inventors of this Practice. Quum
in se cuique minimum fiduciae esset. They had little confidence in themselves.
For naturally any company whatever is comfortable in danger. Third Persons were
formerly called in to prevent Disorder and foul play only, and to be witness of
the Success of the Combat. But since they have brought it to this pa^^ that
they themselves engage, whoever is invited cannot handsomely stand by as an idle
Spectator, for fear of being suspected either of want of Affection or Courage.
Besides the injustice and unworthiness of such an Action, of engaging other
Force and Valor in the Protection of your Honor than your own; I conceive it
a disadvantage to a brave man, and who wholly relies upon himself, to shuffle
his Fortune with that of a Second; since every one runs hazard enough in
himself, without hazarding for another, and has enough to do to assure himself
in his own Virtue for the defense of his Life, without intrusting a thing so
dear in a third man's hand. For, if it be not expressly agreed upon before to
the contrary, it is a combined Party of all four, and if your Second be killed,
you have two to deal withal with good reason. And to say that it is foul play,
it is so indeed, as it is well armed to charge a man that has but the hilts of
a broken Sword in his hand, or clear and untouched a man that is desperately
wounded: but if these be advantages you have got by fighting, you may make use
of them without reproach: the disparity and inequality is only weighed and
considered from the condition of the Combatants when they begun, as to the
rest, you must take your Fortune: and though you had alone three Enemies upon
you at once, your two Companions being killed, you have no more wrong done you,
than I should do in a Battle, by running a man through I should see engaged
with one of our own men with the like advantage. The nature of Society will
have it so, that where there is Troop against Troop (as where our Duke of
Orleance challenged Henry King of England an hundred against an hundred: three
hundred against as many as the Argians against the Lacedaemonians, and three to
three, as the Horatii against the Curiatii) the multitude on either side is
considered but as one single man, the hazard every where, where there is
company, being confused and mixed. I have a domestic Interest in this
Discourse; for my Brother, the Sieur de Matecoulom, was at Rome entreated by a
Gentleman with whom he had no great acquaintance, and who was Defendant, and
challenged by another, to be his Second; In this Duel he found himself matched
with a Gentleman much better known to him, where, after having dispatched his
man, seeing the two Principal still on foot, and sound, he ran in to disengage
his Friend. What could he do less? should he have stood still, and if Chance
would have ordered it so, have seen him he was come thither to defend killed
before his face, what he had thither done signified nothing to the Business,
the Quarrel was yet undecided. The courtesy that you can, and certainly ought
to show to your Enemy, when you have reduced him to an ill Condition, and have
a great advantage over him, I do not see how you can do it, where the Interest
of another is in the case, where you are only called in as an Assistant, and
the Quarrel is none of yours. He could neither be just nor courteous at the
hazard of him he was there to serve; and was also enlarged from the Prisons of
Italy at the speedy and solemn request of our King. Indiscreet Nation! we are
not content to make our Vices and Follies known to the World by Report only,
but we must go into Foreign Countries, there to show them what Fools we are.
Put three Frenchmen into the Deserts of Libya, they will not live a Month
together without fighting; so that you would say this Peregrination were a
thing purposely designed to give Strangers the pleasures of our Tragedies, and
for the most part such as rejoice and laugh at our miseries. We go into Italy
to learn to fence, and fall to practice at the expense of our Lives before we
have learned it: and yet, by the order of Discipline, we should put the Theory
before the Practice. We discover our selves to be but Learners. Primitiae
juvenum miserae, Eneid. l. 11.
bellique futuri
Dura rudimenta. --
Of Youth the first Instructions painful are,
And hard the Rudiments of future War.
I know Fencing is an Art very useful to its end, (in a Duel betwixt two
Princes, Cousin-germans in Spain, the elder, says Livie, by his skill and
dexterity in Arms, easily surmounting the greater and more awkward Strength of
the younger) and of which, the knowledge, as I experimentally know, has
inspired some with Courage above their natural Talent: but this is not properly
Valor, because it supports it self upon Address, and is founded upon something
besides it self. The honor of Combat consists in the jealousy of Courage, and
not of Skill; and therefore I have known a Friend of mine, famed for a great
Master in this Exercise, in his Quarrels make choice of such Arms as might
deprive him of this advantage, and that wholly depended upon Fortune, and
assurance, that they might not attribute his Victory rather to his skill in
Fencing than his Valor. When I was young, Gentlemen avoided the reputation of
good Fencers, as injurious to them; and learned with all imaginable privacy to
fence, as a Trade of subtilty, derogating from true and natural Virtue.

Tasso. Can. 12.
Non schivar, non parar, non ritirarsi,
Voglion costor, ne qui destrezza ha part,
Non danno i colpi finti hor pieni, hor scarsi,
Toglie l'ira e il furor l'uso de l' art,
O di le spade horribilmente urtarsi
Amezzo, il ferro, il pie d'orma non part,
Sempre e il pie fermo, e la man sempre in moto,
Ne scende taglio in van ne punta a voto.
Mr. Fairfax.
They neither shrank, nor vantage sought of ground,
They traversed not, nor skipt from part to part,
Their blows were neither false, nor feigned found,
The night, their rage would let them use no Art,
Their Swords together clash with dreadful sound,
Their feet stand fast, and neither stir nor start,
They move their hands, steadfast their feet remain,
Nor blow, nor foin they struck, or thrust in vain.
Butts, Tilting, and Barriers, the images of Warlike Fights, were the Exercises
of our Forefathers: this other Exercise is so much the less noble, as it only
respects a private end, that teaches us to ruin one another, against Law and
Justice, and that every way always produces very ill effects. It is much more
worthy, and more becoming, to exercise our selves in things that strengthen,
than that weaken our Governments, and that tend to the public safety and
common glory. Publius Rutilius Consus was the first that taught the Soldiers
to handle their Arms with skill, and joined Art to Virtue: not for the use of
private quarrel, but for War, and the Quarrels of the People of Rome. A popular
and civil Art of Defense. And besides the example of Caesar, who commanded his
men to shoot chiefly at the face of Pompey's Gensdarmes in the Battle of
Pharsalia: a thousand other Commanders have also unbethought them to invent new
forms of Weapons, and new ways of striking and defending, according as occasion
shall require. But as Philopaemen condemned wrestling, wherein he excelled,
because the preparatives that were therein employed were differing from those
that appertain to Military Discipline, to which alone he conceived men of
Honor ought wholly to apply themselves; so it seems to me, that this Address
to which we form our Limbs, those Writings and Motions young men are taught in
this new School, are not only of no Use, but rather contrary and hurtful to the
manner of fight in Battle: and also our People commonly make use of particular
Weapons, and peculiarly designed for Duel. And I have known when it has been
disapproved, that a Gentleman challenged to fight with Rapier and Poignard,
should appear in the equipage of a man at Arms; or that another should take his
Cloak instead of a Poignard. It is worthy of Consideration, that Lachez in
Plato, speaking of learning to fence after our manner, says, that he never knew
any great Soldier come out of that School, especially the Masters of it: and
indeed as to them our own experience tells us as much. As to the rest, we may
at least conclude, that they are Qualities of no Relation nor Correspondence.
And in the Education of the Children of his Government, The Art of cuffing
interdicted by Plato.
Plato interdicts the Art of Cuffing, introduced by Amicus and Epeius, and that
of Wrestling by Antaeus and Cecyo, because they have another end than to render
Youth fit for the service of War, and contribute nothing to it. But I see I am
too far strayed from any Theme. The Emperor Maurice, being advertised by
Dreams and several Prognostics, that one Phocas, an obscure Soldier, should
kill him; questioned his Son-in-Law Philip, who this Phocas was, and what was
his Nature, Qualities and Manners; and so soon as Philip, amongst other things,
had told him, that he was cowardly and timorous, the Emperor immediately
thence concluded that he was then a Murderer and cruel. Cowards naturally
cruel and bloody.
What is it that makes Tyrants so bloody? It Is only the solicitude of their
own Safety, and that their faint Hearts can furnish them with no other means of
securing themselves, than in exterminating those that may hurt them, even so
much as to Woman, for fear of a scratch. Cuncta ferit, dum cuncta timet. Claud.

He strikes at all, who every one does fear.
The first Cruelties are exercised for themselves: from thence springs the fear
of a just Revenge, which afterward produces a series of new Cruelties, to
obliterate one another. Philip King of Macedon, who had so much to do with the
People of Rome, agitated with the horror of so many Murders committed by his
appointment, and doubting of being able to keep himself secure from so many
Families, at diverse times mortally injured and offended by him; resolved to
seize all the Children of those he had caused to be slain, to dispatch them
daily one after another, and so to establish his own repose. Fine Discourses
are never impertinent however placed; and therefore I, who more consider the
weight and utility of what I deliver than their Order and Connection, need not
fear in this place to bring in a fine story, though it be a little by the bye;
for when they are rich in their own native Beauty, and are able to justify
themselves, the least end of a Hair will serve to draw them into my Argument.
Amongst others condemned by Philip, Herodicus, Prince of Thessaly, had been
one. He had moreover after him caused his two Sons in Law to be put to Death,
each leaving a Son very young behind him. Theoxena* and Archo, were their two
Widows. Theoxena, though highly courted to it, could not be persuaded to marry
again: Archo married Poris, the greatest Man of the Aenians, and by him had a
great many Children, which she dying, left in a very tender Age. Theoxena,
moved with a Maternal charity toward her Nephews, that she might have them
under her own Eyes, and in her own Protection, married Poris: when presently
comes a Proclamation of the King's Edict. This brave spirited Mother,
suspecting the cruelty of Philip, and afraid of the Insolence of the Soldiers
toward these fine and tender Children, was so bold as to declare, that she
would rather kill them with her own hands than deliver them. Poris, startled at
this Protestation, promised her to steal them away, and to Transport them to
Athens, and there commit them to the Custody of some faithful Friends of his.
They took therefore the opportunity of an Annual Feast which was celebrated at
Aenia in Honor of Aeneas, and thither they went. Having appeared by day at the
Public Ceremonies, and Banquet, they stole the Night following into a Vessel
laid ready for the purpose, to escape away by Sea. The Wind proved contrary,
and finding themselves in the Morning within sight of the Land from whence they
had launched overnight, were made after by the Guards of the Port: which Poris
perceiving, he labored all he could to make the Mariners do their utmost to
escape from the Pursuers. But Theoxena, frantic with Affection and Revenge, in
pursuance of her former Resolution, prepared both Arms and Poison, and exposing
them before them; Go to, my Children, said she, Death is now the only means of
your Defense and Liberty, and shall administer occasion to the Gods to exercise
their sacred Justice: These sharp Swords, and these full Cups, will open you
the way into it: Courage, fear nothing. And thou, my Son, who art the eldest,
take this Steel into thy Hand, that thou may the more bravely Dye. The
Children having on one side so powerful a Counselor, and the Enemy at their
Throats on the other, ran all of them eagerly upon what was next to hand; and
half dead, were thrown into the Sea. Theoxena, proud of having so gloriously
provided for the safety of her Children, clasping her Arms with great affection
about her Husband's Neck, Let us, my Friend, said she, follow these Boys, and
enjoy the same Sepulcher they do: And so embraced, threw themselves headlong
overboard into the Sea; so that the Ship was carried back empty of the Owners
into the Harbor. Tyrants, at once both to kill and to make their Anger felt,
have pump't their Wit to invent the most lingering Deaths. They will have their
Enemies dispatched, but not so fast that they may not have leisure to taste
their Vengeance. And therein they are mightily perplexed, for if the Torments
they inflict are violent, they are short, if long, they are not then so painful
as they desire; and thus torment themselves in contriving how to torment
others. Of this we have a thousand Examples of Antiquity, and I know not
whether we unawares do not retain some traces of this Barbarity: all that
exceeds a simple Death appears to me absolute Cruelty; neither can our Justice
expect, that he, whom the fear of being executed by being Beheaded or Hanged,
will not restrain, should be any more awed by the imagination of a languishing
Fire, burning Pincers, or the Wheel. And I know not in the mean time, whether
we do not throw them into despair; for in what condition can the Soul of a man,
expecting four and twenty hours together to be broken upon a Wheel, or after
the old way, nailed to a Cross, be? Josephus relates, that in the time of the
War the Romans made in Judea; happening to pass by where they had three days
before crucified certain Jews, he amongst them knew three of his own Friends,
and obtained the favor of having them taken down, of which, two he says died,
the third lived a great while after. Chalcondilas, a Writer of good credit, in
the Records he has left behind him of things that happened in his time, and
near him, tell us, as of the most excessive Torment, of that the Emperor
Meckmed very often practiced, of cutting off men in the middle by the
Diaphragma with one blow of a Cimeter; by which it followed, that they died as
it were two Deaths at once, and both the one part, says he, and the other, were
seen to stir and strive a great while after in very great Torment. I do not
think there was any great sufferance in this motion. The Torments that are the
most dreadful to look on, are not always the greatest to endure; and I find
those that other Historians relate to have been practiced upon the Epirot
Lords, to be more horrid and cruel, where they were condemned to be flead alive
by pieces, after so malicious a manner that they continued fifteen days in this
misery. As also these other two following. Croesus, having caused a Gentleman,
the favorite of his Brother Pantaleon, to be seized on, carried him into a
Fuller's Shop, where he caused him to be scratched and carded with the Cards
and Combs belonging to that Trade till he died. George Jechel, chief Commander
of the Peasants of Polonia, who committed so many Mischiefs under the Title of
the Crusado, being defeated in Battle, and taken by the Vayvod of Transylvania,
was three days bound naked upon the Rack, exposed to all sorts of Torments that
any one could contrive against him; during which time, many other Prisoners
were kept fasting; in the end, he living, and looking on, they made his beloved
Brother Lucat, for whom he only entreated, taking upon himself the blame of all
their evil Actions, to drink his Blood, and caused twenty of his most favored
Captains to feed upon him, tearing his flesh in pieces with their Teeth, and
swallowing the morsels. The remainder of his Body and his Bowels, so soon as he
was dead, were boiled, and others of his followers compelled to eat them.

CHAP. XXVIII. All things have their Season.
SUch as compare Cato the Censor, with the younger Cato that killed himself,
compare two beautiful Natures, and much resembling one another. The first
acquired his Reputation several ways, and excells in Military Exploits, and the
Utility of his public Vocations; but the Virtue of the younger, besides, that
it were blasphemy to compare any to him in Vigor, was much more pure and
unblemished. For who can acquit the Censor of Envy and Ambition, having dared
to justle the Honor of Scipio, a man in Worth, Valor, and all other excellent
Qualities infinitely beyond him, or any other of his time? That which they
report of him, amongst other things, that in his extreme old Age he put himself
upon learning the Greek Tongue, with so greedy an Appetite, as if to quench a
long Thirst, does not seem to me to make much for his Honor; it being properly
what we call being twice a Child. All things have their Season, even the best,
and a man may say his Pater noster out of time; as they accused T. Quintus
Flaminus, that being General of an Army, he was seen praying apart in the time
of a Battle that he won. Juven. sat. 6.
Imponit finem sapiens, and rebus honestis.
The wise man limits even decent things.
Eudemonidas, seeing Xenocrates when very old, still very intent upon his
School-Lectures, When will this man be wise, said he, he does yet learn? And
Philopaemen, to those who extolled King Ptolomy for every day inuring his
Person to the Exercise of Arms; It is not, said he, commendable in a King of
his Age to exercise himself in those things he ought now really to employ them.
The young are to make their Preparations, the old to enjoy them, say the Sages:
and the greatest Vice they observe in us is, that our Desires incessantly grow
young again: we are always re-beginning to live. Our studies and desires should
sometimes be sensible of Age; but we have one foot in the Grave, and yet our
Appetites and Pursuits spring every day new upon us. Tu secanda marmora Hor. l.
2. Ode. 18.

Locas sub ipsum funus, and sepulcri
Immemor, struis domos.
When Death perhaps is near at hand, Sir Thomas Hawkins*

Thou fairest Marbles do command
Be cut for use; yet do neglect
Thy Grave, and Houses still erect.
The longest of my Designs is not of above a years extent; I think of nothing
now but ending, rid my self of all new Hopes and Enterprises; take my last
leave of every place I depart from, and every day disposses my self of what I
have. Olim jam nec perit quicquam mihi, nec acquiritur: Sen. Epist.
plus superest viatici, quam viae. Henceforward I will neither lose, nor expect
to get: I have more wherewith to defray my Journey, than I have way to go.

Vixi, and quem dederat cursum fortuna peregi. Eneid. l. 4.

I Have lived, and finished the career
Wherein my Fortune placed me here.
To conclude, it is the only comfort I find in my old Age, that it mortifies in
me several Cares and Desires wherewith my Life has been disturbed; the Care how
the World goes, the Care of Riches, of Grandeur, of Knowledge, of Health, and
my self. There are, who are learning to speak at a time when they should learn
to be silent for ever. A man may always study, but he must not always go to
School. What a contemptible thing is an old Schoolboy!

Diversos diversa juvant, non omnibus annis.
Gall. Eleg.
Omnia convenient.
For several things do several men delight,
And all things are not for all Ages right.
If we must study, let us study what is suitable to our present Condition, that
we may answer as he did, who being asked to what end he studied in his decrepid
Age, What an old man's study ought to be.
that I may go out better, said he, and at greater ease. Such a study was that
of the younger Cato, feeling his end approach, and which he met with in Plato's
Discourse of the immortality of the Soul: Not as we are to believe that he was
not long beforehand furnished with all sorts of Ammunition for such a
Departure; for of assurance, an established Will and Instruction he had more
than Plato had in all his Writings; his Knowledge and Courage were in this
respect above Philosophy. He applied himself to this study, not for the Service
of his Death, but as a man whose sleeps were never disturbed in the Importance
of such a deliberation, he also without choice or change, continued his Studies
with the other accustomary Actions of his Life. The Night that he was den the
Praetorship, he spent in play. That wherein he was to dye, he spent in reading.
The loss either of Life or of Office, was all one to him.

CHAP. XXIX. Of Virtue.
I Find by experience, that there is a vast difference betwixt the starts and
sallies of the Soul, and a resolute and constant habit; and very well perceive,
that there is nothing we may not do, nay, even to the surpassing the Divinity
it self, says a certain Person, forasmuch as it is more to render a man's self
impassible by his own study and industry, than to be so by his natural
condition; and even to be able to conjoyn to man's imbecility and frailty a
God-like resolution and assurance. But it is by fits and starts; and in the
Lives of those Heroes of Times past there are sometimes miraculous Sallies, and
that seem infinitely to exceed our natural force, but they are indeed but
sallies: and it is hard to believe, that in these so elevated qualities a man
can so thoroughly tinct and imbue the Soul, that they should become constant,
and as it were, natural in him. It accidentally happens even to us, who are but
abortive births of men, sometimes to dart out our Souls, when roused by the
Discourses or Examples of others, much beyond their ordinary stretch; but it is
a kind of Passion which does push and prick them on, and in some sort ravishes
them from themselves: but this Whirlwind once blown over, we see that they
insensibly flag, and slacken of themselves, if not to the lowest degree, at
least so as to be no more the same; insomuch as that upon every trivial
occasion, the losing of a Hawk, or the breaking of a Glass, we suffer our
selves to be moved little less than one of the common People. I am of opinion,
that Order, Moderation, and Constancy excepted, all things are to be done by a
man that is indifferent, and defective in general. Therefore it is, say the
Sages, that to make a right judgment of a man, you are chiefly to pry into his
common Actions, and surprise him in his every day habit. Pyrrho, he who erected
so pleasant a knowledge upon Ignorance, endeavored, as all the rest who were
really Philosophers did, to make his Life correspond with his Doctrine. And
because he maintained the imbecility of Humane Judgment to be so extreme as to
be incapable of any choice or inclination, and would have it wavering and
suspended, considering and receiving all things as indifferent, it is said, that
he always comported himself after the same manner and countenance: if he had
begun a Discourse, he would always end what he had to say, though the Person he
was speaking to was gone away: and if he walked, he never stopped for any
impediment that stood in his way, being preserved from Precipices, the justle
of Carts, and other like accidents, by the care of his Friends: for, to fear,
or to avoid any thing, had been to justle his own Propositions, which deprived
the Senses themselves of all certainty and election. Sometimes he suffered
Incisions and Cauteries with so great constancy, as never to be seen so much as
to winch or stir. It Is something to bring the Soul to these imaginations, more
to join the effects, and yet not impossible; but to conjoyn them with such
perseverance and constancy as to make them habitual, is certainly, in attempts
so remote from the common usance, almost incredible to be done. Therefore it
was, that being one day taken in his House terribly scolding with his Sister,
and being reproached that he therein transgressed his own Rules of
indifference; What, said he, must this foolish Woman also serve for a testimony
to my Rules? Another time, being seen to defend himself against a Dog, It is,
said he, very hard totally to put off man; and we must endeavor and force our
selves to resist and encounter things, first by Effects, but at least by
Reason. About seven or eight years since, a Husbandman yet living, but two
Leagues from my House, having long been tormented with his Wifes Jealousy,
coming one day home from his work, and she welcoming him with her accustomed
railing, entered into so great fury, that with a Sickle he had yet in his hand
he totally cut off all those Parts that she was jealous of, and threw them in
her face. And, it is said, that a young Gentleman of our Nation, brisk and
amorous, having by his perseverance at last mollified the heart of a fair
Mistress, enraged, that upon the point of fruition he found himself unable to
perform, and that, Tib. lib. 4. Eleg. pen.
non viriliter
Iners senile penis extulerat caput,
so soon as ever he came home he deprived himself of it, and sent it his
Mistress, a cruel and bloody Victim for the expiation of his offense. If this
had been done upon mature consideration, and upon the account of Religion, as
the Priests of Cybele did, what should we say of so high an action? A few days
since, at Bergerac, within five Leagues of my House, up the River Dordogne, a
Woman having overnight been beaten and abused by her Husband, a choleric
ill-condition'd fellow, resolved to escape from his ill usage at the price of
her life; and going so soon as she was up the next morning to visit her
Neighbors, as she was wont to do, and having let some words fall of the
recommendation of her Affairs, she took a Sister of hers by the hand, and led
her to the Bridge; whither being come, as it were in jest, without any manner
of alteration in her Countenance, there taking leave of her, she threw her self
headlong from the top into the River, and was there drowned. That which is the
most remarkable in this, is, that this resolution was a whole night forming in
her head: But it is quite another thing with the Indian Women, for it being the
custom there for the men to have many Wives, and the best beloved of them to
kill her self at her Husband's decease, every one of them makes it the Business
of her whole Life to obtain this Privilege, and gain this Advantage over her
Companions, and the good Offices they do their Husband's, aim at no other
Recompense, but to be preferred in accompanying him in Death.

Vbi mortifero jacta est fax ultima lecto, Propertius. l. 3. Eleg. 11.

Vxorum fusis stat pia turba comis:
Et certamen habent lethi quae viva sequatur
Conjugium, pudor est non licuisse mori,
Ardent victrices, and flammae pectora praebent,
Imponuntque suis ora perusta viris.
When to the pile they throw the kindling brand
The pious Wives with Hair dishevelled stand,
Striving which living shall accompany
Her Spouse, and are ashamed they may not dye,
Who are preferred, their Breasts to flame expose,
And their scorched Lips to their dead Husbands close.
A certain Author of our times, Reports, that he has seen in those Oriental
Nations this Custom in practice, that not only the Wives bury themselves with
their Husbands, but even the Slaves he has enjoyed also; which is done after
this manner: The Husband being dead, the Widow may if she will (but few will)
demand two or three Months respite wherein to order her Affairs. The day being
come, she mounts on Horseback, dressed as fine as at her Wedding, and with a
cheerful Countenance says, she is going to sleep with her Spouse, holding a
Looking-glass in her left hand, and an Arrow in the other. Being thus conducted
in pomp, accompanied with her Kindred and Friends, and a great concourse of
People, with great Joy, she is at last brought to the public Place appointed
for such Spectacles: This is a spacious Place, in the midst of which is a Pit
full of Wood, and adjoining to it a Mount raised four or five steps, upon which
she is brought and served with a magnificent Repast; which being done, she
falls to Dancing and Singing, and gives order when she thinks fit to kindle the
Fire; which being performed, she Descends, and taking the nearest of her
Husband's Relations by the hand, they walk together to the River close by,
where she strips her self stark naked, and having distributed her Clothes and
Jewels to her Friends, plunges her self into the Water, as if there to cleanse
her self from her Sins; coming out thence, she wraps her self in a yellow
Linen of five and twenty Else long, and again giving her hand to this Kinsman
of her Husband's, they return back to the Mount, where she makes a Speech to
the People, and recommends her Children to them, if she have any. Betwixt the
Pit and the Mount, there is commonly a Curtain drawn to skreen the burning
Furnace from their sight, which some of them to manifest the greater Courage,
forbid. Having ended what she has to say, a Woman presents her with a Vessel of
Oil, wherewith to anoint her head, and her whole Body; which having done with,
she throws into the Fire, and in an instant precipitates her self after.
Imediately the People throw a great many Billets and Logs upon her, that she
may not be long in dying, and convert all their Joy into Sorrow and Mourning.
If they are Persons of meaner Condition, the Body of the defunct is carried to
the place of Sepulture, and there placed sitting, the Widow kneeling before
him, embracing the dead Body; and continue in this posture whilst they build a
Wall about them, which so soon as it is raised to the height of the Woman's
Shoulders, some of her Relations comes behind her, and taking hold of her Head
writhe her Neck in two, and so soon as she is dead, the Wall is presently
raised up, and closed, where they remain entombed. There was in this same
Country something like this in their Gymnosophist; The Gymnosophists
voluntarily burnt.
for not by constraint of others, nor by the impetuosity of a sudden humor,
but by the express Profession of their Order, their Custom was, that so soon as
they arrived at a certain Age, or that they saw themselves threatened by any
Disease, to cause a funeral Pile to be erected for them, and on the top a
stately Bed, where, after having joyfully feasted their Friends and
Acquaintance, they laid them down with so great Resolution, that Fire being
applied to it, they were never seen to stir either Hand or Foot; and after this
manner one of them, Calanus by Name, expired in the presence of the whole Army
of Alexander the Great; and he was neither reputed holy, nor happy amongst
them, that did not thus destroy himself; dismissing his Soul purged and
purified by the Fire, after having consumed all that was earthy and mortal.
This constant premeditation of the whole Life is that which makes the wonder.
Amongst our other Controversies, that of Fatum is also crept in, and to tie
things to come, and even our own Wills to a certain and inevitable Necessity,
we are yet upon this Argument of time past; Since God foresees that all things
shall so fall out, as doubtless he does, it must then necessarily follow, that
they must so fall out: to which our Masters reply, that the seeing any thing
come to pass, as we do, and as God himself also does, (for all things being
present with him, he rather sees, than foresees) is not to compel an Event:
that is, we see because things do fall out, but things do not fall out because
we see. Events cause Knowledge, but Knowledge does not cause Events. That which
we see happen, does happen; but it might have happened otherwise: and God, in the
Catalogue of the Causes of Events which he has in his Prescience, has also
those which we call accidental and unvoluntary, Causes of Events in the
prescience of Almighty God.
which depend upon the Liberty he has given our free Will, and knows that we do
amiss because we would do so. I have seen a great many Commanders encourage
their Soldiers with this fatal Necessity; Fortuitous and voluntary Causes.
for if our time be limited to a certain hour, neither the Enemies shot, nor
our own Boldness, nor our Flight and Cowardice, can either shorten or prolong
our Lives. This is easily said, but see who will be so persuaded, and if it be
so that a strong and lively Faith draws along with it Actions of the same,
certainly this Faith we so much brag of, is very light in this Age of ours,
unless the Contempt it has of Works, makes it disdain their Company. So it is,
that to this very purpose the Sire de Joinville, as credible a Witness as any
other whatever, tells us of the Bedoins, a Nation amongst the Saracens, with
whom the King St. Lewis had to do in the Holy Land, that they in their
Religion, did so firmly believe the number of every man's days to be from all
eternity prefixed, and set down by an inevitable Decree, that they went naked
to the Wars, excepting a Turkish Sword, and their Bodies only covered with a
white Linen Cloth: and for the greatest Curse they could invent when they were
angry, this was always in their Mouths, Accursed be thou, as he that arms
himself for fear of Death. This is a Testimony of Faith very much beyond ours.
And of this sort is that also that two Religious men of Florence gave in our
Fathers days. Being engaged in some Controversy of Learning, they agreed to go
both of them into the Fire in the sight of all the People, each for the
verification of his Argument, and all things were already prepared, and the
things just upon the point of Execution, when it was interrupted by an
unexpected accident. A young Turkish Lord, having performed a notable Exploit
in his own Person in the sight of both Armies, that of Amurath, and that of
Hunniades ready to join Battle, being asked by Amurath, who in so tender and
unexperienced years (for it was his first sally into Arms) had inspired him
with so brave a Courage, replied, that his chief Tutor for Valor was a Hare.
For being, said he, one day a hunting, I found a Hare sitting, and though I had
a brace of excellent Greyhounds with me, yet methought it would be best for
sureness to make use of my Bow; for she sat very fair. I then fell to letting
fly my Arrows, and shot forty that I had in my Quiver, not only without
hurting, but without starting her from her form. At last I slipped my Dogs after
her, but to no more purpose than I had shot: by which I understood, that she
had been secured by her Destiny; and that neither Darts nor Swords can wound
without the permission of Fate, which we can neither hasten nor defer. This
Story which I am going to tell, may serve by the way to let us see how flexible
our Reason is to all sorts of Images. A Person of great Years, Name, Dignity,
and Learning, boasted to me to have been induced to a certain very important
mutation in his Faith, by a strange, whimsical Incitation, and otherwise so
very ill concluding, that I thought it much stronger being taken the contrary
way: He called it a Miracle, I look upon it quite otherwise. The Turkish
Historians say, that the persuasion those of their Nation have imprinted in
them of the fatal and unalterable Prescription of their Days, does manifestly
conduce to the giving them great assurance in Dangers; and I know a great
Prince, who makes very fortunate use of it; whether it be that he does really
believe it, or that he makes it his excuse, for so wonderfully hazarding
himself, provided Fortune be not too soon weary of her Favor to him. There has
not happened in our memory a more admirable effect of Resolution, than in those
two who conspired the Death of the Prince of Orange. It Is to be wondered at,
Assasination of the Prince of Orange.
how the second that executed it, could ever be persuaded into an attempt,
wherein his Companion, who had done his utmost, had had so ill Success; and
after the same Method, and with the same Arms, to go attaque a Lord, armed with
a late Instruction of distrust, powerful in followers and bodily Strength, in
his own Hall, amidst his Guards, and in a City wholly at his Devotion. He
doubtless employed a very resolute Arm and a Courage enflamed with furious
Passions: A Poignard is surer for striking home, but by reason that more motion
and force of hand is required than with a Pistol, the Blow is more subject to
be put by or hindered. That this man did not run to a certain Death, I make no
great doubt; for the hopes any one could flatter him withal, could not find
place in any sober Understanding, and the Conduct of his Exploit does
sufficiently manifest that he had no want of that no more than of Courage. The
motives of so powerful a Persuasion may be diverse, for our fancy does what it
will both with it self and us. The Duke of Guise.
The Execution that was done near Orleans was nothing like this, there was in
that more of Chance than Vigor, the wound was not mortal, if Fortune had not
made it so; and to attempt to shoot on Horseback, and at a great distance, and
at one whose body was in motion by the moving of his Horse, was the attempt of
a man who had rather miss his blow, than fail of saving himself: as was
apparent by what followed after; for he was so astonished and stupefied with
the thought of so high an Execution, that he totally lost his Judgment both to
find his way and to govern his Tongue. What needed he to have done more than to
fly back to his Friends cross a River? It Is what I have done in less Dangers,
and that I think of very little hazard, how broad soever the River may be,
provided your Horse have good going in, and that you see on the other side
easy landing according to the stream. The other, when they pronounced his
dreadful Sentence. I was prepared for this, said he, beforehand, and I will
make you wonder at my Patience. The Assassins, a Nation bordering upon
Phaenicia, are reputed amongst the Mahometans a People of very great Devotion,
and purity of Manners. They hold that the nearest way to gain Paradise is to
kill some one of a contrary Religion; which is the Reason they have often been
seen, being but one or two, and without Arms, to attempt against powerful
Enemies at the price of a certain Death, and without any Consideration of their
own Danger. So was our Count Raimond of Tripoly assassinated (which Word is
derived from their Name) in the heart of his City, during our Enterprises of
the Holy War. And likewise Conrade, Marquis of Montferrat, the Murderers at
their Execution carrying themselves with great Pride and Glory, that they had
performed so brave an Exploit.

CHAP. XXX. Of a monstrous Child.
THis Story shall go by it self; for I will leave it to Physicians to Discourse
of. Two days ago I saw a Child, that two Men and a Nurse, who said themselves
to be the Father, the Uncle, and the Aunt of it, carried about to get money by
showing it, by reason it was so strange a Creature. It was, as to all the rest
of a common Form, and could stand upon its Feet, could go and gabble much like
other Children of the same Age; it had never as yet taken any other nourishment
but from the Nurses Breasts, and what, in my Presence, they tried to put into
the Mouth of it, it only chewed a little and spit it out again without
swallowing; the Cry of it seemed indeed a little odd and particular, and it was
just fourteen Months old. Under the Breast it was joined to another Child, but
without a Head, and that had the spine of the Back without motion, the rest
entire; for though it had one Arm shorter than the other, it had been broken by
accident at their Birth; they were joined Breast to Breast, and as if a lesser
Ghild would reach the Arms about the Neck of one something bigger. The juncture
and thickness of the place where they were conjoined was not above four
Fingers, or thereabouts, so that if you thrust up the imperfect Child you might
see the Navel of the other below it, and the joining was betwixt the Paps and
the Navel. The Navel of the imperfect Child could not be seen, but all the rest
of the Belly; so that all the rest that was not joined of the imperfect one, as
Arms, Buttocks, Thighs and Legs, hung dangling upon the other, and might reach
to the Mid-leg. The Nurse moreover told us that it urin'd at both Bodies, and
also the members of the other were nourished, sensible, and in the same plight
with that she gave suck to, excepting that they were shorter, and less. This
double Body, and several Limbs relating to one Head, might be interpreted a
favorable Prognostic to the King, of maintaining these various Parts of our
State under the union of his Laws; but lest the Event should prove otherwise,
it is better to let it alone, for in things already past, Cicero. de Divin. l. 2.
there needs no Divination; Vt quum facta sunt, tum ad conjecturam aliqua
interpretatione revocantur. So as when they are come to pass, they should then
by some Interpretation be recalled to Conjecture. As it is said of Epimenides,
that he always Prophesied of things past. I have lately seen a Heards-man in
Medoc of about thirty years of Age, who has no sign of any Genital Parts; he
has three holes by which he incessantly voids his Water, he is Bearded, has
desire, and covets the society of Women. Those that we call Monsters, are not
so to God, who sees in the Immensity of his Work, the infinite Forms that he
has comprehended therein. And it is to be believed, that this Figure which does
astonish us, has relation to some other Figure of the same kind unknown to man.
From his all Wisdom nothing but good, common, and regular proceeds; but we do
not discern the Disposition and Relation. Quod crebro videt, Cicero. de Divin.
l. 2.
non miratur, etiamsi, cur fiat nescit. Quod ante non videt, id, si evenerit,
ostentum esse censet. What he often sees he does not admire, though he be
ignorant how it comes to pass. But when a thing happens he never saw before,
that he looks upon as a Portent. Whatever falls out contrary to Custom, we say
is contrary to Nature, but nothing, whatever it be, is contrary to her. Let
therefore this universal and natural Reason expel the Error and Astonishment
that Novelty brings along with it.

CHAP. XXXI. Of Anger.
PLutarch is admirable throughout; but especially where he judges of humane
Actions; the fine things he says, in comparison of Lycurgus and Numa, upon the
Subject of our great Folly in abandoning Children to the Care and Government of
their Fathers, are very easily discerned. The most of our Civil Governments, as
Aristotle says, leave, after the manner of the Cyclops, to every one the
ordering of their Wives and Children, according to their own foolish and
indiscreet Fancy; and the Lacedemonian and Cretensian are almost the only
Governments that have committed the Education of Children to the Laws. And who
does not see that in a State all depends upon their nurture and bringing up?
and yet they are left to the Mercy of Parents, let them be as foolish and ill
natured as they will, without any manner of Discretion. Amongst other things,
how often have I, as I have past along the Streets, had a good mind to make a
farce, to revenge the poor Boys whom I have seen flead, knocked down, and
miserably abused by some Father or Mother when in their Fury, and mad with
Rage? You shall see them come out with Fire and Fury sparkling in their Eyes,
Juvenal. Sat. 6.
-- rabie jecur incendente feruntur
Praecipites, ut saxa jugis abruta, quibus mons
Subtrahitur, clivoque latus pendente recedit.
With burning Fury they are headlong borne
As when great Stones are from the Mountains torn,
By which the Clifts deprived and lessened are,
And their steep sides are naked left, and bare.
(and according to Hippocrates the most dangerous Maladies are they, that
disfigure the Countenance) with a roaring and terrible Voice very often against
those that are but newly come from Nurse, and there they are lamed and spoiled
with blows, whilst our Justice takes no Cognizance of it; as if these maims and
dislocations were not executed upon Members of our Commonwealth. Gratum est
quod patriae civem, populoque dedisti, Juvenal. Sat. 14.

Si facis ut Patriae sit idoneus, utilis agris,
Vtilis, and bellorum and pacis rebus agendis.
It is a Gift most acceptable, when
Thou to thy Country giv'st a Citizen,
Provided thou have had the knack of it
To make him for his Countries Service fit,
Useful t'assist the Earth in her increase,
And useful in Affairs of War and Peace.
There is no Passion that so much transports men from their right Judgments, as
Anger. No one would demurr upon punishing a Judge with Death who should condemn
a Criminal upon the account of his own Choler; why then should Fathers and
Pedants be any more allowed to whip and chastise Children in their Anger? It Is
then no longer Correction but Revenge. Chastisement is instead of Physic to
Children; and should we suffer a Physician, who should be animated against and
enraged at his Patient? We our selves, to do well, should never lay a Hand upon
our Servants whilst our Anger lasts: whilst the Pulse beats, and that we feel
an Emotion in our selves, let us defer the Business; things will indeed appear
otherwise to us when we are calm and cool. It Is then Passion that commands,
it is then Passion that speaks, and not we. Faults seen through Passion are
magnified, and appear much greater to us than they really are, as Bodies do
being seen through a Mist. Who is hungry uses Meat, but he that will make use
of Correction should have no appetite neither of Hunger or Thirst to it. And
moreover, Chastisements that are inflicted with weight and discretion, are much
better received, and with greater benefit by him who suffers. Otherwise he will
not think himself justly condemned by a man transported with anger and fury,
and will allege his Master's excessive Passion, his inflamed Countenance, his
unwonted Oaths, his Emotion and precipitous Rashness, for his own justification.

Ovid. de Art. lib. 3.
Ora tument ira, nigrescunt sanguine venae,
Lumina Gorgonio* saevius igne micant.
Their Faces swell, and Veins grow black with ire,
And their Eyes sparkle with Gorgonian Fire.
Suetonius reports, that Caius Rabirius having been condemned by Caesar, the
thing that most prevailed upon the People (to whom he had appealed) to
determine the Cause in his favor, was, the animosity and vehemence that Caesar
had manifested in that Sentence. Saying is one thing and Doing is another; we
are distinctly to consider the Sermon and the Preacher. These men took a pretty
Business in hand, who in our Times have attempted to shake the Truth of our
Church by the Vices of her Ministers; she extracts her Testimony elsewhere.
It Is a foolish way of Arguing, and that would throw all things into confusion.
A man whose Manners are good, may have false Opinions, and wicked men may
preach Truth, nay, though he believe it not himself. It Is doubtless a fine
Harmony when doing and saying go together; and I will not deny but that Saying,
when the Actions follow, are of greater Authority and Efficacy, as Eudamidas
said, hearing a Philosopher talk of Military Affairs; These things are finely
said, but he that speaks them is not to be believed, for his Ears have never
been used to the sound of the Trumpet. And Cleomenes, hearing an Orator
declaming upon Valor, burst out into Laughter, at which the other being angry,
I should, said he to him, do the same if it were a Swallow that spoke of this
subject, but if it were an Eagle I should willingly hear him. I perceive,
methinks, in the Writing of the Ancients, that he who speaks what he thinks,
strikes much more home than he that only dissembles. Hear but Cicero speak of
the love of Liberty: Hear Brutus speak of it, his very writings sound that this
man would purchase it at the price of his Life. Let Cicero, the Father of
Eloquence, treat of the contempt of Death, and let Seneca do the same; the
first does languishingly drawl it out, so that you perceive he would make you
resolve upon a thing on which he is not resolved himself. He inspires you not
with Courage, Censure of Cicero and Seneca.
for he himself has none; the other animates and enflames you. I never read
Author, even of those who treat of Virtue, and of Actions, that I do not
curiously examine what a kind of man he was himself. For the Ephori at Sparta,
seeing a dissolute Fellow propose a wholesome advice to the People, commanded
him to hold his peace, and entreated a virtuous man to attribute to himself the
Invention, and to propose it. Plutarch's Writings, if well understood,
sufficiently speak their Author; and so that I think I know him even into his
Soul, and yet I could wish that we had some fuller account of his Life: and am
thus far wandered from my Subject, upon the account of the Obligation I have to
Aulus Gellius, for having left us in Writing this Story of his Manners, that
brings me back to my Subject of Anger. Plutarch reproached for Anger by a Slave
of his.
A Slave of his, a vicious, ill conditioned Fellow, but that had had the
Precepts of Philosophy often ringing in his Ears, having for some Offense of
his been stripped by Plutarch's Command, whilst he was whipping, muttered at
first, that it was without cause, and that he had done nothing to deserve it;
but at last falling in good earnest to exclaim against, and to rail at his
Master, he reproached him, that he was no Philosopher, as he had boasted
himself to be: that he had often heard him say it was indecent to be angry,
nay, had writ a Book to that purpose; and that the causing him to be so cruelly
beaten in the height of his Rage, totally gave the Lie to all his Writings. To
which Plutarch calmly and coldly answered, How, Ruffian, said he, By what do
thou judge that I am now angry, does either my Face, my Color, or my Voice
give any manifestation of my being moved? I do not think my Eyes look fierce,
that my Countenance appears troubled, or that my Voice is dreadful; am I red,
do I foam, does any Word escape my Lips I ought to repent? Do I start? Do I
tremble with Fury? For those I tell thee are the true signs of Anger. And so
turning to the Fellow that was whipping him, Ply on thy Work, said he, whilst
this Gentleman and I dispute. This is the Story.

Archytas Tarentinus, returning from a War wherein he had been Captain General,
found all things in his House in very great disorder, and his Lands quite out
of Tillage, through the ill Husbandry of his Receiver, whom having caused to be
called to him, Go, said he, if I were not in Anger, I would soundly drubb your
sides. Plato likewise being highly offended with one of his Slaves, gave
Speusippus order to chastize him, That Correction never ought to be given in
Anger.
excusing himself from doing it because he was in Anger. And Carillus, a
Lacedemonian, to a Helot, who carried himself so insolently and audaciously
toward him; By the Gods, said he, if I was not angry, I would immediately
cause thee to be put to Death. It Is a Passion that is pleased with, and
flatters it self. How often, being moved under a false cause, if the Person
offending makes a good Defense, and presents us with a just excuse, are we vexed
at Truth and Innocence it self? In proof of which, I remember a mavelous
Example of Antiquity. Piso, otherwise a Man of very eminent Virtue, being moved
against a Soldier of his, for that returning alone from Forage, he could give
him no account where he had left a Companion of his, took it for granted, that
he had killed him, and presently condemned him to Death. He was no sooner
mounted upon the Gibbet, but behold his wandering Companion arrives, at which
all the Army were exceedingly glad, and after many embraces of the two
Comrades, the Hangman carried both the one and the other into Piso's Presence,
all the Assistants believing it would be a great Pleasure even to him himself;
but it proved quite contrary; for through shame and spite, his Fury, which was
not yet cool, redoubled; and by a subtlety which his Passion suddenly suggested
to him, he made three Criminal for having found one innocent, and caused them
all to be dispatched: The first Soldier, because Sentence had passed upon him;
The second, who had lost his way, because he was the Cause of his Companions
Death; and the Hangman, for not having obeyed the Order bad been given him.
Such as have had to do with testy and obstinate Women, may have experimented
into what a Rage it puts them, to oppose Silence and Coldness to their Fury,
and that a man disdains to nourish their Anger. The Orator Celius was
wonderfully choleric by Nature, and to one who sup't in his Company, a man of
a gentle and sweet Conversation, and who, that he might not move him, approved
and consented to all he said; he, impatient that his ill Humor should thus
spend it self without aliment; For the love of the Gods deny me something, said
he, that we may be two. Women in like manner are only angry, that others may be
angry again, in imitation of the Laws of Love. Phocion, to one that interrupted
his speaking by injurious and very opprobrious Words, made no other return than
silence, and to give him full liberty and leisure to vent his spleen; which he
having accordingly done, and the storm blown over, without any mention of this
disturbance, he proceeded in his Discourse where he had left off before. No
answer can nettle a man like such a Contempt. Of the most choleric man in
France, (anger is always an imperfection, but more excusable in a Soldier, for
in that trade it cannot sometimes be avoided) I must needs say, that he is
often the most patient man that I know, and the most discreet in bridling his
Passions; which rises in him with so great Violence and Fury, -- magno veluti
cum flamma sonore
Virgea suggeritur costis undantis aheni, Aeneid. l. 7.

Exultanque aestu latices, furit intus aquai.
Fumidus, atque alte spumis exuberat amnis,
Nec jam se capit unda, volat vapor ater ad auras.
As when into the boiling Caldron's side
A crackling flame of Brush-wood is applied,
The bubbling Liquor there like springs are seen
To swell, and foam to higher Tides within,
Until it does to overflowing rise,
And a fuliginous Vapor upward flies.
that he must of necessity cruelly constrain himself to moderate it; and for my
part, I know no Passion which I could with so much Violence to my self attempt
to cover and conceal. I would not set Wisdom at so high a price; and do not so
much consider what he does, as how much it costs him to do no worse. Another
boasted himself to me of the regularity and sweetness of his Manners, which is
in truth very singular; to whom I replied, that it was indeed something,
especially in Persons of so eminent Quality as himself, upon whom every one had
their Eyes, to present himself always well-tempered to the World; but that the
principal thing was to make Provision for within, and for himself; and that it
was not, in my Opinion, very well to order his Business inwardly to grate
himself, which I was afraid he did, in putting on and outwardly maintaining
the visor and regular Appearance. A man incorporates Anger by concealing it, as
Diogenes told Demosthenes, who, for fear of being seen in a Tavern, withdrew
himself into it. The more you retire, the farther you enter in. I would rather
advise that a man should give his Servant a box of the Ear a little
unseasonably, than wrack his Fancy to represent this grave and composed
Countenance; and had rather discover my Passions than brood over them at my own
expense; they grow less in venting and manifesting themselves; and it is much
better their point should wound others without than be turned toward our
selves within. Omnia vitia in aperto leviora sunt: Seneca. Epist. 57.
and tunc perniciosissima, quum simulata sanitate subsidunt. All Vices are less
dangerous when open to be seen, and then most pernicious when they lurk under a
dissembled Temper. I admonish all those who have authority to be angry in my
Family, in the first place to manage their Anger, and not to lavish it upon
every occasion, for that both lessens the value, and hinders the Effect. Rash
and customary chafing runs into Custom, and renders it self despised; and that
you lay out upon a Servant for a Theft, is not felt, because it is the same he
has seen you a hundred times employ against him for having ill washed a Glass,
or set a Stool out of order. Secondly, that they are not angry to no purpose,
but make sure that their Reprehension reach him at whom they are offended; for
ordinarily they rail and bawl before he comes into their Presence, and continue
scolding an Age after he is gone; Et secum petulans amentia certat: Claudian.

And petulant madness with it self contends.
they attack his shadow, and push the storm in place where no one is either
chastised or interested, but in the clamor of their Voice. I likewise in
Quarrels condemn those who huff and vapor without an Enemy: those Rodomontades
are to be reserved to discharge upon the offending Party. Mugitus veluti cum
prima in praelia taurus
Terrificos ciet, atque irasci in cornua tentat, Aeneid. lib. 12.

Arboris obnixus trunco, ventosque lacessit
Ictibus, and sparsa ad pugnam proludit arena.
Like angry Bulls that make the Valleys ring,
Pressed to the fight, with dreadful bellowing,
Whetting their Horns against the sturdy Oak,
Who with their kicking Heels the winds provoke,
And tossing up the Earth, a Dust do raise
For furious preludes to ensuing frays.
When I am angry, my Anger is very sharp, but withal very short, The Authors
Anger in great and little Occasions.
and as private as I can; I lose my self indeed in Promptness and Violence, but
not in Trouble, so that I throw out all sorts of injurious words at random, and
without choice, and never consider pertinently to dart my Language where I
think it will deepest wound, for I commonly make use of no other Weapon in my
Anger than my Tongue. My Servants have a better bargain of me in great
Occasions than in little, the little ones surprise me; and the mischief on it
is, that when you are once upon the Precipice, it is no matter who gave you the
push, for you always go to the bottom; the fall urges, moves, and makes haste
of it self. In great Occasions this satisfies me, that they are so just every
one expects a warrantable Indignation, and then I glorify my self in deceiving
their Expectation; against these, I fortify and prepare my self, they disturb
my Head, and threaten to transport me very far, should I follow them. I can
easily contain my self from entering into one of these Passions, and am strong
enough when I expect them, to repel their Violence, be the Cause never so
great; but if a Passion once prepossess and seize me, it carries me away, be it
never so small: which makes me indent with those who may contend me, when you
see me first moved, let me alone, right or wrong, I Will do the same for you. The
storm is only begot by a concurrence of Angers, which easily spring from one
another, and are not born together. Let every one have his own way, and we
shall be always at Peace. A profitable Advice, but hard to execute. Sometimes
also it falls out, that I put on a seeming Anger, for the better governing of
my House, without any real Emotion* As Age renders my Humors more sharp, I
study to oppose them, and will, if I can, order it so, that for the Future I
may be so much the less peevish and hard to please, as I have more excuse and
inclination to be so, although I have heretofore been reckoned amongst those
that have the greatest Patience. A Word more to conclude this Chapter.
Aristotle says, that Anger sometimes serves for Arms to Virtue and Valor. It Is
likely it may be so, nevertheless, they who contradict him pleasantly Answer,
that it is a Weapon of novel Use, for we move all other Arms, this moves us, our
Hands guide it not, it is it that guides our Hands, it holds us, we hold not it.

CHAP. XXXII. Defense of Seneca and Plutarch.
THE familiarity I have had with these two Authors, and the assistance they
have lent to my Age, and Book, wholly compiled of what I have borrowed from
them, obliges me to espouse their Quarrel, and to stand up for their Honor. As
to Seneca, amongst a million of little Pamphlets that those of the Reformed
Religion disperse abroad for the defense of their Cause; (and which sometimes
proceeds from so good a Hand, that it is pity his Pen is not employed in a
better Subject) I have formerly seen one, that to make up the Parallel he would
fain find out betwixt the Government of our late poor King Charles the Ninth,
and that of Nero, compares the late Cardinal of Lorrain with Seneca, their
Fortunes to have both of them been the prime Ministers in the Government of
their Princes, and their Manners, Conditions, and Deportments to have been very
near alike: Wherein, in my Opinion, he does the said Cardinal a very great
Honor; for though I am one of those who have a very great esteem for his Wit,
Eloquence, and Zeal to Religion, and the Service of his King, and think it was
a happiness in an Age wherein he was so new, so rare, and also so necessary for
the Public, to have an Ecclesiastical Person, of so high Birth and Dignity,
and so sufficient and capable of his Place; yet to confess the Truth, I do not
think his Capacity by many degrees near to the other, nor his Virtue either so
clean, entire, or steady, as that of Seneca. Now the Book whereof I speak, to
bring about his design, gives a very injurious Description of Seneca, having
borrowed his Reproaches from Dion the Historian, whose Testimony I do not at
all believe. For besides that, he is inconstant, who after having called Seneca
one while very wise, and again a mortal enemy to Nero's Vices, makes him
elsewhere Avaricious, an Usurer, Ambitious, Effeminate, Voluptuous, and a false
Pretender to Philosophy; his own Virtue does appear so lively and vigorous in
his Writings, and his Vindication is so clear from any of these imputations of
Riches, and any extraordinary expensive way of living, that I cannot believe
any Testimony to the contrary. And besides, it is much more reasonable to
believe the Roman Historians in such things, than Greeks and Strangers. Now
Tacitus and the rest speak very honorably both of his Life and Death; and
represent him to us a very excellent and virtuous Person in all things; and I
will allege no other Reproach against Dion's Report but this, which I cannot
avoid, namely, that he has so sickly a Judgment in the Roman Affairs, that he
dares to maintain Julius Caesar's Cause against Pompey, and that of Anthony
against Cicero. Let us now come to Plutarch; Bodinus a good Author.
John Bodinus is a good Author of our times, and a Writer of much greater
Judgment than the rout of Scriblers of his Age, and that deserves to be
carefully read and considered. I find him though a little bold in this passage
of his Method of History, where he accuses Plutarch not only of ignorance
(wherein I would have let him alone: for that is above my reprehension) but
that he often writes things incredible, and absolutely fabulous, which are his
own Words. If he had simply said, that he had delivered things otherwise than
they really are, it had been no great reproach; for what we have not seen, we
are forced to receive from other hands, and take upon trust, and I see he
purposely sometimes variously relates the same Story, as the Judgment of the
three best Captains that ever were, given by Hannibal; it is one way in the Life
of Flaminius, and another in that of Pyrrhus. But to charge him with having
taken incredible and impossible things for current pay, is to accuse the most
judicious Author in the World of want of Judgment. And this is his Example; as,
says he, when he relates that a Lacedemonian Boy suffered his Bowels to be torn
out by a Fox-cub he had stolen, The Bowels of a Lacedemonian Boy torn out by a
Fox-cub.
and kept it still concealed under his Coat till he fell down dead, rather than
he would discover his theft. I find in this first place this Example ill
chosen, forasmuch as it is very hard to limit the Power of the Faculties of the
Soul, whereas we have better. Authority to limit, and know the force of the
bodily Limbs; and therefore, if I had been as he, I should rather have chosen
an Example of this second sort; and there are that are less credible: and
amongst others, that which he relates of Pyrrhus, that all wounded as he was,
he struck one of his Enemies who was armed from Head to Foot, so great a blow
with his Sword, that he clave him down from his Crown to his seat, so that the
Body was divided into two parts. In this Example I find no great Miracle, nor
do not admit of the Salvo with which he excuses Plutarch, to have added this
Word ( as it is said) to suspend our Belief; for unless it be in things received
by Authority, and the reverence to Antiquity or Religion, he would never have
himself admitted, or enjoined us things incredible in themselves to believe;
and that this Word ( as it is said) is not put in this place to that effect, is
easy to be seen, because he elsewhere relates to us, upon this Subject, of the
Patience of the Lacedaemonian Children, The Patience of the Lacedaemonian
Children.
Examples happening in his Time, more unlikely to prevail upon our Faith; as
what Cicero also has testified before him, as having, as he says, been upon the
Place: that even to their Times there were Children found, who, in the trial of
Patience they were put to before the Altar of Diana, suffered themselves to be
there whipped till the Blood run down all over their Bodies, not only without
crying out, but without so much as a Groan, and some till they there
voluntarily lost their Lives: and that which Plutarch also, amongst an hundred
other Witnesses, relates, that at a Sacrifice, a burning Coal being fallen into
the sleeve of a Lacedaemonian Boy, as he was censing, he suffered his whole Arm
to be burned, till the smell of the broyling flesh was perceived by the
Assistants. There was nothing, according to their Custom, wherein their
Reputation was more concerned, nor for which they were to undergo more blame
and disgrace, than in being taken in Theft. Thievery odious to the Spartans.
I am so fully satisfied of the greatness of those Peoples Courage, that his
story does not only not appear to me, as to Bodinus, incredible; but I do not
find it so much as rare and strange. The Spartan History is full of a thousand
more cruel and rare examples; and is indeed all Miracles in Comparison of this.
Thievery very much practiced by the Egyptians.
Marcellinus, concerning theft reports, that in his time there was no sort of
Torments which could compel the Egyptians, when taken in the manner, though a
People very much addicted to it, so much as to tell their Name. Fortitude of a
Spanish Peasant.
A Spanish Peasant, being put to the Wrack about the Accomplices of the murder
of the Praetor Lucius Piso, cried out in the height of the Torment, that his
Friends should not leave him, but look on in all assurance, and that no Pain
had the Power to force from him one word of Confession, which was all they
could get the first day: the next day, as they were leading him a second time
to another Trial, strongly disengaging himself from the Hands of his Guards, he
furiously run his Head against a Wall, Death of Epicaris.
and beat out his Brains. Epicharis, having tired and glutted the Cruelty of
Nero's Yeomen of the Guard, and undergone their Fire, their beating, and their
Engines a whole day together without one Syllable of Confession of her
Conspiracy; being the next day brought again to the Wrack, with her Limbs
almost torn to pieces, conveyed the Lace of her Robe with a running noose over
one of the Arms of her Chair, and suddenly slipping her Head into it, with the
weight of her own Body hanged herself: who having the Courage to dye after that
manner, is it not to be presumed that she purposely lent her Life to the Trial
of her Fortitude the day before, to mock the Tyrant, and encourage others to
the like attempt? And whoever will enquire of our Argoulets of the Experiences
they have had in our Civil-Wars, Or light horse.
will find effects of Patience and Obstinacy in this miserable Age of ours, and
amongst the soft and effeminate Rabble, worthy to be compared with those we
have now related of the Spartan Virtue. I know there have been simple Peasants
amongst us, who have endured the Soles of their Feet to be broiled upon a
Grid-iron, their Fingers-ends to be writhen off with the Cock of a Pistol, and
their bloody Eyes squeezed out of their Heads by force of a Cord twisted about
their Brows, before they would so much as consent to ransom. I have seen one
left stark naked for dead in a Ditch, his Neck black and swelled, with a Halter
yet about it, with which they had dragged him all Night at a Horses Tail, his
Body wounded in a hundred Places, with stabs of Daggers had been given him, not
to kill him, but to put him to Pain, and to affright him: who had endured all
this, and even to being speechless and insensible, resolved, as he himself told
me, rather to dye a thousand deaths (as indeed, as to matter of suffering, he
already had) before he would pay a penny; and yet he was one of the richest
Husbandmen of all the Country. How many have been seen patiently to suffer
themselves to be burnt and roasted for Opinions taken upon trust from others,
and by them not at all understood? Women obstinate.
I have known a hundred and a hundred Women (for Gascony has a certain
Prerogative for Obstinacy) whom you might sooner have made eat Fire, than
forsake an Opinion they had conceived in Anger. They are more exasperated by
blows and constraint. And he that made the Story of the Woman, who in defiance
of all Correction, Threats and Bastinadoes, ceast not to call her Husband lowzy
Knave; and that being plunged over Head and Ears in Water, could yet lift her
Hands above her Head, and make a sign of cracking Lice, fein'd a Tale, of which
in truth we every day see a manifest image in the Obstinacy of Women. And
Obstinacy is the Sister of Constancy, at least in Vigor and Stability. We are
not to judge what is possible, and what is not, according to what is credible
and incredible to our Apprehension, as I have said elsewhere: and it is a great
Fault, and yet that most men are guilty of (which nevertheless I do not mention
with any Reflection upon Bodinus) to make a difficulty of believing that in
another, which they could not, or would not do themselves. Every one thinks
that the sovereign stamp of humane Nature is imprinted in him, and that from it
all others must take their Rule; and that all proceedings which are not like
his, are feigned and false. Is any thing of another Actions or Faculties
proposed to him? The first thing he calls to the Consultation of his Judgment
is his own Example; and as matters go with him, so they must of Necessity do
with all the World besides. O dangerous and intolerable Folly! For my part I
consider some men as infinitely beyond me, especially amongst the Ancients; and
yet, though I clearly discern my inability to come near them by a thousand
paces, I do not forbear to keep them in sight, and to judge of what does
elevate them so, of which I also perceive some seeds in my self; as I also do
of the extreme meanness of some other Minds, which I neither am astonished at,
nor yet do misbelieve. I very well perceive the turns those great Souls take to
raise themselves to such a pitch, and admire their Grandeur; and those flights
that I think the bravest, I could be glad to imitate, where, though I want
wing, yet my Judgment goes along with them.

The other Example he introduces of things incredible, and wholly fabulous,
delivered by Plutarch, is, that Agesilaus was fined by the Ephori for having
wholly engrossed the Hearts and Affections of his Citizens to himself alone.
Agesilaus mulcted by the Ephori for insinuating himself into the Heart of the
People.
And herein I do not see what sign of Falsity is to be found: but so it is,
that Plutarch speaks of things that must needs be better known to him than to
us; and it was no new thing in Greece to see men punished and exiled for this
very thing of being too acceptable to the People, witness the Ostracism and
Petalism. There is yet in this place another Accusation laid against Plutarch,
which I cannot well digest; where he says, that he has sincerely coupled the
Romans with the Romans, and the Greeks amongst themselves: but not the Romans
with the Greeks, witness says he, Demosthenes and Cicero, Cato and Aristides,
Sylla and Lysander, Marcellus and Pelopidas, and Pompey and Agesilaus,
supposing that he has favored the Greeks in giving them so unequal Companions:
which is really to attaque what in Plutarch is most excellent, and most to be
commended. For in his Parallels (which is the most admirable part of all his
Works, and with which, in my Opinion, he is himself the most pleased) the
fidelity and sincerity of his Judgments equal their depth and weight. He is a
Philosopher that teaches us Virtue. Let us see whether we cannot defend him
from this Reproach of Falsity and Prevarication. All that I can imagine could
give occasion to this Censure, is, the great and shining luster of the Roman
Names which we have still before us; it does not seem likely to us that
Demosthenes could rival the Glory of a Consul, Proconsul, and Questor of that
great Republic: but if a man consider the truth of the thing, and the men in
themselves, which is Plutarch's chiefest aim, and more to balance their
Manners, their Natures, and Parts, than their Fortunes; I think contrary to
Bodinus, that Cicero, and the elder Cato come very far short of the men with
whom they are compared. I should sooner for his purpose have chosen the example
of the younger Cato compared with Phocian, for in this couple there would have
been a more likely disparity to the Romans Advantage. As to Marcellus, Sylla,
and Pompey, I very well discern that their Exploits of War are greater and more
full of Pomp and Glory than those of the Greeks, which Plutarch compares with
them: but the bravest and most virtuous Actions, no more in War than elsewhere,
are not always the most renowned. I often see the Names of Captains obscured by
the Splendour of other Names of less desert; witness Labienus, Ventidius,
Telesinus, and several others. And to take it by that, were I to complain on
the behalf of the Greeks, could I not say, that Camillus was much less
comparable to Themistocles, the Gracchi to Agis, and Cleones and Numa to
Lycurgus? But it is folly to judge of things that have so many Aspects at own
view. When Plutarch compares them, he does not for all that make them equal.
Who could more learnedly and sincerely have marked their distinctions? Does he
parallel the Victories, Feats of Arms, the force of their Armies conducted by
Pompey, and his Triumphs, with those of Agesilaus? I do not believe, says he,
that Xenophon himself, if he were now living, though he was allowed to write
whatever pleased him to the advantage of Agesilaus, would dare to bring them
into Comparison. Does he speak of parallelling Lysander to Sylla? There is,
says he, no Comparison, either in the number of Victories, or in the hazard of
Naval Engagements, etc. This is not to derogate from the Romans; for having
only simply named them with the Greeks, he can have done them no injury, what
disparity soever there may be betwixt them: and Plutarch does not entirely
oppose them to one another, there is no preference in general, he only compares
the pieces and circumstances one after another, and gives of every one a
particular and separate Judgment; wherefore, if any one would convince him of
Partiality, he ought to pick out some one of those particular Judgments, or
say in general that he was mistaken in comparing such a Greek to such a Roman,
when there were others more fit and better resembling to parallel him to.

CHAP. XXXIII. The Story of Spurina.
PHilosophy thinks she has not ill employed her Talent, when she has given the
sovereignty of the Soul, and the authority of restraining our Appetites to
Reason. Amongst which, they who judge that there is none more violent than
those which spring from Love, have this Opinion also, that they seize both of
Body and Soul, and possess the whole Man; so that even Health it self depends
upon them, and Medicine is sometimes constrained to pimp for them. But a man
might on the contrary also say, that the mixture of the Body brings an
abatement and weakening; for such desires are subject to Saciety, and capable of
material Remedies. Many being determined to rid their Soul from the continual
Alarms of this Appetite, have made use of Incision and Amputation of the
rebelling Members. Others have subdued their force and ardour by the frequent
application of cold things, as Snow, and Vinegar. The Sack-cloths of our
Ancestors were for this purpose, which is a Cloth woven of Horses Hair, of
which some of them made Shirts, and others Girdles to torture and correct their
Reins. A Prince not long ago told me, that in his Youth, upon a solemn Festival
in the Court of King Francis the First, where every Body was very finely
dressed, he would needs put on his Father's Hair Shirt, which was still kept in
the House; but how great soever his Devotion was, he had not patience to wear
it till Night, and was sick a long time after, adding withal, that he did not
think there could be any youthful heat so fierce that the use of this Receipt
would not mortify, and yet perhaps he never essayed the most violent; for
Experience shows us, that such Emotions are often seen under rude and slovenly
Cloths, and that a Hair Shirt does not always render those Chaste that wear it.
Xenocrates proceeded with greater severity in this Affair, for his Disciples,
to make trial of his Continency, having slipped Lais, that beautiful and famous
Curtezan into his Bed quite naked, excepting the arms of her Beauty and her
wanton Allurements her Philters, finding, that in the despite of his Reason and
philosophical Rules, his unruly flesh began to mutiny, he caused those Members
of his to be burned that he found consenting to this Rebellion. Whereas the
Passions which wholly reside in the Soul, as Ambition, Avarice, and the rest,
find the Reason much more to do, because it cannot there be relieved but by its
own means; neither are those Appetites capable of Saciety, but grow sharper,
and increase by Fruition. The sole Example of Julius Caesar may suffize to
demonstrate to us the disparity of these Appetites; for never was Man more
addicted to amorous Delights than he: Of which, the delicate Care he had of his
Person, to that degree of Effeminacy, as to serve himself with the most
lascivious means to that end, as to have the Hairs of his Body twitch'd off bye
places, and farded all over with Perfumes with the extremest curiosity, is one
Testimony, and he was a Beautiful Person in himself, of a fair Complexion,
tall, and spritely, full faced, with quick hazel Eyes, if we may believe
Suetonius; for the Statues that we see at Rome do not in all points answer this
Description. Besides his Wives, which he four times changed, without reckoning
the Amors of his Childhood with Nicomedes King of Bithynia; he had the
Maidenhead of the Renowned Cleopatra, Queen of Egypt; witness the little
Caesario that he had by her. He also made Love to Eunoe, Queen of Mauritania,
and at Rome, to Posthumia, the Wife of Servius Sulpitius, to Lollia, the Wife
of Gabinius, to Tortulla, the Wife of Crassus, and even to Mutia, Wife to the
Great Pompey: which was the Reason the Roman Historians say, that she was
repudiated by her Husband, which Plutarch confesses to be more than he knew.
And the Curios, both Father and Son, afterward reproached Pompey, when he
married Caesar's Daughter, that he had made himself Son-in-law to a man who had
made him Cuckold, and one that he himself was wont to call Aegystus. Besides
all these, he entertained Servilia, Cato's Sister, and Mother to Marcus Brutus,
from whence every one believes the great affection he had to Brutus did
proceed, by reason that he was born in a time when it was likely he might be
his. So that I have reason, methinks, to take him for a man extremely given to
this Debauch, and of a very amorous Constitution. But the other Passion of
Ambition, Caesar very ambitious.
with which he was exceedingly infected, arising in him to contend with the
former, it was soon compelled to give way. And here calling to mind Mahomet,
who won Constantinople, and totally exterminated the Grecian Name; I do not
know where these two Passions were so evenly balanced, equally an indefatigable
Lecher and Soldier, but where they both meet in his Life, and justle one
another, the quarrelling Ardour always gets the better of the amorous Passion.
And this, though it was out of its natural Season, never regained an absolute
Sovereignty over the other, till he was arrived at an extreme old Age, and
unable to undergo the Fatigues of War. What is related for a contrary Example,
of Ladislaus King of Naples, is very remarkable; that being a great Captain,
Valiant, and Ambitious, he proposed to himself for the principal end of his
Ambition, the execution of his Pleasure, and the enjoyment of some rare and
excellent Beauty. His death sealed up all the rest: for having by a close and
tedious Seige reduced the City of Florence to so great distress, that the
Inhabitants were compelled to Capitulate about surrender; he was content to let
them alone, provided they would deliver up to him a beautiful Maid he had heard
of in their City. They were forced to yield to it, and by a private Injury to
divert the public Ruin. She was the Daughter of a famous Physician of his
time, who finding himself involved in so foul a Necessity, resolved upon a high
Attempt; for as every one was laying to a hand to trick up his Daughter, and to
adorn her with Ornaments and Jewels, to render her more agreeable to this new
Lover, he also gave her a Handkerchief most richly wrought, and of an exquisite
perfume, (an Implement they never go without in those Parts) which she was to
make use of at their first approaches. This Handkerchief, empoisoned with his
chiefest Art, coming to be rubbed between the chafed Flesh and open Pores, both
of the one and the other, so suddenly infused the Poison, that immediately
converting their warm into a cold Sweat, they presently died in one another
Arms. But I return to Caesar. His Pleasures never made him steal one minute of
an hour, nor step one step aside from Occasions that might any way conduce to
his Advancement. That Passion was so sovereign in him over all the rest, and
with so absolute authority possessed his Soul, that it guided him at pleasure: In
earnest, it troubles me when (as to every thing else) I consider the greatness
of this Man, and the wonderful Parts wherewith he was endued, learned to that
degree in all sorts of Knowledge, that there is hardly any one Science of which
he has not written: He was so great an Orator, that many have preferred his
Eloquence to that of Cicero; and he, I conceive, did not think himself
inferior to him in that particular: for his two Anti-Catos were chiefly writ
to counterbalance the Elocution that Cicero had expended in his Cato. As to the
rest, was ever Soul so vigilant, so active, and so patient of Labor as his?
and doubtless it was embellished with many rare seeds of Virtue, I mean innate,
and natural, and not put on. He was singularly Sober, so far from being
delicate in his Diet, that Opius relates, how that having one day at Table
Physical, instead of common Oil, in some Sauce set before him, he did eat
heartily of it, that he might not put his Entertainer out of Countenance.
Another time he caused his Baker to be whipped for serving him with a finer than
ordinary sort of Bread. Cato himself was wont to say of him, that he was the
first sober man that ever made it his Business to ruin his Country. And as to
the same Cato's calling him one day Drunkard, it fell out thus. Being both of
them in the Senate, at a time when Catiline's Conspiracy was in Question, of
which Caesar was suspected, one came and brought him a Ticket sealed up: Cato
believing that it was something the Conspirators gave him notice of, called to
him to deliver it into his hand, which Caesar was constrained to do to avoid
farther suspicion. It was by fortune a Love-letter that Servilia, Cato's Sister
had written to him; which Cato having read, he threw it back to him, saying,
there Drunkard. This, I say, Caesar called Drunkard.
was rather a word of disdain and anger, than an express reproach of this Vice,
as we often rate those that anger us with the first injurious words comes into
our Mouths, though nothing due to those we are offended at. To which may be
added, that the Vice which Cato cast in his dish is wonderfully near akin to
that wherein he had trap'd Caesar; for Bacchus and Venus, Venus accompanies
Bacchus.
according to the Proverb, do very willingly agree; but with me Venus is most
spritely when I am the most sober. The Examples of his Sweetness and Clemency
to those by whom he had been offended are infinite; Caesar's Clemency toward
his Enemies.
I mean, besides those he gave during the time of the Civil Wars, which, as
plainly enough appears by his Writings, he practiced to cajole his Enemies, and
to make them less afraid of his future Dominion and Victory. But I must also
say, that if these Examples are not sufficient Proofs of his natural Sweetness,
they at least manifest a mavelous Confidence and Grandeur of Courage in this
Person.. He has often been known to dismiss whole Armies, after having overcome
them, to his Enemies, without Ransom, or deigning so much as to bind them by
Oath, if not to favor him, at least no more to bear Arms against him. He has
three or four times taken some of Pompey's Captains Prisoners, and as often set
them at Liberty. Pompey declared all those to be Enemies who did not follow him
to the War, and he proclaimed all those to be his Friends who sat still and
did not actually take Arms against him. To such Captains of his as run away
from him to go over to the other side, he sent moreover their Arms, Horses, and
Equipage. The Cities he had taken by force, he left at full liberty to take
which side they pleased, imposing no other Garrison upon them but the memory of
his Sweetness and Clemency. He gave strict and express Charge the day of his
great Battle of Pharsalia, that without the utmost necessity no one should lay
a hand upon the Citizens of Rome. These, in my Opinion, were very hazardous
Proceedings, and it is no wonder if those in our Civil War, who, like him, fight
against the ancient estate of their Country, do not follow his Example; they
are extraordinary means, and that only appertain to Caesar's Fortune, and to
his admirable Foresight in the conduct of Affairs. When I consider the
incomparable Grandeur of his Soul, I excuse Victory that it could not disengage
it self from him, even in so unjust and so wicked a Cause.

To return to his Clemency; we have many natural Examples in the time of his
Government; when all things being reduced to his Power, he had no more need to
dissemble. Caius Memmius had writ very severe Orations against him, which he
had as sharply answered: yet did not soon after forbear to use his interest to
make him Consul. Caius Calvus, who had composed several injurious Epigrams
against him, having employed many of his Friends to mediate a Reconciliation
with him, Caesar voluntarily persuaded himself to write first to him. And our
good Catullus, who had so rudely ruffled him under the name of Mamurra, coming
to make his excuses to him, he made him the same day sit at his Table. Having
Intelligence of some who spoke ill of him, he did no more, but only in a
public Oration declare that he had notice of it. He also less feared his
Enemies than he hated them. Some Conspiracies and Cabals that were made against
his Life, being discovered to him, he satisfied himself in publishing by
Proclamation that they were known to him, without further prosecuting the
Conspirators.

As to the respect he had to his Friends; Caius Oppius, being with him upon a
Journey, and finding himself ill, he left him the only Lodging he had for
himself, and lay all Night upon the hard Ground in the open Air. As to what
concerns his Justice; he put a beloved Servant of his to Death for lying with a
noble Roman's Wife, though there was no complaint made. Never had man more
Moderation in his Victory, nor more Resolution in his adverse Fortune. But all
these good Inclinations were stifled and spoiled by his furious Ambition,
Ambition the only ruin of Caesar's Actions.
by which he suffered himself to be so transported and misled, that a man may
easily maintain, that that Passion guided the Rudder of all his Actions. Of a
liberal man, it made him a public Thief to supply this Bounty and Profusion,
and made him utter this vile and unjust saying, That if the most wicked and
profligate Persons in the World had been faithful in serving him toward his
Advancement, he would cherish and prefer them to the utmost of his Power, as
much as the best of men: It intoxicated him with so excessive a Vanity, as to
dare to boast in the Presence of his Fellow Citizens, that he had made the
great Commonwealth of Rome a Name without Form, and without Body; and to say
that his answer for the future should stand for Laws, and also to receive the
Body of the Senate coming toward him sitting; to suffer himself to be adored,
and to to have divine Honors paid to him in his own Presence. To conclude,
this sole Vice, in my Opinion, spoiled in him the most rich and beautiful
Nature that ever was, and has rendered his Name abominable to all good Men, in
that he would erect his Glory upon the Ruins of his Country, and the
Subversion of the greatest and most flourishing Republic the World shall ever
see.

There might on the contrary many examples be produced of great men whom
Pleasures have made to neglect the conduct of their Affairs, as Mark Anthony
and others; but where Love and Ambition should be in equal Balance, and come to
justle with equal Forces, I make no doubt but the last would win the prize.

But to return to my Subject; It Is much to bridle our Appetites by the
Discourse of Reason, or by Violence to contain our Members within their Duty:
but to lash our selves for our Neighbors Interest, and not only to divest our
selves of the charming Passion that tickles us with the Pleasure we feel of
being agreeable to others, and courted and beloved of every one; but also to
conceive a hatred against the Graces that produce that effect, and to condemn
our Beauty because it enflames others; of this I confess I have met with few
Examples: this indeed is one. Spurina, a young man of Tuscany, Aeneid. lib. 10.
Qualis gemma micat fulvum quae dividet aurum,
Aut collo decus, aut capiti, vel quale per artem
Inclusum buxo, aut Ericia Terebintho.
Lucet ebur, --
As a Gem shines in yellow Gold enchac'd,
On Neck or Head, for Decoration placed;
Or as by Art I'vry does luster get
In the Erician Terebinthus set.
being endowed with a singular Beauty, and so excessive, that the chastest Eyes
could not chastely behold its Rays; not contenting himself with leaving so much
flame and fever as he every where kindled, without relief, entered into a
furious spite against himself, and those great Endowments Nature had so
liberally conferred upon him; as if a man were responsible to himself for the
Faults of others: and purposely slashed and disfigured, with many Wounds and
Scars, the perfect Simmetry and Proportion that Nature had so curiously
imprinted in his Face. To give my free Opinion, I more admire than honor such
Actions. Such Excesses are enemies to my Rules. The design was Conscientious
and Good, but certainly a little defective in Prudence. What! if his Deformity
served afterward to make others guilty of the Sin of Hatred, or Contempt, or
of Envy, at the Glory of so commendable an Action, or of Calumny, interpreting
this Humor a mad Ambition! Is there any Form from whence Vice cannot, if it
will, extract occasion to exercise it self one way or another? It had been more
just, and also more noble, to have made of these Gifts of God a Subject of
regularity and exemplary Virtue. They who retire themselves from the common
Offices, from that infinite number of Vice, and manifest Rules that fetter a
man of exact honesty in the Civil Life, are in my opinion very discreet; what
peculiar sharpness of Constraint soever they impose upon themselves in so
doing. It Is in some sort a kind of dying to avoid the Pain of living well. They
may have another reward, but the reward of the difficulty I fancy they can
never have, nor that in uneasiness there can be any thing beyond keeping
himself upright in the waves of the World, truly and exactly performing all
parts of his Duty. It Is peradventure more easy to live clean from the whole
Sex, than to maintain a man's self exactly in all points in the Society of a
Wife. And a man may more incuriously slip into want than abundance duly
dispensed. Custom, carried on according to Reason, has in it more of sharpness
than abstinence. Moderation is a Virtue that has more work than Sufferance. The
well living of Scipio has a thousand fashions, that of Diogenes but one. This
as much excells the ordinary Lives in Innocence, as the most accomplished
excel them in utility and force.

CHAP. XXXIV. Observation of the means to carry on a War according to Julius
Caesar.
IT IS said of many great Leaders, that they have had certain Books in
particular esteem, as Alexander the Great, Homer, Scipio Affricanus, Xenophon,
Marcus Brutus, Polibius, Charles the Fifth, Philip de Commines, and it is said,
that in our times Machiavel is elsewhere in Repute; but the late Marshall
Strossy, who took Caesar for his Man, doubtless made the best choice, being
that that Book in truth ought to be the Breviary of every great Soldier, as
being the true and most excellent Pattern of all Military Art. And moreover,
God knows with what Grace and Beauty he has embellished that rich Matter, with
so pure, delicate, and perfect Expression, that, in my Opinion, there are no
Writings in the World comparable to his, as to that. I will set down some rare
and particular Passages of his Wars that remain in my memory.

His Army, being in some Consternation upon the Rumor that was spread of the
great Forces that King Juba was leading against him; instead of abating the
Apprehension which his Soldiers had conceived at the News, and of lessening
the Forces of the Enemy, having called them all together to encourage and
reassure them, he took a quite contrary way to what we are used to do, for he
told them that they needed no more to trouble themselves with enquiring after
the Enmies Forces, for that he was certainly informed thereof, and then told
them of a number much surpassing both the truth and the report that was
rumored in his Army; following the advice of Cyrus in Xenophon; forasmuch as
the imposture is not of so great importance to find an Enemy weaker than we
expected, than to find him really very strong, after having been made to
believe that he was weak. It was always his use to accustom his Soldiers
simply to obey, The Obedience of Caesar's Soldiers.
without taking upon them to control, or so much as to speak of their Captains
designs; which he never communicated to them but upon the point of Execution,
and took a delight, if they discovered any thing of what he intended,
immediately to change his Orders to deceive them; and to that purpose would
often, when he had assigned his Quarters in a place, pass forward and lengthen
his days march, especially if it was foul Weather. The Swisse, in the beginning
of his Wars in Gaul, having sent to him to demand a free passage over the Roman
Territories; though resolved to hinder them by force, he nevertheless spoke
kindly to the Messengers, and took some respite to return an Answer, to make
use of that time for the calling his Army together. These silly People did not
know how good a Husband he was of his time: for he does often repeat, that it
is the best part of a Captain to know how to make use of Occasions, and his
diligence in his Exploits are in truth unheard of and incredible. If he was not
very conscientious in taking advantage of an Enemy under color of a Treaty of
Agreement, he was as little in this, that he required no other Virtue in a
Soldier, but Valor only, and seldom punished any other Faults but Mutiny and
Disobedience. He would often after his Victories turn them loose to all sorts of
License, dispensing them for some time from the Rules of Military Discipline,
saying withal, that he had Soldiers so well trained up, that powdered and
perfumed, they would run furiously to the fight. In truth he loved to have them
richly armed, and made them wear engraved, gilded, and damask'd Arms, to the
end that the care of saving their Arms might engage them to a more obstinate
defense. Speaking to them, he called them by the name of Fellow Soldiers,
which we yet use; which his Successor Augustus reformed, supposing he had only
done it upon Necessity, and to cajole those who only followed him as Volunters;
-- Rheni mihi Caesar in undis.
Lucan. l. 5.
Dux erat, hic socius, facinus quos inquinat aequat.
Great Caesar, who my General did appear
Upon the Banks of Rhine's my Fellow here;
For wickedness, where it once hold does take,
All men whom it defiles does equal make.
but that this carriage was too mean and low for the Dignity of an Emperor and
General of an Army; and therefore brought up the custom of calling them
Soldiers only. With this Courtesy Caesar mixed great Severity to keep them in
awe. The ninth Legion having mutin'd near to Placentia, he ignominiously
casheer'd them, though Pompey was then yet on foot, and received them not again
to Grace till after many Supplications. He quieted them more by Authority and
Boldness than by gentle ways. In that place where he speaks of his Passage over
the Rhine toward Germany, he says, that thinking it unworthy of the Honor of
Roman People to waft over his Army in Vessels, he built a Bridge that they
might pass over dry foot. There it was that he built that wonderful Bridge, of
which he gives so particular a Description: Exhortations to Soldiers before a
Battle of great importance.
for he no where so willingly insists upon his own Actions, as in representing
to us the subtlety of his Inventions in such kind of things. I have also
observed this, that he set a great value upon his Exhortations to the Soldiers
before the fight; for where he would show that he was either surpised, or
reduced to a Necessity of fighting, he always brings in this, that he had not
so much as liesure to Harangue his Army. Before that great Battle with those of
Tournay, Caesar, says he, having given order for every thing else, presently
ran where Fortune carried him to encourage his People, and meeting with the
tenth Legion, had no more time to say any thing to them but this, that they
should remember their wonted Valor, not be astonished, but bravely sustain the
Enemies encounter; and being the Enemy was already approached within a Darts
cast, he gave the signal of Battle; and going suddenly thence elsewhere to
encourage others, he found that they were already engaged. His Tongue has
indeed done him notable Service upon several Occasions, and his Military
Eloquence was in his own time so highly reputed, that many of his Army writ
down his Harangues as he spoke them, by which means there were Volumes of them
collected that continued a long time after him. He had so particular a Grace in
speaking, that they who were particularly acquainted with him, and Augustus,
amongst others, hearing those Orations read, could distinguish even to the
Phrases and Words that were none of his. The first time that he went out of
Rome with any public Command, he arrived in eight days at the River Rhine,
having with him in his Coach a Secretary or two before him who were continually
writing, and him that carried his Sword behind him. And certainly, though a man
did nothing but intend his way, he could hardly have performed that Journey so
soon. With which promptness having been every where Victorious in Gaul, he left
it, and following Pompey to Brundusium, in eighteen days time he subdued all
Italy, Caesar's promptness in his Expeditions.
returned from Brundusium to Rome, and from Rome went into the very heart of
Spain, where he underwent extreme difficulties in the War against Afranius and
Petreius, and in the long Siege of Marcelles; from thence he returned into
Macedonia, beat the Roman Army at Pharsalia: passed from thence in pursuit of
Pompey into Egypt, which he also subdued; from Egypt he went into Syria, and
the Territories of Pontus, where he fought Pharnaces; from thence into Afric,
where he defeated Scipio and Juba; again returned through Italy into Spain,
where he defeated Pompey's Sons. Ocior and coeli flammis, and tigride foeta.
Lucan. lib. 5. Virg. Aen. lib. 12.

Ac veluti montis saxum de vertice praeceps
Cum ruit avulsum vento, seu turbidus imber
Proluit, aut annis solvit sublapsa vetustas,
Fertur in abruptum magno mons improbus actu,
Exultatque solo, silvas, armenta, virosque,
Involvens secum.
Swifter than Lightning, or the furious course
Of the fell Tigress when she is a Nurse;
And as a Stone torn from the Mountains crown
By some rough Wind thence tumbles headlong down
Whether washed off by Torrents of a Shower,
Or loosed by Age's all-subduing Power,
The ponderous Mass falls with a mighty force,
And grazing here and there, does in its course
Sweep all before it, Men, and Flocks, and Droves,
And levels with the Earth opposing Groves.
Speaking of the Siege of Avaricum, he says, that it was his Custom to be night
and day with the Pioneers. In all Enterprises of Consequence he still
discovered in Person, and never brought his Army into Quarters till he had
first viewed the Place. And if we may believe Suetonius, when he resolved to
pass over into England, he was the first man that sounded the Passage. He was
wont to say, that he more valued a Victory obtained by Counsel than Force. And
in the War against Petreius and Afranius, Fortune presenting him with an
occasion of manifest Advantage, he declined it, saying, that he hoped with a
little more time and less hazard to overthrow his Enemies. He there also played
a notable part, in commanding his whole Army to pass the River by Swimming,
without any manner of necessity. Lucan. lib. 4.
-- rapuitque ruens in praelia miles
Quod fugiens timuisset iter, mox uda receptis
Membra fovent armis, gelidosque a gurgite, cursu
Restituunt artus.
The Soldiers rush thorough a Pass to fight
They would have been afraid t'ave taken in flight
Then with their Arms their wet Limbs cover ore,
And their numm'd Joints by running do restore.
I find him a little more temperate and considerate in his Enterprises than
Alexander, for this seems to seek and run headlong upon dangers, like an
impetuous Torrent attacks and rushes against every thing it meets without
Choice or Discretion.

Sic tauri-formis volvitur Aufidus,
Horat. lib. 4. Ode. 14.
Qui regna Dauni perfluit Appuli
Dum saevit, horrendamque cultis
Diluviem meditatur agris.
Sir Thomas Hawkins.
So the biforked Aufidus amain
Runs bellowing forth along the Apulian Plain,
When he with rage, and swelling Floods abounds
Threatening a Deluge to the tilled Grounds.
And indeed he was a General in the flower and first heat of his Youth, whereas
Caesar took up the Trade at a ripe and well advanced Age. To which may moreover
be added, that Alexander was of a more sanguine, hot, and choleric
Constitution, apt to push him on to such Extravagancies, which he also inflamed
with Wine, from which Caesar was very abstinent: but where necessary occasion
required, never did any man venture his Person more than he: so much that for
my part, methinks, I read in many of his Exploits a determinate Resolution to
throw himself away, The great Resolution of Caesar in several occasions.
to avoid the shame of being overcome. In his great Battle with those of
Tournay, he charged up to the head of the Enemies without his Shield, as he was
surpised, seeing the Van of his own Army to begin to give ground, which has
also several times befallen him. Hearing that his People where besieged, he
passed through the Enemies Army in disguise to go encourage them with his
Presence. Having crossed over to Dyrrachium with very slender Forces, and
seeing the remainder of his Army, which he left to Antonius his Conduct, slow
in following him, he attempted alone to repass the Sea in a very great Storm;
and privately stole away to fetch the rest of his Forces, the Ports on the
other side being seized by Pompey, and the whole Sea being in his Possession.
And as to what he performed by force of hand, there are very many Exploits that
in hazard exceed all the Rules of War: for with how small means did he
undertake to subdue the Kingdom of Egypt, and afterward to attaque the Forces
of Scipio and Juba, ten times greater than his? These People have had I know
not what of more than humane Confidence in their Fortune, and he was wont to
say, that men must execute, and not deliberate upon Enterprises. After the
Battle of Pharsalia, when he had sent his Army away before him into Asia, and
was passing in one single Vessel the Straight of the Hellespont, he met Lucius
Cassius at Sea with ten tall men of War, where he had the Courage not only to
stay his coming, but to stand up with him, and summon him to yield, and did his
business. Having undertaken that furious siege of Alexia, where there were
fourscore thousand men in Garrison, and that all Gaul was in arms to raise the
siege, having set an Army on foot of a hundred and nine thousand Horse, and of
two hundred and forty thousand Foot, what a Boldness and mad Confidence was it
in him, that he would not give over his Attempt, and retire in two so
invincible Difficulties? which nevertheless he underwent: and after having won
that great Battle against those without, soon reduced those within to his
Mercy. The same happened to Lucullus at the Siege of Tigranocerta against King
Tigranes, but the Condition of the Enemy was not the same, considering the
Effeminacy of those with whom Lucullus had to deal. I will here set down two
rare and extraordinary Events concerning this Siege of Alexia; one, that the
Gauls having drawn their Powers together to encounter Caesar, after they had
made a General muster of all their Forces, resolved in their Council of War to
dismiss a good part of this great multitude, that they might not fall into
Confusion. This Example of fearing being too many is new; but to take it right,
it stands to reason that the Body of an Army should be of a moderate greatness,
and regulated to certain bounds, both out of respect to the difficulty of
providing for them, and the difficulty of Governing and keeping them in Order.
At least it is very easy to make it appear by Example, Monstrous Armies of no
great Effect.
that Armies so monstrous in number have seldom done any thing to purpose.
According to the saying of Cyrus in Xenophon, It Is not the number of men, but
the number of good men that gives the Advantage: the remainder serving rather
to trouble than assist. And Bajazet principally grounded his Resolution of
giving Tamberlaine Battle, contrary to the Opinion of all his Captains, upon
this, that his Enemies numberless number of men gave him assured hopes of
Confusion. Scanderbeg, That great numbers of Men cause Confusion.
a very good and expert Judge in such matters, was wont to say, that ten or
twelve thousand faithful fighting men were sufficient to a good Leader to
secure his Reputation in all sorts of Military Occasions. The other thing I
will here record, which seems to be contrary both to Custom and Rules of War,
is, that Vercingentorix, who was made General of all the parts of the revolted
Gaul, should go shut up himself in Alexia: for he who has the command of a
whole Country, ought never to engage his Person but in case of the last
Extremity, that the only place he had left is in concern, and that the only
hope he had left was in the defense of that City; Otherwise he ought to keep
himself always at Liberty, that he may have means to provide in general for all
parts of his Government.

To return to Caesar. He grew in time more slow, and more considerate, as his
Friend Oppius does witness: conceiving that he ought not easily to hazard the
Glory of so many Victories, which one blow of Fortune might deprive him of.
It Is what the Italians say, when they would reproach the rashness and fool
hardiness of young People, calling them Bisognosi d'honore, necessitous of
Honor, and that being in so great a want and dearth of Reputation, they have
reason to seek it at what price soever, which they ought not to do, who have
acquired enough already. There might reasonably there be some Moderation, and
some Saciety in this Thirst and Appetite of Glory, as well as in other things:
and there are enough who practice it. He was far remote from the religious
Observation of the ancient Romans, who would never prevail in their Wars, but
by dint of Truce, and simple Valor; and yet he was more conscientious than we
should be in these days, and did not approve all sorts of means to obtain a
Victory. In the War against Ariovistus, whilst he was parlying with him, there
happened a great tumult, which was occasioned by the Fault of Ariovistus his
Light Horse, wherein, though Caesar saw he had a very great Advantage of the
Enemy, he would make no use on it, lest he should have been reproached with a
treacherous proceeding. He was always wont to wear a rich Garment, and of a
shining Color in Battle, that he might be the more remarkable, and better
observed. He always carried a stricter hand over his Soldiers, and kept them
closer together when near an Enemy. When the ancient Greeks would accuse any
one of extreme insufficiency, they would say in common Proverb, that he could
neither read nor swim; he was of the same Opinion, that swimming was of great
use in War, and himself found it so, for being to use Diligence, he commonly
swam over the Rivers in his way; for he loved to march on foot, as also did
Alexander the great. Being in Egypt forced, to save himself to go into a little
Boat, and so many People leaping in with him, that it was in danger of sinking,
he chose rather to commit himself to the Sea, and recovered his Fleet, which
lay two hundred paces off, holding in his left hand his Tablets, and drawing
his Coat Armor in his Teeth, that it might not fall into the Enemies hand, by
swimming at a pretty advanced Age. Never had any General so much Credit with
his Soldiers: In the beginning of the Civil-Wars, his Centurions offered him
to find every one a man at Arms at his own charge, and the Foot Soldiers to
serve him at their own expense; those who were most at their ease moreover
undertaking to defray the most necessitous. The late Admiral Chastillion showed
us the like Example in our Civil War; Soldiers Mercenary.
for the French of his Army laid out Money out of their own Purses to pay the
Strangers that were with them. There are but rarely found Examples of so ardent
and so ready an Affection amongst the Soldiers of elder times, who kept
themselves strictly to their Rules of War. Passion has a more absolute command
over us than Reason; and yet it has happened in the War against Hannibal, that by
the Examples of the People of Rome, in the City, the Soldiers and Captains
refused their Pay in the Army, and in Marcellus his Camp those were branded
with the name of Mercenaries who would receive any. Having come by the worse
near Dyrrachium, his Soldiers came and offered themselves to be chastis'd and
punished, so that there was more need to comfort than reprove them. One single
Cohort of his withstood four of Pompey's Legions above four hours together,
till they were almost all killed with Arrows, so that there were a hundred and
thirty thousand Shafts found in the Trench. A Soldier called Scaeva, who
commanded at one of the Avenues, invincibly maintained his ground, having lost
an Eye, one Shoulder, and one Thigh shot through, and his Shield shot through
in two hundred and thirty places. It happened that many of his Soldiers being
taken Prisoners, rather chose to dye than promise to take the contrary side.
Granius Pe^ronius, taken by Scipio in Afric, Scipio having put the rest to
death, sent him word that he gave him his Life, for he was a man of Quality,
and Questor, to whom Petronius sent answer back, that Caesar's Soldiers were
wont to give others their Lives, and not to receive it, and immediately with
his own hand killed himself. Of their Fidelity there are infinite Examples;
amongst which, that which was done by those who were besieged in Salona,
Fidelity of the Garrison of Salona.
a City that stood for Caesar against Pompey, is not, for the rarity of an
Accident that there happened, to be forgot. Marcus Octavius kept them close
besieged; they within being reduced to the extremest necessity of all things,
so that to supply the want of men, most of them being either slain or wounded,
they had manumitted all their Slaves, and had been constrained to cut of all
the Women's Hair to make Ropes, besides a wonderful Dearth of Victuals, and yet
continuing resolute never to yield: After having drawn the Siege to a great
length, by which Octavius was grown more negligent and less attentive to his
Enterprise, they made choice of one Day about Noon, and having first placed the
Women and Children upon the Walls to make a show, sallied upon the Besiegers
with such fury, that having routed the first, second, and third Court of Guard,
and afterward the fourth, and all the rest, and beaten them all out of their
Trenches, they pursued them even to their Ships, and Octavius himself was fain
to fly to Dyrrachium where Pompey lay. I do not at present remember that I have
met with any other Example where the Besieged ever gave the Besieger a total
Defeat, and won the Field; nor that a sally ever arrived at the consequence of
a pure and entire Victory of Battle.

CHAP. XXXV. Of three good Women.
THey are not by the dozen, as every one knows, and especially in the Duties of
Marriage; for that is a bargain full of so many nice Circumstances, that it is
hard a Woman's Will should long endure such a restraint. Men, though their
condition be something better under that tie, have yet enough to do. The true
touch and test of a happy Marriage respects the time of their Cohabitation
only, if it has been constantly mild, loyal, and commodious. In our Age Women
commonly reserve the publication of their good Offices, and their vehement
affection toward their Husbands until they have lost them, or at least, till
then defer the Testimonies of their good Will. A too slow Testimony, and that
comes too late; by which they rather manifest that they never loved them till
dead. Their Life is nothing but Trouble, their Death full of Love and
Courtesy. As Fathers conceal their affection from their Children, Women
likewise conceal theirs from their Husbands to maintain a modest Respect. This
mystery is not for my pallat; it is to much purpose that they scratch themselves
and tear their Hair. I whisper in a Wayting-woman or a Secretaries Ear, how
were they? how did they live together? I always have that good Saying in my
head, jactantius maerent, quae minus dolent. They make the most ado who are
least concerned. Their whimpering is offensive to the living, and vain to the
dead: we should willingly give them leave to laugh after we are dead, provided
they will smile upon us whilst we are alive. Is it not to make a man revive in
spite, that she who spit in my face whilst I was, shall come to kiss my feet
when I am no more? If there be any Honor in lamenting a Husband, it only
appertains to those who smiled upon them whilst they had them, let those who
wept during their Lives laugh at their Deaths, as well outwardly as within.
Moreover, never regard those blubbered Eyes, and that pitiful Voice; but
consider her Deportments, her Complexion, and the plumpness of her Cheecks
under all those formal Veils; it is there the discovery is to be made. There are
few who do not mend upon it, and Health is a quality that cannot lie: that
starched and ceremonious Countenance looks not so much back as forward, and is
rather intended to get a new one than to lament the old. When I was a Boy, a
very beautiful and virtuous Lady, who is yet living, and the Widow of a Prince,
had I know not what more Ornament in her Dress than our Laws of Widow-hood will
well allow, which being reproached withal as a great Indecency, she made
Answer, That it was because she was resolved to have no more Friendships, and
would never marry again.

I have here, not at all dissenting from our Customs, made choice of three
Women, who have also expressed the utmost of their Goodness and Affections
about their Husbands deaths; yet are they Examples of another kind than are now
in Use, and so severe, as will hardly be drawn into Imitation.

The younger Pliny had near unto a House of his in Italy a Neighbor who was
exceedingly tormented with certain Ulcers in his private Parts. His Wife seeing
him so long to languish, entreated that he would give her leave to see, and at
leisure to consider of the condition of his Disease, and that she would freely
tell him what she Thought: This Permission being obtained, and she having
curiously examined the Business, found it impossible he could ever be cured,
and that all he was to hope for or expect, was a great while to linger out a
painful and miserable Life, and therefore, as the most sure and sovereign
Remedy, resolutely advised him to kill himself. But finding him a little tender
and backward in so rude an Attempt: Do not think my Friend, said she, that the
Torments I see thee endure are not as sensible to me as to thy self, and that
to deliver my self from them, I will not my self make use of the same Remedy I
have prescribed to thee. I will accompany thee in the Cure as I have done in
the Disease; fear nothing, but believe that we shall have pleasure in this
Passage, that is, to free us from so many Miseries, and we will go happily
together. Which having said, and roused up her Husband's Courage, she resolved
that they should throw themselves headlong into the Sea out of a Window that
leaned over it; and that she might maintain to the last the loyal and vehement
Affection wherewith she had embraced him during his Life, she would yet have
him dye in her Arms; but for fear they should fail, and lest they should leave
their hold in the fall, and through fear, she tied herself fast to him by the
waste, and so gave up her own Life to procure her Husband's repose. This was a
mean Woman, and even amongst that condition of People, it is no very new thing
to see some rare Examples of Virtue. -- extrema per illos Virg. Georg. lib. 2.

Justitia excedens terris vestigia fecit.
When from the Earth Justice her self bereft,
She her lost steps upon such People left.
The other two were noble and rich, where Examples of Virtue are rarely lodged.
Arria, the Wife of Cecinna Petus, a Consular Person, was the Mother of another
Arria, the Wife of Tharsea Petus, he whose Virtue was so renowned in the time
of Nero, and by means of this Son-in-Law, the Grandmother of Fannia: for the
resemblance of the names of these Men and Women, and their fortunes, have made
many mistake. This first Arria, her Husband Cecinna Petus, The Story of the
death of Arria, the Wife of Cecinna Petus.
having been taken prisoner by some of the Emperor Claudius his People, after
Scribonianus his Defeat, whose Party he had embraced in the War, begged of
those who were to carry him prisoner to Rome, that they would take her into
their Ship, where she should be of much less charge and trouble to them than a
great many Persons they must otherwise have to attend her Husband, and that she
alone would undertake to serve him in his Chamber, his Kitchen, and all other
Offices. But they refused her, wherefore she put her self into a Fisher boat
she hired on a sudden, and in that manner from Slavonia followed him. Being
come to Rome, Junia, the Widow of Scribonianus, one day, for the resemblance of
their Fortune, accosting her in the Emperor's presence; she rudely repulsed
her with these words, I, said she, speak to thee, or give ear to any thing thou
say; to thee in whose lap Scribonianus was slain, and thou art yet alive?
These words, with several other signs, gave her Friends to understand that she
would undoubtedly dispatch herself, impatient of supporting her Husband's
Fortune. And Thrasea, her Son-in-Law, beseeching her not to throw away herself,
and saying to her, What? If I should run the same Fortune that Cecinna has
done, would you that your Daughter, my Wife, should do the same: Would I?
replied she, Yes, yes, I would, if she had lived as long, and in as good
intelligence with thee as I have done with my Husband. These Answers made them
more careful of her, and to have a more watchful Eye to her Deportments. One
day, having said to those that looked to her; It Is to much purpose that you
take all this pains to prevent me; you may indeed make me to dye an ill death,
but to keep me from dying is not in your power; she suddenly furious started
from a Chair wherein she sat, and with all her force ran her head against the
wall, by which blow being laid flat in a swoon, and very much wounded, after
they had again with much ado brought her to her self: I told you, said she,
that if you refused me some easy way of dying, I should find out another how
painful soever. The conclusion of so admirable a Virtue was thus: Her Husband
Petus, not having Resolution enough of his own to dispatch himself, as he was
by the Emperor's cruelty enjoined, one day amongst others, after having first
employed all the Reasons and Exhortations which she thought most prevalent to
persuade him to it, she snatched the Poignard he wore from his side, and
holding it ready in her hand, for the conclusion of her Admonitions, Do thus
Petus, said she, and in the same instant giving herself a mortal stab in the
Breast, and then drawing it out of the wound, presented it to him, ending her
Life with this noble, generous, and immortal Saying, Paete non dolet. Petus, it
hurts not; having strength to pronounce no more but those three never to be
forgotten words. Casta suo gladium cum traderet Arria Paeto, Mart. lib. 1.
Epig. 14.

Quem de viceribus traxerat ipso suis:
Si qua fides, vulnus quod feci, non dolet, inquit,
Sed quod tu facies, id mihi Paete dolet.
When the Chaste Arria gave the reeking brand
That had new goar'd her heart to Petus's hand,
Petus, the wound I Have made hurts not, quoth she,
But the wound thou will make, it is that hurts me.
The Action was much more noble in it self, and of a braver sense than the Poet
could express it; for she was so far from being deterred by the Cruelty of her
Husbands Wound and Death, and her own, that she had been the Promotress, and
had given the Advice: but having performed this high and courageous Enterprise
for her Husbands only Convenience, she had even in the last gasp of her Life no
other concern but for him, and of dispossessing him of the fear of dying with
her. Petus presently struck himself to the Heart with the same Weapon, ashamed,
I believe, to have stood in need of so dear and precious an Example.

Pompeia Paulina, a young and very noble Roman Lady, had married Seneca in his
extreme old Age. Nero, his fine Pupil, sent his Guards to him to denounce the
Sentence of Death, which was performed after this manner. When the Roman
Emperors of those times had condemned any man of Quality, they sent to him by
their Officers to choose what Death he would, and to execute it within such or
such a time, which was limited according to the mettle of their Indignation, to
a shorter, or a longer respite, that they might therein have better leisure to
dispose their Affairs, and sometimes depriving them of the means of doing it by
the shortness of the time; and if the condemned seemed unwilling to submit to
the Order, they had People ready at hand to execute it either by cutting the
Veins of the Arms and Legs, or by compelling them by force to swallow a draught
of Poison. But Persons of Honor would not stay this Necessity, but made use of
their own Physicians and Surgeons for this purpose. Seneca, with a calm and
steady Countenance heard their charge, and presently called for Paper to write
his Will, which being by the Captain denied, he turned himself toward his
Friends, saying to them, Since I cannot leave you any other Acknowledgment of
the Obligation I have to you, I leave you at least the best thing I have,
namely* the Image of my Life and Manners, which I entreat you to keep in Memory
of me; that so doing you may acquire the Glory of sincere and real Friends. And
therewithal, one while appeasing the Sorrow he saw them in with gentle Words,
and presently raising his Voice to reprove them; What, said he, are become of
all our brave Philosophical Precepts? What are become of all the Provisions we
have so many years laid up against the Accidents of Fortune? Is Nero's Cruelty
unknown to us? What could we expect from him who had murdered his Mother, and
his Brother, but that he should put his Governor to Death who had nourished
and bred him? After having spoke these Words in general, he turned himself
toward his Wife, and embracing her fast in his Arms, as her Heart and Strength
failing her, she was ready to sink down with Grief, he begged of her, for his
sake, to bear this Accident with a little more Patience, telling her, that now
the hour was come wherein he was to show, not by Argument and Discourse, but by
effect, the Fruit he had acquired by his Studies, and that he really embraced
his Death, not only without Grief, but moreover with exceeding Joy. Wherefore
my dearest, said he, do not dishonor it with thy Tears, that it may not seem
as if thou love thy self more than my Reputation. Moderate thy Grief, and
comfort thy self in the knowledge thou have had of me and my Actions, leading
the remainder of thy Life in the same virtuous manner thou have hitherto done.
To which Paulina, having a little recovered her Spirits, and warmed her
Magnanimity with the heat of a most generous Affection, replied, No Seneca,
said she, I am not a Woman to suffer you to go alone in such a Necessity: I
will not have you think that the virtuous Examples of your Life have not yet
taught me how to dye, and when can I ever better, or more decently do it, or
more to my own desire, than with you? and therefore assure your self I will go
along with you. Seneca then taking this noble and generous Resolution of his
Wife exceeding kindly at her hands, and also willing to free himself from the
fear of leaving her exposed to the Mercy and Cruelty of his Enemies after his
Death: I have Paulina, said he, sufficiently instructed thee in what would
serve thee happily to live; but thou more covet'st I see the Honor of dying:
in truth I will not grudge it thee, the Constancy and Resolution in our common
end are the same, but the Beauty and Glory of thy part is much greater. Which
being said, the Surgeons at the same time open the Veins of both their Arms,
but being those of Seneca were more shrunk up, as well with Age as Abstinence,
made his Blood to flow too slowly, he moreover commanded them to open the Veins
of his Thighs; and lest the Torments he endured might entenerate his Wives
Heart, and also to free himself from the Affliction of seeing her in so sad a
Condition, after having taken a very affectionate leave of her, he entreated
she would suffer them to carry her into her Chamber, which they accordingly
did; but all these Incisions being not yet enough to make him dye, he commanded
Statius Anneus, his Physician, to give him a draught of Poison, which had not
much better Effect; for by Reason of the weakness and coldness of his Limbs, it
could not arrive at his Heart. Wherefore they were forced to superadd a very
hot Bath, and then feeling his end approach, whilst he had Breath, he continued
excellent Discourses upon the Subject of his present Condition, which the
Secretaries writ down so long as they could hear his Voice, and his last Words
were long after in high Honor and Esteem amongst Men, and it was a great loss
to us that they were not reserved down to our times. Then feeling the last
pangs of Death, with the bloody Water of the Bath he bathed his Head, saying,
This Water I dedicate to Jupiter the Deliverer. Nero, being presently
advertised of all this, fearing lest the Death of Paulina, who was one of the
best descended Ladies of Rome, and against whom he had no particular
unkindness, should turn to his reproach, he sent back Orders in all haste to
bind up her Wounds, which her Attendants without his knowledge had done before;
she being already half dead, and without all manner of Sense. Thus, though she
lived contrary to her own design, it was very honorably, and according to her
own Virtue, her pale Complexion ever after manifesting how much Life was run
from her Veins.

These are my three very true Stories, which I find as diverting, and as
Tragic as any of those we make of our own Heads wherewith to entertain the
common People; and I wonder that they who are addicted to such Relations, do
not rather cull out ten thousand very fine Stories, which are to be found in
very good Authors, that would save them the trouble of Invention, and be more
useful and diverting. And who would make a Collection of them, would need to
add nothing of his own, but the Connection only, as it were the soder of another
Metal; and might by this means embody a great many true Events of all sorts,
disposing and diversifying of them according as the Beauty of the Work should
require, after the same manner almost as Ovid has made up his Metamorphosis of
the infinite number of various Fables.

In these last couple this is moreover worthy of Consideration, that Paulina
voluntarily offered to lose her Life for the love of her Husband, Seneca's
great Affection to his Wife.
and that her Husband had formerly also forbore dying for the love of her.
There is no just counterpoise in this exchange as to us; but according to his
Stoical Humor, I presume he thought he had done as much for her, in prolonging
his Life upon her account, as if he had died for her. In one of his Letters to
Lucilius, after he has given him to understand, that being seized with an Ague
in Rome, he presently took Coach to go to a House he had in the Country,
contrary to his Wives Opinion, who would by all means persuade him to stay: and
that he had told her, that the Ague he was seized with, was not a Fever of the
Body, but the Place; it follows thus. She let me go, says he, with giving me a
strict charge of my Health. Now I, who know that her Life is involved in mine,
begin to make much of my self, that I may preserve her. And I lose the
privilege my Age has given me of being more constant and resolute in many
things; when I call to mind, that in this old Fellow there is a young Lady who
is interested in his Health. And since I cannot persuade her to love me more
courageously, she makes me more sollicitously love my self: for we must allow
something to honest Affections, and sometimes, though occasions importune us to
the contrary, we must call back Life, even though it be with Torment: we must
hold the Soul fast in our Teeth, since the Rule of Living amongst good men is
not so long as they please, but as long as they ought: He that loves not his
Wife and his Friend so well as to prolong his Life for them, but will
obstinately dye, is too delicate and too effeminate: the Soul must impose this
upon it self, when the utility of our Friends does so require: we must
sometimes lend our selves to our Friends, and when we would dye for our selves,
must break that Resolution for them. It Is a Testimony of Grandeur of Courage to
return to Life for the Consideration of another, as many excellent Persons have
done: and it is a mark of singular good nature to preserve old Age (of which the
greatest convenience is the indifferency of its duration, and a more stout and
disdainful use of Life) when a man perceives that this Office is pleasing,
agreeable, and useful to some Person by whom we are very much beloved. And a
man reaps by it a very pleasing Reward; for what can be more delightful than to
be so dear to his Wife, as upon her account he shall become dearer to himself?
Thus has my Paulina loaded me not only with her Fears, but my own; it has not
been sufficient to consider how resolutely I could dye, but I have also
considered how irresolutely she would bear my Death. I am enforced to live, and
sometimes to live is Magnanimity. These are his own Words, as excellent as they
every where use to be.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the most Excellent Men.
IF I should be asked my Opinion and choice of all the men who have come to my
knowledge, I should make answer, That methinks I find three more excellent than
all the rest. One of them Homer, not that Aristotle and Varro for example, were
not peradventure as learned as he; nor that possibly Virgil was not equal to
him in his own Art; which I leave to be determined by such as know them both,
and are best able to judge. I, who for my part, understand but one of them, can
only say this, according to my poor Talent, that I do not believe the Muses
themselves did ever go beyond the Roman. Tale facit carmen docta testudine,
Proper. l. 2. Eleg. ult.
quale
Cynthius impositis temperat articulus.
Whilst playing to his Lute, he Verse does sing,
It Is like Apollo's Voice and fingering.
And yet in this Judgment we are not to forget that it is chiefly from Homer
that Virgil derives his Excellence, that he is his guide and teacher; and that
the Iliad only has supplied him with body and matter out of which to compose
his great and divine Aeneis. I do not reckon upon that, but mix several other
Circumstances that render to me this Poet admirable, even as it were above
Humane condition. And in truth, I often wonder that he who has erected, and by
his Authority given so many Deities reputation in the World, was not deified
himself. Being blind and poor, being that before the Sciences were reduced into
Rule and certain Observations, he was so well acquainted with them, that all
those who have since taken upon them to establish Governments, to carry on
Wars, and to write either of Philosophy or Religion, of what Sect soever, or of
the Arts, having made use (...) him as of a most perfect Instructor in the
knowledge of all things, and of his Books, as of an unexhausted Treasure of all
sorts of Learning, Qui quid sit pulcrum, quid turpe, quid utile, quid non,
Before, ac melius Chrysippo, ac Crantore dixit. Hor. lib. 1. Epist. 2.

Who, what is our good, what not, what brave, what base, Sir Rich. Fenshaw.

Fuller than Crantor, or Chrysippus says.
and as this other says, Ovid. Amo. lib. 3. Eleg. 8.
-- aquo ceu font perenni
Vatum Pieriis labra rigantur aquis.
From whose never failing spring the Poet sips,
And in Pierian Waters wets his lips.
and another, Lucret. lib. 3.
Add Heliconiadum Comites, quorum unus Homerus.
Astra potitus.
Of all Pretenders, Homer is alone
Judged the most worthy of the Poets Throne.
and another, Manil. Astro^*
-- cujusque ex ore profuso
Omnis posteritas latices in carmina duxit,
Amnemque in tenues ausa est deducere rivos,
Vnius faeounda bonis.
From whose full flowing stream Posterity
Have channels laid to draw out Verses by,
And have made bold to draw by those out-lets
The Torrent into little Rivolets,
All fruitful thorough one man's Eloquence.


It Is contrary to the order of Nature that he has made the most excellent
Production that can possibly be, for the ordinary birth of things is imperfect;
they usually thrive, and gather strength by growing: whereas he has rendered the
Infancy of Poesy and other Sciences mature, perfect, and accomplished at
first. And for this Reason he may be called the first and the last of Poets,
according to the fair Testimony Antiquity has left us of him, That as there was
none before him whom he could imitate, so there has been none since that could
imitate him. His words, according to Aristotle, are the only words that have
Motion and Action, and are the only substantial words. Alexander the Great,
having found a rich Cabinet amongst Darius his Spoils, gave order it should be
reserved for him to keep his Homer in: saying, that he was the best and most
faithful Counselor he had in his Military Affairs. For the same reason it was,
that Cleomenes, the Son of Anaxandridas said, that the Lacedaemonian Poet was
the best Master for the Discipline of War. This singular and particular
Commendation is also left of him in the Judgment of Plutarch, that he is the
only Author in the World, that never glutted nor disgusted his Readers,
presenting himself always another thing, and always flourishing in some new
Grace. That wanton Alcibiades, having asked one who pretended to Learning for a
Book of Homer, gave him a box of the Ear because he had none, which he thought
as scandalous, as to take one of our Priests without a Breviary. Xenophanes
complained one day to Hiero, the Tyrant of Syracusa, that he was so poor he had
not wherewithal to maintain two Servants; What? replied the Tyrant, Homer, who
was much poorer than thou art, keeps above ten thousand now he is dead: What
did Panctius leave unsaid when he called Plato the Homer of Philosophers?
Besides, what Glory can be compared to his? Nothing is so frequent in men's
mouths as his Name and Works, nothing so known and received as Troy, Hellen,
and the War about her, when perhaps there was never any such thing. Our
Children are called by names that he feigned above three thousand years ago.
Who is ignorant of the Story of Hector and Achilles? Not only some particular
Families, but most Nations also seek original in his Inventions. Mahomet, the
second of that Name, Emperor of the Turks, writing to our Pope Pius the
second; I am astonished, says he, that the Italians should appear against me,
considering that we have our common descent from the Trojans, and that it
concerns me as well as it does them to revenge the blood of Hector upon the
Greeks, whom they countenance against me. Is it not a noble Farce wherein
Kings, Republics, and Emperors have so many Ages played their parts, and to
which the vast Universe serves for a Theater? Seven Grecian Cities contended
for his Birth, so much Honor even his obscurity helped him to. Aul. Gellius.
Smyrna, Rhodos, Colophon, Salamis, Chios, Argos, Athenae.
By Smyrna, Rhodes, Colophon, Salamis,
Chios, Argos, and Athens he claimed is.
The other is Alexander the Great. For whoever will consider the Age at which
he began his Enterprises, the small means by which he effected so glorious a
Design; the authority he obtained at so slender an Age with the greatest and
most experienced Captains of the World, by whom he was followed, and the
extraordinary favor wherewith Fortune embraced him, and favored so many
hazardous, that I may not say rash Designs: -- impellens quicquid sibi summa
petenti, Lucan li. 1.

Obstaret, gaudensque, viam fecisse ruina.
Bearing down all his high designs withstood,
And pleased by Ruin to have made them good.
That Grandeur, to have at the Age of three and thirty years, past Victorious
through the whole habitable Earth, and in half a Life to have attained to the
utmost of what humane Nature can do; so that you cannot imagine his duration
just, and the continuation of his increase in Virtue and Fortune, even to a due
maturity of Age, but that you must withal imagine something more than man: To
have made so many Royal Branches to spring from his Soldiers; leaving the
World at his death divided amongst four Successors, who were no better than
Captains of his Army, whose Posterity have so long continued, and maintained
that vast possession; so many excellent Virtues as he was master of, Justice,
Temperance, Liberality, Truth in his word, Love toward his own, and Humanity
toward those he overcame; for his manners in general seem in truth incapable
of any manner of reproach, though some particular and extraordinary Actions of
his may peradventure fall under censure. But it is impossible to carry on so
great things as he did with the strict Rules of Justice; such as he are to be
judged in gross, by the main end of their Actions. The ruin of Thebes, the
murder of Menander, and of Ephestion's Physician, the massacre of so many
Persian Prisoners at once, of a Troop of Indian Soldiers, not without
prejudice to his word, and of the Cosseyans, so much as to the very Children,
are indeed Sallies that are not well to be excused. For, as to Clytus, the
fault was more than recompensed in his Repentance, and that very action, as
much as any other whatever, manifests the sweetness of his nature, a nature
most excellently formed to goodness; and it was ingeniously said of him, that
he had his Virtues by Nature, and his Vices by Chance. As to his being a little
given to bragging, and a little too impatient of hearing himself ill spoken of,
and as to those Mangers, Arms, and Bits he caused to be strewn in the Indies,
all those little Vanities, methinks, may very well be allowed to his Youth, and
the prodigious prosperity of his fortune. And who will consider withal his so
many Military virtues, his Diligence, Foresight, Patience, Discipline,
Subtilty, Magnanimity, Resolution, and good Fortune, wherein, (though we had
not had the Authority of Hannibal to assure us) he was the first of men, the
admirable beauty and symmetry of his Person even to a miracle, his majestic
Port and awful Deportment, in a Face so young, so ruddy, and so radiant: Qualis
ubi Oceani perfusus Lucifer unda,
Quem Venus ante alios astrorum diligit ignes, Aeneid. lib. 8.

Extulit os sacrum coelo, tenebrasque resolvit.
Such the Day Star does from the Ocean rise
Above all Lights, grateful to Venus's eyes,
When he from Heaven darts his sacred light,
And dissipates the sullen shades of Night.
the excellency of his Knowledge and Capacity, the duration and grandeur of his
Glory, pure, clean, without spot or envy, and that long after his Death it was
a religious belief, that his very Medals brought good fortune to all that
carried them about them; and that more Kings and Princes have writ his Acts,
than other Historians have written the Acts of any other King or Prince
whatever; and that to this very day the Mahometans, who despise all other
Histories, admit of, and honor his alone, by a special Privilege: whoever, I
say, will seriously consider these particulars, will confess, that all these
things put together, I had reason to prefer him before Caesar himself, who
alone could make me doubtful in my choice: and it cannot be denied, but that
there was more of his own in his Exploits, and more of Fortune in those of
Alexander. They were in many things equal, and peradventure Caesar had the
advantage in some particular qualities. They were two Fires; or two Torrents to
overrun the World by several ways. Et velut immissi diversis partibus ignes
Aeneid. lib. 12.
Arentem in sylvam, and virgulta sonantia lauro:
Aut ubi decursu rapido de montibus altis
Dant sonitum spumosi amnes, and in aequora currunt,
Quisque suum populatus iter.
And like to Fires in several parts applied
To a dry Grove of crackling Lawrel's side;
Or like the Cataracts of foaming Rills,
That tumble headlong from the highest hills
To hasten to the Ocean; even so
They bear all down before them where they go.
But though Caesar's ambition had been more moderate, it would still he so
unhappy, having the ruin of his Country, and the universal mischief to the
World for its abominable object; that all things raked together, and put into
the Balance, I must needs incline to Alexander's side.

The third, in my opinion, and the most excellent of all, is Epaminondas. Of
glory he has not near so much as the other two, (which also is but a part of
the substance of the thing) of Valor and Resolution, not of that sort which is
pushed on by Ambition, but of that which Wisdom and Reason can raise in a
regular Soul, he had all that could be imagined. Of this Virtue of his, he has,
in my thoughts, given as ample proof, as either Alexander himself or Caesar:
for although his Expeditions were neither so frequent and so renowned, they
were yet, if duly considered in all their circumstances, as important, as
bravely fought, and carried with them as manifest testimony of Valor and
military Conduct, as those of any whatever. The Greeks have done him the
honor, without contradiction, to pronounce him the greatest man of their
Nation; and to be the first of Greece, is easily to be the first of the World.
As to his Knowledge, we have this ancient judgment of him, That never any man
knew so much, and spoke so little as he. For he was of the Pythagorean Sect.
But when he did speak, never any man spoke better; an excellent Orator, and of
powerful insinuation. But as to his Manners and Conscience, he has infinitely
surpassed all men that ever undertook the management of Affairs; for in this
one thing, which ought chiefly to be considered, that alone truly denotes us
for what we are, and that alone I counter-balance with all the rest put
together, he comes not short of any Philosopher whatever, not even of Socrates
himself. Innocence in this man is a quality, peculiar, sovereign, constant,
uniform, and incorruptible, compared to which, it appears in Alexander subject
to something else above it, uncertain, variable, effeminate, and accidental.
Antiquity has judged, that in thoroughly sifting all the other great Captains,
there is found in every one some peculiar quality that illustrates his Name. In
this man only there is a full and equal virtue throughout, that leaves nothing
to be wished for in him, whether in private or public Employment, whether in
Peace or War, whether gloriously to live or dye. I do not know any Form or
Fortune of Man that I so much honor and love. It Is true, that I look upon his
obstinate Poverty, as it is set out by his best Friends, a little too
scrupulous and nice. And this is the only action, tho high in it self, and well
worthy of admiration, that I find so severe as not to desire to imitate my self
to the degree it was in him. The s^le Scipio Aemilianus, would any attribute to
him as brave and magnificent an end, and as profound and universal a knowledge,
might be put into the other Scale of the Balance. Oh! what an injury has Time
done me, to deprive me of the sight of two of the most noble Lives, which, by
the common consent of all the World, one the greatest of the Greeks, and the
other of the Romans, were in all Plutarch. What a Matter! what a Workman! For a
man that was no Saint, but, as we say, a gallant man, of civil and ordinary
Manners, and of a moderate Ambition, the richest Life that I know, and full of
the richest, and most to be desired Parts, all things considered, is, in my
opinion, that of Alcibiades. But as to what concerns Epaminondas, I will here,
for the example of an excessive goodness, add some of his Opinions. He
declared, that the greatest satisfaction he ever had in his whole Life was, the
contentment he gave his Father and Mother in his Victory of Leuctra; wherein
his deference is great, preferring their pleasure before his own, Humanity of
Epaminondas.
so just and so full of so glorious an Action. He did not think it lawful, even
to restore the Liberty of his Country, to kill a man without knowing a cause:
which made him so cold in the enterprise of his Companion Pelopidas for the
relief of Thebes. He was also of Opinion, that men in Battle ought to avoid the
encounter of a Friend that was on the contrary side, and to spare him. And his
Humanity even toward his Enemies themselves, having rendered him suspected to
the Beotians; for that after he had miraculously forced the Lacedaemonians to
open him the Pass, which they had undertaken to defend at the entry into Morca,
near unto Corinth, he contented himself with having charged thorough them,
without pursuing them to the utmost, he had his Commission of General taken
from him. Very honorably upon such an account, and for the shame it was to
them upon necessity afterward to restore him to his command, and then to see
how much upon him depended their Safety and Honor: Victory like a shadow
attending him wherever he went; and indeed the Prosperity of his Country, as
being from him derived, died with him.

CHAP. XXXVII. Of the Resemblance of Children to their Fathers.
THis fagotting up of diverse pieces, is so odly composed, that I never set Pen
to Paper, but when I have too much idle time, and never any where but at home;
so that it is compiled at several Interruptions and Intervals, as Occasions
keep me sometimes many Months abroad. As to the rest, I never correct my first
by any second Conceptions; I peradventure may alter a Word or so: but it is only
to vary the Phrase, and not to destroy my former meaning. I have a mind to
represent the progress of my Humor, that every one may see every piece as it
came from the Forge. I could wish I had begun sooner, and had taken more notice
of the course of my Mutations. A Servant of mine, that I employed to transcribe
for me, thought he had got a prize by stealing several pieces from me,
wherewith he was best pleased; but it is my comfort, that he will be no greater
a gainer, than I shall be a loser by the Theft. I am grown older by seven or
eight years since I begun; neither has it been without some new Acquisition: I
have in that time, by the Liberty of years, been acquainted with the Stone, a
long Conversation, which time hardly wears off without some such Inconvenience.
I could have been glad, that of other Infirmities Age has to present long lived
men, it had chosen some one that would have been more welcome to me, for it
could not possibly have laid upon me a Disease, for which, even from my
Infancy, I have had so great a Horror; and it is in truth of all the accidents
of old Age, that of which I have ever been most afraid. I have often thought
with my self, that I went on too far, and that in so long a Voyage, I should at
last run my self into some misadvantage; I perceived, and have often enough
declared, that it was time to knock off, and that Death was to be cut off in
the sound and living part, according to the Chirurgions Rule in Amputations.
And that Nature made him pay very strict Usury, who did not in due time pay the
Principal. And yet I was so far from being ready, that in eighteen Months time,
or thereabout, that I have been in this uneasy Condition, I have so inured my
self to it, as to be content to live on in it; and have found wherein to
comfort my self, and to hope: so much are men enslaved to their miserable
Being, that there is no Condition so wretched they will not accept, provided
they may live: according to that of Moecenas. Debilem facito manu, Seneca
Epist. 101.

Debilem pede coxa,
Lubricos quate dentes
Vita dum superest, been est.
Maim both my Hands and Feet, break Legs and Thighs,
Knock out my Teeth, and bore out both my Eyes,
Let me but live, all is well enough he cries.
And Tamberlain with his foolish humanity palliated the fantastic cruelty he
exercised upon Lepers, when he put all he could hear of to death, to deliver
them, as he pretended, from the painful Life they lived. For there was not one
of them who would not rather have undergone a triple Leprosy, than to be
deprived of their Being. And Antisthenes the Stoic being very sick, and crying
out, who will deliver me from these Evils? Diogenes, who was come to visit him,
This, said he, presenting him a Knife, presently if thou will: I do not mean
from my Life, he replied, but from my Disease. The sufferings that only attaque
the Mind, I am not so sensible of, as most other Men; and that partly out of
Judgment: for the World looks upon several things as dreadful, or to be avoided
at the expense of Life, that are almost indifferent to me: partly thorough a
stupid and insensible Complexion I have in Accidents which do not point-blanck
hit me; and that insensibility I look upon as one of the best parts of my
natural Condition: but essential and corporeal pains I am very sensible of. And
yet having long since foreseen them, though with a sight weak and delicate, and
softened with the long and happy Health and Quiet that God has been pleased to
give me the greatest part of my time, I had in my Imagination fancied them so
insupportable, that in truth I was more afraid than I have since found I had
cause: by which I am still more fortified in this belief, that most of the
Faculties of the Soul, as we employ them, more trouble the repose of Life, than
they are any way useful to it. I am in conflict with the worst, The Stone the
most painful of all Diseases
the most sudden, the most painful, the most mortal, and the most irremediable
of all Diseases. I have already had the trial of five or six very long, and
very painful fits, and yet I either flatter my self, or there is even in this
estate what is very well to be endured by a man who has his Soul free from the
fear of Death, and the Menaces, Conclusions and Consequences, which Physic is
ever thundering in our Ears. But the effect even of pain it self is not so sharp
and intolerable as to put a man of understanding into impatience and despair.
I have at least this advantage by my Stone, that what I could not hitherto
wholly prevail upon my self to resolve upon, as to reconciling and acquainting
my self with Death, it will perfect; for the more it presses upon and
importunes me, I shall be so much the less afraid to dye. I had already gone so
far as only to love Life for Life's sake, but my pain will dissolve this
Intelligence: and God grant that in the end, should the sharpness of it be once
greater then I shall be able to bear, it does not throw me into the other no
less vicious extreme, to desire and wish to dye.

Summum nec metuas diem, nec optes. Mart. l. 10. Epig. 47.

Neither to wish, nor fear to dye.
They are two Passions to be feared, but the one has its remedy much nearer at
hand than the other. As to the rest, I have always found the Precept, that so
exactly enjoins a constant Countenance, and so disdainful and indifferent a
Comportment in the toleration of Infirmities to be merely Ceremonial. Why
should Philosophy, which only has respect to Life and its Effects, trouble it
self about these external Apparences? Let us leave that Care to Histrios and
Masters of Rhetoric, that set so great a value upon our Gestures. Let her, in
God's name, allow this vocal Frailty, if it be neither cordial nor stomachal to
the Disease; and permit the ordinary ways of expressing Grief by sighs, sobs,
palpitations, and turning pale, that Nature has put out of our power. And
provided the Courage be undaunted, and the Expressions not sounding of despair,
let her be satisfied. What makes matter for the wringing of our hands, if we do
not wring our Thoughts? She forms us for our selves, not for others, to be, not
to seem: let her be satisfied with governing our Understandings, which she has
taken upon her the care of instructing; that in the fury of the Cholick she
maintains the Soul in a condition to know it self, and to follow its accustomed
way: contending with, and enduring, not meanly truckling under Pain; moved and
heated, not subdued and conquered in the Contention; but capable of Discourse
and other things to a certain degree. In so extreme Accidents, it is Cruelty to
require so exact a Composedness. It Is no great matter what Faces we cut, if we
find any ease by it: if the Body find it self relieved by complaining, let him
go too: if Agitation eases him, let him tumble and toss at pleasure; if he
finds the Disease evaporate (as some Physicians hold that it helps Women in
delivery) extremely to cry out, or if it do but amuse his Torments, let him
roar aloud. Let us not command this Voice to sally, but stop it not. Epicurus
does not only forgive his Sage for crying out in Torments, but advises him to
it. Pugiles etiam quum feriunt, in jactandis caestibus ingemiscunt, Cicero
Thusc. l. 2.
quia profundenda voce omne corpus intenditur, venitque plaga vehementior. When
men fight with Clubs, they groan in laying on, because the whole strength of
Body goes along with the Voice, and the blow is laid on with greater force. We
have enough to do to deal with the Disease, without troubling our selves with
these superfluous Rules; which I say in excuse of those whom we ordinarily see
impatient in the assaults of this Infirmity; for as to what concerns my self, I
have passed it over hitherto with a little better Countenance, and contented my
self with grunting, without roaring out. Not nevertheless, that I put any great
constraint upon my self to maintain this exterior Decency, for I make little
account of such an Advantage: I allow herein as much as the Pain requires, but
either my Pains are not so excessive, or I have more than ordinary Patience. I
complain, I confess, and am a little impatient in a very sharp fit, but I do
not arrive to such a degree of despair, as he who with Ejulatu, questu, gemitu,
Ibid.
fremitibus
Resonando multum flebiles voces refert.
Howling, Roaring, and a thousand noises
Expressed his Torment in most dismal Voices.
I relish my self in the midst of my Dolor, and have always found that I was in
a Capacity to speak, think, and give a rational Answer as well as at any other
time, but not so coldly and indifferently, being troubled and interrupted by
the Pain. When I am looked upon by my Visiters to be in the greatest Torment,
and that they therefore forbear to trouble me, I often try my own strength, and
my self set some Discourse on foot, the most remote I can contrive from my
present condition. I can do any thing upon a sudden endeavor, but it must not
continue long. What pity it is I have not the Faculties of that Dreamer Cicero,
who dreaming he was lying with a Wench, found he had discharged his Stone in
the Sheets! My Pains do strangely disappetite me that way. In the intervals
from this excessive Torment, when my Uriters only languish without any great
dolor, I presently feel my self in my wonted state, forasmuch as my Soul takes
no other alarm but what is sensible and corporal, which I certainly owe to the
care I have had of preparing my self by Meditation against such Accidents: --
laborum
Aeneid. l. 6.
Nulla mihi nova nunc facies inopinaque surgit,
Omnia praecepi, atque animo mecum ante peregi.
No face of Pain, or Labor, now can rise
Which by its novelty can me surprise,
I Have been accustomed all things to explore,
And been inured unto them long before.
I am a little roughly handled for a Learner, and with a sudden and sharp
alteration, being fallen in an instant from a very easy and happy condition of
Life into the most uneasy and painful that can be imagined. For besides that
it is a Disease very much to be feared in it self, it begins with me after a
more sharp and severe manner than it uses to do with other men. My Fits come so
thick upon me, that I am scarcely ever at ease; and yet I have hitherto kept my
mind so upright, that provided I can still continue it, I find my self in a
much better condition of Life than a thousand others, who have no Fever, nor
other Disease but what they create to themselves for want of meditation. There
is a certain sort of crafty Humility that springs from Presumption: as this for
Example, that we confess our Ignorance in many things, and are so courteous as
to acknowledge, that there are in the works of Nature some Qualities and
Conditions that are imperceptible to us, and of which our understanding cannot
discover the means and causes; by this honest Declaration we hope to obtain
that People shall also believe us of those that we say we do understand. We
need not trouble our selves to seek out Miracles and strange Difficulties;
methinks there are so incomprehensible Wonders amongst the things that we
ordinarily see, as surpass all difficulties of Miracles. What a wonderful thing
it is, that the drop of Seed from which we are produced, should carry in it
self the impression not only of the bodily Form, but even of the Thoughts and
Inclinations of our Fathers? Where can that drop of Fluid matter contain that
infinite number of Forms? And how can they carry on these Resemblances with so
temerarious and irregular a Progress, that the Son shall be like his Great
Grandfather, the Nephew like his Uncle? In the Family of Lepidus at Rome,
there were three, not successively, but by intervals, that were born with the
same Eye covered with a Cartilage. At Thebes, there was a Race that carried
from their Mothers Womb the form of the head of a Lance, and who was not born
so, was looked upon as illegitimate. And Aristotle says, that in a certain
Nation, where the Women were in common, they assigned the Children to their
Fathers by their resemblance. It Is to be believed that I derive this Infirmity
from my Father; The Author's Father afflicted with the Stone.
for he died wonderfully tormented with a great Stone in his Bladder; he was
never sensible of his Disease till the sixty seventh year of his Age, and
before that had never felt any grudging or symptoms of it either in his Reins,
Sides, or any other part; and had lived till then in a happy vigorous state of
Health, little subject to Infirmities, and continued seven years after in this
Disease, and died a very painful Death. I was born above five and twenty years
before his Disease seized him, and in the time of his most flourishing and
healthful state of Body, his third Child in order of Birth: where could his
propension to this Malady lie lurking all that while? And he being so far from
the Infirmity, how could that small part of his Substance, carry away so great
an impression of its share? And how so concealed, that till five and forty
years after I did not begin to be sensible of it? being the only one to this
hour, amongst so many Brothers and Sisters, and all of one Mother, that was
ever troubled with it. He that can satisfy me in this point, I will believe
him in as many other Miracles as he pleases, always provided, that as their
manner is, he does not give me a Doctrine much more intricate and fantastic
than the thing it self for current pay. Let the Physicians a little excuse the
Liberty I take, for by this same infusion, and fatal insinuation it is that I
have received a hatred and contempt of their Doctrine. The Antipathy I have
against their Art is hereditary. My Father lived threescore and fourteen years,
my Grandfather sixty nine, my Great-Grandfather almost fourscore years, without
ever tasting any sort of Physic: and with them whatever was not ordinary Diet,
was instead of a Drugg. Physic is grounded upon Experience and Examples, so is
my Opinion. And is not this an express and very advantageous Experience? I do
not know that they can find me in all their Records three that were born, bred,
and dyed under the same Roof, who have lived so long by their own Conduct. They
must here of Necessity confess, that if Reason be not, Fortune at least is on
my side, and with Physicians, Fortune goes a great deal further than Reason;
let them not take me now at a disadvantage; let them not threaten me in the
subdued condition I now am, for that were treachery. And to say truth, I have
got enough the better of them by these domestic Examples, that they should
rest satisfied. Humane things are not usually so constant, it has been two
hundred years save eighteen that this Trial has lasted, for the first of them
was born in the Year 1402. It Is now indeed very good reason that this
Experience should begin to fail us: let them not therefore reproach me with the
Infirmities under which I now suffer; is it not enough for my part, that I have
lived seven and forty years in perfect Health? Though it should be the end of
my career, it is of the longer sort. My Ancestors had an aversion to Physic by
some secret and natural instinct; for the very sight of a Potion was loathsome
to my Father. The Seigneur de Gaviac, my Uncle by the Father's side, a
Churchman, and a Valetudinary from his Birth, and yet that made that crazy Life
to hold out to sixty seven years; being once fallen into a furious Fever, it
was ordered by the Physicians, he should be plainly told that if he would not
make use of help (for so they call that which is very often quite contrary) he
would infallibly be a dead man. The good man, though terrified with this
dreadful Sentence, yet replied, I am then a dead man. But God soon after made
the Prognostic false. The youngest of the Brothers, which were four, and by
many years the youngest, the Sieur de Bussaget, was the only man of the Family
that made use of Medicine, by reason, I suppose, of the commerce he had with
the other Arts, for he was a Counselor in the Court of Parliament, and it
succeeded so ill with him, that being in outward appearance of the strongest
constitution, he yet died before any of the rest, the Sieur Saint Michel only
excepted. It Is possible I may have derived this natural Antipathy to Physic
from them; but had there been no other consideration in the case, I would have
endeavored to have overcome it. For all conditions that spring in us without
reason, are vicious; and is a kind of Disease that we are to wrestle with: It
may be I had naturally this Propension, but I have supported and fortified it
by Arguments and Reasons, which have established in me the Opinion I am of. For
I also hate the consideration of refusing Physic for the nauseous taste: I
should hardly be of that humor, who find Health worth purchasing by all the
most painful Cauteries and Incisions that can be applied. And, according to
Epicurus, I conceive, that Pleasures are to be avoided, if greater Pains be the
consequence; and Pains to be coveted, that will terminate in greater Pleasures.
Health is a precious thing, and the only one in truth meriting that a man
should lay out, not only his time, sweat, labor, and goods, but also his Life
it self to obtain it, forasmuch as without it Life is injurious to us.
Pleasure, Wisdom, Learning, and Virtue without it wither away and vanish; and
in the most queint and solid Discourses that Philosophy would imprint in us to
the contrary, we need no more but oppose the image of Plato, being struck with
an Epilepsie or Apoplexy; and in this Presupposition to defy him to call the
rich Faculties of his Soul to his assistance. All means that conduce to Health,
can neither be too painful nor too dear to me. But I have some other Apparences
that makes me strangely suspect all this merchandise. I do not deny but that
there may be some Art, and that there are not amongst so many works of Nature,
things proper for the conservation of Health; that is most certain; I very well
know there are some Simples that moisten, and others that dry; I experimentally
know that Radishes are windy, and Senna leaves purging; and several other such
Experiences I have, which I am as sure of as I am that Mutton nourishes, and
Wine warms me: and Solon would say, That eating was Physic against Hunger. I
do not disapprove the use we make of things the Earth produces, nor doubt in
the least of the power and fertility of Nature, and disapprove not application
of what she affords to our necessities: I very well see that Pikes and Swallows
live by her Laws; but I mistrust the Inventions of Wit, Knowledge, and Art; to
countenance which, we have abandoned Nature and her Rules, and wherein we keep
no bounds nor moderation. As we call the creation of the first Laws that fall
into our hands Justice, and their practice and dispensation very foolish and
very unjust: And as those who scoff at and accuse it, cannot nevertheless wrong
that noble Virtue, but only condemn the abuse and profanation of that sacred
Title; so in Physic, I very much honor that glorious Name, and the end it is
studied for, and what it promises to the service of Mankind; but what it foists
upon us, I neither honor nor esteem. In the first place, Experience makes me
dread it; for amongst all of my Acquaintance, I see no Race of People so soon
sick, and so long before they are well, as those who take much Physic. Their
very Health is altered and corrupted by their frequent Prescriptions.
Physicians are not content to deal only with the Sick, but they will moreover
corrupt Health it self, for fear men should at any time escape their Authority.
Do they not from a continual and perfect Health, extract suspicion of some
great Sickness to ensue? I have been sick often enough, and have always found
my sicknesses easy enough to be supported (though I have made trial of almost
all sorts) and as short as those of any other without their help, or without
swallowing their ill tasted doses. The Health I have is full and free, without
other Rule or Discipline than my own Custom and Pleasure. Every place serves me
well enough to stay in, for I need no other conveniences when I am sick than
what I must have when I am well. I never disturb my self that I have no
Physician, no Apothecary, nor any other Assistance, which I see most other sick
men more afflicted at than they are with their Disease, What! Do they
themselves show us more felicity and duration in their own Lives that may
manifest to us some apparent effect of their Skill? There is not a Nation in
the World that has not been many Ages without Physic; Physic unknown to many
Nations.
and the first Ages, that is to say, the best and most happy, knew no such
thing; and the tenth part of the World knows nothing of it yet: several Nations
are ignorant of it to this Day, where men live more healthful and longer than
we do here, and even amongst us the common People live well enough without it.
The Romans were six hundred years before they received it; and after having
made trial of it, banished it from their City at the instance of Cato the
Censor, who made it appear how easy it was to live without it, having himself
lived fourscore and five years, and kept his Wife alive to an extreme old Age,
not without Physic only but without a Physician: for every thing that we find
to be healthful to Life, may be called Physic. He kept his Family in health,
as Plutarch says, if I mistake not, with Hares milk, as Pliny reports, that the
Arcadians cured all manner of Diseases with that of a Cow; and Herodotus says,
the Lybians generally enjoy a rare Health, by a Custom they have after their
Children are arrived to four years of age, to burn and cauterize the Veins of
their Head and Temples, by which means they cut off all defluxions of Rheumes
for their whole lives. And the Country People of our Province make use of
nothing in all sorts of Distempers but the strongest Wine they can get, mixed
with a great deal of Saffron and Spice, and all with the same success. And to
say the truth, of all this diversity and confusion of Apothecaries Bills, what
other end and effect is there after all, but to purge the Belly? which a
thousand ordinary Simples will do as well; and I do not know whether such
evacuations be so much to our advantage as they pretend, and whether Nature do
not require a Residence of her Excrements to a certain proportion, as Wine does
of its Lees to keep it alive. You often see healthful men fall into Vomitings and
Fluxes of the Belly by unknown Accidents, and make a great evacuation of
Excrements, without any preceding need, or any following benefit, but rather
with hurt to their Constitution. It Is from the great Plato that I lately
learned, that of three sorts of motions which are natural to us, purging is the
worst, and that no man, unless he be a Fool, ought to take any thing to that
purpose, but in the extremest Necessity: Men disturb and irritate the Disease
by contrary Oppositions. It must be the way of living that must gently
dissolve, and bring it to its maturity. The violent gripings and contest
betwixt the Drug and the Disease, is ever to our loss, since the Combat is
fought within our selves, and that the Drug is an Assistant not to be trusted,
being in its own nature an Enemy to our Health; and but by trouble has no
access into our Condition. Let it alone a little: the Providence that takes
care of Fleas and Moles, does also take care for men, if they will have the
same Patience Fleas and Moles have, to leave it to its self. It Is to much
purpose that we cry out upon it, it is the way to make us hoarse, but not to
hasten it. It Is a proud and uncompassionate Order, our Fears, our Despair,
displeases and stops it from, instead of inviting it to our relief. It owes
assistance to the Disease, as well as to Health; and will not suffer it self to
be corrupted in favor of the one, to the prejudice of the others right, for it
would then fall into Disorder. Let us in Gods Name follow it. It leads those
that follow, and those who will not follow, it drags along both their Fury and
Physic together. Order a Purge for your Brain, it will there be much better
employed, than upon your Stomach. One asking a Lacedemonian, who had made him
live so long, he made answer, the ignorance of Physic. And the Emperor Adrian
continually exclaimed as he was dying, that the crowd of Physicians had killed
him. An ill Wrestler turned Physician: Courage, says Diogenes to him, thou have
done well, for now thou will throw those who have formerly thrown thee. But
they have this Advantage, according to Nicocles, that the Sun gives Light to
their Success, and the Earth covers their Failures* and besides, they have a
very advantageous way of making use of all sorts of Events: for what Fortune,
Nature, or any other Causes, (of which the number is infinite) produces of good
and healthful in us, it is the Privilege of Physic to attribute to it self.
All the happy Successes that happen to the Patient must be derived from thence.
The Occasions that have cured me, and thousand others, Physicians usurp to
themselves, and their own Skill: and as to ill Accidents, they either
absolutely disown them, in laying the fault upon the Patient, by such frivolous
and idle Reasons as they can never be to seek for; as he lay with his Arms out
of Bed, or he was disturbed with the rattling of a Coach: -- Rhedarum transitus
arcto Juvenal. Sat. 3.

Vicorum inflexu: --
He heard the Wheels and Horses trampling Feet
In the straight turning of a narrow Street.
or some body had set open the Casement, or he had lain upon his left side: or
had had some odd Fancies in his Head: in sum, a Word, a Dream, or a look, seem
to them excuse sufficient wherewith to palliate their own Errors: Or, if they
so please, they yet make use of their growing worse, and do their Business that
way which can never fail them: which is, by buzzing us in the Ears, when the
Disease is more inflamed by their Medicaments, that it had been much worse but
for those Remedies. He, who from an ordinary cold, they have thrown into a
double Tertian-Ague, had but for them been in a continued Fever. They do not
much care what Mischief they do, since it turns to their own Profit. In
earnest, they have Reason to require a very favorable belief from their
Patients, and indeed it ought to be a very easy one to swallow things so hard
to be believed. Plato said very well, that Physicians were the only men that
might lie at Pleasure, since our Health depends upon the Vanity and Falsity of
their Promises.

Aesop, a most excellent Author, and of whom few men discover all the Graces,
does pleasantly represent to us the tyrannical Authority Physicians usurp over
poor Creatures, weakened and subdued hy Sickness and Fear; for he tells us, that
a sick Person, being asked by his Physician what Operation he found of the
Potion he had given him, I have sweat very much, says the sick man; that is
good, says the Physician; another time, having asked him him how he felt
himself after his Physic, I have been very cold, and have had a great
shivering upon me, said he; that is good, replied the Physician: After the
third Potion, he asked him again how he did, Why I find my self swelled, and
puffed up, said he, as if I had a Dropsy. That is very well, said the
Physician. One of his Servants coming presently after to inquire how he felt
himself, Truly Friend, said he, with being too well, I am about to dye. There
was a more just Law in Egypt, by which the Physician for the three first days
was to take charge of his Patient, at the Patients own Peril and Fortune: but
those three days being past, it was to be at his own. For what Reason is it,
that their Patron Aesculapius should be struck with Thunder for restoring
Hyppolitus from Death to Life, Aeneid. lib. 7.
Nam pater omnipotens aliquem indignatus ab umbris
Mortalem infernis, ad lumina surgere vitae
Ipse repertorem medicinae talis, and artis
Flumine Phaebigenam stygias detrusit ad undas.
For Jupiter, offended at the sight
Of one he had struck dead, restored to light,
He struck the Artist durst it undertake
With his fork'd lightning to the Stygian Lake.
and his followers be pardoned, who send so many Souls from Life to Death? A
Physician, boasting to Nicocles that his Art was of great Authority: It is so
indeed, said Nicocles, that can with impunity kill so many People. As to what
remains, had I been of their Counsel, I would have rendered my Discipline more
sacred and mysterious; they had begun well, but they have not ended so. It was
a good beginning to make Gods and Demons the Authors of their Science, and to
have used a peculiar way of speaking and writing. And notwithstanding that,
Philosophy concludes it folly to persuade a man to his own good by an
unintelligible way: Vt si quis medicus imperet ut sumat,
Terrigenam, herbigradam, domiportam, Cicero de Divin. l. 2.
sanguine cassam.
as if a Physician should command his Patient to take Snails by unknown Names
and Epithets. It was a good Rule in their Art, and that accompanies all other
vain, fantastic, and supernatural Arts, that the Patients belief should
prepossess them with good hope and assurance of their effects and operation. A
Rule they hold to that degree, as to maintain that the most inexpert and
ignorant Physician is more proper for a Patient that has confidence in him,
than the most learned and experienced, that he is not acquainted with. Nay,
even the very choice of most of their Drugs is in some sort mysterious and
divine. The left foot of a Tortoise, the Urine of a Lizard, the Dung of an
Elephant, the Liver of a Mole, Blood drawn from under the Wing of a white
Pidgeon; and for us who have the Stone, (so scornfully they use us in our
Miseries) the Excrement of Rats beaten to Powder, and such like trash and
fooleries, which rather carry a face of Magical Enchantment, than any solid
Science. I omit the odd number of their Pills, the appointment of certain days
and feasts of the year, the Superstition of gathering their Simples at certain
hours: and that austere grim Countenance and haughty carriage which Pliny
himself so much derides. But they have, as I said, failed, in that they have
not added to this fine beginning, the making their Meetings and Consultations
more religious and secret, where no profane Person ought to have been admitted,
no more than in the secret Ceremonies of Aesculapius. For by Reason of this it
falls out, that their irresolution, the weakness of their Arguments,
Divination, and Foundations, the sharpness of their Disputes, full of hatred,
jealousy, and particular interest, coming to be discovered by every one, a man
must be very blind not to discern that he runs a very great hazard in their
Hands. Who ever saw one Physician approve of another Prescription, without
taking something away, or adding something to it? By which they sufficiently
betray their Art, and make it manifest to us, that they therein more consider
their own Reputation, and consequently their Profit, than their Patients
interest. He was a much wiser man of their Tribe, who of old gave it for a
Rule, that only one Physician should undertake a sick Person; for if he do
nothing to purpose, one single man's default can bring no great scandal upon
the Profession; and on the contrary, the glory will be great, if he happen to
have good Success, whereas when there are many, they at every turn bring a
disrepute upon their Calling, forasmuch as they oftener do hurt than good. They
ought to be satisfied with the perpetual disagreement which is found in the
Opinions of the principal Masters, and ancient Authors of this Science, which
is only known to men well read, without discovering to the vulgar the
Controversies and various Judgments which they still nourish and continue
amongst themselves; shall we have one Example of the ancient Controversy in
Physic? Hierophilus lodges the original cause of all Diseases in the Humors;
Erasistratus, in the Blood of the Arteries; Asclepiades, in the invisible Atoms
of the Pores; Alcmaeon, in the Exuberancy, or Defect of our bodily strength;
Diocles, in the Inequality of the Elements of which the Body is composed, and
in the quality of the Air we suck in; Strato, in the Abundance, Crudity, and
Corruption of the Nourishment we take; and Hippocrates lodges them in the
Spirits. There is a certain Friend of theirs, whom they know better than I, who
declares upon this Subject, that the most important Science in Practice amongst
us, as that which is entrusted with our Health and Conversation, is by ill luck
the greatest misfortune, the most uncertain, the most perplexed, and agitated
with the greatest Mutations. There is no great danger in mistaking the height
of the Sun, or in the fraction of some Astronomical Supputation: but here,
where our whole Being is concerned, it is not Wisdom to abandon our selves to
the mercy of the Agitation of so many contrary Winds. Before the Peloponnesian
War, there was no great talk of this Science: Hippocrates brought it into
Repute; and whatever he established, Chrysippus overthrew; after that,
Erascistratus, Aristotle's Grandchild, overthrew what Chrysippus had writ.
After these, the Empiricks started up, who took a quite contrary way to the
Ancients in the management of this Art. When the credit of these began a little
to decay, Herophilus set another sort of Practice on foot, which Asclepiades in
turn stood up against, and overthrew. The Opinions first of Themison, and then
of Musa, and after that, those of Vexius valens, a Physician famous through the
Intelligence he had with Messalina, came in Vogue. The Empire of Physic in
Nero's time was established in Thessalus, who abolished and condemned all that
had been held till his time. This man's Doctrine was refuted by Crinus of
Marselles, who first brought all Medicinal Operations under the Ephemerides,
and motions of the Stars, and reduced eating, sleeping, and drinking to hours
that were most pleasing to Mercury, and the Moon. His Authority was soon after
supplanted by Charinus, a Physician of the same City of Marselles; a Man that
not only controverted all the ancient methods of Physic, but moreover the
usage of hot Baths, that had been generally, and so many Ages before in common
Use. He made men bath in cold Water even in Winter, and plunged his sick
Patients in the natural Waters of every stream. No Roman till Pliny's time had
ever vouchsafed to practice Physic, that office was only performed by Greeks
and Foreigners, as it is now amongst us French, by those that sputter Latin;
for, as a great Physician says, we do not easily receive the Medicine we
understand no more than we do the Drugs we our selves gether. If the Nations
from whence we fetch our Guaiacum, Sarsaparilla, and China wood, converse with
Medicine, how great a value must we imagine by the same recommendation of
strangeness, rarity, and dear purchase, do they set upon our Cabbidge and
Parsley? For who would dare to contemn things so far fetched, and sought out at
the hazard of so long and dangerous a Voyage?

Since the ancient mutations in Physic, there have been infinite others down
to our own times, and for the most part such as have been infinite, entire, and
universal, as those for Example, produced by Paracelsus, Fioravanti, and
Argenterius; for they, as I am told, do not only alter one Receipt, but the
whole Contexture and Rules of the body of Physic, accusing all others of
ignorance and imposition that have practiced before them. At this rate, in what
a condition the poor Patient must be, I leave you to judge. But if we were yet
assured, that when they mistake themselves, that mistake of theirs would do us
no harm, though it do us no good, it were a reasonable bargain to venture
making our selves better without any danger of being made worse. Aesop tells a
Story, that one who had bought a Morisco Slave, A Moor bathed and purged to
clear his Complexion.
believing that his black Complexion was accidental in him, and occasioned by
the ill usage of his former Master, caused him to enter into a course of
Physic, and with great care to be often bathed and purged: it happened that the
Moor was nothing amended in his tawny Complexion, but he wholly lost his former
Health. How often do we see Physicians impute the death of their Patients to one
another? I remember that some years ago, there was an Epidemical Disease, very
dangerous, and for the most part mortal, that raged in the Towns about us: the
storm being over, which had swept away an infinite number of men, one of the
most Famous Physicians of all the Country presently after published a Book upon
that Subject, wherein, upon better Thoughts, he confesses, that the letting
blood in that Disease was the principal cause of so many miscarriages.
Moreover, their Author's hold, that there is no Physic that has not something
hurful in it. And if even those of the best Operation do in some measure offend
us, what must those do that are totally misapplied? For my own part, though
there were nothing else in the Case, I am of Opinion, that to those that loath
the taste of Physic, it must needs be a dangerous and prejudicial Endeavor to
force it down at so incommodious a time, and with so much aversion, and believe
that it marvellously distempers a sick Person at a time when he has so much
need of Repose. And besides this, if we but consider the occasions upon which
they usually ground the cause of our Diseases, they are so light and nice, that
I thence conclude a very little Error in the dispensation of their Drugs may
do a great deal of mischief. Now, if the mistake of a Physician be so
dangerous, we are in but a scurvy Condition; for it is almost impossible but he
must often fall into those mistakes: he had need of too many parts,
considerations, and circumstances, rightly to level his Design: he must know
the sick Person's complexion, his temperature, his humors, inclinations,
actions, nay, his very thoughts and imaginations. He must be assured of the
external circumstances, of the nature of the Place, the quality of the Air and
Season, the situation of the Planets, and their influences: he must know in
the Disease the Causes, Prognostics, Affections, and Critical days; in the
Druggs, the weight, the power of working, the Country, figures, age, and
dispensations, and he must know how rightly to proportion and mix them
together, to beget a just and perfect proportion; wherein if there be the least
error, if amongst so many Springs there be but any one out of order, it is
enough to destroy us. God knows of how great difficulty most of these things
are to be understood. For (for Example) how shall a Physician find out the true
sign of the Disease, every Disease being capable of an infinite number of
Indications? How many Doubts and Controversies have they amongst themselves
upon the Interpretation of Vrines? Otherwise, from whence should the continual
Debates we see amongst them about the knowledge of the Disease proceed? How
would we excuse the error they so often fall into, of taking one thing for
another? In the Disease I have had, were there never so little difficulty in
the case, I never found three of one Opinion: which I instance, because I love
to introduce Examples wherein I am my self concerned.

A Gentleman was at Paris lately cut for the Stone by order of the Physicians,
in whose Bladder, being accordingly so cut, there was found no more Stone than
in the palm of his Hand; and in the same place, a Bishop, who was my particular
good Friend, having been earnestly pressed by the major part of the Physicians in
Town, whom he consulted, to suffer himself to be cut, to which also, upon their
words, I used my interest to persuade him: when he was dead, and opened, it
appeared that he had no Stone but in the Reins. They are least excusable for
any error in this Disease, by reason that it is in some sort palpable; and it is
by that, that I conclude Surgery to be much more certain, by reason that it
sees and feels what it does, and so goes less upon conjecture; whereas the
Physicians have no speculum Matricis, by which to discover our Brains, Lungs,
and Liver. Even the very promises of Physic are incredible in themselves: for,
being to provide against diverse and contrary Accidents, that often afflict us
at one and the same time, and that have almost a necessary relation, as the
heat of the Liver, and the coldness of the Stomach, they will needs persuade
us, that of their Ingredients one will heat the Stomach, and the other will
cool the Liver: one has its commission to go directly to the Reins, nay, even
to the Bladder, without scattering its Operations by the way, and is to retain
its Power and Virtue thorough all those stops and meanders, even to the place
to the service of which it is designed, by its own occult propriety: the other
will dry the Brain, and another will moisten the Lungs. All these things being
mixed in one Potion, is it not a kind of madness to imagine or to hope that
these differing Virtues should separate themselves from one another in this
mixture and confusion, to perform so many various errands? I should very much
fear that they would either lose or change their Tickets, and trouble one
another quarters: And who can imagine but that in this liquid confusion these
Faculties must corrupt, confound, and spoil one another? And is not the danger
still more, when the making up of this Medicine is entrusted to the Skill and
Fidelity of another, to whose mercy we again abandon our Lives? As we have
Doublet and Breeches-makers, distinct Trades to Clothe us, and are so much the
better fitted, being that each of them meddles only with his own Business, and
has less to trouble his head withal than a Tailor that undertakes all; and as
in matter of Diet, great Persons, for their better convenience, and to the end
they may be better served, have Cooks of distinct Offices, some for Soops and
Pottages, and others for Roasting, which one Cook that should undertake the
whole Service, could not so well perform, so must we be treated in our Cures.
The Egyptians had reason to reject this general Trade of a Physician, and to
divide the Profession to several peculiar Diseases, to every part of the Body a
particular Operator. For that part was more properly, and with less confusion
provided for, being they especially regarded nothing else: Ours are not aware
that he who provides for all, provides for nothing, and that the entire
government of this Microcosme is more than they are able to undertake. Whilst
they were afraid of stopping a Looseness, lest they should put him into a Fever,
they killed me a Friend that was worth more than the whole pack of them put
altogether. They counterpoise their own Divinations with the present Evils, and
because they will not cure the Brain to the prejudice of the Stomach, they
offend both with their mutinous and tumultuary Drugs. As to the variety and
weakness of Reasons, it is more manifest in this than in any other Art.
Aperitive Medicines are proper for a man subject to the Stone, by reason that
opening and dilating the Passages, they help forward the slimy Matter whereof
Gravel and the Stone is engendered, and convey that downward which begins to
harden and gather in the Reins. Aperitive things are dangerous for a man
subject to the Stone, by reason that opening and dilating the Passage, they
help forward toward the Reins the matter proper to create the Stone, which, by
their own propension that way, being apt to seize it, it is not to be imagined
but that a great deal of what has been so conveyed thither must remain behind.
Moreover, if the Medicine happen to meet with any thing too gross to be carried
thorough all those narrow Passages it must pass to be expelled, that
obstruction whatever it is, being stirred by these aperitive things, and thrown
into those narrow Passages, coming to stop them, will occasion a certain and
most painful Death. They have the like constancy in the advices they give us
for the regiment of Life. It is good to make water often, for we experimentally
see, that in letting it lie long in the Bladder, we give it time to settle the
Sedement which will concreate into a Stone: It is good not to make water often,
for the heavy Excrements it carried along with it will not be voided without
violence, as we see by experience, that a Torrent that runs with force, washes
the ground it rowls over much clearer than the course of a slow and tardy
Stream. Likewise it is good to have often to do with Women, for that opens the
Passages and helps to evacuate Gravel: It is also very ill to have often to do
with Women, because it heats, tires, and weakens the Reins. It is good to bath
frequently in hot waters, forasmuch as that refreshes and mollifies the place
where the Gravel and Stone lie; and it is also ill, by reason that this
application of external heat helps the Reins to bake, harden, and petrifie the
Matter so disposed. For those who are at the Bath, it is most healthful to eat
little at Night, to the end that the Waters they are to drink the next Morning
may have a better Operation upon an empty Stomach; on the contrary, it is
better to eat little at Dinner, that it hinder not the Operation of the Waters,
which is not yet perfect, and not to oppress the Stomach so soon after the
other labor, but leave the office of digestion to the Night, which will much
better perform it than the Day, where the Body and Soul are in perpetual moving
and action; thus do they juggle and cant in all their Discourses at our
expense, and cannot give me one Proposition against which I cannot erect a
contrary of equal force. Let them then no longer exclaim against those, who in
this trouble of Sickness suffer themselves to be gently guided by their own
Appetite, and the advice of Nature, and commit themselves to the common
Fortune. I have seen in my Travels almost all the famous Baths of Christendom,
and for some years past have begun to make use of them my self, for I look upon
bathing as generally wholesome, and believe that we suffer no little
inconveniences in our Health, by having left off the Custom that was generally
observed in former times almost by all Nations, and is yet in many, of bathing
every day; and I cannot imagine but that we are much the worse by having our
Limbs crusted, and our Pores stopped with dirt and filth. And as to the drinking
of them, Fortune has in the first place rendered them not at all unacceptable
to my taste; and secondly, they are natural and simple, which at least carry no
danger with them though they do us no good. Of which, the infinite crowd of
People of all sorts of Complexions that repair thither, I take to be a
sufficient warranty: And although I have not there observed any extraordinary
and miraculous Effects; but that on the contrary, having more narrowly than
ordinary inquired into it, I have found all the reports of such operations that
have been spread abroad in those Places, ill grounded and false, and those that
believe them (as People are willing to be gulled in what they desire) deceived
in them; yet I have seldom known any that have been made worse by those Waters,
and a man cannot honestly deny but that they beget a better Appetite, help
Digestion, and do in some sort revive us, if we do not go too late and in too
weak a Condition, which I would dissuade every one from doing. They have not
the virtue to raise men from desperate and inveterate Diseases, but they may
help some light Indisposition, or prevent some threatening Alteration. Who does
not bring along with him so much cheerfulness as to enjoy the pleasure of the
Company he will there meet, and of the Walks and Exercises, to which the
amenity of those Places invite us, will doubtless lose the best and surest part
of their Effect. For this reason I have hitherto chosen to go to those of the
most pleasant Situation, where there was the best convenience of Lodging,
Provision, and Company, as the Baths of Bavieres in France, those of Plombieres
in the Frontiers of Germany and Lorrain, those of Baden in Swizerland, those of
Lucque in Tuscany, and especially those Della-Villa, which I have the most, and
at several Seasons frequented. Every Nation has particular Opinions touching
their Use, and several Rules and Methods in using them, and all of them,
according to what I have seen almost of like Effect. Drinking of them is not at
all received in Germany; they bath for all Diseases only, and will lie dabling
in the Water almost from Sun to Sun. In Italy, when they drink nine days, they
bath at least thirty, and commonly drink the Water mixed with some other Drugs
to make it work the better. We are here ordered to walk to digest it, there
they are kept in bed after taking it till it be wrought off, their Stomachs and
Feet having continually hot cloths applied to them all the while: and as the
Germans have a particular practice generally to use Cupping and Scarification
in the Bath: So the Italians have their Doccie, which are certain little
Channels of this hot Water brought thorough Pipes, and with them bath an hour
in the Morning, and as much in the Afternoon for a Month together, either the
Head, Stomach, or any other part where the Grief lies. There are infinite other
varieties of Customs in every Country, or rather, there is no manner of
resemblance to one another. By which you may see, that this little part of
Physic, to which I have only submitted, though the least depending upon Art of
all others, has yet a great share of the confusion and incertainty every where
else manifest in their Profession. The Poets say whatever they please with
greater Emphasis and Grace; witness these two Epigrams. Alcon hesterno signum
Jovis attigit illa Auson Epig.

Quamvis marmoreus, vim patitur medici:
Ecce hodie jussus transferri ex aede vetusta,
Effertur, quamvis sit Deus, atque Lapis.
Alcon did yesterday Joves Statue touch,
Which, although Marble, suffered by it much:
For to day order being given it should
Be taken from the old Temple where it stood,
The thing without further delay was done,
Although he was a God, and made of Stone.
and the other, Lotus nobiscum est hilaris, coenavit and idem, Mart. Epig.

Inventus mane est mortuus Andragoras,
Tam subitae mortis causam Faustine requiris?
In somnis medicum viderat Hermocratem.
Andragoras bathed, supped, and went well to bed
Last Night, but in the Morning was found dead;
Would know, Faustinus, what was his Disease?
He dreaming saw the Quack, Hermocrates.
Upon which I will relate two Stories: The Baron of Caupene in Chalosse, and I,
have betwixt us the Advouzon of a Benefice of great extent, at the foot of our
Mountains called Lahontan. It is with the Inhabitants of this Angle, as it is
said of those of the Vale of Angrougne; they lived a peculiar sort of Life,
their Fashions, Cloths, and Manners distinct from other People, ruled and
governed by certain particular Laws and Vsances, received from Father to Son,
to which they submitted, without other constraint than the Reverence to Custom.
This little State had continued from all Antiquity in so happy a Condition,
that no neighboring Judge was ever put to the trouble of enquiring into their
doings, no Advocate ever retained to give them Counsel, nor Stranger ever
called in to compose their Differences; nor was ever any of them seen to go a
begging. They avoided all Alliances and Traffic with the other World, that
they might not corrupt the Purity of their own Government; till, as they say,
one of them, in the memory of man, having a mind spurred on with a noble
Ambition, contrived to bring his Name into Credit and Reputation, to make one
of his Sons something more than ordinary, and having put him to learn to write,
made him at last a brave Town Clerk: This Fellow being grown up, began to
disdain their ancient Customs, and to buz into the Peoples Ears the pomp of the
other parts of the Nation. The first prank he played, was, to advise a Friend of
his, that some body had offended by sawing off the Horns of one of his Goats,
to make his Complaint to the Kings Judges thereabout, and so he went on in this
Practice, till he spoiled and confounded all. In the tail of this Corruption,
they say, there happened another, and of worse consequence, by means of a
Physician, who fell in love with one of their Daughters, had a mind to marry
her, and to live amongst them. This man first of all began to teach them the
names of Fevers, Rheums and Imposthumes, the Seat of the Heart, Liver, and
Intestines, a Science till then utterly unknown to them; and instead of
Garlic, with which they were wont to cure all manner of Diseases, how painful
or extreme soever, he taught them, though it were but for a Cough, or any
little Cold, to take strange mixtures, and began to make a Trade, not only of
their Healths, but of their Lives. They swear that till then they never
perceived the Evening Air to be offensive to the Head, that to drink when they
were hot was hurtful, and that the Winds of Autumn were more unwholesome than
those of the Spring; that since this use of Physic, they find themselves
oppressed with a Legion of unaccustomed Diseases, and that they perceive a
general decay in their wonted Vigor, and their Lives are cut shorter by the
half. This is the first of my Stories.

The other is, that before I was afflicted with the Stone, hearing that the
Blood of a He-Goat was with many in very great esteem, and looked upon as a
Celestial Manna rained down upon these latter Ages for the good and
Preservation of the Lives of Men, and having heard it spoken of by men of
Understanding for an admirable Drug, and of infallible Operation: I, who have
ever thought my self subject to all the accidents that can befall other men,
had a mind in my perfect health to furnish my self with this admirable
Medicine, and therefore gave order to have a Goat fed at home according to the
Receipt: for he must be taken in the hottest Month of all Summer, and must only
have aperitive Herbs given him to eat, and White Wind to drink. I came home by
chance the very day he was to be killed; and one came and told me, that the
Cook had found two or three great Balls in his Paunch, that rattled against one
another amongst what he had eaten: I was curious to have all his Entrals
brought before me, where, having caused the Skin that enclosed them to be cut,
there tumbled out three great lumps, as light as Spunges, so that they appeared
to be hollow; but as to the rest, hard and firm without, and spotted and mixed
all over with various dead colors. One was perfectly round, and of the bigness
of an ordinary Bowl, the other two something less, of an imperfect roundness,
as seeming not to be arrived at their full growth. I find by inquiry of People
accustomed to open these Animals, that it is a rare and unusual accident. It Is
likely these are Stones of the same Nature with ours; and if so, it must needs
be a very vain hope in those who have the Stone, to extract their Cure from the
Blood of a Beast who was himself about to dye of the same Disease. For to say
that the Blood does not participate of this Contagion, and does not alter its
wonted Virtue, it is rather to be believed, that nothing is engendered in a Body
but by the Conspiracy and Communication of all the Parts: the whole mass works
together, though one part contributes more to the work than another, according
to the diversity of Operations. Wherefore it is very likely that there was some
petrifying quality in all the parts of this Goat. It was not so much for fear
of the future, and for my self, that I was curious of this Experiment, but
because it falls out in mine, as it does in many other Families, that the Women
store up such little Trumperies for the service of the People, using the same
Receipt in fifty several Diseases, and such a Receipt as they will not take
themselves, and yet triumph in their good Successes. As to what remains, I
honor Physicians, not according to the common rule, for Necessity, (for to
this Passage may be added another of the Prophet, reproving King Asa for having
recourse to a Physician) but for themselves, having known many very good men of
that Profession, and most worthy to be believed. I do not attaque them, it is
their Art I inveigh against, and do not much blame them for making their
Advantage of our Folly, for most men do the same. Many Callings, both of
greater and less Dignity than theirs, have no other Foundation or Support than
public abuse. When I am sick I send for them, if they be near, only to have
their Company, and fee them as others do. I give them leave to command me to
keep my self warm, because I naturally love to do it, and to appoint Leeks or
Lettuce for my Broth, to order me White Wind or Claret, and so all other things
at their own Pleasure, which are indifferent to my Palate and Custom. I know
very well that I do nothing for them in so doing, because sharpness and ill
pleasing tastes are accidents of the very Essence of Physic. Wine prescribed
for the sick Spartans.
Licurgus ordered Wine for the sick Spartans: Why? because they abominated the
drinking of it when they were well: as a Gentleman, a Neighbor of mine, takes
it for a rare Medicine in his Fever, because that naturally he mortally hates
the taste. How many do we see amongst them of my Humor, that despise taking
Physic themselves, are men of a liberal Diet, and live a quite contrary sort
of Life to what they prescribe others? What is this but flatly to abuse our
Simplicity. For their own Lives and Healths are no less dear to them than ours
are to us, and consequently they would accomodate their Effects to their own
Rules, if they did not themselves know how false they are. It Is the fear of
Death, and of Pain, an impatience of the Disease, and a violent and indiscreet
desire of a present Cure that so blinds us: and pure Cowardice that makes our
belief so pliable and easy to be imposed upon: and yet most men do not so much
believe as they acquiesce and permit, for I hear them find fault and complain
as well as we: But they resolve at last; What should I do then? As if
Impatience were of it self a better Remedy than Patience. Is there any one of
those who have suffered themselves to be persuaded into this miserable
Subjection, that does not equally surrender himself to all sorts of Impostures?
Who does not give up himself to the mercy of whoever has the impudence to
promise him a Cure? The sick Persons of Babylon exposed in the market place.
The Babylonians carried their sick into the public Place, the Physician was
the People, where every one that passed by, being in humanity and civility
obliged to enquire of their Condition, gave some advice according to his own
Experience. We do little better, there being not so silly a Woman whose Charms
and Drenches we do not make use of, and according to my Humor, if I were to
take Physic, I would sooner choose to take theirs than any other, because, at
least, if they do no good they will do no harm. What Homer and Plato said of
the Egyptians, that they were all Physicians, may be said of all People; there
is no one that does not boast of some rare Receipt, and who will not venture it
upon his Neighbor if he will permit him. I was the other day in Company where
some one of my Meaning that was troubled with the Stone.
fraternity told us of a new sort of Pills made up of a hundred and odd
Ingredients: it made us very merry, and was a singular Consolation, for what
Rock could withstand so great a battery? And yet I hear by those who have made
trial of it, that the least atom of Gravel will not stir for it. I cannot take
my hand from the Paper before I have added a word or two more concerning the
assurance they give us of the infallibility of their Drugs, and the Experiments
they have made.

The greatest part, and I think above two thirds of the medicinal Virtues
consist in the Quintessence, or occult propriety of Simples, of which we can
have no other instruction than Use and Custom. For Quintessence is no other
than a Quality of which we cannot by our Reason find out the cause. In such
Proofs, those they pretend to have acquired by the inspiration of some Demon,
I am content to receive (for I meddle not with Miracles) as also the Proofs
which are drawn from things that upon some other account often fall into use
amongst us; as if in Wool, wherewith we are wont to clothe our selves, there
have accidentally some occult desiccative Propriety been found out of curing
kib'd Heels, or as if in the Radish we eat for Food, there have been found out
some aperitive Operation. Galen reports, that a Man happened to be cured of a
Leprosy by drinking Wine out of a Vessel into which a Viper had crept by
chance. In which Example, we find the means, and a very likely guide and
conduct to this Experience; as we also do in those Physicians pretend to have
been directed to by the Example of some Beasts. But in most of their other
Experiments, wherein they declare to have been conducted by Fortune, and to
have had no other guide than Chance, I find the Progress of this Information
incredible. Suppose man looking round about him upon the infinite number of
things, Plants, Animals, and Metals, I do not know where he would begin his
trial; and though his first fancy should fix him upon an Elk's horn, wherein
there must be a very gentle and easy belief, he will yet find himself
perplexed in his second Operation. There are so many Maladies, and so many
Circumstances laid before him, that before he can arrive at the certainty of
the point, to which the perfection of his Experience should arrive, humane
sense will be at the end of its lesson: and before he can, amongst this
infinity of things, find out what this Horn is amongst so many Diseases, what
the Epilepsie, the many Complexions in a melancholic Person, the many Seasons
in Winter, the many Nations in the French, the many Ages in Age, the many
Celestial Mutations in the Conjunction of Venus and Saturn, and the many Parts
in man's Body, nay, in a Finger: and being in all this directed neither by
Argument, Conjectures, Example, nor Divine Inspirations, but merely by the sole
motion of Fortune; it should be by a perfectly artificial, regular, and
methodical Fortune. And after the Cure is performed, how can he assure himself
that it was not because the Disease was arrived at its period, or an effect of
Chance? or the Operation of something else that he had eaten, drunk, or touched
that day? or by Virtue of his Grand-mothers Prayers? And moreover, had this
Experiment been perfect, how many times was it reiterated, and this long
beadrole of Fortunes and Encounters strung anew from Chance to conclude a
certain Rule? And when the Rule is concluded, by whom I pray you? Of so many
millions, there are but three Men who take upon them to record their
Experiments. And must Chance needs just meet one of these? What if another, and
a hundred others have made contrary Experiments? We might, peradventure, have
some light in this, were all the Judgments and Arguments of men known to us.
But that three witnesses, three Doctors, should Lord it over all Mankind is
against all reason. It were fit that humane Nature should have deputed and
culled them out, and that they were declared our Comptrollers by express
Letters of Attorney.

To Madam de Duras.
Madam, The last time you honored me with a Visit, you found me at work upon
this Chapter, and being it may happen that these trifles may one day fall into
your Ladyships hands, I will also that they testify in how great honor the
Author will take any Favor you shall please to show them. You will there find
the same air and behavior you have observed in his Conversation, and though I
could have borrowed some better or more favorable garb than my own, I would
not have done it, for I require nothing more of these Writings, but to present
me to your Memory, such as I naturally am. The same Conditions and Faculties
your Ladyship has been pleased to frequent and receive with much more Honor
and Courtesy than they deserve, I will put together. (but without alteration)
in one solid Body, that may peradventure continue some years, or some days
after I am gone; where you may find them again when your Ladyship shall please
to refresh your Memory, without putting you to any greater trouble, neither are
they worth it. I desire you should continue the favor of your Friendship to
me, by the same Qualities by which it was acquired; and am not ambitious that
any one should love and esteem me more dead than living. The Humor of Tyberius
is ridiculous, but yet common, who was more sollicitous to extend his Renown to
Posterity than to render himself acceptable to men of his own time. If I was
one of those to whom the World could owe commendation, I would acquit the one
half to have the other in hand, that their praises might come quick and
crowding about me, more thick than long, more full than durable; and let them
cease on God's Name with my knowledge, and when the sweet sound can no longer
pierce my Ears. It were an idle Humor to go about, now that I am going to
forsake the commerce of Men, to offer my self to them by a new Recommendation.
I make no account of the Goods I could not employ in the Service of my Life.
And such as I am, I will be elsewhere than in Paper: My Art and Industry have
been ever directed to render me good for something; and my Studies, to teach me
to do, and not to write. I have made it my whole business to frame my Life.
This has been my Trade and my Work. I am less a writer of Books than any thing
else. I have coveted so much understanding for the Service of my present and
real Conveniences, and not to lay up a stock for my Posterity. Who has any
thing of Value in him, let him make it appear in his Manners, in his ordinary
Discourses, in his Courtships, and his Quarrels, in Play, in Bed, at Table, in
the management of his Affairs, in his Economy. Those that I see make good
Books in ill Breeches, should first have mended their Breeches, if they would
have been ruled by me. Ask a Spartan, whether he had rather be a good Orator or
a good Soldier; and if I was asked the same Question, I would rather choose to
be a good Cook, had I not one already to serve me. Good God! Madam, how should
I hate the Reputation of being a pretty Fellow at Writing, and an Ass and a Sot
in every thing else. Yet I had rather be a Fool in any thing than to have made
so ill a Choice wherein to employ my Talent. And I am so far from expecting to
gain any new Reputation by these Follies, that I shall think I come off pretty
well if I lose nothing by it of that little I had before. For besides that this
dead painting will take from my natural Being, it has no resemblance to my
better Condition, but also much lapsed from my former Vigor and Cheerfulness,
and looks faded, and withered. I am toward the bottom of the Barrel, which
begins to taste of the Lees. And to the rest, Madam, I should not have dared to
make so bold with the Mysteries of Physic, considering the esteem that your
Ladyship, and so many others have of it, had I not had encouragement from their
own Authors, Pliny, and Celsus. If these ever fall into your hands, you will
find that they speak much more rudely of their Art than I do; I but pinch it,
they cut the Throat on it. Pliny, amongst other things, twits them with this,
That when they are at the end of the Rope, that is, when they have done the
utmost of what they are able to do, they have a pretty device to save
themselves, of recommending their Patients, whom they have teased and tormented
with their Drugs and Diets to no purpose, some to Vows and Miracles, and others
to the hot Baths and Waters. (Be not angry, Madam, he speaks not of those in
our Parts, who are under the Protection of your House, and all Gramontins.)
They have besides another way of saving their own Credit, of ridding their
hands of us, and securing themselves from the reproaches we might cast in their
Teeth of the little amendment, when they have had us so long in their hands,
that they have not one more Invention left wherewith to amuse us; which is, to
send us to the better Air of some other Country. This, Madam, is enough; I hope
you will give me leave to return to my former Discourse, from which I have so
far digrest, the better to divert you.

It was, I think, Pericles, who being asked how he did, you may judge, says he,
by these, showing some little Scrowls of Parchment he had tied about his Neck
and Arms. By which he would infer, that he must needs be very sick when he was
reduced to a Necessity of having recourse to such idle and vain Fopperies, and
of suffering himself to be so equipped. I dare not promise but that I may one
day be so much a Fool as to commit my Life and Death to the Mercy and
Government of Physicians; I may fall into such a Frenzy: I dare not be
responsible for my future Constancy: but then, if any one ask me how I do, I
may also answer, as Pericles did, You may judge by this, showing my hand
clutch'd up with six drams of Opium: it will be a very evident sign of a
violent sickness: and my Judgment will be very much out of Order. If once fear
and impatience get such an Advantage over me, it may very well be concluded
that there is a dreadful Fever in my Mind. I have taken the pains to plead this
Cause, which I little enough understand, a little to back and support the
natural aversion to Drugs and the Practice of Physic, I have derived from my
Ancestors: to the end it may not be a mere stupid and temerarious aversion, but
have a little more Form; and also, that they who shall see me so obstinate in
my Resolution against all Exhortations and Menaces that shall be given me, when
my Infirmity shall press hardest upon me, may not think it is mere Obstinacy in
me; or any one so ill natured, as yet to judge it to be any motive of Glory:
For it would be a strange ambition to seek to gain Honor by an Action my
Gardener or my Groom can perform as well as I. Certainly, I have not a Heart so
tumorous and windy, that I should exchange so solid a Pleasure as Health, for
an airy and imaginary Pleasure. Glory, even that of the four Sons of Aymon, is
too dear bought to a man of my Humor, if it cost him three swinging fits of
the Stone. Give me Health in Gods Name! Such as love Physic, may also have
good, great, and convincing Considerations; I do not hate Opinions contrary to
my own. I am so far from being angry to see a discrepancy betwixt mine and
other men's Judgments, and from rendering my self unfit for the Society of Men,
for being of another Sense and Party than mine; that on the contrary, (the most
general way that Nature has followed being Variety, and more in Souls than
Bodies, forasmuch as they are of a more supple substance, and more susceptible
of Forms) I find it much more rare to see our Humors and Designs jump and
agree. And there never was in the World two Opinions alike, no more than two
Hairs, or two Grains. The most Universal Quality, is Diversity.

The End of the Second Book.
MICHEL SEIGNEVR DE MONTAIGNE.


Printed for T. Bassett M. Gilliflower and W. Hensman.

ESSAYS OF MICHAEL SEIGNEUR DE MONTAIGNE.

With Marginal Notes, and Quotations of the cited Authors.

Made English By CHARLES COTTON, Esquire

The Third and last Volume.

LONDON, Printed for T. Basset at the George in Fleet Street, and M.
Gilliflower and W. Hensman in Westminster Hall, 1685.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS Contained in this Third Book.
Chapter 1. OF Profit and Honesty. 1. Chap. 2. Of Repentance. 26. Chap. 3. Of three
Commerces. 50. Chap. 4. Of Diversion. 71. Chap. 5. Upon some Verses of Virgil.
88. Chap. 6. Of Coaches. 190. Chap. 7. Of the inconvenience of Greatness. 222.
Chap. 8. Of the Art of Conferring. 230. Chap. 9. Of Vanity. 269. Chap. 10. Of
managing the Will. 371. Chap. 11. Of Cripples. 410. Chap. 12. Of Physiognomy.
428. Chap. 13. Of Experience. 477.
ESSAYS OF Michael Seigneur de Montaigne.
The Third BOOK.
CHAP. I. Of Profit and Honesty.
NO Man is free from speaking foolish things; but the worst on it is, when a Man
studies to play the Fool.

Ne iste magno conatu, magnas nugas dixerit. Ter. Heaut. Act. 4. Sc. 1.

Lest it with him do come to pass,
To take great Pains to be an Ass.
This does not concern me, mine slip from me with as little care as they are of
little value, and it is the better for them. I would presently part with them
for what they are worth, and neither buy nor sell them, but as they weigh. I
speak in Paper, as I do to the first I meet, and that this is true, observe
what follows. To whom ought not Treachery to be hateful, when Tyberius refused
it in a thing of so great Importance to him? Treachery rejected by Tyberius.
He had word sent him from Germany, that if he thought fit, they would rid him
of Ariminius, the most potent Enemy the Romans had, by Poison. He returned
answer, That the People of Rome were wont to revenge themselves of their
Enemies by open ways, and with their Swords in their hands, and not
clandestinely, and by Fraud. Wherein he quitted the utile for the honest. You
will tell me that he was a Deceiver, and did not speak as he thought; I believe
so too: and it is no great Miracle in Men of his Profession. But the
acknowledgement of Virtue, is not less valid in the Mouth of him that hates it,
for as much as truth forces it from him, and if he will not inwardly receive
it, he at least puts it on, and with it makes himself outwardly fine. Our
outward and inward Structure is full of imperfection, but there is nothing
useless in Nature, not so much as Inutility it self; nothing has insinuated it
self into this Universe, that has not therein some fit and proper place. Our
Being is cemented with sickly Qualities, Ambition, Jealousy, Envy, Revenge,
Superstition and Despair, have so natural a Possession in us, that the Image is
discerned in Beasts: Nay, and Cruelty, so unnatural a Vice, for even in the
midst of Compassion, we feel within I know not what tart-sweet titillation of
ill-natured Pleasure in seeing others suffer, and the Children feel it: Suave
meri magno turbantibus aequora ventis, Lucan. l. 2.

Et Terra magnum alterius spectare laborem.
It Is sweet from Land to see a Storm at Sea,
And others sinking, whilst our selves are free.
of the Seeds of which Qualities, whoever should divest man, would destroy the
Fundamental Conditions of human Life: Likewise in all Governments there are
necessary Offices, Vices Necessary in all Governments.
not only abject, but vicious also. Vices have there a help to make up the seam
in our piecing; as Poisons are useful for the Conservation of Health. If they
become excusable because they are of use to us, and that the common Necessity
covers their true Qualities: we are to resign this part to the strongest and
boldest Citizens, who sacrifice their Honor and Conscience, as others of old
sacrificed their Lives for the good of their Country: We who are weaker, take
upon us the parts of Actions, both that are more easy, and less hazardous: the
public Weal requires that a Man should betray, and lie, and massacre; let us
leave this Commission to Men that are more obedient, and more supple. In
earnest, I have often been troubled to see Judges by Fraud, and false hopes of
Favor or Pardon, allure a Criminal to confess his Fact, and therein to make
use of Cozenage and Impudence. It would become Justice, and Plato himself, who
countenances this manner of proceeding, to furnish me with other means more
suitable to my own liking. This is a malicious kind of Justice, and I look upon
it as no less violated by it self than by others. I said not long since to some
company in Discourse, that I should hardly be drawn to betray my Prince for a
particular Man, who should be very much ashamed to betray any particular Man
for my Prince; and do not only hate deceiving my self, but that any one should
deceive through me; I will neither afford matter nor occasion to any such
thing. In the little I have had to mediate betwixt our Princes in the Divisions
and Subdivisions, by which we are at this time torn to pieces, I have been very
careful that they should neither be deceived in me, nor deceive others by me:
People of that kind of trading are very reserved, and pretend to be the most
moderate imaginable, and nearest to the Opinions of those with whom they have
to do; I expose my self in my true Opinion, and after a method the most my own;
a young and tender Negotiator, and one who had rather fail in the Affair than
be wanting to my Self: And yet it has been hitherto with so good luck, (for
Fortune has doubtless the best share in it) that little has past from hand to
hand with less suspicion, or more favor and privacy. I have a free and open
way that easily insinuates it self, and obtains belief with those with whom I
am to deal at the first meeting. Sincerity and pure Truth, in what Age sover
pass for current; and besides, the liberty and freedom of a Man who treats
without any Interest of his own, is never hateful or suspected, and he may very
well make use of the Answer of Hipperides to the Athenians, who complained of
his blunt way of speaking. My Masters, do not consider whether or no I am free,
but whether I am so without a Bribe, or without any advantage to my own
Affairs. My liberty of Speaking has also easily cleared me from all suspicion
of dissembling by its vehemence, (leaving nothing unsaid how home and bitter
soever, so that I could have said no worse behind their backs) and in that it
carried along with it a manifest show of simplicity and negligence. I pretend
to no other fruit by acting than to Act, and add to it no long pursuit nor
proposals; every action plays its own Game, win if it can. As to the rest, I am
not swayed by any Passion either of love or hatred toward the great ones, nor
have my Will captivated either by particular injury or obligation. I look upon
our King with an affection simply loyal and respective, neither prompted on nor
restrained by any private Interest, and I love my self for it. Neither does the
general and just Cause attract me otherwise than with moderation, and without
Animosity. I am not subject to these penetrating and entirely affected
Engagements. Anger and Hatred are beyond the duty of Justice, and are Passions
only useful to those who do not keep themselves strictly to their duty by mere
Reason. Vtatur motu animi, qui uti ratione non potest. He only employs his
Passion that can make no use of his Reason. All just intentions are temperate
of themselves; if otherwise, they degenerate into Seditious and unlawful. This
is it which makes me walk every where with my Head erect, my Face and my Heart
open. To confess the Truth, and I am not afraid to confess it; I should easily
for need hold up one Candle to St. Michael and another to his Dragon, like the
old Woman; I will follow the right side even to the fire, but exclusively if I
can: Let Montaigne be overwhelmed in the public Ruin, if need be; but if
there be no need, I should think my self obliged to Fortune to save me, and I
will make use of all the length of line my duty allows for his preservation:
Was it not Atticus, who being of the just, but losing side, preserved himself
by his moderation, in that universal shipwreck of the World amongst so many
mutations and diversities? For private men, as he was, it is more easy; That
it is neither Honorable, nor Honest, to stand Neuter in a Civil War.
and in such kind of work, I find a man may justly not be ambitious to offer
and insinuate himself; for a man indeed to be wavering and irresolute, to keep
his affection unmoved, and without inclination in the Troubles of his Country,
and a public Division, I neither think it handsome nor honest. Livie. l. 32.
Ea non media, sed nulla via est, velut eventum expectantum, quo Fortunae
consilia sua applicent. That is not a middle way, but no way, to expect Events
by which they referr their resolutions to Fortune. This may be allowed in our
Neighbors Affairs, and thus Gelo the Tyrant of Syracusa suspended his
inclination in the War betwixt the Greeks and Barbarians, keeping a Resident
Ambassador with Presents at Delphos, to lie and watch to see which way Fortune
would incline, and then take present occasion to fall in with the Victors. It
would be a kind of Treason to proceed after this manner in our own domestic
Affairs, wherein a man must of necessity be of the one side or the other;
though for a Man who has no Office or express command to call him out, to sit
still, I hold it more excusable (and yet I do not excuse my self upon these
terms) except in Foreign Expeditions, to which also, according to our Laws, no
man is pressed against his will. And yet even those who wholly engage themselves
in such a War, may behave themselves with such temper and moderation, that it is
likely the storm may fly over their heads without doing them any harm. Had we
not reason to expect such an issue in the Person of the late Sieur de
Morvilliers, late Bishop of Orleans? And I know amongst those who behave
themselves the most bravely and briskly in the present War, some whose Manners
are so gentle, obliging, and just, that they will certainly stand firm whatever
Event Heaven is preparing for us. I am of Opinion, that it properly belongs to
Kings only to quarrel Kings, and laugh at those Bully-Rocks, that out of
wantonness of Courage, present themselves to so disproportioned disputes: for a
Man has never the more particular quarrel to a Prince, for marching openly and
boldly against him for his own Honor, and according to his Duty: if he does
not love such a Person, he does better he has a Reverence and Esteem for him.
And the Cause of defending the Laws, and the Ancient Government of a Kingdom,
has this always especially annexed to it, that even those, who for their own
private Interest invade them, excuse, if they do not honor the Defenders. But
we are not, as we now a days do, to call pievishness and inward discontent,
that spring from private Interest and passion, Duty, nor a treacherous and
malicious conduct, Courage. They call their propension to mischief and
violence, Zeal: it is not the Cause, but their Interest that inflames them. They
kindle and begin a War, not because it is just, but because it is War. A Man
may very well behave himself commodiously and loyally too, amongst those of the
adverse Party; carry your self, if not with the same equal affection (for that
is capable of different measures) at least, with an affection moderate, well
tempered, and such as shall not so engage you to one Party, that it may expect
all you are able to do for that side, and content your self also with a
moderate proportion of their Favor and good Will, and to swim in troubled
Waters without fishing in them. The other way of offering a man's self, and the
utmost Service he is able to do, both to one Party and the other, has yet in it
less of Prudence than Conscience. Does not he to whom you betray another, to
whom you was as welcome as to himself, know that you will at another time do as
much for him? He holds you for a Villain; and in the mean time hears what you
will say, gathers intelligence from you, and works his own ends out of your
disloyalty; Wherein Double-dealing Men are of Use.
for double-dealing men are useful in bringing in, but we must have a care
they carry out as little as is possible. I say nothing to one Party, that I may
not upon occasion say to the other, with a little alteration of accent, and
report nothing but things either indifferent or known, or what is of common
Consequence. I cannot permit my self for any consideration to tell them a Lie.
What is entrusted to my secrecy, I religiously conceal; but I take as few
trusts of that nature upon me as I can. The Secrets of Princes are a
troublesome burden to such as are not interested in them. I very willingly
indent that they trust me with little, but confidently rely upon what I tell
them: I have ever known more than I desired. One open way of speaking opens
another open way of speaking, and draws out discoveries like Wine and Love.
Phillipides, in my Opinion, answered King Lysimacus very discreetly, who asking
him what of his Estate he should bestow upon him? What you will, said he,
provided it be none of your Secrets. I see every one mutters, and is
displeased, if the bottom of the Affair be concealed from him wherein he is
employed, or that there be any reservation in the thing; for my part, I am
content to know no more of the business than what they desire I should employ
my self in, nor desire that my Knowledge should exceed or strain my word: If I
must serve for an Instrument of deceit, let it be at least with a safe
Conscience. I will neither be reputed a Servant so affectionate, nor so loyal,
as to be fit to betray any one. Who is unfaithful to himself, is excusably so
to his Master. But they are Princes who do not accept men by halves, and
despise limited and conditional Services. I cannot help it, I truly tell them
how far I can go; for a Slave I should not be, but upon very good Reason, and
however I could hardly submit to that Condition. And they also are too blame to
exact from a Freeman the same Subjection and Obligation to their Service, they
do from him they have made, and bought, or whose Fortune does particularly and
expressly depend upon theirs. The Laws have delivered me from a great Anxiety,
they have chosen a Master for me, all other Superiority and Obligation ought to
be relative to him, and cut off from all other. Yet is not this to say, that if
my Affection should otherwise sway and incline me, my hand should presently
obey it; the Will and Desire are a Law to themselves; but Actions must receive
Commission from the public appointment. All this proceeding of mine is a
little dissonant from the ordinary forms; It would produce no great Effects,
nor be of any long duration; Innocence it self could not, in this Age of ours,
either Negotiate without Dissimulation, or Traffic without Lying. And indeed
public Employments are by no means for my Pallat: what my Profession requires,
I perform after the most private manner that I can. Being young, I was engaged
up to the Ears in Business, and it succeeded well, but I disengaged my self in
due time. I have often since avoided meddling in it, rarely accepted, and never
asked it, keeping my back still turned to Ambition: but if not like Rowers, who
so advance backward, yet so nevertheless, that I am less obliged to my
Resolution than to my good Fortune, that I was not wholly embarked in it. For
there are ways less displeasing to my Taste, and more suitable to my Ability,
by which, if she had formerly called me to the public Service, and my own
Advancement toward the Worlds Opinion, I know I should, in spite of all my own
Arguments to the contrary, have pursued them. Such as commonly say, in
Opposition to what I profess, that what I call Freedom, Simplicity, and
plainness in my Manners, is Art, and Subtilty, and rather Prudence than
Goodness, Industry than Nature, good Sense than good Luck, do me more Honor
than Disgrace: but doubtless they make my Subtilty too subtle; and whoever has
followed me close, and pried narrowly into me, I will give him the Victory, if
he does not confess that there is no Rule in their School that could match this
natural Motion, and maintain an appearance of Liberty and License so equal and
inflexible, through so many various and crooked Paths, and that all their Wit
and Endeavor could never have led them through. The way of Truth is one, and
simple, that of particular Profit, and the Commodity of Affairs a man is
entrusted with, is double, unequal, and casual. I have seen these counterfeit
and artificial Liberties practiced, but for the most part without Success. They
relish of Aesop's Ass, who in Emulation of the Dog, obligingly clapped his two
fore Feet upon his Master's shoulders; but as many caresses as the Dog had for
such an expression of kindness, twice so many blows with a Cudgel had the poor
Ass for his Complement. Cicero de Off. l. 1.
Id maxim quemque decet, quod est cujusque suum maxim. That best becomes
every man, that he is best at. I will not deprive Deceit of its due, that were
but ill to understand the World: I know it has often been of great use, and that
it maintains and supplies most men's vacancies. There are Vices that are lawful,
as there are many Actions either good, or at least excusable, that are not
lawful in themselves. That Justice which in it self is natural and universal,
is otherwise, and more nobly ordered, than that other Justice, which is
peculiar, National, and wrested to the ends of Government. Cicero de Off. l. 5.
Very juris germanaeque Justitiae solidam, and expressam effigiem nullam
tenemus; umbra and imaginibus utimur. We retain no solid and express effigies
of true right and Justice; we have only the shadow and images of it. Insomuch
that the wise Dandamy's hearing the Lives of Socrates, Pythagoras and Diogenes
read, judged them to be great men every way, excepting that they were too much
subjected to the reverence of the Laws, which to second and authorize, true
Virtue must abate very much of its original vigor, and many vicious actions
are introduced, not only by their permission, but advice. Ex senatus consultis,
Seneca Epist. 97.
plebisque scitis scelera exercentur. Vicious Actions are committed by the
consent of the Magistrates and the common Laws. I follow the common Phrase,
that distinguishes betwixt profitable, and honest things, so as to call some
natural Actions, that are not only Profitable and Necessary, Dishonest, and
Foul. But let us proceed in our Examples of Treachery: Two Pretenders to the
Kingdom of Thrace, were fallen into dispute about their Title; The Emperor
hindered them from proceeding to blows: but one of them under color of bringing
things to a friendly issue by an interview, having incited his concurrent to an
Entertainment in his own House, took, and killed him. Justice required that the
Romans should have Satisfaction for this Offense: but there was a difficulty in
obtaining it by ordinary ways. What therefore they could not do by due forms of
Law, without a War, and without Danger, they attempted to do by Treachery; and
what they could not honestly do, they did profitably. For which end, one
Pomponius Flaccus was found to be a fit Instrument: This Man by dissembled
Words and assurance, having drawn the other into his Toil, instead of the
Honor and Favor he had promised him, sent him bound Hand and Foot to Rome.
Here one Traitor betrayed another, contrary to common Custom: for they are full
of mistrust, and it is hard to overreach them in their own Art: witness the sad
Experience we have lately had. Let who will be Pomponius Flaccus, and there are
enough that would: for my part, both my Word, and my Faith are like all the
rest, parts of this common Body: their best effect is the public Service,
which I take for presupposed. But should one command me to take charge of the
Palace, and the Records there, I should make answer, that I understood it not;
or the command of a Conductor of Pioneers, I would say, that I was called to a
more honorable Employment: so likewise, he that would employ me to lie,
betray, and forswear my self, though not to assassinate, or to poison, for some
notable Service, I should say, if I have robbed, or stolen any thing from any
man, send me rather to the Galleys. For it is lawful for a Man of Honor to say
as the Lacedaemonians did, having been defeated by Antipater, when just upon the
point of concluding an agreement, You may impose as heavy and ruinous Taxes
upon us as you please, but to command us to do shameful and dishonest things,
you will lose your time, for it is to no purpose. Every one ought to make the
same vow to himself, that the Kings of Egypt made their Judges solemnly swear,
that they would not do any thing contrary to their Consciences, though never so
much commanded to it by them themselves. In such Commissions, there is an
evident mark of Ignominy and Condemnation. And he who gives it, does at the
same time accuse you, and gives it, if you understand it right, for a Burden
and a Punishment. As much as the public Affairs are bettered by your Exploit,
so much are your own the worse, and the better you behave your self in it, it is
so much the worse for your self. And it will be no new thing, nor peradventure
without some color of Justice, if the same Person ruin you who set you on
work. Wherein Treachery is only to be excused.
If Treachery can be in any case excusable, it must be only so when it is
practiced to chastise and betray Treachery. There are Examples enough of
Treacheries, not only rejected, but chastised, and punished by those in Favor
of whom they were undertaken. Who is ignorant of Fabricius his Sentence against
Pyrrhus, his Physician? But this we also find recorded, that some Persons have
commanded a thing, who afterward have severely revenged the Execution of it
upon him they had employed, rejecting the Reputation of so unbridled an
Authority, and disowning so lewd, and so base a Servitude and Obedience.
Jaropele, Duke of Russia, tampered with a Gentleman of Hungary to betray
Boleslaus King of Poland, either by killing him, or by giving the Russians
opportunity to do him some notable Mischief. This Gallant goes presently in
hand with it, was more assiduous in the Service of that King than before; so
that he obtained the honor to be of his Council, and one of the chiefest in
his Trust; with these Advantages, and taking an opportune occasion of his
Masters absence, he betrayed Visilicia, a great and rich City, to the Russians,
which was entirely sacked and burned, and not only all the Inhabitants of both
Sexes, young and old, put to the Sword, but moreover a great number of
Neighboring Gentry, that he had drawn thither to that wicked end. Jaropele,
his Revenge being thus satisfied, and his Anger appeased, which was not however
without pretense (for Boleslaus had highly offended him, and after the same
manner) and sated with the effect of this Treachery, coming to consider the
foulness of it, with a sound Judgment, and clear from Passion, looked upon what
had been done with so much horror and remorse, that he caused the Eyes to be
boar'd out, and the Tongue, and shameful Parts to be cut off of him that had
performed it. Antigonus persuaded Agaraspides's Soldiers to betray Eumenes
their General, his Adversary, into his hands. But after he had caused him so
delivered to be slain, he would himself be the Commissioner of the Divine
Justice, for the Punishment of so detestable a Crime, and committed them into
the hands of the Governor of the Province, with express command by all means
to destroy, and bring them all to an evil end. So that of all that great number
of men, not so much as one ever returned again into Macedonia. The better he
had been served, the more wickedly he judged it to be, and meriting greater
Punishment. The Slave that betrayed the place where his Master P. Sulpitius lay
concealed, was, according to the promise of Sylla's proscription, A Slave
thrown from the Tarpeian Rock for his Treason.
manumitted for his Pains: but according to the promise of the public Justice,
which was free from any such Engagement, he was thrown headlong from the
Tarpeian Rock. And our King Clouis, instead of the Arms of Gold he had promised
them, Three Servants hanged for betraying Canacre their Master.
caused three of Canacre's Servants to be hanged after they had betrayed their
Master to him, though he had debauched them to it. They hanged them with the
purse of their Reward about their Necks. After having satisfied their second,
and special faith, they satisfy the general, and first. Mahomet the second,
being resolved to rid himself of his Brother, out of Jealousy of State,
according to the Practice of the Ottoman Family, he employed one of his
Officers in the Execution; who pouring a quantity of Water too fast into him,
choked him. This being done, to expiate the Murder, he delivered the
Murderer into the hands of the Mother of him he had so caused to be put to
Death, (for they were but half Brothers by the Fathers side) who in his
Presence ripped up the Murderers Bosom, and with her own revenging hands rifled
his Breast for his Heart, tore it out, and threw it to the Dogs. And even to
the vilest Dispositions, it is the sweetest thing imaginable, having once got
the trick in a vicious Action, to foist, in all security, into it some show of
Virtue and Justice, as by way of Compensation, and Conscientious Remorse. To
which may be added, that they look upon the Ministers of such horrid Crimes, as
upon People that reproach them with them; and think by their Deaths to race out
the Memory and Testimony of such Proceedings. Or if perhaps you are rewarded,
not to frustrate the public Necessity of that extreme and desperate Remedy; he
that does it, cannot for all that, if he be not such himself, but look upon you
as a cursed and execrable fellow; and conclude you a greater Traitor, than he
does against whom you are so: for he tries the Lewdness of your Disposition by
your own hands; where he cannot possibly be deceived, you having no Object of
preceding hatred to move you to such an Act. But he employs you as they do
condemned Malefactors in Executions of Justice, an Office as necessary as
dishonest. Besides the baseness of such Commissions, there is moreover a
Prostitution of Conscience. Virgins could not be put to Death at Rome.
Being the Daughter of Sejanus could not be put to death by the Law of Rome,
because she was a Virgin, she was, to make it lawful, first ravished by the
Hangman, and then strangled: not only his hand, but his Soul is slave to the
public Convenience. When Amurath the first, more grievously to punish his
Subjects, who had taken part in the Parricide Rebellion of his Son, ordained,
that their nearest Kindred should assist in the Execution; I find it very
handsome in some of them, to have rather chosen to be unjustly thought guilty
of the Parricide of another, than to serve Justice by a Parricide of their own.
And whereas I have seen at the taking of some little Fort by assault in my
time, some Rascals, who to save their own Lives; would consent to hang their
Friends and Companions; I look upon them to be in a worse Condition than those
that were hanged. It Is said, that Wittoldus, Prince of Lituania, introduced
into that Nation, that the Criminal condemned to death, Criminals condemned to
execute themselves.
should with his own hand execute the Sentence: thinking it strange that a
third Person, innocent of the Fault, should be made guilty of Homicide. A
Prince, when by some urgent Circumstance, or some impetuous and unforeseen
accident that very much concerns his Estate, compelled to forfeit his Word, and
break his Faith, or otherwise forced from his ordinary Duty, ought to attribute
this Necessity to a lash of the Divine Rod: Vice it is not, for he has given up
his own Reason to a more Universal, and more powerful Reason: but certainly
it is a misfortune: so that if any one should ask me, What Remedy? None, say I,
if he were really racked betwixt these two Extremes, Cicero de Off. l. 3.
(sed videat ne quaeratur latebra perjurio) he must do it: but if he did it
without regret, if it did not grieve him to do it, it is a sign his Conscience
is in a scurvy Condition. If there be a Person to be found of so tender a
Conscience as to think no cure whatever worth so important a Remedy, I shall
like him never the worse. He could not more excusably, or more decently perish.
We cannot do all we would. So that we must often, as the last anchorage, commit
the ^rotection of our Vessels to the conduct of Heaven. To what more just
necessity does he reserve himself? What is less possible for him to do, than
what he cannot do but at the expense of his Faith and Honor? Things that
perhaps ought to be dearer to him than his own Safety, or the Safety of his
People. Though he should with folded arms only call God to his Assistance, has
he not reason to hope that the Divine bounty will not refuse the Favor of an
extraordinary Arm to just and pure hands? These are dangerous Examples, rare,
and sickly exceptions to our natural Rules: we must yield to them, but with
great Moderation and Circumspection. No private utility is of such Importance,
that we should upon that account strain our Consciences to such a degree: the
public may, when very manifest, and of very great concern. Timoleon made a
timely expiation for his strange Fact by the Tears he shed, calling to mind
that it was with a fraternal hand that he had slain the Tyrant. And it justly
pricked his Conscience, that he had been necessitated to purchase the public
Utility at so great a price, as the violation of his own Manners. Even the
Senate it self, by his means delivered from slavery, durst not positively
determine of so high a Fact, and divided into two so important, and contrary
Aspects. But the Syracusans, having opportunely at the same time sent to the
Corinthians to solicit their Protection, and to require of them a Captain fit
to restablish their City in its former Dignity, and to cleanse Sicile of
several little Tyrants, by which it was oppressed; they deputed Timoleon for that
Service, with this cunning Declaration; That according as he should behave
himself, well or ill in his Employment, their Sentence should incline either to
favor the deliverer of his Country, or to disfavour the murderer of his
Brother. This fantastic Conclusion carries along with it some excuse, by
reason of the danger of the Example, and the importance of so bifronted an
Action: And they did well to discharge their own Judgment of it, and to referr
it to others, who were not so much concerned. But Timoleon's comportment in
this Expedition soon made his Cause more clear; so worthily and virtuously he
demeaned himself upon all occasions. And the good Fortune that accompanied him
in the difficulties he had to overcome in this noble Employment, seemed to be
strewn in his way by the Gods, as favorably conspiring for his Justification.
This Man's end is excusable, if any can be so. But the profit of the
Augmentation of the public Revenue, that served the Roman Senate for a
pretense to the foul conclusion I am going to relate, is not sufficient to
warranty any such injustice.

Certain Cities had redeemed themselves and their liberty by money, by the
order and consent of the Senate, out of the hands of L. Sylla. The business
coming again in question; the Senate condemned them to be taxable as they were
before, and that the money they had disburs'd for their Redemption should be
thrown away. Civil War does often produce such lewd Examples; that we punish
private men for confiding in us when we were public Ministers: and the
self-same Magistrate makes another man pay the penalty of his change that
cannot help it. The Paedagogue whips his Scholar for his docility, and the
Guide beats the blind-man that he leads by the hands; a horrid image of
Justice. There are Rules in Philosophy that are both false and weak. The
Example that is proposed to us, preferring private Utility before Faith given,
Private Utility not to be preferred before Faith given.
has not weight enough by the Circumstance they put to it. Robbers have seized
you, and after having made you swear to pay them a certain sum of money,
dismiss you. It Is not well done to say, that an honest man can be quit of Oath
without payment, being out of their hands. It Is no such matter: What fear has
once made me willing to do, I am obliged to do it when I am no more in fear.
And though that fear only prevailed with my Tongue, without forcing my Will,
yet am I bound to keep my Word. For my part, when my Tongue has sometimes
inconsiderately said something that I did not think, I have made a Conscience
of disowning it. Otherwise, by degrees we shall abolish all the right another
pretends to from our promise. Cicero de Off. l. 3.
Quasi vero forti viro vis possit adhiberi. As though a Man truly valiant could
be compelled. And it is only lawful upon the account of private Interest to
excuse breach of Promise, when we have promised something that is unlawful and
wicked in it self; For the right of Virtue ought to take place of the right of
any obligation of ours. I have formerly placed Epaminondas in the first rank of
excellent men, and do not repent it. How far did he stretch the consideration
of his own particular Duty? who never killed man that he had overcome; who for
his inestimable benefit of restoring the liberty of his Country, made
Conscience of killing a Tyrant, or his accomplice, without due form of Justice:
and who concluded him to be a wicked man, how good a Citizen soever otherwise,
who amongst his Enemies spared not his Friend and Acquaintance in Battle. This
was a Soul of a rich composure: He married Bounty and Humanity; nay, even the
tenderest and most delicate in the whole School of Philosophy, to the rudest
and most violent of all humane Actions. Was it Nature or Art that had
intenerated that great and brave Courage of his, so constant in dangers, and so
obstinate against pain and death, to such an extreme degree of Sweetness and
Compassion? Dreadful in War, with fire and blood, he overran and subdued a
Nation invincible to all others but to him alone; and yet in the heat of an
Encounter could turn aside from his Friend. Certainly he was most fit to
command in War, who could so rein himself, with the curb of a good Nature, in
the height and heat of his Fury, and a Fury so inflamed and foaming with blood
and slaughter. It Is almost a miracle to be able to mix any image of Justice
with such violent Actions: and it was only possible for such a stedfastness of
mind as that of Epaminondas, therein to mix sweetness, and the facility of the
gentlest Manners and purest Innocence. And whereas one told the Mammertines,
that Statues were of no resistance against armed men; and another told the
Tribune of the People, that the time of Justice and War were distinct things;
and a third said, that the noise of Arms deaft the voice of the Law: This man
in all this rattle was not deaf to that of Civility, and mere Courtesy. Had he
not borrowed from his Enemies the custom of sacrificing to the Muses when he
went to War, that they might by their sweetness and gayety soften his Martial
and unrelenting Fury? Let us not fear, by the example of so great a Master, to
believe that there is something unlawful, even against an Enemy: and that the
common Concern ought not to require all things of all, against private
Interest: Manente memoria etiam in dissidio publicorum faederum privati juris:
Ovid.
-- and nulla potentia vires
Praestandi, ne quid peccet amicus habet.
And no power upon Earth can e're dispense
Treachery to a Friend without Offense.
and that all things are not lawful to an honest man, for the Service of his
Prince, the Laws, or the general Quarrel. Cicero de Off. l. 6.3.
Non enim patria praestat omnibus officiis, and ipsi conducit pios habere Cives
in Parents. It Is an Instruction proper for the time wherein we live: we need
not harden our Courages with these Arms of Steel, it is enough that our
Soldiers are inured to them: it is enough to dip our Pens in Ink, without
dipping them in Blood. If it be grandeur of Courage, and the effect of a rare
and singular Virtue to contemn Friendship, private Obligations, a man's Word,
and relation for the common good, and Obedience to the Magistrate: it is
certainly sufficient to excuse us, that it is a Grandeur that could have no
place in the Grandeur of Epaminondas his Courage. I abominate those mad
Exhortations of this other enraged and discomposed Soul.

Dum tela micant, Lucan. l. 7.
non vos pi^tatis imago
Vlla nec adversa conspecti front parents
Commoveant, vultus gladio turbate verendos.
When Sword's are drawn, let no remains of Love,
Friendship, or Piety, Compassion move:
But boldly wound the venerable Face
Of your own Fathers, if opposed in place.
Let us deprive wicked, bloody, and treacherous Natures of such a pretense of
Reason: let us set aside this guilty and extravagant Justice, and stick to more
humane imitations. How great things can Time and Example do? In an encounter of
the Civil War against Cinna, one of Pompeys Soldiers having unawares killed
his Brother, who was of the contrary Party, he immediately for shame and sorrow
killed himself: and some years after, in another Civil War of the same People,
demanded a Reward of his Office, for having killed his Brother. A Man proves
but ill the Honor and Beauty of an Action by its Utility: and Men very ill
conclude that every one is obliged, and it becomes every one to do it, if it be
of Utility. Propert.
Omnia non pariter rerum omnibus apta.
All things are not alike for all Men fit.
Let us choose what is more necessary and profitable for humane Society; it
will be Marriage: and yet the Council of the Saints find the contrary much
better, excluding the most honorable vocation of Men: as we design those
Horses for Stallions, of which we have the least Esteem.

CHAP. II. Of Repentance.
OThers form Man, I only report him: and represent a particular one, ill
fashioned enough: and whom, if I had to model a new, I should certainly make
him something else than what he is: but that is past recalling. Now, though the
Features of my Picture alter and change, it is not however unlike. The World
eternally turns round, all things therein are incessantly moving, the Earth,
the Rocks of Caucasus, and the Pyramids of Egypt, both by the public motion,
and their own. Even Constancy it self is no other but a slower and more
languishing Motion. I cannot fix my Object, it is always tottering and reeling
by a natural Giddiness. I take it as it is at the instant I consider of it. I
do not paint its Being, I paint its Passage, not a passing from one Age to
another, or, as the People say, from seven to seven Years; but from Day to Day,
from Minute to Minute. I must accommodate my History to the Hour. I may
presently change, not only by Fortune, but also by Intention? It Is a
counterpart of various and changeable Accidents, and irresolute Imaginations,
and, as it falls out, sometimes contrary: whether it be that I am then another
self; or that I take Subjects by other Circumstances and considerations; so it
is that I may peradventure contradict: but, as Demades said, I never contradict
the Truth. Could my Soul once take footing, I would not Essay, but resolve: but
it is always learning and making trial. I propose a Life mean, and without
luster? It Is all one. All moral Philosophy may as well be applied to a private
Life, as to one of the greatest Employment: Every man carries the entire form
of human Condition. Authors communicate themselves to the People by some
especial Work; I, the first of any, by my universal Being: as Michael de
Montaigne, not as a Grammarian, a Poet, or a Lawyer. If the World find fault
that I speak of my self, I find fault that they do not so much as think of
themselves. But is it reason, that being so particular in my way and manner of
living, and of so little Use, I should pretend to recommend my self to the
public knowledge? And is it also reason, that I should introduce into the
World, where Art and Handling have so much credit and authority, crude, and
simple effects of Nature, and of a weak Nature to boot? Is it not to build a
Wall without Stone or Brick, or some such thing, to write Books without
Learning? The fancies of Music are carried on by Art, mine by Chance: I have
this at least according to Discipline, that never any man treated of a Subject
he better understood and knew, than what I have undertaken, and that in this I
am the most understanding Man alive. Secondly, that never any man penetrated
farther into his matter, nor better, and more distinctly sifted the Parts and
Consequences of it, nor ever more exactly and fully arrived at the end he
proposed to himself. To finish it, I need bring nothing but fidelity to the
Work; and that is there, and the most pure and sincere that is any where to be
found. I speak truth, not so much as I would, but as much as I dare, and I dare
a little the more, as I grow older, for, methinks, Custom allows to Age more
liberty of prating, and more indiscretion of talking of a man's self. That
cannot fall out here, which I often see elsewhere, that the Work and the
Artificer contradict one another: Has a man of so sober Conversation writ so
foolish a Treatise? Or do so learned writings proceed from a man of so weak
Conversation? Who talks at a very ordinary rate, and writes rarely; is to say
that his Capacity is borrowed, and not his own. A learned man is not learned in
all things; but a sufficient man is sufficient throughout, even to Ignorance it
self. Here my Book and I go hand in hand together. Elsewhere men may recommend
or accuse the Work upon the Work-man's account; here they cannot: Who touches
the one invades the other. He that shall censure it without knowing him, will
more wrong himself than me; who does understand it, gives me all the
satisfaction I desire. I shall be happy beyond my desert, if I can obtain only
thus much from the public Approbation, as to make men of understanding
perceive that I was capable of making my advantage of Knowledge, had I had it,
and that I deserved to have been assisted by a better Memory.

Be pleased here to excuse what I often repeat, that I very rarely repent, and
that my Conscience is satisfied with it self, not like the Conscience of an
Angel, or that of a Horse, but like the Conscience of a man; always adding this
Clause, not one of Ceremony, but a true and real Submission; that I speak
enquiring and doubtingly, purely and simply referring my self to the common and
accepted beliefs for the Resolution. I do not teach, I only repeat. There is no
Vice, that is absolutely so, which does not offend, and that a sound Judgment
does not accuse; for there is in it so manifest a Deformity and Inconvenience,
that peradventure they are in the right, who say, that it is chiefly begot by
Ignorance: So hard it is to imagine that a man can know without abhorring it.
Malice sucks up the greatest part of her own venom, and poisons herself. Vice
leaves repentance in the Soul, like an Ulcer in the flesh, which is always
scratching and lacerating it self: For Reason effaces all other griefs and
sorrows, but it begets that of Repentance, which is so much the more grievous,
by reason it springs within, as the cold and hot of Fevers are more sharp than
those that only strike upon the outward skin. I hold for Vices, (but every one
according to its proportion) not only those which Reason and Nature condemn;
but those also, the opinion of men, though false and erroneous, have made such,
if authorized by Law and Custom. There is likewise no Virtue which does not
rejoice a well descended Nature. There is a kind of I know not what
congratulation in well doing, that gives us an inward Satisfaction, and a
certain generous boldness that accompanies a good Conscience. A Soul daringly
vicious, may peradventure arm it self with security, but cannot supply it self
with this Complacency and Satisfaction. It Is no little Satisfaction to feel a
Man's self preserved from the contagion of so depraved an Age, and to say to
himself; Whoever could penetrate into my Soul, would not there find me guilty
either of the affliction, or the ruin of any one; or of Revenge or Envy, or any
offense against the public Laws, or of Novelty, or Trouble, or failure of my
word, and though the license of the Time permits, and teaches every one so to
do, yet have I not plundered any French Man's Goods, or taken his Money, and
have lived upon what is my own in War as well as Peace; neither have I set any
man to work without paying him his Hire. These Testimonies of a good Conscience
please, and this natural rejoicing is very beneficial to us, and the only
reward that we can never fail of. To ground the recompense of virtuous Actions
upon the Approbation of others, is too uncertain and unsafe a Foundation,
especially in so corrupt and ignorant an Age as this, the good Opinion of the
vulgar is injurious. Upon whom do you rely to show you what is recommendable?
God defend me from being an honest Man, according to the Descriptions of Honor
I daily see every one make of himself. Quae fuerant Vitia, Mores sunt. Seneca
Epist.
What before were Vices, are now reputed Manners. Some of my Friends have
sometimes schooled and tutored me with great Sincerity and Plainness, either of
their own voluntary motion, or by me entreated to it, as to an Office, which to
a well composed Soul, surpasses not only in Utility, but in Kindness, all other
Offices of Friendship. I have always received them with the most open Arms,
both of Courtesy and Acknowledgment. But to say the truth, I have often found
so much false Measure, both in their Reproaches and Praises, that I had not
done much amiss, rather to have erred than to have done well, according to
their Method. We chiefly, who live private Lives, not exposed to any other view
than our own, ought to have settled a president within our selves, by which to
try our Actions: and according to that, sometimes to encourage, and sometimes
to correct our selves. I have my Laws and my Judicature to judge of my self,
and apply my self more to those than any other Rules. I do indeed restrain my
Actions according to others; but extend them not by any other Rule than my own.
You your self only know if you are cowardly and cruel, loyal and devout: others
see you not, and only guess at you by uncertain Conjectures, and do not so much
see your Nature as your Art. Rely not therefore upon their Opinions, but stick
to your own. Cicero de Not. Dei. lib. 1.
Tuo tibi judicio est utendum Virtutis, and vitiorum grave ipsius conscientiae
pondus est: qua sublata, jacent omnia. Thou must spend thy own Judgment upon
thy self, great is the weight of thy own Conscience in the discovery of thy own
Virtues and Vices: which being taken away, all things are lost. But the saying*
that Repentance immediately follows the Sin, seems not to have respect to Sin
in its gayest Dress: which is lodged in us as in its own proper Habitation. One
may disown, and retract the Vices that surprise us, and to which we are hurried
by Passions; but those which by a long habit are rooted in a strong and
vigorous Will, are not subject to Contradiction. What Repentance is.
Repentance is no other but a recanting of the Will, and an Opposition to our
Fancies, which lead us which way they please. It makes this Person disown his
former Virtue and Continency.

Quae men's est hodie, Hor. lib. 4. Ode 10.
cur eadem non puero fuit
Vel cur his animis incolumes non redeunt genae?
Why is not my Mind now alas!
The same that when a Boy it was?
Or why does not my rosy hue
Return, my Beauty to renew.
It Is an exact life, that contains it self in due order in private: every one
may juggle his part, and represent an honest man upon the Stage: but within,
and in his own Bosom, where all things are lawful, all things concealed to be
regular, there is the point. The next degree is to be so in his House, and in
his ordinary Actions, of which we are accountable to none, and where there is
no study, nor Artifice. And therefore Bias, setting forth the excellent estate
of a private Family, of which, says he, the Master is the same within, by his
own Virtue and Temper, that he is abroad, for fear of the Laws, and report of
Men. And it was a worthy saying of Julius Drufus, to the Masons who offered him
for three thousand Crowns to put his House in such a Posture that his
Neighbors should no more have the same Inspection into it as before; I will
give you, said he, six thousand, to make it so that every body may see into
every Room. It Is honorably recorded of Argesilaus, that he used in his
Journeys always to take up his Lodgings in Temples, to the end that the People,
and the Gods themselves, might pry into his most private Actions. Such a one
has been a Miracle to the World, in whom neither his Wife nor Servant have ever
seen any thing so much as remarkable. Few men have been admired by their own
Domestics. No man a Prophet in his own Country.
And no one has been a Prophet, not only in his own House, but in his own
Country, says the Experience of Histories? It Is the same in things of naught*
In this low example, the Image of a greater is to be seen. In my Country of
Gascony, they look upon it as a Drollery to see me in print. The further off I
am read from my own home, the better I am esteemed. I am fain to purchase
Printers in Guienne, elsewhere they purchase me. Upon this it is, that they lay
their foundation, who conceal themselves present, and living, to obtain a Name
when they are absent, and dead. I had rather have a great deal less in hand,
and do not expose my self to the World upon any other account than my present
share; when I leave it, I quit the rest. The People reconduct such a one with
public Wonders and Applause to his very Door, he puts off this pageantry with
his Robe, and falls so much the lower by how much he was higher exalted. In
himself within, all is in tumult and disorder. And though all should be regular
there, it will require a quick and well chosen Judgment that can perceive it in
these low and private Actions. To which may be added, that Order is a heavy,
melancholic Virtue: to enter a Breach, carry an Embassy, and govern a People,
are Actions of Renown: to reprehend, laugh, sell, pay, love, hate, and gently
and justly converse with a man's own Family, and with himself; not to relent,
not to give a man's self the lie, is more rare and hard, and less remarkable.
By which means retired lives, whatever is said to the contrary, undergo Offices
of as great, or greater difficulty than the other do. And private men, says
Aristotle, serve Virtue more painfully and assiduously, than those in Authority
do. We prepare our selves for eminent Occasions, more out of Glory than
Conscience. The shortest way to arrive at Glory, should be to do that for
Conscience which we do for Glory. And the Virtue of Alexander appears to me
with much less Vigor in his Theater, than that of Socrates in his mean and
obscure Employment. I can easily conceive Socrates in the place of Alexander,
but Alexander in that of Socrates I cannot. Who shall ask the one what he can
do, he will answer, subdue the World: And who shall put the same question to
the other, he will say, carry on humane Life conformable to its natural
Condition; a much more general, weighty, and legitimate Knowledge than the
other. The Virtue of the Soul does not consist in flying high, but walking
orderly; its Grandeur does not exercise it self in Grandeur, but in Mediocrity.
As they who judge and try us within, make no great account of the luster of
public Actions; and see they are only streaks and rays of clear Water
springing from a slimy and muddy bottom: So likewise they who judge of us by
this gallant outward appearance, in like manner conclude of our internal
Constitution; and cannot couple common Faculties, and like their own with the
other Faculties, that astonish them, and are so far out of their sights.
Therefore it is, that we give such savage forms to Demons. And who does not
give Tamberlain great Eyebrows, wide Nostrils, a dreadful Face, and a
prodigious Stature, according to the imagination he has conceived by the report
of his Name? Had any one formerly brought me to Erasmus, I should hardly have
believed, but that all was Adage and Apothegme he spoke to his Man, or his
Hostess. We much more aptly imagine an Artizan upon his Close-stool, or upon
his Wife, than a great President venerable by his port and sufficiency. We
fancy that they will not abase themselves so much from their high Tribunals, as
to live. As vicious Souls are often incited by some strange impulse to do well,
so are virtuous Souls to do ill. They are therefore to be judged by their
settled state when they are near repose, and in their native station. Natural
inclinations are much assisted and fortified by Education, but they seldom
alter and overcome their Institution. A thousand Natures of my time have
escaped toward Virtue or Vice through a quite contrary Discipline.

Sic ubi desuetae silvis in carcere clausae Lucan. lib. 4.

Mansuevere ferae, and vultus posuere minaces
Atque hominem didicere pati, si torrida parvus
Venit in Ora cruor, redeunt rabiesque furorque,
Admonitaeque tument gustato sanguine fauces,
Fervet, and a trepido vix abstinet ira magistro.
So savage Beasts, when they are Captive made,
Grow tame, and half forget their killing trade;
Demit their fierce looks, and themselves inure
The Government of mankind to endure:
But if again the blood for which they burn
They taste, their rage and fury then return,
They thirst for more, grow fell, and wildly stare,
And scarce their trembling Masters do forbear.
These original Qualities are not to be rootted out, they may be covered and
concealed. The Latin Tongue is as it were natural to me, I understand it
better than French, but I have not used to speak it, nor hardly to write it
these forty years; and yet upon extreme and sudden emotions which I have fallen
into twice or thrice in my Life, (and once seeing my Father in perfect health
fall upon me in a swoon.) I have always uttered my first outcries and
ejaculations in Latin. Nature starting up, and forcibly expressing it self in
spite of so long a Discontinuation; and this Example is said of many others.
They who in my time have attempted to correct the Manners of the World by new
Opinions, have indeed reformed seeming Vices, but the real and essential Vices
they leave as they were, if they do not augment them; and augmentation is
therein to be feared; we defer all other well doing of less cost and greater
merit, upon the account of these external Reformations, and thereby expiate
good cheap, for the other natural, consubstantial and intestine Vices. Look a
little into our Experience. There is no man, if he listen to himself, who does
not in himself discover a particular and governing Form of his own that justles
his Education, and wrestles with the tempest of Passions that are contrary to
him. For my part, I seldom find my self agitated with Surprises; I almost
always find my self in my place, as heavy and unweildy Bodies do: If I am not
at home, I am always near at hand; my Debauches do not transport me very far,
there is nothing strange or extreme in the case; and yet I have sound and
vigorous Raptures and Delights. The true Condemnation, and which touches the
common practice of Men, is, that their very Progress it self is full of Filth
and Corruption; the Idea of their Reformation blotted, their Repentance sick
and faulty, as much very near as their Sin. Some, either for having been linked
to Vice by a natural Propension, or long Practice, cannot see the Deformity of
it. Others (of which Constitution I am) do indeed weigh Vice, but they
counter-balance it with Pleasure, or some other occasion, and suffer, and lend
themselves to it for a certain price; but viciously and basely however: yet
there might happily be imagined so vast a disproportion of measure, where with
justice the Pleasure might excuse the Sin, as we say of profit; not only if
accidental, and out of Sin, as in Thefts; but in the very exercise of it; as in
the enjoyment of Women, where the Temptation is violent, and it is said,
sometimes not to be overcome.

Being the other day at Armaignac, which appertains to a Kinsman of mine, I
there saw a Country Fellow that was by every one nicknam'd the Thief; who thus
related the story of his own Life: That being born a Beggar, and finding that
he should not be able to get his living by his hands, he resolved to turn
Thief, and by means of his strength of Body, had excercis'd this trade all the
time of his Youth in great security; for he ever made his Harvest and Vintage
in other men's Grounds, but a great way off, and in so great Quantities, that it
was not to be imagined one man could have carried away so much in one night
upon his Shoulders; and moreover, was so careful equally to divide and
distribute the mischief he did, that the loss was of less Importance to every
particular man. He is now grown old and rich, for a man of his Condition,
thanks be to his Trade, which he openly confesses to every one: and to make his
Peace with God* he says, that he is daily ready by good Offices to make
satisfaction to the Successors of those he has robbed, and if he do not finish,
(for to do it all at once he is not able) he will then leave it in charge to
his Heirs to perform the rest proportionably to wrong he himself only knows he
has done to every one. By this Description, whether true or false, this Man
looks upon Theft as a dishonest Action, and hates it, but less than Poverty,
and does simply repent; but for as much as was thus recompensed he repents not.
This is not that habit that incorporates us into Vice, and conforms even our
Understanding it self to it, nor is it that impetuous Whirlwind that by gusts
troubles and blinds our Souls, and for the time, precipitates us, Judgment and
all, into the power of Vice.

I customarily do what I do thoroughly, I make but one step on it; I have rarely
any movement that hides it self and steals away from my Reason, and that does
not upon the matter proceed by the consent of all my Faculties, without
decision, or intestine Sedition; my Judgment is to have all the blame, or all
the praise, and the blame it once has it has always, for I have from my Infancy
almost always had the same inclination, the same speed, and the same force. And
as to universal Opinions, I fixed my self from my Childhood in the place where
I resolved to stick. There are some Sins that are impetuous, prompt, and
sudden, let us set them aside; but in these other Sins so often repeated,
deliberated and contrived, whether Sins of Complexion, or Sins of Profession
and Vocation; I cannot conceive that they can have so long been settled in the
same Resolution, unless the Reason and Conscience of him who has them be
constant to have them so, and the Repentance he boasts to be inspired with on a
sudden, is very hard for me to imagine. I follow not the Opinion of the
Pithagorean Sect, that men take up a new Soul when they repair to the Images of
the Gods to receive Oracles, unless they mean that it is new, and lent for the
time, our own showing so small sign of Purification and Cleanness, fit for such
an Office. They act quite contrary to the Stoical Precepts, that do indeed
command us to correct the Imperfections which we know our selves guilty of, but
forbids us to disturb the Repose of our Souls. These make us believe that they
have great Grief and Remorse within: but of Amendment, Correction, or
Demonstration, they make nothing appear. It cannot certainly be a perfect Cure,
if the Humor be not wholly discharged, if Repentance were laid upon the Scale
of a Balance, it would weigh down Sin. Devotion easy to counterfeit.
I find no quality so easy to counterfeit, as Devotion, provided they do not
conform their Manners and Life to the Profession: its Essence is abstruce and
occult, the apparences easy and majestic. For my own part, I may desire in
general to be other than I am; I may condemn and dislike my whole frame, and
beg of Almighty God for an entire Reformation, and that he will please to
pardon my natural Infirmity: but I ought not to call this Repentance, methinks,
no more than the being dissatisfied that I am not an Angel, or Cato: my Actions
are conformable to what I am, and to my Condition. I can do no better, and
Repentance is not properly concerned in things that are not in our Power;
Sorrow is. I imagine an infinite number of Souls more elevated and regular than
mine; and yet I do not for all that improve my Faculties no more than my Arm,
or will grow more strong and vigorous for conceiving those of another to be so.
If to imagine and wish a nobler way of acting than that we have, Repentance
whence produced.
should produce a Repentance of our own, we must then repent us of our most
innocent Actions, forasmuch as we well suppose, that in a more excellent Nature
they would have been carried on with greater Dignity and Perfection; and would
that ours were so. When I reflect upon the Deportments of my Youth, with that
of my old age, I find that I have behaved my self equally well in both,
according to what I understand. This is all that my resistance can do. I do not
flatter my self; in the same Circumstance I should do the same things. It is
not a Spot, but rather an universal Tincture, with which I am imbued. I know no
mean Ceremonies, and superficial Repentance. It must sting me all over before I
can call it so, and that it prick my Bowels as deep and universally as God sees
into me. As to Employment, many good Opportunities have escaped me for want of
good Conduct; and yet my Deliberations were sound enough, according to the
occurrences presented to me. It Is their way to choose always the easiest and
the safest course. I find that in my former Counsels, I have proceeded with
Discretion, according to my own rule, and according to the state of the subject
proposed, and should do the same a thousand years hence in like Occasions. I do
not consider what it is now, but what it was then, when I deliberated on it.
The force of all Counsel consists in the Time; Occasions, and things eternally
shift and change. I have in my Life committed some great and important Errors,
not for want of good Understanding, but for want of good Luck. There are
secret, and not to be foreseen parts in matters we have in handling, especially
in the Nature of men; mute Conditions, that make no show, unknown sometimes
even to the Professors themselves; that spring and start up by accidental
Occasions. If my Prudence could not penetrate into, nor foresee them, I blame
it not: it is commissioned no further than its own limits. If the event be too
hard for me, and take the side I have refused, there is no Remedy, I do not
blame my self, I accuse my Fortune, and not my own handy Work; this cannot be
called Repentance. Phocion, having given the Athenians an Advice that was not
followed, and the Affair nevertheless succeeding contrary to his Opinion, some
one said to him; Well, Phocion, art thou content that Matters go so well? I am
very well pleased replied he, that this has happened so well, but I do not repent
that I counseled the other. When any of my Friends address themselves to me
for Advice, I give it heartily and clearly, without sticking, as almost all
other men do, at the hazard of the thing, that it may fall out contrary to my
Opinion, by which means I may be reproached for my Counsel; I am very
indifferent as to that: For the Fault will be theirs in having consulted me;
and I could not refuse them my best Advice. I, for my own part, can rarely
blame any one but my self, for my oversights and Misfortunes. For indeed I
seldom consult the Advice of another, if not by Honor of Ceremony, or
excepting where I stand in need of Information, as to matter of Fact. But in
things wherein I stand in need of nothing but Judgment, other men's Reasons may
serve to fortify my own, but have little power to dissuade me. I hear them
with Civility and Patience all; but to my knowledge, I never made use of any
but my own. With me they are but Flies and Atoms, that confound and distract my
Will. I lay no great stress upon my Opinions; but I lay as little upon those of
others, and Fortune rewards me accordingly. If I receive but little Advice, I
also give but little; I seldom consult others, and am seldom believed, and know
no concern either public or private, that has been mended or bettered by my
Advice. Even they whom Fortune had in some sort tied to my Direction, have more
willingly suffered themselves to be governed by any other Counsels than mine;
and as a man who is as jealous of my repose as of my Authority, I am better
pleased that it should be so. In leaving me there, they humor what I profess,
which is to settle and wholly contain my self within my self: I take a pleasure
in being uninteressed from other men's Affairs, and disengaged from being their
warranty, and responsible for what they do. In all Affairs that are past, be it
how it will, I have very little regret; for this Imagination puts me out of my
pain, that they ought so to fall out: they are in the great revolution of the
World, and in the Chain of Stoical Causes: your Fancy cannot, by wish and
Imagination, remove one tittle, but that the great current of things will
reverse both the past and the future. As to the rest, I abominate that
accidental Repentance which old Age brings along with it: and he, who said of
old, that he was obliged to his Age for having weaned him from Pleasure, was of
of another Opinion than I am; I can never think my self beholding to Impotency
for any good it can ever do me. Nec tam aversa unquam videbitur ab opere suo
Providentia, ut debilitas inter optima inventa sit. Nor can Providence ever be
seen so averse to her own Work, that debility should be ranked amongst the best
things. Our Appetites are rare in old age; a profound Saciety seizes us after
the Act; I see nothing of Conscience in this, heaviness and weakness imprint in
us a drowsy and rheumatick Virtue. We must not suffer our selves to be so
wholly carried away by natural alterations, as to suffer our Judgments to be
imposed upon by them. Youth and Pleasure have not formerly so far prevailed
upon me, that I did not well enough discern the face of Vice in Pleasure,
neither does the nausity that years have brought me, so far prevail with me
now, that I cannot discern Pleasure in Vice. Now that I am no more in my
flourishing Age, I judge as well of these things as if I was. I, who narrowly
and strictly examine it, find my Reason the very same it was in my most
licentious age, if not perhaps a little weaker, and more decayed by being grown
old; and I find that the Pleasure it refuses me upon the account of my bodily
Health, it would no more refuse it now in Consideration of the health of my
Soul than at any time heretofore. I do not repute it more valiant for being out
of Combat. My temptations are so broken and mortified, that they are not worth
its Oppositions, holding but out my hands I repel them. Should one present the
old Concupiscence before it, I fear it would have less power to resist it than
heretofore. I do not discern that in it self it judges any thing otherwise now,
than it formerly did, nor that it has acquired any new light. Wherefore, if
there be convalescence, it is an enchanted one. Miserable kind of Remedy to owe
a man's Health to his Disease. It Is not for our misfortune to perform this
Office, but for the good fortune of our Judgment. I am not to be made to do any
thing by Persecutions and Afflictions, but curse them. That is for People that
are not to be roused but by a Whip; my Reason is much more active in
Prosperity, and much more distracted, and put to it to digest Pains than
Pleasures. I see best in a clear Sky. Health does premonish me, as more
cheerfully, so to better purpose than Sickness. I did all that in me lay to
reform and regulate my self from Pleasures at all times, when I had Health and
Vigor to enjoy them. I should be troubled and ashamed, that the Misery and
Misfortune of my Age, should be preferred before my good, healthful, spritely,
and vigorous Years; and that men should esteem me, not for what I have been,
but by that miserable part of my self, where I have, as it were, ceased to be.
In my Opinion it is the happy Living, and not (as said Antisthenes) the happy
Dying, in which humane Felicity consists. I have not made it my Business to
make a monstrous addition of a Philosophers tail to the Head and Body of a
Libertine: nor would I have this wretched remainder give the lie to the
pleasant, sound, and long part of my Life. I will present my self uniformly
throughout. Were I to live my Life over again, I should live it just as I have
done. I neither complain of the past, nor do I fear the future; and If I am not
much deceived, I am the same within that I am without. It Is one main Obligation
I have to Fortune, that the Succession of my bodily Estate has been carried on
according to the natural Seasons; I have seen the Grass, the Blossoms, and the
Fruit, and now see the Tree withered: happily however, because naturally. I
bear the Infirmities I have the better, because they came not till I had Reason
to expect them; and because also they make me with greater Pleasure remember
that long Felicity of my past Life. My Wisdom peradventure may have been the
same in both Ages; but it was more active, and of better Grace whilst young and
spritely, than now it is when broken, pievish, and uneasy. I renounce then
these casual and painful Reformations, God must touch our Hearts, and our
Consciences must amend of themselves, by the force of our Reason, and not by
the decay of our Appetites. Pleasure is in it self neither pale nor
discolored, to be discerned by dim and decayed Eyes. We ought to love
Temperance for it self, and because God has commanded that and Chastity; but
what we are reduced to by Catarrhs, and that I am obliged to the Stone for, is
neither Chastity nor Temperance. A Man cannot boast that he despises and
resists Pleasure, if he cannot see it; if he knows not what it is, cannot
discern its graces, forces, and most alluring Beauties; I know both the one and
the other, and may therefore the better say it; but, methinks, our Souls in old
Age are subject to more troublesome maladies and imperfections than in Youth. I
said the same when young, and that I was reproached with the want of a Beard,
and I say so now that my gray Hairs give me some Authority; we call the
difficulty of our Humors, and the disrelish of present things, Wisdom, but in
truth we do not so much forsake Vices as we change them, and in my opinion, for
worse. Besides a foolish and feeble Pride, an impertinent Prating, froward and
insociable Humors, Superstition, and a ridiculous desire of Riches when we
have lost the Use; I find more Envy, Injustice and Malice. Age imprints more
wrinkles in the Mind than it does in the Face, and Souls are never, or very
rarely seen, that in growing old do not smell sour and musty. Man moves all
together, both toward his perfection and decay. In observing the Wisdom of
Socrates, and many Circumstances of his condemnation, I should dare to believe,
that he in some sort himself purposely by collusion contributed to it, seeing
that at the age of seventy years he suffered the lofty motions of his Wit to be
so crampt, and his wonted luster to be so obscured. What strange Metamorphoses
do I see Age every day make in many of my acquaintance? it is a potent Malady,
and that naturally and imperceptibly steals into us, and vast provision of
study, and great precaution are required to evade the imperfections it loads us
with, or at least, to obstruct their progress. I find, that notwithstanding all
my retrenchments, it gets foot by foot upon me; I make the best resistance I
can, but I do not know to what at last it will reduce me; but fall out what
will, I am content the World may know when I am fallen, from whence I fell.

CHAP. III. Of three Commerces.
WE must not rivet our selves so fast to these Humors and Complexions. Our
chiefest sufficiency is to know how to apply our selves to diverse Employments.
It Is to be, but not to live, to keep a man's self tied and bound by necessity
to one only Course. Those are the bravest Souls that have in them the most
variety, and that are most flexible and pliant; of which here is an honorable
Testimony of the elder Cato: Huic versatile ingenium sic pariter ad omnia fuit,
Livius, l. 34.
ut natum ad id unum diceres, quodcumque ageret. This Man's Parts were so
convertible to all Uses, that a man would think he were born only for what ever
he did. Might I have the liberty to dress my self after my own Mode, there is
no so graceful fashion to which I would be so fixed, as not to be able to
disengage my self from it. Life is an unequal, irregular, and multiform Motion.
It Is not to be a Friend to a man's self, much less a Master; it is not to be a
Slave so incessantly, to be so led by the nose by ones own Inclinations, that a
man cannot turn aside nor writhe his neck out of the collar. That our
Inclinations are not always to be followed.
I speak it now in this part of my Life, wherein I find I cannot disengage my
self from the importunity of my Soul, by reason that it cannot commonly amuse
it self, but on things wherein it is perplexed, nor employ it self but
entirely, and with all its force. Upon the lightest Subject can be offered, it
makes it infinitely greater, and stretches it to that degree, as therein to
employ its utmost power, wherefore its Idleness is to me a very painful Labor,
and very prejudicial to my Health. Most men's minds require foreign matter to
exercise and enliven them; mine has rather need to sit still and repose it
self; Senec. Epist. 56.
Vitia otii negotio discutienda sunt. The vices of Sloth are to be shak'd off
by business; for its chiefest and most painful study is to study it self. Books
are to it a sort of employment that debauches it from its study. Upon the first
Thoughts that possess it, it begins to bustle and make trial of a Vigor in all
Senses, exercises its power of handling, sometimes making trial of its force,
and then fortifying, moderating and ranging it self by the way of Grace and
Order. It has of its own wherewith to rouse its Faculties: Nature has given to
it, as to all others, matter enough of its own to make advantage of, and
Subjects proper enough, where it may either invent or judge. Meditation is a
powerful and full study to such as can effectually employ themselves. I had
rather forge my Soul than furnish it. There is no employment, either more weak
or more strong, than that of entertaining a man's own Thoughts, according as
the Soul is. The greatest men make it their whole business, Cice. Thus. l. 5.
quibus vivere est cogitare. To whom to live is to think. Nature has also
favored it with this privilege, that there is nothing we can do so long, nor
any Action to which we more frequently and with greater facility addict our
selves. It Is the business of the Gods, says Aristotle, and from whence both
their beatitude and ours proceed. The principal use of Reading to me, is, that
by various Objects it rouzes my Reason, and employs my Judgment, not my Memory.
Few entertainments then detain me without force and violence; it is true, that
the beauty and neatness of a Work take as much or more with me than the weight
and depth of the Subject: And forasmuch as I slumber in all other
communication, and give but a negligent attention, it often falls out, that in
such mean and pitiful Discourses, I either make strange and ridiculous Answers
unbecomming a Child, or more indiscreetly and rudely maintain an obstinate
Silence. I have a melancholic and pensive way, that withdraws me into my self,
and to that a stupid and childish Ignorance of many very ordinary things, by
which two Qualities I have obtained, that men may truly report five or six as
ridiculous tales of me as of any other whatever. But to proceed in my Subject;
this difficult Complexion of mine renders me very nice in my conversation with
men, whom I must cull and pick out for my purpose, and unfit for common
Society. We live and negotiate with the People; if their Conversation be
troublesome to us, if we disdain to apply our selves to mean and vulgar Souls,
(and the mean and vulgar are often as regular as those of the finest thread; and
all wisdom is folly that does not accomodate it self to the common Ignorance)
we must no more intermeddle either with other men's Affairs or our own; and all
business both public and private must be managed apart from the Popular. The
less forced, and most natural motions of the Soul, are the most beautiful; the
best employments, those that are least constrained. Good God! how good an
Office does Wisdom to those whose desires it limits to their Power? That is the
most happy Knowledge. What a man can, was the Sentence Socrates was so much in
love withal, a Motto of great substance; we moderate and adapt our desires to
the nearest and easiest to be acquired things. Is it not a foolish Humor of
mine, to separate my self from a thousand to whom my Fortune has conjoined me,
and without whom I cannot live, to cleave to one or two that are out of my
Commerce, or rather a fantastic desire of a thing I cannot obtain? My gentle
and easy Manners, enemies of all soureness in Conversation, may easily enough
have secured me from the Envy and Animosities of men; I do not say so as to be
beloved, but never any man gave less occasions of being hated; but the coldness
of my Conversation has reasonably deprived me of the good Will of many, who are
to be excused if they interpret it in another and worse sense. I am best at
contracting, and maintain rare and exquisite Friendships; for by reason that I
so greedily seize upon such Acquaintance as fits my liking, I throw my self
with such violence upon them that I hardly fail to stick, and often make an
Impression where I hit, as I have often made happy proof. I am in some sort
cold and shy, for my motion is not natural, if not with full sail: Besides, my
Fortune having trained me up from my Youth in, and given me a relish of one
sole and perfect Friendship, it has in truth given me a kind of nausity to
meaner Conversations, and too much imprinted in my Fancy, that they are Beasts
of Company, as the Ancient said, but not of the Herd. And also I have a natural
difficulty of communicating my self by halves, and that Reservation, servile,
and jealous Prudence required in the conversation of numerous and imperfect
Friendships. And we are principally enjoined to these in this Age of ours, when
we cannot talk of the World, but either with danger or false-hood. Yet do I
very well discern, that he who has the Conveniences (I mean the the essential
Conveniences) of Life for his end, as I have, ought to fly these difficulties
and delicacy of Humor as much as the Plague. I should commend a Soul of
several Stories, that knows both how to bend and to slacken it self, that finds
it self at ease in all Conditions of Fortune, that can discourse with a
Neighbor, of his Building, Hunting, or any little Contention betwixt him and
another: that can chat with a Carpenter or a Gardener with Pleasure. I envy
those who can render themselves familiar with the meanest of their Followers,
and divert themselves with their own Attendants: and dislike the Advice of
Plato, that Men should always speak in a Magisterial tone to their Servants,
whether Men or Women; without being sometimes facetious and familiar. For
besides my reason, Magisterial Language to Servants reproved.
it is inhumane and unjust, to set so great a value upon this pitiful
prerogative of Fortune; and the Governments, wherein less disparity is
permitted betwixt Masters and Servants, seem to me the most equitable. Others
study how to raise and elevate their Minds, I, how to humble mine, and to bring
it low; it is only vicious in extension.

Narras, and genus Aeaci Hor. lib. 3. Ode 19.

Et pugnata sacro bella sub Ilio;
Quo Chium pretio cadum
Mercemur, quis aquam temperet ignibus,
Quo praebente domum, and quota
Pelignis caream frigoribus, taces.
Paraphrased by T. F.
Thou por'st on Helvi^us, and studiest in vain,
How many years past betwixt King and Kings Reign;
To make an old Woman even twitter for joy
At an eighty eight story, or the scuffle at Troy.
But where the good Wine, and best fire is,
When the cruel North wind does blow,
And the Trees do penance in Snow;
Where the Poets delight and desire is,
Thou pitiful Book-worm never troublest thy Brain.
Thus, as the Lacedemonian Valor stood in need of Moderation, and of the sweet
and harmonious sound of Flutes to soften them in Battle, lest they should
precipitate themselves into Temerity and Fury; whereas all other Nations
commonly make use of harsh and shrill sounds, and of loud and imperious Voices,
to incite and heat the Soldiers Courage to the last degree: so, methinks, that
contrary to the usual Method, in the Practice of our Minds, we have for the
most part more need of Lead, than Wings* of Temperance; and Composedness; than
Ardour, and Agitation. But above all things, it is in my Opinion, egregiously to
play the Fool, to put on the Gravity of a Man of Understanding amongst those
that know nothing: and to speak in print, favellar in punta di forchetta: you
must let your self down to those with whom you converse; and sometimes affect
Ignorance: lay aside constraint and subtilty, it is enough in common
Conversation to preserve Decency and Order; as to the rest, flag as low as the
Earth, if they desire it. The Learned often stumble at this Stone; they will be
always showing their utmost skill, and strew their Writings all over with the
Flowers of their Eloquence: they have in these days so filled the Cabinets and
Ears of the Ladies with it, that if they have lost the Substance, they at least
retain the Words: so as in all discourse upon all sorts of Subjects, how mean
and common soever, they speak and write after a new and learned way; Hoc
sermon pavent, hoc iram, gaudia, curas, Juven. Sat. 6.

Hoc cuncta effundunt animi secreta, quid ultra?
Concumbunt docte.
In the same Language they express their fears,
Their anger, and their joys, their griefs and cares,
And all their Secrets do pour out; What more?
In the same learned Phrase they play the Whore.
and quote Plato and Aquinas in things the first they meet could determine as
well. The Learning that cannot penetrate their Souls, hangs still upon the
Tongue. If those of Quality will be persuaded by me, they shall content
themselves with setting out their proper and natural Treasures; they conceal
and cover their Beauties under others that are none of theirs: it is a great
folly to put out their own Light, to shine by a borrowed luster: they are
interred and buried under the Article Capsula totae. It is because they do not
sufficiently know, that the World has nothing fairer than themselves, it is for
them to honor the Arts, and to paint Painting. What need have they of any
thing, but to live beloved and honored? They have, and know but too much for
this. They need do no more, but rouse and heat a little the Faculties they have
of their own. When I see them tampering with Rhetoric, Law, Logic, and the
like; so improper and unnecessary for their Business, I begin to suspect, that
the men who inspire them with such things, do it that they may govern them upon
that account. For what other excuse can I contrive? It is enough that they can
without our Instruction govern the Graces of their Eyes to Gayety, Severity,
and Sweetness, and season a denial either with Anger, Suspense, or Favor, and
that they need not another to interpret what we speak for their Service. With
this Knowledge they command with the Switch, and rule both the Regents and the
Schools. But if nevertheless they think much to give place to us in any thing
whatever, and will out of Curiosity have their share in Books; Poesy allowed
to Women.
Poetry is a Diversion proper for theM, it is a wanton and subtle, a dissembling
and prating Art, all Pleasure, and all show like themselves. They may also
extract several Conveniences from History. What kind of Philosophy is proper
for Women.
In Philosophy, out of the moral part of it, they may select such instructions
as will teach them to judge of our Humors and Conditions, to defend themselves
from our Treacheries, to regulate the ardor of their own Desires, to manage
their Liberty, lengthen the Pleasure of Life, and mildly to bear the
inconstancY of a Servant, the rudeness of a Husband, and the importunity of
Years, Wrinckles, and the like. This is the utmost of what I would allow them
in the Sciences. There are some particular Natures that are private and
retired: my natural way is proper for Communication, and apt to lay me open; I
am all without, and in sight, born for Society and Friendship: the solitude
that I love my self, and recommend to others, is chiefly no other, than to
withdraw my Thoughts and Affections into my self; to restrain and check, not my
steps, but my own Cares and Desires; resigning all foreign Solitude, and
mortally avoiding Servitude and Obligations; and not so much the crowd of men,
as the crowd of Business. Local Solitude, to say the truth, does rather give me
more room, and set me more at large; I more willingly throw my self upon
Affairs of State, and the World, when I am alone. At the Louvre, and in the
bustle of the Court, I fold my self within my own Skin. The crowd thrusts me
upon my self. And I never entertain my self so wantonly, so licentiously, nor
so particularly, as in places of respect, and ceremonious Prudence: Our Follies
do not make men laugh, but our Wisdom. I am naturally no Enemy to a Court Life;
I have therein past a good part of my own, and am of an Humor to be cheerful
in great Companies, provided it may be by intervals, and at my own time: But
this softness of Judgment whereof I speak, ties me by force to solitude, even
in my own House, in the middle of a numerous Family, and a House sufficiently
frequented; I see People enough, but rarely such with whom I delight to converse.
And I there reserve both for my self and others an unusual Liberty: There is in
my House no such thing as Ceremonies, ushering or waiting upon them down to the
Coach, and such other troublesome Ceremonies as our courtesy joins, (O servile
and importunate Custom!) every one there governs himself according to his own
Method; let who will speak his Thoughts, I sit mute, meditating and shut up in
my Closet, without any offense to my Guests. The men, whose Society and
Familiarity I covet, are those they call sincere and ingenious men, and the
Image of these make me disrelish the rest. It is, if rightly taken, the rarest
of our Forms, and a Form that we chiefly owe to Nature. The end of this
Commerce is simply Privacy, Frequentation and Conference, the exercise of
Souls, without other Fruit. In our Discourse all Subjects are alike to me; let
there be neither weight, nor depth, it is all one, there is yet Grace and
Pertinency, all there is tincted with a mature and constant Judgment, and mixed
with Bounty, Freedom, Gayety and Friendship. It Is not only in talking of the
Affairs of Kings and State, that our Wits discover their force and Beauty, but
every whit as much in private Conferences. I understand my People even by their
Silence and Smiles; and better discover them perhaps at Table, than in the
Counsel. Hippomachus said very well, that he could know the good Wrestlers by
only seeing them walk in the Street. If Learning will please to step into our
talk, it shall not be rejected, not magisterial, imperious, and importunate, as
it commonly is, but suffragan and docile in it self. We there only seek to
divert our selves, and to pass away our time; when we have a mind to be
instructed and preached to, we will go seek it in its Throne. Let it debase it
self to us for once, if it so please; for useful and profitable as it is, I
presuppose that even in the greatest need, we may do well enough without it,
and do our Business without its Assistance. A well descended Soul, and
practiced in the Conversation of men, will of her self, render her self
agreeable to all. Art is nothing but the counter-part and register of what such
Souls produce. The Conversation also of beautiful and well bred Women, is also
for me a most sweet commerce: Cicer^.
nam nos quoque Oculos eruditos habemus. If the Soul has not therein so much to
enjoy, as in the first, the bodily Senses, which also participate more of this,
bring it to a proportion near to, though, in my opinion, not equal to the
other. But it is a Commerce wherein a man must stand a little upon his Guard,
especially those of a vigorous Constitution, as I am. The burnt Child dreads
the fire. I there scalded my self in my Youth, and suffered all the Torments
that Poets say are to befall all who precipitate themselves into Love without
Order and Judgment. It is true, that whipping has made me wiser since. Ovid.
Trist. l. 1. El. 1.
Quicumque Argolica de class Capharea fugit,
Semper ab Euboices vela retorquet aquis.
O'th Grecian Fleet, who would Capharius flee,
Must always steer from the Euboick Sea.
It Is folly to fix all a man's Thoughts upon it, and madness to engage in it
with a furious and indiscreet Affection; but on the other side, to engage there
without Love and without Inclination, like Comedians, to play a common part,
without putting any thing to it of his own but Words, is indeed to provide for
his safety; but withal, after as scandalous a manner, as he who should abandon
his Honor, Profit, or Pleasure, for fear of danger; for it is most certain,
that from such a Practice, they who set it on foot can expect no Fruit that can
please or satisfy a noble Soul. A man must of necessity have in good earnest
desired that which he in good earnest expects to have a pleasure in enjoying; I
say, though Fortune should unjustly favor their Dissimulation, which often falls
out, because there is none of the Sex, let her be as ugly as the Devil, who
does not think her self well worthy to be beloved, and that does not prefer her
self before other Women, either for her Youth, the color of her Hair, or her
graceful Motion, (for generally there are no more foul than fair;) and the
Brachman Virgins, who have no other Beauty to recommend them, the People being
assembled by the common Crier to that effect, come out into the Market place to
expose their matrimonial Parts to public view, to try if those at least were
not of temptation sufficient to get them Husbands. Consequently, there is not
one who does not easily suffer her self to be overcome by the first Vow that is
made to serve her. Now from this ordinary treachery of men, that must fall out
which we already experimentally see, either that they rally together, and
separate themselves by themselves to evade us, or else form their Discipline by
the Example we give them, play their Parts of the Farce as we do ours, and give
themselves up to the sport, without Passion, Care, or Love: Neque affectui suo
aut alieno obnoxiae: believing, according to the persuasion of Lysias in Plato,
that they may with more Utility and Convenience surrender themselves up to us
the less we love them. Where it will fall out, as in Comedies, that the People
will have as much Pleasure or more than the Comedians. For my part, I no more
acknowledge a Venus without a Cupid, than a Mother without Issue: They are
things that mutually lend, and own their Essence to one another; so this Cheat
rebounds back upon him who is guilty of it, it does not cost him much indeed,
but he also gets little or nothing by it. They who have made Venus a Goddess,
have taken notice that her principal Beauty was incorporeal and spiritual. But
the Venus which these People hunt after, is not so much as humane, nor indeed
brutal; the very Beasts will not accept it so gross and so earthly. We see that
Imagination and Desire often heats and incites them before the Body does; we see
in both the one Sex and the other, they have in the herd choice and particular
election in their Affections, and that they have amongst themselves a long
Commerce of old good Will. Even those to whom old Age denies the practice of
their desire, do yet tremble, neigh, and twitter for Love. We see them before
the Act full of hope and ardour, and when the Body has played its Game, yet
please themselves with the sweet remembrance of the Pleasure past; some that
swell with Pride after they have performed, and others, who tired and sated, do
yet by Vociferation express a triumphing Joy. Who has nothing to do but only to
discharge his Body of a natural necessity, need not to trouble others with so
curious Preparations. It is not Meat for a gross and boisterous Appetite. As
one who does not desire that men should think me better than I am, I will here
freely discover the Errors of my Youth, not only for the danger of impairing my
Health, (and yet I could not be so careful, but that I had two light
Mischances) but moreover upon the account of Contempt, I have seldom given my
self up to common and mercenary Embraces. I would heighten the Pleasure by the
Difficulty, by Desire, and a certain kind of Glory; and was clearly of
Tiberius's mind, Modest and noble Amors of Tiberius.
who in his Amors was as much taken with Modesty and Birth as any other
Quality; and of the Courtesan Floras Humor, Those of Flora.
who never prostituted her self to less than a Dictator, a Consul, or a Censor,
and solac'd her self in the dignity of her Lovers; doubtless Pearl and Tissue,
Titles and Attendance, add something to it. As to the rest, I had a great
esteem for Wit, provided the Person was without exception; for, to confess the
truth, if the one or the other of these two Perfections must of necessity be
wanting, I should rather have quitted that of the Understanding, that has its
Use in better things; but in the subject of Love, a Subject principally
relating to the Senses of Seeing and Touching, something may be done without
the Graces of the Mind, without the Graces of the Body nothing. Beauty is the
true prerogative of Women, and so peculiarly their own, that ours, though
naturally requiring another sort of Feature, is never in its luster but when
puerile and beardless, confused and mixed with theirs. It Is said, that such as
are preferred to the Grand Signior upon the account of Beauty, which are an
infinite number, are at the farthest dismissed at two and twenty years of Age.
Reason, Prudence, and Offices of Friendship are better found amongst men, and
therefore it is, that they govern the Affairs of the World. These two Commerces
are fortuitous, and depending upon others; the one is troublesome by its
rarity, the other wither with Age, so that they could never have been
sufficient for the Business of my Life. That of Books, which is the third, is
much more certain, and much more our own. It yields all other Advantages to the
other two; but has the Constancy and Facility of its Service for its own share:
It goes side by side with me in my whole Course, and every where is assisting
to me: it comforts me in my Age and Solitude; it eases me of a troublesome
weight of idleness, and delivers me at all hours from Company that I dislike:
and it blunts the point of Griefs, if they are not extreme, and have not got an
entire Possession of my Soul. To divert my self from a troublesome Fancy, it is
but to run to my Books, they presently fix me to them, and drive the other out
of my Thoughts; and do not mutiny to see that I have only recourse to them for
want of other more real, natural, and lively Conveniences; they always receive
me with the same Kindness. He may well go a foot, they say, who leads his Horse
in his Hand. And our James, King of Naples and Sicily, who, handsome, young,
and healthful, caused himself to be carried up and down on a Barrow, extended
upon a pitiful mattrice in a poor Robe of gray Cloth, and a Cap of the same;
but attended withal with a Royal train of Litters, led-Horses of all sorts,
Gentlemen and Officers, did yet herein represent a tender and unsteady
austerity. The sick man is not to be lamented, who has his cure in his sleeve.
In the experience and practice of this Sentence, which is a very true one, all
the benefit I reap from Books consists; and yet I make as little use of it
almost as those that know it not: I enjoy it as a Miser does his money, in
knowing that I may enjoy it when I please: my mind is satisfied with this right
of possession. I never travel without Books, either in Peace or War; and yet
sometimes I pass over several days, and sometimes months, without looking on
them: I will read by and by, say I to my self, or to morrow, or when I please,
and in the interim Time steals away without any inconvenience. For it is not to
be imagined to what degree I please my self, and rest content in this
consideration, that I have them by me, to divert my self with them when I am so
disposed, and to call to mind what an ease and refreshment they are to my Life.
It Is the best Viaticum I have yet found out for this humane journey, and very
much lament those men of understanding who are unprovided of them. And yet I
the rather accept of any other sort of diversion, how light soever, because
this can never fail me. When at home, I a little more frequent my Library, from
whence I at once survey all the whole concerns of my Family: It Is situated at
the entrance into my House, and I thence under me see my Garden, Court, and
base-Court, and into all the parts of the building. There I turn over now one
Book, and then another, of various Subjects, without method or design: one
while I meditate, another I record, and dictate as I walk to and fro, such
whimsies as these I present you here. It Is in the third story of a Tower, of
which the Ground-room is my Chapel, the second story an Apartment with a
withdrawing Room and Closet, where I often lie to be more retired. Above it is
a great Wardrobe, which formerly was the most useless part of the House. I
there pass away both the most of the days of my Life, and most of the hours of
those days. In the Night I am never there. There is within it a Cabinet
handsome and neat enough, with a Fire place very commodiously contrived, and
Light very finely fitted. And was I not more afraid of the Trouble than the
Expense, the Trouble that frights me from all Business, I could very easily
adjoyn on either side, and on the same Floor, a Gallery of an hundred paces
long, and twelve broad, having found Walls already raised for some other
design, to the requisite height. Every place of retirement requires a walk. My
Thoughts sleep if I sit still; my Fancy does not go by it self, as when my Legs
move it: and all those who study without a Book are in the same Condition. The
Figure of my Study is round, and has no more flat Wall than what is taken up by
my Table and my Chair; so that the remaining parts of the Circle present me a
view of all my Books at once, set up upon five degrees of Shelves round about
me. It has three noble and free Prospects, and is sixteen paces diameter. I am
not so continually there in Winter; for my House is built upon an Eminence, as
its Name imports, and no part of it is so much exposed to the Wind and Weather
as that, which pleases me the better: for being of a painful access, and a
little remote, as well upon the account of Exercise, as being also there more
retired from the Crowd. It Is there that I am in my Kingdom, as we say, and
there I endeavor to make my self an absolute Monarch, and to sequester this
one corner from all Society both Conjugal, Filial, and Civil. Elsewhere I have
but verbal Authority only, and of a confused Essence. That man in my Opinion is
very miserable, who has not at home where to be by himself, where to entertain
himself alone, or to conceal himself from others. Ambition sufficiently plagues
her Proselites, by keeping themselves always in show, like the Statue of a
public Place. Seneca de Consol. ad Polib. c. 26.
Magna Servitus est magna Fortuna. A great Fortune is a great Slavery. They
have not so much as a Retirement for the Necessities of Nature. I have thought
nothing so severe in the Austerity of Life that our Churchmen affect, as what
I have observed in some of their Societies; namely, to have a perpetual Society
of place by Rule, and numerous Assistants amongst them in every Action
whatever; And think it much more supportable to be always alone, than never to
be so. If any one shall tell me, that it is to undervalue the Muses, to make
use of them only for sport, and to pass away the time; I shall tell him, that
he does not know the value of Sport and Pleasure so well as I; if I forbear to
add further, that all other end is ridiculous. I live from Hand to Mouth, and,
with Reverence be it spoken, I only live for my self; to that all my Designs do
tend, and in that terminate. I studied when young for Ostentation; since, to
make my self a little wiser; and now for my Diversion, but never for any
Profit. A vain and prodigal Humor I had after this sort of Furniture, not only
for the supplying my own need and defects, but moreover for Ornament and
outward show, I have since quite reav'd my self of. Books have many charming
Qualities to such as know how to choose them. But every good has its ill; it is
a Pleasure that is not pure and clean, no more than others: it has its
Inconveniences, and great ones too. The Mind indeed is exercised by it, but
the Body, the care of which I must withal never neglect, remains in the mean
time without Action, grows heavy and stupid. I know no excess more prejudicial
to me, nor more to be avoided in this my declining Age. These are my three
beloved, and particular Occupations; I speak not of those I owe to the World by
Civil Obligation.

CHAP. IV. Of Diversion.
I Was once employed to consolate a Lady truly afflicted; What Women's mournings
commonly are.
most of their Mournings are put on, and for outward Ceremony.

Vberibus semper Lacrymis, semperque paratis,
In statione sua, Juven. Sat. 6.
atque expectantibus illam
Quo jubeat manare modo.
They always have a damm for present use,
Ready, and waiting when they draw the Sluice,
On least pretenses of Joys, Griefs, or Fears,
To sally out in false dissembling Tears.
A man goes the wrong way to work, when he opposes this Passion; for Opposition
does but irritate and make them more obstinate in Sorrow, and the evil is
exasperated by being contended with. We see in common Discourse, that what I
have negligently let fall from me, if a man takes hold of it, so as to
controvert what I have said, I justify it with the best Arguments I have; and
much more a thing wherein I had a real Interest. And besides, in so doing, you
enter rudely upon your Operation; whereas the first addresses of a Physician to
his Patient should be gracious, gay, and pleasing. Never did any ill-look'd,
morose Physician do any thing to purpose. On the contrary, How Consolation
ought to be practiced.
then a Man should at the first approaches favor their Grief, and express some
Approbation of their Sorrow: By this intelligence you obtain Credit to proceed
further, and after a facile and insensible manner fall into Discourses more
solid and proper for their Cure. I, whose aim it was principally to gull the
Assistants who had their Eyes fixed upon me, designed only to palliate the
Disease. And indeed I have found by Experience, that I have an unluckey hand in
persuading. My Arguments are either too sharp, or too flat, and rather press
too roughly, or not home enough. After I had some time applied my self to her
Grief, I did not attempt to cure her by strong and lively Reasons, either
because I wanted them, or because I thought to do my business better another
way; neither did I insist upon a choice of any of those methods of Consolation
which Philosophy prescribes; That what we complain of is no evil, according to
Cleanthes; that it is a light evil, according to the Peripateticks; that to
bemoan ones self is an action neither commendable nor just, according to
Chrysippus; Nor this of Epicurus, more suitable to my way, of shifting the
thoughts from afflicting things to those that are pleasing; nor making a bundle
of all these together, to make use of upon occasion, according to Cicero; but
gently bending my Discourse, and by little and little digressing, sometimes to
subjects nearer, and sometimes more remote from the purpose; she was more
intent to what I said, I insensibly deprived her of her Sorrow, and kept her
calm and in good Humor whilst I continued there. I herein made use of
diversion. They who succeeded me in the same service, did not for all that find
any amendment in her, for I had not gone to the root. I peradventure may
elsewhere have glaunc'd upon some sort of public diversions. And the practice
of Military ones, which Pericles made use of in the Peloponnesian War, with a
thousand others in other places to withdraw the adverse Forces from their own
Countries, is too frequent in History. It was an ingenious evasion whereby the
Sieur d'Himbercourt saved both himself and others in the City of Liege, into
which the Duke of Burgundy, who kept it besieged had made him enter, to execute
the Articles of their promised Surrender. These People being assembled by Night
to consider of it, begun to mutiny against the past Agreement, and to that
degree, that several of them resolved to fall upon the Commissioners who had
labored in it, and whom they had in their power. He feeling the gusts of this
first storm of these People, who were coming to rush into his Lodgings,
suddenly sent out to them two of the Inhabitants of the City (of which he had
some with him) with new and milder terms, to be proposed in their Counsel,
which he had suddenly contrived at need. These two diverted the first tempest,
carrying back the enraged Rabble to the Town Hall, to hear and consider of what
they had to say. The deliberation was short; a second storm arose as full of
animosity as the other; whereupon he dispatched four new Mediators of the same
quality to meet them, protesting that they had now better Conditions to present
them with, and such as would give them absolute satisfaction; by which means
the Tumult was once more appeased, and the People again turned back to the
Conclave. In fine, by thus ordering these amusements one after another,
diverting their Fury, and dissipating it in frivolous Consultations, he laid it
at last asleep till the day appeared, which was his principal end. This other
story that follows is also of the same predicament. Atalanta, a Virgin of
excelling Beauty, and of wonderful disposition of Body, to disengage her self
from the crowd of a thousand Suitors who sought her in marriage, made this
Proposition, that she would accept of him for her Husband who should equal her
in Running, upon condition that they who failed should lose their Lives; there
were enough who thought the Prize very well worth the hazard, and who suffered
the penalty of the bloody Contract. Hippomenes, being to make trial after the
rest, makes his address to the Goddess of Love, imploring her assistance, who
granting his request, gave him three golden Apples, and instructed him how to
use them. The ground they run upon being an even Plane, as Hippomenes perceived
his Mistress to press hard up to him, he, as it were by chance, let fall one of
these Apples; the Maid, taken with the beauty of it, failed not to step out of
her way to take it up: Obstupuit virgo, Ovid. Metam. lib. 10.
nitidique cupidine pomi
Declinat cursus, aurumque volubile tollit.
The nimble Virgin, dazzel'd to behold
The glittering Apple tumbling over the mold,
Stopped her career to seize the rolling Gold.
He did the same, when he saw his time, by the second and the third, till by so
diverting her, and making her lose so much ground, he won the Course. When
Physicians cannot stop a Catarrh, they divert, and turn it into some other less
dangerous part. And I find also that is the most ordinary practice for the
diseases of the Mind. Cicero, Thus. l. 5.
Abducendus etiam nonnunquam animus est, ad alia studia, sollicitudines, curas,
negotia: Loci denique mutatione, tanquam aegroti non convalescentes, saepe
curandus est. The mind is sometimes to be diverted to other Studies, Thoughts,
Cares, and Business: and lastly, by change of place, as sick Persons that do
not recover are ordered change of Air. It Is to little effect directly to justle
a man's Infirmities, we neither make him sustain, nor repel the attack; we
only make him decline and evade it. This other lesson is too high and too
difficult. It Is for men of the first Form of knowledge purely to insist upon
the thing, to consider and judge of it. It appertains to one sole Socrates
only, to entertain Death with an indifferent Countenance, to grow acquainted
with it, and to sport with it; he seeks no consolation out of the thing it
self; dying appears to him a natural and indifferent accident, it is there that
he fixes his sight and resolution, without looking elsewhere. The Disciples of
Hegesias, that pine themselves to death, animated thereunto by his fine
Lectures, which were so frequent, that King Ptolomy ordered he should be
forbidden to entertain his followers with such homicide Doctrines: those People
do not consider death it self, neither do they judge of it; it is not there
that they fix their Thoughts, they run toward, and aim at a new Being. The
poor wretches that we see brought upon the Scaffold, full of ardent devotion,
and therein, as much as in them lies, employing all their Senses, their Ears in
hearing the instructions are given them, their Eyes and Hands lifted up toward
Heaven, their Voices in loud Prayers, with a vehement and continual emotion,
are doubtless things very commendable and proper for such a necessity. We ought
to commend them for their Devotion, but not properly for their constancy. They
shun the encounter, they divert their thoughts from the consideration of death,
as Children are amused with some Toy or other, when the Surgeon is going to
give them a prick with his Lancet. I have seen some, who casting sometimes
their eyes upon the dreadful Instruments of death round about, have fainted,
and furiously turned their thoughts another way. Such as are to pass a
formidable Precipice, are advised either to shut their eyes or to look another
way. Subrius Flavius, being by Nero's command to be put to death, and by the
hand of Niger, both of them great Captains; when they led him to the place
appointed for his Execution, seeing the hole that Niger had caused to be
hollowed to put him into ill-favour'dly contrived: Neither is this, said he,
turning to the Soldiers who guarded him, according to Military Discipline. And
to Niger, who exhorted him to keep his head firm; do but thou strike as firmly,
said he. And he very well foresaw what would follow, when he said so; for
Niger's arm so trembled, that he had several blows at his head before he could
cut it off. This man seems to have had his thoughts rightly fixed upon the
subject: he that dies in a Battle, with his Sword in his hand, does not then
think of death, he feels, nor considers it not; the ardour of the Fight diverts
his thoughts another way. An honest Man of my acquaintance, falling as he was
fighting a Duel at single Rapier, and feeling himself nailed to the earth by
nine or ten thrusts of his Enemy, every one present called to him to think of
his Conscience; but he has since told me, that though he very well heard what
they said, it nothing moved him, and that he never thought of any thing but how
to disengage and revenge himself. He afterward killed his Man in that very
Duel. He who brought L. Syllanus the sentence of Death, did him a very great
kindness, in that having received his answer, that he was well prepared to dye,
but not by base hands, he run upon him with his Soldiers to force him; and as
he, naked as he was, obstinately defended himself with his fists and feet, he
made him lose his Life in the dispute; by that means dissipating and diverting
in a sudden and furious Rage the painful apprehension of the lingering Death to
which he was designed. We always think of something else; either the hope of a
better Life comforts and supports us, or the hope of our Childrens Valor, or
the future glory of our Name, or the leaving behind the evils of this Life, or
the Vengeance that threatens those who are the causers of our death,
administers Consolation to us.

Aeneid. l. 4.
Spero equidem mediis, si quid pia numina possunt,
Supplicia hausurum scopulis and nomine Dido
Saepe vocaturum.
Audiam, and haec manes veniet mihi fama subimos.
Mr. Ogilby.
Sure if the Gods have any power at all,
Split on a Rock, thou shall on Dido call.
-- thy Fortunes I shall know
By Fame conveyed me to the shades below.
Xenophon was sacrificing with a Crown upon his Head, when one came to bring
him News of the Death of his Son Gryllus, The valiant Death of Gryllus.
slain in the Battle of Mantinea. At the first surprise of the News, he threw
his Crown to the Ground; but understanding by the sequel of the Narrative, the
manner of a most brave and valiant Death, he took it up, and replac'd it upon
his Head. Epicurus himself, at his Death, consolates himself upon the Utility
and Eternity of his Writings. Omnes clari, Cicero. Thus. l. 3.
and nobilitati Labores, fiunt tolerabiles. All Labors that are illustrious*
and renowned, are supportable. And the same Wound, the same Fatigue, is not,
says Xenophon, so intolerable to a General of an Army, as to a common Soldier.
The cheerful Death of Epaminondas.
Epaminondas dyed much more cheerful, having been informed that the Victory
remained to him. Haec sunt solatia, Cicero. Thus. l. 2.
haec fomenta summorum Dolorum. These are lenitives, and fomentations to the
greatest Pains. And such other Circumstances amuse, divert, and turn our
thoughts from the consideration of the thing in it self. Even the Arguments of
Philosophy are always diverting, and putting by the Matter, so as scarce to rub
upon the Sore. The greatest man of the first Philosophical School, and
Superintendent over all the rest, the great Zeno, against Death forms this
Syllogism: No Evil is honorable; but Death is honorable: Therefore Death is
no Evil. Against Drunkenness this; No one commits his Secrets to a Drunkard;
but every one commits his Secrets to a Wise Man: therefore a wise man is no
Drunkard. Is this to hit the white? I love to see, that these great and leading
Souls cannot rid themselves of our Company. As perfect men as they would be,
they are yet but simple men. Revenge is a sweet Passion, of great and natural
impression; I discern it well enough, though I have no manner of Experience of
it. From which, not long ago, to divert a young Prince; I did not tell him that
he must, to him who had struck him upon the one Cheek, turn the other, upon the
account of Charity; nor go about to represent to him the tragical Events that
Poetry attributes to this Passion; I did not touch upon that string; but made
it my Business to make him relish the Beauty of a contrary Image: and by
representing to him what Honor, Esteem, and good Will he would acquire by
Clemency and good Nature, diverted him to Ambition. Thus a man is to deal in
such Cases. If your Passion of Love be too violent, disperse it, say they, and
they say true; for I have often tried it with Advantage: break it into several
Desires, of which let one be regent if you will over the rest; but, lest it
should tyrannize and domineer over you, weaken and protract, in dividing and
diverting it; Persius. Sat. 6.
Cum morosa vago singultiet inguine venae.
Lucret. l. 4.
Conjicito humorem collectum in Corpora quaeque.
and look to it in time, lest it proves too troublesome to deal with, when it
has once seized you.

Si non prima novis conturbes vulvera plagis,
Lucret. l. 4.
Volgivagaque vagus venere ante recentia cures.
Unless you fancy every one you view, Mr. Creech.

Revel in Love, and cure old Wounds by new.
I was once wounded with a vehement Displeasure, and withal, more just than
vehement; I might peradventure have lost my self in it, if I had merely trusted
to my own Strength. Having need of a powerful Diversion to disengage me, by
amorous Art and Study, wherein I was assisted by my Youth, I found one out:
Love relieved and rescued me from the evil wherein Friendship had engaged me.
It Is in every thing else the same; a violent Imagination has seized me, I find
it a nearer way to change, than to subdue it: I depute, if not one contrary,
yet another at least in its place. Variation does always relieve, dissolve, and
dissipate; if I am not able to contend with it, I escape from it; and in
avoiding it slip out of the way, and make my doubles: shifting of Place,
Business, and Company, I secure my self in the crowd of other Thoughts and
Fancies, where it loses my trace, and I escape. After the same manner does
Nature proceed, by the benefit of Inconstancy; Time the Physician of our
Passions.
for the time she has given us for the sovereign Physician of our Passions,
does chiefly work by that, that supplying our Imaginations with other, and new
Affairs, it un-nerves, and dissolves the first apprehension, how strong soever.
A wise man sees his Friend little less dying at the end of five and twenty
years, than the first year, and according to Epicurus, no less at all; for he
did not attribute any alleviation of Afflictions, neither to the foresight of
the man, or the Antiquity of the Evils themselves. But so many other thoughts
traverse the first, that it languishes and tires at last. Alcibiades, to divert
the Inclination of common Rumors, cut off the Ears and Tail of his beautiful
Dog, and turned him out into the public place, to the end, that giving the
People this occasion to prate, they might let his other Actions alone. I have
also seen, for this same end of diverting the Opinions and Conjectures of the
People, and to stop their Mouths, some Women conceal their real Affections by
those that were only counterfeit, and put on to blind men's Eyes; but some of
them withal, who in counterfeiting have suffered themselves to be caught
indeed, and who have quitted the true and original Affection, for the feigned:
and by them have found, that they who find their Affections well placed are
Fools to consent to this disguise. The favorable and public reception being
only reserved for this pretended Servant, a man may conclude him a Fellow of
very little address, and less Wit, if he does not in the end put himself into
your place, and you into his; this is properly to cut out, and make up a Shoe
for another to draw on. A little thing will turn and divert us; because a
little thing holds us. We do not much consider Subjects in gross, and single in
themselves; but they are little and superficial Circumstances that wound us,
and the outward useless rinds that pill off those Subjects.

Folliculos ut nunc teretes aestate cicadae Lucret. l. 5.

Linquunt. --
Such as the terous husks, or shells we find
In Summer, Grasshoppers do leave behind.
Even Plutarch himself laments his Daughter for the little apish tricks of her
Infancy. The remembrance of a Farewell, of the particular grace of an Action, of
a last recommendation afflicts us. The sight of Caesar's Robe troubled all
Rome, which was more than his death had done. Even the sound of Names ringing
in our ears, as, my poor Master, my faithful Friend; Alas, my dear Father, or,
my sweet Daughter, afflict us. When these Repetitions torment me, and that I
examine it a little nearer, I find it is no other but a Grammatical complaint; I
am only wounded with the word and tone, as the Exclamations of Preachers do
very often work more upon their Auditory than their Reasons, and as the pitiful
eyes of a Beast killed for Service, without my weighing, or penetrating in the
interim into the true and real essence of my Subject.

His se stimulis dolor ipse lacessit. Lucan. l. 2.

With these incitements grief it self provokes.
These are the foundations of our mourning. The obstinacy of my Stone to all
remedies, especially those in my Bladder, has sometimes thrown me into so long
suppressions of Urine for three or four days together, and so near death, that
it had been folly to have hoped to evade it, and it was much rather to have
been desired, considering the miseries I endure in those: cruel Fits. Criminals
yards tied up to stop their Urine.
Oh that the good Emperor, who caused Criminals to be tied that they might dye
for want of pissing, was a great Master in the* Hangman's Science! Finding my
self in this condition, I considered by how many light causes and objects
Imagination nourished in me the regret of Life; and of what Atoms the weight
and difficulty of this dislodging was composed in my Soul, and to how many idle
and frivolous thoughts we give way in so great an Affair. A Dog, a Horse, a
Book, a Glass, and what not? were considered in my loss. To others, their
ambitious hopes, their money, their knowledge, not less foolish Considerations
in my opinion than mine. I look upon Death carelessly, when I look upon it
universally as the end of Life. I insult over it in gross; but in retail it
domineers over me. The Tears of a Footman, the disposing of my Clothes, the
touch of a friendly hand, which is a common Consolation, discourages and
entenerates me. So do the Complaints in Tragedies infect our Souls with Grief,
and the Regrets of Dido and Ariadne, impassionate even those who believe them
not in Virgil and Catullus. It Is a simptom of an obstinate and obdurate Nature,
to be sensible of no emotion; as it is reported for a Miracle of Polemon; who
not so much as altered his Countenance at the biting of a mad-Dog, who tore
away the Calf of his Leg. And no Wisdom proceeds so far, as to conceive so
lively and entire a cause of Sorrow by Judgment, that it does not suffer an
increase by presence, where the Eyes and Ears have their share; parts that are
not to be moved but by vain accidents. Is it reason, that even the Arts
themselves should make an advantage of our natural brutality and weakness? An
Orator, says Rhetoric, in the farce of his pleading, shall be moved with the
sound of his own Voice and feigned Emotions, and suffer himself to be imposed
upon by the passion he represents; he will imprint in himself a true and real
Grief, by means of the part he plays, to transmit it to the Audience, who are
yet less concerned than he: as they do, who are hired at Funerals to assist in
the ceremony of Sorrow, who fell their Tears and Mourning by weight and
measure. For although they act in a borrowed Form, nevertheless by habituating
themselves, and settling their Countenances to the occasion, it is most certain,
they often are really affected with a true and real Sorrow. I was one, amongst
several other of his Friends, who conveyed the Body of Monsieur de Grammont to
Soissons, from the siege of la Fere, where he was slain; I observed that in all
places we passed through, we met with sorrowful Countenances occasioned by the
mere solemn pomp of our Convoy, for the Name of the Defunct was not there so
much as known. Quintillian reports, to have seen Comedians so deeply engaged in
a Mourning part, that they could not give over weeping when they came home, and
who, having taken upon them to stir up Passion in another, have themselves
espoused it to that degree, as to find themselves infected with it, not only to
Tears, but moreover with Paleness, and the comportment of men really
overwhelmed with Grief. In a Country near our Mountains, the Women play
Priest Martin, that is to say, both the Priest and the Clerk, for as they
augment the regret of the deceased Husband, by the remembrance of the good and
agreeable Qualities he was master of; they also at the same time make a
register of, and publish his imperfections; as if of themselves to enter into
some compensation, and so divert themselves from compassion to disdain; and yet
with much better grace, than we, who when we lose an old Acquaintance, strive
to give him new and false praises, and to make him quite another thing when we
have lost sight of him, than he appeared to us when we did see him: as if
regret was an instructive thing, or that tears, by washing our Understandings,
cleared them. For my part, I henceforth renounce all favorable testimonies men
would give of me, not because I shall not be worthy of them, but because I
shall be dead. Whoever shall ask a man, what Interest have you in this Siege?
the interest of Example, he will say, and of the common obedience to my Prince:
I pretend to no profit by it; and for glory, I know how small a part can
reflect upon such a private man as I: I have here neither passion nor quarrel.
And yet you shall see him the next day quite another man, chasing, and red with
fury, ranged in Battle for the Assault; it is the glittering of so much Steel,
the fire and noise of our Canon and Drums, that have infused this new Rancour
and Fury into his Veins. A frivolous Cause you will say, how a Cause? There
needs none to agitate the mind; a mere whimsie without body and without subject
will rule and sway it. Let me think of building Castles in Spain, my
imagination suggests to me Conveniences and Pleasures with which my Soul is
really delighted and pleased. How often do we torment our Mind with Anger or
Sorrow by such shadows, and engage our selves in fantastic Passions that alter
both the Soul and Body? What astonished, fleering, and confused Grimaces does
this raving put our Faces into! What sallies and agitation both of Members and
Voices does it inspire us with? Does it not seem that this individual man has
false Visions from the crowd of others with whom he has to do, or, that he is
possessed with some internal Demon that persecutes him? Enquire of your self,
where is the object of this Mutation? Is there any thing but us in Nature, but
subsisting nullity, over which it has power? Cambyses, for having dreamt that
his Brother should be one day King of Persia, put him to death: a beloved
Brother, and one in whom he had always confided. Aristodemus, King of the
Messenians, killed himself out of a fancy of ill Omen, from I know not what
howling of his Dogs; and King Midas did as much upon the account of some
foolish dream he had dreamed. It Is to prize Life at its just value, to abandon
it for a dream; and yet here the Soul triumphs over the miseries and weakness
of the Body, and truly in that it is exposed to all offenses and alterations,
it has reason to speak after this manner; Prop. lib. 3. Eleg. 3.
O prima infoelix fingenti Terra Prometheo!
Ille parum cauti pectori egit opus.
Corpora disponens, mentem non vidit in art,
Recta Animi primum debuit esse via.
Oh, 'twas for man a most unhappy Day,
When rash Prometheus formed him out of Clay!
In his attempt the ambitious Architect
Did indiscreetly the main thing neglect.
In framing Bodies, he had not the Art
To form the Mind, which is the chiefest part.


CHAP. V. Upon some Verses of Virgil.
BY how much profitable Thoughts are more full and solid, by so much are they
also more cumbersome and heavy. Vice, Death, Poverty, Diseases, are grave and
grievous Subjects. A man must have his Soul instructed in the means to sustain
and to contend with Evils, and in the rules of living and believing well; and
often rouse it up, and exercise it in this noble study. But in an ordinary
Soul, it must be by intervals, and with Moderation; it will otherwise grow
besotted if continually intent upon it. I found it necessary when I was young,
to put my self in mind, and to solicit my self to keep me to my Duty; Gayety
and Health do not, they say, so well agree with those grave and serious
Meditations: I am at present in another Condition. The Indispositions of Age do
but too much put me in mind, and preach to me. From the excess of spriteliness,
I am fallen into that of Severity; which is much more troublesome. And for that
reason, I now suffer my self on purpose, a little to run into disorder; and
sometimes busy my Mind in wanton and youthful Thoughts, wherewith it diverts
it self. I am of late but too reserved, too heavy, and too ripe; my Age does
every day read to me new Lectures of Coldness and Temperance. This Body of mine
avoids Disorder, and dreads it; it is now my Body's turn to guide my Mind
toward Reformation; it governs in turn, and more rudely and imperiously than
the other; it lets me not an hour alone, sleeping nor waking: but is always
preaching to me, Death, Patience, and Repentance. I now defend my self from
Temperance, as I have formerly done from Pleasure; it draws me too much back,
and even to Stupidity. Now I will be Master of my self to all intents and
purposes. Wisdom has its excess, and has no less need of Moderation than Folly.
Therefore, lest I should wither, dry up, and overcharge my self with Prudence,
in the intervals and truces my Infirmities allow me, Ovid. Trist. l. 4. El. 1.
Men's intenta suis ne siet usque malis.
That my Mind may not eternally be bent
And fixed upon Subjects discontent.
I gently decline it, and turn away my Eyes from the stormy and frowning Sky I
have before me; which, thanks be to God, I consider without Fear, but not
without Meditation and Debate. And amuse my self in the remembrance of my
better years: Petron. Arbiter.
-- Animus quod perdidit, optat
Atque in praeterita se totus imagine versat.
The Mind what it has lost, wishes to have,
And on things past eternally does rave.
Let Infancy look forward, and Age backward; Is not this the signification of
Janus his double Face? Let Years hale me along if they will, but it shall be
backward: As long as my Eyes can discern the pleasant Season expired, I shall
now and then turn them that way. Though it escape from my Blood and Veins, I
shall not however root the Image of it out of my Memory.

-- hoc est, Mart. l. 10. Ep. 23.

Vivere bis, Vita posse priore fui.
It Is to live twice to him who can obtain
Of thought to enjoy his former Life again.
Plato ordains, that old men should be present at the Exercises, Dances, and
Sports of young People, that they may rejoice in others, for the Activity and
Beauty of Body, which is no more in themselves; and call to mind the Grace and
Comeliness of that flourishing Age: And will, that in these Recreations, the
Honor of the prize should be given to that young man who has most diverted the
Company. I was formerly wont to mark cloudy and gloomy days, for extraordinary;
those are now my ordinary ones, the extraordinary are the clear and bright, I
am ready to leap out of my Skin for Joy, as for an unwonted favor, when
nothing ails me. Let me tickle my self presently after, I cannot force a poor
smile from this wretched Body of mine. I am only merry in conceit, by artifice
to divert the melancholy of Age; but doubtless it requires another Remedy ^han
the Efficacy of a Dream. A weak contest of Art against Nature. It Is great folly
to lengthen and anticipate humane Inconveniences, as every one does. I had
rather be a less while old, than to be old before I am really so. I seize on
even the least occcasions of Pleasure I can meet; I know very well, by
hearsay, several sorts of prudent Pleasures, that are effectually so, and
glorious to boot: but Opinion has not power enough over me, to give me an
Appetite to them. I covet not so much to have them magnanimous, magnifick, and
lofty; as I do to have them sweet, facile, and ready. A Natura discedimus,
Populo nos damus, nullius rei bono auctori. We depart from Nature, and give our
selves to the People who understand nothing. My Philosophy is in Action, in
natural and present Practice, very little in Fancy. What if I have a Mind to
play at Cob-nut, or to whip a Top?

Ennius.
Non ponebat enim Rumores ante Salutem.
-- He was too wise
Idle Reports before his Health to prize.
Pleasure is a Quality of very little Ambition, it thinks it self rich enough
of it self, without any addition of Repute; and is best pleased where most
obscure. A young man should be whipped, who pretends to a Palate in Wine and
Sawces; there was nothing which at that Age I less valued or knew; now I begin
to learn. I am very much ashamed on it; but what should I do? I am more ashamed
and vexed at the Occasions that put me upon it. It Is for us to dote and trifle
away the time, and for Young Men to stand upon their Reputation, and the
Punctilio's of Honor; they are going toward the World, and the Worlds
Opinion, we are retiring from it. Sibi Arma, Cicero de Senec.
sibi Equos, sibi Hastas, sibi Clavam, sibi Pilam, sibi Nationes, and Cursus
habent: nobis senibus, ex lusionibus multis, talos relinquant and tesseras. Let
them reserve to themselves, Arms, Horses, Spears, Clubs, Tennis, Swimming, and
Races; and of their numerous Sports and Exercises, leave to us old Men the
diversion of Cards and Dice. The Laws themselves send us home to our Lodgings.
I can do no less in favor of this wretched Condition, into which my Age has
thrown me, than furnish it with Toys to play withal, as they do Children, and
we also become such. Both Wisdom and Folly will have enough to do to support
and relieve me by alternate Offices in this Calamity of Age.

Misce stultitiam consiliis brevem. Hora. l. 4. Ode 12.

Short follies mix with Counsels wise.
I accordingly avoid the lightest Punctures, and those that formerly would not
have rippled the Skin, do now pierce me through and through: My habit of Body
is now so naturally declining to Evil: In fragili corpore odiosa omnis offensio
est. To a decrepid Body all offense is hateful. Mensque pati durum sustinet
aegra nihil. Ovid de Ponto.

And a sick Mind nothing that is hard endures.
I have ever been tender in matters of offense, I am much more tender now, and
open throughout. Ovid de Tris.
Et minime vires frangere quassa valent.
And little force will break what is cracked before.
My Judgment restrains me from kicking against, and murmuring at the
inconveniences that Nature orders me to endure, but it does not take away my
Feeling: I, who have no other thing in my prospect but to live and be merry,
would run from one end of the World to the other to seek out one good Year of
pleasant and jocund Tranquillity. A melancholic and dull Tranquillity, is, I
confess, enough for me, but it benumns, stupifies, and besots me, I am not
contented with it: If there be any Person, any knot of good Company in Country
or City, in France, or elsewhere, Resident, or in Motion, who can like my
Humor, and whose Humors I can like, let them but whistle, and I will run to
furnish them with Essays of Flesh and Bone. Seeing it is the privilege of the
Mind to rescue it self from old Age* I advise mine to it with all the power I
have, let it in the interim continue green, and flourish if it can like
Mistletoe upon a dead Tree: But I fear it is a Traitor, it has contracted so
strict a Fraternity with the Body, that it leaves me at every turn to follow
that in its need. I wheedle and deal with it apart in vain; I try to much
purpose to wean it from this Correspondence; to much effect quote to it Seneca
and Catullus, and represent to it beautiful Ladies, and Royal Masks; if its
Companion have the Stone, it seems to have it too. Even the Faculties that are
most peculiarly and properly its own, cannot then perform their Functions, but
manifestly appear stupefied and asleep; there is no spriteliness in its
Productions, if there be not at the same time an equal Proportion in the Body
too. Our Masters are too blame, that in searching out the causes of the
extraordinary emotions of the Soul, besides attributing it to a Divine Ecstasy,
Love, Martial Fierceness, Poesy, and Wine, they have not also attributed a
part to Health. A boiling, vigorous, full, and lazy Health, such as formerly
the verdure of Youth and security by fits supplied me withal; that Fire of
Spriteliness and Gayety darts into the Mind flashes that are lively and bright
beyond our natural Light, and with the most working, if not the most desparate
Enthusiasms: It is then no wonder if a contrary Estate stupifie and clog my
Spirit, and produce a contrary Effect. Ad nullum consurgit opus cum corpore
languet. Corn. Gallus.

For when the Body languishing does lie,
I to no Office can my self apply.
And yet would have me obliged to it, for giving much less consent to this
Stupidity than other men of my Age ordinarily do. Let us at least whilst we
have Truce, drive away incommodities and difficulties from our Commerce. Hor.
Ep. 13.
Dum licet obducta solvatur front senectus:
Sir Thomas Hawkins.
Whilst Strength is fresh, and us it well becoms,
Let Us old Age banish which the Brow benums.
Tetrica sunt amaenanda jocularibus. Syd. Apollin. l. 1.
Sour things are to be sweetened with those that are pleasant. I love a gay and
civil Wisdom, and fly from all sourness and austerity of Manners, all grumness
of Faction being suspected to me. I am very much of Plato's Opinion, who says,
That facile or difficile Humors are a great Prejudice to the good or ill
Disposition of the Mind. Socrates had a constant Countenance, but withal,
serene and smiling; not sourely constant, like the elder Crassus, that never
any one saw Laugh. Virtue is a pleasant and gay Quality. I know very well that
few will quarrel with the liberty of my Writings, who have not more to quarrel
with in the License of their own Thoughts: I conform my self well enough to
their Inclinations, but I offend their Eyes. It Is a pretty Humor to strain the
Writings of Plato, to wrest his pretended Negotiation with Phaedo, Dion,
Stella, and Archeanassa. Non pudeat dicere, quod non pudeat sentire. Let us not
be ashamed to speak, what we are not ashamed to think. I hate a froward and
pensive Spirit, that slips over all the Pleasures of Life, and seizes and feeds
upon Misfortunes; like Flies, that cannot stick to a sleek and polished Body,
but fix and repose themselves upon craggy and rough Places; and like
Cuppingglasses, that only suck and attract the worst Blood. As to the rest, I
have enjoined my self to dare to say all that I dare to do, and even thoughts
that are not to be published displease me; the worst of my Actions and
Qualities do not appear to me so foul, as I find it foul and base not to dare
to own them. Every one is wary and discreet in Confession, but men ought to be
so in Action. The boldness of doing ill is in some sort recompensed and
restrained by the boldness of confessing it. Whoever will oblige himself to
tell all, should oblige himself to do nothing that he must be forced to
conceal. I wish that this excessive License of mine may draw men to freedom,
above these timorous and mincing pretended virtues sprung from our
imperfections; and that at the expense of my immoderation, I may reduce them to
reason. A man must see and study his Vice to correct it; they who conceal it
from others, commonly conceal it from themselves; and do not think they sin
close enough, if they themselves see it. They withdraw and disguise them from
their own Consciences. Quare vitia sua nemo confitetur? Seneca, Epist. 53.
Quia etiam nunc in illis est, somnium narrare vigilantis est. Why does no man
confess his Vices? Because he is yet in them; it is for a waking man to tell his
dream. The diseases of the Body explain themselves in increasing. We find that
to be the Gout, which we called a Rheum or a Strain. The diseases of the Soul,
the greater they are, keep themselves the more obscure; and the most sick are
the least sensible. Therefore it is, that with an unrelenting hand, they must
often in the day be taken to task, opened, and torn from the hollow of the
heart. As in doing well, so in doing ill, the mere confession is sometimes
satisfaction. Is there any deformity in doing amiss that can excuse us from
confessing our selves? It is so great a pain to me to dissemble, that I evade
the trust of another Secrets, wanting the heart to disavow my knowledge. I can
conceal it, but deny it I cannot, without the greatest trouble and violence to
my self imaginable. To be very secret, a man must be so by nature, not by
obligation. It Is little worth in the service of a Prince to be secret, if a man
be not a Liar to boot. If he who asked Thales the Milesian, whether he ought
solemnly to deny that he had committed uncleanness, had applied himself to me,
I should have told him, that he ought not to do it; Lying worse than the sin of
uncleanness.
for I look upon Lying as a worse fault than the other. Thales advised him
quite contrary, bidding him swear to secure the greater fault by the less:
nevertheless this counsel was not so much an election as a multiplication of
Vice. Upon which, let us say this by the bye, that we deal sincerely and well
with a man of Conscience, when we propose to him some difficulty in
counterpoise of the Vice; but when we shut him up betwixt two Vices, he is put
to a hard choice: as Origin was, either to Idolatrize, or to suffer himself to
be carnally abused by a great Ethiopian Slave was brought to him. He submitted
to the first condition, and vitiously, says one. And yet those Women of our
times are not to be disliked, who, according to their error, protest, they had
rather burden their Consciences with ten men than one Mass. If it be
indiscretion so to publish their Errors, yet there is no great danger that it
pass into Example and Custom. For Aristo said, that the winds men most feared,
were those that laid them open; we must tuck up this ridiculous rag that hides
our manners: they send their Consciences to the Stews, and keep a starched
Countenance: Even Traitors and Assassins espouse the Laws of Ceremony, and
there fix their Duty; so that neither can Injustice complain of incivility, nor
Malice of indiscretion. It Is pity but an ill man should be a Fool to boot, and
that Decency should palliate his Vice. This rough-cast only appertains to a
good and sound Wall, that deserves to be preserved and whited. In favor of the
Hugonots, Auricular Confession.
who condemn our Auricular and private Confession, I confess my self in
public, religiously and purely. St. Augustine, Origin, and Hippocrates, have
published the Errors of their Opinions; and I moreover of my Manners. I am
greedy of making my self known, and I care not to how many, provided it be
truly; or to say better, I hunger for nothing, but I mortally hate to be
mistaken by those who come to learn my Name. He that does all things for Honor
and Glory, what can he think to gain by showing himself to the World in a
Vizor; and by concealing his true Being from the People? Commend a crooked
Fellow for his Stature, he has reason to take it for an affront: If you are a
Coward, and that men commend you for your Valor, is it of you that they speak?
They take you for another. I should like him as well, who glorifies himself in
the Complements and Congees are made him, as if he were Master of the Company,
when he is one of the most inferior of the Train. Archelaus, King of
Macedonia, walking along the Street, some body threw Water on his Head; which
they who were with him, said he ought to punish: I, but said he, whoever it
was, he did not throw the Water upon me, but upon him who he took me to be.
Socrates being told that People spoke ill of him, Not at all, said he, there is
nothing in me of what they say. For my part, if any one should commend me for a
good Pilot, for being very modest, or very chaste, I should owe him no Thanks.
And also, whoever ever should call me Traitor, Robber, or Drunkard, I should be
as little concerned. They who do not rightly know themselves, may feed
themselves with false Approbations; not I, who see my self, and who examine my
self even to my very Bowels, and who very well know what is my due. I am
content to be less commended, provided I am better known. I may be reputed a
wise man in such a sort of wisdom as I take to be folly. I am vexed that my
Essays only serve the Ladies for a common moveable, a Book to lie in the
Parlour Window; this Chapter shall prefer me to the Closet; I love to traffic
with them a little in private; public conversation is without favor, and
without favor. In farewels, we above ordinary heat our Affections toward the
things we take leave of. I take my last leave of the pleasures of this World,
these are our last embraces. But to return to my Subject: What he rendered the
act of Generation, an act so natural, so necessary, and so fit for men, a thing
not to be spoken of without blushing; and to be excluded from all serious and
regular Discourses? We boldly pronounce kill, rob, betray, but the other we
dare only to mutter betwixt the Teeth. Is it to say, that the less we say in
Words, we may pay it so much the more with thinking? For it is certain, that
the Words least in use, most seldom writ, and best kept in, are the best, and
most generally known. No Age, no Manners are ignorant of them, nay, more than
the Word bread. They imprint themselves in every one, without being expressed,
without Voice, and without Figure. And the Sex that most practices it, is bound
to say least of it. It Is an act that we have placed in the Free-franchise of
Silence, from whence to take it is a Crime. We are not to accuse and judge it;
neither dare we reprehend it but by Periphrasis, and in Picture. A great favor
to a Criminal, to be so execrable, that Justice thinks it unjust to touch and
see him; free, and safe by the benefit of the severity of his Condemnation. Is
it not here as in matter of Books, that sell better, and become more public
for being suppressed? For my part, I will take Aristotle at his word, who says,
Bashfulness an Ornament in young People.
that Bashfulness is an Ornament to Youth, but a Reproach to old Age. These
Verses are preached in the ancient School, a School that I much more adhere to
than the Modern; the Virtues of it appear to me to be greater, and the Vices
less.

Plutarch.
Ceux qui par trop fuyant Venus estrivent,
Faillent autant que ceux qui trop la suivent.
They err as much Venus too much forbear,
As they who in her Rites too frequent are.
Lucret.
Tu Dea, tu rerum naturam sola gubernas,
Nec sine te quicquam dias in luminis oras
Exoritur, neque fit laetum, nec amabile quicquam.
Mr. Creech.
Thou, Nature's powerful Ruler, without whom
Nothing that is lovely, nothing gay can come
From darksome Chaos deep, and ugly Womb.
I know not who could set Pallas and the Muses at variance with Venus, and make
them cold toward Love; but I see no Deities so well met, or that are more
indebted to one another. Who will deprive the Muses of amorous Imaginations,
will rob them of the best Entertainment they have, and of the noblest matter of
their Work: and who will make Love lose the Communication and Service of Poesi,
will disarm him of his best Arms. By this means they charge the God of
Familiarity and good Will, and the protecting Goddesses of Humanity and
Justice, with the Vice of Ingratitude and Unthankfulness. I have not been so
long casheer'd from the State and Service of this God, that my Memory is not
still perfect in his Force and Power. -- agnosco veteris vestigia flammae.
Aeneid. l. 4.

Of my old flame some Footsteps yet remain.
There are yet some remains of heat and emotion after the Fever; Nec mihi
deficiat calor hic, hyemantibus Annis.
Of Youth though I am past the burning rage,
I have some heat yet in my Winter Age.
Withered and drooping as I am, I feel yet some remains of that past ardour.
Qual l'atto Aegeo per che Aquilone o Noto Tasso, Gant. 12.

Cessi, che tutto prima il vuolse, and scosse,
Non S'accheta ci pero, ma'l son^ e'l moto,
Ritien de l'onde anco agitate e gross.
Mr. Fairfax.
As Aegean Seas, when storms be calmed again,
That roul'd their tumbling Waves with troublous blasts,
Do yet of Tempests passed, some shows retain,
And here and there their swelling billows cast.
But for what I understand of it, the force and power of this God are more
lively and animating in the Picture of Poesy than in their own Essence. Juven.
Sat. 6.
Et versus digitos habet.
For there is charming harmony in Verse.
It has, I know not what kind of air more amorous than Love it self; Venus is
not so beautiful, naked, alive, and panting, as she is here in Virgil. Virgil,
Aeneid. lib. 8.
Dixerat, and niveis, hinc atque hinc Diva lacertis
Cunctantem amplexu molli fovet: Ille repent
Accepit solitam flammam, notusque medullas
Intravit calor, and labefacta per ossa cucurrit.
Non secus, atque olim tonitru cum rupta corusco
Ignea rima micans percurrit limine nimbos.
and paulo post. -- ea verba loquutus,
Optatos dedit amplexus, placidumque petivit
Conjugis infusus gremio per membra soporem.
Mr. Ogilby.
The Goddess here round in her snowy arms
In soft embraces him consulting warms;
Straight he takes fire, and through his marrow came
Accustomed heat, which did his blood inflame:
So from a fiery Breach erupted flies,
Shining with flame, bright Thunder from the Skies.
and a little after. -- This having said,
After a sweet Embrace he takes his rest,
Reposing on the beauteous Goddess Breast.
All that I find fault with in considering it, is, that he has represented her
a little too Passionate for a married Venus. In this discreet kind of coupling,
the Appetite is not usually so wanton, but more grave and dull. Love hates that
People should hold of any but herself, and goes but faintly to work in
Familiarities derived from any other title, as Marriage is. The Alliance and
Dowry do therein sway by Reason as much or more than Grace and Beauty. Men do
not marry for themselves, though they deny it, they marry as much or more for
their Posterity and Family. The Custom and Interest of Marriage concerns our
Race much more than us; and therefore it is, that I like to have a Match
carried on by a third hand, rather than a Man's own, and by another Man's
liking than that of the Party himself; and how much is all this opposite to
contracts of Love? And also it is a kind of Incest to employ in this venerable
and sacred Alliance, the heat and extravagance of amorous License, as I think I
have said elsewhere. A man, says Ariosto, must approach his Wife with Prudence
and Modesty, lest in dealing too lasciviously with her, the extreme Pleasure
make her exceed the bounds of Reason. What he says upon the account of
Conscience, the Physicians say upon the account of Health: That a Pleasure
excessively lascivious, voluptuous, and frequent, makes the Seed too hot, and
hinders Conception: It Is said on the contrary, that to a languishing
Congression, as that naturally is, to supply it with a due and fruitful Heat,
a man must do it but seldom, and by notable Intermissions; Virg. Georg. l. 3.
Quod rapiat sitiens venerem interiusque recondat. I see no marriages where the
conjugal Intelligence sooner fails, than those that we contract upon the
account of Beauty and amorous Desires; there should be more solid and constant
foundation, and they should proceed with greater Circumspection; this furious
Ardour is worth nothing. They who think they honor marriage by joining Love to
it, do, methinks, like those, who to favor Virtue, hold, that Nobility is
nothing else but Virtue; they are indeed things that have some relation to one
another, but there is a great deal of difference; we should not so mix their
Names and Titles, it is a wrong to them both, so to confound them. Nobility is a
brave Quality, and with good reason introduced; but forasmuch as it is a Quality
depending upon others, and may happen in a vicious Person, it is in estimate
infinitely below Virtue. It Is a Virtue, if it be one, that is artificial and
apparent, depending upon Time and Fortune; various in form, according to the
Countries, Living, and Mortal; without Birth, as the River Nile; genealogical
and common, drawn by Consequence, and a very weak one. Knowledge, Strength,
Bounty, Beauty, Riches, and all other Qualities, fall into Communication and
Commerce, but this is consummated in it self, and of no use to the Service of
others. There was proposed to one of our Kings the choice of two Concurrents,
who both pretended to the same Command, of which the one was a Gentleman, the
other was not; he ordered, that without respect to Quality, they should choose
him who had the most merit; but where the worth of the Competitors should
appear to be entirely equal, they should have respect to Birth: this was justly
to give it its due rank. A Youngman unknown, coming to Antigonus to make suit
for his Fathers Command, a valiant Man, but lately dead: Friend, said he, in
such preferments as those, I have not so much regard to the Nobility of my
Soldiers as their Prowess: And indeed it ought not to go as it did with the
Officers of the Kings of Sparta, Trumpeters, Fiddlers, Cooks, the Children of
whom always succeeded in their Places, how ignorant soever, and were preferred
before the most experimented in the Trade. They of Callicut make a sort of
Nobles above humane. They are interdicted marriage, and all but warlike
Employments They may have Concubines their fill, and the Women as many
Ruffians, without being jealous of one another; but it is a capital and
irremissible Crime to couple with a Person of meaner Condition than themselves,
and they think themselves polluted, if they have but touched one in walking
along; and supposing their Nobility to be marvellously injured and interested
in it, kill such as only approach a little too near them: insomuch that the
ignoble are obliged to cry as they go, like the Gundeleers of Venice, at the
turnings of Streets, for fear of justling, and the Nobles command them to step
aside to what part they please: by which means the last avoid what they repute
a perpetual Ignominy, and the other a certain Death. No time, no favor of the
Prince, no Office, or Virtue, or Riches, can ever prevail to make a Plebean
become noble. To which this Custom is assisting, that marriages are interdicted
betwixt several Trades; neither is the Daughter of a Shoemaker permitted to
marry with a Carpenter; and the Parents are obliged to train up their Children
precisely in their own Callings, and not put them to any other Trade; by which
means the distinction and continuation of their Fortune is maintained. A good
marriage, if it be really so, rejects the Company and Conditions of Love, and
tries to represent those of Friendship. It Is a sweet Society of Life, full of
Constancy, Trust, and an infinite number of useful and solid Offices and
mutual Obligations; of which any Woman that has a right taste Optato quam
junxit lumine taedae,
Whose Hymeneal Torch shines bright,
Kindled by a whisked light.
would be loath to serve her Husband in quality of a Mistress. If they be lodged
in his affection as a Wife, she is more honorably and securely placed. When he
pretends to be in love with another, and works all he can to obtain his desire,
let any one but then ask him, on which he had rather a Disgrace should fall,
his Wife or his Mistress, which of their misforunes would most afflict him, and
to which of them he wishes the most Grandeur; these Questions are out of
dispute in a sound marriage: and that so few are observed to be happy, is a
token of its Price and Value. If well formed, and rightly taken, it is the best
of all humane Societies. We cannot live without it, and yet we do nothing but
decry it. It happens, as with Cages, the Birds without despair to get in, and
those within despair of getting out. Socrates, being asked whether it was more
commodious to take a Wife, or not, Let a Man take which course he will, said
he, he will be sure to repent. It Is a Contract to which the common Saying, Homo
homini, aut Deus, aut Lupus, Erasm. Ad^g.
Man to Man is either a God or a Wolf, may very fitly be applied. There must be
a Concurrence of many Qualities to the erecting it. It is found now a days more
convenient for innocent and Plebean Souls, where Delights, Curiosity, and
Idleness do not so much disturb it; but extravagant Homours, such as mine, that
hate all sorts of Obligation and Restraint, are not proper for it.

Gallus. Ele. 1.
Et mihi dulce magis resoluto vivere collo.
For Liberty to me is far more sweet
Than all the Pleasures of the Nuptial Sheet.
Might I have had my own Will, I would not have married Wisdom her self, if she
would have had me. But it is to much purpose to evade it, the common custom and
usance of Life will have it so. The most of my Actions are guided by Example,
not by Choice. And yet I did not go to it of my own voluntary Motion, I was led
and drawn to it by strange and accidental Occasions. For not only things that
are incommodious in themselves, but also nothing so ugly, vicious, and to be
avoided, that may not be rendered acceptable by some Condition or Accident; so
unsteady and vain is all humane Resolution. And I was persuaded to it, when
worse prepared, and more backward than I am at present, that I have tried what
it is. And as great a Libertine as I am taken to be, I have in truth more
strictly observed the Laws of Marriage, than I either promised, or expected.
It Is in vain to kick when a Man has once put on his Fetters. A man must
prudently manage his Liberty; but having once submitted to Obligation, he must
confine himself within the Laws of common Duty, at least, do what he can
toward it. They who engage in this Contract, with a Design to carry themselves
in it with hatred and contempt, do an unjust and inconvenient thing; and the
fine Rule that I hear pass from hand to hand amongst the Women, as a sacred
Oracle, Sers ton mary comme ton maistre,
Et t'en guard comme d'un traitre.
Serve thy Husband like a Waiter,
But guard thy self as from a Traitor.
which is to say, comport thy self toward him with a dessembled inimical, and
distrustful Reverence and Respect, (a style of War and Defiance) is equally
injurious and hard. I am too mild for such rugged Designs. To say the truth, I
am not arrived to that Perfection of cunning and gallantry of Wit, to confound
Reason with Justice, and to laugh at all Rule and Order that does not please my
Palate; because I hate Superstition, I do not presently run into the contrary
extreme of irreligion. If a man does not always perform his Duty, he ought at
least to love and acknowledge it, it is Treachery to marry without espousing.
Let us proceed further. Our Poet represents a Marriage happy in good
intelligence, wherein nevertheless there is not much Loyalty. Does he mean,
that it is not impossible but a Woman may give the reins to her own Passion,
and yield to the importunities of Love, and yet reserve some Duty toward
Marriage, and that it may be hurt without being totally broken? Such a serving
Man there may be, as may ride in his Masters Saddle, whom nevertheless he does
not hate. Beauty, Opportunity, and Destiny, (for Destiny has also a hand in it)
-- fatum est in partibus illis
Juven. Sat. 9.
Quas sinus abscondit; nam si tibi Sidera cessent,
Nil faciet longi mensura incognita Nervi.
have debauched her to a Stranger; though not so wholly peradventure, but that
she may have some remains of kindness for her Husband. They are two Designs,
that have several paths leading to them, without being confounded with one
another; and a Woman may yield to such a Man as she would by no means have
married, not only for the Condition of his Fortune, but the dislike of his
Person. Few men have made a Wife of a Mistress, that have not repented it. And
even in the other World, what an unhappy Life does Jupiter lead with his, whom
he had first enjoyed as a Mistress? It Is, as the Proverb is, to shite in the
Basket, and then to put it upon his Head. I have in my time seen Love
shamefully and dishonestly cured in a good Family by Marriage, the
Considerations are too much different. We love at once two things contrary in
themselves without any disturbance. Isocrates was wont to say, that the City of
Athens pleased as Ladies do that men court for Love; every one loved to come
thither to take a turn, and pass away his time; but no one liked it so well as
to espouse it, that is, to inhabit there, and to make it his constant
Residence. I have been vexed to see Husbands hate their Wives only because they
do them wrong. We should not however, methinks, love them the less for our
Faults; they should, at least upon the account of Repentance and Compassion, be
dearer to us. They are different ends, and yet in some sort compatible.
Marriage has Utility, Justice, Honor, and Constancy for its share; a flat, but
more universal Pleasure: Love founds it self wholly upon Pleasure, and indeed
has it more full, lively and stinging; a Pleasure inflamed by difficulty; there
must be in it sting and ardour: It Is no more Love, if without Darts and Fire.
The Bounty of Ladies is too profuse in marriage, and dulls the point of
Affection and Desire: To evade which inconvenience, do but observe what pains
Lycurgus and Plato take in their Laws. Women are not to blame at all, when they
refuse the Rules of Life that are introduced into the World; forasmuch as the
Men made them without their Consent. There is naturally Contention and Brawling
betwixt them and us; and the strictest Friendship we have with them, is yet
mixed with Tumult and Tempest. In the Opinion of our Author, we deal
inconsiderately with them in this. After we have discovered, that they are
without comparison more able and ardent in the Effects of Love than we, and
that the old Priest has testified so much, who had been one while a Man, and
then a Woman: Ovid. Metam. lib. 3.
Venus huic erat utraque nota:
Tiresias must decide
Mr. Sandys.
The difference, who both Delights had tried.
and moreover, that we have learnt from their own Mouths, the proof that in
several Ages was made by an Emperor and an Empress of Rome, both famous for
Ability in that Affair: for he in one Night defloured ten Sarmatian Virgins
that were his Captives: but she had five and twenty bouts in one Night,
changing her Man according to her need and liking: Juvenal. Sat. 6.
-- adhuc ardens rigidae tentigine vulvae:
Et lassata Viris, nondum satiata recessit.
and that upon the difference which happened in Catalognia, wherein, a Wife
complaining of her Husbands too frequent addresses to her (not so much as I
conceive, that she was incommodated by it (for I believe no Miracles out of
Religion) as under this pretense to curtail and curb in this, which is the
fundamental act of Marriage, the Authority of Husbands over their Wives, and to
show that their Frowardness and Malignity go beyond the Nuptial Bed, and spurn
under foot even the Graces and sweets of Venus;) the Husband, a man really
brutish and unnatural, replied, that on fasting days he could not subsist with
less than ten courses. Whereupon came out that notable Sentence of the Queen of
Arragon* by which, after mature deliberation of her Counsel, this good Queen,
to give a Rule and Example to all succeeding Ages of the moderation required in
a just Marriage, set down six times a day as a Legitimate and Necessary stint;
surrendering and quitting a great deal of the needs and desires of her Sex, that
she might, she said, establish an easy, and consequently, a permanent and
immutable Method. Hereupon Doctors cry out, What the Devil must the female
Appetite and Concupiscence be, when their Reason, their Reformation and Virtue,
is taxed at such a rate? Considering the diverse Judgments of our Appetites; for
Solon, Patron of the Law-Schools, taxes us but at three a Month, that men may
not fail in point of Conjugal frequentation. After having, I say, believed, and
preached all this, we go and enjoin them Continency for their particular share,
and upon the extremest Penalties. There is no Passion so hard to contend with
as this, which we will have them only to resist; not simply as a Vice only, but
as an execrable Abomination, worse than Irreligion, and a Parricide; whilst we
at the same time go to it without Offense or Reproach: Even those Women amongst
us who have tried to do it, have sufficiently confessed what difficulty, or
rather impossibility, they have found by material Remedies, to subdue, weaken,
and oppose the Body. We, on the contrary, would have them Sound, Vigorous, in
good liking, high fed, and Chaste together, that is to say, both hot and cold;
for the Marriage, which we say is to keep them from burning, is but a small
Refreshment to them, as we order the matter: For if they take one whose
vigorous Age is hot and boiling, he will be proud that his Neighbors know it.
Mart. l. 12. Epig. 99.
Sit tandem pudor, aut eamus in jus,
Multis Mentula millibus redempta,
Non est haec tua, Basse, vendidisti.
Polemon the Philosopher was justly by his Wife brought in question for sowing
in a barren Field the Seed that was due to one that was fruitful. If on the
other side, they take a decayed Fellow, they are in a worse condition in
Marriage than either Maids or Widows. We think them well provided for, because
they have a man to lie withal, as the Romans concluded Clodia Laeta, a Vestal
Nun, violated, because Caligula had approached her, though it was affirmed he
did no more but approach her: but on the contrary, we by that increase their
Necessity, forasmuch as the touching and Company of any man whatever rouses
their desires, that in Solitude would be more quiet. And to the end, it is
likely, that they might render their Chastity more meritorious by this
Circumstance and Consideration; Boleslaus, and King his Wife, King and Queen
of Poland, Chastity vowed and kept on the Wedding day.
vowed it by mutual consent, being in Bed together, on their very Wedding day,
and kept their Vow in spite of all matrimonial Conveniences and Delights. We
train them up from their Infancy to the traffic of Love; their Grace,
Dressing, Knowledge, Language, and whole Instruction tend that way: Their
Governesses imprint nothing in them but the Idea of Love, if for nothing else
but by continually representing it to them, to make them disgust it. My
Daughter, the only Child I have, is now of an Age that forward young Women are
allowed to be married at; she is of a slow, thin, and tender Complexion, and
has accordingly been brought up by her Mother after a private and particular
manner, so that she but now begins to be weaned from her childish Simplicity.
She was one day reading before me in a French Book, where she happened to meet
the word Beech-Tree.
fouteau, the name of a Tree very well known; the Woman to whose Conduct she is
committed, stopped her short a little rudely, and made her skip over that
dangerous step; I let her alone, not to trouble their Rules, for I never
concern my self in that sort of Government. The Feminine Policy has a
mysterious proceeding, we must leave it to them; but if I am not mistaken, the
Commerce of twenty Lacquies could not in six Months time have so imprinted in
her Fancy the meaning, usage, and all the consequence of the sound of these
smutty Syllables, as this good old Woman did by Reprimand and Interdiction.
Horace, lib. 3. Ode 6.
Motus doceri gaudet Ionicos
Natura virgo, and frangitur artubus
Jam nunc, and incestos amores
De tenero meditatur ungui.
The Maid, for marriage ripe, much joys to learn
Sir Thomas Hawkins.
Ionick Dances, and can well discern,
With Art to feign, and quickly prove
The Pleasures of unlawful Love.
Let them but give themselves the rein a little, let them but enter into
liberty of Discourse, we are but Children to them in this Science: Hear them
but represent our Pursuits and Discourses, they will very well make you
understand that we bring them nothing they have not known before, and digested
without our help. Is it perhaps, as Plato says, that they have formerly been
debauched young Fellows? I happened one day to be in a Place where I could learn
some of their Talk without suspicion; I am sorry I cannot repeat it. By'rlady,
said I, it is time for us to go study the Phrases of Amadis, Boccace, and
Aretine, to be able to Discourse with them: We employ our time to much purpose
indeed, there is neither Word, Example, nor Step, they are not more perfect in
than our Books; it is a Discipline that springs with their Blood, Et mentem ipsa
Venus dedit. Virg. Georg. l. 3.

Venus her self has made them what they are.
which these good Instructers, Nature, Youth, and Health, are continually
inspiring them with, they need not learn, they breed it; Nec tantum niveo
gavisa est ulla columbo, Catullus.

Compar, vel si quid dicitur improbius,
Oscula mordenti semper decerpere rostro:
Quantum praecipue multivola est mulier.
Not more delighted is the milk-white Dove,
Or if there be a thing more prone to Love,
Still to be Billing with her mate, than is
Woman, with every man she meets to kiss.
So that if the natural Violence of their desire were not a little restrained
by Fear and Honor, which were wisely contrived for them, we should be all
shamed. All the motions in the World tend to this Conjunction; it is a matter
infused throughout: it is a Center to which all things tend. We yet see the
Edicts of the old and wise Rome, made for the service of Love, and the Precepts
of Socrates for the Instruction of Courtezans.

Nec non libelli Stoici, inter sericos
Jacere pulvillos amant. Horace, Ep. 8.

And Stoical Books, for all their gravity,
Amongst silk Cushions love to lie.
Zeno, amongst his Laws, did also regulate the divarications and motions in
getting a Maidenhead. Of what sense was the Philosopher Strato's Book of carnal
Conjunction? And what did Theophrastus treat of in those he entitled the one
the Lover, and the other, of Love? Of what Aristippus in his of ancient
Delights? What do the so long and lively Descriptions in Plato of the Loves of
his time pretend to? And the Book called the Lover, of Demetrius Phalerus? And
Clinias, that of getting Children, or of Weddings; and the other of the Master,
or the Lover? And that of Aristo of amorous Exercises? What those of Cleanthes,
one of Love, the other of the art of Loving? The amorous Dialogues of Spherus?
and the Fable of Jupiter and Juno, of Chrysippus, impudent beyond all
toleration? And his fifty so lascivious Epistles? I will let alone the Writings
of the Philosophers of the Epicurean Sect, protectrice of Voluptuousness and
Pleasure. Fifty Deities were in time past assigned to this Office: and there
has been a Nation found out, where, to assuage the Lust of those that came to
their Devotion, they had purposely Strumpets in their Temples for them to lie
withal; Whores kept in Temples for the use of those who came (...).
and it was an act of Ceremony to do that before they went to Prayers. Nimirum
propter continentiam incontinentia necessaria est, incendium ignibus
extinguitur. Doubtless Incontinency is necessary for Continency's sake: a
Conflagration is extinguished by fire. In the greatest part of the World, that
Member of our Body was deified. In the same Province, some flead off the Skin
to offer and consecrate a Piece, others offered and consecrated their Seed. In
another, the Young Men publicly cut through betwixt the Skin and the Flesh of
that part in several places, and thrust pieces of Wood into the Overtures as
long and thick as they would receive, and of those pieces of Wood afterward
made a fire for an Offering to their Gods, and were reputed neither Vigorous
nor Chaste, if by the force of that intolerable Pain they seemed to be any
thing dismayed. Elsewhere, the most Sacred Magistrate was reverenced and
acknowledged by that Member: and in several Ceremonies the Picture of it was
carried in pomp to the Honor of several Divinities. The Egyptian Ladies in
their Bacchanals carried every one one carved of Wood about their Necks,
exactly made great and heavy as every one was able to bear, besides one which
the Statue of their God represented, which in greatness surpassed all the rest
of his Body. The married Women near to the place where I live, make of their
Kerchiefs the Figure of one upon their Foreheads to glorify themselves in the
enjoyment they have of it; and coming to be Widows, they throw it behind, and
cover it with their Head-cloths. The most modest Matrons of Rome, thought it an
Honor to offer Flowers and Garlands to the God Priapus. And they made the
Virgins, at the time of their Espousals, sit upon his shameful Parts. And I
know not whether I have not in my time seen some air of like Devotion. What was
the meaning of that ridiculous thing our Forefathers wore before on their
Breeches, Codpices worn.
and that is still worn by the Swisse? To what end do we make a show of our
Implements in Figure under our Gaskins, and often, which is worse, above their
natural size, by a kind of Imposture? I have half a mind to believe that this
sort of Vestment was invented in the better and more Conscientious Ages, that
the World might not be deceived, and that every one should give a public
account of his Dimensions: The simple Nations wear them yet, and near about the
real size. In those days the Tailor took measure, as the Shoemaker does now, of
a Leg or a Foot. That good Man, who, when I was young, gelt so many noble and
antic Statues in his great City, that they might not corrupt the sight,
according to the advice of this other old good Man; Flagitii principium est
nudare inter cives corpora. It Is the beginning of Wickedness to show their
Nudities in public. I should have called to mind, that as in the Mysteries of
the Goddesses all Masculine appearance was excluded, that he did no thing, if he
did not geld Horses and Asses, and finally all Nature too.

Omne adeo genus in terris, Virgil. Georg. l. 3.
hominumque ferarumque,
Et genus aequoreum, pecudes pictaeque volucres,
In furias ignemque ruunt. --
All men on Earth, and Beasts both mild and tame, Mr. Ogilby.

Sea Monsters, gaudy Foul, rush to this flame,
The same love works in all.
The Gods, says Plato, have given us one disobedient and unruly Member, that
like a furious Animal, attempts by the Violence of its Appetite, to subject all
things to it. And they have given Women one that has the same Qualities, like a
greedy and ravenous Animal, which if one refuse to give him Food in season,
grows wild, impatient of delay, and infusing the rage into their Bodies, stops
the passages, and hinders Respiration, causing a thousand Inconveniences; till
having imbibed the Fruit of the common thirst, he has plentifully besprinkled
and bedewed the bottom of their Womb. Now my Legislator should also have
considered, that peradventure it were a chaster and more fruitful usance to let
them know the quick betimes, than permit them to guess according to the liberty
and heat of their own Fancy; instead of real parts, they substitute through
hope and desire, others that are three times more extravagant. And a certain
Friend of mine lost himself by producing his in place not yet fit to admit them
to their more serious use. What Mischief do not those Pictures of prodigious
dimension do, that the Boys make upon the Stair-cases and Galleries of the
Royal Houses? which give them a strange contempt of our natural Furniture. And
what do we know but that Plato, after other well instituted Republics,
ordered, that the Man and Woman, old and young, should expose themselves naked
to the view of one another, in his Gymnastick, upon that very account? The
Indians, who see the men stark naked, have at least cooled the sense of Seeing.
And let the Women of the Kingdom of Pegu say what they will, (who below the
waste have nothing to cover them but a Cloth slit before, and so straight, that
what decency and modesty soever they pretend by it, at every step all is to be
seen) that it is an Invention found out to allure the men to them, and to
divert them from the Boys, to which that Nation is generally inclined; yet
peradventure they lose more by it than they get, and a man may venture to say,
that an entire Appetite is more sharp than one already glutted by the eyes. And
also Livia was wont to say, that to a Virtuous Woman a naked Man was but a
Statue. The Lacedaemonian Women, more Virgins when Wives, than our Daughters
are; saw every day the Young Men of their City stripped naked in their
Exercises; little minding themselves to cover their Thighs in walking,
believing themselves, says Plato, sufficiently covered with their Virtue
without any other Robe. But those of whom St. Austin speaks, have given nudity
a wonderful power of Temptation, that have made it a Doubt, whether Women at
the day of Judgment shall rise again in their own Sex, and not rather in ours,
for fear of tempting us again in that holy estate. In brief, we allure and
flesh them by all sorts of ways: We incessantly heat and stir up their
Imagination, and yet we find fault. Let us confess the truth; there is scarce
one of us that does not more apprehend the shame that accrues to him by the
Vices of his Wife, than by his own, and that is not more sollicitous (a
wonderful Charity) of the Conscience of his virtuous Wife than of his own; who
had not rather commit Theft and Sacrilege, and that his Wife was a Murtheress
and a Heretic, than that she should not be more chaste than her Husband. An
unjust estimate of Vices. Both we and they are capable of a thousand
Corruptions more prejudicial and unnatural than Lust: But we weigh Vices not
according to Nature, but according to our Interest; by which means they take so
many unequal forms. The austerity of our Decrees renders the propension of
Women to this Vice more violent and vicious than its Condition will bear, and
engages it in Consequences worse than their Cause. They will voluntarily offer
to go to the Exchange to seek for Gain, and to the War to get Reputation,
rather than in the midst of ease and delights to have to do with so difficult a
Guard. Do not they very well see that there is neither Merchant nor Soldier,
who will not leave his business to run after this other, and so much as the
Porter and Cobbler, toiled and tired out as they are with Labor and Hunger?
Horace, lib. 2. Ode 12.
Number tu quae tenuit dives Achaemenes,
Aut pinguis Phrygiae Mygdonias opes,
Permutare velis crine Licinniae,
Plenas aut arabum domos,
Dum fragrantia detorquet ad osculae
Cervicem, aut facili saevitia negat,
Quae poscente magis gaudeat eripi.
Interdum rapere occupet?
Would thou for all that Achaemenes had,
Or all the Phrygian Wealth before thee laid,
Or Riches that in Arabs Houses are,
Change thy Licinnias golden Hair,
When she her neck to fragrant Kisses wries,
Or with a pretty Anger them denies,
What she would rather give than take by far,
And snatches them e're she is aware?
I cannot tell whether the Exploits of Alexander and Caesar do really surpass
the Resolution of a beautiful young Woman, bred up after our fashion in the
Light and Commerce of the World, battered by so many contrary Examples, and yet
keeping her self entire in the midst of a thousand continual and powerful
Solicitations and Pursuits. There is no doing more prickly than that not
doing, nor more active. I find it more easy to carry a suit of Arms all the
days of a man's Life, than a Maidenhead; and the Vow of Virginity, of all
others is the most noble, as being the hardest to keep. Diaboli Virtus in
Lumbis est, Div. Hieron. in Epist.
says St. Hierom. We have doubtless resigned to the Ladies the most difficult,
and most vigorous of all humane endeavors, and let us resign to them the Glory
too. This ought to encourage them to be obstinate in it, it is a brave thing for
them to defy us, and to spurn under foot that vain pre-eminence of Valor and
Virtue that we pretend to have over them. They will find, if they do but
observe it, that they will not only be much more esteemed for it, but also much
more beloved. A gallant Man does not give over his pursuit for being refused,
provided it be a refusal of Chastity, and not of choice. We may swear,
threaten, and complain to much purpose; we lie, we love them the better: there
is no allurement like Modesty, if it be not rude and uncivil. It Is stupidity
and meanness, to be obstinate against hatred and disdain; but against a
virtuous and constant Resolution, mixed with an acknowledgement, it is the
exercise of a noble and generous Soul. They may acknowledge our Services to a
certain degree, and give us civilly to understand, that they disdain us not.
For that Law that enjoins them to abominate us, because we adore them, and to
hate us because we love them; is certainly very severe, if but for the
difficulty of it. Why should they not give ear to our offers and demands, so
long as they are contained within the bounds of Modesty? Wherefore should we
fancy them to have other thoughts within, and to be worse than they seem? A
Queen of our time ingeniously said, that to refuse these Courtships is a
Testimony of weakness in Women, and a self accusation of Facility; and that a
Lady could not boast of her Chastity, who was never tempted. The Limits of
Honor are not cut so short, they may give themselves a little rein, and
dispense a little without forfeiting themselves; there lies before the Frontier
some space free, indifferent and neuter: he that has beaten and pursued her
into her Fort, is a strange fellow if he be not satisfied with his Fortune. The
price of the Conquest is considered by the difficulty. Would you know what
impression your Service and Merit have made in her Heart? Judge of it by her
Behavior. Some may grant more, who do not grant so much. The Obligation of a
Benefit wholly relates to the good will of those who confer it, the other
coincident Circumstances are dumb, dead, and casual. It costs her dearer to
grant you that little, than it would do her Companion to grant all. If in any
thing rarity give the estimation, it ought especially in this. Do not consider
how little it is that is given, but how few have it to give. The value of Money
alters according to the Coin, and stamp of the Place. Whatever the spite and
indiscretion of some may make them say upon the excess of their Coffeehouse;
yet Virtue and Truth will in time recover all. I have known some, whose
Reputation has for a great while suffered under slander, who have after been
restored to the Worlds universal Opinion, merely by their Constancy, without
care or artifice; every one repents, and gives himself the lie for what he has
believed and said; and from Maids, a little suspected, they have been afterward
advanced to the first rank amongst the Ladies of Honor. Some body told Plato,
that all the World spoke ill of him. Let them talk, said he, I will live so as
to make them change their Note. Besides the fear of God, and the price of so
rare a Renown, which ought to make them look to themselves, the corruption of
the Age we live in compells them to it; and if I were as they, there is nothing
I would not rather do, than entrust my Reputation in so dangerous hands. In my
time, the Pleasure of telling (a Pleasure little inferior to that of doing)
was not permitted but to those who had some faithful and only Friend; but now
the ordinary Discourse and common Table-talk, is nothing but boasts of Favors
received, and the secret Liberality of Ladies. In earnest. it is too abject, and
too much meanness of Spirit, to suffer such ungrateful, indiscreet, and
giddyheaded People, so to persecute, teaze, and rifle those tender and obliging
Favors. This our immoderate and illegitimate Exasperation against this Vice,
springs from the most vain and turbulent Disease that afflicts humane Minds,
which is Jealousy; Ovid de Art. Amandi.
Quis vetat apposito Lumen de lumine sumi?
Dent licet assidue, nil tamen inde perit.
That Light from Light be taken, who will deny?
Though they do naught but give, nought's lost thereby.
she, Jealousy and Envy.
and Envy her Sister, seem to me to be the most idle and foolish of the whole
Troop. As to the last, I can say little to it, a Passion, that though said to be
so mighty and powerful, had never to do with me. As to the other, I know it by
sight, and that is all. Beasts feel it. The Shepherd Cratis, being fallen in
love with a She-Goat, the He out of jealously, came to butt him as he was laid
a sleep, and beat out his Brains. We have raised this Fever to a greater excess
by the Examples of some barbarous Nations; the best disciplined have been
touched with it, and it is reason; but not transported: Ovid.
Ense maritali nemo confessus Adulter,
Purpureo Stygias Sanguine tinxit aquas.
Never did Adulterer, by a Husband slain,
With purple Blood the Stygian Waters stain.
Lucullus, Caesar, Pompey, Antonius, Cato, and other brave men, were Cuckolds,
and knew it, without making any bustle about it. There was in those days but
one Coxcomb, Lepidus, that died for Grief that his Wife had used him so. Ah!
tum te miserum, malique fati, Catullus. Ep. 15.

Quem attractis pedibus patente porta,
Percurrent mugilesque raphanique.
And the God of our Poet, when he surpised one of his Companions with his
Wife, satisfied himself with putting them to shame only. Atque aliquis de Diis
non tristibus optat, Ovid. Metam. lib. 4.

Sic fieri turpis. --
-- they shamefully lay bound, Mr. Sandys.

Yet one a wanton wished to be so found.
and nevertheless took fire at the soft embraces she gave him, complaining,
that upon that account she was grown jealous of his Affection. Quid causas
petis ex alto? Virgil. Aeneid. l. 8.
fiducia cessit
Quo tibi Diva mei? --
What need'st thou doubt, Mr. Ogilby.
and make a question thus?
Where is your Confidence reposed in us?
Nay, she entreats Arms for a Bastard of hers, Arma rogo genitrix nato. Ibid.

Another for her Son does Armor crave.
which are freely granted; and Vulcan speaks honorably of Aeneas; Arma acri
facienda viro. Ibid.

Arms for a valiant Hero must be made. Mr. Ogilby.

with, in truth, a more than humane Humanity. And I am willing to leave this
excess of Bounty to the Gods: Catullus, Number. 69.
Nec divis homines componere aequum est.
Nor is it fit to equal men with Gods.
As to the confusion of Children, besides that the gravest Legislators ordain
and affect it in their Republics, it nettles not the Women, where this Passion
is I know not how much better seated. Ibid.
Saepe etiam Juno maxima Caelicolam
Conjugis in culpa flagravit quotidiana.
And Juno, with fierce jealousy inflamed,
Her Husband's daily slips has often blamed.
When Jealousy seizes these poor, weak, and resistless Souls, it is pity to see
how miserably it torments and tyrannizes over them; it insinuates it self into
them under the title of Friendship, but after it has once possessed them, the
same causes that served for a foundation of good Will, serve them for a
foundation of mortal Hatred: it is, of all the diseases of the Mind, that which
most things serve for Aliment, and fewest for Remedy. The Virtue, Health,
Merit, and Reputation of the Husband, are the Incendiaries of their Fury and
ill Will. Nullae sunt inimicitiae nisi amoris acerbae. Propertius.

Their Angers are but the effects of Love.
This Fever defaces and corrupts all they have of beautiful and good besides.
And there is no action of a jealous Woman, let her be how chaste and how good a
Housewife soever, that does not relish of Anger and Rudeness. It Is a furious
Agitation, that rebounds them to an Extremity quite contrary to its Cause:
Which was very manifest in one Octavius at Rome, who, having lain with Pontia
Posthumia, found his love so much augmented by Fruition, that he solicited
with all importunity to marry her, which seeing he could not persuade her to,
this excessive Affection precipitated him to the effects of the most cruel and
mortal hatred, for he killed her. In like manner, the ordinary symptoms of this
other amorous Disease, are intestine Hatreds, private Conspiracies and
Conjurations, Notumque, furens quid foemina possit. Aeneid. lib. 5.

-- The cause unknown,
But that a desperate Woman carried on Mr. Ogilby.

With Rage might do,
and a Rage which so much the more frets it self, as it is compelled to excuse
it self by a pretense of good Will. Now the duty of Chastity is of a vast
Extent. Is it their Wills that we would have them restrain? That is a very
pliant and active thing, a thing very quick and nimble to be staid. How? if
Dreams sometimes engage them so far that they cannot deny them. It is not in
them, nor peradventure in Chastity it self, seeing it is a Female, to defend it
self from Lust and Desire. If we are only interested in their Will, what a case
are we in then? Do but imagine what crowding there would be amongst Men in
pursuance of these Privileges, to run full speed, though without Tongue and
Eyes, into every Woman's Arms that would accept them. The Scythian Women put out
the Eyes of all their Slaves and Prisoners of War, that they might have their
Pleasure of them, and they never the wiser. Oh, the furious advantage of
Opportunity! Should any one ask me, what was the first part of Love, I should
Answer, that it was how to take a man's time, and so the second, and so the
third; it is a point that can do every thing. I have sometimes wanted Fortune,
but I have also sometimes been wanting to my self in matter of Attempt. There
is greater Temerity required in this Age of ours, which our young People excuse
under the name of heat. But should Women examine it more strictly, they would
find, that it rather proceeded from Contempt. I was always superstitiously
afraid of giving offense, and have ever had a great respect for her I loved:
Besides, who in this traffic takes away the Reverence, defaces at the same
time the Luster. I would in this Affair have a Man a little play the Child, the
Timorous, and the Servant: If not altogether in this, I have in other things
some air of the foolish bashfulness whereof Plutarch makes mention; and the
course of my Life has been diverse ways hurt and blemished with it, a Quality
very ill suiting my universal Form: And what is there also amongst us but
Sedition and Discord? I am as much our of Countenance to be denied as I am to
deny; and it so much troubles me to be troublesome to others, that in occasions
where Duty compells to try the good will of any one in a thing that is
doubtful, and that will be chargeable to him, I do it very faintly, and very
much against my will: But if it be for my own particular, (whatever Homer truly
says, that Modesty is a foolish Virtue in an indigent Person) I commonly commit
it to a third Person to blush for me, and deny those that employ me with the
same difficulty; so that it has sometimes befallen me to have had a mind to
deny when I had not the power to do it. It Is folly then to attempt to bridle in
Women a Desire that is so powerful in them, and so natural to them. And when I
hear them brag of having so maidenly and so temperate a Will, I laugh at them.
They retire too far back. If it be an old Toothless Trot, or a young dry
Consumptive thing, though it be not altogether to be believed, at least, they
may say it with more similitude of truth. But they, who are yet capable of
love, and still pant with desire, talk at that ridiculous rate to their own
prejudice, by reason that inconsiderate excuses are a kind of self Accusation.
Like a Gentleman, a Neighbor of mine, suspected to be insufficient; Catullus,
Number. 68.
Languidior tenera cui pendens sicula beta,
Nunquam se mediam sustulit ad tunicam.
who three or four days after he was married, to justify himself, swore aloud
that he had rid twenty Stages the Night before: an Oath that was afterward
made use of to convince him of his ignorance in that Affair, and to divorce him
from his Wife. Besides, it signifies nothing, for there is neither Continency
nor Virtue where there are no opposing Desires. It is true, they may say, but
they will not yield unto it. Saints themselves speak after that manner; I mean
those who boast in good earnest of their coldness and insensibility, and who
expect to be believed when they profess it with a grave and serious
Countenance; for when it is spoken with an affected Look, where their Eyes give
the lie to their Tongue, and speak in the Cant of their Profession, which
always goes against the hair, it is good sport. I am a great Servant of Liberty
and Plainness, but there is no remedy, if it be wholly simple or childish it is
silly, and unbecomming Ladies in this Commerce; and presently runs into
Impudence: Their Disguises and Figures only serve to cosen Fools. Lying is
there in its seat of Honor; it is a by-way, that by a backdoor leads us to
Truth. If we cannot curb their Imagination, what would we have them do? Do
indeed? There are enough who evade all Communication, by which Chastity may be
corrupted. Illud saepe facit, quod sine test facit. Mart. Ep. lib. 7. Epig. 61.

He often does himself apply
To that he does when none is by.
And those whom we fear the least, are peradventure most to be feared; their
Sins that make the least noise are the worst. Offender moecha simpliciore
minus. Id. lib. 6. Ep. 7.

A professed Strumpet less offense does give.
There are ways by which they may lose their Virginity without prostitution,
and, which is more, without their knowledge. D. Aug. de Civit, 1.1. Cap. 18.
Obstetrix virginis cujusdam integritatem manu velut explorans, sive
malevolentia, sive inscitia, sive casu, dum inspicit, perdidit. Some one by
seeking her Maidenhead has lost it, another by playing with it has destroyed
it. We cannot precisely circumscribe the occasions; we interdict them. They
must guess at our meaning under general and doubtful terms. The very Idea we
invent for their Chastity is ridiculous: for, amongst the greatest Examples
arrived at my knowledge, Fatua, The extreme Chastity of some Women.
the Wife of Fannus, is one, who never after her Marriage suffered herself to
be seen by any man what ever; and the Wife of Hiero, who never perceived her
Husband's stinking Breath, imagining that it was common to all men. They must
become insensible and invisible to satisfy us. Now let us confess, that the
knot of this Judgment of Duty does principally lie in the Will. There have been
Husbands who have suffered this accident, not only without reproach, or taking
offense at their Wives, but with singular Obligation to them, and great
commendation of their Virtue. Such a Woman has been, who prized her Honor
above her Life, and yet has prostituted it to the furious Lust of a mortal
Enemy to save her Husband's Life, and who, in so doing, did that for him, she
would not have done for her self! It is not here that we are to produce their
Examples, they are too high and rich to be set off with so poor a Foil as I can
give them here, let us reserve them for a nobler place; but for Examples of
ordinary luster, Do we not every day see Women amongst us that surrender
themselves for their Husbands only benefit, and by their express Order and
Mediation? and of old Phaulius the Argian, who offered his to King Philip out
of Ambition, as that Galba did out of Civility, who having entertained Moecenas
at Supper, and observing that his Wife and he began to cast Sheeps eyes at one
another, and to complot Love by signs, let himself sink down upon his Cushion,
like one in a profound sleep, to give opportunity to their desires: Women
prostituted by the mediation of their Husbands, and for their Advantage.
which he also handsomely confessed, for at the same time a Servant making bold
to clatter the Plate that stood upon the Table, he plainly cried; What a noise
do you make, you Rogue? do you not see that I only sleep for Moecenas? Such a
Man may be, whose Manners may be lewd enough, and yet whose Will may be more
reformed than another, who outwardly carries himself after a more regular
manner: As we see some, who complain of having vowed Chastity before they knew
what they did; and I have also known others really complain of having given
themselves up to Debauchery before they were of years of Discretion. The Vice
of the Parents, or the impulse of Nature, which is a rude Councellor, may be
the cause. In the East Indies, though Chastity is of singular Reputation, yet
Custom permitted a married Woman to prostitute her self to any one who
presented her with an Elephant, and that with Glory too, to have been valued at
so high a rate. Phaedon the Philosopher, a Man of Birth, after the taking of
his Country Elida, made it his trade to prostitute the beauty of his youth, so
long as it lasted, to any one that would, for Money, thereby to gain his
Living. And Solon was the first in Greece, it is said, who by his Laws gave
Liberty to Women, at the expense of their Chastity, to provide for the
Necessities of Life; a Custom that Herodotus says had been received in many
Governments before his time. And besides, what Fruit is there of this painful
Solitude? For what Justice soever there is in this Passion, we are yet to
consider whether it turns to account, or no. Does any one think to curb it by
his Industry? Juven. Sat. 6.
Pone Seram, cohibe: sed quis custodiet ipsos
Custodes? cauta est, and ab illis incipit uxor.
Hang on a Lock, I hear old Friends advise,
Sir Robert Stapleton.
Appoint a Guard, but who shall watch the Spies?
Her Art first draws them in.
What Convenience will not serve their turn in so knowing an Age? Curiosity is
vicious throughout; but it is pernicious here. It Is Folly to examine into a
Disease for which there is no Physic that does not inflame and make it worse;
of which the shame grows still greater, and more public by Jealousy, and of
which the Revenge more wounds our Prosperity, than it heals us. You wither and
dye in the search of so obscure a proof. How miserably have they of my time
arrived at that knowledge, who have been so unhappy as to have found it out? If
the Informer does not at the same time apply a Remedy, and bring relief; it is
an injurious Information, and that better deserves a stab than the Lie: We no
less laugh at him who takes pains to prevent it, than he who is a Cuckold, and
knows it not. The Character of Cuckold is indelible, who once has it carries it
to his grave; the Punishment proclaims it more than the Fault. It is to much
purpose to see, to draw the Curtain, and to lift up the Quilt to discover our
private Misfortunes, thence to expose them on Tragic Scaffolds; and
Misfortunes that only hurt us by being known; for a good Wife, or a happy
Marriage, is said, not that they are really so, but because no one says to the
contrary. Men should be so discreet, as to evade this tormenting and
unprofitable knowledge: and the Romans had a Custom, when returning from any
Expedition, to send home before to acquaint their Wives with their coming, that
they might not surprise them; and to this purpose it is, that a certain Nation
has introduced a custom, that the Priest shall on the Wedding day unlock the
Brides Cabinet, to free the Husband from the doubt and Curiosity of examaning
in the first assault, whether she comes a Virgin to his Bed, or that she has
been at the Trade before. But the World will be talking. I know a hundred
honest men Cuckolds, that are handsomely, and not very indecently so; a worthy
man is lamented, but not disesteem'd for it. Order it so that your Virtue may
conquer your Misfortune, that good Men may curse the Occasion, and that he who
wrongs you may tremble but to think on it. And moreover, who escapes being
talked of at the same rate, from the least even to the greatest? -- tot qui
legionibus imperitavit, Lucret. l. 3.

Et melior quam tumultis fuit, improbe, rebus.
To whom so many Legions did bow,
And who by much was better far than thou.
You hear how many honest men are reproached with this in your presence, and
you may believe that you are no more spared behind your Back. Nay, the very
Ladies will be laughing too; and what are they so apt to laugh at in this
virtuous Age of ours, as at a peaceable and well-compos'd marriage? There is
not one amongst you but has made some body Cuckold: and Nature runs much in
parallel, in compensation, and turn for turn. The frequency of this accident
ought long since to have made it easy; and it is now past into Custom.
Miserable Passion, which has this also, that it is incommunicable. Catullus.
Fors etiam nostris invidit questibus Aures.
And spiteful Fortune too denies
An Ear to our Calamities.
For to what Friend dare you entrust your Griefs; who, if he does not laugh at
them, will not make use of the occasion to get a share of the Quarry? The
sharps* as well as the sweets of Marriage, are kept secret by the wise; and
amongst other troublesome Conditions appertaining to it, this, to a prating
Fellow, as I am, is one of the chief, that custom has rendered it indecent and
prejudicial, to commmunicate to any one all that a man knows, and all that a
man feels. To give even Women counsel against Jealousy, would be so much time
lost, their very Being is so made up of Suspicion, Vanity, and Curiosity, that
to cure them by any lawful ways, is not to be hoped or expected. They often
recover of this Infirmity, by a form of Health much more to be feared than the
Disease it self. For as there are Enchantments that cannot take away the Evil,
but by throwing it upon another, they also willingly transfer this Fever to
their Husbands, when they shake it off themselves. And yet I know not, to speak
truth, whether a man can suffer worse from them than their Jealousy; it is the
most dangerous of all their Conditions, as the Head is of all their Members.
Pittacus was used to say, that every one had his defect, and that his was the
jealous Head of his Wife; but for which he should think himself perfectly
happy. A mighty inconvenience sure which could poison the whole Life of so
just, so wise, and so valiant a man; What must we other little Fellows do? The
Senate of Marselles had reason to grant him that begged leave to kill himself,
that he might be delivered from the Clamor of his Wife, his request; for it is
a mischief that is never removed, but that it carries away the piece; and that
has no Remedy but Flight or Patience, though both of them very hard. He was
doubtless an understanding Fellow that said, there was no happy Marriage but
betwixt a blind Wife and a deaf Husband. Let us also consider whether the great
and violent Severity of Obligation we enjoin them, does not produce two effects
contrary to our design, namely, whether it does not render the Pursuants more
eager to attaque, and the Women more easy to yield. For as to the first, by
raising the value of the Place, we raise the value and the desire of the
Conquest. Might it not be Venus her self, who so cunningly enhaunc'd the price
of her Merchandise, by making the Laws her Bawds; knowing how insipid a delight
it would be that was not heightened by Fancy and hardness to atchieve? To
conclude, it is all Swines-flesh, varied by Sawces, as said Flaminius his Host.
Cupid is a roguish God, who makes it his sport to contend with Devotion and
Justice: It Is his Glory that his Power mates all other Powers, and all other
Rules give place to his.

Ovid Trist. lib. 4. El. 1.
Materiam Culpae prosequiturque suae.
And seeks out Matter for his Crimes.
As to the second point; should we not be less Cuckolds, if we less feared to
be so? according to the Humor of Women: whom Interdiction incites, and who are
more eager for being forbid. Teren. Eunu. Act. 4. Sc. 7.
Vbi velis nolunt, ubi nolis volunt ultro,
Concessa pudet ire via. --
You would, they will not, when you would not, they would,
Consent does freeze, denial fires their Blood.
What better Interpretation can we make of Messalina's Behavior? She at first
made her Husband a Cuckold in private, as is the common use: but, bringing her
Business about with too much ease, by reason of her Husbands Stupidity; she
soon scorned that way, and presently fell to making open love, to own her
Servants, and to favor and entertain them in the sight of all.* She would make
him know and see how she used him. This Animal, not to be roused with all this,
and rendering her Pleasures dull and flat by his too stupid Facility, by which
he seemed to authorize, and make them lawful; what does she? but being the Wife
of a living and healthful Emperor, and at Rome, the Theater of the World, in
the face of the Sun, and with solemn Ceremony, and to Silius, who had long
before enjoyed her, she publicly marries her self one day that her Husband was
gone out of the City. Does it not seem as if she was going to become Chaste by
her Husband's negligence? or that she sought another Husband that might sharpen
her appetite by his jealousy, and who by watching should incite her? But the
first difficulty she met with was also the last; this Beast suddenly roused.
These stupid sort of Men are often the most dangerous. I have found by
Experience, that this extreme Toleration, when it comes to dissolve, produces
the most severe Revenge; for taking fire on a sudden, Anger and Fury being
combined in one, discharge their utmost force at the first charge. Aeneid. lib.
12.
Irarumque omnes effundit habenas. He put her to death, and with her a great
number of those with whom she had had Intelligence, even those who could not
help it, and whom she had caused to be forced to her Bed with Scourges. What
Virgil says of Venus and Vulcan, Lucretius had better expressed of a stolen
Enjoyment betwixt her and Mars. Lucret. lib. 1.
-- bellifera maenera Mavors
Armipotens regit, in gremium qui saepe tuum se
Rejicit, aeterno devinctus Vulnere amoris:
Pascit amore avidos inhians in te Dea visus,
Eque tuo pendet resupini spiritus ores:
Hunc tu Diva tuo recubantem corpore sancto
Circumfusa super, suaveis ex ore loquelas
Funde.
Mr. Creech.
-- For furious Mars,
The only Governor, and God of Wars,
Tired with heat and toil, does often resort
To taste the Pleasures of the Paphian Court;
Where on thy Bosom he supinely lies,
And greedily drinks Love at both his eyes,
Till quite o're-come, snatching an eager Kiss,
He hastily goes on to greater bliss:
Then midst his strict embraces clasp thine arms
About his Neck, and call forth all thy charms*
Careless, with all thy subtle arts become
A Flatterer, and beg a Peace for Rome.
When I consider this rejicit, pascit, inhians, molli, fovet, medullas,
labefacta, pendet, percurrit, and that noble circumfusa, mother of the gentle
infusus; I contemn those little Quibbles and verbal Allusions have been since
in use. Those well-meaning People stood in need of no subtilty to disguise
their meaning; their Language is downright and plain, and full of natural and
continued Vigor; they are all Epigram, not only with a sting in the tail, but
the head, body, and feet, carry the same force throughout. There is nothing
forced, nothing languishing, but they still keep the same pace. Contextus totus
virilis est, Sen. Ep. 33.
non sunt circa flosculos occupati. The whole contexture is manly, without
insisting upon little flowers of Rhetoric. It Is not a soft Eloquence, and
without offense only, it is nervous and solid, that does not so much please, as
it fits and ravishes the greatest minds. When I see these brave methods of
expression, so lively, so profound, I do not say that it is well said, but well
thought. It Is the spriteliness of the imagination that swells and elevates
words. Pectus est quod disertum facit. Quintil. lib. 10.
Our People call Language Judgment, and fine words full Conceptions. This
painting is not so much carried on by dexterity of hand, as by having the
object more lively imprinted in the Soul: Gallus speaks simply, because he
conceives simply: Horace does not content himself with a superficial expression
that would betray him; he sees farther and more clearly into things, his Wit
breaks into, and rummages all the magazine of words and figures wherewith to
express himself, and he must have them above ordinary, because his Conception
is so. Plutarch says, that he sees the Latin Tongue by the things. It Is here
the same: the Sense illuminates, and produces the words: no more words of air,
but of flesh and bone; they signify more than they express. Moreover, those
who are not well skilled in a Language, perceive some image of this; for in
Italy, I said whatever I had a mind to in common discourse, but in more serious
subjects, I durst not have trusted my self with an Idiome that I could not wind
and turn out of its ordinary pace; I would therein have a power of introducing
something of my own. The handling and utterance of fine Wits is that which sets
off a Language; not so much by innovating it, as by putting it to more vigorous
and various service, and by straining, bending, and adapting it to them. They
do not create words, but they enrich their own, and give them weight and
signification by the Uses they put them to, and teach them unwonted motions,
but withal, ingeniously and discreetly. And how little this talent is given to
all, is manifest by the many French Scriblers of this Age. They are bold, and
proud enough not to follow the common road, but want of Invention and
discretion ruins them. There is nothing seen in their Writings but a wretched
affectation of a strange new style, with cold and absurd disguises, which,
instead of elevating, depress the matter. Provided they can but trick up their
style with fine new words, they care not what they signify; and to bring in a
new word by the head and shoulders, they leave the old one, very often more
sinewy and significant than the other. There is stuff enough in our Language,
but there is a defect in cutting out. For there is nothing that might not be
made out of our terms of Hunting and War, which is a fruitful Soil to borrow
from. And the forms of speaking, like Herbs, improve and grow stronger by being
transplanted. I find it sufficiently abounding, but not sufficiently pliable
and vigorous. It quails under a powerful Conception. If you would maintain the
dignity of your style, you will often perceive it to flag and languish under you,
and there Latin steps in to its relief, as Greek does to other Languages. Of
some of the words I have picked out for my own use, we do not easily discern
the energy, by reason that the frequent use of them have in some sort embas'd
their beauty, and rendered it common. As in our ordinary Language there are
several excellent Phrases and Metaphors to be met with, of which the beauty is
withered by age, and the color is sullied by too common handling; but that
takes nothing from the relish to an understanding man: neither does it derogate
from the glory of those ancient Authors, who, it is likely, first brought those
words into that luster. The Sciences treat of things too finely, and after an
artificial, very different from the common and natural way. My Page makes love,
and understands it, but read to him Leo Hebreus and Ficinus, where they speak
of him, his thoughts and actions, he understands it not. I do not find in
Aristotle most of my ordinary motions; they are there covered, and disguised in
another robe for the use of the Schools. Well may they speed; but were I of the
Trade, I would as much naturalize Art, as they artifie Nature. Let us let Bembo
and Equicola alone. When I write, I can very well spare both the Company and
the remembrance of ^ooks, lest they should interrupt my Method. And also in
truth the best Authors too much humble and discourage me. I am very much of the
Painters Mind, who having represented Cocks most wretchedly ill, charged all
his Boys not to suffer any natural Cock to come into his Shop; and had rather
need to give my self a little luster of the Invention of Antinonnydes the
Musician, who, when he was to sing or play, took care before hand that the
Auditory should, either before or after, be entertained and glutted with some
other ill Musicians. But I can hardly be without a Plutarch, he is so
universal, and so full, that upon all Occasions, and what extravagant Subject
soever you take in hand, he will still intrude himself into your Business, and
holds out to you a liberal, and not to be exhausted hand of Riches and
Embellishments. It vexes me that he is so exposed to the spoil of those who are
conversant with him. I can no sooner cast an Eye upon him, but I purloyn either
a Leg or a Wing. And also for this Design of mine, it is convenient for me to
write at home, in a wild Country, where I have no body to assist or relieve me;
where I hardly see a man that understands the Latin of his Pater Noster, and
of French as little, if not less. I might have made it better elsewhere, but
then the work would have been less my own; and its principal end and perfection
is to be exactly mine: I should well enough correct an accidental Error, of
which I am full, as I run carelessly on: but for any ordinary and constant
Imperfections, it were a kind of Treason to put them out. When another tells,
or that I say to my self, Thou art too thick of Figures; this is a word of the
Gascon growth, and therefore a dangerous Phrase; (I do not reject any of those
that are used in the common Streets of France, they that will fight Custom with
Grammar, are Fools) this is an ignorant Discourse; this is a Paradoxical
saying, this is a foolish Expression. Thou make thy self merry sometimes; and
men will think thou say a thing in good earnest, which thou only speak in
jest. Yes, say I, but I correct the Faults of Inadvertence, not those of
Custom. Do I not talk at the same rate throughout? Do I not represent my self
to the Life? It Is enough that I have done what I designed; all the World knows
me in my Book, and my Book in me. Now I have an apish imitating Quality; when I
used to write Verses, (and I never made any but Latin) they evidently accused
the Poet I had last read; and some of my first Essays have a little exotic
taste. I speak something another kind of Language at Paris than I do at
Montaigne. Whoever I steadfastly look upon, easily leaves some impression of his
upon me. Whatever I consider, I usurp; whether a foolish Countenance, a
disagreeable look, or a ridiculous way of speaking; and Vices most of all,
because they seize and stick to me, and will not leave hold without shaking
off. I swear more by Imitation than Humor. A murdering imitation, like that
of the Apes, so terrible both in stature and strength, that Alexander met with
in a certain Country of the Indies, which he would have had much ado any other
way to have subdued. But they afforded him the means by that Inclination of
theirs to imitate whatever they saw done. For by that the Hunters were taught
to put on Shoes in their sight, and to tie them fast with many knots, and to
muffle up their Heads in Caps all composed of running nooses, and to seem to
anoint their Eyes with Glue; so did those silly Creatures employ their
Imitation to their own ruin, they glew'd up their own Eyes, haltred and bound
themselves. The other faculty of playing the Mimicks, and ingeniously acting
the Words and Gestures of another, purposely to make others merry, and to raise
their Admiration, is no more in me than in a Stock. When I swear my own Oath,
it is only by God, of all Oaths the most direct. They say that Socrates swore by
the Dog, Zeno had for his Oath the same Interjection, at this time in use
amongst the Italians Cappari: Pythagoras swore by Water and Air. I am so apt,
without thinking of it, to receive these superficial Impressions, that if I
have Majesty or Highness in my Mouth three days together, they come out
instead of Excellency and Lordship, eight days after; and what I say to day in
sport and fooling, I shall seriously say the same to morrow. Wherefore, in
writing, I more unwillingly undertake beaten Arguments, lest I should handle
them at another expense. Every Subject is equally fertile to me. A Fly will
serve me for a Subject, and it is well if this I have in hand has not been
undertaken at the Recommendation of as wanton a Will. I may begin with that
which pleases me best, for the Subjects are all linked to one another; but my
Soul displeases me, in that it ordinarily produces its deepest and most airy
conceits which please me best, when I least expect or study for them; and
suddenly vanish, having at the instant nothing to apply them to; on Horseback,
at the Table, and in Bed: but most on Horseback, where I am most given to
think. My speaking is a little nicely jealous of Silence and Attention, if I
talk my best. Who interrupts me, cuts me off. In traveling, the Necessity of
the way will often put a stop to Discourse; besides that, I for the most part
travel without Company, fit to entertain long Discourses, by which means I have
all the leisure I would to entertain my self. It falls out as it does in my
Dreams, whilst dreaming, I recommend them to my Memory, (for I am apt to dream
that I dream) but the next Morning I may represent to my self of what
Complexion they were, whether gay, or sad, or strange, but what they were, as
to the rest, the more I endeavor to retrieve them, the deeper I plunge them in
oblivion. So of Thoughts that come accidentally into my Head, I have no more
but a vain Image remaining in my Memory, only enough to make me torment my self
in their quest to no purpose. Well then, laying Books aside, and more simply
and materially speaking, I find after all, Definition of Love.
that Love is nothing else but the thirst of enjoying the subject desired;
neither is Venus any other thing than the pleasure of discharging the Vessels,
as the Pleasure Nature gives us of discharging other Parts, that either by
immoderation or indiscretion become vicious. According to Socrates, Love is the
Appetite of Generation, by the mediation of Beauty. And having often considered
the ridiculous titillation of this Pleasure, the absurd, hairbrain'd, and
senceless motions with which it inspires Zeno and Cratippus; the indiscreet
rage, and the Countenance enflamed with Fury and Cruelty in the sweetest
effects of Love: and then that sour, grave, severe, and extatick one i^ so
wanton an Action, that our Delights and our Excrements are promiscuously
shuffled together, and that the supreme Pleasure carries along with it fainting
and complaining, as well as Grief; I then believe it to be true that Plato
says, that the Gods made man for their Sport: -- quaenam ista jocandi Claudian.

Saevitia? --
What a strange sporting Cruelty
May this be said to be?
and that it is in mockery, that Nature has ordered the most troublesome of
Actions to be the most common, by that to make us equal, and to parallel Fools
and wise Men, Beasts and us. Even the most contemplative and prudent man, when
I imagine him in this posture, I hold him an impudent Fellow to pretend to be
prudent and contemplative. They are the Peacocks Feet that abate his pride. --
ridentem dicere verum Hora. lib. 1. Sat. 1.

Quid vetat? --
One may speak Truth in jest without Offense.
They who banish serious imaginations from their sports, do, says one, like him
who dares not adore the Statue of a Saint, if not covered with a Veil. We eat
and drink indeed as Beasts do; but those are not actions that obstruct the
functions of the Soul. In those we maintain our advantage over them; but this
subjects all other thought, and by its imperious authority makes an Ass of all
Plato's Divinity and Philosophy too, and yet he complains not of it. In every
thing else a man may keep some Decorum, all other Operations submit to the
Rules of Decency; this cannot so much as in imagination appear other than
vicious or ridiculous. Examine if you can therein find one wise and discreet
proceeding. Alexander said, that he chiefly knew himself to be mortal by this
act and sleeping; sleep suffocates and suppresses the Faculties of the Soul;
the familiarity with Women does likewise dissipate and exhaust them. Doubtless
it is a mark, not only of our original corruption, but also of our vanity and
deformity. On the one side, Nature pushes us on to it, having fixed the most
noble, utile, and pleasant of all her functions to this desire: and on the
other side, leaves us to accuse and avoid it, as insolent and indecent, to
blush at it, and to recommend abstinence. Are we not sufficiently Brutes, to
call that work brutish which begets us? People of so many differing Religions
have concurred in several Ceremonies, as Sacrifices, Lamps, burning Incence,
Fasts, and Offerings; and amongst other, in the condemning this Act: All
Opinions concenter in this, besides the old custom of Circumcisions. We have
peradventure reason to blame our selves for being guilty of so foolish a
Production as man, and to call the Act and Parts shameful that are employed in
the work (I am sure mine are now properly shameful.) The Essenians, of whom
Pliny speaks, kept up their Country several Ages without either Nurse or
Baby-clouts, by the arrival of Strangers, who following this pretty humor,
came continually in to them: A whole Nation being resolute, rather to hazard a
total Extermination, than to engage themselves in Female embraces, and rather
to lose the succession of men than to beget one. It Is said, that Zeno never had
to do with a Woman but once in his life, and then out of civility, that he
might not seem too obstinately to disdain the Sex. Every one avoids seeing a
man born, every one runs to see him dye. To destroy a spacious Field is sought
out, and in the face of the Sun; but to make him we creep into as dark and
private a corner as we can. It Is a man's duty to withdraw himself from the
light to do it; but it is glory, and the fountain of many Virtues to know how to
destroy what we have done: the one is injury, the other favor: for Aristotle
says, that do any one a Courtesy, in a certain Phrase of his Country, is to
kill him. The Athenians, to couple the disgrace of these two Actions, being to
purge the Isle of Delos, and to justify themselves to Apollo, interdicted at
once all Birth and Burials in the Precincts thereof. Nostri nosmet poenitet.
Terence.
We are ashamed of our selves. There are some Nations that will not be seen to
eat. I know a Lady, and of the best Quality, who has the same opinion, that
it is an ill sight to see one chew their meat, that takes away much from their
Grace and Beauty, and therefore unwillingly appears at a public Table with an
Appetite; and know a man also, that cannot endure to see another eat, nor be
seen himself; and is more shy of company in putting in than putting out. In the
Turkish Empire, there are a great number of men, who, to excel others, never
suffer themselves to be seen when they make their repast; who never have any
more than one a Week, who cut and mangle their Faces and Limbs, and never speak
to any one: Fanatic People, who think to honor their Nature by denaturing
themselves; that value themselves upon their contempt of themselves, and grow
better by being worse: What monstrous Animal is this, that is a Horror to
himself, to whom his delights are grievous, and who weds himself to
misfortunes? There are who conceal their Life, Virg. Georg. lib. 2.
Exilioque domos, and dulcia limina mutant,
Some banished, do their native seats exchange,
Mr. Ogilby.
And Countries under other Climats range.
and withdraw them from the sight of other men's, that avoid Health and
Cheerfulness, as dangerous and prejudicial Qualities. Not only many Sects, but
many People, curse their Birth, and bless their Death; and there is a Place
where the Sun is abominated, and darkness adored. We are only ingenious in
using our selves ill; it is the only quarry our, Wits fly at; and Wit, when
misapplied, is a dangerous tool. O miseri quorum gaudia crimen habent! Gallus
Eleg. 1.

O wretched men whose Pleasures are a Crime!
Alas, poor man, thou have inconveniences that are inevitable enough without
increasing them by thine own invention, and art miserable enough by Nature,
without being so by Art; thou have real and essential Deformities enough, without
forging those that are imaginary. Do thou find that thou have not performed
all the necessary Offices that Nature has enjoined thee, and that she is idle
in thee; if thou do not oblige thy self to more and new? Thou do not stick
to infringe the universal and undoubted Laws; but stick'st close to those
confederate and fantastic ones of thy own, and by how much more particular,
uncertain, and contradicted they are, by so much thou employ'st thy whole
endeavor in them: The Laws of thy Parish bind thee; those of the World concern
thee not: run but a little over the Examples of this kind, thy Life is full of
them. Whilst the Verses of these two Poets treat so reservedly and discreetly
of wantonness, as they do, methinks, they discover it much more. Ladies cover
their Necks with Network, as Priests do several sacred things, and Painters
shadow their Pictures to give them greater luster: and, it is said, that the Sun
and Wind strike more violently by Reflection than in a direct Line. The
Egyptian wisely answered him who asked him what he had under his Cloak; it is
hid under my Cloak, said he, that thou may not know what it is: but there are
certain other things that People hide only to show them: Hear this that speaks
plainer, Ovid Am. lib. 1. El. 5.
Et nudam pressi corpus adusque meum.
And in these naked Arms of mine,
Her naked Body I did twine.
methinks, I am eunuch'd with the Expression. Let Martial turn up Venus's Coats
as high as he can, he cannot show her so naked: He, who says all that is to be
said, gluts and disgusts us: He, who is afraid to express himself, draws us on
to guess at more than is meant. There is a kind of treachery in this sort of
Modesty, and specially whilst they half open, as they do, so fair a path to
Imagination, both the action and description should relish theft. The more
respective, more timorous, more coy, and secret Love of the Spaniards and
Italians please me. I know not who of old wished his weason as long as that of
a Crane, that he might the longer taste what he swallowed: it had been better
wished in this quick and precipitous Pleasure, especially in such natures as
mine, that had the fault of being too prompt. To stop its flight, and delay it
with preambles, all things, a Wink, a Bow, a Word, a Sign, stand for favor and
recompense betwixt them. Were it not an excellent piece of Thrift in him that
could dine on the steam of the roast? It Is a Passion that mixes very little
with solid Essence, much more with vanity and feverish raving, and we are to
reward and pay it accordingly. Let us teach the Ladies to value and esteem
themselves, to amuse and fool us, We give the last Charge at the first Onset,
the French impetuosity will still show it self. By spinning out their favors,
and exposing them in small parcels, even miserable old Age it self will find
some little share of reward, according to its worth and merit; who has no
fruition but in fruition, who wins nothing unless he sweeps the stakes: and who
takes no pleasure in the chase but in the quarry, ought not to introduce
himself in our School. The more steps and greices there are, so much higher and
more honorable is the uppermost Seat. We should take a pleasure in being
conducted to it, as in magnificent Palaces, by Portico's, Entries, long and
pleasant Galleries, by many turns and windings. This disposition of things
would turn to our advantage; we should there longer stay, and longer love;
without hope, and without desire we proceed not worth a pin: Our Conquest and
entire possession is what they ought infinitely to dread: when they wholly
surrender themselves up to the mercy of our Fidelity and Constancy, they run a
mighty hazard; they are Virtues very rare, and hard to be found, they are no
sooner ours, but we are no more theirs. Catullus.
Postquam cupidae mentis satiata libido est,
Verba nihil metuere, nihil perjuria curant.
When our Desires and Lusts once sated are,
For Oaths and Promises we little care.
And Thrasonides, a young man of Greece, was so in love with his Passion, that
having gained a Mistresses consent, he refused to enjoy her, that he might not
by fruition quench and stupifie the unquiet ardour of which he was so proud,
and with which he so pleased himself. Dearness is a good Sauce to Meat. Do but
observe how much the manner of Salutation, particular to our Nation, has by its
facility made Kisses, which Socrates says so powerful and dangerous for the
stealing of Hearts, of no esteem. It is a nauseous and injurious Custom for the
Ladies, that they must be obliged to lend their Lips to every Fellow that has
three Footmen at his heels, how nasty or deformed soever: Mart. lib. 7. Epig.
94.
Cujus livida naribus caninis,
Dependet glacies, rigetque barba:
Centum occurrere malo culilingis.
And we do not get much by the bargain; for as the World is divided, for three
beautiful Women we must kiss threescore ugly ones; and to a tender Stomach,
like those of my Age, an ill kiss over pays a good one. In Italy they
passionately court, even their common Women, who prostitute themselves for
money, and justify the doing so, by saying, that there are degrees of
fruition, and that by their Services they will procure themselves that which is
best and most entire. They sell nothing but their Bodies, the Will is too free,
and too much its own to be exposed to sale; so say these, that it is the Will
they undertake, and they have reason; It Is indeed the Will that we are to
serve, and have to do withal. I abhor to imagine mine in a Body without
Affection. And this madness is, methinks, Cousin-German to that of the Boy, who
would needs lie with the beautiful Statue of Venus, made by Praxiteles; or that
of the furious Egyptian, who violated the dead Carcass of a Woman he was
embalming: which was the occasion of the Law afterward made in Egypt, The
Corpse of beautiful Women kept three days in Egypt before they were interred.
that the Corpse of beautiful young Women, of those of good Quality, should be
kept three days, before they should be delivered to those whose Office it was
to take care for the Interrment. Periander did more wonderfully, who extended
his conjugal Affection (more regular and legitimate) to the enjoyment of his
Wife Melissa after she was dead. Does it not seem a Lunatic humor in the
Moon, seeing she could no otherwise enjoy her Darling Endymion, to lay him for
several Months asleep, and to please her self with the fruition of a Boy, who
stirred not but in his sleep? I likewise say, that we love a Body without a
Soul, when we love a Body without its consent and concurring desire. All
Enjoyments are not alike: There are some that are Hectic and languishing: a
thousand other causes besides good Will may procure us this Favor from the
Ladies: this is not a sufficient testimony of Affection: Treachery may lurk
there as well as elsewhere: they sometimes go to it but by halves. Id. lib. 11.
Epig. 61.
tanquam thura merumque parent
absentem marmoreamve putes.
So coldly they unto the work prepare,
You Would think them absent, or else marble were.
I know some, who had rather lend that than their Coach, and who only impart
themselves that way: You are to examine whether your company pleases them upon
any other account, or like some strong chin'd Groom, for that only, and in what
degree of favor you are with them. -- tibi si datur uni
Catullus.
Quo lapide illa diem candidiore notet.
Whether thy Mistress favor thee alone,
And mark thy day out with the whiter stone.
What if they eat your Bread with the sauce of a more pleasing imagination?
Tibullus.
Te tenet, absentes alios suspirat amores.
She kindly strains thee in her Arms, but has
Her thoughts the while fixed in another place.
What? have we not seen one in these days of ours, that made use of this Act
upon the account of a most horrid Revenge, by that means to kill, and poison,
as he did, a beautiful Woman? Such as know Italy, will not think it strange, if
for this Subject, I seek not elsewhere for Examples: for that Nation may be
called the Regent of the world in this: They have generally more handsome, and
fewer ugly women than we: but for rare and excelling Beauties we have as many
as they. I think the same of their Wits; of those of the common sort they have
many, and evidently more. Brutality is without comparison much rarer there; but
in singular Souls, and those of the highest Form, we are nothing indebted to
them. If I should carry on the comparison, I might say, as touching Valor,
that, on the contrary it is, to what it is with them, common, and natural with
us: but sometimes we see them possessed to such a degree as surpasses the most
steady and obstinate Examples we can produce. The Marriages of that Country are
defective in this; Their Custom commonly imposes so rude, and so slavish a Law
upon the Women, that the most remote Acquaintance with a Stranger rendered
necessarily substantial; and seeing that all comes to one account, they have no
hard choice to make. And have they broken down the Fence? We may safely presume
they have, Luxuria ipsis vinculis, sicut fera bestia, irritata, deinde emissa.
Lust like a wild Beast, being more enraged by being bound, breaks from his
Chains with greater wildness. They must give them a little more Rein; Ovid. Am.
l. 3. Eleg. 4.
Vidi ego nuper equum contra sua Fraena tenacem
Ore reluctanti fluminis ire modo.
I saw, spite of his Bit, a headstrong Colt
Run with his Rider, like a Thunderbolt.
The desire of Company is allayed by giving a little Liberty. It Is a good
Custom we have in France, that our Sons are received into the best Families,
there to be entertained and bred up Pages, as in a School of Nobless. And it is
looked upon as a discourtesie, and an affront to refuse a Gentleman. I have
taken notice (for so many Families so many differing forms) that the Ladies who
have been strictest with their Maids, have had no better luck than those who
allowed them a greater Liberty. There should be Moderation in all things, one
must leave a great deal of their Conduct to their own Discretion; for, when all
comes to all, no Discipline can curb them throughout. But it is true withal,
that she who comes off with flying Colors from a School of Liberty, brings
with her whereon to repose more Confidence, than she who comes away sound from
a severe and strict Education. Our Fathers dressed up their Daughters looks in
Bashfulness and Fear, we ours in Confidence and Assurance. We understand
nothing of the Matter. We must leave it to the Sarmates, that are not to lie
with a Man, till with their own hands they have first killed another in Battle.
For me, who have no other title left me to these things, but by the cares; it is
sufficient, if according to the Privilege of my Age, they retain me for one of
their Counsel. I do then advise them, and us men too, to Abstinence; but if the
Age we live in will not endure it, at least Modesty and Discretion. For as the
Story of Aristippus says, speaking to two young men, who blushed to see him go
into a scandalous House; the Vice is in not coming out, not in going in. Let
her that has no care of her Conscience, have yet some regard to her Reputation;
and though she be rotten within, let her carry a fair outside at least. I commend
a Gradation, and the deferring of time in bestowing of their Favors. Plato
declares, that in all sorts of Love, Facility and Promptness are forbidden the
Defendant. It Is a sign of eagerness, so rashly, suddenly, and hand over head
wholly to surrender themselves, which they ought to disguise with all the art
they have. In carrying themselves modestly and unwillingly in the granting
their last Favors, they much more allure our desires, and hide their own. Let
them still fly before us, even those who have most mind to be overtaken. They
better conquer us by flying, as the Scythians do. To say the truth, according
to the law that Nature has imposed upon them, it is not properly for them
either to will, or desire; their part is to suffer, obey, and consent: and for
this it is that Nature has given them a perpetual Capacity, which in us is but
sometimes, and uncertain; they are always fit for the encounter, that they may
be always ready when we are so. Seneca in Epist.
Patinatae. And whereas she has ordered that our Appetites shall be manifest by
a prominent Demonstration, she would have theirs to be hidden and concealed
within; and has furnished them with Parts improper for Ostentation, and simply
defensive. Such Proceedings as this that follows, must be left to the Amazonian
License. Alexander and Thalestris.
Alexander marching his Army thorough Hyrcania, Thalestris Queen of the
Amazons, came with three hundred light Horse of her own Sex, well mounted and
armed, having left the remainder of a very great Army that followed her behind
the neighboring Mountains, to give him a Visit; where she publicly allowed,
and in plain terms told him, that the Fame of his Valor and Victories had
brought her thither to see him, and to make him an Offer of her Forces to
assist him in the pursuit of his Enterprises: and that finding him so handsome,
young, and vigorous, she, who was also perfect in all those qualities, advised
that they might lie together; to the end, that from the most valiant Woman of
the World, and the bravest man then living, there might spring some great and
wonderful Issue for the time to come. Alexander returned her thanks for all the
rest; but to give leisure for the accomplishment of her last demand, he
detained her thirteen days in that place, which were spent in Royal Feasting
and Jollity, for the welcome of so noble a Princess. We are almost throughout
incompetent and unjust Judges of their Actions, as they are of ours. I confess
the truth when it makes against me, as well as when it is on my side. It Is an
abominable intemperance that pushes them on so often to change, and that
hinders them to limit their Affection to any one Person whatever; as is evident
in that Goddess, to whom are attributed so many changes, and so many several
Enamorato's. But it is true withal, that it is contrary to the nature of Love,
if it be not violent, and contrary to the nature of Violence if it be constant.
And they who make it a wonder, exclaim, and keep such a clutter to find out the
causes of this Frailty of theirs, as unnatural, and not to be believed; how
comes it to pass they do not discern how often they are themselves guilty of
the same, without any Astonishment or Miracle at all? It would peradventure be
more strange to see the Passion fixed. It Is not a simply corporeal Passion.
Affections of Women subject to change.
If there be no end in Avarice and Ambition, there is doubtless no more in
Desire; It still lives after Saciety, and it is impossible to prescribe either
constant Satisfaction, or end; it ever goes beyond its possession: and by that
means Inconstancy peradventure is in some sort more pardonable in them than in
us. Inconstancy pardonable in Women.
They may plead as well as we the inclination to Variety and Novelty, common to
us both. And secondly, without us, that they buy a Pig in a poak. Joan Queen of
Naples, Andreosse hanged by his Wife Joan Queen of Naples, for not being
sufficiently furnished.
caused her first Husband Andreosse to be hanged at the Bars of her Window in
a Halter of Gold and Silk, woven with her own Hand, because that in Matrimonial
performances, she neither found his Parts nor Abilities answer the Expectation
she had conceived from his Stature, Beauty, Youth, and Activity, by which she
had been caught and deceived. There is more pains required in doing than in
suffering; and so they are on their part always at least provided for
Necessity, whereas on our part it may fall out otherwise. For this Reason it
was that Plato wisely made a Law, Men stripped naked before Marriage.
that before Marriage, to determine of the fitness of the Persons, the Judges
should see the young Men who pretended to it, stripped stark naked, and the Women
but to the Girdle only. When they come to try us, they do not perhaps think us
worthy of their choice. Experta latus medidoque simillima loro
Mart. l. 7. Epig. 57.
Inguina, nec lassa stare coacta manu,
Deserit imbelles thalamos --
It Is not enough that a man's Will be good,
Weakness and Insufficiency lawfully break a Marriage:
Et quaerendum aliunde foret nervosius illud,
Catullus.
Quod posset Zonam solvere virgineam.
why not, and according to her own scantling, and amorous intelligence, more
bold and active? Si blando nequeat superesse labori. Virg. Georg. lib. 3.

If strength they want Loves task to undergo.
But is it not a great Impudence to offer our Imperfections and Imbecillities,
Old men's Love feeble and imperfect.
where we desire to please, and leave a good Opinion and Esteem of our selves?
For the little that I am able to do now, -- ad unum Horace. Epod. 17.

Mollis opus --
One bout a Night.
I would not trouble a Woman, that I am to reverence and fear. -- fuge
suspicari, Hor. lib. 2. Ode 4.

Cujus undenum trepidavit aetas
claudare lustrum
suspect not him, Sir Richard Fanshaw.

One whose Love's Wildfire Age does throw
it is cooling Snow.
Nature should satisfy her self in having rendered Age miserable, without
rendering it ridiculous too. I hate to see it, for one poor inch of pitiful
Vigor, which comes upon it but thrice a Week, to strut, and set out it self
with as much eagerness as if it could do mighty feats, a true flame of Flax;
and wonder to see it so boil and bubble, at a time when it is so congealed and
extinguished. This Appetite ought not to appertain to any thing but the flower
of beautiful Youth. Trust not to it, because you see it seconds that
indefatigable, full, constant, and magnanimous ardour that is in you, for it
will certainly leave you in the lurch at your greatest need; but rather return
it to some tender, bashful, and ignorant Boy, who yet trembles at the Rod, and
blushes, Aeneid. lib. 12.
Indum sanguineo veluti violaverit ostro
Si quis ebur, vel mista rubent ubi lilia multa
Alba rosa --
So Indian Ivory streaked with Crimson shows,
Or Lillies white mixed with the Damask Rose.
who can stay till the Morning without dying for shame to behold the disdain of
the fair Eyes of her who knows so well his fumbling impertinence; Ovid Amo. l.
1. Eleg. 7.
Et taciti fecere tamen convitia vultus,
and though she nothing say,
How ill she likes my work, her looks betray.
he never had the satisfaction and the glory of having cudgel'd them till they
were weary, with the vigorous performance of one heroic Night. When I have
observed any one to be troubled with me, I have presently accused her Levity;
but have been in doubt, if I had not reason rather to complain of Nature, she
has doubtless used me very uncivilly, and unkindly, Si non longa satis, si non
been mentula crassa:
Nimirum sapiunt videntque parvam Martial.

Matronae quoque mentulam illibenter.
and done me a most irreparable injury. Every Member I have, as much one as
another, is equally my own, and no other does more properly make me a man than
this. I universally owe my entire Picture to the public. The Wisdom of my
Instruction wholly consists in Liberty, and naked Truth; disdaining to
introduce these little, feigned, common, and provincial Rules, into the
Catalogue of its real Duties, all natural, general, and constant; of which
Civility and Ceremony are Daughters indeed, but illegitimate. We are sure to
have the Vices of Appearance when we shall have had those of Essence. When we
have done with these, we run full drive upon others, if we find it must be so.
For there is danger that we shall fancy new Offices, to excuse our Negligence
toward the natural ones, and to confound them. That this is so, it is manifest,
that in places where the Faults are Witch-crafts, the Witch-crafts are but
Faults. That in Nations where the Laws of Decency are most rare, and most
remiss, the primitive Laws of common reason are better observed: the
innumerable multitude of so many Duties stifling and dissipating our Industry
and Care. The Application of our selves to light and trivial things, diverts us
from those that are necessary and just. O, that these superficial men take an
easy and plausible way in comparison of ours! These are shadows wherewith we
palliate and pay one another; but we do not pay, but inflame the reckoning
toward that great Judge, who tucks up our rags and tatters above our shameful
Parts, and is not nice to view us all over, even to our inmost and most secret
Nudities: it were an useful Decency of our maidenly Modesty, could it keep him
from this Discovery. In fine, whoever could reclaim man from so scrupulous a
verbal Superstition, would do the World no great disservice. Our Life is
divided betwixt Folly and Prudence. Whoever will write but what is reverend and
Canonical, will leave above the one half behind. I do not excuse my self to my
self, and if I did, it should rather be for my Excuses that I would excuse my
self, than for any other Fault. I excuse my self of certain Humors, which I
think more strong in number than those that are on my side: In consideration of
which, I will further say this, (for I desire to please every one, though it
will be hard to do; esse unum hominem accommodatum ad tantam morum ac sermonum
and voluntatum varietatem) that they ought not to condemn me for what I make
Authorities, received and approved of so many Ages, to utter: and that there is
no reason that for want of Rhyme they should refuse me the Liberty they allow
even to Churchmen of our Nation, and time. Of which here are two, and of the
briskest amongst them; Rimula, dispeream, ni monogramma tua est. Beza.

Un vit d'amy la content, and bien traitte. St. Gelais.

besides how many others. I love Modesty, and it is not out of Judgment that I
have chosen this scandalous way of speaking; it is Nature that has chosen it for
me: I commend it not, no more than other forms that are contrary to common
usance: but I excuse it, and by Circumstances both general and particular,
alleviate the Accusation. But to proceed; From whence also can that Usurpation
of sovereign Authority you take upon you over the Women, who favor you at
their own expense, Si furtiva dedit nigra munuscula nocte. Catullus.

If in the silence of the Night
She has permitted stolen delight.
so that you presently assume the Interest, Coldness, and Authority of a
Husband, be derived? It Is a free contract. Why do you not then begin, as you
intend to hold on? There is no prescription upon voluntary things. It Is against
the form; but it is true withal, that I in my time have carried on this
intrigue as much as the Nature of it would permit, as conscientiously, and with
as much color of Justice, as any other contract whatever; and that I never
pretended other Affection than what I really had, and have truly acquainted
them with the Declination, Vigor, and Birth of the fame, the Fits and
Intermissions: a man does not always hold on at the same rate. I have been so
sparing of my Promises, that I think I have been better than my Word. The
Author's Fidelity in Love.
They have found me faithful to their Inconstancy, even to a professed, and
sometimes a multiplied Inconstancy. I never broke with them whilst I had any
hold at all, and what Occasion soever they have given me, never broke with them
to Hatred or Contempt. For such Privacies, though obtained upon never so
scandalous terms, do yet oblige to some good Will. I have sometimes, upon their
tricks and evasions, discovered a little indiscreet Anger and Impatience; for I
am naturally subject to rash Emotions, which though light and short, often
spoil my Market. Would they freely have consulted my Judgment, I should not
have stuck to have given them sharp and paternal Counsels, and to have pinched
them to the quick. If I have left them any cause to complain of me, it is rather
to have found in me, in comparison of the modern usance, a Love foolishly
conscientious than any thing else. I have kept my word in things wherein I
might easily have been dispensed; they then sometimes surrendered themselves
with Reputation, and upon Articles that they were willing enough should be
broken by the Conqueror. I have more than once made Pleasure in its greatest
effort strike to the interest of their humor; and where Reason importuned me,
have armed them against my self; so that they ordered their affairs more
decently and securely by my Rules, when they frankly referred themselves to
them, than they would have done by their own. I have ever, as much as I could,
wholly taken upon my self alone the hazard of our assignations to acquit them,
and have always contrived our meetings after the hardest and most unusual
manner, as less suspected, and moreover, in my opinion, more accessible. They
are chiefly more open, where they think they are the most securely shut. Things
least feared are least interdicted and observed. One may more boldly dare what
no body thinks you dare, which by the difficulty becomes easy. Never had any
man his approaches more impertinently genital; this way of loving is more
according to my discipline: but how ridiculous and ineffectual to our People,
who better know than I? yet I shall not repent me of it, I have nothing there
more to lose. me tabula sacer Horat. lib. Ode 5.

Votiva paries, indicat uvida
Suspendisse potenti
Vestimenta Maris Deo.
For me, Sir Rich. Fanshaw.
my votive table shows
That I have hanged up my wet clothes
Upon the Temple Wall
Of Sea's great Admiral.
It Is now my time to speak out. But I might peradventure say, as another would
do, Thou talkest idly, my friend, the Love of thy time has little Commerce with
Faith and Integrity. Terence. Eun. Act. 1. Scaen. 1.
haec si tu postules
Ratione certa facere, nihilo plus agas,
Quam si des operam, ut cum ratione insanias.
These things if thou will undertake,
By Reason, permanent to make;
This will be all thou wilt get by it,
Wisely to run out of thy Wit.
On the contrary also, if it were for me to begin again, in earnest it should
be by the same method, and the same progress, how fruitless soever it might
prove. Folly and Ignorance are commendable in an incommendable action. The
farther I go from their humor in this, I approach so much nearer to my own. As
to the rest, in this traffic, I would not suffer my self to be totally carried
away, I would please my self in it, but would not forget my self withal: I
would keep the little Sense and Discretion that Nature has given me, entire for
their service and my own: a little Emotion, but no Dotage. My Conscience should
also be engaged in it, even to Debauch and Dissolution; but so far as to
Ingratitude, Treachery, Malice and Cruelty, never. I would not purchase the
pleasure of this Vice at any rate, but content my self with its proper and
simple expense. Nullum intra se vitium est, Nothing is a Vice in it self. I
almost equally hate a stupid and slothful Laziness, as I do a toilsome and
painful Employment; the one pinches, the other lays me asleep. I like wounds
as well as bruises, and cuts as well as dry blows. I found in this Commerce,
when I was the most able for it, a just moderation betwixt these Extremes. Love
is a spritely, lively, and gay Agitation, I was neither troubled nor afflicted
with it, but heated, and moreover disordered; a man must stop there: it hurts
no body but fools. A young man asked the Philosopher Panetius, if it was
becoming a wise man to be in Love? Let the wise man look to that, answered he,
but let not thou and I, who are not so, engage our selves in so stirring and
violent an affair, that will slave us to others, and render us contemptible to
our selves. He said true: that we are not to entrust a thing so precipitous in
it self, to a Soul that has not wherewithal to withstand its assaults, and
disprove the saying of Agesilaus, that Prudence and Love cannot live together.
It Is a vain Employment, it is true, indecent, shameful, and unlawful; but to
carry it on after this manner, I look upon it as wholesome, and proper to
enliven a drowsy Soul, and to rouse up a heavy Body. And, as an experienced
Physician, I would prescribe it to a man of my form and condition, as soon as
any other Recipe whatever, to rouse and keep him in vigor till well advanced
in years, and to defer the approaches of Age, whilst we are but in the Suburbs,
and that the Pulse yet beats. Juven. Sat. 3.
Dum nova canities, dum prima and recta senectus,
Dum superest Lachesi quod torqueat, and pedibus me
Porto meis, nullo dextram subeunte bacillo.
Sir Robert Stapleton.
Whilst Age strait-shouldred has some youth in it,
Whilst my hair's gray, whilst there is a remnant yet
For Lachesis to spin, whilst I walk on
My own Legs, need no staff to lean upon.
We have need to be trinckled and tickled by some such niping incitation as
this. Do but observe what Youth, Vigor, and Gayety it inspired Anacreon
withal. And Socrates, who was then older than I, speaking of an amorous
Object, Leaning, said he, my Shoulder to her Shoulder, and my Head to hers, as
we were reading together in a Book, I felt, without dissembling, a sudden sting
in my Shoulder like the biting of a Flea, which I still felt above five days
after, and a continual itching crept into my Heart. What only an accidental
touch, and of a Shoulder, to heat and alter a Soul mortified and enerved by
Age, and the strictest liver of all Mankind? And pray why not? Socrates was a
Man, and would neither be, nor be like any other thing. Philosophy does not
contend against natural Pleasures, Natural Pleasures allowed if moderate.
provided they be moderate: and only preaches Moderation, not a total
abstinence. The power of resistance is employed against those that are
adulterate, and introduced by Innovation. Philosophy says, that the Appetites
of the Body ought not to be augmented by the Mind; and ingeniously warns us not
to stir up Hunger by Saturity, not to stuff instead of filling the Belly, to
avoid all Fruition that may bring us to want, and all Meats and Drinks that
procure Thirst and Hunger: As she does in the service of Love, she there
prescribes us to take such an object as may only simply satisfy the Bodies
real need, and may not stir the Soul, which ought only barely to follow and
assist the Body, without mixing in the affair. But have I not reason to
believe, that these Precepts, which nevertheless, in my opinion, are elsewhere
very severe, are only directed to a Body in its best, and best performing
plight: and that in a Body broken with Age, as in a weak Stomach, it is
excusable to warm and support it by Art, and by the mediation of the Fancy, to
restore the Appetite, and cheerfulness it has lost in it self. May we not say,
that there is nothing in us during this earthly Prison that is purely either
corporeal or spiritual; and that we injuriously break up a man alive; and that
it seems but reasonable that we should carry our selves as favorably at least
against the use of Pleasure, as we do against that of Pain? It was (for
example) vehement even to perfection in the Souls of the Saints by Repentance:
the Body had there naturally a share by the right of Union, and yet might have
but little part in the Cause; and yet are they not contented that it should
barely follow, and assist the afflicted Soul. They have afflicted it by it
self, with grievous and peculiar torments, to the end, that by emulation of one
another, the Soul and Body might plunge man into misery, by so much more
salutiferous as it is more painful and severe. In like manner, is it not
injustice in bodily pleasures to subdue and keep under the Soul, and say, that
it must therein be dragged along, as to some enforced and servile obligation and
necessity? It Is rather her part to botch and cherish them, there to present her
self, and to invite them, the Authority of Ruling belonging to her, as it is
also her part, in my opinion, in Pleasures that are proper to her, to inspire
and infuse into the Body all the resentment it is capable of, and to study how
to make it pleasant and useful to it. For it is good reason, as they say, that
the Body should not pursue its Appetites to the prejudice of the Mind; but why
is it not also reason that the Mind should not pursue hers to the prejudice of
the Body? I have no other Passion to keep me in breath. What Avarice, Ambition,
Quarrels and Suits do to others, who, like me, have no particular Vocation,
Love would much more commodiously do; it would restore to me Vigilance,
Sobriety, Grace, and the care of my Person. It would re-assure my countenance,
that the sour looks, those deformed, and to be pitied sour looks of old Age,
might not step in to disgrace it; would again put me upon sound and wise
studies, by which I might render my self more loved and esteemed, clearing my
mind of the despair of it self, and of its Use, and redintigrate it to it self;
would divert me from a thousand troublesome thoughts, and a thousand
melancholic Humors, that Idleness and the ill posture of our Health loads us
withal at such an Age; would warm again, in Dreams at least, the Blood that
Nature has given over; would hold up the Chin, and a little stretch out the
Nerves, the vigours, and gayety of Life of that poor man who is going full
drive toward his ruin. But I very well understand that it is a commodity very
hard to recover: by Weakness and long Experience our taste is become more
delicate and nice: we ask most, when we bring least; and will have the most
choice, when we least deserve to be accepted: and knowing our selves for what
we are, we are less confident and more distrustful, nothing can assure us of
being beloved, considering our condition and theirs. I am out of countenance to
see my self in company with those young wanton creatures, Cujus in indomito
constantior inguine nervus, Horat. Epod. 12.

Quam nova collibus arbor inhaeret.
to what end should we go insinuate our misery with their gay and spritely
humor? Possint ut juvenes visere fervidi,
Hor. lib. 4. Ode 13.
Multo non sine risu,
Dilapsam in cineres facem.
That Youth inflamed may behold:
Sir Thomas Hawkins.
Not without laughter, and much scorn,
A burning Torch to Ashes worn.
They have Strength and Reason on their side, let us give way, we are most able
to make good our ground. And these blossoms of springing Beauty suffer not
themselves to be handled by such benumbed hands, nor be dealt with mere
material means. For, as the old Philosopher answered one that jeered him
because he could not gain the favor of a young Girl he made love to, Friend,
the hook will not stick in such soft cheese. It is a Commerce that requires
relation and correspondence: the other Pleasures we receive may be acknowledged
by recompenses of another nature: but this is not to be paid but with the same
kind of Coin. In earnest, in this sport, the Pleasure I give does more tickle
my imagination, than that they give me. Now, as he has nothing of generosity in
him that can receive a courtesy where he conferrs none, it must needs be a
mean Soul that will owe all, and can be contented to maintain a Friendship with
Persons to whom he is a continual charge. There is no Beauty, Grace, nor
Privacy so exquisite, that a gallant man ought to desire at this rate. If they
only can be kind to us out of Pity, I had much rather dye than live upon
Charity. I would have right to ask in the style that I saw some beg in Italy,
Fate ben per voi, Do good for your self; or after the manner that Cyrus
exhorted his Soldiers, Who loves me, follow me. Consort your self (some one
will say to me) with Women of your own condition, whom, the company of one of
the same Age will render more easy to your desire. O ridiculous and stupid
composition! nolo Mart. li. 10. Epig. 90.

Barbam vellere mortuo Leoni.
Rouse not a sleeping Lioness.
Xenophon lays it for an objection, and an accusation against Menon, that he
never made love to any but old Women: for my part, I take more pleasure in
seeing only the just and sweet mixture of two young Beauties: or only to
meditate of it in my fancy, than to be my self an Actor in the second with a
deformed creature. I leave that fantastic Appetite to the Emperor Galba, that
was only for old curried flesh: and to this poor wretch, O, ego Di faciant
talem te cernere possim, Ovid. Trist.

Charaque mutatis oscula far comis,
Amplectique meis corpus non pingue lacertis.
O, would to Heaven, that such I might thee see,
To kiss those Locks, gray with Antiquity,
And thy lank withered Body to embrace.
And amongst the Deformities, Painted Beauties reckoned amongst Deformities.
I reckon forced and artificial Beauties. Emonez, a young Curtezan of Chios,
thinking by fine dressing to acquire the Beauty that Nature had denied her,
came to the Philosopher Arcesilaus, and asked him, if it was possible for a
wise man to be in love, Yes, replied he, provided it be not with a sarded and
adulterated Beauty, like thine. The Deformity of a confessed Antiquity, is not
to me so despiseable and nauseous, as another that is polished and plastered
up. Shall I speak it without the danger of having my Throat cut? At what Age
Love is in his Throne.
Love, in my Opinion, is not properly and naturally in its Season, but in the
Age next to Childhood; Hor. lib. 2. Ode 5.
Quem si puellarum insereres choro,
Mill sagaces falleret hospites,
Discrimen obscurum, solutis
Crinibus, ambiguoque vultu.
Whom should you with dishevelled Hair,
And that ambiguous face, bring in
Amongst the Chorus of the fair,
He would deceive the subtlest there,
So smooth, so rosy is his Skin.
nor beauty neither. For whereas Homer extends it so far as to the budding of
the Chin; Plato himself has observed it for rare. And the reason why the
Sophist Dion called the first appearing Hairs of adolescence, Aristogitons, and
Harmodii, is sufficiently known. I find it in virility already in some sort a
little out of date, though not so much as in old Age. Importunus enim
transvolat aridas Quercus. Hor. l. 4. Ode 13.

Love restless with quick motion flies
From withered Oaks.
And Marguerite, Queen of Navarre, like a Woman, does very far extend the
Advantage of Women, ordaining, that it is time at thirty years old, to convert
the title of Fair into that of Good. The shorter Authority we give him over our
lives, it is so much the better for us. Do but observe his Comportment; it is a
beardless Boy, that knows not how they proceed in his School, contrary to all
Order; Study, Exercise, and Usance, are ways for Insufficiency to proceed by.
There Novices rule. Amor ordinem nescit. Love knows no Order. Divus Hieron.
Doubtless his conduct is much more graceful, when mixed with Inadvertency and
Trouble: Miscarriages and ill Successes give him Appetite and Grace, provided
it be sharp and eager, it is no great matter whether it be prudent or no. Do but
observe how he goes reeling, tripping, and playing: you put him in the Stocks
when you guide him by Art and Wisdom, and he is restrained of his Divine
Liberty when put into those hairy and callous Clutches. As to the rest, I often
hear them set out this Intelligence, as entirely spiritual, and disdain to put
the interest the Senses there have into Consideration. Every thing there serves
turn; but I can say that I have often seen, that we have excused the weakness
of their Understandings, in favor of their outward Beauty; but have never yet
seen that in favor of a mind, how mature and well-dispos'd soever, any one
would lend a hand to support a Body that was never so little decayed. Why does
not some one make an attempt to make that noble Socratical Contract and Union
of the Body to the Soul, purchasing a philosophical and spiritual Intelligence
and Generation at the price of his Thighs, which is the highest price it can
amount to? Plato ordains in his Laws, that he who has performed any signal and
advantageous Exploit in War, may not be refused during the whole Expedition,
his Age, or Deformity notwithstanding, a kiss, or any other amorous Favor from
any whatever. What he thinks to be so just in Recommendation of Military
Valor, why may it not be the same in Recommendation of any other good Quality?
And why does not some Woman take a fancy to prepossess over her Companions the
Glory of this chaste Love? I may well say chaste, -- nam si quando ad praelia
ventum est
Vt quondam in stipulis magnus sine viribus ignis Virg. Georg. lib. 3.

Incassum furit. --
For when to join Love's Battle they engage, Mr. Ogilby.

Like Fire in Straw they fondly spend their rage.
the Vices that are stifled in the thought are not the worst. To conclude this
notable Commentary, which has escaped from me in a Torrent of babble, a Torrent
sometimes impetuous and offensive: Vt missum sponsi furtivo munere malum,
Catullus.

Procurrit casto Virginis e gremio:
Quod miserae oblitae molli sub vest locatum,
Dum adventu matris prosilit, excutitur,
Atque illud prono praeceps agitur decursu,
Huic manat tristi conscius ore rubor.
As a fair Apple, by a Lover sent
To's Mistress, for a private Complement,
Does tumble from the rosy Virgins lap,
Where she had quite forgot it by mishap;
When, starting at her Mothers coming in,
It is shak'd out her Garments from between,
And rouls over the Floor before her Eyes,
A guilty blush her fair Complexion dies.
I say that Males and Females are cast in the same Mould, and that Education
and Usage excepted, the difference is not great: Plato indifferently invites
both the one and the other to the Society of all Studies, Exercises, and
Commands, both Military and Civil, in the Commonwealth; and the Philosopher
Antisthenes took away all distinction betwixt their Virtue and ours. It is much
more easy to accuse one Sex, than to excuse the other. It Is according to the
Proverb, Ill may Vice correct Sin.

CHAP. VI. Of Coaches.
IT is very easy to make it appear, that great Authors, when they write of
Causes, do not only make use of those they think to be the true Causes indeed,
but also of those they believe are not so, provided their Works may be
illustrated with the Beauty of Invention. They speak true, and usefully enough,
if it be ingeniously. We cannot make our selves sure of the supreme Cause, and
therefore clutter a great many together, to see if it may not accidentally be
amongst them, namque unam dicere causam,
Lucret. l. 6.
Non satis est, verum plures unde una tamen sit.
Mr. Creech.
And thus my Muse a store of Causes brings;
For here, as in a thousand other things,
Though by one single Cause the effect is done,
Yet since it is hid, a thousand must be shown,
That we may surely hit that single one.
Will you ask me, Why they say God bless you when you Sneeze.
whence the Customs of blessing those that Sneeze? we break Wind three several
ways; that which sallies from below is too filthy; that which breaks out from
the Mouth carries with it some reproach of having eaten too much; the third
Eruption is Sneezing, which, because it proceeds from the Head, and is without
offense, we give it this civil Reception; Do not laugh at this distinction, for
they say it is Aristotle's. I think I have read in Plutarch (which of all the
Authors I ever conversed with, is he who has best mixed Art with Nature, and
Judgment with Knowledge,) giving a Reason for the rising of the Stomach in
those that are at Sea, that it is occasioned by fear, having found out some
reason by which he proves, that fear may produce such an Effect: I, who am very
subject to vomit, know very well that that Cause concerns not me; Why People
are apt to vomit at Sea.
and know it not by Argument, but by necessary Experience, without instancing
what has been often told me; that the same thing often happens in Beasts,
especially Hogs, when out of all apprehension of danger; and what an
Acquaintance of mine has told me of himself, that being very subject to it, the
Disposition to vomit has three or four times gone off him, being very much
afraid in a violent Storm, as it happened to that ancient. Seneca.
Pejus vexabar quam ut periculum mihi succurreret. I was too much troubled for
my danger to relieve me. I was never afraid upon the Water, nor indeed in any
other peril (and I have had enough before my eyes, that have been just enough, if
death be one) so as to be astonished and to lose my Judgment. Fear springs
sometimes as well from want of Judgment as from want of Courage. All the
dangers I have been in I have looked upon without winking, with an open, sound,
and entire Sight; and besides, a man must have courage to fear: It has formerly
served me better than some others, so to order my retreat, that it was, if not
without fear, nevertheless without affright and astonishment. It was stirred
indeed, but not amazed nor stupefied. Great Souls go yet much farther, and
represent flights, not only sound and temperate, but moreover fierce. Let us
make a Relation of that which Alcibiades reports of Socrates, his fellow in
Arms: I found him, says he, after the rout of our Army, him and Lachez in the
rear of those that fled, and considered him at my leisure, and in security, for
I was mounted upon a good Horse, and he on foot, and had so fought. I took
notice in the first place, how much Judgment and Resolution he showed in
comparison of Lachez, and then the bravery of his march, nothing different from
his ordinary gate; his sight firm and regular, considering and judging what
passed about him, looking one while upon those, and then upon others, Friends
and Enemies, after such a manner as encouraged the one, and signified to the
others, that he would sell his life dear to any one should attempt to take it
from him, and so they came off; for People are not willing to attack such kind
of men, but pursue those they see are in a Fright. This is the Testimony of
this great Captain, which teaches us what we every day see, that nothing so
much throws us into dangers as an inconsiderate eagerness of getting our selves
clear of them. Quo timoris minus est, eo minus ferme pericula est. Livius, l.
22.
When there is least fear there is for the most part least danger. Our People
are too blame to say that such a one is afraid of Death, when he expresses that
he thinks of it and fore-sees it: Foresight is equally convenient in what
concerns us, whether good or ill. To consider and judge of the danger, is in
some sort the reverse to being astonished. I do not find my self strong enough
to sustain the force and impetuosity of this Passion of Fear, nor of any other
vehement Passion whatever: If I was once conquered and beaten down, I should
never rise again very sound. Whoever should once make my Soul lose her footing,
would never set it upright again: she retasts and researches her self too
profoundly, and too much to the quick, and therefore would never let the wound
she had received heal and cicatrize: It has been well for me that never any
sickness has yet discomposed it: At every charge made upon me, I make my utmost
opposition and best defense; by which means the first that should rout me,
would make me for ever rallying again; I have no after game to play. On which
side soever the inundation breaks my banks, I lie open, and am drowned without
remedy. Epicurus says, that a wise Man can never become a Fool; and I have an
Opinion reverse to this Sentence, which is, that who has once been a very Fool,
will never after be very wise. God grant me Cold according to my cloth, and
Passions proportionable to the means I have to withstand them. Nature having
laid me open on the one side, has covered me on the other; having disarmed me
of strength, she has armed me with insensibility, and an apprehension that is
either regular or dull. Now I cannot long endure (and when I was young much
less endured) either Coach, Litter, or Boat, and hate all other riding but on
Horseback, both in the City and Country. But I can worse endure a Litter than
a Coach, and by the same reason, better a rude Agitation upon the Water, from
whence fear is produced, than the motions of a Calm. At the little jerks of
Oars, stealing the Vessel from under us, I find I know not how both my Head and
my Stomach disordered: neither can I endure to sit upon a tottering Stool. When
the Sail, or the Current carries us equally, or that we are towed, those equal
agitations do not disturb me at all. It Is an interrupted Motion that offends
me, and most of all when most slow: I cannot otherwise express it. The
Physicians have ordered me to squeeze and gird my self about the bottom of my
Belly with a Napkin to remedy this accident; which however I have not tried,
being accustomed to wrestle with my own defects, and overcome them by my self.
Would my Memory serve me, I should not think my time ill spent in setting down
here the infinite variety that History presents us of the use of Coaches in the
Service of War: various according to the Nations, and according to the Ages; in
my Opinion, of great necessity and effect: so that it is a wonder that we have
lost all knowledge of them. I will only say this, that very lately, in our
Fathers time, the Hungarians made very advantagous use of them against the
Turks; having in every one of them a Targetter and a Musket, and a number of
Harquebuseers drawn up, ready, and charged, and all covered with a A Defense of
Shields ranged by one another.
Pavesade like a Galliot. They made the Front of their Battle with three
thousand such Coaches, and after the Canon had played, made them all pour in
their shot upon the Enemy, and made them swallow that Volley before they tasted
of the rest; which was no little advance; and that done, the said Chariots
charged into their Squadrons to break them, and make way for the rest: besides
the use they might make of them to flank their Bodies in a place of danger
marching in the Field, or to cover a Quarter, and fortify it in haste. In my
time, a Gentleman in one of our Frontiers, unweildy of Body, and not being able
to procure a Horse able to carry his weight, having a Quarrel, rid up and down
in a Chariot of this fashion, and found great Convenience in it. But let us
leave these Chariots of War. As if the insignificancy of Coaches had not been
sufficiently known by better proofs, the last Kings of our first Race traveled
in a Chariot drawn by four Oxen. Mark Anthony was the first at Rome that caused
himself to be drawn in a Coach by Lions, and a singing Wench with him.
Heliogabalus did since as much, calling himself Cybele, the Mother of the Gods;
and also by Tigers, taking upon him the Person of the God Bacchus, he also
sometimes harnessed two Stags to his Coach, another time four Dogs, and
another, four naked Whores, causing himself to be drawn by them in Pomp, stark
naked too. The Emperor Firmus caused his Chariot to be drawn by Ostriches of a
prodigious size, so that it seemed rather to fly, than roll. The strangeness of
these Inventions puts this other Fancy in my head; that it is a kind of
Pusillanimity in Monarchs, The excessive expense of Monarchs a testimony of
pusillanimity.
and a Testimony that they do not sufficiently understand themselves what they
are, when they study to make themselves honored, and to appear great by
excessive Expense. It were indeed excusable in a foreign Country, where they
are Strangers; but amongst their own Subjects, where they are in Sovereign
command, and may do what they please, it derogates from their Dignity, the most
supreme degree of Honor, to which they can arrive. As, methinks, it is
superfluous in a private Gentleman to go finely dressed at home; his House, his
Attendents, and his Kitchen, sufficiently answer for him. The advice that
Isocrates gives his King, seems to be grounded upon Reason; that he should be
splendid in Pla^e and Furniture: forasmuch as it is an expense of duration,
that devolves to his Successors; and that he should avoid all Magnificences
that will in a short time be forgot. I loved to go fine when I was a younger
Brother, for want of other Ornament, and it became me well: there are some upon
whom their rich clothes weep. We have strange stories of the frugality of our
Kings about their own Persons, and in their gifts: Kings that were great both
in Reputation, Valor, and Fortune. Demosthenes mightily stickles against the
Law of the City, that assigned the public Money for the Pomp of their public
Plays and Festivals: he would that their Greatness should be seen in the
number of Ships well equipt, and good Armies well provided for. And there is
good reason to condemn Theophrastus, who, in his Book of Riches, has
established a contrary opinion, and maintains that sort of Expense to be the
true fruit of Abundance. They are delights, says Aristotle, that only please
the baser sort of the People, and that vanish from the memory so soon as they
are sated with them, and of which no serious and judicious man can have any
esteem. This Money would, in my opinion, be much more Royally, as more
profitably, justly, and durably, laid out in Ports, Havens, Walls, and
Fortifications; in sumptuous Buildings, Churches, Colleges, the reforming of
Streets and Highways; wherein Pope Gregory the thirteenth will leave a
laudable memory to future times; and wherein our Queen Catharine would to all
Posterity manifest her natural Liberality, and Munificence to succeeding Ages,
would her Means supply her Affection. Fortune has done me a great despite, in
interrupting the noble Structure of the Pont-neuf of our great City, The
Pont-neuf at Paris.
and depriving me of the hope of seeing it finished before I dye. Moreover, it
seems to the Subjects, who are daily Spectators of these Triumphs, that their
own Riches are exposed before them, and that they are entertained at their own
expense. For the People are apt to presume of Kings, as we do of our Servants,
that they are to take care to provide us all things necessary in abundance; but
not touch it themselves: And therefore the Emperor Galba, being pleased with a
Musician that played to him at Supper, called for his Cabinet, and gave him a
handful of Crowns that he took out of it, with these words, This is not the
Public Money, but my own. Yet it so falls out, that the People for the most
part have Reason on their side, and that their Princes feed their Eyes with
what they once had to fill their Bellies. Liberality it self is not in its true
Luster in a Sovereign hand: private men have therein the most right; for to
take it exactly, a King has nothing properly his own; he owes himself to
others. Authority is not given in favor of the Magistrate, but of the People.
A Superior is never made so for his own Profit, but for the Profit of the
Inferior; and a Physician for the sick Person, and not for himself. All
Magistracy, as well as all Art, has its end out of it self. Seneca.
Nulla ars in se versatur. Wherefore the Governors of young Princes, who make
it their Business to imprint in them this Virtue of Liberality, and preach to
them to deny nothing, and to think nothing so well spent, as what they give, (a
Doctrine that I have known in great Credit in my time) either have more
particular regard to their own profit, than that of their Master, or ill
understand to whom they speak. It is too easy a thing to imprint Liberality in
him who has as much as he will to supply it with at the expense of others; and
the estimate of it, not being proportioned to the value of the Gift, but to the
Wealth of him who extends it, it comes to nothing in so mighty Hands. They find
themselves Prodigal, before they can be reputed Liberal; And yet it is but of
little Recommendation, in comparison of other Royal Virtues: and the only one,
as the Tyrant Dionysius said, that suits well with Tyranny it self. I should
rather teach him this of the ancient Labourer, (...). Corinea apud Plutarch.
That whoever will have a good Crop, must sow with his hand, and not pour out
of the Sack: he must disperce it abroad, and not lay it on a heap in one place:
and that being he is to give, or to say better, to pay and restore to so many
People, according as they have deserved, he ought to be a loyal and discreet
Disposer. If the Liberality of a Prince be without measure or discretion, I had
rather he were covetous. A Royal Virtue seems most to consist in Justice;
Wherein Royal Virtue consists.
and of all the parts of Justice, that best denotes a King that accompanies his
Liberality; for that they have particularly reserved to be performed by
themselves, whereas all other sorts of Justice they remit to the Administration
of others. An immoderate Bounty is a very weak means to acquire them good will,
for it checks more People than it allures: Cicero de Offi. Jem. Seneca de
Benef. vel in Epist.
Quo in plures usus sit, minus in multos uti possit. Quid autem est stultius,
quam quod libenter facias, curare ut id diutius facere non possis. By how much
more you use it to many, by so much less will you be in a capacity to use it to
many more. And what greater folly can there be than to order it so, that what
you would do willingly you cannot do long? And if it be conferred without due
respect of Merit, Tyrants hated by those whom they have unjustly advanced.
it puts him out of countenance that receives it, and is received without
grace. Tyrants have been sacrificed to the hatred of the People by the hands of
those very men they have unjustly advanced; such kind of men thinking to assure
to themselves the possession of Benefits unduly received, if they manifest to
have him in hatred and disdain of whom they hold them; and in this associate
themselves to the common Judgment and Opinion. The Subjects of a Prince profuse
in Gifts, grow unreasonable in asking, and accommodate themselves not to
Reason, but Example. We have in earnest very often reason to blush at our own
Impudence: we are over-paid, according to Justice, when the Recompense equals
our Service; for do we owe nothing of natural Obligation to our Princes? If he
bears our Charges, he does too much; it is enough that he contributes to them,
the overplus is called Benefit, which cannot be exacted: for the very name of
Liberality sounds of Liberty: there is no end on it, as we use it. We never
reckon what we have received, we are only for the future Liberality. Wherefore,
the more a Prince exhausts himself in giving, the poorer he grows in Friends.
How should he satisfy immoderate desires, that still increase the more they
are filled? He who has his thoughts upon taking, never thinks of what he has
taken. Covetousness has nothing so proper, and so much its own as Ingratitude.
The Example of Cyrus will not do amiss in this place, to serve the Kings of
these times for a touchstone, to know whether their gifts are well or ill
bestowed, and to see how much better that Emperor conferred them than they do:
by which means they are reduced to borrow of their unknown Subjects, and rather
of them who they have wronged than of them on whom they have conferred their
benefits, and so receive Aids, wherein there is nothing of gratuitous but the
Name. Croesus reproached him with his Bounty, and cast up to how much his
Treasure would amount if he had been a little closer handed. He had a mind to
justify his Liberality, and therefore sent Dispatches into all Parts to the
Grandees of his Dominions, whom he had particularly advanced, entreating every
one of them to supply him with as much Money as they could for a pressing
occasion, and to send him a particular of what every one could advance. When
all these Tickets were brought to him, every one of his Friends, not thinking
it enough barely to offer him only so much as he had received from his Bounty,
adding to it a great deal of his own, it appeared that the Sum amounted to a
great deal more than Croesus his reckoning. Whereupon Cyrus, I am not, said he,
less in love with Riches, than other Princes, but rather a better Husband, you
see with how small a venture I have acquired the inestimable Treasure of so
many Friends; and how much more faithful Treasure they are to me than Mercenary
men without Obligation or Affection would be; and my Money better laid up than
in Chests, putting upon me the Hatred, Envy, and Contempt of other Princes. The
Emperors excused the Superfluity of their Plays, and public Spectacles, by
reason that their Authority did in some sort (at least in outward appearance)
depend upon the Will of the People of Rome; who, time out of mind, had been
accustomed to be entertained and caressed with such shows and excesses. But
they were particular men who had nourished this Custom, to gratify their
Fellow-Citizens and Companions, (and chiefly out of their own Purses) by such
Profusion and Magnificence: It had quite another taste, when they were the
Masters who came to hold it up. Cic. de Off. lib. 1.
Pecuniarum translatio a justis dominis ad alienos non debet liberalis videri.
The transferring of Money from the right Owners to Strangers, ought not to have
the Title of Liberality. Philip, being his Son, went about by Presents to gain
the Affection of the Macedonians, reprimanded him in a Letter after this
manner. What! have thou a mind that thy Subjects shall look upon thee as their
Cash-keeper, and not as their King? Will It thou tamper with them to win their
Affections? Do it then by the benefit of thy Virtue, and not by those of thy
Chest. And yet it was doubtless a fine thing to bring and plant within the
Theater a great number of vast Trees, with all their Branches in their full
verdure, representing a great shady Forest, disposed in excellent order, and
the first day to throw into it a thousand Ostriches and a thousand Stags, a
thousand Boars, and a thousand fallow Deer, to be killed and disposed of by the
People: the next day, to cause an hundred great Lions, an hundred Leopards, and
three hundred Bears to be killed in his presence; and for the third day, to
make three hundred pair of Fencers to fight it out to the last, as the Emperor
Probus did. It was also very fine to see those vast Amphitheaters, Rich and
sumptuous Amphitheaters.
all faced with Marble without, curiously wrought with Figures and Statues, and
the inside sparkling with rare decorations and enrichments. Calphurnius, Eg. 7.
Baltheus en gemmis, en illita Porticus auro.
Behold a Belt with Jewels glorious made,
And a brave Portico with Gold o're-laid.
all the sides of this vast space filled and environed from the bottom to the
top, with three or fourscore ranks of Seats, all of Marble also, and covered
with Cushions, Juven. sat. 3.
-- exeat, inquit,
Si pudor est, and depulvino surgat equestri,
Cujus res legi non sufficit.
Sir Robert Stapleton.
Get y'out, whose means fall short of Law, one cries,
For shame from off the noble Cushion rise.
where a hundred thousand men might sit placed at their ease: and the place
below, where the Plays were played, to make it by Art first open, and cleave in
chinks, representing Caves that vomited out the Beasts designed for the
Spectacle; and then secondly, to be overflowed with a profound Sea, full of Sea
Monsters, and loaded with Ships of War, to represent a Naval Battle: and
thirdly, to make it dry and even again for the Combat of the Gladiators; and
for the fourth Scene, to have it strewn with Vermillion and Storax instead of
Sand, there to make a solemn Feast for all that infinite number of People: the
last Act of one only day. Quoties nos descendentis arenae Calphurnius.

Vidimus in parts, ruptaque voragine terrae
Emersisse feras, and iisdem saepe latebris
Aurea cum croceo creverunt arbuta libro.
Nec solum nobis silvestria cernere monstra
Contigit, aequoreos ego cum certantibus ursis
Spectavi vitulos, and equorum nomine dignum,
Sed deforme pecus.
How often, when Spectators, have we seen
One corner of the Theater sink in;
And from a dreadful Chasm in the Earth,
Vomit wild Beasts: Then presently give birth
Unto a glittering Grove of golden Bowers,
That put forth blossoms of enameled flowers.
Nor yet of Sylvan Monsters had we sight
Alone, I saw Sea-calves with wild Bears fight,
And a deformed sort of Monsters came,
Which by their shape we might Sea-horses name.
sometimes they have made a high Mountain to advance it self, full of
Fruit Trees, and other flourishing sorts of Wood, sending down Rivolets of
Water from the top, as from the mouth of a Fountain: Other whiles, a great Ship
was seen to come rouling in, which opened and divided of it self; and after
having disgorg'd from the hold four or five hundred Beasts for fight, closed
again, and vanished without help. At other times, from the Floor of this Place,
they made spouts of perfumed Water, dart their streams upward, and so high as
to besprinkle all that infinite Multiude. To defend themselves from the
injuries of the weather, they had that vast Place one while covered over with
Purple Curtains of Needlework, and by and by with Silk of another color, which
they could draw off or on in a moment, as they had a mind. Quamvis non modico
caleant spectacula sole,
Vela reducuntur cum venit Hermogenes.
The curtains, tho'the Sun does scorch the skin,
Are when Hermogenes appears drawn in.
The Network also that was set before the People to defend them from the
violence of these turned out Beasts, were also woven of Gold. Calphurnius, Eg.
7.
auro quoque torta refulgent
Retia.
And woven Nets refulgent were with Gold.
If there be any excusable in such excesses as these, it is where the Novelty
and Invention create more wonder than expense. Even in these Vanities we
discover how fertile those Ages were in other kind of Wits than these of ours.
It is with this sort of fertility, as with other products of Nature. Not that
she there employed her utmost force. We do not go, we rather run up and down,
and whirle this way and that; we turn back the way we came. I am afraid our
knowledge is weak in all Senses. We neither see far forward, nor backward: Our
understanding comprehends little, and lives but a little while; it is short both
in extent of time, and extent of matter. Vixere fortes ante Agamemnona Hor.
lib. 4. Ode 9.

Multi, sed omnes illacrymabilis
Vrgentur, ignotique longa Nocte.
Men slashed e're Diomed was made; Sir Richard Fanshaw.

But all are in Oblivion drowned,
And put unmourn'd into the ground,
For lack of sacred Poets aid.
Et supra bellum Trojanum, and funera Trojae, Lucretius, l. 5.

Multi alias alii quoque res cecinere Poetae.
And long before the War, and Sack of Troy,
On other things Bards did their Pens employ.
And the Narrative of Solon, of what he had got out of the Egyptian Priests,
touching the long life of their estate, and their manner of learning and
preserving foreign Histories; is not, methinks, a Testimony to be slighted upon
this consideration. Cicero de not. Deo. l. 1.
Si interminatam in omnes parts magnitudinem regionum videremus, and temporum,
in quam se injiciens animus, and intendens, ita late longeque peregrinatur, ut
nullam oram ultimi videat, in qua possit insistere: In haec immensitate
infinita, vis innumerabilium appareret formarum. Could we see on all parts the
unlimited Magnitude of Regions and Extent of Times, upon which the mind being
intent, does wander so far and wide, that no limits of the last are to be seen,
in which it can bound its Eye. We should in that infinite Immensity discover an
innumerable quantity of Forms. Though all that has arrived at our Knowledge of
times past should be true, and known by some one Person, it would be less than
nothing in comparison of what is unknown. And if this Image of the World, which
glides whilst we live upon it, how wretched and short is the Knowledge of the
most curious? Not only of particular Events, which Fortune often renders
exemplary, and of great concern, but of the Estate of great Governments and
Nations, a hundred more escape us, than ever come to our Knowledge. We make a
mighty Business of the Invention of Artillery and Printing, which other Men at
the other end of the World, Printing in China.
in China, had a thousand years ago. Did we but see as much of the World as we
do not, we should perceive, it is to be supposed, a perpetual Multiplication,
and Vicissitude of forms. There is nothing single and rare in respect of
Nature, but in respect of our Knowledge; which is a wretched Foundation whereon
to ground our Rules, and that represents to us a very false Image of things. As
we now a days vainly conclude the declension and decrepitude of the World, by
the Arguments we extract from our own Weakness and decay; Jamque adeo affecta
est Aetas affectaque Tellus.
Lucret. l. 2.
So much the Age, so much the Earth is changed.
so did they formerly vainly conclude the Birth and Youth of theirs, by the
Vigor they observed in the Wits of their time, abounding in Novelties, and the
invention of diverse Arts. Verum, ut opinor, habet novitatem, Lucret. l. 5.
summa recensque
Natura est Mundi, neque pridem exordia coepit:
Quare etiam quaedam nunc arts ^xpoliuntur,
Nunc etiam augescunt, nunc addita navigiis sunt
Multa.
But sure the Nature of the World is strong,
Perfect and young; nor can I think it long
Since it beginning took, because we know
Arts still increase, and still politer grow,
And many things, in former times unknown,
Are added now to Navigation.
Our World has lately discovered another, (and who will assure us that it is
the last of his Brothers, since the Demons, the Sybils, and we our selves have
been ignorant of this till now?) as large, well peopled, and fruitful, as this
whereon we live; and yet so raw and childish, that we yet teach it its ABC:
it is not above fifty years since it knew neither Letters, Weights, Measures,
Vestments, Corn, nor Vines. It was then quite naked in the Mothers lap, and
only lived upon what she gave it. If we rightly conclude of our end, and this
Poet of the youthfulness of that Age of his; that other World will only enter
into the Light when this of ours shall make its Exit. The Universe will be
Paralitick, one Member will be useless, another in vigor. I am very much
afraid that we have very much precipitated its declension and ruin by our
contagion; and that we have sold it our Opinions and our Arts at a very dear
rate. It was an infant World, and yet we have not whipped, and subjected it to
our discipline, by the advantage of our Valor and natural Forces; neither have
we won it by our Justice and Goodness, nor subdued it by our Magnanimity. Most
of their Answers, and the Negotiations we have had with them, witness, that
they were nothing behind us in Pertinency, and clearness of natural
Understanding. The astonishing magnificence of the Cities of Cusco and Mexico,
and amongst many other such like things, the Garden of this King, The
magnificent Garden of the King of Mexico.
where all the Trees, Fruits and Plants, according to the order and stature
they are in a Garden, were excellently formed in Gold; as in his Cabinet were
all the Animals bred upon the Earth, and in the Seas of his Dominions; and the
beauty of their Manufactures, in Jewels, Feathers, Cotton, and Painting, gave
ample proof that they were as little inferior to us in ^ndustry. But as to
what concerns Devotion, observance of the Laws, Bounty, Liberality, Loyally,
and plain dealing, it was of Use to us, that we had not so much as they; for
they have lost, ^old, and betrayed themselves by this advantage. As to boldness
and courage, stability, constancy against Pain, Hunger, and Death, I should not
fear to oppose the Examples I find amongst them, to the most famous Examples of
elder times, that we find in our Records on this side of the World. For, as to
those who have subdued them, take but away the Slights and Artifices they
practiced to deceive them, and the just astonishment it was to those Nations,
to see so sudden and unexpected an arrival of men with Beards, differing in
Language, Religion, Shape and Countenance, from so remote a Part of the World,
and where they had never heard there was any habitation, mounted upon great
unknown Monsters, against those who had never so much as seen a Horse, or any
other Beast trained up to carry a man, or any other loading; shell'd in a hard
and shining skin, with a cutting and glittering Weapon in his hand, against
them, who, out of wonder at the brightness of a Looking-glass, or a Knife,
would truck great Treasures of Gold and Pearl; and who had neither Knowledge
nor Matter with which at leisure they could penetrate our Steel: to which may
be added, the Lightning and Thunder of our Pieces and Harquebuses, enough to
fright Caesar himself, If surpised, with so little Experience; and how,
against naked People, if not, where the invention of a little quilted Cotton
was in use, without other Arms, at the most, than Bows, Stones, Staves, and
Bucklers of Wood; People surpised under color of Friendship and good Faith,
by the curiosity of seeing strange and unknown things; take but away, I say,
this disparity from the Conquerours, and you take away all the occasion of so
many Victories. When I look upon that invincible ardour wherewith so many
thousands of Men, Women, and Children, have so often presented, and thrown
themselves into inevitable dangers for the defense of their Gods and Liberties;
that generous obstinacy, to suffer all extremities and difficulties, and even
Death it self, rather than submit to the Dominion of those by whom they had
been so shamefully abused; and some of them choosing rather to dye of hunger
and fasting, than to accept of nourishment from the hands of their so basely
victorious Enemies: I foresee, that whoever would have attacqu'd them upon
equal terms of Arms, Experience, and Number, would have had a hard, and
peradventure a harder game to play, than in any other War we have seen. Why did
not so noble a Conquest fall under Alexander, or the ancient Greeks and Romans;
and so great a revolution and mutation of so many Empires and Nations, fall
into hands that might have rooted up and gently levelled, and made plain and
smooth whatever was rough and savage amongst them, and that might have
cherished and propagated the good Seeds that Nature had there produced, mixed,
not only with the Culture of Land, and the Ornament of Cities, the Arts of this
part of the World, in what was necessary, but also the Greek and Roman Virtues,
with those that were Originals of the Country? What a particular Reparation had
it been to them, and what a general good to the whole World, had our first
Examples and Deportments in those Parts allured those People to the Admiration
and Imitation of Virtue, and had begot betwixt them and us a fraternal Society
and Intelligence? How easy had it been to have made Advantage of Souls so
innocent, and so eager to learn; having for the most part naturally so good
Inclinations before? Whereas, on the contrary, we have taken Advantage of their
Ignorance and Inexperience, with greater ease to incline them to Treachery,
Luxury, Avarice, and toward all sorts of Inhumanity and Cruelty, by the
Pattern and Example of our Manners. Who ever enhanc'd the price of Merchandise
at such a rate? So many Cities levelled with the Ground, so many Nations
exterminated, so many millions of People fallen by the Edge of the Sword, and
the richest and most beautiful part of the World turned upside down, for the
Traffic of Pearl and Pepper: Mechanic Victories! Never did Ambition, never
did Animosities engage men against one another to such a degree of Hostility
and miserable Calamity. Certain Spaniards coasting the Sea in quest of their
Mines, landed in a fruitful, and pleasant, and very well peopled Country, and
there made to the Inhabitants their accustomed Remonstrances; that they were
peaceable men, who were come from a very remote Country, and sent on the behalf
of the King of Castile, the greatest Prince of the habitable World, to whom the
Pope, God's Vicegerent upon Earth, had given the Principality of the Indies.
The Offers of the Spaniards to the discovered Indians.
That if they would become Tributaries to him, they should be very gently and
courteously used, at the same time requiring of them Victuals for their
Nourishment, and Gold whereof to make some pretended Medicine. They moreover
remonstrated to them the belief of the only God, and the Truth of our Religion,
which they advised them to embrace, to which they also added some Threats. To
which they received this Answer: That as to their being peaceable, they did not
seem to be such, if they were so. As to their King, he seemed to be neccesitous
and poor, because he asked, and he who had given him that divident, a man that
loved dissension, to go give away that to another, which was none of his own,
to bring it into dispute against the ancient Possessors. As to Victuals, they
would supply them, that of Gold they had little; it being a thing they had in
very small esteem, as being of no use to the service of Life, whereas their
Care was only bent to pass it over happily and pleasantly: but that what they
could find, excepting what was employed in the Service of their Gods, they
might freely take. As to one only God, the Proposition had pleased them well,
but that they would not change their Religion, both because they had so happily
lived in it, and that they were not wont to take advice of any but their
Friends, and those they knew. As to their Menaces, it was a sign of want of
Judgment, to threaten those whose Nature and Power was to them unknown. That
therefore they were to make haste to avoid their Coast, for they were not used
to take the Civilities and Remonstrances of armed Men and Strangers in good
part; otherwise they should do by them as they had done by those others,
showing them the Heads of several executed men round the Walls of their City. A
fair Example of the gibberish, and beginning to speak of this Infancy. But so
it is, that the Spaniards did neither in this, nor several other places, where
they did not find the Merchandise they sought for, make any stay, or any
attempt, whatever other Conveniences were there to be had; Witness the
Cannibals.

Of two the most puissant Monarchs of that World, and peradventure of this,
Kings of so many Kings, and the last they exterminated; that of Peru, having
been taken in a Battle, The excessive Ransom of the King of Peru.
and put to so excessive a ransom as exceeds all belief, and it being
faithfully paid, and that he had by his Conversation given manifest signs of a
franck, liberal, and constant Spirit, and of a clear and settled Understanding;
the Conquerours had a mind, after having exacted a million, three hundred
twenty five thousand, and five hundred weight of Gold, besides Silver, and
other things which amounted to no less; (so that their Horses were shod with
Massy Gold) yet to see (at the price of what Disloyalty and Injustice
whatever) what the remainder of the Treasures of this King might be, and to
possess themselves of that also. To which end a false Accusation was preferred
against him, and false Witnesses brought in to prove that he went about to
raise an Insurrection in his Provinces, by that means to procure his own
Liberty. Whereupon, by the virtuous Sentence of those very men who had by this
Treachery conspired his ruin, he was condemned to be publicly hanged, after
having made him buy off the Torment of being burnt alive, Afterward hanged
notwithstanding.
by the Baptism they gave him immediately before Execution. A horrid and
unheard of Barbarity, which nevertheless he underwent without going less either
in Word or Look, with a truly grave and royal Behavior. After which, to calm
and appease the People, daunted and astonished at so strange a thing, they
counterfeited great Sorrow for his Death, and appointed most sumptuous Funerals.

The Siege of Mexico.
The other King of Mexico, after a long time defended his beleaguered City, and
having in this Siege manifested the utmost of what Suffering and Perseveration
can do, if ever Prince and People did, and his Misfortune having delivered him
alive into his Enemies hands, upon Articles of being treated like a King; The
King taken Prisoner.
neither did he in his Captivity discover any thing unworthy of that Title. His
Enemies, after their Victory, not finding so much Gold as they expected, when
they had searched and rifled with their utmost Diligence, they went about to
procure Discoveries by the most cruel Torments they could invent upon the
Prisoners they had taken: but having profited nothing that way, their Courages
being greater than their Torments, they arrived at last to such a degree of
Fury, as, contrary to their Faith, and the Law of Nations, to condemn the King
himself, and one of the principal Noblemen of his Court to the Wrack, Put to
the Wrack.
in the Presence of one another. This Lord, finding himself overcome with Pain,
being environed with burning Coals, pitifully turned his dying Eyes toward
his Master, as it were to ask him pardon that he was able to endure no more;
whereat the King darting at him a fierce and severe look, as reproaching his
Cowardice and Pusillanimity, with a rude and constant Voice said to him thus
only: And what do thou think I suffer, said he, am I in a Bath, am I more at
ease than thou? Whereupon the other immediately quail'd under the Torment, and
died upon the Place. The King, half roasted, was carried thence; not so much
out of pity, (for what compassion ever touched so barbarous Souls, who, upon
the doubtful information of some Vessel of Gold to be made a Prey of, caused
not only a Man, but a King so great in Fortune and Desert, to be broiled before
their Eyes) but because his Constancy rendered their Cruelty still more
shameful. They afterward hanged him, Afterward hanged.
for having nobly attempted to deliver himself by Arms from so long a
Captivity, where he dyed with a Courage becoming so Magnanimous a Prince.

Another time they burnt in the same fire, Indian Prisoners burnt alive by the
Spaniards.
four hundred and sixty men alive at once, the four hundred, of the common
People, the sixty, the principal Lords of a Province; no other but mere
Prisoners of War. We have these Narratives from themselves: for they do not
only own it, but boast of it. Could it be for a testimony of their Justice, or
their Zeal to Religion! Doubtless these are ways too differing, and contrary to
so holy an end. Had they proposed to themselves to extend our Faith, they would
have considered, that it does not amplify in the possession of Territories,
but in the gaining of men, and would have more than satisfied themselves with
the slaughters occasioned by the necessity of War, without indifferently mixing
a Massacre, as upon wild Beasts, as universal as Fire and Sword could make it,
having only, by their good will, saved so many as they intended to make
miserable Slaves of for the Work and Service of their Mines: So that many of
the Captains were put to death upon the place of Conquest, by order of the King
of Castile, justly offended with the horror of their Deportments, and almost
all of them hated and disesteem'd. God did meritoriously permit that all this
great Plunder should be swallowed up by the Sea in Transportation, or by Civil
Wars, wherewith they devoured one another, and the greatest part was buried
upon the Place, with out any fruit of their Victory. As to what concerns the
Revenue, that being in the hands of so parcimonious and so prudent a Prince, it
so little answers the expectation was given to his Predecessors of it, and that
first abundance of Riches which was found at the first Landing in those new
discovered Countries, (for though a great deal be fetched from thence, yet we see
it is nothing in comparison of that ought to be expected) it is, that the use of
Coin was there utterly unknown, and that consequently their Gold was found all
hoarded together, being of no other use but for Ornament and Show, as a
Furniture reserved from Father to Son, by many puissant Kings, who always
drained their Mines to make this vast heap of Vessels and Statues, for the
decoration of their Palaces and Temples; whereas our Gold is always in motion
and Traffic: We cut ours into a thousand small pieces, and cast it into a
thousand Forms, and scatter and disperse it a thousand ways. But suppose our
Kings should thus hoard up all the Gold they could get in several Ages, and let
it lie idle by them. Those of the Kingdom of Mexico were in some sort more
civilized, and greater Artists than the other Nations that were beyond them:
Therefore did they judge as we do, that the World was near its period, and
looked upon the Desolation we brought amongst them for a certain Sign of it.
They believed that the Existence of the World was divided into five Ages, and
the Life of five successive Suns, of which four had already ended their time,
and that that which gave them Light was the fifth. The first perished, with all
other Creatures, by an universal Inundation of Water. The second, by the
Heavens falling upon us, which suffocated every living Thing: to which Age they
assign the Giants, and showed bones to the Spaniards, according to the
proportion of which, the Stature of men amounted to twenty hands high. The
third, by Fire, which burnt and consumed all. The fourth, by an Emotion of the
Air and Wind, which came with such violence as to beat down even many
Mountains; wherein the men dyed not, but were turned into Baboons; (what
impressions will not the weakness of human Belief admit?) After the death of
this fourth Sun, the World was twenty five years in perpetual darkness; in the
fifteenth of which, a Man and a Woman were created, that restored human Race:
ten years after, upon a certain Day, the Sun appeared newly created, and since
the account of their years take beginning from that day. The third day after
his Creation, the ancient Gods dyed; and the new ones are since born daily.
After what manner they think this last Sun shall perish, my Author knows not.
But their number of this fourth Change agrees with the great Conjunction of
Stars, that eight hundred and odd years ago, as Astrologers suppose, produced
great Alterations and Novelties in the World. As to Pomp and Magnificence, upon
the account of which I am engaged in this Discourse, neither Greece, Rome, nor
Egypt, whether for utility, difficulty, or state, The magnificent Cawsey
betwixt Quito and Cusco.
compare any of their Works with the way to be seen in Peru, made by the Kings
of the Country, from the City of Quito, to that of Cusco, (three hundred
Leagues) straight, even, five and twenty Paces wide, paved, and enclosed on
both sides with high and beautiful Walls; and close by them on the inside, two
clear Rivolets, bordered with a beautiful sort of a Tree which they call Molly:
in which Work, where they met with Rocks and Mountains, they cut them through,
and made them even, and filled up Pits and Valleys with Lime and Stone to make
them level. At the end of every days Journey are beautiful Palaces, furnished
with Provisions, Vestments, and Arms, as well for Travelers, as for the Armies
that are to pass that way. In the estimate of this Work, I have reckoned the
difficulty which is particularly considerable in that Place. They did not build
with any Stones less than ten foot square: and had no other convenience of
carriage, but by drawing their load themselves by force of Arms, and knew not
so much as the Art of Scaffolding, nor any other way of standing to their Work,
but by throwing up Earth against the Building, as it rose higher, taking it
away again when they had done. Let us here return to our Coaches, instead of
which, and of all other sorts of Carriages, they caused themselves to be
carried by men, and upon their Shoulders. This last King of Peru, the day that
he was taken, was thus carried betwixt two upon staves of Gold, and set in a
Chair of Gold in the middle of his Battle. As many of these Sedan-men as were
killed to make him fall, (for they would take him alive) so many others (and
they contended for it) took the place of those that were slain, so that they
could never beat him down, what slaughter soever they made of those People,
till a Light horseman seizing upon him, brought him down.

CHAP. VII. Of the inconvenience of Greatness.
SInce we cannot attain unto it, let us revenge our selves by railing at it:
and yet it is not absolutely railing against any thing to proclaim its defects,
because they are in all things to be found, how beautiful, or how much to be
coveted however. It has in general this manifest advantage, that it can go less
when it pleases, and has very near the absolute choice of both the one and the
other Condition. For a man does not fall from all heights, there are several
from which one may descend without falling down. It does indeed appear to me,
that we value it at too high a rate, and also over value the resolution of
those whom we have either seen, or heard have contemned it, or displaced
themselves of their own accord. Its Essence is not so evidently commodious,
that a man may not without a miracle refuse it; I find it a very hard thing to
undergo Misfortunes, but to be content with a competent measure of Fortune, and
to avoid Greatness, I think a very easy matter. It Is* methinks, a Virtue to
which I, who am none of the nicest, could without any great endeavor arrive.
What then is to be expected from them that would yet put into Consideration the
glory attending this refusal, wherein there may lurk worse Ambition, than even
in the desire it self, and Fruition of Greatness? Forasmuch as Ambition never
comports it self better according to it self, than when it proceeds by obscure
and unfrequented ways. I incite my Courage to Patience, but I rein it as much
as I can toward desire. I have as much to wish for as another, and allow my
Wishes as much Liberty and Indiscretion: but yet it never befell me to wish for
either Empire or Royalty, for the Eminency of those high and commanding
Fortunes. I do not aim that way, I love my self too well. When I think to grow
greater, it is but very moderately, and by a compelled and timorous Advancement,
such as is proper for me; in Resolution, in Prudence, in Health, in Beauty, and
even in Riches too. But this supreme Reputation, and this mighty Authority
oppress my Imagination. And, quite contrary to some others, I should
peradventure rather choose to be the second or third in Perigourd, than the
first at Paris: at least, without lying, the third, than the first at Paris. I
would neither dispute, a miserable unknown, with a Noble-man's Porter, nor make
Crowds open in Adoration as I pass: I am trained up to a moderate Condition, as
well by my choice, as Fortune; and have made it appear in the whole Conduct of
my Life and Enterprises, that I have rather avoided than otherwise, the
climbing above the degree of Fortune wherein God has placed me by my Birth: all
natural Constitution is equally just and easy. My Soul is so sneaking and
mean, that I measure not good Fortune by the height, but by the Facility. But
if my Heart be not great enough, it is open enough to make amends at any ones
request freely to lay open its Weakness. Should any one put me upon comparing
the Life of L. Thorius Balbus, a brave man, handsome, learned, healthful,
understanding, and abounding in all sorts of Conveniences and Pleasures,
leading a quiet Life, and all his own, his Mind well prepared against Death,
Superstition, Pains, and other Encumbrances of humane Necessity; dying at last
in Battle with his Sword in his Hand, for the defense of his Country, on the
one part; and on the other part, the Life of M. Regulus, so great and high as
is known to every one, and his end admirable; the one without Name, and without
Dignity, the other exemplary, and glorious to wonder: I should doubtless say as
Cicero did, could I speak as well as he. But if I was to touch it in my own
Phrase, I should then also say, that the first is as much according to my
Capacity, and Desire, which I conform to my Capacity, as the second is far
beyond it; that I could not approach the last but with Veneration, the other I
would willingly attain by Custom. But let us return to our temporal Greatness,
from which we are digress'd. I disrelish all Dominion, whether active or
passive. Otanes, one of the seven who had right to pretend to the Kingdom of
Persia, did, A Sovereign Authority moved for a moderate Fortune.
as I should willingly have done; which was, that he gave up to his Concurrents
his right of being promoted to it, either by Election or by Lot; provided, that
he and his might live in the Empire out of all Authority and Subjection, those
of the ancient Laws excepted: and might enjoy all liberty that was not
prejudicial to them, as impatient of commanding, as of being commanded. That it
is a troublesome and difficult Employment to command.
The most painful and difficult Employment in the World, in my Opinion, is
worthily to discharge the Office of a King. I excuse more of their mistakes,
than men commonly do, in consideration of the intolerable weight of their
Function, which does astonish me. It Is hard to keep measure in so immeasurable
a Power. Yet so it is, that it is to those who are not the best natured men, a
singular incitement to Virtue, to be seated in a place where you cannot do the
least good that shall not be put upon Record; and where the least benefit
redounds to so many men: and where your Talent of Administration, like that of
Preachers, does principally address it self to the People, no very exact Judge,
easy to deceive, and easily content. There are few things wherein we can give
a sincere Judgment, by reason that there are few wherein we have not in some
sort a particular Interest. Superiority and Inferiority, Dominion and
Subjection, are bound to a natural Envy and Contest, and must necessarily
perpetually entrench upon one another. I neither believe the one nor the other
touching the rights of the adverse Party; let Reason therefore, which is
inflexible and without Passion, determine. It Is not above a Month ago that I
read over two Scoth Authors contending upon this Subject; of which, he who
stands for the People, makes Kings to be in a worse Condition than a Carter;
and he who writes for Monarchy, places him some degrees above God-Almighty in
Power and Sovereignty. The Inconvenience of Greatness.
Now the Inconveniency of Greatness, that I have made choice of to consider in
this place, upon some occasion that has lately put it into my head, is this.
There is not peradventure any thing more pleasant in the Commerce of men, than
the Trials that we make against one another, out of Emulation of Honor and
Valor, whether in the Exercises of the Body, or in those of the Mind; wherein
the Sovereign Greatness can have no true part. And in earnest, I have often
thought, that out of force of respect, men have used Princes disdainfully and
injuriously in that particular. For the thing I was infinitely offended at in
my Childhood, that they who exerciz'd with me forbore to do their best,
because they found me unworthy of their utmost endeavor, is what we see happen
to them every day, every one finding himself unworthy to contend with them. If
we discover that they have the least Passion to have the better, there is no
one who will not make it his Business to give it them, and who will not rather
betray his own Glory, than offend theirs; and will therein employ so much force
only as is necessary to advance their Honor. What share have they then in the
Engagement, wherein every one is on their side? Methinks I see those Paladins
of ancient times presenting themselves to Justs, The Paladins.
with enchanted Arms and Bodies; Brisson running against Alexander, purposely
mist his blow, and made a fault in his Career; Alexander chid him for it, but
he ought to have had him whipped. Upon this consideration, Carneades said, Riding
the great Horse the only true Exercise of the Sons of Princes.
that the Sons of Princes learned nothing right, but to ride the great Horse;
by reason that in all their Exercises every one bends and yields to them: but a
Horse, that is neither a Flatterer nor a Courtier, throws the Son of a King
with no more remorse, than he would do that of a Porter. Homer was compelled to
consent, that Venus, so sweet and delicate as she was, should be wounded at the
Battle of Troy, thereby to ascribe Courage and Boldness to her; Qualities that
cannot possibly be in those who are exempt from Danger. The Gods are made to be
angry, to fear, to run away, to be jealous, to grieve, and to be transported
with Passions, to honor them with the Virtues, that amongst us are built upon
these Imperfections. Who does not participate in the hazard and difficulty, can
pretend no interest in the Honor and Pleasure that are the consequents of
hazardous Actions. It Is pity a man should be so potent that all things must
give way to him. Fortune therein sets you too remote from Society, and places
you in too great a Solitude. This easiness and mean facility of making all
things bow under you, is an enemy to all sorts of Pleasure. This is to slide,
not to go, this is to sleep, and not to live. Conceive man accompanied with
Omnipotency, you throw him into an Abyss: he must beg disturbance and
opposition as an alms. His Being and his Good is indigent: Their good Qualities
are dead and lost; for they are not to be perceived, but by comparison, and we
put them out of it: they have little knowledge of the true praise, having their
Ears deaft with so continual and uniform an Approbation. Have they to do with
the meanest of all their Subjects? they have no means to take any advantage of
him, if he but say, It Is because he is my King, he thinks he has said enough to
express, that he therefore suffered himself to be overcome. This Quality
stifles and consumes the other true and essential Qualities: they are involved
in the Royalty, and leave them nothing to recommend themselves withal, but
actions that directly concern themselves, and that merely respect the function
of their Place. It Is so much to be a King, that he only is so by being so; the
strange luster that environs him, conceals and shrowds him from us; our sight
is there repelled and dissipated, being stopped and filled by this prevailing
light. The Senate awarded the prize of Eloquence to Tiberius; he refused it,
supposing, The prize of Eloquence refused by Tiberius, and why.
that though it had been just, he could derive no advantage from a Judgment so
partial, and that was so little free to judge. As we give them all advantages
of Honor, so do we sooth and authorize all their Vices and Defects, not only
by approbation, but by imitation also. Every one of Alexanders followers
carried their Heads on one side, as he did; Dionysius his flatterers.
and the flatterers of Dionysius ^un against one another in his presence,
stumbled at, and overturned whatever was under foot, to show they were as
pur-blind as he. Natural imperfections have sometimes also served to recommend
a man to Favor. I have seen Deafness affected: and because the Master hated
his Wife, Plutarch has seen his Courtiers repudiate theirs, whom they loved:
And which is yet more, Uncleanness and all manner of dissolution has been in
fashion; as also Disloyalty, Blasphemies, Cruelty, Heresy, Superstition,
Irreligion, Effeminacy, and worse, if worse there be. And by an Example yet
more dangerous than that of Mithridates Flatterers, who, Those of Mithridates.
by how much their Master pretended to the honor of a good Physician, came to
him to have Incisions and Cauteries made in their Limbs; for these others
suffered the Soul, a more delicate and noble Part, to be cauteriz'd. But to end
where I begun: The Emperor Adrian, disputing with the Philosopher Favorinus
about the interpretation of some Word: Favorinus soon yielded him the victory;
for which his Friends rebuking him; You talk simply, said he, would you not
have him wiser than I, who commands thirty Legions? Augustus writ Verses
against Asinius Pollio, and I, said Pollio, say nothing, for it is not prudence
to write in contest with him who has power to proscribe: And he had reason; for
Dionysius, because he could not equal Philoxenus in Poesy, and Plato in
Discourse, condemned one to the Quarries, and sent the other to be sold for a
Slave into the Island of Aegina.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Art of Conferring.
IT IS the custom of our Justice to condemn some for a warning to others. To
condemn them for having done amiss, were folly, as Plato says, for what is done
can never be undone; but it is to the end they may offend no more, and that
others may avoid the Example of their offense: we do not correct the man we
hang, we correct others by him. I do the same. My Errors are sometimes natural,
incorrigible, and irremediable: but the good virtuous men do the Public in
making themselves imitated, I peradventure may do the same in making my manners
evaded: Horace, lib. ^. sa^. 4.
Nonne vides albi ut male vivat filius utque
Barrus inops? magnum documentum, ne patriam rem
Perdere quis velit.
Do but observe the wealthy Albius's Son, Mr. Alexander Brom.

Into what want he is by wildness run;
See what a shabby fellow Barrus's grown,
Barrus, the ranting'st Gallant of the Town:
A good Instruction for young Heirs, that they
Should not their Patrimony fool away.
Whilst I publish and accuse my own Imperfections, some one will learn to be
afraid of them. The Parts that I most esteem in my self, derive more honor
from decrying, than from commending my own Manners: which is the reason why I
so often fall into, and so much insist upon that strain. But, when all is
summed up, a man never speaks of himself without loss. A man's accusations of
himself are always believed, his praises never. There may peradventure be some
of my own Complexion, who better instruct me by contrariety than similitude.
and more by avoiding than by imitation. The elder Cato had a regard to this
sort of discipline, when he said, that the wise may learn more of fools, than
fools can of the wise; and Pausanias tells us of an ancient player upon the
Harp, who was wont to make his Scholars go to hear one that played very ill,
who lived over against him, that they might learn to hate his discords and
false measures. The horror of Cruelty more inclines me to Clemency, than any
Example of Clemency could possibly do. A good Rider does not so much mend my
seat, as an awkward Attorney, or a Venetian on Horseback; and a clownish way
of Speaking does more reform mine, than the quaintest Dialect. The ridiculous
and simple look of another, does always advertise and advise me; that which
pricks, rouzes and incites much better than that which tickles. The time is now
proper that we should reform backward, more by dissenting than agreeing, by
differing than consent. Profiting little by good Examples, I make use of those
that are ill, which also are every where to be found: I endeavor to render my
self as agreeable as I see others offensive, as constant, as I see others
fickle, as affable, as I see others rough, and as good as I see others evil.
But I propose to my self invincible measures. The most fruitful and natural
exercise of the Mind, in my opinion, is Conference; I find the use of it more
sweet than of any other action of Life. And for that reason it is, that if I
were now compelled to choose, I should sooner, I think, consent to lose my
Sight, than my Hearing and Speech. The Athenians, and also the Romans, kept
this Exercise in great honor in their Academies. The Italians retain some
footsteps of it to this day to their great advantage, as is manifest by the
comparison of our understandings with theirs. The study of Books is a
languishing and feeble Motion, Conference of greater advantage than the reading
of Books.
that heats not, whereas Conference teaches and exercises at once. If I conferr
with an understanding Man, and a rude Jester, he presses hard upon me, and
wounds me on both sides; his imaginations raise up mine to more than ordinary
pitch. Jealousy, Glory, and Contention, stimulate and raise me up to something
above my self; and a consent of Judgment is a quality totally offensive in
Conference. But, as our minds fortify themselves by the communication of
vigorous and regular Understandings; it is not to be expressed how much they
lose and degenerate by the continual commerce and frequentation we have with
those are mean and low. There is no Contagion that spreads like that: I know
sufficiently by Experience what it is worth a yard. I love to discourse and
dispute, but it is but with few men, and for my self; for to do it as a
Spectacle and entertainment to great Persons, and to vaunt of a man's Wit and
Eloquence, is, in my opinion, very unbecoming a man of Honor. Impertinency is
a scurvy Quality, but not to be able to endure it, to fret and vex at it, as I
do, is another sort of disease, little inferior to Impertinence it self; and
is the thing that I will now accuse in my self. I enter into Conference, and
dispute with great liberty and facility, forasmuch as Opinion meets in me with
a Soil very unfit for Penetration, and wherein to take any deep root: no
Propositions astonish me, no belief offends me, though never so contrary to my
own. There is no so frivolous and extravagant Fancy that does not seem to me
suitable to the product of human Wit. We, who deprive our Judgments of the
right of determining, look indifferently upon various Opinions, and if we
incline not our Judgments to them, yet we easily give them the hearing. Where
one Scale is totally empty, I let the other waver under old Wives dreams. And I
think my self excusable, if I rather choose the odd number, Thursday, rather
than Friday; and if I had rather be the twelfth or fourteenth, than the
thirteenth at Table; if I had rather on a Journey see a Hare run by me than
cross my way; and rather give my Man my left foot than my right, when he comes
to dress me. All such whimsies as are in Use amongst us, deserve at least to be
hearkened unto. For my part, they only with me import inanity, but they import
that. Moreover, vulgar and casual Opinions are considered as things of moment,
and are indeed something more than nothing in Nature: and who will not suffer
himself to proceed so far, falls peradventure into the Vice of Obstinacy, to
avoid that of Superstition. The contradictions of Judgments then do neither
offend nor alter, they only rouse and exercise me. We evade Correction, whereas
we ought to offer and present our selves to it, especially when it appears in
the form of Conference, and not of Authority. At every opposition, we do not
consider whether or no it be just, but right or wrong, how to disengage our
selves: instead of extending the Arms, we thrust out our Claws. I could suffer
my self to be rudely handled by my Friend, so much as to tell me that I am a
Fool, and talk I know not of what. I love stout Expressions amongst brave Men,
and to have them speak as they think. We must fortify and harden our hearing
against this tenderness of the ceremonious sound of Words. I love a strong and
manly Familiarity and Conversation: a Friendship that flatters it self in the
sharpness and vigor of its Communication; like love, in biting and scratching.
It is not vigorous and generous enough, if it be not quarrelsome; if civilized
and artificial, if it treads nicely, and fears the shock. Cicero de finib. l. 1.
Neque enim disputari sine reprehensione potest. Neither can a man dispute, but
he must reprehend. When any one contradicts me, he raises my attention, not my
anger: I advance toward him that controverts, that instructs me. The Cause of
Truth ought to be the common Cause both of one and the other: What will he
answer? The Passion of Anger has already confounded his Judgment; amazement has
usurpt the place of Reason. It were not amiss, that the decision of our
disputes should pass by wager: that there might be a material mark of our
losses, to the end we might the better remember them; and that my Man might
tell me, Your Ignorance and Obstinacy cost you last year, at several times, a
hundred Crowns. I embrace and caress Truth in what hand soever I find it, and
cheerfully surrender my self, and my conquered arms, as far off as I can
discover it: and, provided it be not too imperiously, take a pleasure in being
reproved; and accommodate my self to my Accusers, very often more by reason of
civility than amendment, loving to gratify and nourish the liberty of
Admonition, by my facility of submitting to it. Nevertheless, it is hard to
bring the men of my time to it. They have not the courage to correct, because
they have not the courage to suffer themselves to be corrected; and speak
always with dissimulation in the presence of one another. I take so great
pleasure in being judged and known, that it is upon the matter indifferent to
me in which of the two Forms I am so: My Imagination does so often contradict
and condemn it self, that it is all one to me if another do it, especially
considering that I give his reprehension no greater authority than what I will
my self. But I break with him, who carries himself so high, as I know some do,
that repents his advertisement, if not believed, and takes it for an affront if
it be not immediately followed. In that Socrates always received smiling the
Contradictions opposed against his Arguments, a man may say his strength of
Reason was the cause, and the advantage being certain to fall on his side, he
accepted them as matter of new victory. Nevertheless, we see on the contrary,
that nothing in Argument renders our Sentiments so delicate, as the opinion of
preeminency and disdain of the Adversary; and that in Reason, it is rather for
the weaker to take in good part the oppositions that correct him and set him
right. In earnest, I rather choose the frequentation of those that ruffle me
than those that fear me. It Is a dull and hurtful Pleasure to have to do with
People who admire us, and approve of all we say. Antisthenes commanded his
Children, never to take it kindly, or for a favor from any man that commended
them. I find I am much prouder of the victory I obtain over my self, when even
in the ardour of dispute, I make my self submit to my Adversaries force of
Reason, than I am pleased with the victory I obtain over him through his
weakness. In fine, I receive and admit of all manner of attacks that are
direct, how weak soever: but I am too impatient of those that are made out of
Form. I care not what the Subject is, the Opinions are to me all one, and I am
as indifferent whether I get the better or the worse: I can peaceably argue a
whole day together, if the Argument be carried on with order. I do not so much
require force and subtilty, as method. I mean the order which we every day
observe in the wranglings of Shepherds and Apprentices, but never amongst us.
If they start from their Subject, it is an incivility, and yet we do it. But
their Tumult and Impatience never puts them out of their Theme. Their Argument
still continues its Course. If they prevent, and do not stay for one another,
they at least understand one another very well. Any one answers too well for
me, if he answers what I say. But when the Dispute is irregular and perplexed,
I leave the thing, and insist upon the form with Anger and Indiscretion; and
fall into a willful, malicious, and imperious way of Disputation, of which I am
afterward ashamed. It Is impossible to deal honestly and fairly with a Fool. My
Judgment is not only corrupted under the hand of so impetuous a Master, but my
Conscience also. Our Disputes ought to be interdicted, and punished as well as
other verbal Crimes. What Vice do they not raise and heap up, being always
governed and commanded by Passion? We first quarrel with their Reasons, and
then with the men. We only learn to dispute, that we may contradict, and so
every one contradicting, and being contradicted, it falls out, that the fruit
of Disputation is to lose and nullify Truth; and therefore it is that Plato in
his Republic prohibits this Exercise to Fools and ill bred People. To what end
do you go about to inquire of him who knows nothing to purpose? A man does no
injury to the Subject, when he leaves it to seek how he may defend it. I do not
mean by an Artificial and Scolastick way, but by a natural one, with a sound
understanding. What will it be in the end? One flies to the East, the other to
the West, they lose the principal, and wander in the Crowd of Incidents. After
an hour of Tempest they know not what they seek: one is low, the other high,
and a third wide. One catches at a word and a simile; another is no longer
sensible of what is said in Opposition to him, and thinks of going on at his
own rate, not of answering you. Another, finding himself too weak to make good
his rest, fears all, refuses all, and at the very beginning confounds the
Subject; or in the very height of the dispute stops short, and grows silent: by
a peevish ignorance affecting a proud contempt; or by an unseasonable modesty
shuns any further debate. Provided that this strikes, he cares not how much he
lays himself open; the other counts his Words, and weighs them for Reasons.
Another only brawls, and makes use of the Advantage of his Lungs. Here Is one
that learnedly concludes against himself, and another that deafs you with
Prefaces, and senseless Digressions: another falls into downright railing, and
seeks a ridiculous quarrel, to disengage himself from a Wit that presses too
hard upon him: And a last man sees nothing into the reason of the thing, but
draws a line of Circumvallation about you of Dialectick Clauses, and the
formulas of his Art. Now who would not enter into distrust of Sciences, and
doubt whether he can reap from them any solid Fruit for the service of Life;
considering the use we put them to? Nihil sanantibus literis. Who has got
Understanding by his Logic? Where are all her fair Promises? Nec ad melius
vivendum, Seneca.
nec ad commodius disserendum. It neither makes a man live better, nor dispute
more commodiously. Is there more noise or confusion in the scolding of
Fish-Wives, than in the public disputes of men of this Profession? I had
rather my Son should learn in a Tap-house to speak, than in the School to
prate. Take a Master of Arts, conferr with him, Why does he not make us
sensible of this artificial Excellence? Why does he not ravish Women, and
Ignorants, as we are, with Admiration at the steadiness of his Reasons, and the
Beauty of his Order? Why does he not sway and persuade us to what he will? Why
does a man who has so great advantage in matter, mix Railing, Indiscretion, and
Fury in his Disputations? Strip him of his Gown, his Hood, and his Latin; let
him batter our Ears with Aristotle, who is wholly pure, and wholly believed,
you will take him for one of us, or worse. Whilst they torment us with this
Complication and Confusion of Words, it fares with them, methinks, as with
Juglers; their Dexterity imposes upon our Senses, but does not at all work upon
our belief: this Legerdemain excepted, they perform nothing that is not very
ordinary and mean. For being the more learned, they are never the less Fools. I
love and honor Knowledge as much as they that have it. And in its true use,
it is the most noble, and the greatest Acquisition of men: but in such as I
speak of (and the number of them is infinite) who build their fundamental
sufficiency and value upon it; who appeal from their Understanding to their
Memory, Seneca.
sub aliena umbra latentes; and who can do nothing but by Book; I hate it, if I
may dare to say so, worse than Stupidity it self. In my Country, and in my
time, Learning improves Fortunes enough, but not Minds. If it meet with those
that are dull and heavy, it overcharges and suffocates them, leaving them a
crude and undigested mass: if airy and fine, it purifies, clarifies, and
subtilizes them, even to Exinanition. It Is a thing of almost indifferent
quality; a very useful accession to a well born Soul, but hurtful and
pernicious to others: or rather, a thing of very precious use, that will not
suffer it self to be purchased at an under rate. In the hand of some it is a
Scepter, in that of others a Fools Bawble. But let us proceed. What greater
Victory can you expect, than to make your Enemy see and know that he is not
able to encounter you? When you get the better of your Argument, it is Truth*
that wins; when you get the Advantage of Fame and Method, it is then you that
win. I am of Opinion, that in Plato and Xenophon, Socrates disputes more in
favor of Disputants, than in favor of the Dispute, and more to instruct
Euthydemus and Protagoras in the knowledge of their Impertinence, than in the
Impertinence of their Art. He takes hold of the first Subject, like one that
has a more profitable end than to explain it, namely, to clear the
Understandings, that he takes upon him to instruct and exercise. To hunt after
Truth is properly our business, and we are inexcusable if we carry on the Chase
impertinently and ill: to fail of seizing it, is another thing. For we are born
to inquire after Truth, it belongs to a greater power to possess it. It is not,
as Democritus said, hid in the bottom of the Deeps; but rather elevated to an
infinite height in the Divine knowledge. The World is but a School of
Inquisition. It is not who shall carry the Ring, but who shall run the best
Courses. He may as well play the fool who speaks true, as he that speaks false*
for we are upon the manner, not the matter of speaking. It Is my humor, as much
to regard the form as the substance, and the Advocates, as much as the Cause;
as Alcibiades ordered we should: and every day pass away my time in reading
Authors, without any consideration of their Learning; their Method is what I
look after, not their Subject; how, not what they write: And just so do I hunt
after the conversation of any eminent Wit, not that he may teach me, but that I
may know him; and that being acquainted, if I think him worthy of imitation, I
may imitate him. Every man may speak truly, but methodically, and prudently,
and fully, is a talent that few men have. The falsity also that proceeds from
Ignorance does not offend me, but the foppery of it. I have broken off several
Treaties that would have been of advantage to me, by reason of the impertinence
of those with whom I treated. I am not moved once in a year at the faults of
those over whom I have authority; but upon the account of the ridiculous
obstinacy of their Excuses, we are every day going together by the ears: They
neither understand what is said, nor why, and answer accordingly, which would
make a man mad. I never feel any hurt upon my Head, but when it is knocked
against another, and more easily forgive the Vices of my Servants, than their
boldness, importunity, and folly. Let them do less, provided they understand
what they do. You live in hopes to warm their affection to your Service; but
there is nothing to be had, or to be hoped for from a stock. But what if I take
things otherwise than they are? perhaps I do: and therefore it is that I accuse
my own impatience; and hold in the first place, that it is equally vicious both
in him that is in the right, and him that is in the wrong; for it is always a
tyrannick soureness, not to endure a form contrary to ones own: and besides,
there cannot in truth be a greater, more constant, nor more irregular folly,
than to be moved and angry at the follies of the World; for it principally
makes us quarrel with our selves, and the old Philosopher never wanted occasion
for his tears, whilst he considered himself. Miso, Heraclitus.
one of the seven Sages, of a Timonian and Democritick humor, being asked,
what he laughed at, being alone? That I do laugh alone, answered he. How many
ridiculous things, in my own opinion, do I say, and answer every day that comes
over my head? and then how many more, according to the opinion of others? If I
bite my own Lips, what ought others to do? In fine, we must live amongst the
living, and let the River run under the Bridge, without care, or, at least,
without our alteration. To speak the truth, why do we meet a man with a hulch
back, or any other deformity, without being moved, and cannot endure the
encounter of a deformed mind without being angry? This vicious sourness
relishes more of the Judge than the Crime. Let us always have this saying of
Plato in our mouths; Do not I think things unsound, because I am not sound my
self? Am I not my self in fault? may not my observation reflect upon my self? A
wise and divine saying, that lashes the most universal and common Error of
mankind; not only the Reproaches that we throw in the faces of one another, but
our Reasons also, our Arguments and Controversies are reboundable upon us, and
we wound our selves with our own weapons. Of which, Antiquity has left me enough
grave Examples. It was ingeniously, and home said, by him who was the inventer
of this Sentence; Stercus cuique suum been olet. We see nothing behind us.
Erasm. Adag.
We mock our selves an hundred times a day, when we deride our Neighbor, and
detest in others the Defects which are more manifest in us, and admire them
with a mavelous inadvertency and impudence. It was but yesterday, that I saw
a man of understanding, as pleasantly as justly scoffing at the folly of
another, who did nothing but torment every body with the Catalogue of his
Genealogy and Alliances, above half of them false, (for they are most apt to
fall into such ridiculous Discourses, whose Qualities are most dubious, and
least sure;) and yet, would he have looked into himself, he would have
discerned himself to be no less intemperate and impertinent, in extolling hi^
Wifes Pedigree. Oh importunate presumption, with which the Wife sees her self
armed by the hands of her own Husband! Did he understand Latin, we should say
to him, Age, si haec non insanit satis sua sponte, instiga. Teren. And. Act. 4.
sc. 2.

If of her self she be not mad enough,
Faith, urge her on unto the utmost proof.
I do not say, that no man should accuse who is not clean himself, for then no
one would ever accuse, because none is absolutely clean from the same sort of
spot; but I mean, that our Judgment, falling upon another whose name is then in
question, does not at the same time spare our selves, but sentences us with an
inward and severe authority. It Is an office of Charity, that he who cannot
reclaim himself from a Vice, should nevertheless endeavor to remove it from
another, in whom peradventure it may not have so deep and so malignant a root.
Neither do I think it an answer to the purpose, to tell him, who reproves me
for my fault, that he himself is guilty of the same. What by that? The reproof
is notwithstanding true, and of very good use. Had we a good Nose, our own
ordure would stink worse to us, forasmuch as it is our own. And Socrates is of
opinion, that whoever should find himself, his Son, and a stranger guilty of
any violence and wrong, ought to begin with himself, to present himself first
to the Sentence of Justice, and implore, to purge himself, the assistance of
the hand of the Executioner; in the next place he should proceed to his Son,
and lastly, to the Stranger. If this Precept seem too severe, he ought at least
to present himself the first to the Punishment of his own Conscience. The
Senses are our proper and first Judges, which perceive not things but by
external Accidents; and it is no wonder, if in all the parts of the Service of
our Society, there is so perpetual and universal a mixture of Ceremonies, and
superficial Apparences; insomuch that the best and most effectual part of our
Policies do therein consist: It Is still man with whom we have to do, of whom
the Condition is wonderfully Corporal. Let those, who of these late years would
erect for us such a contemplative and immaterial an Exercise of Religion, not
wonder if there be some who think it had vanished and melted through their
Fingers, had it not more upheld it self amongst us as a Mark, Title, and
Instrument of Division and Faction, than by it self. As in Conference, the
Gravity, Robes, and Fortune of him that speaks, oft-times gives Reputation to
vain Arguments and idle Words; it is not to be presumed, but that a man so
attended and feared, has in him more than ordinary Sufficiency; and that he to
whom the King has given so many Offices and Commissions, so supercilious and
proud, has not a great deal more in him, than another that salutes him at so
great a distance, and who has no Employment at all. Not only the Words, but the
sour looks also of these People are considered and recorded; every one making
it his Business to give them some fine and solid Interpretation. If they stoop
to common Conference, and that you offer any thing but Approbation and
Reverence, they then knock you down with the Authority of their Experience;
they have heard, they have seen, they have done so and so, you are crushed with
Examples. I should tell them, that the Fruit of a Chirurgions Experience, is
not the History of his Practices, and his remembering that he has cured four
People of the Plague, and three of the Gout, unless he knows how from hence to
extract something whereon to form his Judgment, and to make us sensible that
he is become more skilful in his Art. As in a Consort of Instruments, we do not
hear a Lute, a Harpsical, or a Flute alone, but one entire Harmony of all
together. If Travel and Offices have improved them, it is a product of their
Understanding to make it appear. It Is not enough to reckon Experiments, they
must weigh and sort them, digest and distill them, to extract the Reasons and
Conclusions they carry along with them. There were never so many Historians. It
is indeed good, and of use to read them; for they furnish us every where with
excellent and laudable Instructions from the Magazine of their Memory, which
doubtless is of great concern to the relief of Life; but it is not that we seek
for now: we examine whether these Relators and Collectors of things are
commendable themselves. I hate all sorts of Tyranny, whether Verbal or
Effectual. I am very ready to oppose my self against these vain Circumstances
that delude our Judgments by the Senses; and whilst I lie upon my Guard from
these extraordinary Grandeurs, I find, that at best, they are but Men, as
others are; Juven. Sat. 8.
Rarus enim firm Sensus communis in illa Fortuna.
Sir Robert Stapleton.
For it is rare
If mighty Fortunes common Sense can share.
Peradventure we esteem and look upon them for less than they are, by reason
they undertake more, and more expose themselves; they do not answer the charge
they have undertaken. There must be more Vigor and Strength in the Bearer,
than the Burden; he who has not lifted as much as he can, leaves you to ghess,
that he has still a Strength beyond that; and that he has not been tried to the
utmost of what he is able to do; He who sinks under his load, makes a discovery
of his best, and the weakness of his Shoulders. This is the reason that we see
so many silly Souls amongst the Learned, and more than those of the better
sort: they would have made good Husbandmen, good Merchants, and good Artizans:
their natural vigor was cut out to that proportion. Knowledge is a thing of
great weight, they faint under it: their Understanding has neither vigor nor
dexterity enough to set forth and distribute, to employ, or make use of this
rich and powerful matter. It has no prevailing virtue but in a strong Nature;
and such Natures are very rare. And the weak ones, says Socrates, spoil the
dignity of Philosophy in the handling. It appears useless and vicious, when
lodged in an ill contrived mind. They spoil and make fools of themselves.
Humani qualis simulator simius oris,
Quem puer arridens, Claudian.
pretioso stamine serum
Velavet, nudasque nates, ac terga reliquit
Ludibrium mensis.
Just like an Ape, that in his face does bear
Of man the counterfeited Character,
Whom wanton Boys to Table laughter move,
Have dizen'd up in richest silks above,
And, the Ape more ridiculous to show,
The raw, bald buttocks naked left below.
Neither is it enough for those who govern and command us, and have all the
World in their hands, to have a common understanding, and to be able to do the
same that we can. They are very much below us, if they be not infinitely above
us. As they promise more, so they are to perform more; and yet silence is to
them not only a countenance of respect and gravity, but very often of good
husbandry too: for Megabysus, going to see Apelles in his painting room, stood
a great while without speaking a word, and at last began to talk of his
Paintings; for which he received this rude reproof; Whilst than wast silent,
thou seemd'st to be some extraordinary Person, by reason of thy Chains and rich
Habit, but now that we have heard thee speak, there is not the meanest Boy in
my Shop that does not despise thee. Those Princely Ornaments and that mighty
state, did not permit him to be ignorant with a common ignorance, and to speak
impertinently of Painting; he ought to have kept this external and presumptive
knowledge silent. To how many Puppies of my time has a sullen and silent
fashion procured the opinion of Prudence and Capacity? Dignities more
distributed by Fortune, than Merit.
Dignities and Offices are of necessity conferred more by Fortune than upon the
account of Merit, and we are often too blame, to condemn Kings when they are
misplaced. On the contrary, it is a wonder they should have so good luck where
there is so little skill; Martial.
Principis est virtus maxima, nosse suos.
There Is of a Princes Virtues none
So great, as that he know his own.
For Nature has not given them a sight that can extend to so many People, to
discern which excells the rest, nor to penetrate into our Bosoms, where the
knowledge of our Wills and best value lies. They must choose us by conjecture
and by groping; by the Family, Wealth, Learning, and the Voice of the People,
which are all very feeble Arguments. Whoever could find out a way that a man
might judge by Justice, and choose men by Reason, would in one thing establish a
perfect Form of Government. Ay, but he brought this great Affair to a very good
pass. That is indeed to say something, but not to say enough. For this Sentence
is justly received, That we are not to judge of Counsels by Events. The
Carthaginians punished the ill Counsels of their Captains, though the Issue was
successful; and the People of Rome have often denied a Triumph for great and very
advantageous Victories, because the Conduct of the General was not answerable
to his good fortune. We ordinarily* see in the actions of the World, that
Fortune, to show us her power in all things, and that she takes a pride to
abate our Presumption, seeing she could not make Fools wise, she has made them
fortunate, in envy of Virtue; and does most favor those Executions, the Web of
which is most purely her own. Whence it is, that we daily see the simplest
amongst us bring to pass great Business, both public and private. And, as
Syrannez the Persian answered those who wondered that his Affairs succeeded so
ill, considering that his Deliberations were so wise, that he was sole Master
of his Designs, but that the Success was wholly in the power of Fortune. These
may answer the same, but with a contrary Biass, Most worldly Affairs are
governed and performed by her. Virg. Aeneid. l. 3.
Fata viam inveniunt. The Event does often justify a very foolish Conduct. Our
interposition is nothing more than as it were a running on by rote, and more
commonly a Consideration of Custom and Example, than of Reason. Being
astonished at the Greatness of the Execution, I have formerly been acquainted
with their Motives and Address, by those who had performed it, and have found
nothing in it, but very ordinary Counsels; and the most vulgar and useful are
also perhaps the most sure and convenient for practice, if not for show. And
what if the plainest Reasons are the best seated? the meanest, lowest, and most
beaten more adapted to Affairs? How the Authority of the Counsels of Kings is
to be preserved.
To maintain the Authority of the Counsels of Kings, it is not fit that profane
Persons should participate of them, or see further into them than the outmost
Bar. He that will husband his Reputation, must be reverenced upon Credit, and
taken all together. My Consultation gives the first lines to the Matter, and
considers it lightly by the first face it presents: the stress and main of the
Business I have still referred to Heaven: Hor. l. 1. Ode. 9.
Permit divis caetera. good and ill Fortune are in my Opinion two Sovereign
Powers. It Is Folly to think that humane Prudence can play the part of Fortune;
and vain is his attempt, who presumes to comprehend Causes and Consequences,
and by the hand to conduct the progress of his design; and most especially vain
in the Deliberations of War. There was never greater Circumspection and
Military Prudence, than sometimes is seen amongst us: can it be that men are
afraid to lose themselves by the way, that they reserve themselves to the end
of the Game? I do moreover affirm, that our Wisdom it self, and wisest
Consultations, for the most part commit themselves to the Conduct of Chance. My
Will and my Reason is sometimes moved by one Breath, and sometimes by another;
and many of these movements there are, that govern themselves without me: my
Reason has uncertain and casual agitations and impulsions. Vertuntur species
animorum, Virg. Georg. lib. 1.
and pectora motus
Nunc alios, alios dum nubila ventus agebat Concipiunt.
Their thoughts are changed, Mr. Ogilby.
the motions of their mind,
Inconstant are, like Clouds before the Wind.
Let a man but observe who are of greatest Authority in Cities, and who best do
their own business, we shall find that they are commonly men of the least
Parts: Women, Children, and madmen have had the fortune to govern great
Kingdoms equally well with the wisest Princes: and Thucydides says, that the
stupid more frequently do it than those of better understandings. We attribute
the effects of their good fortune to their Prudence. Vt quisque fortuna utitur,
Plaut. Pherd.
Ita praecellet; atque exinde sapere illum omnes dicimus.
Men, as they husband their Estates, we prize,
And who are rich, are still reputed wise.
Wherefore I say, that in all sorts of Fortune Events are a very poor testimony
of our worth and Parts. Now I was upon this point, that there needs no more,
but to see a man promoted to Dignity, though we knew him but three days before
a man of no regard; yet an image of Grandeur, and some extraordinary Parts
insensibly steals into our opinion, and we persuade our selves, that being
augmented in Reputation and Attendants, he is also increased in Merit. We judge
of him not according to his value, but as we do by Counters, according to the
prerogative of his Place. If it happen so that he fall again, and be mixed with
the common crowd, every one inquires with admiration into the cause of his
having been raised so high. Is it he? say they, could he make no better
provision for himself when he was in place? Do Princes satisfy themselves with
so little? Really we were in good hands. This is a thing that I have often seen
in my time. Nay, so much as the very disguises of Grandeurs represented in our
Comedies, does in some sort move and deceive us. That which I my self adore in
Kings, is, the Crowd of their Adorers. All Reverence and Submission is due to
them, except that of the Understanding: my Reason is not obliged to bow and
bend, my Knees are. Melanthius being asked, what he thought of the Tragedy of
Dionysius? I could not see it, said he, it was so clouded with Language: so the
most of those who judge of the Discourses of great men, ought to say, I did not
understand his words, he was so clouded with Gravity, Majesty, and Greatness.
Antisthenes, one day entreated the Athenians to give order that their Asses
might as well be employed in tilling the ground as the Horses were: To which it
was answered, that those Animals were not destined for such a service: That Is
all one, replied he, it only sticks at your command: for the most ignorant and
incapable men you employ in your Commands of War, immediately become worthy
enough because you employ them. To which, the Custom of so many People who
Canonize the Kings they have chosen out of their own Body, and are not content
only to honor, but adore them, comes very near. Deification and Adoration of
the Kings of Mexico.
Those of Mexico, after the Ceremonies of his Coronation, dare no more presume
to look him in the face; but, as if they had deified him by his Royalty,
amongst the Oaths they make him take to maintain their Religion and Laws, to be
valiant, just, and mild, he moreover swears to make the Sun run his Course in
his wonted Light, to drain the Clouds at a fit Season, to confine Rivers within
their Channels, and to cause all things necessary for his People to be landed
upon the Earth. I differ from this common fashion, and am more apt to suspect
his Capacity, when I see it accompanied with that grandeur of Fortune and
public Applause. We are to consider, of what advantage it is to speak when he
pleases, to choose the Subject he will speak of, to interrupt or change other
men's Arguments with a Magisterial Authority; to protect himself from the
oppositions of others by a nod, a smile, or silence, in the presence of an
Assembly that trembles with reverence and respect. A man of a prodigious
Fortune, coming to give his Judgment upon some slight Dispute that was
foolishly set on foot at his Table, begun in these words, It can be no other
but a Liar or a Fool, that will say otherwise than so and so. Pursue this
philosophical Point with a Dagger in your hand. There is another Observation I
have made, from which I draw great advantage; which is, that in Conferences and
Disputes, every word that seems to be good is not immediately to be accepted.
Most men are rich in borrowed Sentences, without understanding the force of
them themselves. That a man does not perfectly understand all he borrows, may
perhaps be verified in my self. A man must not always presently yield, what
truth or beauty soever may seem to be in the Argument. Either a man must
stoutly oppose it, or retire, under color of not understanding it, to try on
all parts how it is lodged in the Author. It may happen that we may run upon
the point, and meet the truth that we could not otherwise reach. I have
sometimes, in the necessity and heat of the Combat, made falsifies that have
gone through and through, beyond my expectation and design. I only gave them in
number, they were received in weight. As when I contend with a vigorous man, I
please my self with anticipating his conclusions, I ease him of the trouble of
explaining himself; I strive to prevent his Imagination, whilst it is yet
springing and imperfect: the Order and Pertinency of his Understanding, warns
and threatens me afar off: I deal quite contrary with these; I must understand,
and presuppose nothing but by them. If they determine in general words, this is
good, that is naught, and that they happen to be in the right, see if it be not
Fortune that hits it off for them. Let them a little circumscribe and limit
their Judgment, why, or how it is so. These universal Judgments, that I see so
common, signify nothing. These are men that salute a whole People in a crowd
together; They who have a real acquaintance, take notice of, and salute them
particularly and by name. But it is a hazardous Attempt; and from which I have
more than every day seen it fall out, that weak Understandings, having a mind
to appear ingenious, in taking notice, as they read a Book, of that is best,
and most to be admired, fix their admiration upon something so very ill chosen,
that instead of making us discern the excellency of the Author, they make us
see their own ignorance. This exclamation is safe enough, This is fine, after
having heard a whole Page of Virgil: and by that the cunning sort of Fools save
themselves. But to undertake to follow him line by line, and with an expert and
approved judgment, to observe where a good Author excells himself, weighing
the Words, Phrases, Inventions and various Excellencies, one after another;
Cic. Offic. lib. 1.
take heed of that, Videndum est, non modo, quid quisque loquatur, sed etiam,
quid quisque sentiat, atque etiam qua de causa quisque sentiat. A man is not
only to examine what every one says, but also what every one thinks, and for
what reason every one thinks. I every day hear Coxcombs say things that are not
foolish: They say a good thing, let us examine how far they understand it,
whence they have it, and what they mean by it. We help them to make use of this
fine Expression, of this fine Sentence, which is none of theirs, they only have
it in keeping; they have spit it out at a venture, we bring it for them into
credit and esteem. You take them by the hand when you see them falling. To what
purpose? They do not think themselves obliged to you for it, and become more
fools still. Never take their part, let them alone; they will handle the matter
like People who are afraid of burning their fingers, they neither dare change
its seat nor light, nor break into it, shake it never so little, it slips
through their fingers; they give up their cause, be it never so strong, or good
however. These are fine Arms, but ill hasted. How many times have I seen the
experience? Now if you come to explain any thing to them, and to confirm them,
they presently catch at it, and presently rob you of the advantage of your
interpretation; It was what I was about to say; it was just my conceit, and if
I did not express it so, it was for want of Language. Very pretty! Malice it
self must be employed to correct this proud Ignorance. Hegias his Doctrine,
that we are neither to hate, nor accuse, but instruct, has reason elsewhere;
But here it is injustice and inhumanity, to relieve and set him right who stands
in no need on it, and is the worse for it. I love to let them step deeper into
the dirt; and so deep, that if it be possible, they may at last discern their
error. Folly not to be cured by Admonition.
Folly and absurdity are not to be cured by bare Admonition. And what Cyrus
answered to him, who importuned him to harangue his Army, upon the point of
Battle, that men do not become valiant and warlike upon a sudden, by a fine
Oration, no more than a man becomes a good Musician by hearing a fine Song, may
properly be said of such an Admonition as this. These are Apprentice-ships that
are to be served beforehand, by a long and continued Education. We owe this
care, and this assiduity of Correction and Instruction to our own; but to go
preach to the first passer by, and to Lord it over the Ignorance and Folly of
the first we meet, is a thing that I abhor. I rarely do it, even in particular
conferences, and rather surrender my cause, than proceed to these supercilious
and magisterial instructions. My humor is unfit either to speak or write for
Beginner; but for things that are said in common Discourse, or amongst other
things* I never oppose them, either by word or sign, how false or absurd
soever. As to the rest, nothing vexes me so ill in Folly, as that it pleases it
self more than any Reason can reasonably please it self. It Is ill luck, that
Prudence forbids us to satisfy and trust in our selves, and always dismisses
us timorous and discontent; whereas Obstinacy and Temerity fill those who are
possessed with them with joy and assurance. It Is for the ignorant to look at
other men over the shoulder, always returning from the combat full of Joy and
Triumph. And moreover, for the most part, this arrogance of Speech and gaiety
of Countenance gives them the better of it in the opinion of the Audience,
which is commonly ignorant, and incapable of well judging and discerning the
real advantage. Obstinacy of Opinion, Obstinacy a testimony of Folly.
and heat in Argument are the surest proofs of Folly. Is there any thing so
assured, resolute, disdainful, contemplative, serious and grave as an Ass? may
we not mix with the title of Conference and Communication, the quick and sharp
Reparties which Mirth and Familiarity introduces amongst Friends, pleasantly
and wittily jesting with one another? An exercise for which my natural gayety
renders me fit enough; which, if it be not too long and serious, as the other I
spoke of but now, it is no less smart and ingenious, nor of less utility, as
Lycurgus thought. For my part, I contribute to it more Liberty than Wit, and
have therein more of Luck than Invention; but I am perfect in suffering, for I
endure a Revenge, that is not only tart, but indiscreet to boot, without being
moved at all. And whoever attaques me, if I have not a brisk answer immediately
ready, I do not study to pursue the Point with a tedious and impertinent
Contest, bordering upon Obstinacy, but let it pass, and deferr my revenge to
another, and some better time. There is no Merchant that always gets. Most men
change their Countenance and their Voice where their Wits fail, and by an
unseasonable Indignation, instead of revenging themselves, accuse at once their
own Folly and Impatience. In this Jollity we sometimes pinch the private
strings of our Imperfection, which, at another time, when more temperate, we
cannot touch without offense, and profitably give one another a hint of our
Defects. There are other Sports of Hand, rude and indiscreet, after the French
manner, that I mortally hate; my skin is very tender and sensible: I have in my
time seen two Princes of the Blood Interred upon that very account. It Is
unhandsome to fall out, and fight in play. As to the rest, when I have a mind
to judge of any one, I ask him how much he is contented with himself, to what
degree his speaking or his work pleases him. I will none of these fine excuses,
I did it only in sport: Ovid. Trist. lib. 1. El. 6.
Ablatum mediis opus est incudibus istud.
This Work unfinished from the Anvil came.
I was not an hour about it: I have never revised it since. Well then, say I,
lay these aside, and give a perfect one, such a one as you would be measured
by: And then, what do you think is the best thing in your Work? Is it this part
or that? the Grace, or the Matter, the Invention, the Judgment, or the
Learning? For I find that men are commonly as wide of the mark in judging of
their own Works, as those of others; not only by reason of the kindness they
have for them, but for want of capacity to know and distinguish them. The Work,
by its own Force and fortune, may second the Workman, and sometimes outstrip
him, beyond his Invention and Knowledge. For my part, I do not judge of the
value of other men's Works more obscurely than of my own; and prize my Essays
now high, now low, with great doubt and inconstancy. There are several Books
that are useful upon the account of their Subjects, from which the Author
derives no praise; and good Books, as well as good Works, that shame the
Workman. I may write the manner of our Feasts, and the fashion of our Clothes,
and may write them ill; I may publish the Edicts of my time, and the Letters of
Princes that pass from hand to hand; I may make an Abridgment of a good Book,
(and every Abridgment upon a good Book is a foolish Abridgment) which Book
shall come to be lost, and the like. The Epitomizing of Books a foolish
undertaking, and without honor to the Undertaker.
Posterity will derive a singular utility from such Compositions: but what
honor shall I have, unless by great good fortune? A great part of the most
famous Books are in this condition. When I read Philip de Commines, several
years ago, doubtless a very good Author, I there took notice of this for no
vulgar saying, That a man must have a care of doing his Master so great
service, till at last he will not know how to give him his just reward. I ought
to commend the Invention, not him, because I met with it in Tacitus not long
since: Tacit. Ann. lib. 4.
Beneficia eo usque laeta sunt, dum videntur exolvi posse, ubi multum
antevenere, pro gratia odium redditur. Benefits are so far acceptable, as they
are in a capacity of being returned; but once exceeding that, hatred is
returned instead of thanks. And Seneca boldly says, Sen. Ep. 81.
Nam qui putat esse turpe non reddere, non vult esse cui reddat. For he who
thinks it a shame not to requite, would not have that man live to whom he owes
return. Q. Cicero says more faintly, Qui se non putat satisfacere, amicus esse
nullo modo potest. Who thinks himself behind hand in obligation, can by no
means be a friend. The Subject, according to what it is, may make a man looked
upon as Learned, and of good memory, but to judge in him the Parts that are
most his own, and the most worthy, the vigor and beauty of his Soul; a man
must first know what is his own, and what is not; and in that which is not his
own, how much we are obliged to him for the Choice, Disposition, Ornament, and
Language he has there presented us with. What if he has borrowed the matter,
and spoiled the form? as it often falls out; we who are little read in Books are
in this straight, that when we meet with a great Fancy in some new Poet, or
some strong Argument in a Preacher, we dare not nevertheless commend it, till
we have first informed our selves of some learned man, if it be his own, or
borrowed from some other; until that, I always stand upon my Guard. I came
lately from reading the History of Tacitus quite thorough, without interrupting
it with any thing else; (which but seldom happens with me, it being twenty
years since I have stuck to any one Book an hour together,) and I did it at the
instance of a Gentleman for whom France has a great esteem, as well for his own
particular Worth, as upon the account of a constant form of Capacity and
Virtue, which runs thorough a great many Brothers of them. I do not know any
Author that in a public Narration, mixes so much Consideration of Manners, and
particular Inclinations. And I am of a quite contrary Opinion to him, The
Character of Tacitus.
which is, that being especially to follow the Lives of the Emperors of his
time, so various and extreme in all sorts of forms, and so many notable Actions
as their Cruelty particularly produced in their Subjects, he had a stronger and
more attracting matter to treat of, than if he had been to discribe Battles,
and universal Commotions: so that I often find him sterile, running over those
brave Deaths, as if he feared to trouble us with their multitude and length.
This form of Histories is by much the most useful: public Commotions depend
most upon the Conduct of Fortune, private ones upon our own. It Is rather a
Judgment, than a Deduction of History; there are in it more Precepts than
Stories: it is not a Book to read, it is a Book to study and learn; it is so full
of Sentences, that right or wrong, they are there in muster: it is a Nursery of
Ethics and politic Discourses, for the Use and Ornament of those who have any
place in the Government of the World. He always pleads by strong and solid
Reasons, after a tart and subtle manner, according to the affected style of
that Age; and was so in love with a sound style, that where quickness and
subtilty was wanting in things, he supplied them with lofty and swelling words.
It is not much unlike the style of Seneca. I look upon Tacitus, as more sinewy,
and Seneca more sharp. His Pen seems most proper for a troubled and sick
Estate, as ours at present is; you would often say, that he deciphers and girds
at us. They who doubt of his Fidelity, sufficiently accuse themselves of being
his Enemy upon some other account. His Opinions are sound, and lean for the
most part toward the Roman Affairs: And yet I am angry at him, for judging
more severely of Pompey, than suited with the Opinion of those worthy men that
lived in the same time, and treated with him; and to have reputed him equal
with Marius and Sylla, excepting that he was more close. Other Writers have not
acquitted his intention in the government of Affairs, from ambition nor
revenge; and even his Friends were afraid that his Victory would have
transported him beyond the bounds of Reason, but not to so immeasurable a
degree: there is nothing in his Life that has threatened us with so express
Cruelty and Tyranny. Neither ought we to proportion Suspicion to Evidence; and
that makes me that I do not believe his Narratives to be ingenious and true;
but that he might add a little in this very thing, that they are not always
applied to the Conclusions of his Judgments, which he follows according to the
Inclination he has taken, very often beyond the Subject he treats of, which he
will not design to look upon with so much as one glance of Favor. He needs no
excuse, for having approved the Religion of his time, according as the Laws
enjoined, and to have been ignorant of the true; this was his Misfortune, not
his Fault. I have principally considered his Judgment, and am not very well
satisfied throughout; as these Words in the Letter, Tyberius his trouble of
Conscience about the Religion of his time.
that Tyberius, being old and sick, sent to the Senate. What shall I write to
you, Sirs, or how should I write to you, or what should I not write to you at
this time? May the Gods and the Goddesses lay a worse Punishment upon me, than
I am every day tormented with, if I know. I do not see why he should so
positively apply them to the sharp Remorses that tormented the Conscience of
Tyberius: at least, when I was in the same Condition, I perceived no such
thing. And this also seemed to me a little mean in him, that being to say, that
he had borne honorable Offices in Rome, he excuses himself, that he does not
speak it out of Ostentation: this seems a little too mean for such a Soul as
his; for, not to speak roundly of a man's self, implies some want of Courage; a
rough and lofty Judgment, and that judges soundly and surely, makes use of his
own Example upon all Occasions, as well as those of others, and gives Evidence
as freely of himself, as of a third Person: we are to pass by these common
Rules of Civility in favor of Truth, and Liberty. I dare not only speak of my
self, but speak only of my self. When I write of any thing else, I miss my way,
and wander from my Subject; yet am I not so indiscreetly enamored of my self,
that I cannot distinguish and consider my self apart, as I do a Neighbor, or a
Tree. It Is equally a Fault, not to discern how far a man's worth extends, and
to say more than a man discovers in himself. We owe more love to God, than to
our selves, and know him less; and yet speak of him as much as we will. If the
writings of Tacitus relate any thing true of his Qualities, he was a great man,
upright and bold, not of a superstitious, but a philosophical and generous
Virtue. A man may think him a little too bold in his Relations; as where he
tells us, that a Soldier carrying a burden of Wood, A Soldiers hands
perished with cold, carrying a burden of Wood.
his hands were so frozen, and so stuck to the load, that they there remained
closed and dead, being severed from his Arms. I always in such things submit to
the authority of so great Witnesses. What he also says, that Vespasian, by the
favor of the God Serapis, A blind Woman cured by Vespasian.
cured a blind Woman by anointing her Eyes with his Spittle, and I know not
what other Miracles: he does it by the Example and Duty of all good Historians.
He records all Events of Importance; and amongst public accidents are the
common Rumors and Opinions: it is their part to recite common beliefs, not to
regulate them: That part concerns Divines and Philosophers, who are the guides
of Conscience. And therefore it was, that this Companion of his* and as great a
man as himself, Quint. Curtius.
very wisely said; Equidem plura transcribo, quam credo: nam nec affirmare
sustineo, de quibus dubito, nec subducere quae accepi. Truly, I set down more
things than I believe, for I can neither endure to affirm things whereof I
doubt, nor smother what I have heard. And this other, Haec neque affirmare,
Livius. l. 7.
neque refellere operae pretium est: famae rerum standum est. It Is neither
worth the while to affirm, or to refute these things, we must stand to Report.
And writing in an Age wherein the belief of Prodigies began to decline, he
says, he would not nevertheless forbear to insert in his Annals, and to give a
relation of things received by so many worthy men, and with so great reverence
of Antiquity. It Is very well said. Let them deliver us History, more as they
receive than believe it; I, who am Monarch of the matter whereof I treat, and
who am accountable to none, do not nevertheless always believe my self; I often
hazard sallies of my own Wit, for which I very much suspect my self, and
certain Quibbles, at which I shake my Ears; but I let them go at a venture, I
see that others get Reputation by such things: it is not for me alone to judge.
I present my self standing, and lying on my face, my back, my right side, and
my left, and in all my natural Postures. Wits, though equal in force, are not
always equal in taste and application. This is what my Memory has presented me
in gross, and with incertainty enough. All Judgments in gross, are weak and
imperfect.

CHAP. IX. Of Vanity.
THere is peradventure no more manifest Vanity, than to write so vainly. That
which Divinity has so divinely expressed to us, ought to be carefully and
continually meditated by understanding men. Who does not see that I have taken
a Road, in which, incessantly and without labor I shall proceed, so long as
there shall be Ink and Paper in the World? I can give no account of my Life by
my Actions; Fortune has placed them too low: I must do it by my Fancies. And
yet I have seen a Gentleman that only communicated his Life by the workings of
his Belly: you might see in his House a show of a row of Basins of seven or
eight days Excrements; that was all his Study, all his Discourse; all other
talk stunk in his Nostrils. These here, but not so nauseous, are the Excrements
of an old Mind, sometimes thick, sometimes thin, and always indigested; and
when shall I have done representing the continual agitation and mutation of my
Thoughts, as they come into my Head, seeing that Diomedes writ six thousand
Books upon the sole subject of Grammar? What then ought prating to produce,
since prattling, and the first beginning to speak, stuffed the World with such a
horrible number of Volumes? So many words about words only. O Pythagoras, why
did not thou allay the Tempest! They accused one Galba of old for living
idly; he made answer, That every one ought to give account of his actions, but
not of his leisure. He was mistaken, for Justice takes Cognizance, and will
have an account even of those that Glean, which is one of the lasiest
Employments. But there should be some restraint of Law against foolish and
impertinent Scriblers, as well as against Vagabonds and idle Persons; which, if
there was, both I and a hundred others would be banished the Kingdom. I do not
speak this in jest: Scribbling seems to be a sign of a disordered and licencious
Age. When did we write so much as since our Civil Wars? When the Romans so
much, as when their Commonwealth was upon the point of Ruin? Besides that, the
refining of Wits does not make People wiser in a Government: this idle
Employment springs from this, that every one applies himself negligently to the
duty of his vocation, and is easily debauched from it. The Corruption of the
Age is made up upon the particular Contribution of every individual man. One
contributes Treachery, others Injustice, Irreligion, Tyranny, Avarice and
Cruelty, according as they are of Power, the weaker sort contribute Folly,
Vanity, and Idleness, of which I am one. It seems as if it were the Season for
vain things when the hurtful oppress us; and that in a time when doing ill is
common, to do nothing but what signifies nothing is a kind of Commendation.
It Is my comfort, that I shall be one of the last that shall be called in
question; and whilst the greater Offenders are calling to account, I shall have
leisure to amend: for it would, methinks, be against reason to punish little
Inconveniences, whilst we are infected with the greater. As the Physician
Philotimus said to one who presented him his Finger to dress, and who he
perceived, both by his Complexion and his Breath, had an Ulcer in his Lungs:
Friend, said he, it is not now time to concern your self about your fingers
ends. And yet I saw, some years ago, a Person whose Name and Memory I have in
very great Esteem, in the very height of our great Disorders, when there was
neither Law nor Justice put in Execution, nor Magistrate that performed his
Office, no more than there is now, publish I know not what pitiful
Reformations, about Cloths, Cookery, and long depending Suits in Law. These are
amusements wherewith to feed a People that are ill used, to show that they are
not totally forgot. These others do the same, who insist upon stoutly defending
the Forms of Speaking, Dances, and Games, to a People totally abandoned to all
sort of execrable Vices. It Is no time to bathe and cleanse a man's self when he
is seized on by a violent Fever. It Is for the Spartiates only to fall to
combing and curling themselves when they are just upon the point of running
headlong into some extreme danger of their Life. For my part, I have yet a
worse Custom, that if my Shoe go awry, I let my Shirt and my Cloak do so too, I
scorn to mend my self by halves: when I am lean, I feed upon mischief; I
abandon my self through despair; let my self go toward the Precipice, and, as
the Saying is, Throw the Helve after the Hatchet. I am obstinate in growing
worse, and think my self no more worth my own care; I am either good or ill
throughout. It Is a favor to me, that the Desolation of this Kingdom falls out
in the Desolation of my Age: I better suffer that my ills be multiplied, than
if my goods had been disturbed. The words I utter in mishap, are words of
spite. My Courage sets up its bristles instead of letting them down; and,
contrary to others, I am more devout in good than in evil Fortune* according to
the Precept of Xenophon, if not according to his Reason, and am more ready to
turn up my Eyes to Heaven to return my thanks than to crave; I am more
sollicitous to improve my Health when I am well, than to restore it when I am
sick. Prosperities are the same Discipline and Instruction to me, that
Adversities and Persecutions are to others: as if good Fortune were a thing
inconsistent with good Conscience; men never grow good, but in evil. Good
Fortune is to me a singular spur to modesty and moderation. An entreaty wins, a
threat checks me, favor makes me bend, fear stiffens me. Amongst humane
Conditions, this is common enough, to be better pleased with strange things
than our own, and to love Innovation and Change. Change pleasing to men.
Ipsa dies ideo nos grato perluit haustu, Petronius Arbiter. Epig.

Quod permutatis hora recurrit equis.
The day it self with better draughts does pass, Spoke of a Water Hourglass*

Because it changes Water every Glass.
I have my share. Those who follow the other extreme of agreeing amongst
themselves, to value what they have above all the rest, and to conclude no
Beauty can be greater than what they see, if they are not wiser than we, are
really more happy. I do not envy their Wisdom, but their good Fortune. This
greedy Humor of new and unknown things helps to nourish in me the desire of
Travel: but a great many more Circumstances contribute to it. I am very willing
to overrun the Government of my House. There is, I confess, a kind of
convenience in Commanding, though it were but in a Barn, and to be obeyed by
ones Servants: But it is too uniform and languishing a Pleasure, and is moreover
of necessity* mixed with a thousand vexatious Thoughts. One while the Poverty
and the Oppression of your Tenants; another, quarrels amongst Neighbors;
another, the trespasses they make upon you afflicts you; Horat. l. 3. Ode 1.
Aut verberatae grandine vineae,
Fundusque mendax, arbore nunc aquas
Culpante, nunc torrentia agros
Sydera, nunc hyemes iniquas.
Sir Richard Fanshaw.
Or Hail-smit Vines, or Years of Death,
Sometimes the too much wet in fault,
Sometimes the Stars that broil the Earth,
Sometimes the Winter that was naught.
and that God scarce in six Months sends a Season, wherein your Bailiff can do
his business as he should; but that if it serves the Vines, it spoils the
Medows. Lucret. l. 5.
Aut nimiis torret fervoribus aetherius Sol,
Aut subiti perimunt imbres, gelidaeque pruinae,
Flabraque ventorum violento turbine vexant.
Mr. Creech.
The Scorching Sun, with his too busy beams,
Burns up the Fruits, or clouds do drown with Streams;
Or chilled by too much Snow, they soon decay;
Or Storms blow them and all our hopes away.
To which may be added, the new and neat made shoe of the man of old, that
hurts your foot; and that a Stranger does not understand how much it costs you,
and what you contribute to maintain that show of Order that is seen in your
Family, and that peradventure you buy too dear. I came late to the Government
of a Family. They whom Nature sent into the World before me, long eased me of
that trouble: so that I had already taken another bent more suitable to my
Humor; The Government of a Family more troublesome than hard.
yet for so much as I have seen, it is an Employment more troublesome than hard.
Whoever is capable of any thing else will easily do that. Had I a mind to be
Rich, that way would seem too long; I had served my Kings, a more profitable
Traffic than any other. Since I pretend to nothing but the reputation of
having got nothing, as I have imbezell'd nothing conformably to the rest of my
Life, improper either to do good or ill of any moment; and that I only desire
to pass, I can do it, thanks be to God, without any great endeavor. At the
worst, evermore prevent Poverty by lessening your expense: It Is that which I
make my great concern, and doubt not but to do it before I shall be compelled.
As to the rest, I have sufficiently settled my Thoughts to live upon less than
I have, and live contentedly. Non aestimatione sensus, verum victu, Cicer^.
atque cultu, terminantur pecuniae modus. It Is not in the value of Possessions,
but in our Diet and Clothing that our Riches are truly limited. My real need
does not so wholly take up all I have, that Fortune has not whereon to fasten
her teeth without biting to the quick. My Presence, as contemptible as it is,
does me great Service in my domestic Affairs; I employ my self in them, but it
goes against the hair, considering that I have this in my House, that though I
burn my Candle at one end by my self, the other is not spared. Journeys do me
no harm but only by their Expense, which is great, and more than I am well able
to bear; being always wont to Travel with not only a necessary, but a handsome
Equipage. I must make them so much shorter and fewer, wherein I spend but the
froth, and what I have reserved for such Uses, delaying and deferring my Motion
till that be ready. I will not, that the Pleasure of going abroad spoil the
Pleasure of being retired at home. On the contrary, I intend they shall nourish
and favor one another. Fortune has assisted me in this, that since my
principal Profession in this Life, was to live at ease, and rather idly than
busily; she has deprived me of the necessity of growing Rich, to provide for
the multitude of my Heirs. If there be not enough for one, of that whereof I
had so plentifully enough, at his peril be it. His Imprudence will not deserve
that I should wish him any more. And every one, according to the Example of
Phocion, provides sufficiently for his Children, who so provides for them, as
to leave them as much as was left him. I should by no means like of Crates his
way. He left his Money in the hands of a Banker, with this Condition; that if
his Children were Fools, he should then give it to them; if witty, he should
then distribute it to the most Fools of the People. As if Fools, for being less
capable of living without Riches, were more capable of using them. So it is,
that the damage which is occasioned by my absence, seems not to deserve, so
long as I am able to support it, that I should wave the occasions of diverting
my self from that troublesome assistance. There is always something that goes
amiss. The Affairs one while of one House and then of another will tear you to
pieces. You pry into every thing too near; your Perspicacity does you hurt here
as well as in other things. I steal away from occasions of vexing my self, and
turn from the knowledge of things that go amiss; and yet I cannot so order it,
but that every hour I justle against something or other that displeases me. And
the Tricks that they most conceal from me, are those that I the soonest come to
know. Some there are that a man himself must help to conceal. Vain Vexations,
vain sometimes, but always Vexations. The smallest and slightest Impediments
are the most piercing: and as little Letters most tire the Eyes, so do little
Affairs the most disturb us. A rout of little ills more offend than one how
great soever. By how much domestic Thorns are numerous and sharp, by so much
they prick deeper, and without warning, easily surprising us, when least we
suspect them. I am no Philosopher. Evils oppress me according to their
Importance, and they import as much according to the form as the Matter; and
very often more. If I have therein more Perspicacity than the Vulgar, I have
also more Patience. Finally, they weigh with me, if they do not hurt me. Life
is a tender thing, and easily molested. Since my Age has made me grow more
pensive and morose, Seneca. Epist. 13.
nemo enim resistit sibi cum ceperit impelli: for no man resists himself, after
he once begins to decline; for the most trivial cause imaginable, I irritate
that Humor, which afterward nourishes and exasperates it self of its own
accord; attracting and heaping up matter upon matter whereon to feed. Prove.
Lucret. l. 1.
Stillicidii casus Lapidem cavat.
A falling drop at last will cave a Stone.
These continual trickling drops make Ulcers in me. Ordinary Inconveniences are
never light, they are continual and irreparable; when they continually and
inseparably spring from the concerns of good Husbandry. When I consider my
Affairs at distance, and in gross, I find, because perhaps my Memory is none of
the best, that they have gone on hitherto in improving beyond my Reason or
Expectation. Methinks my Revenue is greater than it is; their Prosperity
betrays me: But when I pry more narrowly into the Business, and see how all
things go, Tum vero in curas Animum diducimus omnes. Virg. Aen. lib. 5.

then my Breast
Is with innumerable cares oppressed.
I have a thousand things to desire and to fear. To give them quite over is
very easy for me to do: but to look after them without trouble is very hard.
It Is a miserable thing to be in place where every thing you see employs and
concerns you. And I fancy that I more cheerfully enjoy the Pleasures of another
man's House, and with greater and a purer relish than those of my own.
Diogenes, according to my Humor, answered him who asked him what sort of Wine
he liked the best, That of another, said he. My Father took a delight in
building at Montaigne, where he was born, and in all the Government of
domestic Affairs, I love to follow his Example and Rules; and shall engage
those who are to succeed me, as much as in me lies, to do the same. Could I do
better for him, I would; and am proud that his Will is still performing and
acting by me. God forbid, that in my hands I should ever suffer any image of
Life, that I am able to render to so good a Father, to fail. And whereas I have
taken in hand to finish some old Foundations of Walls, and to repair some
ruinous Buildings, in earnest I have done it more out of respect to his Design,
than my own Satisfaction; and am angry at my self, that I have not proceeded
further to finish the Foundation he has left in my House; and so much the more,
because I am very likely to be the last Possessor of my Race, and to give the
last hand to it. For, as to my own particular Application, neither the Pleasure
of Building, which they say is so bewitching, nor Hunting, nor Gardens, nor the
other Pleasures of a retired Life, can much trouble my Head. And it is what I am
angry at my self for, as I am for all other Opinions that are incommodious to
me; which I would not so much care to have vigorous and learned, as I would
have them easy and convenient for Life. They are true and sound enough, if
they are profitable and pleasing. Such as hear me declare my Ignorance in
Husbandry, whisper in my Ear, that it is disdain, and that I neglect to know
the Instruments of Husbandry, its Seasons, and Order; how they order my Vines,
how they graft, and to know the names and forms of Herbs and Fruits, and the
dressing the Meat by which I live, with the names and prizes of the Stuffs I
wear, because I have set my Heart upon some higher Knowledge; they kill me in
saying so. This is Folly, and rather Brutishness than Glory; I had rather be a
good Horseman than a good Logician. Quin tu iliquid saltem potius quorum
indiget usus, Virg. Eclog. 2.

Viminibus molique paras detexere junco.
Why rather not useful Employment find
Thy long neglected Vines to prune and bind.
We amuse our thoughts about the general Concern, and about universal Causes
and Conducts, which will very well carry on themselves without our Care; and
leave our own Business at random, with the care of our own Persons, which are
nearest to us, than that of any one man whatever. Now I am indeed for the most
part at home; but I would be there better pleased than any where else. Sit meae
seeds utinam senectae, Hor. lib. 2. Ode. 6.

Sit modus lasso Maris, and Viarum,
Militicaeque
Tyber, Sir Thomas Hawkins.
which the Argives built (O may)
That be the place of my last day;
May it my limit be of ease
From Journeys, Warfare, and rough Seas.
I know not whether or no I shall bring it about, I could wish, that instead of
some other member of his Succession, my Father had resigned to me the
passionate affection he had in his old age to his Husbandry. He was happy in
that he could accomodate his Desires to his Fortune, and satisfy himself with
what he had. Philosophy may to much purpose condemn the meanness and sterility
of my Employment, if I can once come to relish it, as he did. I am of Opinion,
that the most honorable Calling is to serve the Public, and to be useful to
many. Cicero de Amicitia.
Fructus enim ingenii, and Virtutis, omnisque praestantiae tum maximus
accipitur, quum in proximum quemque confertur. We then reap the most Wit,
Virtue, and all sorts of Merit, when they are conferred upon every one of our
nearest Relations. For my part, I disclaim in it; partly out of Conscience,
(for where I see the weight that lies upon such Employments, I perceive also
the little means I have to contribute to them; and Plato, who was a Master in
all sorts of Government, did not nevertheless forbear to abstain from them) and
partly out of Cowardice. I content my self with enjoying the World without
bustle; only to live an irreproachable Life, and such a one as many neither be
a burden to my self nor to any other. Never did any man more faintly and
negligently suffer himself to be governed by a third Person, then I should do,
had I any one to whom to entrust my self. One of my wishes at this time should
be, to have a Son in Law that knew handsomely how to cherish my old Age, and to
rock it asleep; into whose hands I might deposite in sovereignty the management
and use of all my Goods, that he might dispose of them as I do, and get by them
what I get, provided that he on his part were truly acknowledging, and a
Friend. But we live in a World where Loyalty in ones own Children is unknown.
He that has the charge of my Purse upon Travel, has it purely, and without
control; and he might also deceive me in reckoning. And, if he is not a Devil,
I shall oblige him to deal faithfully with me by so entire a Trust. Multi
fallere docuerunt, dum timent falli, Seneca. Epist. 3.
and aliis jus peccandi, suspicando fecerunt. Many have taught others to
deceive by fearing to be deceived, and by suspecting them, have given them a
just title to do ill. The most common security I take of my People is their
ignorance; I never suspect any to be vicious till I have first found them so,
and repose the most confidence in the younger sort, that I think are least
spoiled by Example. I had rather be told at two months end, that I have spent
four hundred Crowns, than to have my Ears beaten every night with three, five,
and seven: And I have been this way as little robbed as another. It is true, I
am willing enough not to see it; I do in some sort in good earnest harbor a
kind of perplexed, uncertain knowledge of my Money: for to a certain
proportion, I am content to doubt. One must leave a little room for the
Infidelity or Indiscretion of a Servant, if you have enough in gross to do your
business, let the overplus of Fortunes Liberality run a little more freely at
her Mercy; it is the Gleaners Portion. After all, I do not so much value the
Fidelity of my People, as I contemn their Injury. What a mean and ridiculous
thing it is for a man to study his Money, to delight a man's self with handling
and telling it! It Is by that, that Avarice makes its approaches. Of eighteen
years that I have had my Estate in my own hands, I could never prevail with my
self, either to read over my Deeds, or examine my principal Affairs, which
ought of Necessity to pass thorough my Knowledge and Inspection. It Is not a
Philosophical disdain of worldly and transitory things, my taste is not
purified to that degree, and I value them at as great a rate at least as they
are worth; but it is in truth an inexcusable and childish Laziness and
Negligence. What would I not rather do than read an Evidence? and sooner, than
as a Slave to my own business, to tumble over a company of old musty Writings?
or which is worse, those of another man, as so many do now a days to get Money?
I have nothing dear but care and trouble, and endeavor nothing so much as to
be careless and at ease. I had been much fitter, I believe, could it have been
without Obligation and Servitude to have lived upon another man's Fortune than
my own: And also I do not know, when I examine it nearer, whether according to
my Humor, what I have to suffer from my Affairs and Servants, have not in it
something more abject, troublesome, and tormenting, than there would be in
serving a man better born than my self, that would govern me with a gentle
rein, Cicero.
and a little at my own ease. Servitus Obedientia est fracti Animi, and
abjecti, arbitrio carentis suo: Servitude is the Obedience of a subdued and
abject Mind, wanting its own free will. Crates did worse, Poverty affected by
Crates.
who threw himself into the liberty of Poverty, only to rid himself of the
inconveniences and care of his House. This is what I would not do, I hate
Poverty equally with grief; but I could be content to change the kind of Life I
live for another that was meaner and had fewer Affairs. When absent from home,
I strip my self of all these thoughts, and should be less concerned for the
ruin of a Tower, than I am, when present, at the fall of a Tile. My mind is
easily composed at distance, but suffers as much as that of the meanest Peasant
when I am in place. The reins of my Bridle being wrong put on, or a Strap
flapping against my Leg, will keep me out of humor a day together. I raise my
Courage well enough against inconveniences, lift up my Eyes I cannot. Sensus,
o superi, sensus. I am at home responsible for what ever goes amiss. Few
Masters, I speak of those of competent Condition, such as mine (and if there be
any such they are happy) can rely so much upon another, but that the greatest
part of the burden will lie upon their own shoulders. This takes much from my
Grace in entertaining Strangers, so that I have peradventure detained some
rather out of expectation of a good Dinner, than by my own behavior; and lose
much of the Pleasure I ought to reap at my own House from the visitation and
assembling of my Friends. The most ridiculous carriage of a Gentleman in his
own House, is to see him bustling about the business of the House, whispering
one Servant, and looking an angry look at another. It ought insensibly to slide
along, and to represent an ordinary Current; and I think it equally unhandsome
to talk much to their Guests of their Entertainment, whether by way of bragging
or excuse. I love order and cleanliness, Hor. lib. 1. Epist. 5.
and cantharus, and lanx
Ostendunt mihi me.
more than abundance, and at home have an exact regard to necessity, little to
outward show. If a Footman falls to cuffs at another man's House, or that he
stumble and throw a Dish before him as he is carrying it up, you only laugh and
make a jest on it; you sleep whilst the Master of the House is stating a Bill of
Fare with his Steward for your morrows Entertainment: I speak according as I do
my self, not disesteeming nevertheless good husbandry in general, or not
considering how pleasant a quiet and thrifty managery, and carried regularly
on, is to some Natures. And not willing to annex my own errors and
inconveniences to the thing, nor to give Plato the lie, who looks upon it as
the most pleasant Employment to every one to do his particular Affairs without
wrong to another, when I Travel I have nothing to care for but my self, and the
laying out my Money; which is disposed of by one single Precept. Too many
things are required to the raking it together; in that I understand nothing; in
spending it I understand a little, and how to give day to my Expenses, which is
indeed its principal Use. But I rely too proudly upon it, which renders it
unequal and difform, and moreover immoderate, in both the one and the other
usage. If it makes a show, if it serve the turn, I indiscreetly let it run, and
as indiscreetly tie up my Purse-strings if it does not shine and please.
Whatever it be, whether Art or Nature, that imprint in us the condition of
Living by the Example of others, it does us much more harm than good. We
deprive our selves of our proper Utilities, to accomodate apparences to the
common Opinion. We care not so much what our Being is, as to us, and in
reality, as what it is to the public Observation. Even the goods of the Mind,
and Wisdom it self, seem fruitless to us, if only enjoyed by our selves, and if
it produce not it self to the view and approbation of others. There is a sort
of men whose Gold runs in streams imperceptibly under ground; others expose it
all in Plates and Branches, so that to the one a A piece of Copper Money worth
three Farthings.
Lyard is worth a Crown, and to others the contrary: the World esteeming its
Use and Value, according to the show. All curious Solicitude about Riches
smells of Avarice: even the very disposing of it, with a too punctual and
artificial Liberality, is not worth a painful Solicitude. He that will order
his Expense to just so much, makes it too pinched and narrow. The keeping or
spending, are of themselves indifferent things, and receive no color of good
or ill, but according to the application of the Will. The other cause that
tempts me out to these Journeys, is the difference in the present manners of
our State; I could easily satisfy my self with this Corruption in reference to
the public Interest, Juven. sat. 13.
pejoraque saecula ferri
Temporibus, quorum sceleri non invenit ipsa
Nomen, and a nullo posuit natura metallo.
Sir Robert Stapleton.
It Is the ninth Age, worse than the iron Times,
Nature no metal has to name our Crimes.
but not to my own. I am in particular too much oppressed. For in my
Neigbour-hood we are of late, by the long license of our Civil Wars, grown old
in so riotous a form of State, Quippe, ubi fas, versum atque nefas.
Mr. Ogilby.
Where wrong is right, and War through all the World*
So many shapes of Wickedness has hurld.
that in earnest, it is a wonder how it can subsist* Virg. Aeneid. lib. 9.
Armati terram exercent, semperque recentes
Convectare juvat praedas, and vivere rapto.
With Arms upon their backs they plow the Soil,
And make it their business to subsist by Spoil.
In fine, I see by our Example, that the Society of men is maintained and held
together at what price soever; in what condition soever they are placed, they
will still close and stick together, both moving and in heaps; as uneven
Bodies, that shuffled together without order, find of themselves a means to
unite and settle, often better than they could have been disposed by Art. King
Philip mustered up a Rabble of the most wicked and incorrigible Rascals he
could pick out, and put them all together into a City he had caused to be built
for that purpose, which bore their Name. I believe that they, even from Vices
themselves, erected a Government amongst them, and a commodius and just
Society. I see not one Action, or three, or an hundred, but Manners, in common
and received Use, so cruel, especially in Inhumanity and Treachery, which are
to me the worst of all Vices, that I have not the heart to think of them
without horror; and almost as much admire as I detest them. The exercise of
these notorious Villainies carry with them as great signs of vigor and force of
Soul, as of error and disorder. Necessity reconciles and brings men together;
and this accidental Connection afterward forms it self into Laws: For there
have been as Savage ones as any Humane Opinion could produce, which
nevertheless have maintained their Body with as much health and length of Life
as any Plato or Aristotle could invent. And certainly, all these descriptions
of Policies feigned by Art, are found to be ridiculous and unfit to be put in
practice. These great and tedious debates about the best Form of Society, and
the most commodious Rules to bind us, are debates only proper for the exercise
of our Wits; as in the Arts there are several Subjects, who have their being in
agitation and controversy, and have no Life but there. Such an Idea of
Government might be of some value in a new World; but we take a World already
made, and formed to certain Customs. We do not beget it, as Pyrrha, The Law of
Solon.
or Cadmus did. By what means soever we may have the privilege to rebuild and
reform it anew, we can hardly writhe it from its wonted bent, but we shall
break all, Solon being asked, whether he had established the best Laws he could
for the Athenians; Yes, said he, of those they have received. Varro excuses
himself after the same manner, that if he were to begin to write of Religion,
he would say what he believed; but being it was already received, he would
write more according to Usance than Nature. Not according to Opinion, What is
the best Government for every Nation.
but in truth and realty, the best and most excellent Government for every
Nation is that under which it is maintained. Her Form and essential convenience
depends upon Custom. We are apt to be displeased at the present condition; but
I do nevertheless maintain, that to desire the Command of a few in a Republic,
or another sort of Government in Monarchy than that already established, is
both Vice and Folly. Aim l'estat tell que tu le vois estre, Pybrac aux Quadrins.

S'il est Royal, aim la royaute,
S'il est de peu, ou bien communaute,
Aim l'aussi, car Dieu t'y a fait naistre.
The Government approve, be it what it will,
If it be Royal, then love Monarchy;
If a Republic, yet approve it still,
For God himself thereto subjected thee.
So writ the good Monsieur de Pybrac, Testimony of Monsieur de Pybrac, and
Monsieur de Foix.
whom we have lately lost, a Man of so excellent a Wit, so sound Opinions, and
so gentle Manners. This loss, and that at the same time we have had of Monsieur
de Foix, are of so great importance to the Crown, that I do not know whether
there is another couple in France worthy to supply the rooms of these two
Gascons in Sincerity and Wisdom in the King's Council. They were both variously
great men, and certainly, according to the Age, rare and great, each of them in
the kind. But what Destiny placed them in these times, men so remote from and
so disproportioned to our Corruption and intestine Tumults? Nothing presses so
hard upon a State as Innovation: change only gives form to Injustice and
Tyranny. When any piece is out of order, it may be propt; one may prevent and
take care that the alteration and corruption natural to all things do not carry
us too far from our beginnings and principles: but to undertake to found so
great a mass anew, and to change the Foundations of so vast a Building, is for
them to do, who to make clean, efface; who will reform particular defects by an
universal Confusion, and cure Diseases by Death: Non ta^ commutandarum quam
evertendarum rerum cupidi. Cic. de Offi. lib. 2.
Not so desirous of changing, as of overthrowing things. The World is unwilling
to be cured; and so impatient of any thing that presses it, that it thinks of
nothing but disengaging it self at what price soever. We see by a thousand
Examples, that it ordinarily cure^ it self to its cost: the discharge of a
present Evil is no cure, if there be not a general amendment of Condition. The
Chirurgion^ end is not only to eat away the dead Flesh, that is but the
progress of his Cure, he has a care over and above to fill up the Wound with
better and more natural Flesh, and to restore the Member to its due estate.
Whoever only proposes to himself to remove that which offends him, falls short,
for Good does not necessarily succeed Evils, another Evil may succeed, and a
worse, as it happened to Caesar's Tutors, who brought the Republic to such a
pass* that they had reason to repent the meddling with it. The same has since
happened to several others, even down to our own Times. The French, my
Contemporaries, know it well enough. All great mutations shake and disorder a
State. Whoever would aim directly at a cure, and would consider of it before he
begun, would be very willing to withdraw his hands from meddling in it. Pacuvius
Calavius corrected the Vice of this proceeding by a notable Example. His Fellow
Citizens were in mutiny against their Magistrates, he being a man of great
Authority in the City of Capua, found means one day to shut up the Senators in
the Palace, and calling the People together in the Market place, there told
them, that the day was now come, wherein at full Liberty they might revenge
themselves on the Tyrants by whom they had been so long oppressed; and who he
had now all alone, and unarmed at his Mercy: advising them withal, that they
should call them out one by one by Lot; and should particularly determine of
every one, causing whatever should be decreed to be immediately executed; with
this caution also, that they should at the same time depute some honest man in
the place of him that was condemned, to the end there might be no vacancy in
the Senate. They had no sooner heard the name of one Senator, but that a great
cry of universal dislike was raised up against him. I see, says Pacuvius, that
this must out, he is a wicked Fellow, let us look out a good one in his room;
immediately there was a profound silence, every one being at a stand whom to
choose. But one, more impudent than the rest, having named his man, there arose
yet a greater consent of Voices against him, an hundred Imperfections being
laid to his charge, and as many just reasons being presently given why he
should not stand. These contradictory Humors growing hot, it fared worse with
the second Senator and the third, there being as much disagreement in the
Election of the new, as consent in the putting out of the old. In the end,
growing weary of this bustle to no purpose, they began some one way, and some
another, to steal out of the Assembly; every one carrying back this Resolution
in his mind, that the oldest and best known Evil was ever more supportable than
one that was new and untried. To see how miserably we are torn in pieces: for
what have we not done? Ehu cicatricum, and sceleris pudet,
Horat. l. 1. Ode 35.
Fratrumque: quid nos dura refugimus
Atas? Quid intactum nefasti
Liquimus? Vnde manus, inventus
Metu Deorum continuit? Quibus
Pepercit aris.
Sir Thomas Hawkins.
Fie on our Broils, vile Acts, and Brothers fall,
Bad Age: What Mischief do we shun at all?
What Youth, his hand for fear of God contains?
Or who from sacred Altars spoil refrains?
I do not presently conclude, Ter. Adel. Act. 4. Scen. 7.
ipsa si velit salus,
Servare prorsus non potest hanc familiam.
Would safety't self its best care have,
This Family it cannot save.
we are not however peradventure at the last gasp. The Conservation of States
is a thing that in all likelihood surpasses our Understanding. A Civil
Government, is, as Plato says, a mighty and puissant thing, and so hard to be
dissolved, that it continues many times against mortal and intestine Diseases,
against the Injury of unjust Laws, against Tyranny, the Corruption and
Ignorance of Magistrates, and the License and Sedition of the People. We
compare our selves in all our Fortunes to what is above us, and still look
toward the better: but let us measure our selves with what is below us, there
is no Condition so miserable, wherein a man may not find a thousand Examples
that will administer Consolation. It Is our Vice that we more unwillingly look
upon what is above, than willingly what is below: and Solon was used to say,
that whoever would make an heap of all ills together, there is no one who would
not rather choose to bear away the ills he has, than to come to an equal
Division with all other men from that heap, and take with him from thence so
much as would upon the divident fall to his particular share. Our Government is
indeed very sick, but there have been others sicker, without dying. The Gods
play at Tennis with us, and bandy us every way. Enimvero Dii nos Homines quasi
pilas habent. Plaut.
The Stars have fatally destined the state of Rome for an Example of what they
could do in this kind: The Estate of Rome, and its diverse forms.
in it is comprised all the forms and adventures that concern a State: all that
order or disorder, good or evil Fortune can do. Who then can despair of his
Condition, seeing the shocks and commotions wherewith she was tumbled and tossed,
and yet withstood them all? If the extent of Dominion be the Health of a State,
which I by no means think it is, (and Isocrates pleases me, when he instructs
Nicocles not to envy Princes who have large Dominions, but those who know how
to preserve them when they fall into their hands) that of Rome was never so
sound, as when it was most sick: The worst of her forms was the most fortunate.
A man could hardly discern any Image of Government under the first Emperors,
The horrible Confusion under the first Emperor.
it was the most horrible and tumultuous Confusion that can be imagined. It
endured it notwithstanding, and therein continued, not only conserving a
Monarchy limited within his own bounds, but so many Nations, so differing, so
remote, so ill affected, so confusedly commanded, and so unjustly conquered. --
nec gentibus ullis
Lucan.
Commodat in populum, terrae pelagique potentem,
Invidiam fortuna suam.
But to no foreign Arms would Fortune yet
Lend her own Envy against Rome so great,
That over Nations, and mighty Kings,
Over Lords and Seas she stretched her Eagles-wings.
Every thing that totters does not fall. The contexture of so great a body
holds by more nails than one. It holds even by its Antiquity, like old
Buildings, from which the Foundations are worn away by time, without rough-cast
or mortar, which yet live and support themselves by their own weight; nec jam
validis radicibus haerens, Lucan. l. 1.

Pondere tuta suo est.
Like an old lofty Oak, Mr. May.
that heretofore
Great Conquerours spoils, and sacred Trophies bore,
Stands firm by his own weight.
moreover, it is not rightly to go to work, to discover only the flank and the
graff, to judge of the Security of a place; it must be examined which way
approaches can be made to it, and in what Condition the Assailant is. Few
Vessels sink with their own weight, and without some exterior violence. Let us
every way cast our Eyes, every thing about us totters; in all the great States
both of Christendom and else where, that are known to us, if you will but look,
you will there see evident threats of alteration and ruin: Et sua sunt illis
incommoda, Aeneid. 11.
parque per omnes Tempestas.
They all of them do in the mischief share,
And the rude Tempest rages every where.
Astrologers may very well, as they do, warn us of great Revolutions, and
eminent Mutations: their Prophecies are present and palpable, they need not go
to Heaven to foretell this. There is not only Consolation to be extracted from
this universal combination of ills and menaces, but moreover some hopes of the
continuation of our State; forasmuch as naturally nothing falls, where all
does. An universal Sickness is particular Health: Conformity is an Enemy to
Dissolution. For my part, I despair not, and fancy that I discover ways to
save us. Hor. Epog. 13.
Deus haec fortasse benigna
Reducet in sedem vice.
Sir Thomas Hawkins.
God will perchance,
Them to their Seat with happy change advance.
Who knows but that God will have it happen, as it does in humane Bodies, that
purge and restore themselves to a better estate by long and grievous Maladies;
which restores them a more entire and perfect Health than that they took from
them? That which weighs the most with me, is, that in reckoning the symptoms of
our ill, I see as many natural ones, and that Heaven sends us, and properly its
own, as of those that our disorder and humane imprudence contribute to it. The
very Stars seem to declare, that we have continued long enough, and beyond the
ordinary term already: And this also afflicts me, that the mischief which most
threatens us, is, not an alteration in the entire and solid Mass, but its
dissipation and divultion, which is the most worthy of our fears. I moreover
fear, in these ravings of mine, the treachery of my Memory, lest by
Inadvertence it should make me write the same thing twice. I hate to examine my
self, and never review, but very unwillingly, what has once escaped my Pen. I
here set down nothing new. These are common Thoughts, and having peradventure
conceived them an hundred times, I am afraid I have set them down some where
else already. Repetition troublesome
Repetition is every where troublesome, though it were in Homer; but it is
ruinous in things that have only a superficial and transitory show. I do not
love Inculcation, even in the most profitable things, as in Seneca. And the
usage of the Stoical School displeases me, to repeat upon every Subject at
length the principles and presuppositions that serve in general, and always to
realledge anew common and universal Reasons. My Memory grows infinitely worse
every day than other: Pocula Le^haeos ut si ducentia somnos, Hor. Epod. 14.

Arente fauce traxerim.
As if in thirst Lethe's oblivious flood
I had carous'd into my blood.
I must be fain for the time to come, (for hitherto, thanks be to God, nothing
has happened much amiss) whereas others seek time and opportunity to think of
what they have to say, to avoid all preparations, for fear of tying my self to
some obligation upon which I must be forced to insist. To be tied and bound to
a thing puts me quite out, and to depend upon so weak an Instrument as my
Memory. I never read this following Story, that I am not offended at it with a
natural Resentment. Lyncestes, Lyncestes killed with thrusts of Pikes by
Alexanders Soldiers.
accused of conspiracy against Alexander, the day that he was brought out
before the Army, according to the Custom, to be heard what he could say for
himself, had prepared a studied Speech, of which, haggling and stammering, he
pronounced some words; but still being more perplexed, whilst struggling with
his Memory, and that he was recollecting himself of what he had to say, the
Soldiers nearest to him charged their Pikes against him and killed him,
looking upon him as convict. His astonishment and silence served them for a
Confession. For having had so much leisure to prepare himself in Prison, they
concluded that it was not his Memory that failed him, but that his Conscience
tied up his Tongue, and stopped his Mouth. This was very well said. The Place,
the Assistants, and the expectation astonish him even at the time when it stood
him upon to speak the best he could. What can a man do, when it is a Harangue
upon which his Life depends? For my part, the very being tied to what I am to
say is enough to loose me from it. When I wholly commit and referr my self to
my Memory, I lay so much stress upon it, that it sinks under me, and I suppress
it with the burden. So much as I trust to it, so much do I put my self out of
my own power, so much as to find it in my own Countenance; and have been
sometimes very much put to it to conceal the slavery wherein I was engaged;
whereas my design is, to manifest in speaking a perfect negligence both of face
and accent; and casual and unpremeditated motions, as rising from present
occasions, choosing rather to say nothing to purpose, than to show that I came
prepared to speak well, a thing especially unbecoming a man of my Profession,
and of great obligation to him that cannot retain much; the preparation begets
a great deal more expectation than it will satisfy. A man often strips himself
to his Doublet to leap no further than he would have done in his Gown. Nihil
est his, qui placere volunt, Cicero. Acad. l. 4.
tam adversarium, quaam expectatio. Nothing is so great an adversary to those
who make it their business to please, as Expectation. It is recorded of the
Orator Curio, that when he proposed the division of his Oration into three or
four parts, it often happened, either that he forgot some one, or added one or
two more. I have always avoided falling into this inconvenience, having always
hated these Promises and Prescriptions, not only out of distrust of my Memory,
but also because this Method relishes too much of the Artist. Simpliciora
militares decent. It Is enough that I have promised to my self never to take
upon me to speak in Place of respect, for as to speaking, when a man reads his
Speech, besides that it is very absurd, it is a mighty disadvantage to those
who naturally could give it a Grace by action; and to rely upon the mercy of my
present Invention, I will much less do it; it is heavy and perplexed, and such as
would never furnish me in sudden and important Necessities. Permit, Reader,
this Essay its course also, and this sitting to finish the rest of my Picture.
I add, but I correct not; first, because I conceive, that a man having once
parted with his Labors to the World, he has no farther right to them; let him
do better if he can in some new Undertaking, but not adulterate what he has
already sold; of such dealers nothing should be bought till after they are
dead: let them well consider what they do, before they produce them to the
light. Who hastens them? My Book is always the same, saving that upon every new
Edition, (that the Buyer may not go away quite empty) I take the liberty to add
(as it were by an ill-jointed in-laying or faneering) some few insignificant
things over and above. They are no other but over-weight, that do not disfigure
the primitive Form of those Essays, where they, by a little ambitious subtilty,
give a kind of particular Repute to every one of those that follow. From thence
however there will easily happen some transposition of Chronology; my stories
taking place according to their patness, and not always according to their Age.
Secondly, because that for what concerns my self, I fear to lose by the change:
my Understanding does not always go forward, it goes backward too. I do not
much less suspect my Fancies for being the second or the third, than for being
the first, or present, or past; we often correct our selves as foolishly as we do
others. I am grown older by a great many years since my first Publications,
which were in the year 1580: but I very much doubt whether I am grown an inch
the wiser. I now, and I anon, are two several Persons; but whether the better,
now, or anon, I am not able to determine. It were a fine thing to be old, if we
only traveled toward improvement; but it is a drunken, stumbling, reeling,
ill-favored motion, like that of Reeds, which the Air casually waves to and
fro at Pleasure. The Writings of Antiochus corrected by himself in his more
mature Age.
Antiochus had in his Youth effectually written in favor of the Academy, but
in his old age he writ as much against it; would not which of these two soever
I should follow, be still Antiochus? After having established the incertainty,
to go about to establish the certainty of humane Opinions, was it not to
establish doubt, and not certainty? And to promise, that had he had yet another
Age to live, he would be always upon terms of altering his Judgment, not so
much for the better, as for something else? The public Favor has given me a
little more confidence then I expected; but what I most fear, is, lest I should
glut the World with my Writings: I had rather of the two nettle my Reader, than
tire him; as a learned man of my time has done. Praise is always pleasing, let
it come from whom, or upon what account it will; yet ought a man to understand
why he is commended, that he may know how to keep up the same Reputation still.
The vulgar and common esteem is seldom happy in hitting right; and I am much
mistaken, if amongst the Writings of my time, the worst are not those which
have most gained the popular applause. For my part, I confess my self obliged,
and return my thanks to those good natured men, who are pleased to take my weak
Endeavors in good part. The Faults of the Workmanship are no where so
apparent, as in a matter which of it self has no Recommendation. Blame not me,
Reader, for those that slip in here, by the fancy or inadvertency of others;
every hand, every Artizan contribute their own Materials, I neither concern my
self with Ortography (and only care to have it after the old way) nor pointing,
Ortography and pointing despised.
being very unexpert both in the one and the other. Where they wholly break the
Sense, I am very little concerned, for they at least discharge me; but where
they substitute a false one, as they so often do, and wrest me to their
Conception, they ruin me. When the Sentence nevertheless is not strong enough
for my Proportion, a civil Person ought to reject it as spurious, and none of
mine. Whoever shall know how lasie I am, and how indulgent to my own Humor,
will easily believe that I had rather write as many more Essays, than be tied
to revise these over again for so childish a Correction. I was saying
elsewhere, that being planted in very Center of this new Religion, I am not
only deprived of any great Familiarity with men of other kind of Manners than
my own, and of other Opinions, by which they hold together, as by a tie that
supersedes all other Obligations; but moreover* I do not live without danger,
amongst men to whom all things are equally lawful, and of whom the most part
cannot offend the Laws more than they have already done; from whence the
extremest degree of License does proceed. All the particular Circumstances
respecting me being sum'd up together, I do not find one man of my Country, who
pays so dear for the defense of our Laws both in cost and damages (as the
Lawyers say) as my self. And some there are who vapor and brag of their Zeal
and Constancy, that if things were justly weighed, do not much less than I. My
House, as one that has ever been open and free to all Comers, and civil to all,
(for I could never persuade my self to make a Garrison of it, that being to
make it the aim of the remotest Enemy) has sufficiently merited a popular
kindness, and so that it would be a hard matter justly to insult over me upon
my own Dunghill; and I look upon it as a wonderful and exemplary thing, that
it yet continues a Virgin from Blood and Plunder during so long a storm, and so
many neighboring Revolutions and Tumults. For to confess the truth, it had
been possible enough for a man of my Complexion to have shak'd hands with any
one constant and continued Form whatever. But the contrary Invasions and
Incursions, Revolutions, and Vicissitudes of Fortune round about me, have
hitherto more exasperated, then calmed and mollified the humor of the Country,
and involve me over and over again with invincible Difficulties and Dangers. I
escape, it is true, but am troubled that it is more by chance, and something of
my own Prudence, than by Justice, and am not satisfied to be out of the
Protection of the Laws, and under any other safeguard than theirs. As matters
stand, I live above one half by the Favor of others, which is an untoward
Obligation. I do not like to owe my safety either to the Generosity or
Affection of great Persons, who are content to allow me my Liberty, or to the
obliging manners of my Predecessors, or my own; for what if I was another kind
of man? If my Deportments, and the frankness of my Conversation or Relation
oblige my Neighbors, it is cruel that they should acquit themselves of that
Obligation in only permitting me to live, and that they may say, we allow him
the free liberty of having Divine Service read in his own private Chapel, when
it is interdicted in all Churches round about, and allow him the use of his
Goods, and the fruition of his Life, as one that protects our Wives and Cattle
in time of need. For my House has for many Descents shared in the Reputation of
Lycurgus the Athenian, Lycurgus the general Trustee for all his fellow Citizens.
who was the general Feoffee and Guardian of the Purses of his fellow Citizens.
Now I am clearly of Opinion, that a man should live by Authority, and not
either by Recompense or Favor. How many gallant men have rather chosen to lose
their Lives than to abandon their Duty? I hate to subject my self to any sort
of Obligation, but above all, to that which binds me by the duty of Honor. I
think nothing so dear as what is given me, and that because my Will lies at
pawn under the title of Ingratitude, and more willingly accept of Offices that
are to be sold; being of Opinion, that for the last I give nothing but Money,
but for the other I give my self. The knot that binds me by the Laws of
Courtesy pinches me more than that of Loyal constraint, and I am much more at
ease when bound by a Scrivener than by my self. Is it not reason that my
Conscience should be much more engaged when men simply rely upon it? In a Bond,
my Faith owes nothing, because it has nothing lent it. Let them trust to the
security they have taken without me; Promises to be strictly observed.
I had much rather break the Wall of a Prison, and the Laws themselves, than my
own Word. I am nice, even to Superstition, in keeping my Promises, and
therefore upon all occasions have a care to make them uncertain and
conditional. To those of no great moment, I add the ^ealousie of my own Rule to
make it weight; ^t wracks and oppresses me with its own Interest. Even in
Actions that are wholly my own, and free, if I once say it, I conceive that I
have bound my self, and that delivering it to the knowledge of another, I have
positively enjoined it my own performance. Methinks I promise it, if I but say
it, and therefore am not apt to say much of that kind. The Sentence that I pass
upon my self is more severe than that of a Judge, who only considers the common
Obligation; but my Conscience looks upon it with a more severe and penetrating
Eye. I lag in those Duties to which I should be compelled if I did not go.
Cicero de Offic.
Hoc ipsum ita justum est quod recte fit, si est voluntarium. Even that which
is well done, is only just when it is voluntary. If the Action has not some
splendour of Liberty, it has neither Grace nor Honor. Ter. Adel. Act. 3. Scen.
5.
Quod me jus cogit, vix Voluntate impetrent.
That which the Laws have power to constrain,
They from my Will would hardly e're obtain.
Where Necessity draws me, I love to let my Will take its own Course. Quia
quicquid imperio cogitur, exigenti magis quam praestanti acceptum refertur. For
whatever is compelled by power, is more imputed to him that exacts tha^ to him
that performs. I know some who follow this Rule, even to Injustice, who will
sooner give than restore, sooner lend than pay, and will do them the least good
to whom they are most obliged. I am of a quite contrary Humor. I so much love
to disengage and disobligate my self, that I have sometimes looked upon
Ingratitudes, Affronts, and Indignities which I have received from those to
whom either by Nature or Accident I was bound in some duty of Friendship, as an
Advantage to me, taking this occasion of their ill usage, for an acquittance
and discharge of so much of my Debt. And though I still continue to pay them
all the Offices of public Reason, I notwithstanding find my self very sparing
of doing that upon the account of Justice, which I did upon the score of
Affection, and am a little eased of my former Solicitude by my inward Will.
Est prudentis sustinere ut cursum, Cic. de Amicitia.
sic impetum benevolentia. It Is the part of a wise man to keep a curbing hand,
as upon the ordinary pace, so especially upon the precipitation of his good
Will; which is in me too urging and pressing where I take; at least, for a man
who love not to be strained at all. And this husbanding my Friendship serves me
for a sort of Consolation in the Imperfections of those in whom I am concerned.
I am sorry they are not such as I could wish they were, but so it is, that I
also go less in my Application and Engagement toward them. I approve of a man
that is the less fond of his Child for having a scald head, or being crooked;
and not only when he is ill-natured, but also when he is unhappy and imperfect
in his Limbs, (for God himself has abated that from his value and natural
estimation) provided he carry himself in this coldness of Affection with
Moderation and exact Justice. Proximity lessens not defects with me, but rather
makes them greater. After all, according to what I understand in the Science of
Benefits and Acknowledgement (which is a subtle Science, and of great use) I
know no Person whatever more free and less indebted than I am at this hour.
What I do owe, is simply to common and natural Obligations; as to any thing
else, no man is more absolutely clear. -- nec sunt mihi nota potentum
Aeneid. l. 12.
Munera. --
The Gifts of great men are to me unknown.
Princes give me a great deal, if they take nothing from me; and do me good
enough, if they do me no harm; that is all I ask. Oh, how am I obliged to
Almighty God, who has been pleased that I should immediately receive all I have
from his Bounty, and particularly reserved all my Obligation to himself! How
instantly do I beg of his holy Compassion, that I may never owe a real thanks
to any one! O happy Liberty wherein I have thus far lived! May it continue with
me to the last. I endeavor to have no need of any one. In me omnis spes est
mihi. All my hope is in my self. It Is what every one may do in himself, but
more easily they whom God has placed in a Condition exempted from natural and
urgent Necessities. It is a wretched and dangerous thing to depend upon others.
Our selves, which is the most just and safest Refuge, are not sufficiently
assured. I have nothing mine but my self, and yet the possession is in part
defective and borrowed. I fortify my self both in Courage, which is the
strongest assistant, and also in Fortune, therein wherewith to satisfy my
self, though every thing else should forsake me. Eleus Hippias did not only
furnish himself with Knowledge, that he might at need cheerfully retire from
all other Company to enjoy the Muses, nor with the Knowledge of Philosophy only
to teach his Soul to be contented with it, and bravely to subsist without
outward Conveniences, when Fate would have it so; he was moreover so curious,
as to learn Cookery, to shave himself, to make his own Clothes, his own Shoos
and Drawers, to provide for all his Necessities in himself, and to wean himself
from the Assistance of others. A man more freely and cheerfully enjoys borrowed
Conveniences, when it is not an Enjoyment forced and constrained by need, and
when a man has in his own Will and Fortune wherewithal to live without them. I
know my self very well. But it is hard to imagine any so pure Liberality of any
one toward me, any so frank and free Hospitality, that would not appear to me
unhandsom, tyrannical, and tainted with reproach, if Necessity had reduced me
to it. As giving is an ambitious and authoritative quality, so is accepting a
quality of Submission. Witness the injurious and quarrelsom refusal that
Bajazet made of the Presents that Themir sent him; That it is injurious to
refuse a Present.
and those that were offered in the behalf of the Emperor Solomon to the
Emperor of Calicut, were so much disdained by him, that he not only rudely
rejected them, saying, that neither he, nor any of his Predecessors had never
been wont to take, and that it was their Office to give; but moreover caused
the Ambassadors sent for that purpose to be put into a Dungeon. When Thetis,
says Aristotle, flatters Jupiter; when the Lacedaemonians flatter the
Athenians, they never put them in mind of the good they have received from
them, which is always odious, but of the benefits they have received from them:
That it is odious to reproach any with a Benefit conferred.
such as I see so frequently employ every one in their Affairs, and thrust
themselves into so much obligation, would never do it, did they but relish the
sweetness of a pure Liberty as I do, and did they but weigh, as wise men
should, the burden of Obligation. It Is sometimes peradventure fully returned,
but it is never dissolved. It Is a miserable slavery to a man that loves to be at
full liberty upon all accounts. Such as know me, both better and meaner men
than my self, are able to say whether they have ever known a man less
importuning, soliciting, entreating, and pressing upon others than I; but if I
am, and be a degree beyond all modern Example, it is no great wonder so many
parts of my Manners contributing to it. A little natural Pride, an impatience
of being refused, the contradiction of my Desires and Designs, and my most
beloved Qualities, Idleness and Freedom; by all these together I have conceived
a mortal hatred to being obliged to any other, or by any other than my self. I
prodigally lay out all I can wrap and wring of my own, rather than employ the
bounty of another in any light or important occasion or necessity whatever. My
Friends do strangely importune me, when they advise me to call in a third
Person, and I think it costs me little less to disengage him who is indebted to
me by making use of him, than to engage my self to him that owes me nothing:
These Conditions being removed, provided they require of me nothing of any
great trouble or care, (for I have renounced all business that requires great
diligence) I am easily entreated, and ready to do every one the best service I
can: But yet I have, I confess, more avoided receiving than sought occasions of
giving, and also, according to Aristotle, it is more easy. My Fortune has
allowed me but little to do others good withal, and the little it can afford
is put into a pretty close hand. Had I been born a great Person, I should have
been ambitious to have made my self beloved, not to make my self feared or
admired; Shall I more plainly express it? I should more have endeavored to
please than to do good. Cyrus very wisely, and by the Mouth of a great Captain,
and better Philosopher, prefers his Bounty and Benefits much before his Valor
and Warlike Conquests. And the elder Scipio, wherever he would raise his
Esteem, sets a higher value upon his Affability and Humanity, than his Prowess
and Victories, and has always this glorious Saying in his Mouth, That he has
given his Enemies as much occasion to love him as his Friends. I will then say,
that if a man must of necessity owe something, it ought to be by a more
legitimate title than that whereof I am speaking, to which the necessity of
this miserable War compells me; and not in so great a debt as that of my total
Preservation both of Life and Fortune that over-whelms me. I have a thousand
times gone to bed at my own House with an apprehension that I should be
betrayed and murdered that very night, compounding with Fortune, that it might
be without terror, and with quick dispatch; and after my Pater noster have
cried out, Virg. Ecl. 1.
Impius haec tam culta novalia miles habebit.
Shall impious Soldiers have these new plowed Grounds.
What remedy? it is the Place of my Birth, and most of my Ancestors have here
fixed their Affection and Name; we inure our selves to whatever we are
accustomed. And in so miserable a Condition as ours is, Custom is a great
bounty of Nature, which benums our Senses to the sufferance of many evils. A
Civil War has this with it worse than other Wars have, to make us stand
Sentinels in our own Houses. Quam miserum, porta vitam muroque tueri, Ovid.
Trist. l. 4. Eleg. 1.

Vixque suae tutum viribus esse domus!
To ones own Walls and Gates, it is wretched sure
To trust one's Life, yet scarce to be secure.
It Is a grievous extremity for a man to be justled in his own House. The
Country where I live is always the first in Arms, and the last that lays them
down, and where there is never an absolute Peace. Tum quoque cum pax est, Lucan.
trepidant formidine belli.
quoties pacem fortuna lacessit;
Hac iter est bellis, melius fortuna dedisset
Orb sub Eoo sedem, gelidaque sub Areto,
Errantesque domos.
Oh ill built City, too too near the Gaul! Mr. May.

Oh, sadly situated Place! when all
The World have Peace, we are the spoil of War,
And first that are invaded; happier far
Might we have lived in farthest North or East,
Or wandering Tents of Scythia, than possessed
The edge of Italy.
I sometimes extract the means to fortify my self against these
Considerations, from carelessness and sloth, which also in some sort bring us
on to resolution. It often befalls me to imagine and expect mortal dangers with a
kind of delight. I stupidly plunge my self headlong into Death, without
considering or taking a view of it, as into a deep and obscure Abyss, which
swallows me up at one leap, and involves me in an instant in a profound sleep
without any sense of pain. And in these short and violent Deaths, the
Consequence that I foresee administers more Consolation to me than the Effect
does Fear. They say, that as Life is not better for being long, so Death is
better for being not long. I do not so much evade being dead, as I enter into
confidence with dying. I wrap and shroud my self in the storm that is to blind
and carry me away with the Fury of a sudden and insensible Attack. Moreover,
what if it should fall out, that as some Gardiners say, that Roses and Violets
spring more odoriferent near unto Garlic and Onions, by reason that the last
suck and imbibe all the ill odor of the Earth; that these depraved Natures
should also attract all the malignity of my Air and Climate, and so render it
so much better and purer by their vicinity, that I should not lose all? That
cannot be, but there may be something in this, that Bounty and Goodness is more
beautiful and attractive when it is rare, and that Contrariety and Diversity
fortifies and shuts up well-doing within it self, and inflames it by the
jealousy of opposition and glory. Thieves and Robbers (of their special
favor) have no particular aim at me, no more have I to them. I should have my
hands too full. Like Consciences are lodged under several sorts of Robes, like
Cruelty, Disloyalty, and Rapine; and so much the worse as they are more
mischievous to others, and more secure and concealed in themselves, under the
color of the Laws. I less hate an open professed injury than one that is
clandestine and treacherous; an Enemy in Arms than an Enemy in a Gown. Our
Fever has seized upon a Body that is not much the worse for it. There was Fire
before, and now it is broke out into a Flame. The noise is greater, the evil
much the same. I casually answer such as ask me the reason of my Travels, that
I know very well what I fly from, but not what I seek. If they tell me that I
may be as unhealthy amongst Strangers, and that their Manners are no purer than
ours; I first reply, that that is hard to be believed. Tam multae scelerum
facies. Virg. Georg. l. 1.
Secondly, that it is always gain to change an ill Condition for one that is
uncertain, and that the ills of others ought not to concern us so much as those
of our own. I will not here omit, that I never mutiny so much against France,
that I am not perfectly friends with Paris; The commendation of Paris.
that City has ever had my Heart from my infancy, and it has fallen out, as of
excellent things, that the more beautiful Cities I have seen since, the more
the beauty of this does still win upon my affection. I love it by it self, and
more in its own native Being, than in all the Pomp of foreign and acquired
Embellishments; I love it tenderly, even to its warts and blemishes. I am not a
Frenchman but by this great City, great in People, great in the felicity of
her Situation; but above all, great and incomparable in variety and diversity
of Commodities, the Glory of France, and one of the most noble Ornaments of the
World. God of his Goodness compose our Differences, and deliver us from this
Civil War; I find her sufficiently defended from all other Violences. I give
her caution, that of all sorts of People, those will be the worst that shall
set it in Division; I have no fears of her, but of her self; and certainly I
have as much fear for her as for any other City in the Kingdom. Whilst she
shall continue, I shall never want a retreat, where I may live or dye,
sufficient to make me amends for parting with any other home or retreat
whatever. Not because Socrates has said so, but because it is in truth my own
Humor, and peradventure not without some excess. I look upon all men as my
Compatriots, and embrace a Polander with as sincere an Affection as a
Frenchman, preferring the universal and common tie to all National ties
whatever. I am not much taken with the sweetness of a natural Air: Acquaintance
wholly new, and wholly my own, appear to me full as good as the other common
and accidental ones with our Neighbors: Friendships that are purely of our own
acquiring, ordinarily carry it above those to which the Communication of the
Clime or of Blood oblige us. Nature has placed us in the World free and
unbound, we imprison our selves in certain streights, like the Kings of Persia,
The Water of the River Choaspes the beverage of the Persian Kings.
who oblige themselves to drink no other Water but that of the River Choaspes,
and foolishly quit claim to their right of usage in all other Streams; and as
to what concerned themselves, dried up all the other Rivers of the World. What
Socrates did toward his end, Death preferred to banishment.
to look upon a Sentence of Banishment as worse than a Sentence of Death
against him; I shall, I think, never be either so decrepid, or so strictly
habituated to my own Country, to be of that Opinion. These Celestial Lives have
Images enough, which I embrace more by Esteem, than Affection; and they have some
also so elevated and extraordinary, that I cannot embrace them so much as by
Esteem, for as much as I cannot conceive them. This Humor was very tender in a
man that thought the whole World his City. It is true, that he disdained
Travel, and had hardly ever set his Foot out of the Attick Territories. What
though he complained of the Money his Friends offered to save his Life, and
that he refused to come out of Prison by the Mediation of others; not to
disobey the Laws in a time when they were otherwise so corrupted? These
Examples are of the first kind for me; of the second there are others that I
could find out in the same Person. Many of these rare Examples surpass the
force of my Action; but some of them do moreover surpass the force of my
Judgment. These Reasons set aside, Travel is in my Opinion a very improving
thing; the Soul is there continually employed in observing new and unknown
things: and I do not know, as I have often said, a better School wherein to
model Life, than by incessantly exposing to it the diversity of so many other
lives, fancies, and usances; and to make it relish so perpetual a variety of
the form of humane Nature. The Body is therein neither idle nor overwrought,
and that moderate Agitation puts in breath. I can keep on Horseback, as much
tormented with the Stone as I am, without alighting or being weary, eight or
ten hours together. Aeneid. l. 6.
Vires ultra sortemque senectae.
Beyond the strength and common use of Age.
No Season is Enemy to me, but the parching heat of a scorching Sun; Vmbrellas
of Italy
for the Vmbrellas made use of in Italy ever since the time of the ancient
Romans, more burden a man's Arm than they relieve his Head. I would fain know
what pain it was to the Persians so long ago, and in the Infancy of their
Luxury, to make such Ventiducts, and plant such Shades about their abodes, as
Xenophon reports they did. I love Rain, and to dabble in the Dirt, as well as
tame Ducks do; the change of Air and Climate never concern me; every Sky is
alike. I am only troubled with inward Alterations, which I bred within my self,
and those are not so frequent in Travel. I am hard to be got out, but being
once upon the Road, I hold out as well as the best. I take as much pains in
little, as in great Attempts; and am as sollicitous to equip my self for a
short Journey, if but to visit a Neighbor, as for the longest Voyage. The
Spanish way of traveling.
I have learnt to travel after the Spanish fashion, and to make but one Stage
of a great many Miles; and in excessive heats, I always travel by Night, from
Sunset, to Sunrising. The other method of baiting by the way, in haste and
hurry to gobble up a Dinner, is, especially in short days, very inconvenient.
My Horses perform the better, for never any Horse tired under me that was able
to hold out the first days Journey. I water them at every Brook I meet, and
have only a care they have so much way to go before I come to my Inn, as will
warm the Water in their Bellies. My unwillingness to rise in a Morning, gives
my Servants leisure to dine at their ease before they go out. For my own part,
I never eat too late: my Appetite comes to me in eating, and not else, and am
never hungry but at Table. Some of my Friends blame me for continuing this
traveling Humor, being married and old. But they are out in it, for it is the
best time to leave a man's House, when a man has put it into a way of
continuing without us; and settled such an Economy, as corresponds to it for
mere Government. It Is much greater imprudence to abandon it to a less faithful
Housekeeper, and who will be less sollicitous to provide for the Family, and
look after your Affairs. The most useful and honorable Knowledge and
Employment for the Mother of a Family, is, the Science of good Housewifry, I
see some that are covetous indeed, but very few that are saving. It Is the
supreme quality of a Woman, and that a man ought to seek after before any
other, as the only dowry that must ruin or preserve our Houses. Let men say
what they will, according to the Experience I have learned, I require in
married Women the Oeconomical Virtue above all other Virtues; I put my Wife
to it, as a Concern of her own, leaving her by my absence the whole Government
of my Affairs. I see, and am ashamed to see, in several Families I know,
Monsieur, about Dinner time, come home all dirt, and in great disorder, from
trotting about amongst his Husbandmen and Laborers, when Madam is perhaps
scarce out of her Bed, and afterward is pouncing and tricking up herself
forsooth in her Closet. This is for Queens to do, and that is a question too.
It Is ridiculous, and unjust, that the Laziness of our Wives should be
maintained with our Sweat and Labor. No man, forasmuch as in me lies, shall
have a more free and liberal, a more quiet and free fruition of his Estate than
I. If the Husband bring Matter, Nature her self will that the Wife find the
Form. That Conjugal Friendship grows warm by absence.
As to the Duties of Conjugal Friendship, that some think to be violated by the
absence, I am quite of another Opinion; it is on the contrary an Intelligence
that easily cools by a too frequent and assiduous Practice. Every strange Woman
appears graceful, and every one finds by Experience, that being continually
together is not so pleasing, as to part for a time, and meet again. These
interruptions inflame me anew toward my Wife, and render my own House more
pleasant to me. Absence, and change of Place, renew my Appetite both to the one
and the other. I know that the Arms of Friendship are long enough to reach from
the one end of the World to the other, and especially this, where there is a
continual communication of Offices that rouse the Obligation and Remembrance.
The Stoics say, that there is so great Connection and Relation amongst wise
men, that he who dines in France, nourishes his Companion in Egypt; and that
whoever does but hold out his Finger, in what part of the World soever, all the
wise Men upon the habitable Earth feel themselves assisted by it. Fruition and
Possession principally appertain to the Imagination. It more fervently and
constantly embraces what it is in quest of, than what we hold in our Arms. Let
a man but consider and cast up his daily Thoughts, and he will find, that he is
most absent from his Friend when in his Company. His Assistance relieves your
Attention, and gives your Thoughts Liberty to absent themselves at every turn,
and upon every Occasion. When I am out at Rome, I keep and govern my House, and
the Conveniences I there left, see my Walls rise, my Trees shoot, and my
Revenue increase, or decrease, very near as well as when I am there. Ovid.
Trist. l. 3. Eleg. 4.
Ante oculos errat domus, errat forma locorum.
My House, and forms of places constantly
Present themselves unto my Fancy's Eye.
If we enjoy nothing but what we touch, we may say farewell to the Money in our
Closets, and to our Sons when they are gone a hunting. We will have them nearer
to us. Is the Garden, or half a days Journey from home so far? What is ten
Leagues, far, or near? If near, what is eleven, twelve, or thirteen? and so by
degrees. In earnest, if there be a Woman who can tell her Husband what step
ends the near, and what step begins the remote, I would advise her to stop
between. Hor. lib. 2. Epist. 1.
excludat jurgia finis:
Vtor permisso, caudaeque pilos ut equinae
Paulatim vello: and demo unum, demo etiam unum
Dum cadat clusus ratione ruentis acervi.
the whole House tail we may
Sir W. P.
Thus hair by hair, at length pluck quite away.
And let them in Gods Name call Philosophy to their Assistance; in whose teeth
it may be cast, that seeing it neither discerns the one nor the other end of
the joint, betwixt the too much and the little, the long and the short, the
light and the heavy, the near and the remote, that seeing it discovers neither
the beginning nor the end, it must needs judge very uncertainly of the middle.
Cic. Acad. lib. 4.
Rerum natura nullam nobis dedit cognitionem finium. Are they not still Wives
and Friends to the dead, who are not only at the end of this, but in the other
World? We embrace not only the absent, but those who have been, and those who
are not yet. We do not promise in Marriage to be continually twisted and linkt
together, like some little Animals that we see, or like those of Karenty, The
bewitched of Karenty.
that are bewitched, tied together like Dogs. And a Wife ought not to be so
greedily enamored of her Husbands Fore-parts, that she cannot endure to see
him turn his Back, if Occasion be. But may not this saying of that excellent
Painter of Women's Humors be here introduced, to show the Reason of their
Complaints? Vxor, si cesses, aut te amare cogitat, Ter. Adelp. Act. 1. Scen. 1.

Aut tete amari, aut potare, aut animo obsequi,
Et tibi been esse soli, cum sibi sit male.
Thy Wife, if thou stay'st long abroad, is moved,
Thinking thou either love, or art beloved;
Drinking, or something else, thy self to please,
And that you are well, whilst she is ill at ease.
Or may it not be, that of it self Opposition and Contradiction entertains and
nourishes them, and that they sufficiently accommodate themselves, provided
they incommodate you? In true Friendship, wherein I pretend to be as perfect as
another, I more give my self to my Friend, than I endeavor to attract him to
me. I am not only better pleased in doing him service, than if he conferred a
Benefit upon me; but moreover, had rather he should do himself good than me,
and he most obliges me when he does so. Of the Utility the absence of a Friend
is.
And if absence be either more pleasant or convenient for him, it is also more
acceptable to me than his Presence; neither is it properly absence, when we can
write to one another. I have sometimes made good use of our separation from one
another. We better filled, and further extended the possession of Life in being
parted. He lived, rejoiced, and saw for me, and I for him, as plainly as if he
had himself been there; one part remained idle, and we confounded one another
when we were together. The distance of Place rendered the Conjunction of our
Wills more rich. This insatiable desire of personal Presence, a little implies
weakness in the fruition of Souls. As to what concerns Age, which is alleged
against me, it is quite contrary; it is for Youth to subject it self to common
Opinions, and to curb it self to please others. It has wherewithal to please
both the People and its self; we have but too much ado to please our selves
alone. As natural Conveniences fail, let us supply them with those that are
artificial. It Is Injustice to excuse Youth for pursuing its Pleasures, and to
forbid old Men to seek them. When young, I concealed my wanton Passions with
Prudence; now I am old, I chase away Melancholy by Debauch. And thus do the
Platonic Laws forbid Travel till forty or fifty years old, that men's Travels
might be more useful and instructive in so mature an Age. I should sooner
subscribe to this second Article of the Laws, who forbids it after threescore;
but at such an Age you will never return from so long a Journey. What care I
for that? I neither undertake it to return nor to finish it. My business is
only to keep my self in motion whilst motion pleases me, and only walk for the
walks sake. They who hunt after a Benefice, or a Hare, run not; they only run
that run at Base, and to exercise their running. My design is divisible
throughout, it is not grounded upon any great hopes, every day concludes my
expectation. And the Journey of my Life is carried on after the same manner;
and yet I have seen Places enough a great way off, when I could have wished to
have been stayed. And why not, if Chrysippus, Cleanthes, Diogenes, Zeno,
Antipater, so many Sages of the sourest Sect, cheerfully abandoned their
Country, without occasion of complaint, and only for the enjoyment of another
Air? In earnest, that which most displeases me in all my Voyages, is, that I
cannot resolve to settle my Abode where I should best like, but that I must
always propose to my self to return, to accommodate my self to the common
Humor. If I feared to dye in any other Place than that of my Birth; if I
thought I should dye more uneasily remote from my own Family, I should hardly
go out of France; I should not without fear step out of my Parish. I feel Death
always twitching me by the Throat, or by the Back, but I am of another temper,
it is in all Places alike to me; yet, might I have my choice, I think I should
rather choose to dye on Horse back than in a Bed, out of my own House, and far
enough from my own People. There is more Heartbreaking than Consolation in
taking leave of ones Friends; I am willing to omit that civility, for that of
all the Offices of Friendship is the only one that is unpleasant, and could
with all my heart dispense with that great and eternal Farewell. If there be
any convenience in so many standers by, it brings an hundred inconveniences
along with it. I have seen many miserably dying, surrounded with all his Train:
it is a crowd that choaks them. It Is against Duty, and a testimony of little
kindness, and little care, to permit you to dye in Repose, one torments your
Eyes, another afflicts your Ears, another tires your faultring Tongue; you have
neither Sense nor Member that is not violated by them: Your Heart is wounded
with compassion to hear the mourning of those that are your real Friends, and
perhaps with spite, to hear the counterfeit condolings of those who only
pretend and make a show of being so. Who ever has been delicate that way, when
well, is much more so in his weakness. In such a necessity a tender Hand is
required, and accomodated to his Sentiments, to scratch him just in the place
where he itches, or not to meddle with him at all. If we stand in need of a
viz. a Midwife so called in French.
Knowing Woman to bring us into the World, we have much more need of a wiser
Man to help us out of it. Such a one, and a Friend to boot, a man ought to
purchase at any rate for such an Occasion. I am not yet arrived to such a pitch
of Bravery as to disdain all assistance in that fatal Hour, nor pretend to be
able so to fortify my self in my own Strength, that nothing can assist or
offend me; I have not brought my self to that: I endeavor to hide my self, and
to escape from this Passage, not by Fear but by Art. I do not intend in this
act of dying to muster up and make a show of my constancy. For whom should I do
it? All the right and title I have to reputation will then cease. I content my
self with a death involved within it self, quiet, solitary, and all my own,
suitable to my retired and private life. Quite contrary to the Roman
Superstition, where a man was looked upon as unhappy, who dyed without
speaking, and that had not his nearest Relations to close his eyes. The eyes of
dying Persons closed by their nearest Relations.
I have enough to do to comfort my self, without giving my self the trouble of
consolating others; thoughts enough in my head, not to need that Circumstances
should possess me with new; and matter enough to entertain my self withal
without borrowing. This critical minute is out of the part of Society, it is the
act of one single Person. Let us live, and be merry amongst our Friends, let us
go dye, and be sullen amongst Straners. A man may find those for his money that
will shift his pillow, and rub his feet, and will trouble him no more than he
would have them, who will present him with an indifferent Countenance, and
suffer him to govern himself, and to complain according to his own Method. I
wean my self daily by my Reason from this childish and inhumane Humor, of
desiring by our sufferings to move the Compassion and Mourning of our Friends.
We stretch our Inconveniences beyond their just extent when we extract tears
from them, and the Constancy which we commend in every one in supporting his
own adverse Fortune, we accuse and reproach in our Friends when the case is our
own; we are not satisfied that they should be sensible of our Condition only,
unless they be moreover afflicted. A man should publish and communicate his
joy, but as much as he can, conceal and smother his grief: He that makes
himself lamented without Reason, is a man not to be lamented when there shall
be real Cause. To be always complaining, is the way never to be lamented; by
making himself always in so pitiful a Taking, he is never commiserated by any.
He that makes himself dead when he is alive, is subject to be thought likely to
live when he is dying; I have seen some, who have taken it ill when they have
been told that they looked well, and that their Pulse was temperate, contain
their smiles, because they betrayed a Recovery, and be angry at their Health
because it was not to be lamented: And, which is a great deal more, they were
not Women neither. I describe my Infirmities, but such as they really are at
most, and avoid all Expressions of ill Prognostic and composed Exclamations.
If not Mirth, at least, Mourning very improper about sick Persons.
a temperate Countenance in the standers by, is proper in the Presence of a
wise sick Man. He does not quarrel with Health, for seeing himself in a
contrary Condition. He is pleased to contemplate it found and entire in others,
and at least to enjoy it for company. He does not, for feeling himself melt
away, abandon all thoughts of Life, nor avoid to discourse of ordinary and
indifferent things. I will study sickness whilst I am well; when it has seized
me it will make its impression real enough, without the help of my Imagination.
We prepare our selves before hand for the Journey we undertake and resolve
upon, we leave the appointment of the Hour when to take Horse to the Company,
and in their favor deferr it. I find this unexpected advantage in the
publication of my Manners, that it in some sort serves me for a Rule. I have
sometimes some consideration of not betraying or falsifying the History of my
Life. This public Declaration obliges me to keep my way, and not to give the
lie to the Image I have drawn of my Qualities, commonly less deformed and
interdicted than the malignity and infirmity of the Judgments of this Age
would have them. The uniformity and simplicity of my Manners produce a Face of
easy interpretation, but because the fashion is a little new, and out of Use,
it gives great opportunity to slander. Yet so it is, that whoever will go about
justly do condemn me, I do think I so sufficiently assist his malice in my
known and avowed Imperfections, that he may that way satisfy his ill nature,
without fighting with the Wind. If I my self, to prevent his accusation and
discovery, confess enough to frustrate his malice, as he conceives, it is but
reason that he make use of his right of amplification, and to wire-draw my
Vices as far as he can; offense has a right beyond Justice; and let him make
the roots of those errors I have laid open to him shoot up into Trees and
Branches: let him make his Use, not only of those I am really infected with,
but also of those that only threaten me; Injurious Vices both in quality and
number. Let him cudgel me that way. I should willingly follow the example of
the Philosopher Dion. Antigonus being about to reproach him with the meanness
of his Birth, he presently cut him short, with this Declaration* I am, said he,
the Son of a Slave, a Butcher, and stigmatized, and of a Whore, my Father
married in the lowest of his Fortune, who both of them were whipped for Offenses
they had committed. An Orator bought me, when a Child, and finding me a pretty
and hopeful Boy, bred me up, and when he died left me all his Estate, which I
have transported into this City of Athens, and here settled my self to the
study of Philosophy. Let the Historians never trouble themselves with inquiring
after me. I shall tell them what I am; and a free and generous confession
enervates Reproach, and disarms Slander. So it is, that, one thing with
another, I fancy men as often commend, as undervalue me beyond reason. As
methinks also, from my infancy, in rank and degree of Honor, they have given
me a place rather above than below my right. I should find my self more at ease
in a Country where these Degrees were either regulated or not regarded. Amongst
men, when the difference about the precedence either of walking or sitting
exceeds three replies, it is reputed uncivil. I never stick at giving, or taking
place out of Rule, to avoid the trouble of Ceremony. And never any man had a
mind to go before me, but I permitted him to do it. Besides the profit I make
of writing of my self, I have also hoped for this other advantage, that if it
should fall out that my humor should please, or jump with those of some honest
man, before I dye, he would then desire, and seek to be acquainted with me, and
to come up to me. I have given him a great deal of space; for all that he could
have in many years acquired by a long familiarity, he has seen in three days
in this memorial, and more surely and exactly set down. A pleasant fancy: many
things that I would not confess to any one in particular, I deliver to the
Public; and send my best Friends to a Booksellers shop, there to inform
themselves concerning my most secret Thoughts. Per. sat. 5.
excutienda damus praecordia.
My Intrails I lay open to men's view.
Had I by good Direction known where to have sought any one proper for my
Conversation, I should certainly have gone a great way to have found him out:
For the sweetness of suitable and agreeable Company, cannot, in my Opinion, be
bought too dear. Oh! What a thing is a true Friend! How true is that old
saying, How useful and necessary a Friend is.
That the Use of a Friend is more pleasing and necessary than the Element^ of
Water and Fire! To return to my Subject, there is then no great harm in dying
privately, and far from home. And we also conceive our selves obliged to retire
for natural Actions less unseemely, and less terrible than this. But moreover,
such as are reduced to spin out a long languishing Life, ought not perhaps to
wish to trouble a great Family with their continual Miseries. Therefore the
Indians, in a certain Province, thought it just to knock a man of the head, when
reduced to such a Necessity: and in another of their Provinces, they all
forsook him, to shift for himself as well as he could. To whom do they not at
least become tedious and insupportable? You teach your best Friends to be cruel
of force; hardening Women and Children by long usance, neither to lament, nor to
regard your sufferings. The Groans forced from me by the pain of the Stone,
were grown so familiar to my People, that no body took any more notice of them.
And though we should extract some Pleasure from their Conversation, (which does
not always happen, by reason of the Disparity of Conditions, which easily
begets Contempt or Envy toward any one whatever) is it not too much to be
troublesome all the days of a man's Life? The more I should see them force
themselves out of real Affection to be serviceable to me, the more I should be
sorry for their pains. We have liberty to lean, but not to lay our whole weight
upon others, so as to prop our selves by their ruin. Like him who caused
little Childrens Throats to be cut, to make use of their Blood for the cure of
a certain Disease he had: Or that other, who was continually supplied with
tender young Girls, to keep his old Limbs warm in the Night, and to mix the
sweetness of theirs with his sour and stinking Breath. Decrepitude is a
solitary Quality. I am sociable even to excess; and I think it reasonable that
I should now withdraw my Miseries from the sight of the World, and keep them to
my self. Let me shrink and draw up my self like a Tortoise. I learn to see men
without hanging upon them, I should endanger them in so steep a passage. It Is
now time to turn my back to company. But in these Travels you may be surprised
with Sickness in some wretched place where nothing can be had to relieve you: I
always carry most things necessary about me; and besides, we cannot evade
Fortune, if she once resolve to attack us. I need nothing extraordinary when I
am sick. I will not be beholding to my Bolus to do that for me which Nature
cannot. At the very beginning of my Fevers, and Sicknesses that cast me down,
whilst entire, and but a little disorder in my Health, I reconcile my self to
Almighty-God by the last Christian Offices: and find my self by so doing less
oppressed, and more easy, and have got methinks so much the better of my
Disease. And I have yet less need of a Scrivener or Counselor, than of a
Physician. What I have not settled of my Affairs when I was in Health, let no
one expect I should do it when I am sick. What I will do for the service of
Death, is always done. I durst not so much as one day deferr it. And if nothing
be done, it is as much as to say, either that doubt hindered my choice, (and
sometimes it is well chosen not to choose) or that I was positively resolved not
to do any thing at all. I write my Book to few men, and to few years. Had it
been matter of duration, I should have put it into a better Language; for,
according to the continual variation that ours has been continually subject to,
who can expect that the present force should be in use fifty years hence? It
slips every day thorough our Fingers, and since I was born is altered above one
half. We say that it is now perfect; and every Age says the same of the
Language then spoken: But I shall hardly trust to that, so long as it varies
and changes as it does. It Is for good and useful Writings to nail and rivet it
to them, and its Reputation will go according to the Fortune of our State. For
which Reason, I am not afraid to insert in it several private Articles, which
will spend their use amongst the men that are now living, and that concern the
particular knowledge of some who will see further into them than every common
Reader. I will not after all, as I often hear dead men spoken of, that men should
say of me, He judged, and lived so and so; he would have done this or that,
could he have spoke when he was dying, he would have said so or so, and have
given this thing or the other; I knew him better than any. Now, as much as
Decency permits, I here discover my Inclinations and Affections; but I do it
more willingly and freely by word of Mouth, to any one who desires to be
informed. So it is, that in these Memoires, if any one observe, he will find,
that I have either told, or designed to tell all. What I cannot express, I
point out with my Finger. Verum animo satis haec vestigia parva sagaci Lucret.
l. 1.

Sunt, per quae possis cognoscere caetera tute:
But by these footsteps a sagacious mind
May easily all other Matters find.
I leave nothing to be desired, or to be ghess'd at concerning me. If People
must be talking of me, I would have it to be justly, and truly. I would come
again with all my Heart from the other World, to give any one the lie that
should report me other than I was, though he did it to honor me. I perceive
that People represent, even living men, quite another thing than what they
really are: and had I not stoutly defended a Friend, whom I have lost, they
would have torn him into a thousand several pieces. To conclude the account of
my frail Humors, I do confess, that in my Travel, I seldom come to my Inn, but
that it comes into my Mind to consider whether I could there be sick, and dying
at my ease; I would be lodged in some convenient part of the House, remote from
all noise, ill scents, and smoke. I endeavor to flatter Death by these
frivolous Circumstances; or to say better, to discharge my self from all other
Encumbrances, that I may have nothing to do, nor be troubled with any thing but
it, which will lie heavy enough upon me, without the assistance of any other
thing to mend the Load. I would have my Death share in the ease and
conveniences of my Life; it is a great part of it, and of the greatest
importance, and hope it will not for the future contradict what is past. Death
has some forms that are more easy than others, and receives diverse Qualities,
according to every ones Fancy. Amongst the natural ones, those that proceed
from Weakness and Stupidity I think the most favorable: amongst those that are
violent, I can worse endure to think of a precipice than the fall of a House,
that will crush me flat in a moment; and a wound with a Sword, than a
Harquebuss shot: and should rather have chosen to poison my self with Socrates,
then stab my self with Cato. And though it be the same thing, yet my
Imagination makes as great a difference as betwixt Death and Life, betwixt
throwing my self into a burning Furnace, and plunging into the Channel of a
River: So idely does our Fear more concern it self in the Means than the
Effect. It is but an instant, it is true, but withal, an instant of such
weight, that I would willingly give a great many days of my Life to pass it
over after my own fashion. Since every ones Imagination renders it more or less
terrible, and since every one has some choice amongst the several forms of
dying, let us try a little further, to find some one that is wholly clear from
all Offense. Might not one render it moreover Voluptuous, as they did who died
with Anthony and Cleopatra? I set aside the brave and exemplary efforts
produced by Philosophy and Religion. But amongst men of little mark, such as
Petronius, and a Tigillinus at Rome, there have been found men condemned to
dispatch themselves, who have as it were rocked Death asleep with the delicacy
of their Preparations; They have made it slip and steal away, even in the
height of their accustomed Diversions. Amongst Whores and good Fellows, not a
word of Consolation, no mention of making a Will, no ambitious affectation of
Constancy, no talk of their future Condition: amongst Sports, Feastings, Wit,
and Mirth, common and indifferent Discourses, Music, and amorous Verses. Were
it not possible for us to imitate this Resolution after a more decent manner?
Since there are Deaths that are fit for fools, and fit for the wise, let us
find out such as are fit for those who are betwixt both. My Imagination
suggests to me one that is easy, and since we must dye, The manner of dying
left to the choice of Criminals by the Tyrants.
to be desired. The Roman Tyrants thought they did in a manner give a Criminal
Life, when they gave him the choice of his Death. But was not Theophrastus,
that so delicate, so modest, and so wise a Philosopher, compelled by Reason,
when he durst repeat this Verse-translated by Cicero? Cic. Thus. lib. 5.
Vitam regit Fortuna, non Sapientia.
Fortune, not Wisdom, humane Life does sway.
Fortune is assisting to the Facility of the bargain of my Life; having placed
it in such a condition, that for the future it can be no advantage nor
hindrance to those that are concerned in me. It Is a Condition that I would have
accepted at any time of my Age: but in this occasion of trussing up my Baggage,
I am particularly pleased, that in dying I shall neither do them good nor harm;
she has so ordered it by a cunning Compensation, that they who may pretend to
any considerable advantage by my death, will at the same time sustain a
material Inconvenience. Death sometimes is more grievous to us, in that it is
grievous to others, and interests us in their interest as much as in our own,
and sometimes more. In this Convenience of lodging that I desire, I mix nothing
of Pomp and Splendour, I hate it rather; but a certain plain neatness, which is
oftest found in places where there is less of Art, and that Nature has adorned
with some grace that is all her own. Non ampliter, sed munditer convivium. Cor.
Nepos in vita Attici.
Plus salis quam sumptus. And besides, it is for those whose Affairs compel
them to travel in the depth of Winter thorough the Grisons Country, to be
surprised upon the way with great Inconveniences. I, who for the most part
travel for my pleasure, do not order my Affairs so ill. If the way be foul on
my right hand, I turn on my left, if I find my self unfit to ride, I stay where
I am: and so doing, in earnest, I see nothing that is not as pleasant and
commodious as my own House. It Is true, that I always find superfluity
superfluous, and observe a kind of trouble even in abundance it self. Have I
left any thing behind me unseen, I go back to see it, it is still my way; I
trace no certain line, either strait or crooked. Do I not find in the place to
which I go what was reported to me? as it often falls out, that the Judgments of
others do not jump with mine, and that I have found those Reports for the most
part false; I never complain of losing my Labor: I have at least informed my
self that what was told me was not true. I have a Constitution of Body as free,
and a Palate as indifferent as any man living: the diversity of Fashions of
several Nations no further concern me than the mere pleasure of Variety. Every
Usance has its Reason. Let the Plate and Dishes be Pewter, Wood, or Earth, my
Meat be boiled or roasted, let them give me Butter or Oil, of Nuts, or Olives,
hot, or cold, it is all one to me; and so indifferent, that growing old, I
accuse this generous Faculty, and have need that delicacy and choice should
correct the Indiscretion of my Appetite, and sometimes relieve my Stomach. When
I have been abroad out of France, and that People out of Courtesy have asked
me if I would be served after the French manner, I laughed at the question, and
always frequented Tables the most filled with Strangers. I am ashamed to see my
Countrymen besotted with this foolish Humor of quarelling with forms contrary
to their own. They seem to be out of their Element, when out of their own
Village. Wherever they go, they keep strictly to their own fashions, and
abominate those of Strangers. Do we meet with a Compatriot in Hungary? Oh the
happy adventure! They are thence-forward inseparable; they cling together, and
their whole Discourse is to condemn the barbarous manners they see there. And
why barbarous, but because they are not French? And those have made the best
use of their Travels, who have observed most to speak against; for most of them
go for no other end, but to come again. They proceed in their Travel with great
Gravity and Circumspection, with a silent and incommunicable Prudence,
preserving themselves from the Contagion of an unknown Air. What I am saying of
them, puts me in mind of something like it. I have sometimes obsev'd in some of
our young Courtiers, they will not mix with any but men of their own sort; and
look upon us as men of another World, with disdain and pity. Put them upon any
Discourse but the Intrigues of the Court, and they are utterly at a loss; as
very Owls and Novices to us, as we are to them. And it is truly said, that a
well bred man is of a compound Education. I, on the contrary, travel very much
sated with our own fashions; not to look for Gascons in Sicily, I have left
them at home: I rather seek for Greeks than Persians, they are the men I
endeavor to be acquainted with, and the men I study, it is there that I bestow
and employ my self: and which is more, I fancy that I have met but with few
Customs that are not at least as good as our own. I have not, I confess,
traveled very far; scarce out of the sight of the fanes of my own House. As to
the rest, most of the accidental Company a man falls into upon the Road, beget
him more Trouble than Pleasure; I wave them as much as I civilly can,
especially now that Age seems in some sort to privilege and sequester me from
the common forms. You suffer for others, or others suffer for you; both of them
Inconveniences of importance enough, but the latter appears to me the greater.
It Is a rare Fortune, Worthy Men of great Solace in Travel.
but of inestimable solace, to have a worthy man, one of a sound Judgment, and
of Manners conformable to your own, who takes a delight to bear you Company. I
have been at an infinite loss for that upon my Travels. But such a Companion
should be chose and acquired from your first setting out. There can be no
Pleasure to me without Communication: there is not so much as a spritely
thought comes into my mind, that it does not grieve me to have produced alone,
and that I have no one to communicate it unto. Seneca. Epist. 6.
Si cum hac exceptione detur Sapientia, ut illam inclusam teneam, nec enuntiem,
rejiciam. If Wisdom were conferred with this caution, that I must keep it to my
self, and not communicate it to others, I would none of it. This other has
strained it one note higher. Si contigerit ea vita sapienti, ut omnium rerum
affluentibus copiis, Cic. de Offi. lib. 1.
quamvis omnia, quae cognitione digna sunt, summo otio secum ipse consideret,
and contempletur, tamen si solitudo tanta sit, ut hominem videre non possit,
excedat e vita. If such a condition of Life should happen to a wise man, that
in the greatest plenty of all Conveniences he might at the most undisturbed
leisure, consider, and contemplate all things worth the knowing, yet if his
Solitude must be such that he must not see a man, he had much better dye.
Architas was of my Opinion, when he said, that it would be unpleasant even in
Heaven it self, to wander in those great and Divine Celestial Bodies without a
Companion. But yet it is much better to be alone, than in foolish and troublesome
Company. Aristippus loved to live as a Stranger in all places. Mea si fata meis
paterentur ducere vitam Auspiciis. Aeneid. l. 4.

But if the Fates would so propitious be
To let me live at my own Liberty,
I should choose to pass away the greatest part of my Life on Horseback. --
visere gestiens, Hor. lib. 3. Ode. 3.

Qua part debacchentur ignes,
Quae nebulae pluviique rores.
Visit the stores of Snow and Hail, Sir Richard Fanshaw.

And where excessive Heats prevail.
Have you not more easy diversions at home? what do you there want? Is not
your house situated in a sweet and healthful Air, sufficiently furnished, and
more than sufficiently large? The Royal Majesty has more than once been
entertained there with all his train. Has not your Family left more below it in
good Government, than it has above it is Eminence? Is there any novel,
extraordinary, and indigestible thought that afflicts you? Quae te nunc coquat,
and vexet sub pectore fixa. Cic. de Senect. ex Enn.

That now lies broiling in thy troubled breast,
And never will suffer thee to be at rest.
Where do you think to live without disturbance? Curtius.
Nunquam simpliciter fortuna indulget. You see then, it is only you that
trouble your self, and you shall every where follow your self, and every where
complain; for there is no satisfaction here below, but either for brutish or
Divine Souls. He, who in so just an occasion has no contentment, where will he
think to find it? How many millions of men terminate their wishes in such a
condition as yours? Do but reform your self; for that is wholly in your own
power: whereas you have no other right but Patience toward Fortune. Nulla
placida quies est, Senec. Epist. 56.
nisi quam ratio composuit. I see the reason of this Advertisement, and see it
perfectly well; but he might sooner have done, and have spoken more
pertinently, in bidding me in one word, Be wise. This resolution is beyond
Wisdom, it is her work and product. Thus the Physician lies preaching to a poor
languishing Patient to be cheerful, but he would advise him a little more
discreetly in bidding him be well. For my part, I am but a man of the common
sort. It Is a wholesome Precept, certain, and easy to be understood, Be content
with what you have, that is to say, with reason: and yet to follow this advice,
is no more in the power of the wise men of the World than in me: it is a common
saying, but of a terrible extent: what does it not comprehend? All things fall
under discretion and qualification. I know very well, that to take it by the
letter, this pleasure of traveling is a testimony of uneasiness and
irresolution, and also those two are our governing and predominating qualities.
Yes, I do confess they are: I see nothing, not so much as in a dream, and in a
wish, whereon I could set up my rest: Variety only, and the possession of
diversity, can satisfy me, if any thing can. In traveling, it pleases me that
I may stay where I like without inconvenience, and that I have wherewithal
commodiously to divert my self. I love a private life, because it is my own
choice that I love it, not by any dissenting from, or dislike of the public
way of living, which peradventure is as much according to my Complexion. I
serve my Prince more cheerfully, because it is by the free election of my own
Judgment and Reason, without any particular obligation; and that I am not
compelled so to do, for being rejected or disliked by the other Party; and so
of all the rest. I hate the morsels that necessity carves me. I should think
that the greatest convenience upon which I were only to depend, had me by the
throat: Alter remus aquas, alter mihi radat arenas. Prop. l. 3. Eleg. 2.

Let me in water plunge one Oar,
And with the other rake the shore.
One cord will never hold me fast enough. You will say there is vanity in this
way of living. But where not? Both these fine Precepts are vanity, and all
Wisdom is vanity. Dominus novit cogitationes sapientium, quoniam vanae sunt.
These exquisite subtilties are only fit for Sermons. They are Discourses that
will send us all saddled into the other World. Life, as a material and corporal
motion, an action imperfect and irregular of its own proper Essence, I make it
my business to serve it according to it self. Aen. lib. 6.
Quisque suos patimur manes.
We all are punished for our proper crimes.
Sic est faciendum, Cic. de Off. lib. 1.
ut contra naturam universam nihil contendamus: ea tamen conservata, propriam
sequantur. We must so order it, as by no means to contend against Universal
Nature; but yet, that Rule being observed, to follow our own. To what end are
these elevated points of Philosophy, upon which no humane Being can rely? and
those Rules that exceed both our Use and Force? I see that we have often Images
of Life set before us, which neither the Proposer nor those that hear him have
any manner of hope, nor which is more, of inclination to follow. Of the same
sheet of Paper whereon the Judge has but just writ a Sentence against an
Adulterer, he steals a piece whereon to write a Love-Letter to his Companions
Wife. She whom you have but just now entertained in your Embraces, will
presently, even in your own hearing, aloud, more inveigh against the same fault
in her Companion than a Porcia. And such there are, who will condemn men to
death for Crimes that they do not themselves repute so much as faults. I have
in my youth seen a man in good Habit, with one hand present the People with
Verses that excelled both in Wit and Debauchery, and with the other, at the
same time, the most seditious Theological Reformation that the World has been
treated withal these many years. Men proceed at this rate; We let the Laws and
Precepts follow their way; our selves keep another course; not only by
debauchery of Manners, but ofttimes by Judgment and contrary Opinion. Do but
hear a Philosophical Lecture; the Invention, Eloquence, and Pertinency
immediately work upon your Mind, and move you; There is nothing that either
flatters or reprehends your Conscience; it is not to it that they address. Is
not this true? This made Aristo say, that neither a Bath nor a Lecture did
signify any thing, unless they scowr'd and made men clean. One may stop at the
outward skin; but it is after the marrow is picked out: as after having quafft
off the Wine out of a fine Bowl, we consider the graving and workmanship. In
all the Courts of ancient Philosophy this is to be found, that the same
Philosophy Reader does there publish the Rule of Temperance, and at the same
time Lectures of Love and Wantonness. And Xenophon, even in the bosom of
Clinias, writ against the Aristippick virtue. It Is not that there is any
miraculous conversion in it that makes them thus waving, but because Solon
represents sometimes in his own Person, and sometimes in that of a Legislator.
One while he speaks for the crowd, and another for himself; taking the free and
natural Rules for his own share, assuring himself of a firm and established
health and vigor. Juv. Sat. 13.
Curentur dubii medicis majoribus aegri.
Sir Robert Stapleton.
Great Doctors must do desperate Patients good.
Antisthenes allowed a Sage to love, A Sage permitted to love.
and do whatever he saw opportune, without regard to the Laws; forasmuch as he
was better advised than they, and had a greater knowledge of Virtue. His
Disciple Diogenes said, that men to Perturbations were to oppose Reason, to
Fortune Confidence, and to the Laws Nature. For tender Stomachs, forced and
artificial Re^ipes must be prescribed: good and strong Stomachs serve
themselves simply with the prescriptions of their own natural appetite. After
this manner do our Physicians proceed, who eat Melons and drink Icet wines,
whilst they confine their Patients to Syrups and Panades. I know not, said the
Curtezan Lais, what they talk of Books, Wisdom, and Philosophy, but those men
knock as often at my door as any other,. At the same rate that our license
carries us beyond what is lawful and allowed, men have often, beyond the
universal Reason, strech'd and tenter'd the Precepts and Rules of Life. Nemo
satis credit tantum delinquere quantum Juven. Sat. 14.

Permittas. --
None sins just so far as he has in charge, Sir Rob. Stapleton.

But at his pleasure will his Vice enlarge.
It were to be wished, that there were more proportion betwixt the Command and
the Obedience, and the Mark seems to be unjust to which one cannot attain.
There is no so good man, that so squares all his Thoughts and Actions to the
Laws, that he is not faulty enough to deserve hanging ten times in his Life.
Nay, and such a one too, as it were great Pity to make away, and very unjust to
punish. -- Olle, Mart. lib. 7. Ep. 9.
quid ad te
De cute quid faciat ille vel illa sua?
Olus, what is it to thee
What with themselves does he or she?
And such a one there may be, as has no way offended the Laws, who nevertheless
would not deserve the Character of a virtuous man, and that Philosophy would
justly condemn to be whipped; so unequal and perplexed is this relation. We are
so far from being good men, according to the Laws of God, that we cannot be so
according to our own. Humane wisdom could never yet arrive at the Duty as it
had it self prescribed; and could it arrive there, it would still prescribe it
self others beyond it, to which it would ever aspire and pretend; so great an
enemy to consistency is our humane condition. Man enjoins himself to be
necessarily in fault. He is not very discreet to cut out his own Duty by the
measure of any other Being than his own. To whom does he prescribe that which
he does not expect any one should perform? Is he unjust in not doing what it is
impossible for him to do? The Laws which condemn us not to be able, condemn us
for not being able. At the worst hand, this difform liberty of presenting
themselves two several ways, the Actions after one manner, and the Discourses
after another way, be allowed to those who only speak of things; but it cannot
be allowed to those who speak themselves, as I do; I must march my pen as I do
my feet. The common Life ought to have communication with the other Lives. The
Virtue of Cato was vigorous beyond the Reason of the Age he lived in, and for a
man whose province it was to make one in the governing others, doubtless
dedicated to the Public Service; and yet it might be called a Justice, if not
unjust, at least vain, and out of season. Even my own manners, which have not
above an inch of singularity in them above those that are current amongst us,
render me nevertheless a little odd and unsociable to the Age I live in. I know
not whether it be without reason that I am disgusted with the World I frequent;
but I know very well that it would be without reason, should I complain of its
being disgusted with me, seeing I am so with it. The Virtue that is assigned to
the Affairs of the World, is a Virtue of many wavings, corners, and elbows, to
join and adapt it self to humane Frailty, mixed, and artificial; not strait,
clean, constant, nor purely innocent. Our Annals to this very day reproach one
of our Kings for suffering himself simply to be carried away by the
conscientious Persuasions of his Confessor. Affairs of State have bolder
Precepts. exeat Aula Lucret. l. 8.

Qui vult esse pius.
Let him who will be good from Court retire.
I have formerly tried to employ in the management of public Affairs, Opinions
and Rules of living, as rude, new, unpolished, or unpolluted, as either born
with me, or brought away from my education, and wherewith I serve my own turn,
if not so commodiously, at least as securely, in my own particular Concerns:
but I have found a scolastick and novice Virtue, foolish and dangerous. He that
goes into a Crowd, must now go one way, and then another, keep his Elbows
close, retire, or advance, and quit the direct way, according to what he
encounters; and must live not so much according to his own Method, as that of
others; not according to what he proposes to himself, but according to what is
proposed to him: according to the Time, according to Men, according to
Occasions. Plato says, that whoever escapes from the Worlds handling with clean
Breeches, escapes by Miracle: and says withal, that when he appoints his
Philosopher the head of a Government, he does not mean a corrupt one like that
of Athens, and much less such a one as this of ours, wherein Wisdom it self
would be to seek. And a good Herb transplanted into a soil very contrary to its
own nature, much sooner conforms it self to the Soil, than it reforms the Soil
to it. I find, that if I were wholly to apply my self to such Employments, it
would require a great deal of change and new modelling in me before I could be
any way fit for it. And though I could so far prevail upon my self, (and why
might I not with Time and Diligence work such a feat) I would not do it. By the
little trial I have had of public Employment, it has been so much disgust to
me; I feel by times some Temptations toward Ambition rising in my Soul, but I
obstinately oppose them. Catul. Epig. 8.
At tu, Catulle, obstinatus obdura.
But oh Catullus, be thou obstinate.
I am seldom called to it, and as seldom offer my self uncalled. Liberty and
Laziness, the Qualities most predominant in me, are Qualities diametrically
contrary to that trade. We cannot distinguish the Faculties of men. They have
divisions and limits hard and delicate to choose. To conclude from the discreet
conduct of a private Life, a Capacity for the mannagement of public Affairs,
is to conclude it ill. A man may govern himself well, that cannot govern others
so, and compose Essays, that could not work Effects. Such a one may be, who
can order a Siege well, that would ill marshall a Battle, and that can speak
well in private, who would ill harangue a People, or a Prince. Nay, it is
peradventure rather a Testimony in him who can do the one, that he cannot do
the other, than otherwise. I find that elevated Souls are not much more proper
for low things, than mean Souls are to^ high ones. Could it be imagined that
Socrates should have administered occasion of laughter at the expense of his
own Reputation to the Athenians, for having never been able to sum up the Votes
of his Tribe, to deliver it to the Counsel. Doubtless the Veneration I have for
the Perfections of this great man, deserves that Fortune should furnish, for
the excuse of my principal imperfections, so magnifick an Example. Our
sufficiency is cut out into small parcels, mine has no latitude, and is also
very contemptible in number. Saturninus, to those who had conferred upon him
the command in chief, Companions, said he, you have lost a good Captain, to
make him an ill General. Whoever boasts, in so sick a time as this, to employ a
true and sincere Virtue in the Worlds Service, either knows it not, Opinions
growing corrupt with manners, (and in truth to hear them describe it, to
glorify themselves in their Deportments, and to lay down their Rules; instead
of painting Virtue, they paint pure Vice and Injustice, and so represent them
false in the education of Princes) or if he does know it, boasts unjustly, and
let him say what he will, does a thousand things of which his own Conscience
must necessarily accuse him. I should willingly take Seneca's Word, of the
Experience he made upon the like Occasion, provided he would deal clearly and
sincerely with me. The most honorable mark of Goodness in such a Necessity, is
freely to confess both his own Fault, and those of others; with the Power of
his Virtue to stop his Inclination toward Evil, unwillingly to follow this
propension, to hope better, to desire better. I perceive that in these unhappy
Divisions wherein we are miserably involved in France, every one does his best
to defend, and by Argument to make good his Cause; but even the very best with
Dissimulation and Disguise. He that would write roundly of the true state of
the Quarrel, would write rascally and viciously. What is the most just Party,
other than a Member of a decayed and worm-eaten Body? But of such a Body, the
Member that is least affected, is said to be sound, and with good reason,
forasmuch as our Qualities have no title but in Comparison. The Civil Innocence
is measured according to Times and Places. I loved to read in Xenophon this
Commendation of Agesilaus; being entreated by a neighboring Prince with whom he
had formerly had War, to permit him to pass thorough his Country; he granted
his request, giving him free passage thorough Peloponnesus, and not only did
not imprison, or poison him, being at his mercy, but courteously received him
according to the Obligation of his Promise, without doing him any the least
Injury or Offense. To such Humors as these, this was an Act of no great
luster; elsewhere, and in another Age, the Frankness and Magnanimity of such an
Action will be in high esteem. The Students of Montagne College in Paris.
Our Crack-rope Capets would have laughed at it, so little does the Spartan
Innocence resemble that of France. We are not without virtuous men, but it is
according to what we repute so. Whoever has his Manners established in
Regularity above the Standard of the Age he lives in, let him either wrest, or
blunt his Rules; or, which I would rather advise him to, let him retire, and
not meddle with us at all. What will he get by it? Egregium sanctumque virum si
cerno, Juven. Sat. 13.
bimembri
Hoc monstrum Puero, and miranti jam sub arato
Piscibus inventis and foetae comparo Mulae.
To me an honest man more monster seems Sir Robert Stapleton.

Than Nature shakes all when a Woman teems
A Child with two Heads; than Mules foaling found,
Or wondrous Fishes plowed out from the Ground.
A man may regret better times, but cannot fly from the present; we may wish
for other Magistrates, but we must notwithstanding obey those we have; and
peradventure it is more laudable to obey the bad than the good. So long as the
Image of the ancient and received Laws of this Monarchy shall shine in any
corner of the Kingdom, there will I be. If they unfortunately happen to thwart
and contradict one another, so as to produce two Factions of doubtful and
difficult choice, I will willingly choose to withdraw and escape the Tempest.
In the mean time Nature, or the hazards of War may lend me a helping hand.
Betwixt Caesar and Pompey, I should soon and frankly have declared my self; but
amongst the three Robbers that came after, a man must have been necessitated
either to hide himself, or have gone along with the current of the time; which
I think a man may lawfully do, when Reason no longer Rules. Quo diversus abis?
Whither do thou wandering run?
This medly is a little from my Subject. I go out of my way, but it is rather
upon the account of license than oversight. My Fancies follow one another, but
sometimes at a great distance; and look toward one another, but it is with an
oblique glance. I have read a Dialogue of Plato, of such a motley and
fantastic Composition, as had the beginning of Love, and all the rest to the
end of Rhetoric. They stick not at these Variations, and have a mavelous
Grace in letting themselves be carried away at the pleasure of the Wind; or at
least to seem as if they were. The titles of my Chapters do not always
comprehend the whole matter, they often but denote it by some mark only, as these
others, Andrea, Eunuchus; or these, Sylla, Cicero, Torquetus. I love a Poetic
March, by leaps and skips; it is an Art, as Plato says, light, nimble, and a
little maddish. There are pieces in Plutarch, where he forgets his Theme, where
the Proposition of his Argument is only found by incidence; and stufft
throughout with foreign matter. Do but observe his footing in the Demon of
Socrates. Good God, how beautiful then, are his variations and digressions, and
then most of all, when they seem to be fortuitous, and introduced for want of
heed. It Is the indiligent Reader that loses my Subject, and not I; there will
always be found some words or other in a corner that are to be purpose, though
it lie very close. I ramble indiscreetly and tumultuously, my Style and my Wit
wander at the same rate; a little Folly is tolerable in him that will not be
guilty of too much, says both the Precepts; and more the Examples of our
Masters. A thousand Poets flag and languish after a Prosaick manner, but the
best old Prose (and I strew them here up and down indifferently for Verses)
shines throughout, and has the luster* vigor, and boldness of Poetry, not
without some Air of its Fury; and certainly Prose ought to have the
Pre-eminence in speaking* The Poet, says Plato, when set upon the Muses Tripod,
pours out with Fury whatever comes into his Mouth, like the Pipe of a Fountain,
without considering and pausing upon what he says; and things come from him of
various colors, of a contrary substance, and with an uninterrupted torrent:
And all the old Theology, as the wise inform us, and the first Philosophy, are
Poesy. It Is the original Language of the Gods; I mean, that my matter
distinguishes it self; it sufficiently shows where it changes, where it
concludes, when it begins, and where it rejoyns, without interlacing it with
words of connection, introduced for the relief of weak or negligent Ears, and
without explaining my self. Who is he that had not rather not be read at all,
than after a drowsy or cursory manner? Seneca Epist. 2.
Nihil est tam utile, quod in transitu prosit. Nothing can be so profitable, as
to be so when negligently read. If to take a Book in hand, were to read it, to
look upon it were to consider it, and to run it slightly over, were to make it
a man's own; I were then to blame to make my self so ignorant, as I say I am.
Seeing I cannot fix the Attention of my Reader by the weight of what I write,
Manco male, I am much mistaken, if I should chance to do it by my Intricacies;
nay, he will afterward repent that he ever perplexed himself about it: it is very
true, but he will yet be there perplexed. And besides, there are some Humors in
which Intelligence produces disdain; who will think better of me for not
understanding what I say, and will conclude the depth by the obscurity of my
Sense; which, to speak sincerely, I mortally hate, and would avoid it if I
could. Aristotle boasts some where in his Writings, that he affected it;
vicious Affectation. The frequent Breaks, and short Paragraphs in Chapters that
I made my Method in the beginning of my Book, I have since thought, broke and
dissolved the Attention before it was raised, as making it disdain to settle it
self to so little; and upon that account have made the rest longer, such as
require Propositions, and assigned leisure. In such an Employment, to whom you
will not give an hour, you give nothing; and do nothing for him, for whom you
only do whilst you are doing something else. To which may be added, that I have
peradventure some particular Obligation to speak only by halves, to speak
confusedly and discordantly. I am therefore angry at this kind of perplexing
Reason; these extravagant Projects that trouble a man's Life, and those
Opinions so fine and subtle, that though they be true, I think them too dear
bought. On the contrary, I make it my business to bring Vanity it self in
repute, and Folly too, if it bring me any Pleasure; and permit me to follow my
own natural Inclinations, without carrying too strict a hand upon them. I have
seen elsewhere Palaces in rubbish, and Statues both of Gods and Men defaced,
and yet there are men still; all this is true, and yet for all that, I cannot
so often review the ruins of that so great, and so puissant City, Meaning Rome.
that I do not admire and reverence it. The care of the dead is recommended to
us; besides, I have been bred up from my Infancy with these People: I had
knowledge of the Affairs of Rome long before I had any of those of my own
House. I knew the Capitol, and its platform, before I knew the Louvre; and the
River Tiber, before I knew the River Seine. The Qualities and Fortunes of
Lucullus, Metellus, and Scipio, have ever run more in my Head than those of any
of my own Country. They are all dead, and so is my Father as absolutely dead as
they; and is removed as far from me and Life in eighteen years, as they are in
sixteen hundred; whose Memory nevertheless, Friendship and Society, I do not
cease to hug and embrace with a very perfect and lively Union. Gratitude
toward the dead.
Nay, of my own Inclination, I render my self more officious to the dead; they
no longer help themselves, and therefore methinks the more require my
assistance: it is there that Gratitude appears in its full luster. Benefits are
not so generously placed where there is Retrogradation and Reflection.
Arcesilaus going to visit Ctesibius who was sick, and finding him in a very
poor Condition, privately conveyed some Money under his Pillow; and, by
concealing it from him, acquitted him moreover from the acknowledgement due to
such a Benefit. Such as have merited from me my Friendship and Gratitude, have
never lost them by being no more; I have better and more carefully paid them,
when gone, and ignorant of what I did. I speak most kindly and affectionately
of my Friends when they can no more know it. I have had a hundred quarrels in
defending Pompey, and upon the account of Brutus. This Acquaintance does yet
continue betwixt us. We have no other hold even of present things but by Fancy.
Finding my self of no use to this Age, I throw my self back upon that other;
and am so enamored of the free, just, and flourshing Estate of that ancient
Rome (for I neither love it in its birth, nor old age,) that I interest my self
in it to a degree of Passion; and therefore cannot so often review the situation
of their Streets and Houses, and Ruins as profound as the Antipodes, that it
does not always put me into a Dump. Is it by Nature, or through error of Fancy,
that the sight of Places which we know have been frequented and inhabited by
Persons whose Memories are recommended in Story, does in some sort work more
upon us than to hear a recital of their Acts, or to read their Writings? Cic.
de fin. lib. 5.
Tanta vis admonitionis inest in locis. Et id quidem in hac urbe infinitum:
quacumque enim ingredimur: in aliquam historiam vestigium ponimus. So great a
power of Admonition is in Places; and truly in this City so infinite, that
which way soever we go we tread upon some History. It pleases me to consider
their Face, Port, and Vestments. I ruminate those great Names betwixt my Teeth,
and make them ring in my own Ears. Ego illos veneror, and tantis nominibus
semper assurgo. Seneca. Epist. 64.
I reverence them, and rise up in honor of so great Names. Of things that are
in some part great and admirable, I admire even the common Parts. I could wish
to see them talk, walk, and sup together. It were Ingratitude to contemn the
Relics and Images of so many worthy and valiant Men as I have seen live and
dye, and who by their Example give us so many good Instructions, knew we how to
follow them. And moreover, this very Rome that we now see deserves to be
beloved; so long, and by so many Titles a confederate to our Crown; the only
common and universal City. Rome the common and universal City.
The Sovereign Magistrate that Commands there, is equally acknowledged and
obeyed elsewhere: it is the Metropolitan City of all the Christian Nations. The
Spanish and French are there at home. To be a Prince of this Estate, there
needs no more but to be a Prince of Christendom. There is no Place upon Earth,
that Heaven has embraced with such an influence and constancy of favor; her
very Ruins are glorious. Laudandis preciosior ruinis.
More glorious by her Ruins made. Sydonius Apol.

She yet in her very Ruins retains the marks and image of Empire. Vt palam sit
uno in loco gaudentis opus esse Naturae. That it may be manifest that Nature is
in one place enamored of her own Work. Some one would blame, and be angry at
himself, to perceive himself tickled with so vain a Pleasure. Our Humors are
never too vain that are pleasant. Let them be what they would that did
constantly content an honest man of common Understanding, I could not have the
heart to accuse him. I am very much obliged to Fortune, in that to this very
hour she has offered me no outrage beyond what I was well able to bear. Is it
not happily her Custom to let those live in quiet by whom she is not
importuned? Quanto quisque sibi plura negaverit, Hor. lib. 3. Ode. 16.

A Diis plura feret, nil cupientium,
Nudus castra peto, multa petentibus,
Desunt multa.
The more a man himself denies, Sir Richard Fanshaw.

The more indulgent Heaven bestows;
Let them that will side with the I's,
I Am with the Party of the No's.
If she continue her favor, she will dismiss me very well satisfied. nihil
supra
Hor. lib. 2. Ode. 16.
Deos lacesso
Nor for more
Do I the Gods implore.
But beware the shock. There are a thousand that perish in the Port. I easily
comfort my self for what shall here happen when I shall be gone. Present things
trouble me enough; Fortunae caetera mando.
To Fortune I do leave the rest.
Besides, I have not that strong Obligation, that they say ties men to the
future, by the Issue that succeeds to their Name and Honor; and peradventure
ought less to covet them, if they are to be so much desired. I am but too much
tied to the World, and to this Life of my self: I am content to be in Fortune's
power by Circumstances properly necessary to my Being, without otherwise
enlarging her Jurisdiction over me, and have never thought, that to be without
Children was a defect that ought to render Life less complete, or less
contented. A steril Vacation has its conveniences too. Children are of the
number of things that are not so much to be desired, Children not much to be
coveted, and why. Tertull. de pudicit.
especially now, that it would be so hard to make them good. Bona jam nec nasci
licet, ita corrupta sunt semina. And yet are justly to be lamented by such as
lose them when they have them. He who left me my House in charge, foretold
that I was like to ruin it, considering my Humor so little inclined to look
after household Affairs: But he was mistaken, for I am in the same condition now
as when I first entered into it, or rather better; and yet without Office, or
any Place of profit. As to the rest, if Fortune has never done me any violent
or extraordinary injury, neither has she done me any particular favor.
Whatever we derive from her Bounty, was there above an hundred years before my
time. I have, as to my own particular, no essential and solid good, that I
stand indebted for to her Liberality; she has indeed done me some airy Honors,
and titulary Favors without substance, and those in truth she has not granted,
but offered me, who, God knows, am all material, and who take nothing but what
is real and massy too for current pay: and who, if I durst confess so much,
should not think Avarice much less excusable than Ambition, nor Pain less to be
avoided than Shame, nor Healthless to be coveted than Learning, or Riches than
Nobility. Amongst those empty Favors of hers, there is none that so much
pleases the vain Humor natural to my Country, as an Authentic Bull of a
Roman Burgess, that was granted me when I was last there, glorious in Seals and
gilded Letters; and granted with all imaginable Ceremony and Bounty. And
because it is couched in a mixed Style, more or less and that I could have been
glad to have seen a Copy of it before it had pas'd the Seal: I will, to
satisfy such as are sick of the same curiosity I am, transcribe it here in its
true form.

Quod Horatius Maximus, Martius Cecius, Alexander Mutus, almae urbis
conservatores de Illustrissimo viro Michaele Montano equite Sancti Michaelis,
and a Cubiculo Regis Christianissimi, Romana Civitate donando, ad Senatum
retulerunt, S. P. Q. R. de ea re ita fieri censuit. CVm veteri more, and
instituto cupide illi semper studioseque suscepti sint, qui virtute ac
nobilitate praestantes, magno Reip. nostrae usui atque ornamento fuissent, vel
esse aliquando possent: Nos majorum nostrorum exemplo, atque auctoritate
permoti, praeclaram hanc Consuetudinem nobis imitandam, ac servandam fore
censemus. Quamobrem cum Illustrissimus Michael Montanus Eques Sancti Michaelis,
and (...) Cubiculo Regis Christianissimi, Romani nominis studiosissimus, and
familiae laud, atque splendore, and propriis virtutum meritis dignissimus sit,
qui summo Senatus Populique Romani judicio, ac studio in Romanam Civitatem
adsciscatur, placere Senatui P. Q. R. Illustrissimum, Michaele^ Montanum rebus
omnibus ornatissimum, atque huic inclyto populo charissimum, ipsum posterosque
in Romanam Civitatem adscribi, ornarique omnibus, and praemiis and honoribus,
quibis illi fruuntur, qui Cives Patritiique Romani nati, aut jure optimo facti
sunt. In quo censere Senatum P. Q. R. se non tam illi jus Civitatis largiri,
quam debitum tribuere, neque magis beneficium dare, quam ab ipso accipere, qui
hoc Civitatis munere accipiendo, singulari Civitatem ipsam ornamento, atque
honor affecerit. Quam S. C. auctoritatem iidem Conservatores per Senatus R. Q.
R. scribas in acta referri atque in Capitolii curia servari, privilegiumque
hujusmodi fieri, solitoque urbis sigillo communiri curarunt. Anno ab urbe
condita CXCCCXXXI. Post Christum natum M.D.LXXXI. III Idus Martii. Horatius
Fuscus Sacri S. P. Q. R. scriba.
Vincent. Martholus Sacri S.P. Q. R. scriba.
Being before Burgess of no City at all, I am glad to be created one, of the
most Noble that ever was, or ever shall be. If other men would consider
themselves at the rate I do, they would, as I do, discover themselves to be
full of inanity and foppery; to rid my self of it I cannot, without making my
self away. We are all leavened with it, as well one as another; but they who
are aware on it, have the better bargain, and yet I know not whether they have
or no: This Opinion, and common Usance, to observe others more than our selves,
has very much relieved us that way. It Is a very displeasing Object: We can
there see nothing but Misery and Vanity. Nature, that we may not be dejected
with the sight of our own Deformities, has wisely thrust the action of Seeing
outward. We go forward with the Current, but to turn back toward our selves is
a painful motion; so is the Sea moved and troubled when the Waves rush against
one another. Observe, says every one, the motion of the Heavens, the Revolution
of public Affairs; observe the quarrel of such a Person, take notice of such a
ones Pulse, of such another last Will and Testament; in sum, be always looking
high or low, on one side, before, or behind you. It was a Paradoxical command
anciently given us by the God of Delphos, Look into your self, discover your
self, keep close to your self; call back your Mind and Will, that elsewhere
consumes themselves into your self; you run out, you spill your self, carry a
more steady hand: men betray you, men spill you, men steal you from your self.
Do thou not see that this World we live in keeps all its sights confined
within, and its Eyes open to contemplate it self? It Is always Vanity for thee,
both within and without, but it is less Vanity when less extended. Excepting
thee, (O man) said that God, every thing studies it self first, and has bounds
to its Labors and Desires, according to its need. There is nothing so empty
and necessitous as thou who imbracest the Universe, thou art the Explorator
without Knowledge, the Magistrate without Jurisdiction; and after all, the Fool
in the Play.

CHAP. X. Of managing the Will.
FEW things, in comparison of what commonly affect other men, move, or to say
better, possess me: for it is but Reason they should concern a man, provided
they do not possess him. I am very sollicitous, both by Study and Argument, to
enlarge this privilege of Insensibility, which is in me naturally raised to a
pretty degree; so that consequently I espouse, and am very much moved with very
few things. I am clear sighted enough, but I fix upon very few Objects; have a
sense delicate and tender enough, but an Apprehension and Application hard and
negligent; I am very unwilling to engage my self. As much as in me lies, I
employ my self wholly for my self; and in this very Subject, should rather
choose to curb and restrain my Affection from plunging it self over Head and
Ears into it, it being a Subject that I possess at the mercy of others, and
over which Fortune has more right than I. So that even so much as to health,
which I so much value, it were necessary for me, not so passionately to covet
and desire it, as to find Diseases insupportable. A man ought to moderate
himself betwixt the hatred of Pain, and of love of Pleasure. And Plato sets
down a middle Path of Life betwixt both. But against such Affections as wholly
carry me away from my self, and fix me elsewhere; against those, I say, I
oppose my self with my utmost force and power. It Is my Opinion, that a man
should lend himself to others, and only give himself to himself. Were my Will
easy to lend it self out, and to be swayed, I should not stick there: I am too
tender both by nature and usance, Ovid de Trist. l. 3. Eleg. 2.
-- fugax rerum, securaque in otia natus.
Born, and bred up in negligence and ease.
hot and obstinate disputes wherein my Adversary would at last have the better.
The issue that would render my heat and obstinacy disgraceful, would
peradventure vex me to the last degree. Should I set my self to it at the rate
that others, who do pursue and grasp at so much, my Soul would never have the
force to bear the Emotion and Alarms; it would immediately be disordered by
this inward Agitation. If sometimes I have been put upon the management of
other men's Affairs, I have promised to take it in hand, but not into my Lungs
and Liver; to take it upon me, not to incorporate it; to take pains, not be
passionate in it; I have a care of it, but I will not brood upon it: I have
enough to do to order and govern the domestic Tumults that I have in my own
Veins and Bowels, without introducing a crowd of other men's Affairs; and am
sufficiently concerned about my own proper and natural Business, without
meddling with the concerns of others. Such as know how much they owe to
themselves, and how many Offices they are bound to of their own, find, that
Nature has cut them out work enough of their own to keep them from being idle.
Thou have Business enough at home, look to that. Men let themselves out to
hire, their Faculties are not for themselves, but to be employed for those to
whom they have enslaved themselves; this common Humor pleases not me. We must
be thrifty of the liberty of our Souls, and never let them out but upon just
Occasions, which are very few, if we judge aright. Do but observe such as have
accustomed themselves to be at every ones call, they do it indifferently upon
all, as well little as great Occasions, in that which nothing concerns them, as
much as in what imports them most: They intrude themselves indifferently where
ever there is business, and are without Life, when not in the bustle of
Affairs. In negotiis sunt, Seneca. Epist. 22.
negotii causa. They only seek business for business sake. It is not so much
that they will go, as it is that they cannot stand still: Like a rolling Stone
that cannot stop till it can go no farther. Business, in a certain sort of men,
is a mark of Understanding, and they are honored for it. Their Souls seek
repose in Agitation, as Children do by being rocked in a Cradle. They may
pronounce themselves as serviceable to their Friends, as troublesome to
themselves. No one distributes his Money to others, but every one therein
distributes his Time and his Life. There is nothing of which we are so
prodigal, as of those two things, of which to be thrifty, would be both
commendable and useful. I am of a quite contrary Humor. I look to my self, and
commonly covet with no great ardour what I do desire, and desire little, employ
and busy my self but rarely and temperately, at the same rate. Whatever they
take in hand, they do it with their utmost power and vehemence. There are
therein so many dangerous steps, that for the more safety, we must a little
lightly and superficially slide through the World, and not rush through it.
Pleasure it self is painful at the bottom.

Hor. lib. 2. Ode. 2.
-- incedis per ignes,
Subpositos cineri doloso.
Thou upon glowing Coals does tread,
Under deceitful Ashes hid.
The Parliament of Bourdeaux chose me Mayor of their City, at a time when I was
at a great distance from France, and much more remote from any such thought; I
entreated to be excused, and refused it. But I was told by my Friends, that I
had committed an Error in so doing, and the greater, because the King had
moreover interposed his Command in that Affair. It Is an Office that ought to be
looked upon so much more Honorable, as it has no other Salary nor advantage
than the bare honor of its Execution: It continues two years, but may be
extended by a second Election, which very rarely happens: it was to me, and had
never been so but twice before: some years ago to Monsieur de Lansac, and
lately to Monsieur de Biron, Mareschall of France, in whose place I succeeded,
and left mine to Monsieur de Matignon, Mareschall of France also. Proud of so
noble a Fraternity. Vterque bonus pacis bellique minister. Aeneid. lib. 10.

Both of them men of worthy Character,
For able Ministers in Peace and War.
Fortune would have a hand in my Promotion, by this particular Circumstance
which she put in of her own; not altogether vain; for Alexander disdained the
Ambassadors of Corinth, who came to make him a tender of a Burgessship of their
City; but when they proceeded to lay before him, that Bacchus and Hercules were
also in the Register, he thankfully accepted the offer. At my arrival, I
faithfully and conscientiously represented my self to them for such as I find
my self to be; a man without Memory, without Vigilance, without Experience, and
without Vigor; but withal, without Hatred, without Ambition, without Avarice,
and without Violence, that they might be informed of my Qualities, and know
what they were to expect from my Service. And being that the knowledge they had
had of my Father, and the Honor they had for his Memory, had been the only
Motives to conferr this Favor upon me: I plainly told them, that I should be
very sorry any thing should make so great an Impression upon me as their
Affairs, and the Concerns of their City had done upon him, whilst he had the
same Government to which they had preferred me. I very well remember, from a
Boy, to have seen him in his old Age, tormented with, and sollicitous about the
public Affairs, neglecting the soft repose of his own House, to which the
declension of his Age had reduced him for several years before; the management
of his own Affairs, and his Health, and certainly despising his own Life, which
was in great danger of being lost, by being engaged in long and painful Voyages
on their behalf. Such was he, and this Humor of his proceeded from a
mavelous good Nature. Never was there a more charitable and popular Soul. Yet
this proceeding which I commend in others, I do not love to follow my self, and
am not without excuse. He had learnt, that a man must forget himself for his
Neighbor, and that particulars were in no manner of consideration in
comparison with the general Concern. Most of the Rules and Precepts of this
World run this way, to drive us out of our selves into the wide World for the
benefit of public Society. They thought to do a great Feat, to divert us from
our selves, presuming we were but too much fixed at home, and by a too natural
Inclination, and have said all they could to that purpose: for it is no new
thing for wise men to preach things as they serve, not as they are. Truth has
its Obstructions, Inconveniences, and Incompatibilities with us. We must be
often deceived, that we may not deceive our selves; Shut our Eyes, and stupifie
our Understandings to redress and amend them. Imperiti enim judicant, and qui
frequenter in hoc ipsum fallendi sunt, ne errent. For the ignorant judge, and
therefore are often to be deceived lest they should err. When they prescribe us
to love three, four, and fifty degrees of things above our selves, they do like
Archers, who to hit the white, take their aim a great deal higher than the
Butt. To set a crooked stick strait, we bend it the contrary way. I believe,
that in the Temple of Pallas, as we see in all other Religions, there were
apparent Mysteries to be exposed to the People, and others more secret and
high, that were only to be shown to such as were professed. It Is likely that in
these, the true point of Friendship that every own owes to himself is to be
found; not a false Friendship, that makes us embrace Glory, Knowledge, Riches,
and the like, with a principal and immoderate Affection, as Members of our
Being: nor an indiscreet and effeminate Friendship, wherein it happens as with
Ivy, that decays and ruins the Walls it does embrace: but a sound and regular
Friendship, equally utile and pleasant. Who knows the Duties of this
Friendship, and does practice them, is truly of the Cabinet-Counsel of the
Muses, and has attained to the height of humane Wisdom, and our Happiness. Such
a one exactly knowing what he owes to himself, will in his part find that he
ought to apply the usance of the World, and of other men to himself, and to do
this, to contribute the Duties and Offices appertaining to him, to the public
Society. Who does not in some sort live to others, does not live much to
himself. Seneca. Ep. 48.
Qui sibi amicus est, scito hunc amicum omnibus esse. He who is his own Friend,
is a Friend to every body else. The principal charge we have, is, to every own
his own conduct: And it is for this only that we here live. As he who should
forget to live a virtuous and holy Life, and should think he acquitted himself
of his Duty in instructing and training others up to it, would be a Fool; even
so, who abandons his own particular healthful and pleasant living to serve
others, takes, in my Opinion, a wrong and an unnatural course. I would not that
men should refuse, in the Employments they take upon them, their Attention,
Pains, their best Eloquence, and their Sweat and Blood, in time of need; Hor.
lib. 4. Ode. 9.
non ipse pro charis amicis
Aut patria timidus perire.
Sir Richard Fanshaw.
He well knows how hard want to bear
And fears a Crime more than his end,
And for his Country, or his Friend,
To stake his Life he does not fear.
But it is only borrowed, and accidentally; his Mind being always in Repose, and
in Health, not without Action, but without Vexation, without Passion. To be
simply doing, costs him so little, that he acts even sleeping. But it must be
set on going with Discretion; for the Body receives the Offices imposed upon
it, just according to what they are; the Mind often extends and makes them
heavier at its own Expense, giving them what measure it pleases. Men perform
like things with several sorts of Endeavor, and different Contention of Wit;
the one does well enough without the other. For how many People hazard
themselves every day in War without any concern which way it goes; and thrust
themselves into the dangers of Battles, the loss of which will not break their
next Nights sleep? And such a man may be at home, out of Danger, which he durst
not have looked upon, who is more passionately concerned for the issue of this
War, and whose Soul is more anxious about Events, than the Soldier who stakes
his Life and Blood in the Quarrel. I could have engaged my self in public
Employments, without quitting my own Interest a nail's breadth, and have given
my self to others, without abandoning my self; this sharpness and violence of
desires more hinders than it advances the Execution of what we undertake; fills
us with impatience against slow or contrary Events, and with heat and suspicion
against those with whom we have to do. We never carry on that thing well, by
which we are prepossessed and led. Male cuncta ministrat
Impetus
For heat does still
Carry on all things very ill.
He, who therein employs only his Judgment and Address, proceeds more
cheerfully: he counterfeits, he gives way, he deferrs all things at his ease
according to the necessities of occasions; he fails in his attempt without
trouble and afflictions, ready and entire for a new Enterprise: he always
marches with the Bridle in his hand. In him who is drunk with this violent and
tyrannick intention, we discover by necessity much imprudence and injustice.
The impetuosity of his desire carries him away. These are rash motions, That
the chastisement of Offenses ought to be performed without anger.
and if Fortune do not very much assist, of very little fruit. Philosophy will,
that in the revenge of injuries received, we should strip our selves of Choler;
not that the Chastisement should be less, but on the contrary, that the Revenge
may be the better, and more heavily laid on, which it conceives will be by this
impetuosity hindered. For Anger does not only trouble, but of it self does also
weary the arms of those who chastise. Proverb.
This fire benumms and wastes their force. As in precipitation, festinatio tarda
est, Haste trips up its own heels, fetters and stops it self. Senec. Epist. 44.
Ipsa se velocitas implicat. For example; According to what I commonly see,
Avarice has no greater impediment than it self. The more bent and vigorous it
is, the less it ^akes together; and commonly sooner grows rich, when disguised
in a Vizor of Liberality. A very honest Gentleman, and a particular Friend of
mine, had like to have cracked his brains by a too passionate attention and
affection to the Affairs of a certain Prince, his Master; Which Master has thus
set himself out to me; that he foresees the weight of Accidents as well as
another, but that in those for which there is no remedy, he presently resolves
upon suffering; in others, having taken all the necessary precautions which by
the vivacity of his understanding he can presently do, he quietly expects what
may follow. And in truth, I have accordingly seen him maintain a great
indifferency and liberty of actions, and serenity of countenance, in very great
and nice Affairs. I find him much greater, and of greater capacity in adverse
than prosperous Fortune. His Losses are to him more glorious than his
Victories, and his Mourning than his Triumph. Do but consider, that even in
vain and frivolous actions, as at Chess, Tennis, and the like, this eager and
ardent engaging with an impetuous desire, immediately throws the Mind and
Members into indiscretion and disorder. A man astonishes and hinders himself.
He that carries himself the most moderately both toward gain and loss, has
always his Wits about him. The less peevish and passionate he is at play, he
plays much more advantageously and surely. As to the rest, we hinder the Minds
seizure and hold, in giving it so many things to seize upon. Some things we are
only to offer to it, to tie it to others, and with others to incorporate it. It
can feel and discern all things* but ought to feed upon nothing but it self*
and should be instructed in what properly concerns it self, that is properly of
its own Being and Substance: The Laws of Nature teach us what we are justly to
have. After the S^ges have told us, that no one is indigent according to
Nature, and that every one is so according to Opinion, they very subtly
distinguish betwixt the desires that proceed from her, and those that proceed
from the disorder of our own fancy. Those of which we can see the end are hers;
those that fly before us, and of which we can see no end, are our own. The want
of Goods is easily repaired, the poverty of the Soul is irreparable. Lucilius,
lib. 5. apud Nonium.
Nam si, quod satis est homini, id satis esse potesse^,
Hoc sat erat: nunc, quum hoc non est, qui credimus porro
Divitias ullas animum mi explere potesse?
If what is for man enough, enough could be,
It were enough: but being that we see
Will not serve turn, how can I e're believe
That any Wealth my mind content can give.
Socrates, seeing great quantity of Riches, Jewels, and Furniture of great
value, carried in pomp through the City; How many things, said he, do I not
desire. Metrodorus lived on the weight of twelve ounces a day, Epicurus upon
less: Metroclez slept in Winter abroad amongst Sheep, in Summer in the
Cloisters of Churches. Sufficit ad id natura quod poscit. Seneca Epist. 90.
Cleanthes lived by labor of his own hands, and boasted, that Cleanthes, if he
would, could yet maintain another Cleanthes. If that which Nature exactly and
originally requires of us for the conservation of our Being, be too little, (as
in truth what it is, and how good cheap Life may be maintained, cannot be
better made out, than by this Consideration, that it is so little, that by its
littleness escapes the gripe and shock of Fortune) let us dispense our selves a
little more, let us yet call every one of our Habits and Conditions Nature; let
us tax and treat our selves by this measure, let us stretch our appurtenances
and accounts so far, for so far I fancy we have some excuse. Custom is a second
Nature, and no less powerful. What is wanting to my Custom, I reckon is wanting
to me; and I should be almost as well content that they took away my Life, as
cut me short in the way wherein I have so long lived. I am no more in a
Condition of any great change, nor to put my self into a new and unwonted
course, not though never so much to my Advantage; it is past time for me to
become other than what I am. And as I should complain of any great good
Adventure that should now befall me, that it came not in time to be enjoyed;
Hor. lib. 1. Epist. 5.
Quo mihi fortunae, si non conceditur uti?
Might I have the Worlds Wealth I should refuse it,
What good will it do me, If I may not use it.
so should I complain of any inward acquest. It were almost better, never, than
so late to become an honest man; and well read in living, when a man has no
longer to live. I, who am ready to make my exit out of the World, would easily
resign to any new comer, who should desire it, all the Prudence I have acquired
in the Worlds Commerce. After Me^^ comes Mustard. I have no need of Goods, of
which I can make no use. Of what use i^ Knowledge to him that has lost his
Head? 'Ti^ an Injury and Unkindness in Fortune, to tender us Presents that will
only inspire us with a just despite that we had them not in their due season.
Guide me no more, I can no longer go. Of so many parts as make up a perfect
man, Patience is the best. Assign the pa^^ of an excellent Treble to a
Chorister that ha^ rotten Lungs, and Eloquence to a Hermit exiled into the
Deserts of Arabia. There need^ no Art to further a fall; the end finds it (...)
of it self; at the Conclusion of every Affair my World is at an end, my Form
expired; I am totally past, and am bound to authorize it, an^ to conform my
Posterity to it. The Abridgment of ten days offered by the Pope.
I will here de^clare by way of Example, that the late te^ days diminution of
the Pope, have taken me (...) low, that I cannot well recover my self. I follow
the years wherein we kept another kind of account, so ancient, and so long a
Custom, challenges and calls me back to it; so that I am constrained to be a
kind of Heretic in that point, impatient of any, though corrective Innovation.
My Imagination, in spite of my Teeth, always pushes me ten days forward or
backward, and is ever murmuring in my Ears. This Rule concerns those who are to
begin to be. If Health it self, as sweet as it is, returns to me by fits, it is
rather to give me cause of regret, than possession of it; I have no place left
to keep it in. Time leaves me, without which nothing can be possessed. Oh, what
little account should I make of those great elective Dignities that I see in
such esteem in the World, that are never conferred but upon men who are taking
leave of it; wherein they do not so much regard how well he will discharge his
trust, as how short his Administration will be; from the very Entry, they look
at the exit. To conclude, I am ready to finish this man, and not to rebuild
another. By long usance this Form is in me turned into Substance, and Fortune
into Nature. I say therefore, that every one of us feeble Creatures is
excusable in thinking that his own which is comprised under this measure; but
withal, beyond these limits, it is nothing but Confusion, it is the largest
extent we can grant to our own claim. The more Business we create our selves,
and the more we amplify our Possessions, so much more do we expose our selves
to the Blows and Adversities of Fortune. The career of our desires ought to be
circumscribed, and restrained to a short limit of near and contiguous
Conveniences; and ought moreover to perform their Course, not in a right line,
that ends elsewhere, but in a Circle, of which the two points by a short wheel
meet and terminate in our selves. Actions that are carried on without this
Reflection, a near and essential Reflection I mean; such as those of ambitious
and avaricious men, and many more who run point blanck, and whose career always
carries them before themselves, such Actions I say are erroneous and sickly:
most of our Business is Farce. Patron. Arbit.
Mundus universus exercet Histrioniam. We must play our part well, but withal
as the part of a borrowed Person; we must not make real Essence of a Vizor and
outward appearance, nor of a strange Person our own; we cannot distinguish the
Skin from the Shirt: it is enough to meal the Face without mealing the Breast. I
see some, who transform and transubstantiate themselves into as many new Shapes
and new Beings as they undertake Employments, and who prelate themselves even
to the Heart and Liver, and carry their state along with them, even to the
Close-stool: I cannot make them distinguish the Salutations are made to them
from those are made to their Commission, their Train, Quin. Cur. lib. 3.
or their Mule. Tantum se Fortunae permittunt, etiam ut Naturam didiscant. They
so much give themselves up to Fortune, as even to forget their Nature. They
swell and puff up their Souls, and their natural way of speaking, according to
the height of their Place. The Mayor of Bordeaux and Montaigne have ever been
two, by very manifest separation. To be an Advocate, or a Treasurer, a man must
not be ignorant of the Knavery of such Callings; and yet ought not to refuse to
take the Calling upon him: it is the usance of his Country, and there is Money
to be got by it; a man must live by the World* and make his best of it, such as
it is. But the Judgment of an Emperor ought to be above his Empire, and the
seeing and considering of it, as of a foreign accident; and he ought to know
how to enjoy himself apart from it, and to communicate himself as James and
Peter, to himself at least. I cannot engage my self so deep and so entire; when
my Will gives me to any one, it is not with so violent an Obligation that my
Judgment is infected with it. In the present Broils of this Kingdom, my
Interest has not made me forget my self, nor the laudable Qualities of some of
our Adversaries, nor those that are reproachable in those of our Party. They
adore all of their own side, for my part I do not so much as excuse most things
in those of mine: A good Speech has never the worse grace for being made
against me. The knot of the controversy excepted, I have always kept my self
in equanimity and pure indifference. Neque extra necessitates belli, praecipuum
odium gero. And have no express hatred beyond the Necessity of War. For which I
am pleased with my self, and the more, because I see others commonly fail on
the contrary side. Such as extend their anger and hatred beyond the dispute in
question, as most men do, show that they spring from some other occasion and
particular cause; like one who being cured of an Ulcer, has yet a remaining
Fever, by which it appears that the Ulcer had another more concealed beginning;
which is, that they are not concerned in the common cause, because it is
wounding to the State and common Interest; but are only netled by Reason of
their private and particular Concern. This is the true Reason why they are so
particularly animated, and to a degree so beyond Justice and public Reason.
Non tam omnia universi, quam ea, quae ad quemque pertinent, singuli carpebant.
Every one was not so much angry against things in general, as against those
that particularly concerned themselves. I would have matters go well on our
side, but if they do not, I shall not run mad, I am heartily for the right
party; but I do not affect to be taken notice of for an especial Enemy to
others, and beyond the general quarrel. I am a mortal Enemy to this vicious
form of censure, He is of the League, because he admires the Duke of Guise. He
is astonished at the King of Navarrs Valor and Diligence, and therefore he is
a Hugonot. He finds such and such Faults in the Kings Manners and Conduct, and
therefore he is seditious in his Heart. And would not grant to a Magistrate
himself, that he did well in condemning a Book because it had placed a Heretic
amongst the best Poets of the Time. Shall we not dare to say of a Thief, that
he has a handsome Leg? If a Woman be a Strumpet, must it needs follow that she
has a stinking Breath? Did they in the wisest Ages revoke the proud title of
Capitolinus, they had before conferred upon Marcus Manlius, as being the
Conservator of Religion and the public Liberty? Did they therefore damn the
Memory of his Liberality, his Feats of Arms, and Military Recompense granted to
his Virtue, because he afterward aspired to the Sovereignty, to the Prejudice
of the Laws of his Country? If they take a hatred against an Advocate, he will
not be allowed the next day to be eloquent. I have elsewhere spoke of the Zeal
that pushed on worthy men to the like Faults. For my part, I can say, such a
one does this thing ill, and another thing virtuously and well. They will
likewise, that in the Prognostics, or Sinister Events of Affairs, every one
should in his Party be blind, or a Block-head, and that our Persuasion and
Judgment should be subservient, not to Truth, but to the project of our
desires. I should rather incline toward the other extreme, so much I fear
being suborned by my desire: To which may be added, that I am a little tenderly
distrustful of things that I wish. Facility of People in suffering themselves
to be imposed upon.
I have in my time seen wonders in the indiscreet and prodigious facility of
People in suffering their hopes and belief to be led and governed which way has
best pleased and served their Leaders, above an hundred mistakes one upon
another; and above Dreams and Phantasms. I no more wonder at those who have
been blinded, and seduced by the ^ooleries of Apollonius and Mahomet. Their
Sense and Understanding is absolutely taken away by their Passion; their
Discretion has no more any other choice than that which smiles upon them, and
relieves their Cause. I had principally observed this in the beginning of our
intestine Distempers, th^^ other which is sprung since, in imitating, has
surpassed it; by which I am satisfied that it is a quality inseparable from
popular Errors. After the first that rouls, Opinions drive on one another like
Waves with the Wind. A man is not a member of the Body, if it be in his Power
to forsake it, and if he do not roll the common way; but doubtless they wrong
the just side, when they go about to assist it with Fraud. I have ever been
against that Practice. They are only fit to work upon weak heads; for the
found, there are surer and more honest ways to keep up their Courages, and to
excuse adverse Accidents. Heaven never saw a greater Animosity than that
betwixt Caesar and Pompey, nor ^ver shall; and yet I observe methinks in those
brave Souls, a great moderation toward one another. It was a jealousy of
Honor and Command, which did not transport them to a furious and indiscreet
hatred, and that was, though hatred, without Malignity and Detraction. In their
briskest and ho^test Encounters, and Exploits upon one another, I discover some
remains of respect and good will; and am therefore of Opinion, that had it been
possible, each of them would rather have done his Business without the ruin of
the other, than with it. Take notice how much otherwise Matters went with
Marius and Sylla. We must not precipitate our selves so headlong after our
Affections and Interest. As when I was young, I opposed my self to the progress
of Love, which I perceived to advance too fast upon me, and had a care lest it
should at last become so pleasing, as to force, captivate, and wholly reduce me
to his Mercy: so I do the same upon all other Occasions where my Will is
running on with too warm an Appetite. I lean opposite to the side it inclines
to, as I find it going to plunge and make it self drunk with its own wine; I
evade nourishing its Pleasure so far, that I cannot recover it without infinite
loss. Souls, that through their own Stupidity only discern things by halves,
have this happiness, that they smart least with hurtful things. It Is a
spiritual Leprosy that has some show of Health, and such a Health as
Philosophy does not altogether contemn; but yet we have no Reason to call it
Wisdom, as we often do. And after this manner, some one anciently mocked
Diogenes, who in the depth of Winter, and stark naked, went hugging an Image of
Snow for a Trial of his Patience: this other meeting him in this Equipage, Art
thou now very cold? said he, Diogenes patient of Cold.
not at all replied Diogenes. Why then, said the other, What great and
exemplary thing can thou think thou do in embracing that Snow? A man, to
take a true measure of Constancy, must necessarily know what suffering is; but
Souls that are to meet with adverse Events, and the Injuries of Fortune in
their depth and sharpness, that are to weigh and taste them according to their
natural weight and sharpness, let such show their skill in avoiding the Causes,
and diverting the Blow. What did King Cotys do? A rich Vessel purposely broken
by King Cotys, and why.
He paid liberally for the rich and beautiful Vessel that had been presented
him, but being it was exceeding brittle, he immediately broke it betimes, to
prevent so easy a matter of displeasure against his Servants. In like manner,
I have willingly avoided all confusion in my Affairs, and never coveted to have
my estate contiguous to those of my Relation, and such with whom I coveted a
strict Friendship; whence Matters of Unkindness and falling out do often proceed.
I have formerly loved Cards and Dice, but have long since left them off, only
for this Reason, that though I carried my losses as handsomely as another, I was
not well satisfied and quiet within. Let a man of Honor, who ought to be
sensible of the Lie, and who is not to take a scurvy excuse for Satisfaction,
avoid Occasions of dispute. I shun melancholic and sour natured men, as I
would do the Plague. And in Matters I cannot talk of without Emotion and
Concern, I never meddle, if not compelled by my Duty. Seneca. Epist. 92.
Melius non incipient, quam desinent. A man had better never to have begun,
than to desist. The surest way therefore is, to prepare a man's self before hand
for Occasions. I know very well, that some wise men have taken another way, and
have not feared to grapple and engage to the utmost upon several Subjects. Such
are confident of their own Strength, under which they protect themselves in all
ill Successes, making their Patience wrestle and contend with disaster: velut
rupes vastum quae prodit in aequor, Virgil. Aeneid. 10.

Obvia ventorum furiis, expostaque ponto,
Vim cunctam atque minas perfert coelique marisque
Ipsa immota manens.
He as a Rock amongst vast Billows stood, Mr. Ogilby.

Scorning loud Winds, and raging of the Flood,
And fixed remaining all the force defies
Mustred from threatening Seas, and thundering Skies.
Let us never attempt these Examples, we shall never come up to them. They set
themselves resolutely, and without trouble, to behold the ruin of their
Country, to which all the good they can contrive or perform is due. This is too
much, and too rude for our common Souls to undergo. Cato indeed gave up the
noblest Life that ever was upon this account; but it is for us meaner spirited
men, to fly from the storm as far as we can; we ought to make provision of
Resentment, not of Patience, and evade the Blows we cannot put by. Zeno, seeing
Chremonidez, a young man whom he loved, draw near to sit down by him, suddenly
start up; and Cleanthes demanding of him the Reason why he did so, I hear, said
he, that Physicians, especially ordered Repose, and forbid Emotion in all
Tumors. Socrates does not say, do not surrender to the Charms of Beauty, stand
your ground, and do your utmost to oppose it. Fly it, says he, shun the sight
and encounter of it, as of a powerful Poison that darts and wounds at distance.
And his good Disciple, either faining or reciting, but in my Opinion, rather
reciting than faining, the rare Perfections of that great Cyrus, makes him
distrustful of his own Strength, to resist the Charms of the Divine Beauty of
that illustrious Panthea, his Captive, in committing the visiting and keeping
of her to another, who could not have so much Liberty as himself. And the Holy
Ghost in like manner, Ne nos inducas in tentationem. We do not pray that our
Reason may not be combated and overcome by Concupiscence, but that it should
not be so much as tried; that we should not be brought into a state wherein we
were so much as to suffer the approaches, solicitations, and temptations of
Sin: and we beg of Almighty-God to keep our Consciences quiet, fully, and
perfectly delivered from all commerce of Evil. Such as say that they have
reason for their revenging Passion, or any other sort of troublesome Agitation
of Mind, do often say true, as things now are, but not as they were. They speak
to us when the Causes of their Error are by themselves nourished and advanced.
But look backward, recall these Causes to their Beginning, and there you will
put them to a non^plus; will they have their Fault less for being of longer
continuance, and that of an unjust beginning, the sequel can be just? Whoever
shall desire the good of his Country, as I do, without fretting or pining
himself, will be troubled, but will not swoon to see it threatening either its
own ruin, or a no less ruinous continuance. Poor Vessel, that the Waves, the
Winds, and the Pilot, toss and steer to so contrary Designs! in tam diversa,
magister, Buchanan.

Ventus, and unda trahunt.
He, who does not gape after the Favor of Princes, as after a thing he cannot
live without, does not much concern himself at the coldness of their Reception
and Countenance, nor at the inconstancy of their Wills. He who does not brood
over his Children or his Honors with a slavish propension, ceases not to live
commodiously enough after their loss. Who does good principally for his own
satisfaction, will not be much troubled to see men judge of his actions
contrary to his merit. A quarter of an ounce of Patience will provide
sufficiently against such inconveniences. I find ^ase in this Receipt,
redeeming my self in the beginning as good cheap as I can; and find, that by
that means I have escaped much trouble and many difficulties. With very little
ado I stop the first sally of my Emotions, and leave the subject that begins to
be troublesome before it transports me. He who stops not the start, will never
be able to stop the career* Who cannot keep them out, will never get them out
when they are once got in; and who cannot crush them at the beginning, will
never do it after, nor ever keep himself from falling, if he cannot recover
himself when he first begins to totter. Cicero Thus. l. 4.
Etenim ipsa se impellunt, ubi semel a ratione discessum est: ipsaque sibi
imbecillitas indulget, in altumque provehitur imprudent: nec reperit locum
consistendi. For they throw themselves headlong, when once they lose their
Reasons; and Frailty does so far indulge it self, that it is unawares carried
out into the deep, and can find no Port wherein to come to an Anchor. I am
betimes sensible of the little breezes that begin to sing and whistle in the
shrowds; the forerunners of the storm. Aeneid. lib. 10.
-- ceu flamina prima
Cum deprensa fremunt Sylvis, and caeca volutant
Murmura, venturos nautis prodentia ventos.
Mr. Ogilby.
as when Winds rise,
And stop by Woods, a sudden Murmur send,
Which does a storm to Mariners portend.
How often have I done my self a manifest Injustice, to avoid the hazard of
having yet a worse done me by the Judges, after an Age of Vexations, dirty and
vile Practices, more Enemies to my Nature than Fire or the Wrack? Convenit a
litibus quantum licet, and nescio an paulo plus etiam quam licet abhorrentem
esse. Est enim non modo liberale, Cicero de Offi. lib. 2.
paululum nonnumquam de suo jure decedere, sed interdum etiam fructuosum. A man
should be an enemy to all Contention as much as he lawfully may, and I know
not, whether not something more: For it is not only liberal, but sometimes also
advantageous too, a little to recede from ones right. Were we wise, we ought to
rejoice and boast, as I one day heard a young Gentleman of a good Family very
innocently do, that his Mother had lost her Trial, as if it had been a Cough, a
Fever, or something very troublesome to keep: Even the Favors that Fortune
might have given me through Relation or Acquaintance with those who have
Sovereign Authority in those Affairs, I have very conscientiously waved; and
very carefully avoided employing them to the prejudice of others, and of
advancing my pretentions above their true Right. In fine, I have so much
prevailed by my Endeavors, in a happy hour I may speak it, that I am to this
day a Virgin from all Suits in Law; though I have had very fair offers made me,
and with very just Title, would I have hearkened to them: and a Virgin from
Quarrels too. I have almost past over a long Life without any offense of
moment, either active or passive, or without ever hearing a worse word than my
own Name: a rare Favor of Heaven. Our greatest Agitations have ridiculous
Motives and Causes. What ruin did our last Duk^ of Burgundy run into about a
Cart load of Sheeps Pel^s! And was not the graving of ^ Seal the first and
principal cause of the greatest Commotion that this Machine of the World di^
ever undergo? For Pompey and Caesar are but the off-sets and continuation of
two others* And I have in my time seen the wisest Head^ in this Kingdom
assembled with great Ceremony, and at the public expense, about Treaties and
Agreements, of which the true decision did in the mean time absolutely depend
upon the Ladies Cabinet-Counsel, and the inclination of some foolish Women. The
Apple of Discord.
The Poets very well understood this, when they put all Gre^^ and Asia to Fire
and Sword for an Apple. Inquire why that man hazards his Life and Honor upon
the Fortune of his Rapier and Dagger; let him acquaint you with the occasion of
the Quarrel, he cannot do it without blushing, it is so idle and frivolous: A
little thing will engage you in it, but being once embarked, all cords, draw;
greater provisions are then required, more hard, and more important. How much
easier is it not to enter in, than it is to get out? Now we should proceed
contrary to the Reed, which at its first springing, produces a long and strait
shoot, but afterward, as if tired and out of Breath, it runs into thick and
frequent joints and knots, as so many pauses; which demonstrates, that it has
no more its first Vigor and Constancy. 'Twere better to begin fair and coldly,
and to keep a man's Breath, and vigorous attaques for the height and stress of
the Business. We guide and govern Affairs in their Beginnings, and have them
then in our own power; but afterward, when they are once at work, it is they
that guide and govern us, and we are to follow them. Yet do I not pretend by
this to say, that this Council has discharged me of all difficulty, and that I
have not often had enough to do to curb and restrain my Passions. They are not
always to be governed according to the measure of Occasions, and often have
their Entries very sharp and violent. So it is, that thence good fruit and
profit may be reaped; except for those, who in well doing are not satisfied
with any benefit, if Reputation be wanting: For in truth, such an effect is not
valued but by every one to himself. You are better contented, but not more
esteemed; seeing you reformed your self before you came into play, and that any
Vice was discovered in you: yet not in this only, but in all other Duties of
Life, also the way of those who aim at Honor, is very different from that they
proceed by; who propose to themselves Order and Reason. I find some, who rashly
and furiously rush into the Lists, and cool in the Course. As Plutarch says,
that as those who thorough Bashfulness, being soft and facile to grant whatever
is desired of them, are afterward as frail to break their word, and to recant;
so likewise he who enters lightly into a Quarrel, is subject to go as lightly
out. The same difficulty that keeps me from entering into it, would, when once
hot and engaged in Quarrel, incite me to maintain it with great Obstinacy and
Resolution. It Is the Tyranny of Custom, when a man is once engaged, he must go
through with it, or dye. Undertake coldly, said Bias, but pursue with Ardour.
For want of Prudence, men fall into want of Courage, which is more intolerable.
Most Accomodations of the Quarrels of these days of ours, are shameful and
false, we only seek to save Apparences, and in the mean time betray and disavow
our true Intentions. We salve the fact. We know very well how we said the
thing, and in what sense we spoke it, and both all the Company, and of them our
Friends with whom we would appear to have the Advantage, understand it well
enough too. It Is at the expense of our Liberty, and the Honor of our Courage,
that we disown our Thoughts, and seek refuge in Falsities, to be Friends. We
give our selves the Lie, to excuse the Lie we have given to another. You are to
consider if your Word or Action may admit of another Interpretation; it is your
own true and sincere Interpretation of, and your real meaning in what you said
or did, that you are thenceforward to maintain, whatever it cost you. Men speak
to your Virtue, Honor, and Conscience, which are none of them to be disguised.
Let us leave these pitiful Ways and Expedients to the Juglers of the Law. The
Excuses and Satisfactions that I see every day made, and given to repair
Indiscretion, seem to me more scandalous than Indiscretion it self. It were
better to affront your Adversary a second time, than to offend your self by
giving him so unmanly a Satisfaction. You have braved him in your heat and
anger, and you go to flatter and appease him in your cooler and better sense;
and by that means lay your self lower, and at his feet, whom before you
pretended to overtop. I do not find any thing a Gentleman can say so rude and
vicious in him, as unsaying what he has said is infamous; when to unsay it is
authoritatively extracted from him, for as much as Obstinacy is more excusable
in a man of Honor than Pusillanimity can possibly be. Passions are as easy
for me to evade, as they are hard for me to moderate. Exscinduntur facilius
animo, Juvenal.
quam temperantur. Who cannot attain unto that noble Stoical impassibility, let
him secure himself in the bosom of this popular Stupidity of mine. What those
great Souls performed by their Virtue, I inure my self to do by Complexion. The
middle region harbors Storms and Tempests, the two extremes of Philosophers
and ignorant men concur in Tranquillity and Happiness. Foelix qui potuit rerum
cognoscere causas, Virg. Georg. lib. 2.

Atque metus omne, and inexorabile fatum
Subjecit pedibus, strepitumque Acherontis avari,
Fortunatus, and ille, Deos qui novit agrestes,
Panaque, Sylvanumque senem, Nymphasque sorores.
Mr. Ogilby.
Happy is he that hidden causes knows,
And bold, all shapes of danger dare oppose,
Trampling beneath his feeet the cruel fates,
Whom Death, nor swallowing Acheron amates;
And he is blessed who knows our Country Gods,
Pan, old Sylvanus, and the Nymphs aboads.
The births of all things are weak and tender, and therefore are we to have an
eye to their Beginnings; for as then in their Infancy the Danger is not
perceived; so when it is grown up, the Remedy is no more to be found. I had
every day encountered a million of Crosses, harder to digest in the progress of
my Ambition, than it has been hard for me to curb the natural propension that
inclined me to it. Hor. lib. 3. Ode. 17.
jure perhorrui,
Late conspicuum tollere verticem.
Sir. Rich. Fanshaw.
I did well
To shrink my Head into my Shell.
All public Actions are subject to various and uncertain Interpretations, for
too many heads judge of them. Some say of this City Employment of mine (and I
am willing to say a word or two of it, not that it is worth so much, but to
give an account of my manners in such things) that I have behaved my self in it
like a man not easy to be moved, and with a languishing Affection; and they
have some color for what they say. I endeavor to keep my Mind and my Thoughts
in repose. Quvito Cicero.
Cum semper natura, tum etiam aetate jam quietus. As being always quiet by
Nature, so also now by Age. And if they sometimes lash out upon some rude and
sensible impression, it is in truth without my advice. Yet from this natural
heaviness of mine, men ought not to conclude a total inability in me; for want
of Care, and want of Sense are two very different things, and much less any
unkindness, or Ingratitude, toward that Corporation, who employed the utmost
means they had in their power to oblige me, both before they knew me and after.
And they did much more for me in choosing me anew, than in conferring that
Honor upon me at first; I love them entirely, and wish them all the good that
can befall so worthy a Society. And doubtless, had occasion been, there is
nothing I would have spared for their Service; I did for them as I would have
done for my self. It Is a good Warlike and generous People, but capable of
Obedience and Discipline, and of whom the best use may be made, if well guided.
They say also, that my Administration was passed over without any great Remark,
or any Record of moment. It Is true. They moreover accuse my Cessation in a time
when every body almost was convinced of doing too much. I am impatient to be
doing where my Will spurs me on; but this point is an enemy to Perseverance.
Let whoever will make use of me, according to my own way, employ me in affairs
where rigor and liberty are required; where a direct, short, and moreover, a
hazardous Conduct are necessary, I peradventure may do something; but if it
must be long, subtle, laborious, artificial and intricate, they were better
call in some body else. All important Offices are not hard: I came prepared to
carry my self a little more roughly, had there been great occasion; for it is
in my power to do something more than I do, or than I love to do; I did not to
my knowledge omit any thing that my Duty really required; it is true, that I
easily forget those Offices that Ambition mixes with Duty, and palliates with
Title. Those are they, that for the most part, fill the Eyes and Ears, and give
men the most satisfaction. Not the thing, but the appearance contents them.
They think men sleep if they hear no noise. My Humor is no friend to tumult. I
could appease a Riot without emotion, and chastise a Disorder without
alteration. If I stand in need of Anger and Inflammation, I borrow it, and put
it on; my Manners are heavy, rather faint than sharp. I do not condemn a
Magistrate that sleeps, provided the People under his charge sleep as well as
he: the Laws in that case sleep too. For my part, I commend a gliding,
solitary, and silent Life. Cicero de Off. lib. 1.
Neque submissam, and abjectam, neque se efferentem. My Fortune will have it
so. I am descended from a Family that has lived without Luster or Tumult, and
time out of mind particularly ambitious of Valor and Loyalty. Our People now
adays are so bred up to bustle and Ostentation, that good Nature, Moderation,
Equity, Constancy, and such quiet and obscure Qualities, are no more thought on
or regarded. Rough bodies make themselves felt, the smooth are imperceptly
handled. Sickness is felt, Health little, or not at all, no more than the Oils
that foment us, in comparison of the Pains for which we are fomented. It Is
acting for a man's Reputation and particular profit, not for the Public good,
to referr that to be done in the public place, which a man may as well do in
the Council Chamger, and to noonday, what might have been done the night
before; and to be jealous to do that himself which his Colleague can do as well
as he. So were some Chirurgions of Greece wont to make their Operations upon
Scaffolds in the sight of the People, to draw more practice and profit. They
think that good Orders cannot be understood but by the sound of Trumpet.
Ambition is not a Vice of little People, and of so mean Abilities as ours. One
said to Alexander, your Father will leave you a great Dominion, easy and
pacifick; this Youth was emulous of his Father's Victories, and the Justice of
his Government; and would not have enjoyed the Empire of the World in ease and
peace. Alcibiades, in Plato, had rather dye Young, Beautiful, Rich, Noble, and
Learned, and all this with Excellence, than to continue in the state of such a
Condition. This disease is peradventure excusable in so strong and so full a
Soul. When these wretched and dwarfish Souls gull and deceive themselves, and
think to spread their Fame, for having given right judgment in an Affair, or
continued the discipline of keeping the Guard of a Gate of their City, the more
they think to exalt their heads, the more they show their tails. This little
well doing has neither body nor life; it vanishes in the first mouth, and goes
no farther than from one Street to another. Talk of it in God's-name to your
Son, or your Servant; like that old Fellow, who having no other Auditor of his
Prayers, nor approver of his Valor, boasted to his Chambermaid, crying out, O
Perret, what a brave man have thou to thy Master! At the worst hand, talk of it
to your self; like a Counselor of my Acquaintance, who having disgorg'd a
whole Cartfull of Paragraphs, with great heat, and as great folly, coming out
of the Councel-Chamber to piss, was heard very conscientiously to mutter
betwixt his teeth. Psalm. 113.
Non nobis, Domine, non nobis, sed nomine tuo da gloriam. Who can get it of no
body else, let him pay himself out of his own purse. Fame is not prostituted at
so cheap a rate. Rare and exemplary Actions, to which it is due, would not
endure the company of this prodigious crowd of little performances. Marble may
exalt your Titles as much as you please, for having repaired a Rod of a ruinous
Wall, or cleans'd a public Aquaduct; but not men of Sense. Renown does not
follow all good Deeds, if Novelty and Difficulty be not conjoined. Nay, so much
as mere estimation, according to the Stoics, is not due to every Action that
proceeds from Virtue; neither will they allow him bare thanks, who out of
Temperance forbears to meddle with an old blear-eyed Hagg. Such as have known
the admirable Qualities of Scipio Affricanus, deny him the glory that Penetius
attributes to him, of being abstinent from Gifts, as a glory not so much his,
as that of the Age he lived in. We have Pleasures suitable to our Fortunes, let
us not usurp those of Grandeur. Our own are more natural, and by so much more
solid and sure, as they are more low. If not for that of Conscience, yet at
least for Ambitions sake, let us reject Ambition, let us disdain that thirst of
Honor and Renown, so low and mendicant, that it makes us beg it of all sorts
of People: Quae est ista laus quae possit e macello peti? What praise is that
which is to be got in the Market? by abject means, and at what cheap rate
soever. It Is dishonor to be so honored. Let us learn to be no more greedy,
than we are capable of Honor. To be puffed up with every Action that is
innocent, or of use, is only for such with whom such things are extraordinary
and rare: They will value it as it costs them. How much more a good effect
makes a noise, so much I abate of the goodness of it; and enter into suspicion
that it was more performed for noise, than upon the account of goodness. Being
exposed upon the stall, it is half sold. Those Actions have much more grace and
luster, that slip from the hand of him that does them negligently, and without
noise: and that some honest man after chooses out, and raises from the shade to
produce it to the light upon its own account. Cicero Thus. l. 2.
Mihi quidem laudaliora videntur omnia, quae sine venditatione, and sine populo
test fiunt. All things truly seem more laudable to me, that are performed
without ostentation, and without the testimony of the People. Says the proudest
man of the World, I had no care but to conserve, and to continue, which are
silent and insensible effects. Innovation is of great luster, but it is
interdicted in this time, when we are pressed upon, and have nothing to defend
our selves from but Novelties. To forbear doing, is often as generous as to do,
but it is less in the light; and the little of good that I have in me is of this
kind. In fine, occasions in this Employment of mine have been confederate with
my Humor, and I thank them for it. Is there any one who desires to be sick
that he might see his Physicians Practice? And would not that Physician deserve
to be whipped, who should wish the Plague amongst us, that he might put his Art
in practice? I have never been of that wicked Humor, and common enough, to
desire that the troubles and disorders of this City should elevate and honor
my Government; I have ever willingly contributed all I could to their
tranquillity and ease. He who will not thank me for the order, sweet and silent
calm that has accompanied my Administration, cannot however deprive me of the
share that belongs to me by the title of my good Fortune. And I am of such a
Composition, that I would as willingly be happy as wise; and had rather owe my
successes purely to the favor of Almighty God, than to any industry or
operation of my own. I had sufficiently published to the World my unfitness for
such public Offices; but I have something in me yet worse than incapacity;
which is, that I am not much displeased at it, and that I do not much go about
to cure it, considering the course of Life that I have proposed to my self.
Neither have I satisfied my self in this Employment, but I have very near
arrived at what I expected from my own performance, and have yet much surpassed
what I promised them with whom I had to do: For I am apt to promise something
less than what I am able to do, and than what I hope to make good. I assure my
self that I have left no impressions of Offense or Hatred behind me, and to
leave a regret or desire of me amongst them. I at least know very well that I
did never much affect it.

-- mean huic confidere monstro, Virgil. Aeneid. lib. 5.

Mean salis placidi vultum, fluctusque quietos Ignorare?
Would thou I should a quiet Sea believe, Mr. Ogilby.

To this inconstant monster credit give?
CHAP. XI. Of Cripples.
The year cut ten days shorter.
It Is now two or three years ago that they made the year ten days shorter in
France. How many changes may we expect should follow this reformation! This was
properly removing Heaven and Earth at once; and yet nothing for all that stirs
from its place: my neighbors still find their seasons of sowing and reaping,
the opportunities of doing their business, with the hurtful and propitious
days, just at the same time, where they had time out of mind assigned them.
There was no more error perceived in our old usance, than there is amendment
found in this new alteration. So great an incertainty there is throughout; so
gross, obscure, and dull is our understanding. It Is said, that this regulation
might have been carried on with less inconvenience, by substracting. according
to the example of Augustus, the Bissextile, which is in some sort a day of
trouble, till we had exactly satisfied that debt; which is not performed
neither by this correction, and we yet remain some days in arrear: And yet by
the same means such order might be taken for the future, ordering, that after
the revolution of such a year, or such a number of years, the supernumerary day
might be always thrown out, so that we could not henceforward err above four
and twenty hours in our computation. We have no other account of time but
years; the World has for many Ages made use of that only, and yet it is a
measure that to this day we are not agreed upon; such a one, that we still
doubt what form other Nations have variously given to it, and what was the true
use of it. What does this saying of some mean, that the Heavens in growing old
bow themselves down nearer toward us, and put us into an uncertainty even of
hours and days? And that which Plutarch says of the Months, that Astrology had
not in his time determined of the motion of the Moon? So what a fine condition
are we in to keep Records of things past. I was just now ruminating, as I often
do upon this, what a free and roving thing humane judgment is. I ordinarily
see, that men, in things proposed to them, more willingly study to find out the
Reason than to find out the Truth: they slip over presuppositions, but are
curious in examination of consequences. They leave the things and fly to the
causes. Pleasant praters! The knowledge of Causes does only concern him who has
the conduct of things, not us, who are only to undergo them, and who perfectly
have full and accomplished use of them according to our need, without
penetrating into the Original and Essence. Neither is Wine more pleasant to him
that knows its first faculties. On the contrary, both the Body and the Soul
alter and interrupt the right they have of the use of the World, and of
themselves, by mixing with it the Opinion of Learning. Effects concern us, but
the means not at all. To determine, and to distribute appertain to superiority
and command, as it does to subjection to accept it. Let me reprehend our
Custom. They commonly begin thus: How is such a thing done? Whereas they should
say, Is such a thing done? Our prattle is able to create a hundred other
Worlds, and to find out the beginnings and contexture; it needs neither Matter
nor Foundation. Let it but run on, it builds as well in the Air, as on the
Earth; and with Inanity as well as Matter. Persius. Sat. 5.
dare pondus idonea fumo I find that almost throughout we should say, there is
no such thing; and should my self often make use of this answer, but I dare not:
for they cry that it is a defect produced from ignorance and weakness of
Understanding. And I am forced for the most part to juggle for Company, and
prate of frivolous and idle Subjects, that I believe never a word of. Besides
that, in truth, it is a little rude and quarelling, flatly to deny a
Proposition; and few People but will affirm, especially in things hard to be
believed, that they have seen them, or at least will name such Witnesses whose
Authority will stop our Mouths from Contradictions. By this means we know the
Foundations and Means of things that never were; and the World scuffles about a
thousand Questions, of which both the pro and the con are false. Cicero. Acad.
lib. 4.
Ita finitima sunt falsa veris, ut praecipitem locum non debeat se sapiens
committere. False things are so like the true, that a wise man should not trust
himself upon the precipice. Truth and Lies are fa^'d alike, their port, taste,
and proceedings are the same, and we look upon them with the same Eye. I find
that we are not only remiss in defending our selves from deceit, but we seek
and offer our selves to be gulled; we love to entangle our selves in Vanity, as
a thing conformable to our Being. I have seen the birth of many Miracles of my
time, which although they were abortive, yet have we not failed to foresee
what they would have come to, had they lived their full Age. It Is but finding
the end of the Clue, and a man may wind off as much as he will; and there is a
greater distance betwixt nothing, and the least thing in the World, than there
is betwixt that and the greatest. Now the first that are imbued with this
beginning of Novelty, when they set out their History, find, by oppositions
they met with, where the difficulty of persuasion lies, and so caulk that place
with some false piece. Besides that, In^ita hominibus libidine alendi de
industria rumores, Men having a natural desire to nourish Reports, we naturally
make a conscience of restoring what has been lent us, without some usury and
access of our substance. Particular Error, first makes the public Error, and
afterward, in turn, the public Error makes the particular one; so all this
vast Fabric goes forming and confounding it self from hand to hand, so that
the remotest Testimony is better instructed than those that are nearest; and
the last informed better persuaded than the first: It Is a natural progress. For
whoever believes any thing, thinks it a work of Charity to persuade another
into the same opinion* Which the better to do, he will make no difficulty of
adding as much of his own Invention, as he conceives necessary to encounter the
resistance or want of Conception he meets with in others. I my self, who make a
great conscience of lying, and am not very sollicitous of giving credit and
authority to what I say, do yet find, that in the Arguments I have in hand,
being heated with the opposition of another, or by the proper heat of my own
narration, I swell and puff up my subject by Voice, Motion, Vigor, and force
of Words; and moreover, by Extention and Amplification, not without some
prejudice to the naked truth: but I do it conditionally withal, that to the
first who brings me to my self, and who asks me the plain and naked truth, I
presently surrender my Passion, and deliver it to him without Exaggeration,
without Emphasis, or any Farding of my own. A quick and earnest way of
Speaking, as mine is, is apt to run into Hyperbole. There is nothing to which
me^ commonly are more inclined than to give way to their own Opinions. Where
the ordinary means fail us, we add Command, Force, and Fire, and Sword. It Is
ill luck to be at that pass, that the best touch of Truth, must be the
multitude of Believers in a crowd, where the number of fools so much exceeds
the wise. Cicero de divi. l. 2. Item Aug. de Civit. Dei, lib. 6. cap. 10.
Quasi vero quidquam sit tam valde, quam nil sapere vulgar. Sanitatis
patrocinium est, insanientium turba. As if any thing were so common as
Ignorance. The multitude of Fools is a protection to the Wise. It Is hard to
resolve a man's Judgment against the common Opinions. The first persuasion
taken from the very Subject it self possesses the simple, and from that, it
diffuses it self to the wise, under the authority of the number and antiquity
of the Witnesses. For my part, what I should not believe from one, I should not
believe from a hundred and one; and do not judge Opinions by the years. It Is
not long since, one of our Princes, in whom the Gout had spoiled an excellent
Nature, and spritely Disposition, suffered himself to be so far persuaded with
the report was made of the wonderful Operations of a certain Priest, A Priest
that cured all sorts of Diseases by words and gestures.
that by words and gestures cured all sorts of Diseases, as to go a long
Journey to seek him out; and by the force of his Apprehension for some time, so
persuaded, and laid his Legs asleep, as to obtain that service from them they
had a long time forgot. Had Fortune heaped five or six such like Accidents, it
had been enough to have brought this Miracle into Nature. There was after
discovered so much Simplicity, and so little Art in the Architecture of such
Operations, that they were thought too contemtible to be punished, as would be
thought of most such things, were they well examined. Miramur ex intervallo
fallentia. Seneca. Epist. 118.
We admire at distance things that deceive. So does our sight often represent to
us strange Images at distance, that vanish in approaching near. Cret. lib. 9.
Nunquam ad liquidum fama perducitur. Fame is never brought to be clear. It Is
to be wondered at, from how many idle beginnings, and frivolous causes, such
famous impressions commonly proceed. This it is that obstructs the information;
for whilst we seek out the Causes, and the great and weighty ends, worthy of so
great a Name, we lose the true ones. They escape our sight by their littleness:
And in truth, a prudent, diligent, and subtle Inquisition is required in such
searches; indifferent, and not prepossessed. To this very hour all these
Miracles and strange Events have concealed themselves from me, I have never
seen greater Monster or Miracle in the World than my self: a man grows familiar
with all strange things by time and custom; but the more I frequent, and the
better I know my self, the more does my own deformity astonish me, and the less
I understand my self. The principal right of advancing and producing such
Accidents is reserved to Fortune. Riding the other day through a Village, about
two leagues from my House, I found the Place yet hot with the rumor of a
Miracle lately happened there, wherewith the Neighborhood had been several
Months amused, and so, that neighboring Provinces began to take the Alarm, and
to run thither in great Companies of all sorts of People. A young fellow of the
Town, had one night in sport counterfeited the Voice of a Spirit in his own
House, without any other design at present, but only for sport; but this having
succeeded with him a little better than he expected, to illustrate his Farce
with more Actors, he took a stupid silly Country Girl into the Scene, and at
last they were three of the same Age and Understanding, and from domestic
Lectures, proceeded to public Preachings, hiding themselves under the Altar of
the Church, never speaking but by Night, and forbidding any light to be
brought, words which tended to the Conversion of the World, and Threats of the
day of Judgment (for these are subjects under the Authority and Reverence of
which imposture does most securely lurk and lie concealed) and thence
proceeding to vicious and odd Gestures, so simple and ridiculous, that nothing
could hardly be so gross and contemptible amongst little Children: Yet had
Fortune never so little favored the design, who knows to what height this
juggling might have at last arrived? These poor Devils are at present in
Prison, and are like shortly to pay for their Folly, and I know not whether
some Judge may not also make them smart for his. We see clearly in this which
is discovered, but in many things of the like nature, that exceed our
knowledge, I am of Opinion, that we ought to suspend our Judgment, and to keep
it in a Condition as fit to reject, as to receive them. Great abuse in the
World is begot, or to speak more boldly, all the abuses of the World are begot
by our being taught to be afraid of professing our ignorance, and that we are
bound to accept all things we are not able to refute. We speak of all things by
Precepts and Resolution. The Style of Rome was, that even that which a witness
deposed for having seen it with his own eyes, and what a Judge determined with
his most certain knowledge was couched in this form of speaking, it seems. They
make me hate things that are likely, when they impose them upon me for
infallible. I love these words which mollify and moderate the Temerity of our
Propositions, peradventure, in some sort, some, it is said, I think, and the
like: and had I been to train up Children, I had so put this way of answering
into their Mouths, inquiring, and not resolutive, What does this mean? I
understand it not, It may be, Is it true? That they should rather have retained
the form of Pupils at threescore years old, than to go out Doctors as they do,
at ten. Whoever will be cured of Ignorance must confess it. Iris is the
Daughter of Thaumantis. Admiration is the Foundation of all Philosophy,
Inquisition the progress, and Ignorance the end. I but there is a sort of
Ignorance strong and generous, that yields nothing in Honor and Courage to
Knowledge; an Ignorance, which to conceive, requires no less knowledge than
Knowledge it self. I saw in my younger years, a Report of a process that C^rras
a Counselor of Thoulouse put out in print, of a strange accident of two men,
who presented themselves the one for the other. I remember (and I hardly
remember any thing else) that he seemed to have rendered the imposture of him
whom he judged to be guilty, so wonderful, and so far exceeding both our
Knowledge and his own, who was the Judge, that I thought it a very bold
Sentence that condemned him to be hanged. Let us take up some form of Arrest,
that says, The Court understands nothing of the matter; more freely and
ingeniously than the Areopagites did, who finding themselves perplexed with a
Cause they could not unravel, ordered the Parties to appear again after a
hundred years. The Witches of my Neighborhood run a hazard of their lives upon
the intelligence of every new Author that will give real body to his Dreams. To
accommodate the Examples that Holy Writ gives us of such things, most certain,
and irrefragable Examples, and to tie them to our modern Events, being we
neither see the Causes, nor the means, will require another sort of Wit than
ours. It peradventure only appertains to that sole all polert Testimony, to
tell us, This is, and that is, and not that other. God ought to be believed,
and certainly with very good Reason; but not one amongst us for all that, who
is astonished at his own Narration, (and he must of necessity be astonished, if
he be not out of his Wits) whether he employ it about other men's affairs, or
against himself. I am plain and rude, and stick to the main point, and that
which is most likely, avoiding those ancient reproaches. Pliny.
Majorem fidem homines adhibent iis quae non intelligunt. Cupidine humani
ingenii libentius obscura creduntur. Men are most apt to believe what they
least understand: and through the lust of humane Wit, obscure things are more
easily credited. I see very well that men are angry, and that I am forbidden to
doubt upon pain of execrable Injuries. A new way of persuading Mercy for Gods
sake. I am not to be cuff'd into belief. Let them be angry with those who
accuse their Opinion of falsity, I only accuse it of difficulty and boldness;
and condemn the opposite affirmation equally, if not so imperiously with them.
Who will establish his Discourse by authority and huffing, discovers his Reason
to be very weak. For a verbal and scholastic alteration, let them have as much
appearance as their Contradictors. Sic. ^il. Sen.
Videantur sane, non affirmentur modo. But in the real consequence they draw
from it, these have much the advantage. To kill men, a clear and shining light
is required; and our life is too real and essential to warrant these
supernatural and fantastic Accidents. As to Druggs and Poisons, I throw them
out of my count, as being the worst sorts of homicides: yet even in this, it is
said, that men are not always to insist upon the proper confessions of these
People: for they have sometimes been known to accuse themselves of the Murder
of Persons who have afterward been found living and well. In these other
extravagant accusations, I should be apt to say, that it is sufficient a man,
what recommendation soever he may have, be believed in humane things; but of
what is beyond his Conception, and of supernatural effect, he ought then only
to be believed, when authorized by a supernatural Approbation. The privilege
it has pleased Almighty God to give to some of our Witnesses, ought not to be
lightly communicated and made cheap. I have my Ears battered with a thousand
such flim-flams as these. Three saw him such a day in the East, three the next
day in the West; at such an hour, in such a place, and in such habit; in
earnest, I should not believe my self. How much more natural and likely do I
find it that two men should lie, than that one man in twelve hours time should
fly with the wind from East to West? How much more natural, that our
Understanding should be carried from its place by the volubility of our
disordered Minds, than this, that one of us should be carried by a strong
Spirit upon a Broom-staff, Flesh and Bones as we are, up the shaft of a
Chimney? Let not us seek illusions from without and unknown, who are
perpetually agitated with illusions domestic and our own. Methinks a man is
pardonable in disbelieving a Miracle, as much at least as he can divert and
elude the verification by no wonderful ways. And I am of St. Augustine's
Opinion; that it is better to lean toward doubt than assurance, in things hard
to prove, and dangerous to believe. It Is now some years ago, that I traveled
through the Territories of a Sovereign Prince, who in my favor, and to abate
my incredulity, did me the honor to let me see in his own presence, and in a
particular place, ten or twelve prisoners of this kind, and amongst others, an
old Hag, a real Witch, in foulness and deformity, who long had been famous in
that Profession. I saw both proofs and free confessions, and I know not what
insensible mark upon the miserable Creature: Witchmarkes.
I examined and talked with her and the rest as much and as long as I would,
and made the best and soundest Observations I could, neither am I a man to
suffer my Judgment to be captivated by prepossession; and in the end, should in
Conscience sooner have prescribed them Hellebore than Hemlock. Livius.
Captisque res m^gis mentibus, quam consceleratis similis visa. The thing was
rather to be attributed to madness than malice. Justice has correction proper
for such Maladies. As to the Oppositions and Arguments that honest men have
made me, both there and often in other places; I have met with none that have
convinced me, and that have not admitted a more likely solution than their
conclusions. It is true indeed, that the Proof and Reasons that are founded
upon Experience and matter of Fact, I do not go about to untye, neither have
they any end; I often cut them, as Alexander did the Gordian knot. After all,
it is setting a man's Conjectures at a very high price, upon them to cause a man
to be roasted alive. We are told by several Examples, (and particularly
Praestantius, of his Father) that being more profoundly asleep than men usually
are, he fancied himself to be a Mare, and that he served the Soldiers for a
Sumpter; and what he fancied himself to be, he really proved. If Sorcerers
dream so materially; if dreams can sometimes so incorporate themselves with
effects, I cannot believe that therefore our Wills should be accountable to
Justice; which I say, as a man, who am neither Judge nor Privy-Counsellor; and
that think my self by many degrees unworthy so to be, but a man of the common
sort born, and vowed to the obedience of the public Reason, both in its words
and acts. He that should record my idle talk to the prejudice of the most
paltry Law, Opinion, or Custom of his Parish, would do himself a great deal of
wrong, and me much more. For in what I say, I warrant no other certainty, but
that it is what I had then in my Thought. Tumultuous and wavering Thought. All I
say is by way of Discourse, and nothing by way of Advice. Nec me pudet, ut
istos, fateri nescire, Cicero. Acad.
quod nesciam. Neither am I ashamed, as they are, to confess my ignorance of
what I do not know. I should not speak so boldly, if it were my due to be
believed. And so I told a great man, who complained of the tartness and
contension of my Advices. Perceiving you to be ready, and prepared on one part,
I propose to you the other, with all the diligence and care I can, to clear
your Judgment, not to oblige it. God has your Hearts in his hands, and will
furnish you with choice. I am not so presumptuous so much as to desire that my
Opinions should so much as incline you to a thing of so great Importance. My
Fortune has not trained them up to so potent and elevated Conclusions. Truly I
have not only a great many Humors, but also a great many Opinions, that I
would endeavor to make my Son dislike, if I had one. What? if the truest are
not always the most commodious to man, being of too wild a Composition: Whether
it be to the purpose, or not, it is no great matter. It Is a common Proverb in
Italy, that he knows not Venus in her perfect sweetness, who has never lain
with a lame Mistress. Fortune, or some particular Accident, has long ago put
this Saying into the mouths of the People; and the same is said of men as well
as of Women; for the Queen of Amazons answered the Scythian, who courted her to
love, (...), Lame men perform best. Lame People best at the sport of Venus.
In this Feminine Republic, to evade the dominion of the Males, they lamed
them in their infancy, both Arms, Legs, and other Members, that gave them
advantage over them, and only made use of them in that wherein we in the other
Parts of the World make use of them. I should have been apt to think, that the
shuffling pace of the lame Mistress added some new Pleasure to the work, and
some extraordinary titillation to those who were at the sport; but that I have
lately learnt, that ancient Philosophy has it self determined it, which says,
that the Legs and Thighs of lame Women, not receiving, by the reason of their
imperfection, their due aliment, it falls out, that the genital Parts above,
are fuller and better supplied, and much more vigorous. Or else, that this
defect hindering the Exercise, they who are engaged in it, less disperse their
forces, and come more entire to the sports of Venus. Which also is the Reason
why the Greeks decryed the Women-weavers, Woman-weavers more lustful than other
Women.
as being more hot than other Women, by reason of their sedentary Trade; which
they do without any great motion or exercise of the body. What is it we may not
reason of at this rate? I might also say of these, that this jogging their
Breeches, whilst so sitting at work, rouzes and provokes their desire, as the
swinging and jolting of Coaches does that of our Ladies. Do not these Examples
serve to make good what I said at first, that our Reasons often anticipate the
Effect, and have so infinite an extent of Jurisdiction, that they judge and
exercise themselves, even in Inanity, and where there is no Being? Besides the
flexibility of our invention to forge Reasons of all sorts of Dreams, our
Imagination is equally facile to receive impressions of falsity, by very
frivolous Apparences. For, by the sole authority of the ancient and common Use
of this Proverb, I have formerly made my self believe, that I have had more
Pleasure in a Woman by reason she was not strait, and accordingly reckoned that
deformity amongst her Graces. Torquato Tasso, in his comparison he makes
betwixt France and Italy, The French Gentlemen's Legs smaller than others and
why.
says, he has observed, that our Legs are generally smaller than those of the
Italian Gentlemen; and attributes the cause of it to our being continually on
Horseback. Which is the very same from which Suetonius draws a quite contrary
Conclusion; for he says on the contrary, that Germanicus had made his Legs
bigger by the continuation of the same Exercise. Nothing is so supple and
wandering as our Understanding. It Is like the shoe of Theramenez, Theramenez
shoe.
fit for all feet. It Is double and various, and the matters are double and
diverse too. Give me a Dram of Silver, said a Cynick Philosopher to
Antigonus; that is not a Present befitting a King, replied he; give me then a
Talent, said the other; that is not a Present befitting a Cynick. Virg. Georg.
l. 1.
Seu plures calor ille vias, and caeca relaxat
Spiramenta novas veniat qua succus in herbas:
Seu durat magis, and venas astringit hiantes,
Ne tenues pluviae rapidive potentia solis
Acrior, aut Boreae penetrabile frigus adurat.
Mr. Ogilby.
Whether from this new force and nourishment
The Earth receives, or else all venom spent
By fire, and froth superfluous moisture sweat,
Or many dark hid breathings lax'd by heat,
By which fresh sap the springing Corn sustains,
Or more condensed it binds the gaping Veins,
Lest soaking showers, or Sol's more potent Beam,
Or Boreas piercing cold should wither them.
Ogni medaglia ha il suo reverso. Every Medal has its reserve. This is the
reason why Clitomucus said of old, that Carneades had outdone the Labors of
Hercules, in having fixed the consent of men, that is to say, their Opinion, and
the Liberty of judging. This so strong fancy of Carneades, sprung in my Opinion
anciently from the impudence of those who made Profession of Knowledge, and
their immeasurable self-conceit. Esop was set to sale with two other Slaves,
the buyer asked the first what he could do; who, to enhance his own value,
promised Mountains and Miracles, saying, he could do this, and that, and I know
not what; the second as much of himself, and more: when it came to Esop's turn,
and that he was also asked what he could do, nothing, said he, for these two
have taken up all before me, they can do every thing. So has it happened in the
School of Philosophy: The pride of those who attributed the Capacity of all
things to humane Wit, created in others, out of spite and Emulation, this
Opinion, that it is capable of nothing. The one maintain the same extreme in
Ignorance that the others do in Knowledge. To make it undeniably manifest that
man is immoderate throughout, can give no other positive sentence but that of
Necessity, and the want of Ability to proceed further.

CHAP. XII. Of Physiognomy.
ALmost all the Opinions we have are derived from Authority, and taken upon
trust; and it is not amiss. We could not choose worse than by our selves in so
weak an Age. This Image of Socrates his Discourses, which his Friends have
transmitted to us, we approve upon no other account, but merely the reverence
to public Approbation. It Is not according to our own knowledge, they are not
after our way. If any thing of this kind should spring up new, few men would
value them. We discern not the graces otherwise than by certain features,
touched up, and illustrated by Art. Such as glide on in their own Purity and
Simplicity, easily escape so gross a sight as ours; they have a delicate and
concealed Beauty, such as required a clear and purified sight to discover so
secret a light. Is not Simplicity, as we accept it, Cosin-german to Folly, and
a Quality of reproach? Socrates makes his Soul move a natural and common
motion. A country Peasant said this, a Woman said that, he has never any thing
in his Mouth, but Carters, Joiners, Cobblers, and Masons. These are inductions
and similitudes drawn from the most common and known Actions of men, every one
understands them. We should never have entertained the Nobility and Splendour of
his admirable Conceptions under so vile a form; we, I say, who think all things
low and flat, that are not elevated by Learning, and who discern no riches but
in pomp and show. This World of ours is only formed for Ostentation. Men are
only puffd up with Wind, and are bandied too and fro like Tennis-Balls. This
man proposes to himself no vain and idle Fancies, his design was to furnish us
with Precepts and things that more really and fitly serve to the use of Life:
servare modum, finemque tenere, Lucan. l. 2.

Naturamque sequi
To keep a mean, his end still to observe,
And from the Laws of Nature never to swerve.
He was also always one and the same, and raised himself not by starts, but by
complexion, to the highest pitch of vigor; or to say better, he exalted
nothing, but rather brought down, and reduced all asperities and difficulties
to their original and natural Condition, and subjected their power: for in Cato
it is most manifest, that there is a proceeding extended far beyond the common
ways of ordinary men. In the brave exploits of his Life, and in his Death, we
find him always mounted upon his managed Horses. Whereas this man always creeps
upon the ground, and with a slow and ordinary pace, treats of the most useful
Discourses, and bears himself through both at his Death, and the nicest
traverses that would present themselves in the course of humane Life. It has
fallen out well, that the man most worthy to be known, and to be presented to
the World for Example, should be he of whom we have the most certain knowledge;
he has been pried into by the most clear-sighted men that ever were. The
Testimonies we have of him are admirable both in Fidelity and Knowledge. It Is a
great thing that he was able so to order the pure Imaginations of a Child, that
without altering, or wresting them, he has thereby produced the most beautiful
effects of a humane Soul. He presents it not either elevated or rich, he only
represents it sound, but certainly with a brisk and spritely Health. By these
common and natural Springs, by these vulgar and ordinary Fancies, without being
moved, or making any bustle in the Busines^* he set up, not only the most
regular, but the most high and vigorous Beliefs, Actions, and Manners that ever
were. It Is he who brought again from Heaven, where she lost her time, humane
Wisdom, to restore her to man, wherein her most just and greatest business
lies. See him plead before his Judges, do but obser^e by what reasons he rouzes
his Courage to the hazards of War; with what Arguments he fortifies his
Patience against Calumny, Tyranny, Death, and the perverseness of his Wife: you
will find nothing in all this borrowed from Arts and Sciences. The simplest may
there discover their own means and power; it is not possible more to retire, or
to creep more low. He has done humane Nature a great kindness in showing it how
much it can do of it self. We are all of us richer than we think we are; but we
are taught to borrow and to beg, and brought up more to make use of what is
another than our own. Man can in nothing fix and conform himself to his mere
Necessity. Of Pleasure, Wealth, and Power, he grasps at more than he can hold;
his greediness is incapable of moderation. And I find that in curiositioy of
knowing he is the same; ^e cuts himself out more work than he can do, and more
than he needs to do: Extending the utitility of knowledge as far as the matter.
Seneca, Epist. 106.
Vt omnium rerum, sic literarum quoque, intemperanti^ laboramus. That, as of
every thing else, we should also be sick of the intemperance of Letters. And
Tacitus has reason to commend the Mother of Agricola, for having restrained her
Son in his too violent appetite of learning. It Is a good, if duly considered,
which has in it, as the other goods of men have, a great deal of vanity, and of
proper and natural weakness, and that costs very dear; the acquisition of it is
more hazardous than that of all other meat or drink. For in other things, what
we have bought we carry home in some vessel, and there have liberty to examine
our markets, how much it costs, and what it is worth, according to the Season:
but Sciences we can at the very first bestow into no other vessel than the
Soul; we swallow them in buying, and return from the market, either already
infected or amended. There are of such sorts as only burden and over-charge
the Stomach instead of nourishing; and moreover, some, that under color of
curing, poison us. I have been pleased, in place where I have been, to see men
in Devotion vow Ignorance as well as Chastity, Poverty, and Penitence. It Is
also a gelding of our unruly Appetites, to blunt this cupidity that spurs us on
to the study of Books, and to deprive the Soul of this voluptuous complacency,
that tickles us with the Opinion of Knowledge. And it is plenarily to accomplish
the Vow of Poverty to add unto it that of the Mind. We need not be taught to
live at our ease. And Socrates tells us, that it is in us, with the way how to
find it, and the manner how to use it. All these Acquisitions of ours, which
exceed our natural ones, are upon the matter superfluous and vain. It Is much if
they do not more burden and cumber us than they do us good. Paucis opus est
literis ad mente^ bonam. Ibidem.
A man of good natural Parts, and a good Disposition, has no great need of
Learning. It Is a feverish excess of the Mind; a tempestuous and unquiet
Instrument. Do but recollect your self, and you will find in your self natural
Arguments against Death, which are true, and more proper, and fit to serve you
in time of necessity. It Is they that make a Peasant, and an entire People dye
with as much constancy as a Philosopher. Should I have died less cheerfully
before I had read Cicero's Thusculanes? I believe not. And when I find my self
at the best, I perceive that my Tongue is enriched indeed, but my Courage
little or nothing elevated by them. It is just as Nature forged it at first,
and against any conflict only defends it self after a natural and ordinary way.
Books have not so much served me for Instruction as Exercise. What if
Knowledge, trying to arm us with new defenses against natural Inconveniences,
has more imprinted in our fancies their weight and grandeur, than her reasons
and subtilties to secure us from them? They are subtilties indeed, with which
she often alarms us to little purpose. Do but observe, how many slight and
frivolous, and if nearly examined, how many incorporeal Arguments the closest
and wisest Authors scatter about one good one. They are no other but quirks and
fallacies to amuse and gull us. But for as much as it may be with some profit,
I will sift it no further. Many of that sort are here and there dispersed up and
down this Treatise, either upon borrowing, or by imitation; therefore ought a
man to take a little heed, not to call that force which is only a knack of
writing, and that solid, which is only quick, or that good, which is only fine.
Thus. lib. 5*
Quae magis gustata quam potata delectant; Which more delight in tasting, than
in being drank off. Every thing that pleases does not nourish. Sen. Epist.
Vbi non ingenii sed animi negotium agitur. Where the question is not about
improving the Wit, but bettering the Understanding. To see the bustle that
Seneca keeps to fortify himself against Death, to see him so sweat and pant to
harden and encourage himself, and bate so long upon the Perch, would have
lessened his Reputation with me, had he not very bravely maintained it to the
last. His so ardent and frequent agitations discover that he was in himself
impetuous and passionate. Magnus animus remissius loquitur* Seneca. Epist. 115.
and securius: Non est alius ingenis, alius animo color. A great courage speaks
more negligently and more securely. The Wit and Courage wear one and the same
Livery. He must be convinced at his own expense. And he does in some sort
discover that he was hard laid to by his Enemy. Plutarch's way, by how much it
is more disdainful, and farther stretched, is, in my opinion, so much more
manly and persuasive: and I am apt to believe, that his Soul had more assured
and more regular motions. The one more sharp, pricks and makes us start, and
more touches the Soul; the other more solid, informs, establishes, constantly
supports us, and more touches the Understanding. That ravishes the Judgment,
this wins it. I have likewise seen other Writings yet more reverenced than
these, that in the representation of the conflict they maintain against the
Temptations of the flesh, depaint them so sharp, so powerful and invincible,
that we our selves, who are of the meaner sort of the People, are as much to
wonder at the strangeness and unknown force of their temptation, as at their
resistance. To what end do we so arm our selves with this harness of
Philosophy? Let us look down upon the poor People that we see scattered upon
the face of the Earth, prone and intent upon their Business, that neither know
Aristotle, nor Cato, Example, nor Precept. Even from these does Nature every
day extract effects of Constancy and Patience, more pure and manly than those
we so inquisitively study in the Schools. How many do I ordinarily see, who
slight Poverty? how many that desire to dye, or that do it without alarm or
regret? He that is now digging in my Garden, has this Morning buried his
Father, or his Son. The very names by which they call Diseases, sweeten and
mollify the sharpness of them. The Tissick is with them no more but a Cough,
the Bloody Flux but a looseness, a Pleurisy but a stich, and, as they gently
name them, so they patiently endure them. They are very great and grievous
indeed, when they hinder their ordinary Labor; and they never keep their Beds,
but to dye. Simplex illa, Seneca. Epist. 95.
and aperta virtus in obscuram, and solertem scientiam versa est. That plain
and simple Virtue is converted into an obscure and cunning Knowledge. I was
writing this about a time when a great load of our intestine troubles for
several Months lay with all its weight upon me. I had the Enemy at my Door on
one side, and the free-booters, worse Enemies than they, on the other; Seneca.
Non armis, sed vitiis, certatur; and underwent all sorts of Military Injuries
at once. Ovid.
Hostis adest dextra laevaque a part timendus,
Vicinoque malo terret utrumque latus.
On either hand an Enemy alarms,
And threatens both sides with injurious arms.
A monstrous War! Other Wars are bent against Strangers, this against it self;
and destroys it self with its own Poison. It Is of so malignant and ruinous a
nature, that it ruins it self with the rest; and with its own rage mangles and
tears it self to pieces. We ofter see it dissolve of it self, than thorough
scarcity of any necessary thing, or by force of the Enemy. All Discipline
evades it. It comes to compose Sedition, and is it self full of it; Will
chastize Disobedience, and it self is the Example; and, employed for the
defense of the Laws, rebels against those of our own. What a Condition are we
in? Our Physic makes us sick. Plutarch.
Notre mal s'empoisonne
Du secours qu'on luy done.
Such is our fate, that our Disease
Our Remedies do still increase.
Aeneid. lib. 12.
exuperat magis, aegrescitque medendo.
His Physic makes him worse, and sicker still.
Catullus.
Omnia fanda nefanda malo permista furore,
Justificam nobis mentem avertere Deorum.
Right and wrong, shuffled in this Civil War,
Have robbed us of the Gods protecting care.
In the beginning of Popular Maladies, a man may distinguish the sound from the
sick; but when they come to continue, as ours have done, the whole body is then
infected from head to foot, and no part is free from Corruption. For there is
no Air that men so greedily draw in, that diffuses it self so soon, and that
penetrates so deep as that of License. Our Armies only subsist, and are kept
together by the cement of Strangers; for of French there is now no constant and
regular Body of an Army to be made. What a shame it is? there is no more
Discipline but what we learn from borrowed Soldiers. As to us our selves, our
Conduct is at discretion, and not of the Chief, but every one at his own; the
General has a harder game to play within than he has without: In the Word of
Command to march, draw up, wheel, and the like, we obey him indeed; but all the
rest is dissolute and free. It pleases me to observe how much Pusillanimity and
Cowardice there is in Ambition; by how abject and servile ways it must arrive
at its end, but withal, it displeases me to see good and generous Natures, and
that are capable of Justice, every day corrupted in the managery and command of
this Confusion. Long toleration begets habit, habit consent and imitation. We
had ill contrived Souls enough, without spoiling those that were generous and
good; so that if we hold on, there will not remain any with whom to entrust the
health of this State of ours, in case Fortune chance to restore it. Virgil.
Georg. l. 1.
Hunc saltem everso juvenem succurrere seclo,
Ne prohibete --
Mr. Ogilby.
Ah! for young Caesar now your selves engage,
That he again repair this ruined Age.
What is become of the old Precept, That Soldiers ought more to fear their
Chief, than the Enemy? An Orchard of ripe Apples enclosed within the Roman
Camp, left untouched to the Possessor.
And that wonderful Example, that an Orchard being enclosed within the
precincts of a Camp of the Roman Army, was seen at their dislodgment the next
day in the same condition, not an Apple, though ripe and delicate, being pulled
off, but all left to the Possessor? I could wish that our Youth, instead of the
time they spend in less fruitful Travels, and less honorable Employments,
would bestow one half of that time in being an Eyewitness of Naval Exploits,
under some good Captain of Malta, and the other half in observing the
Discipline of the Turkish Armies; for they have many differences and advantages
over ours. One thing is, that our Soldiers here become more licentious in
Expeditions, there more temperate and circumspect. For the thefts and
insolences committed upon the common People, which are only punished with a
Cudgel in Peace, are capital in War. For an Egg taken in Turkey without paying
for it, fifty blows with a Cudgel is the prefixed rate; for any thing else, of
what sort, or how trivial soever, not necessary to nourishment, they are
presently empall'd, or beheaded without mercy. I am astonished, in the History
of Selim, the most cruel Conqueror that ever was, to see that when he subdued
Egypt, the beautiful Gardens about Damas being all open, and in a conquered
Land, and his Army encamped upon the very place, should be left untouched by
the hands of the Soldiers, by reason they had not received the signal of
Plunder. But is there any Disease in a Government so important, as ought to be
physick'd with such a mortal Drugg? No, said Favonius, not so much as the
tyrannical Usurpation of a Commonwealth. Plato likewise will not consent that
a man should violate the Peace of the Country to cure it; and by no means
approves of a Reformation that disturbs and hazards all, and that is to be
purchased at the price of the Citizens blood and ruin; determining it to be the
duty of a good Patriot in such a case to let it alone, and only to pray to God
for his extraordinary Assistance: And seems to be angry with his great Friend
Dion, for having proceeded something after another manner. I was a Platonic in
this point, before I knew there had ever been such a man as Plato in the World.
And if this Person ought absolutely to be rejected from our Society; (he who by
the sincerity of his Conscience, merited from the Divine favor to penetrate so
far into the Christian light, thorough the universal darkness, wherein the
World was involved in his time) I do not think it would well become us to
suffer our selves to be instructed by a Heathen* how great an Impiety it is not
to expect from God any relief simply his own, and without our Cooperation. I
often doubt, whether amongst so many men as tamper in such affairs, there is
not to be found some one of so weak Understanding as to have been really
persuaded that he went toward Reformation by the worst of Deformations, and
advanced toward his Salvation by the most express causes that we have of most
assured Damnation; that by overthrowing Government, Magistracy, and Laws, in
whose protection God has placed him, by inspiring fraternal Minds with
parricidal Animosities, and by calling Devils and Furies to his aid, he can
assist the most holy sweetness and Justice of the divine Law. Ambition,
Avarice, Cruelty, and Revenge, have not sufficient, proper, and natural
Impetuosity of their own, let us bait them with the glorious titles of Justice
and Devotion. There cannot a worse estate of things be imagined, than where
wickedness comes to be legitimate, and assumes, with the Magistrates
permission, the cloak of Virtue. Nihil in speciem fallacius, quam prava
religio, ubi deorum numen praetenditur sceleribus. Nothing has a more deceiving
face than false Religion, where devotion is pretended by wicked men. The
extremest sort of Injustice, according to Plato, is, that that which is unjust
should be reputed for just. The common People suffered therein very much then,
not present damages only; -- undique totis
Vsque adeo turbatur agris, Virgil. Eleg. 1.
--
but future too. The living were to suffer, and so were they who were yet
unborn. They robbed and stripped them, and consequently they did me, even to their
hope; taking from them all they had laid up in store to live on for many years.
Quae nequeunt secum far aut abducere, perdunt, Ovid de Trist. l. 3. Eleg. 10.

Et cremat insontes turba scelesta casus
Muris nulla fides, squallent populatibus agri.
What they cannot bear away, they spoil and spurn,
And lewd Rabble harmless houses burn;
Walls cannot secure their Masters, and the field
Through waste and spoil does an ill prospect yield.
Besides this shock I suffered others. I underwent the inconveniences that
moderation brings along with it in such a Disease. I was pill'd on all hands,
to the Gibelin I was a Guelph, and to the Guelph a Gibelin; some one of the
Poets in my Study expresses this very well, but I know not where it is. The
situation of my House, and my friendliness to my Neighbors, presented me with
one face, my Life and my Actions with another. They did not lay formed
accusations to my charge, for they had no foundation of so doing. I never
slink, nor hide my head from the Laws, and whoever would have questioned me,
would have done himself a greater prejudice than me. They were only mute
suspicions that were whispered about, which never want appearance in so confused
a mixture, no more than envious or idle heads. I commonly my self lend a hand
to presumptuous injuries that Fortune scatters abroad against me, by a way I
have ever had of evading to justify, excuse, or explain my self, conceiving,
that it were to referr my Conscience to arbitration, to plead in its behalf;
Perspicuitas enim, Argumentatione elevatur. For the Perspicuity of a cause is
clouded and darkened by Argumentation. And, as if every one saw as clearly into
me as I do my self, instead of retiring from an accusation, I step up to meet
it, and rather give it some kind of color by an ironical and scoffing
confession, if I do not fit totally mute, as of a thing not worth my answer.
But such as look upon this kind of behavior of mine as too haughty a
Confidence, have as little kindness for me as they who interpret it the
weakness of an indefensible cause; namely, the great ones, toward whom want of
submission is a very great fault. Rude to all Justice that knows and feels it
self, and is not submiss, humble, and suppliant. I have often knocked my head
against this Pillar. So it is, that at what then befell me an ambitious man
would have hanged himself, and a covetous man would have done the same. I have
no manner of care of getting. Sit mihi quod nuno est etiam minus, Hor. lib. 1.
Epist. 18.
ut mihi viv^m
Quod superest ^vi, si quid superesse volent Dii.
I only pray that small estate which I Mr. Alexander Brom.

Now have, may tarry with me till I dye,
And those few days which I have yet to live
(If Heaven to me any more days will give)
I may enjoy my self.
But the losses that befell me by the injury of others, whether by theft or
violence, go almost as near my heart, as they would do to that of the most
avaricious man. The offense troubles me, without comparison, more than the
loss. A thousand several sorts of mischiefs fell upon me in the neck of one
another; I could better have born them all at once. I have already been
considering to whom amongst my Friends I might commit a helpless and decrepid
Age; and having turned my Eyes quite round, I found my self at a loss. To let a
man's self fall plum down, and from so great a height, it ought to be in the
arms of a solid, vigorous, and fortunate Friendship. They are very rare, if
there be any. At last I concluded that it was safest for me to trust to my self
in my greatest Necessity, and if it should so fall out, that I should be but
upon cold terms in Fortunes favor, I should so much more pressingly recommend
me to my own, and look so much the better to my self. Men on all occasions
throw themselves upon foreign Assistances to spare their own, which are the
only certain and sufficient ones with which they can arm themselves. Every one
runs elsewhere, and to the future, forasmuch as no one is arrived at himself.
And I was satisfied, that they were profitable Inconveniences, forasmuch as
ill Scholars are to be admonished* with the Rod, when Reason will not do, as a
crooked piece of Wood is by fire and straining to be reduced to straightness. I
have a great while preached to my self to stick close to my own Concerns, and
separate my self from the affairs of others; yet I am still turning my Eyes
aside. A bow, a kind word or look from a great Person tempts me; of which God
knows how little scarcity there is in these days, and how little they signify.
I moreover, without wrinkling my forehead, hearken to the persuasions are
offered me, to draw me into some place of Traffic, and so gently refuse it, as
if I were half willing to be overcome. Now to so indocile a spirit blows are
required, and this Vessel which thus chops and cleaves, and is ready to fall
one piece from another, is to have the hoops forced down with good sound
strokes of a Mallet. Secondly, that this accident served me for Exercise to
prepare me for worse, if I, who both by the benefit of Fortune, and by the
condition of my Manners, hoped to be the last, should happen to be one of the
first should be trapt in this storm. Instructing my self betimes, to force my
Life, and fit it for a new Estate. The true liberty is to be able to do what a
man will with himself. Seneca.
Potentissimus est qui se habet in potestate. He is most potent, who has
himself in his own Power. In an ordinary and quiet time, a man prepares himself
for moderate and common accidents; but in the Confusion wherein we have been
for these thirty years, every Frenchman, whether in particular or in general,
sees himself every hour upon the point of the total ruin and overthrow of his
Fortune. By so much the more ought he to have his Courage munited with the
strongest and most vigorous Provisions. Let us thank Fortune, that has not made
us live in an effeminate, idle, and languishing Age; some who could never have
been so by other means, will be made famous by their misfortunes. As I seldom
read in Histories the confusions of other States without regret that I was not
present, better to consider them; so does my curiosity make me in some sort
please my self with seeing with my own eyes this notable spectacle of our
public Death, its form and symptoms. And seeing I could not hinder it, am
content to be destined to assist in it, and thereby to instruct my self. Thus
do we manifestly covet to see, though but in Shadow* and the Fables of
Theaters, the pomp of Tragic representations of humane Fortune. It Is not
however without compassion of what we hear, but we please our selves in rouzing
our displeasure by the rarity of these to be pitied Events. Nothing tickles
that does not pinch. And good Historians skip over, as a stagnant Water and
dead Sea, calm Narrations, to be again upon the Narrative of Wars and
Seditions, which they know are most acceptable to the Readers. I question
whether or no I can handsomely confess at how mean and vile a rate of Repose and
Tranquillity I have passed over above the one half of my Life in the rui^ of my
Country. I make my self a little to^ good a bargain of Patience, in accidents
that do not so much regard what they take from me, as what remains safe, both
within and without. There is comfort in evading, one while one, another while
another, of those evils that are levelled at me too at last, but at present
hurt others only about us; as also, that in matters of public Interest, the
more my affection is universally dispersed, the weaker it is. To which may be
added, that it is half true. Tantum ex publicis malis sentimus, quantum ad
privatas res pertinet. We are only so far sensible of public Evils, as they
respect our private Affairs. And that the Health from which we fell was such,
that it self consolates the regret we ought to have. It was Health, but not
otherwise than in comparison of the Sickness that has succeeded it. We are not
fallen from any great height. The corruption and thievery which is in Dignity
and Office, seems the most insupportable to me. We are less injuriously rifled
in a Wood than in a place of security. It was an universal Juncture of
particular Members, rotten to emulation of one another, and the most of them
with inveterate Ulcers, that neither required nor admitted of any Cure. This
conclusion therefore did really more animate than press me by the assistance of
my Conscience, which was not only at peace within it self, but elevated, and I
did not find any reason to complain of my self. Also, as God never sends Evils
any more than Goods, absolutely pure to men, my Health continued at that time
more than usually good; and, as I can do nothing without it, there are few
things that I cannot do with it. It afforded me means to rouse up all my
provisions, and to lay my hand before the wound, that would else peradventure
have gone farther, and experimented in my Patience, that I had some opposition
against Fortune; and that it must be a great shock could throw me out of the
Saddle. I do not say this to provoke her to give me a more vigorous Charge; I
am her humble Servant, and submit to her pleasure. Let her be no other toward
me than she has used to be in God's Name. Do you ask if I am sensible of her
Assaults? Yes, certainly I am. But, as those who are possessed and oppressed
with sorrow, may sometimes suffer themselves nevertheless by intervals to taste
a little Pleasure, and are sometimes surpised with a Smile. So have I so much
power over my self, as to make my ordinary Condition quiet, and free from
disturbing Thoughts; but I suffer my self withal by fits to be surpised with
the stings of those unpleasing imaginations that assault me, whilst I am arming
my self to drive them away, or at least, to wrestle with them. But behold
another aggravation of the evil which befell me in the tail of the rest. I am
both without doors and within assaulted with a most violent Plague in
comparison of all other. For, as sound bodies are subject to more grievous
Maladies, forasmuch as they are not to be forced but by such, so my very
healthful Air, where no contagion, though very near, in the memory of man,
could ever take footing, coming to be corrupted, produced most strange Effects.
Horace, lib. 1. Ode. 28.
Mista senum, and juvenum densantur funera, nullum
Saeva caput Proserpina fugit.
Sir Thomas Hawkins.
In death, both young and old by heaps do join,
Nor any Head escapes sad Proserpine.
I was to suffer this pleasant Condition, that the sight of my House was
frightful to me. Whatever I had there was without Guard, and left to the mercy
of every one. I my self, who am of so hospitable a Nature, was my self, i^ very
great distress for a Retreat for my Family. A wild and scattered Family,
frightful both to its Friends and self, and filling every Place with horror
where it did attempt to settle; being to shift abode so soon as any ones singer
began but to ache. All Diseases are then concluded to be the Plague, and People
do not stay to examine and be sure whether they are it or no. And the mischief
on it is, that according to the Rules of Art, in every danger that a man comes
near, he must undergo a Quarantine in the suspense of his Infirmity; your
imagination all that while tormenting you at pleasure, and turning even your
Health it self into a Fever; yet would not at all this have gone very near to
my Heart; had I not withal been compelled to be sensible of others sufferings,
and miserably to serve six Months together for a Guide to this Caravanne: For I
carry my Antidotes within my self, which are Resolution and Patience.
Apprehension, which is particularly feared in this Disease, does not so much
trouble me. And, if being alone, I should have taken it, it had been a more
spritely, and a longer flight. It Is a kind of death, that I do not think of the
worst sort; it is commonly short, stupid, without pain, and consolated by the
public condition; without ceremony, without mourning, and without a crowd. But
as to the People about us, the hundredth part of them could not be saved. --
videas desertaque regna Virg Georg. lib. 3.

Pastorum, and long saltus lateque vacantes.
Deserted Realms now may thou see of Swains Mr. Ogilby.

And every where forsaken Groves and Plains.
In this place my best Revenue is manual. A cruel Plague in Gascony.
What an hundred men plowed for me, lay a long time fallow. But then what
example of resolution did we not see in the simplicity of all this People?
Every one generally renounced all care of Life. The Grapes, the principal
Revenue of the Country, hung in clusters upon the Vines, every one
indifferently preparing for, and expecting Death, either to Night, or to
Morrow, with a Countenance and Voice so far from fear, as if they had
contracted with Death in this Necessity, and that it had been an universal and
inevitable Sentence. It Is always such. But how slender hold has the resolution
of dying? The distance and difference of a few hours, and the sole
consideration of company, renders the apprehension various to us. Do but
observe these, by reason that they dye in the same Month, Children, young
People, and old, they are no longer astonished at it, they lament no more. I
saw some who were afraid of staying behind, as in a dreadful solitude, and did
not commonly observe any other solicitude amongst them, than that of
Sepultures; they were troubled to see the dead bodies scattered about the
Fields at the mercy of Beasts, which presently began to flock about them. How
differing are the fancies of Men! The Neorites, Sepulture of the Neorites.
a Nation subjected by Alexander, threw the bodies of their dead in the
deepest, and least frequented part of their Woods, on purpose to have them
there eaten; the only Sepulture reputed happy amongst them. Some who were yet
in health, dug their own Graves, and others laid them down in them whilst
alive; Roman Soldiers suffocated with their own hands after the Battle of
Cannae.
and a Labourer of mine, in dying, with his Hands and Feet pulled the Earth
upon him. Was not this to nustle and settle himself to sleep at greater ease? A
bravery in some sort like that of the Roman Soldiers, who after the Battle of
Cannae, were found with their Heads thrust into holes in the Earth, which they
had made, and in suffocating themselves, with their own hands pulled the Earth
about their Ears. In short, a whole Nation by usance was brought to a
Discipline nothing inferior in undauntedness to the most studied and
premeditated Resolution. Most instructions of Sciences, to encourage us, have
in them more of show than of force, and of Ornament, than effect. We have
abandoned Nature, and will teach her what to do; her who did so happily, and so
securely conduct us. And in the mean time, from the footsteps of her
Instruction, and that little, which by the benefit of ignorance, remains of her
Image imprinted in the life of this rustic rout of unpolished men, Science is
constrained every day to borrow thence to make a pattern for her Disciples of
Constancy, Tranquillity, Innocence. It Is pretty to see, that these complain of
so much fine Knowledge, being to imitate this foolish simplicity, and that in
the most principal acts of Virtue. And that our Wisdom must learn even from
Beasts, the most profitable instructions in the greatest and most necessary
Concerns of humane life: As, how we are to live and dye, manage our Fortunes,
love, and bring up our Children, and to maintain Justice. A singular testimony
of humane Infirmity, and that this Reason we so handle at our Pleasure, finding
evermore some diversity and novelty, leaves with us no apparent trace of
Nature. And they make men, as Perfumers mix their Oils, they have sophisticated
it with so many Argumentations and far-fetched Discourses, that it is become
variable, and particular to every one of them, and has lost its proper,
constant, and universal face. And we must seek testimony from Beasts, not
subject to favor, corruption, nor diversity of Opinions. For it is indeed
true, that even they themselves do not always go exactly in the Path of Nature,
but wherein they do swerve, it is so little, that you may always see the track.
As Horses that are lead make several bounds and curvets, but it is always at the
length of the Collar, and they still follow him that leads them; and as a Hawk
takes his flight but still under the restraint of his Cranes. Seneca. Epist.
Exilia, Tormenta, Bella, Morbos, Naufragia meditare, ut nullo sis malo tyro.
Meditate upon Banishments, Tortures, Wars, Diseases, and Shipwracks, that thou
may not be to seek in any disaster. What good will this Curiosity do us, to
preoccupate all the Inconveniences of humane Nature, and to prepare our selves
with so much trouble against things which peradventure will never befall us? (
parem passis tristitiam facit, Seneca. Epist. 74.
pati posse. It troubles men as much that they may possibly suffer, as if they
really did. Not only the blow, but the wind of the blow strikes us.) Or like
Phrenetick People, for certainly it is a Frenzy to go immediately and whip
your self, because it may so fall out, that Fortune may one day make you
undergo it; and to put on your Furr'd-gown at Midsummer, because you will stand
in need of it at Christmas? Throw your selves, say they, into the experience of
all the evils, the most extreme evils that can possibly befall you, assure your
selves there. On the contrary, the most easy, and most natural way would be to
banish even the thoughts of them. They will not come soon enough, their true
Being will not continue with us long enough, we must lengthen and extend them;
we must incorporate them in us before hand, and there entertain them, as if
they would not otherwise sufficiently press upon our Senses. We shall find them
heavy enough when they come, (says one of our Masters, of none of the tender,
but the most severe Sects) in the mean time favor thy self, believe what
pleases thee best. What good will it do thee to prevent thy ill Fortune, to
lose the present for fear of the future; and to make thy self immediately
miserable, because thou art to be so in time? These are his Words. Science
indeed does us one good Office, in instructing as exactly in the dimensions of
Evils. Curis acuens mortalia corda. Virgil.
'Twere pity that any part of their Grandeur should escape our Sense and
Knowledge. It Is certain, that for the most part, the preparation for Death has
administered more Torment than the thing it self. It was of old truly said, and
by a very judicious Author, Seneca.
Minus afficit sensus fatigatio, quam cogitatio. Suffering it self does less
afflict the Senses, than the apprehension of suffering. The Sentiment of
present death does sometimes of it self animate us with a prompt Resolution no
more to avoid a thing that is utterly inevitable. Several Gladiators have been
seen, who, after having fought timorously and ill, have courageously
entertained Death, offering their Throats to the Enemies Sword, and bidding
them dispatch. The remote sight of future Death requires a Constancy that is
slow and lazy, and consequently hard to be got. If you know not how to dye,
never trouble your self; Nature will fully and sufficiently instruct you upon
the place, she will exactly do that business for you, take you no care: ^ropert.
Incertam frustra mortales funeris horam
Quaeritis, and qua sit mors aditura via:
Poen^ minor certam subito perferre ruinam,
Quod timeas, gravius sustinuisse diu.
Mortals, in vain's your Curiosity
To know the Hour, and Death that you must dye:
Better your fate strike with a sudden blow,
Than that you long should what you fear foreknow.
We trouble Life by the care of Death, That Death ought not to be premeditated.
and Death by the care of Life. The one torments, the other frights us. It Is
not against Death that we prepare, that is too momentary a thing; a quarter of
an hours suffering without consequence, and without nuisance, does not deserve
particular Precepts. To say the truth, we prepare our selves against the
Preparations of Death. Philosophy ordains, that we should always have Death
before our Eyes, to foresee and consider it before the time; and after gives
us Rules and Precautions to provide that this foresight and thought do us no
harm: Just so do Physicians, who throw us into Diseases, to the end they may
have whereon to lay out their Druggs, and their Art. If we have not known how
to live, it is mystery to teach us to dye, and make the end difform from all the
rest. If we have known how to live constantly and quietly, we shall know how to
dye so too. They may boast as much as they please. Tota Philosophorum Vita,
commentatio mortis est. Cic. Thus.
That the whole Life of a Philosopher is the Meditation of his Death. But I
fancy, that though it be the end, it is not the aim of his Life. It Is his end,
his extremity, but not nevertheless his object. She ought her self to be to her
self her own aim and design; her true study is to order, govern, and suffer her
self. In the number of several other Offices, that the general and principal
Chapter of knowing how to live comprehends, is this Article of knowing how dye;
and did not our fears give it weight, one of the lightest too. To judge of them
by the utility, and by the naked truth, the lessons of simplicity are not much
inferior to those which the contrary Doctrine preaches to us. Men are
differing in sentiment and force, we must lead them to their own good,
according to their Capacities, and by various ways: Horace, lib. 1. Epist. 1.
Quo me cumque rapit tempestas deferor hospes.
Sir. Rich. Fanshaw.
sworn to no man's words,
To this, and that side I make tacks and bords,
Now plunged in billows of the active Life,
At Virtues Anchor ride contemplative.
I never saw any Countryman of my Neighbors concern himself with the thought
of, with what countenance and assurance he should pass over his last hour;
Nature teaches him not to dream of Death till he is dying: and then he does it
with a better grace than Aristotle, upon whom Death presses with a double
weight, both of it self, and of so long a premeditation. And therefore it was
the opinion of Caesar, that the least premeditated Death was the easiest and
the most happy. Seneca. Epist. 92.
Plus dolet quam necesse est, qui ante dolet quam necesse est. He grieves more
than is necessary, who grieves before it is necessary. The sharpness of this
imagination springs from our own curiosity. Thus do we ever hinder our selves,
desiring to prevent and govern natural prescriptions. It Is only for Doctors to
dine worst, when in the best Health, and that they have the best stomachs, and
to frown, and be out of humor at the Image of Death. The common sort stand in
need of no remedy nor consolation, but just in the shock, and when the blow
comes; and consider no more than just what they endure. Is it not then, as we
say, that the stupidity and name of apprehension in the Vulgar gives them that
patience in present Evils, and that profound carelessness of future sinister
Accidents? That their Souls, by being more gross and dull, are less penetrable,
and not so easily moved? if it be so, let us henceforth, in Gods name, teach
nothing but Ignorance. It Is the utmost fruit which the Sciences promise us, to
which this Stupidity so gently leads its Disciples. We have no want of good
Masters, who are interpreters of natural simplicity. Socrates shall be one.
For, as I remember, he speaks something to this purpose, to the Judges who sat
upon his Life and Death. " I am afraid, (my masters) that if I entreat you to
put me to death, I shall confirm the Evidence of my Accusers, which is, that I
pretend to be wiser than others, as having some more secret knowledge of things
that are above and below us. Socrates his pleeding.
I know very well, that I have neither frequented nor known Death, nor have
ever seen any person that has tried his Qualities, from whom to inform my self.
Such as fear it, presuppose they know it; as for my part, I neither know what
it is, nor what they do in the other World. Death is peradventure an
indifferent thing, peradventure a thing to be desired. It Is nevertheless to be
believed, if it be a transmigration from one place to another, that it is a
bettering of ones condition, to go live with so many great Persons deceased,
and to be exempt from having any more to do with unjust and corrupted Judges:
if it be an annihilation of our Being, it is yet a bettering of ones condition,
to enter into a long and peaceable night. We find nothing more sweet in Life
than a quiet Repose, and a profound Sleep without Dreams. The things that I
know to be evil, as to offend a man's Neighbor, and to disobey ones Superior,
whether it be God or Man, I carefully avoid: such as I do not know whether they
be good or evil, I cannot fear them. If I go to dye, and leave you alive, the
Gods alone only know whether it will go better either with you or me;
wherefore, as to what concerns me, you may do as you shall think fit; but
according to my method of advising just and profitable things, I do affirm,
that you will do your Consciences more right to set me at liberty, unless you
see further into my cause than I. And judging according to my past actions,
both public and private, according to my intentions, and according to the
profit that so many of our Citizens, both young and old, daily extract from my
Conversation, and the fruit that you reap from me your selves, you cannot more
duly acquit your selves toward my merit, than in ordering, that, my poverty
considered, I should be maintained in the The public Exchequer.
Prytaneum, at the Public expense; a thing that I have often known you with
less reason grant to others. Do not impute it to obstinacy or disdain, that I
do not, according to the custom, supplicate, and go about to move you to
commiseration. I have both Friends and Kindred, not being (as Homer says)
begotten of a block, or of a stone, no more than others, that are able to
present themselves before (...) in tears and mourning, and I have three
desolute children with which to move you to compassion: But I should do a shame
to our City, at the Age I am, and in the reputation of Wisdom wherein I now
stand, to appear in such an object form. What would men say of the other
Athenians? I have always admonished those who have frequented my Lectures, not
to redeem their Lives by an indecent action; and in any the Wars of my
Country, at Amphipolis, Potidea, Delia, and other Expeditions where I have
been, I have effectually manifested how far I was from securing my safety by my
shame. I should moreover in^erest your Duty, and should tempt you to unhandsome
things,; for it is not for my Prayers to persuade you, but for the pure and
solid reason of Justice. You have sworn to the Gods to keep your selves
upright, and it would seem as if I suspected, or would recriminate upon you,
should I not believe that you are so: And I should give evidence against my
self, not to believe them as I ought, mistrusting their Conduct, and not purely
committing my Affair into their hands. I do wholly rely upon them, and hold my
self assured, they will do in this what shall be most fit both for you and me.
Good men, whether living or dead, have no reason to fear the Gods.

Is not this an innocent childish pleading of an immaginable loftiness, and in
what a necessity employed? In earnest, he had very good reason to prefer it
before that which the great Orator Lysias had penned for him: admirably couched
indeed in the judiciary style, but unworthy of so noble a Criminal. Had a
suppliant voice been heard out of the mouth of Socrates, that lofty Virtue had
struck sail in the height of its glory. And ought his rich and powerful nature
to have committed her defense to Art, and in her highest proof have renounced
truth and simplicity, the ornaments of his speaking, to adorn and deck it self
with the Embellishments of figures, and equivocations of a premeditated Speech?
He did very wisely, and like himself, not to corrupt the tenure of an incorrupt
Life, and so sacred an image of humane form, to spin out his Decrepitude the
poor eeching of a year, and to betray the immortal memory of that glorious end.
He owed his Life not to himself, but to the Example of the World. Had it not
been a public damage, that he should have concluded it after a lazy and
obscure manner? Doubtless, that careless and indifferent consideration of his
Death, very well deserves that Posterity should consider him so much the more,
as they also did. And there is nothing so just in Justice, than that which
Fortune ordained for his recommendation. For the Athenians abominated all those
who had been causers of his death to such a degree, that they avoided them as
excommunicated Persons, and looked upon every thing as polluted, that had been
touched by them: no one would wash with them in the public Baths: none would
salute, or own acquaintance with them: so that at last, unable longer to
support this public hatred, they hanged themselves. If any one shall think,
that amongst so many other Examples that I had to choose out of in the Sayings
of Socrates, for my present purpose, I have made an ill choice of this, and
shall judge that this Discourse is elevated above common Conceit; I must tell
them that I have purposely done it; for I am of another opinion, and do hold it
a Discourse in rank and simplicity much behind and inferior to common
contrivance. He represents, in an inartificial boldness, and infantive
security, the pure and first impression and ignorance of Nature. For it is to
be believed, that we have naturally a fear of Pain, but not of Death, by reason
of it self. It Is a part of our Being, and no less essential than Living. To
what end should Nature have begot in us a hatred to it, and a horror of it,
considering that it is of so great utility to her in maintaining the Succession
and Vicissitude of her Works? And that in this universal Republic it conduces
more to truth and augmentation, than to loss or ruin. -- sic rerum summa
novatur, Lecret. l. 2.

Mill animus una necata dedit.
The failing of one Life, is the passage to a thousand other Lives: Nature has
imprinted in Beasts the care of themselves, and of their conservation. Nay,
they proceed so far, as to be timorous of being worse* of hitting or hurting
themselves, and of our hal^ering and beating them; accidents which are subject
to their sense and experience; Beasts naturally sollicitous of their
preservation.
but that we should kill them they cannot fear, nor have not the faculty to
imagine and conclude such a thing as Death* Yet it is said, that we see them,
not only cheerfully undergo it, Horses for the most part neighing, and Swans
singing when they dye; but moreover seek it at need: of which Elephants have
given many Examples. But besides all this, is not the way of arguing which
Socrates here makes use of, equally admirable, both in simplicity and
vehemence? Really, it is much more easy to speak like Aristotle, and to live
like Caesar, than to speak and live as Socrates did. There lies the extreme
degree of perfection and difficulty: Art cannot reach it. Now our Faculties are
not so trained up. We do not try, we do not know them, we invest our selves
with those of others, and let our own lie idle. As some one may say of me, that
I have here only made a Nosegay of culled Flowers, and have brought nothing of
my own but the thread that ties them. In earnest, I have so far yielded to the
public Opinion, that those borrowed Ornaments do accompany me, but I do not
think that they totally cover and hide me; that is quite contrary to my design,
who desire to make a show of nothing but what is my own, and what is my own by
Nature: and had I taken my own advice, I had at all adventures spoken purely
alone. I daily more and more load my self every day beyond my purpose and first
Method, upon the account of Idleness, and the humor of the Age. If it
misbecome me, as I believe it does, it is no matter, it may be of use to some
other. Such there are, who quote Plato and Homer, who never saw either of them:
and I also have taken out of places far enough distant from their Source.
Without pains and without Learning, having a thousand Volumes about me in the
place where I write, I can presently borrow, if I please, from a dozen such
Scrap-gatherers as I am, Authors that I do not much trouble my self withal,
wherewith to embellish this Treatise of Physiognomy. There needs no more, but a
praeliminary Epistle of the German cut, to stuff me with proofs, and we by that
means go a begging for a fading Glory, and a cheating the sottish World. These
Rhapsodies of Common Places, wherewith so many furnish their Studies, are of
little use but to common Subjects, and serve but to show, and not to direct us:
a ridiculous fruit of Learning, that Socrates does so pleasantly canvase
against Euthidemus. I have seen Books made of things that were never either
studied or understood; the Author committing to several of his learned Friends
the examination of this and the other matter to compile it; contenting himself
for his share to have projected the Design, and by his industry to have tied
together this Faggot of unknown Provisions; the Ink and Paper at least are his.
This is to buy or borrow a Book, and not to make one; it is to show men, not
that a man can make a Book, but that, whereof they may be in doubt, that he
cannot make one. A President in my hearing boasted, that he had clutter'd two
hundred and odd common places in one of his Judgments; in telling which, he
deprived himself of the Glory that had been attributed to him. In my Opinion, a
pusillanimous and absurd Vanity for such a Subject, and such a Person. I do
quite contrary; and amongst so many borrowed things, am glad if I can steal
one, disguising and altering it for some new service, at the hazard of having
it said, that it is for want of understanding its natural use. I give it some
particular address of my own hand, to the end it may not be so absolutely
strange. These set their thefts to show, and value themselves upon them. And
also they have more credit with the Laws than with me. We Naturalists think
that there is a great and incomparable preference in the honor of Invention,
to that of Quotation. If I would have spoke by Learning, I had spoke sooner, I
had writ in a time nearer to my Studies, when I had more Wit and better Memory;
and would sooner have trusted to the vigor of that Age than this, would I have
professed Writing. And what if this gracious Favor which Fortune has lately
offered me upon the account of this work, had befallen me in such a time of my
Life, instead of this, wherein it is equally desirable to possess, and ready to
lose? Two of my Acquaintance, great men in this faculty, have, in my Opinion,
lost half, in refusing to publish at forty years old, that they might stay till
threescore. Maturity has its defects as well as verdure, and worse; Old Age
unfit for the writing of Books.
and old age is as unfit for this kind of business as any other. Who commits
his Decrepitude to the Press, plays the fool if he think to squeeze any thing
out thence that does not relish of Dotage and Stupidity. Our Wits grow costive
and thick in growing old. I deliver my Ignorance in pomp and state, and my
Learning meagerly and poorly; this accidentally and accessorily, that
principally and expressly; and write purposely of nothing, but nothing, nor of
any Science but that of Inscience. I have chosen a time, when my Life, which I
am to give an account of, lies wholly before me; what remains holds more of
Death. And of my death only, should I find it a prating death as others do, I
would moreover give an account at my departure, Socrates a deformed Fellow.
Socrates was a perfect Exemplar in all great Qualities, and I am vexed that he
had so deformed a Body as is said, and so unsuitable to the Beauty of his Soul,
himself being so amorous, and such an admirer of Beauty. Nature surely did him
wrong. There is nothing more likely than a conformity and relation of the Body
to the Soul. Cic. Thus. lib. 1.
Ipsi animi magni refert quali in corpore locati sint: multi enim e corpore
ex^stunt, quae acuunt montem: multa quae obtundant. It is of great consequence
in what Bodies Souls are placed, for many things spring from the Body that
sharpen the Mind, and many that blunt and dull it. This speaks of an unnatural
ugliness and deformity of Limbs: but we call that ill-favour'dness also, an
unseemliness at first sight, which is principally lodged in the Face, and
distasts us by the Complexion, a Spot, a rude Countenance, sometimes from some
inexplicable cause, in members nevertheless of good simmetry and perfect. The
Deformity that clothed a very beautiful Soul in Boetia was of this Predicament.
That superficial ugliness, which nevertheless is always the most imperious, is
of least prejudice to the state of the Mind, and of little certainty in the
Opinion of men. The other, which by a more proper name, is called a more
substantial Deformity, strikes deeper in. Not every Shoe of smooth sliming
Leather, but every Shoe neatly made, shows the interior shape of the Foot. As
Socrates said of his, that it accused just so much in his Soul, had he not
corrected it by institution; but in saying so, I believe he did but scoff, as
his Custom was, and never so excellent a Soul made it self. What Beauty is, and
how much to be esteemed.
I cannot often enough repeat how great an esteem I have for Beauty, that potent
and advantageous Quality. He called it a short Tyranny, and Plato, the
Privilege of Nature. We have nothing that excells it in Reputation; it has the
first place in the commerce of men; it presents it self to meet (...), seduces
and prepossesses our Judgments with great Authority and wonderful Impression
Phr^ne had lost her Cause in the hands of an excellent Advocate* if opening her
Robe, she had not corrupted her Judges by the luster of her Beauty. And I find
that Cyrus, Alexan^nder, and Caesar, the three Masters of the World, never
neglected Beauty in their greatest Affairs, no more did the first Scipio. The
same word in Greek signifies both fair and good, and the Holy Ghost often calls
those good, whom he means fair. I should willingly maintain the priority in
things called goods, according to the Song, which Plato calls an idle thing,
taken out of some of the ancient Poets, of Health, Beauty, and Riches.
Aristotle says, Beautiful Persons fit to command.
that the right of Command appertains to the beautiful* and when there is a
Person whose Beauty comes near the Images of the Gods, that then Veneration is
likewise due. To him who asked him why People ofter and longer frequented the
company of handsome Persons? That Question, said he, is not to be asked by any,
but one that is blind. The most, and the greate^^ Philosophers, paid for their
schooling, and acquired Wisdom by the Favor and Mediatio^ Beauty. Not only in
the men that serve me, but also in the Beasts, I consider them within two
fingers breadth of Goodness. And yet I fancy that those Features and Moulds of
a Face, and those Lineaments by which men guess at our internal Complexions,
and our Fortunes to come, is a thing that does not very directly and simply lie
under the Chapter of Beauty and Deformity, no more than every good odor and
serenity of Air promises Health, nor all fogg and stink, Infection, and a time
of Pestilence. Such as accuse Ladies of contradicting their Beauty by their
Manners, do not always hit right; for in a Face which is none of the best,
there may lie some air of probity and trust: as on the contrary, I have seen
betwixt two beautiful Eyes, menaces of a dangerous and malignant Nature. There
are some Physiognomies that are favorable, so that in a crowd of victorious
Enemies, you shall presently choose, amongst men you never saw before, one
rather than another, to whom to surrender, and with whom to entrust your Life,
and yet not properly upon the Consideration of Beauty. A man's look is but a
feeble warranty, and yet it is something considerable too. And if I were to
lash them, I would most severely scourge the wicked ones, who belie and betray
the promises that Nature has planted in their Foreheads. I should with great
Severity punish Malice in a mild and gentle Aspect. It seems as if there were
some happy and some unhappy Faces; and I believe there is some Art in
distinguishing affable from simple Faces, severe from rude, malicious from
pensive, scornful from melancholic, and such other bordering Qualities. There
are Beauties which are not only fair, but sour; and others* that are not only
sweet, but more than that, faint. To prognosticate future adventures, is a
thing that I shall leave undecided. I have, as to my own concern, as I have
said elsewhere, simply and nakedly embraced this ancient Rule, That we cannot
fail in following Nature; and that the sovereign Precept is to conform our
selves to her. I have not, as Socrates did, corrected my natural Complexions by
the force of Reason, and have not in the least molested Inclination by Art. I
have let my self go as I came; I contend not. My two principal parts live of
their own accord in Peace and good Intelligence, but my Nurses Milk, thanks be
to God, was tollerably wholesome and good. Let me say this by the way, that I
see a certain Image of scolastick Honesty, almost only in use amongst us, in
greater esteem than it is really worth; a slave to Precepts, and fettered with
hope and fear. I would have it such, as that Laws and Religions should not
make, but perfect and authorize it, that finds it has wherewithal to support
it self without help, born and rooted in us from the seed of universal Reason,
and imprinted in every man by Nature. That Reason which rectified Socrates from
his vicious bent, renders him obedient to Gods, and Men of Authority in his
City; courageous in Death, not because his Soul is immortal, but because he is
mortal. It Is a Doctrine ruinous to all Government, and much more hurtful than
ingenious and subtle, which persuades the People, that a religious belief is
alone sufficient, and without manners, to satisfy the Divine Justice. Usance
demonstrates to us a vast distinction betwixt Devotion and Conscience* I have a
tolerable aspect, both in Form and Interpretation* Terence, Heaut. Act. 1.
Scen. 1.
Quid d^xi habere m^? Iuro habui Chreme.
Heu! tantum attriti corporis ossa vid^s*
Have, did I say? No, Chremes, I had on^^,
Of a worn Body thou but see the Bones.
and that makes a quite contrary show to that of Socrates. It has often befallen
me, that upon the mere credit of my presence, and the air of my face, Persons
who had no manner of knowledge of me, have put a very great confidence in me,
whether in their own affairs or mine; And I have in foreign Parts obtained
favors both singular and rare; but amongst the rest, these two Examples are
peradventure worth particular relation: A certain Person, deliberated to
surprise my House, and me in it; his Artifice was to come to my Gates alone,
and to be importunate to be let in; I knew him by name, and had reason to
repose a confidence in him, as being my neighbor, and something related to me,
I ^aus'd the Gates to be opened to him, as I do to every one, where I found his
Horse panting, and all on a foa^^. He presently popt me in the mouth with this
Flim-flam, "That about half a League off he had unluckily met with a certain
enemy of his, whom I also knew, and had heard of their quarrel; that this enemy
had given him a very brisk chase, and that having been surpised in disorder,
and his Party being too weak, he was fled to my Gates for refuge: And that he
was in great trouble for his followers, whom, he said, he concluded to be all
either dead or taken. I innocently did my best to comfort, assure, and refresh
him. Presently after, comes four or five of his Soldiers, that presented
themselves in the same countenance and affright, to get in too, and after them
more, and still more, very well mounted and armed, to the number of five and
twenty, or thirty, pretending that they had the Enemy at their heels. This
mystery began a little to awake my suspi^ion. I was not ignorant what an Age I
lived in, how much my House might be envied, and I had several examples of
others of my Acquaintance who had miscarried after that manner. So it was, that
knowing there was nothing to be got in having begun to do a courtesy, unless I
went through with it, and I could not disengage my self from them without
spoiling all; I let my self go the most natural and simple way, as I always
do, and invited them all to come in. And in truth, I am naturally very little
inclined to suspicion and distrust. I willingly incline toward excuse, and the
gentlest interpretation. I take men according to the common order, and no more
believe those perverse and unnatural inclinations, unless convinced by manifest
evidence, than I do Monsters and Miracles; and am moreover a man who willingly
commit my self to Fortune, and throw my self headlong into her arms, and have
hitherto found more reason to applaud, than to condemn my self for so doing;
having ever found her more sollicitious of, and more a friend to my affairs,
than I am my self. There are some actions in my Life, wherein the Conduct may
justly be called difficult; or, if they please, prudent. Yet of those,
supposing the third part to have been my own, doubtless the other two Thirds
were absolutely and solely hers. We are, methinks, too blame, in that we do not
enough trust Heaven with our affairs, and pretend to more from our own Conduct
than appertains to us. And therefore it is that our designs so often miscarry.
Heaven is displeased at the extent that we attribute to the right of humane
Prudence above his, and cuts it shorter, by how much the more we amplify it.
The last comers kept themselves on horseback in my Court, whilst their Leader
was with me in the Parlour, who would not have his Horse set up in the Stable,
saying, he would immediately retire, so soon as he should have news of the rest
of his men. He saw himself Master of his Enterprise, and nothing now remained
but the execution. He has since several times said, (for he was not ashamed to
tell the story himself) that my Countenance and freedom had snatched the
Treachery out of his hands. He again mounted his horse; his followers having
continually their Eyes intent upon him, to see when he would give the sign;
very much astonished to see him march away and leave his prey behind him.
Another time, relying upon I know not what Truce, newly published in the Army,
I took a Journey through a very tickle Country. I had not rid far, but I was
discovered, and two or three Parties of Horse, from several places, were sent
out to take me; one of them the third day overtook me, where I was charged by
fifteen or twenty Gentlemen in Vizors, followed at a distance by a Band of
Argoulets. Here was I surrendered, and taken, withdrawn into the thick of a
neigh'bring Forest, dismounted, sob'd, my Trunks rifled, my Cabinet taken, and
my Horses and Equipage divided amongst new Masters. We had in this Copse a very
long Contest about my Ransom, which they set so high, that it very well
appeared I was not known to them. They were moreover in a very great debate
about my Life; and in truth, there were several circumstances that threatened me
of the danger I was in. Tunc animis opus, Aenea tunc pectore firmo. Aenid. l. 6.

Then, then Aeneas, there was need
Of an undaunted hear indeed.
I still insisted upon the Truce, being willing they should only have the gain
of what they had already taken from me, which also was not be despised, without
promise of any other Ransom. After two or three hours that we had been in this
place, and that they had mounted me upon a pitiful Jade that was not likely to
run from them, and committed me to the guard of fifteen or twenty Harquebuzers,
and dispersed my Servants to others, having given order that they should carry
us away Prisoners several ways, and being already got some two or three
Musket Shot from the place, Catullus.
Jam praece Pollucis jam Castoris implor^ta;
Whilst I implored Castor and Pollux aid;
behold a sudden and unexpected alteration; I saw the Chief amongst them return
to me with gentler Language, making search amongst the Troopers for my
squandered Goods, and causing as many as could be recovered to be restored to
me, even to my Cashet; but the best present they made me was my Liberty, for
the rest did not much concern me in those days. The true cause of so sudden a
change, and of this more mature deliberation, without any apparent impulse, and
of so miraculous a repentance, in such a time, in a complotted and deliberated
Enterprise, and become just by usance, (for at the first dash I plainly
confessed to them of what Party I was, and whither I was going) in earnest, I
do not yet rightly apprehend. The most eminent amongst them, who pulled off his
Vizor, and told me his name, then several times told me over and over again,
that I was obliged for my deliverance to my Countenance, and the liberty and
boldness of my Speech, that rendered me unworthy of such a misadventure, and
demanded assurance from me of the like courtesy. It Is like that the Divine
bounty would make use of this vain Instrument for my preservation, and moreover
defended me the next day from other and worse Ambushes, which even these had
given me warning of. The last of these two Gentlemen is yet living, to give an
account of the story; the first was killed not long ago. If my Face did not
answer for me, if men did not read in my Eyes, and in my Voice, the innocence
of my Intention, I had not lived so long without quarrels, and without giving
offense, with the indiscreet liberty I take, right or wrong to say whatever
comes at my Tongues end, and to judge so rashly of things. This way may with
reason appear uncivil, and ill adapted to our way of Conversation, but I have
never met with any who have judged it outrageous or malicious, or that took
offense at my liberty, if he had it from my own mouth. Repeated words have
another kind of sound and sense: neither do I hate any Person whatever, and am
so slow to offend, that I cannot do it, even upon the account of Reason it
self. And when occasion has invited me to sentence Criminals, I have rather
chose to fail in point of Justice than to do it. Vt magis peccari nolim, quam
satis animi ad vindicand^ peccata habeam. So that I had rather men should not
offend* than that I should have the heart to condemn them, Aristotle, it is
said, was reproached for having been too merciful to a wicked man: Aristotle
reproached for being merciful.
I was indeed, said he, merciful to the man, but not to his wickedness.
Ordinary Judgments exasperate themselves to Punishment by the horror of the
Fact. Even this cools mine. The horror of the first Murder makes me fear a
second, and the deformity of the first Cruelty makes me abhor all imitation of
it. That may be applied to me, who am but a Knave of Clubs, which was said of
Charillus King of Sparta, he cannot be good, being he is not evil to the
wicked. Or thus; for Plutarch delivers it both these ways, as he does a
thousand other things, variously, and contrary to one another; He must needs be
good, because he is so even to the wicked. Even as in lawful actions I do not
care to employ my self, when for such as are displeased at it; so, to say the
truth, in unlawful things, I do not make conscience enough of employing my
self, when for such as are willing.

CHAP. XIII. Of Experience.
THere is no desire more natural than that of Knowledge. We try all ways that
can lead us to it; where Reason is wanting, we therein employ Experience, Per
varios usus artem experientia fecit: Manil.

Exemplo monstrante viam.
By several proofs Experience Art has made:
Example being guide.
which is a means much more weak and cheap. But Truth is so great a thing, that
we ought not to disdain any Mediation that will guide us to it. Reason has so
many forms, that we know not to which to take; Experience has no fewer. The
Consequence we will draw from the conference of Events is unsure, by reason
they are always unlike. There is no quality so universal in this Image of
things, as diversity* and variety. Both the Greeks, the Latins, and we, for the
most express Example of similitude, have pitched upon that of Eggs. And yet
there have been men, particularly one at Delphos, who could distinguish marks
of difference amongst Eggs so well, that he never mistook one for another: And,
having many Hens, could tell which had laid it. Dissimilitude intrudes it self
of it self in our works; no Art can arrive at a perfect Similitude. Neither
Perozet, nor any other Card-maker, can so carefully polish and blanch the backs
of his Cards, that some Gamesters will not distinguish them by seeing them only
shuffled by another. Resemblance does not so much make one, as difference makes
another. Nature has obliged her self to make nothing other that was not unlike.
And yet I am not much pleased with his Opinion, who thought by the multitude of
Laws to curb the Authority of Judges, in cutting them out the Cantels. He was
not aware that there is as much liberty and stretch in the Interpretation of
Laws, as in their fashion; and they but fool themselves, who think to lessen
and stop our debates, by summoning us to the express words of the Bible:
Forasmuch as humane Wit does not find the Field less spacious wherein to
controvert the sense of mother, than to deliver his own* and, as if there were
less animosity and tartness in glossing than Invention. We see how much he was
deceived; for we have more Laws i^ France, than in all the rest of the World
besides; and more than would be necessary for the Government of all the Worlds
of Epicurus* Vt olim Flagitiis* Tacitus.
sic nunc Legibus laboramus* so that as formerly we were sick of Wickedness, we
are now sick of the Laws: and yet we have left so much to the debate and
decision of our Judges, that there never was so full and uncontrolled a
Liberty. What have our Legislators got by culling out a hundred thousand
particular Cases, and for those, by having added a hundred thousand Laws? This
number holds no manner of proportion with the infinite diversity of humane
Actions; the multiplication of our Inventions will never arrive at the variety
of Example^. Add to them a hundred times as many more, it will not nevertheless
ever happen, that of events to come, there shall any one fall out, that in this
great number of millions of events so chosen and recorded, shall jump with any
one, to which it can be so exactly coupled and compared, that there will not
remain some Circumstances and Diversity which will require a variety of
Judgment. There is little relation betwixt our Actions that are in perpetual
mutation, and fixed and immobile Laws; the most to be desired, are those that
are the most rare, the most simple and general: and I am further of Opinion,
that we were better to have none at all, than to have them in so prodigious
number as we have. Nature always gives them better, and more pure than those
are we make our selves; witness the Picture of the Golden-Age, and the s^^ate
wherein we see Nations live, who have no other. Some there are, Passengers made
use of for Judges.
who for their only Judge, takes the first passer by that travels along their
Mountains, to determine their Cause: And others, who, on their Market day,
choose out some one amongst them upon the place, to decide all their
Controversies. What danger would there be, that the wisest should so determine
ours, according to occurrences, and by sight, without obligation of Example and
Consequence? Every Shoe to his own Foot. King Ferdinand sent Colonies to the
Indies, and wisely provided that they should not carry along with them any
Students of the Long-Robe, for fear lest Suits should get footing in that new
World; as being a Science in its own Nature, the Mother of altercation and
decision; judging with Plato, that Lawyers and Physicians are the Pests of a
Country. Whence does it come to pass that our common Languages, so easy for
all other uses, become obscure, and are intelligible in Wills and Contracts?
And that he who so clearly expresses himself; whatever he speaks or writes,
cannot find in this any way of declaring himself that does not fall into doubt
and contradiction? If it be not that these Princes of that Art, applying
themselves with a peculiar attention to invent and cull out hard words, and
contrive artificial Clauses, have so weighed every Syllable, and so thoroughly
sifted every sort of quirk, that they are now confounded and entangled in the
infinity of Figures, and so many minute Divisions, that they can no more fall
into any Rule or prescription, nor any certain intelligence. Confusum est
quidquid usque in pulvere in sectum est. Whatever is beaten into Powder is
confused. As you have Children trying to bring a mass of Quicksilver to a
certain number of parts, the more they press and work it, and endeavor to
reduce it to their own will, the more they irritate the liberty of this
generous Metal; it mocks and evades their endeavor, and sparkles it self into
so many separate Bodies, as frustrates all account: so is it here, for in
subdividing these subtilties, we teach men to increase their doubts, they pull
us into a way of stretching and diversifying difficulties, they lengthen and
disperse them. In sowing and retailing of Questions, they make the World to
fructify and increase in uncertainties and disputes. As the Earth is made
fertile by being crumbled and husbanded deep. Difficultatem facit Doctrina;
Doctrine begets Difficulty. We doubted of Vlpian, and are now more perplexed
with Bartolus and Baldus. We should put out the trace of this innumerable
diversity of Opinions, not adorn our selves with it, and fill Posterity with
Crotchets. I know not what to say to it, but Experience makes it manifest, that
so many interpretations dissipate Truth, and break it. Aristotle writ to be
understood, which if he could not be, much less will another that is not so
good at it; and a third than he, who expressed his own Thoughts. We open the
matter, and spill it in pouring out. Of one Subject we make a thousand, and in
multiplying and subdividing them, fall again into the infinity of Atoms of
Epicurus. Never did two men make the same Judgment of the same thing; and it is
impossible to find two Opinions exactly alike, not only in several men, but in
the same men, at diverse hours. I often find matter of doubt, of things which the
Commentary disdains to take notice of. I am most apt to stumble in an even
Country, like some Horses that I have known, who make most trips in the
smoothest way. Who will not say that Glosses augment Doubts and Ignorance,
since there is no one Book to be found, either Humane or Divine, which the World
busies it self about the Difficulties of, which are cleared by Interpretation.
The hundredth Commentator still referrs you to the next, more knotty and
perplexed than he. When were we ever agreed amongst our selves, that a Book had
enough, and that there was now no more to be said? This is most apparent in the
Law. We give the Authority of Law to infinite Doctors, infinite Arrests, and as
many Interpretations; Yet do we find any end of the need of interpreting? Is
there for all that, any progress or advancement toward Peace; or do we stand
in need of any fewer Advocates and Judges, than when this great Mass of Law was
yet in its first Infancy? We on the contrary darken and bury all Intelligence.
We can no more discover it, but at the mercy of so many fences and barriers.
Men do not know the natural Disease of the Mind, it does nothing but ferret and
enquire, and is eternally wheeling, juggling, and perplexing it self; and like
Silkworms, suffocates it self with its own Web. Mus in pice. A Mouse in a
pitch Barrel. It thinks it discovers at a great distance I know not what glimps
of light and imaginary Truth; but whilst running to it so many Difficulties,
Hindrances* and new Inquisitions, crosses its way, that it loses its way, and
is made drunk with the motion. Not much unlike Aesops Dogs, that seeing
something like a dead Body floating in the Sea, and not being able to approach
it, attempted to drink the Water, to lay the passage dry, and so drowned
themselves. To which, what one Crates said of the Writings of Heraclitus, falls
pat enough, that they required a Reader who could swim well, that the depth and
weight of his Doctrine might not overwhelm and choke him. It Is nothing but
particular weakness that makes us content our selves with what others, or our
selves have found out in this choice of Knowledge; one of better understanding
would not rest so content, there is always room for one to succeed, nay even
for our selves, and every where else throughout; there is no end of our
Inquisitions, our end is in the other World. It Is a sign either that Wit is
grown shorter sighted when it is satisfied, or that it is grown weary. No
generous Mind can stop in it self, it will still pretend further, and beyond
its power; it has Sallies beyond its Effects. If it do not advance and press
forward, and retire, rush, turn and wheel about, it is but spritely by halves;
its pursuits are without Bound or Method, its aliment is Admiration, ambiguity
the Chase; which Apollo sufficiently declared, in always speaking to us in a
double, obscure, and oblique Sense; not feeding, but amusing and puzling us.
It Is an irregular and perpetual motion, without Example, and without Aim. His
Inventions heat, pursue, and interproduce one another. Ainsi voit on en
unraisseau coulant
Sans fin l'une eau, apres l'autre roulant,
Et tout de rang, d'un eternel conduict,
L'une suit l'autre, and l'une autre fuit.
Par cette-cy, celle-la est poussee,
Et cette-cy par l'autre est devancee:
Tousiours l'eau va dans l'eau and tousiours est-ce
Mesme ruisseau, and tousiours eau diverse.
So in a running stream one Wave we see
After another roll incessantly,
And as they glide, each does successively
Pursue the other, each the other fly:
By this that is ever-more pushed on, and this
By that continually preceded is:
The Water still does into Water swill,
Still the same Brook, but different Water still.
There is more ado to interpret Interpretations than Things, and more Books
upon Books, than upon all other Subjects; we do dothing but comment upon one
another. Every place says, with Commentaries of Authors there is great
scarcity. Is it not the principal and most reputed knowledge of our Ages to
understand the Learned? Is it not the common and almost end of all Studies? Our
Opinions are grafted upon one another; the first serves for a stock to the
second, the second to the third, and so forth. Thus step by step we climb the
Ladder. From whence it come to pass, that he which is mounted highest has often
more Honor than Merit; for he is got up but a grain upon the shoulders of the
last but one. How often, and peradventure how foolishly, have I stretched my
Book, to make it speak of it self; foolishly, if for no other reason but this;
that I ought to call to mind what I say of others who do the same. These
frequent amorous glances that they so often cast upon their works, witness that
their Hearts pant with self love, and that even the disdainful Severity
wherewith they lash and scourge them, are no other than the wanton
Dissimulations of a nataral kindness: According to Aristotle, whose valuing and
undervaluing himself, often spring from the same air of Arrogance; I urge for my
excuse, that I ought in this to have more liberty than others, forasmuch as I
write of my self, and of my Writings, very near as I do of my other Actions;
and let my Theme return upon my self, I know not whether or no every one else
will take it. I have observed in Germany, that Luther has left as many
Divisions and Disputes about the doubt of his Opinions, and more than he
himself has raised upon the Holy Scriptures. Our contest is verbal. I demand
what Nature is, what Pleasure, Circle and Substitution are. The Question is
about words, and is answered accordingly. A Stone is a Body, but if a man
should further urge, and what is a Body? Substance; and what is Substance, and
so on, he would drive the respondent to the end of his Cal^pin. We exchange one
word for another, and often times for one less understood. I better know what man
is, than I know what animal is, or mortal, or rational. To satisfy one doubt,
they pop (...) in the mouth with three; it is the Hydra's head. Socrates asked
Memnon what Virtue was; There is, says Memnon, the Virtue of a Man* and of a
Woman, of a Magistrate, and of a private Person, of an old Man, and of a Child;
very well, cried Socrates, we were in quest of our Virtue, and thou have
brought us a whole swarm. He put out one question, and thou returnest us a
whole Hive. As no Event, nor no Face entirely resembles another, so do they not
entirely differ. An ingenious mixture of Nature. If our Faces were not alike,
we could not distinguish man from Beast; if they were not unlike, we could not
distinguish one man from another. All things hold by some Similitude, all
Example halts. And the relation which is drawn from Experience is always faulty
and imperfect; comparisons are always coupled at one end or other. So do the
Laws serve and are fitted to every one of our Affairs, by some wrested, bias'd
and forced Interpretation. Since the Ethick Laws that concern the particular
Duty of every one in himself, are so hard to be taught and observed, as we see
they are; it is no wonder if those who govern so many particulars, is much more.
Do but consider the form of this Justice that governs us, it is a true Testimony
of humane weakness, so full it is of Error and Contradiction. What we find to
be Favor and Severity in Justice, and we find so much of them both, that I
know not whether the mean is so often met with, are sick parts, and unequal
Members of the very Body, and offense of Justice. The Country People run to
bring me News in great haste, that they just left in a Forest of mine, a man
with a hundred Wounds upon him, who was yet breathing, and begged of them Water
for pitty's sake, and help to carry him to some place of relief; saying, they
durst not come near him, but run away, lest the Officers of Justice should
catch them there; and as it falls out with those who are found near a murdered
Person, they should be called in question about this accident to their utter
ruin, having neither Money nor Friends to defend their Innocence. What should
I have said to these People? It Is certain that this Office of humanity would
have brought them into trouble. How many Innocents have we known that have been
punished without the Judges fault, and how many that have not arrived at our
knowledge? This hapen'd in my time. Certain men were condemned to die for a
murder committed, their Sentence if not pronounced, at least determined and
concluded on. The Judges just in the nick, are advertised by the Officers of an
inferior Court hard by, that they have some men in Custody, who have directly
confessed the said Murder, and make an undubitable discovery of all the
particulars of the Fact. 'Twas then notwithstanding put to the question,
whether or no they ought to suspend Execution of the Sentence already past upon
the first accused. They considered the novelty of the Example, and the
consequence of reversing Judgments, that the Sentence of Death was duly passed,
and the Judges acquit of repentance: To conclude, these poor Devils were
sacrifis'd to the forms of Justice. Philip, or some other, provided against a
like Inconvenience, after this manner. He had condemned a man in a great fine
toward another, by a determinate Judgment. The truth some time after being
discovered, he found that he had passed an unjust Sentence; on one side was the
Reason of the Cause, on the other side the Reason of the Judiciary Forms. He in
some sort satisfied both, leaving the Sentence in the state it was, and out of
his own Purse recompencing the interest of the condemned party. But he had to
do in a repairable affair, mine were irreparably hanged. How many Sentences
have I seen more criminal than the Crimes themselves? All which makes me
remember the ancient Opinions, That there is a necessity a man must do wrong by
retail, who will do right in gross; and injustice in little things, that will
come to do Justice in great: that humane justice is formed after the model of
Physic, according to which, all that is utile, is also just and honest; and of
what is held by the Stoics, That Nature her self proceeds contrary to Justice
in most of her works; and of what is received by the Cyrennicks, that there is
nothing just of it self, but that Customs and Laws make Justice: And what the
Theodorians hold, that maintain Theft, Sacrilege, and all sorts of Uncleanness
just in a wise man, if he knows them to be profitable to him: there is no
Remedy. I am in the same case that Alcibiades was, that I will never, if I can
help it, put my self into the hands of a man who shall determine of my Head,
where my Life and Honor shall more depend upon the care and diligence of my
Attorney, than my own innocence. I would venture my self with such a Justice as
would take notice of my good Deeds as well as my ill, and where I had as much
to hope as to fear Indemnity is not sufficient pay to a man who does better
than not to do amiss; but our Justice presents us but one hand, and that the
left hand too; let him be who he will, he shall be sure to go off with less. In
China, of which Kingdom the Governments and Arts, without commerce with, or
knowledge of ours, surpasses our best Examples, in several parts of Excellence;
and of which, the History gives me to understand, how much greater and more
various the World is, than either the Ancients or We have been able to
penetrate. The Officers deputed by the Prince to visit the state of his
Provinces, as they punish those who behave themselves ill in their Places, so
do they liberally reward those who have carried themselves above the common
sort, and beyond the necessity of their Duty; they there present themselves,
not only to be approved but to get, nor simply to be paid but to be presented.
No Judge, thanks be to God, has ever yet spoke to me in the quality of a Judge,
upon any account whatever, whether my own, or that of another, whether Criminal
or Civil; nor no Prison has ever received me, so much as upon the account of
entering in to see it. Imagination renders the very outside of a Goal formidable
to me: I am so enamored of Liberty, that should I be interdicted the remotest
corner of the Indies, I should live a little more uneasy. And whilst I can
find either Earth or Air open in any part of the World, I shall never lurk any
where, where I must hide my self. Good God! how ill should I endure the
condition wherein I see so many People, nailed to a corner of the Kingdom,
deprived of the privilege of entering into the principal Cities and Courts, and
the liberty of the public Roads, for having quarreled with our Laws. If those
under which I live, should but wag a finger at me by way of menace, I would
immediately go seek out others, let them be where they would; all my little
Prudence in the Civil War wherein we are now engaged, is employed, that they
may not hinder my liberty of riding from place to place. Now the Laws keep up
their credit, not for being just, but because they are Laws: It is the mystical
foundation of their Authority, and they have no other; and it is well it is so,
for they are often made by Fools; for the most part, by men that out of hatred to
equality, go less in equity; but always by men who are vain and irresolute
Authors. There is nothing so much, nor so grossly, nor so ordinarily faulty, as
the Laws. Whoever obeys them because they are just, does not justly obey them
as he ought. Our French Laws, by their irregularity and deformity, do in some
sort lend a helping hand to disorder and corruption, as is manifest in their
Dispensation and Execution. The Command is so perplexed and inconstant, that it
in some sort excuses both Disobedience, and the Vice of the interpretation, the
administration, and the observation of it. What fruit then soever we may
extract from Experience, yet that however will little advantage our
Institution, which we draw from foreign Examples; if we make so little profit
of that we have of our own, which is more familiar to us, and doubtless
sufficient to instruct us in that whereof we have need. I study my self more
than any other Subject; It Is my Metaphysick, it is my Physic. Qua Deus hanc
mundi temperet art domum, Prop. lib. 3. Eleg. 3.

Qua venit exoriens, qua deficit, unde coactis
Cornibus in plenum menstrua luna redit:
Vnde salo superant venti, quid flamine captet
Eurus, and in nubes unde perennis aqua.
Sit ventura dies mundi quae subruat arces: Lucan. lib. 1.

Quaerite, quos agitat mundi labor.
By what means God the Universe does sway,
Or how the pale-faced Sister of the day,
When in increasing, can her horns unite,
Till they contract into a full orb'd light.
Why Winds do of the Sea the better get,
Why Eurus blows, and Clouds are always wet;
What day the Worlds great Fabric must overthrow,
Let them inquire would the Worlds secrets know.
In this University, I suffer my self to be ignorantly and negligently lead by
the general Law of the World. I shall know it well enough when I feel it; my
Learning cannot make it alter its course; it will not change it self for me,
it is folly to hope it; and a greater folly to concern a man's self about it,
seeing it is necessarily alike, public and common. The bounty and capacity of
the Governor ought absolutely to discharge us of all care of the Government.
Philosophical Inquisitions and Contemplations serve for no other use but to
increase our Curiosity. Philosophers, with great reason, send us back to the
Rules of Nature; but they have nothing to do with so sublime a Knowledge; they
falsify them, and present us her face painted with too high and too adulterate
a Complexion, from whence spring so many different pictures of so uniform a
Subject; as she has given us feet to walk withal, so has she given us Prudence
to guide us in Life: not such an ingenious, robust, and majestic Prudence as
that of their Invention; but yet one that is easy, quiet, and salutiferous;
and that very well performs what the other promises, in him who has the good
luck to know how to employ it sincerely and regularly, that is to say,
according to Nature. The most simply to commit a man's self to Nature, is to do
it the most wisely. Oh, what a soft, easy, and wholesome Pillow is ignorance and
incuriosity, whereon to repose a well contrived Head! I had rather understand
my self well in my self, than in Cicero; of the Experience I have of my self, I
find enough to make me wise, if I were but a good Scholar. Whoever will call to
mind the excess of his past Anger, and to what a degree that fever transports
him, will see the deformity of this passion better than in Aristotle, and
conceive a more just hatred against it. Whoever will remember the hazards he
has run of those that threatened him, and the light occasions that have removed
him from one state to another, will by that prepare himself for future changes,
and the acknowledgment of his Condition. The Life of Caesar himself has no
greater Example for us than our own, and though popular and commanding, is
still a Life contingent to all humane Accidents. Let us but listen to it, and
we apply to our selves all whereof we have principal need. Whoever shall call
to memory how many, and how many times he has been mistaken in his own
Judgment, is he not a great fool if he does not ever after suspect it? When I
find my self convinced by the Reason of another of a false Opinion, I do not so
much learn what he has said to me that is new, and my own particular Ignorance,
that would be no great purchase, as I do in general my own debility, and the
treachery of my Understanding, from whence I extract the reformation of the
whole mass. In all my other Errors I do the same, and find from this Rule great
utility to Life, I regard not the Species and individual, as a Stone that I
have stumbled at; I learn to suspect my steps throughout, and am careful to
place them right. To learn that a man has said or done a foolish thing, is a
thing of nothing. A man must learn that he is nothing but a fool, a much more
ample and important Instruction. The false steps that my Memory has so often
made, even then when it was most secure and confident of it self, are not idly
thrown away, it may now swear to me, and assure me as much as it will, I shake
my Ears, and dare not trust it, the first opposition that is made to my
Testimony, puts me into suspense; and I durst not rely upon it in any thing of
moment, nor warrant it in another bodies concerns: and were it not that what I
do for want of Memory, others do more often for want of Faith; I should always
in matter of fact, rather choose to take truth from another mouth than my own.
If every one would pry into the effects and circumstances of the Passions that
sway him, as I have done into that which I am most subject to; he would see
them coming, and would a little break their impetuosity and career, they do not
always seize us on a sudden, there is threatening and degrees. Fluctus uti primo
caepit cum albesoere ponto,
Paulatim sese tollit mare and altius und^s Claud. vel. Lucan.

Erigit, inde imo consurgit and athera fundo.
As the Sea first begins to foam and fret,
Thence higher swells, higher, and higher yet,
Till at the last the Waves so high do rise,
As seems to bid defiance to the Skies.
Judgment holds in me a presidial seat, at least, it carefully endeavors to
make it so: it lets my Appetites take their own course, as also hatred and
friendship; nay, even that I bear to my self, without feeling alteration or
corruption. If it cannot reform the other parts according to its own model, at
least it suffers not it self to be corrupted by them, but plays its game apart.
That Advertisement to every one to know themselves, should be of important
effect, since the God of Wisdom and Light caused it to be writ on the front of
his Temple, as comprehending all he had to advise us. Plato says also, that
Prudence is no other thing but the execution of this Ordinance; and Socrates
does minutely verify the same in Xenophon. The difficulties and obscurity are
not discerned in any Science, but by those that are got into it, for a certain
degree of Intelligence is required to be able to know that a man knows not: and
we must thrust against a Door to know whether it be bolted against us or no.
From whence this Platonic subtilty springs, that neither they who know are to
inquire, forasmuch as they know, nor they who do not know, for as much as to
inquire they must know what they inquire of. So in this of knowing a man's
self, that every man is seen so resolved and satisfied with himself, and that
every man thinks himself sufficiently intelligent, signifies, that every one
understands nothing at all; as Socrates gives Euthydamus to understand. I, who
profess nothing else, do therein find so infinite a depth and variety, that all
the fruit I have reaped from my Learning, serves only to make me sensible how
much I have to learn. To my weakness, so often confessed, I owe the propension
I have to modesty, to the obedience of belief imposed upon me, to a constant
coldness and moderation of Opinions, and a hatred of that troublesome and
wrangling arrogance, wholly believing and trusting in it self, the capital
Enemy of Discipline and Truth. Do but hear them prate and domineer, the first
fopperies they utter, it is in the style wherewith men establish Religions and
Laws. Cicero, Acad. l. 1.
Nihil est turpius quam cognitioni, and perceptioni, assertionem,
approbationemque precurrere. Nothing is more absurd, than that Assertion and
Allowance should preceed Knowledge and Precept. Aristarchus said, that
anciently there were seven Sages to be found in the World, and in his time
scarce so many Fools. Have not we more reason than he to say so in this Age of
ours. Affirmation and Obstinacy are express signs of want of Wit. A fellow has
stumbled and broke his Nose a hundred times in a day, and yet he will be at his
Ergo's as resolute and brave as before; so that one would conclude he had had
some new Soul and vigor of Understanding infused into him since; and that it
happened to him, as to that ancient Son of the Earth, who took new Resolutions,
and was made more daring by his fall. -- cui cum tetigere parentem Ovid Metam.

Jam defecta vigent renovato robore membra.
Whose broken Limbs upon his Mother laid,
Immediately new force and vigor had.
Does not this incorrigible Coxcomb think that he reassumes a new understanding
by undertaking a new dispute? It Is by my own experience that I accuse humane
ignorance, which is, in my Opinion, the surest part of the Worlds School. Such
as will not conclude it so in themselves, by so vain an Example as mine, or
their own, let them believe it from Socrates, the Master of Masters. For the
Philosopher Antisthenes to his Disciples, Let us go, said he, and hear
Socrates, I will be a Pupil with you. And maintaining this Doctrine of the
Stoical Sect, That Virtue was sufficient to make a Life completely happy,
having no need of any other thing whatever, he added, If not of the form of
Socrates. The long attention that I employ in considering my self, does also
fit me to judge tollerably of others; and there are few things whereof I speak
better, and with better excuse. I happen very often more exactly to see and
distinguish the conditions of my Friends, than they do themselves. I have
astonished some with the pertinence of my description, and have given them
warning of themselves. By having from my Infancy been accustomed to contemplate
my own Life in those of others, I have acquired a Complexion studious in that
particular. And when I am once intent upon it, I let few things about me,
whether Countenances, Humors, or Discourses, that serve to that purpose,
escape me. I study all, both what I am to avoid, and what I am to do. Also in
my Friends, I discover by their productions their inward inclinations; not to
order this infinite variety of so diverse and distracted Actions into certain
Genders and Chapters, and distinctly to distribute my parcels and divisions
under known heads and classes. Virg. Georg.
Sed neque quam multae species, and nomine quae sint
Est numerus.
But not the number of their kind and names,
They are too many.
The wise speak and deliver their Fancies more particularly, and handle them
piece by piece. I, who see no further into things than as usance informs me,
generally present mine without Method, and also as an Inquirer. As in this, I
pronounce my Sentence by loose and unknit Articles; it is a thing that cannot be
spoke at once, and in gross. Relation and Conformity are not to be found in
such low and common Souls as ours. Wisdom is a solid and entire building, of
which every piece keeps its place, and carries its mark. Cic. de fin. lib. 3.
Sola Sapientia in se toto conversa est. Wisdom only is wholly turned into it
self. I leave it to Artists, and I know not whether or no they will be able to
bring it about in so perplexed a thing, to marshall into distinct Bodies this
infinite diversity of Faces, to settle our Inconstancy, and set it in order. I
do not only find it hard to piece our Actions to one another, but I moreover
find it very hard properly to design them every one by themselves by any
principal quality, so ambiguous and variform they are by several lights. That
which is remarked for rare in Perseus King of Macedon, that his Mind fixing it
self to no one condition, wandered in all sorts of living, and represented
Manners so wild and uncouth, that he was neither known by himself, or any
other, what kind of man he was, seems almost to fill all the World. And
especially I have seen another of his stature, to whom I think this Conclusion
might more properly be applied; No moderate settledness, still running headlong
from one extreme to another, upon occasions not to be ghess'd at; no manner of
course without traverse and wonderful contrariety; nor no one quality simple
and unmixt; so that the best guess men can one day make, will be, that he
affected and studied to make himself known, by being not to be known. A man had
need have long Ears to hear himself frankly censured. And being there are few
that can endure to hear it without being nettled, those who hazard the
undertaking it to us, manifest a singular effect of Friendship; for it is to
love sincerely indeed, to attempt to hurt and offend us for our own good. I
think it rude to censure a man whose ill Qualities are more than his good ones.
Plato requires three things in him that will examine the Soul of another, to
wit, Knowledge, good Will, and Boldness. I was once asked where I should have
thought my self fit for, had any one designed to make use of me in my younger
Years. Aencid. l. 5.
Dum melior Vires Sanguis dabat, aemula nedum
Temporibus geminis canebat sparsa senectus.
Whilst better Blood my Limbs with Vigor fed,
And e're old Age had snow'd upon my Head.
For nothing said I. And I am willing enough to profess not knowing how to do
any thing, that I may so be excused from enslaving my self to another. But I
had told these truths to that Master of mine, and had controlled his Manners,
if he had so pleased; not in gross by scholastic Lessons, which I understand
not, and from which I see no true Reformation spring in those that do; but by
observing them by leisure, at all Opportunities, and simply and naturally
judging them as an Eye Witness, distinctly one by one; giving him to understand
upon what terms he was in the common Opinion, in opposition to his Flatterers.
There is none of us that would not be worse than Kings, if so continually
corrupted as they are with that sort of Vermin. But what if Alexander, that
great King and Philosopher, could not defend himself from them? I should have
Fidelity, Judgment, and Liberty enough for that purpose. It would be a nameless
Office otherwise, both in its Grace and Effect; and it is a part that is not
indifferently fit for all men. For Truth it self has not the Privilege to be
spoke at all times, and in all sorts, the use of it, noble as it is, has its
Circumscriptions and Limits. It often falls out, as the World now goes, that a
man lets it slip into the Ear of a Prince, not only to no purpose, but moreover
injuriously and unjustly. And no man shall make me believe that a virtuous
Remonstrance may not be viciously applied, and that the interest of the
Substance is not often to give place to that of the Form. For such a purpose, I
would have a man that is content with his own Fortune; Quod sit esse velit,
nihilque malit. Mart. Epig. lib. 10. Chap. 47.

Who likes that present state of his,
And would not be but what he is.
and meanly born; forasmuch as on one side he would not be afraid to touch his
Masters Heart to the quick, for fear by that means of losing his preferment:
and on the other side, being of mean quailty, he would have more easy
Communication with all sorts of People: and I would have this Office limited to
only one, for to allow the Privilege of this Liberty and Privacy to many,
would beget an inconvenient Irreverence; and even of that one too, I would
above all things require the Fidelity of Silence. A King is not to be believed
when he brags of his Constancy in standing the shock of the Enemy for his
Glory, if for his Profit and Amendment, he cannot stand the Liberty of a
Friends Advice, which has no other Power but to pinch his Ear, the remainder of
its effect being still in his own Hands. Now there is no Condition of Men
whatever who stand in so great need of true and free advertisement as they do.
They support the public Life, and are to satisfy the Opinion of so many
Spectators, that when men have used to conceal from them whatever should divert
them from their own way, they insensibly have found themselves involved in the
hatred and detestation of their People, Free Advice necessary for Kings.
sometimes upon so slight Occasions as they might have avoided without any
prejudice even of their Pleasures themselves, had they been advised and set
right in time. Their Favorites commonly have more regard to themselves, than
they have to their Master; and indeed it stands them upon, forasmuch as in
truth most Offices of true friendships, when applied to the Sovereign, are
under a rude and dangerous hazard; so that therein there is great need, not
only of very great Affection and Freedom, but of Courage too. To conclude all
this Hodg-podg which I scribble, here is nothing but a Register of Essays of my
own Life, which for the internal soundness is exemplary enough to take
instruction against the Hair; but as to bodily health, no man can furnish out
more profitable Experience than I, who present it pure, and no way corrupted
and changed by Art or Opinion. Experience is properly upon its own Dunghill in
the Subject of Physic, where Reason wholly gives it place. Tyberius said, that
whoever had lived twenty years, ought to be responsible to himself for all
things that were hurtful or wholesome to him, and know how to order himself
without Physic. And he might have learnt it of Socrates, who, advising his
Disciples to be sollicitous of their Health, as the chiefest study, added, that
it was hard if a man of Sense, having a care of his Exercises and Diet, did not
better know than any Physician, what was good or ill for him. And also Physic
does profess always to have Experience for the touch of its Operations. And
Plato had reason to say, that to be a right Physician, it would be necessary
that he who would take it upon him, should first himself have passed through
all the Diseases he will pretend to cure, and thorough all the Accidents and
Circumstances whereof he is to judge. It Is but Reason they should get the Pox
if they will know how to cure it; for my part, I should put my self into such
hands: for the others but guide us like him who paints the Sea-Rocks and Ports
upon his Cloth, and there makes the Figure of a Ship to sail in all security;
and put him to it in earnest, he knows not at which end to begin. They make such
a Description of our Maladies, as a Town-Crier does of a lost Horse or Dog,
such a Color, such a Height, such an Ear; but bring him to him, and he knows
him not for all that. God grant that Physic may one day give me some good and
visible relief, namely, when I shall cry out in good earnest. Hor. Car.
Tandem efficaci, do manus Scientiae. The Arts that promise to keep our Bodies
and Souls in Health, promise a great deal, but withal, there is none that less
keep their Promise. And in our times, those that make profession of these Arts
amongst us, less manifest the Effects than any other sort of men. One may say
of them at the most, that they sell Medicinal Drugs, but that they are
Physicians a man cannot say. I have lived long enough to be able to give an
account of the Custom that has carried me so far. And, for whoever has a mind
to read it, as his Taster, I give him this Essay, wherein he will find some
Articles, as my Memory shall supply me with them. I have no Custom that has not
varied according to accidents; but I only record those that I have been best
acquainted with, and that hitherto have had the greatest possession of me. My
form of Life is the same in Sickness that it is in Health, the same Bed, the
same Houses, the same Meat, and the same Drink serve me in both Conditions
alike; I add nothing to them but the moderation of more or less, according to
my Strength and Appetite. My Health is to maintain my wonted state without
disturbance. I see that sickness puts me off it on one side, and if I will be
ruled by the Physicians, they will put me off on the other; so that by Fortune
and by Art I am out of my way. I believe nothing more certainly than this, that
I cannot be offended by the usage of things to which I have been so long
accustomed. It Is for Custom to give a form to a man's Life, such as it best
pleases, she is all in all in that: It Is the Beverage of Circe that varies our
Nature as she pleases best. How many Nations, and but three steps from us,
think the fear of the serene that so manifestly is hurtful to us, a ridiculous
fancy, and our Watermen and Peasants despise it. You make a German sick if you
lay him upon a Quilt, as you do an Italian if you lay him on a Featherbed; and
a Frenchman without Curtains or Fire. A Spanish Stomach cannot hold out to eat
as we can, nor ours to drink like the Swiss. A German made me very merry at
Augusta, with disputing the inconvenience of our Hearths, by the same Arguments
which we commonly make use of in decrying their Stoves: For, to say the truth,
that smothered heat, and then the scent of that heated matter of which the Fire
is composed, very much offend such as are not used to them; not me. But as to
the rest, the Heat being always equal, constant, and universal, without flame,
without smoke, and without the wind that comes down our Chimnies, they may many
ways induce comparison with ours. Why do we not imitate the Roman Architecture?
For, they say, that anciently Fires were not made in their Houses, but on the
outside, and at the foot of them, from whence the heat was conveyed to the
whole Fabric by Pipes contrived in the Wall, which were drawn twining about
the Rooms that were to be warmed: Which I have seen plainly described somewhere
in Seneca. This Gentleman hearing me commend the Conveniences and Beauties of
his City, which truly deserves it, began to lament me that I was to go away.
And the first inconvenience he alleged to me was, the heaviness that the
Chimneys elsewhere brought upon me. He had heard some one make this Complaint,
and fixed it upon us, being by Custom deprived of the means of perceiving it at
home. All heat that comes from the Fire makes me weak and dull, and yet Evenus
said, that Fire was the best condiment of Life. I rather choose any other way of
making my self warm. We are afraid to drink our Wines when toward the bottom of
the Vessel; Palled wine in esteem in Portugal.
in Portugal those Fumes are reputed delicate, and is the Bev^rage of Princes.
In fine, every Nation has several Customs and Usances, that are not only
unknown but savage and miraculous to some others. What should we do with those
People who admit of no Testimonies, if not printed, who believe not men if not
in a Book, nor truth, if not of competent Age? We dignifie our fopperies when
we commit them to the Press. It Is of great deal more weight to him you speak
of, to say, I have seen such a thing* than if you only say, I have heard such a
thing. But I, who no more disbelieve a man's Mouth than his Pen, and who know
that men write as indiscreetly as they speak, and that esteem this Age as much
as one that is past, do as soon quote a Friend of my Acquaintance as Aulus
Gellius or Macrobius, and what I have seen, as what they have writ. And, as
it is held of Virtue, that it is not greater for having continued longer, so do
I hold of Truth, that for being older it is not wiser. I often say, that it is
mere folly that makes us run after strange and scholastic Examples; their
fertility is the same now that it was in the time of Homer and Plato. But is it
not that we derive more honor from the quotation than from the truth of the
Discourse? As if it were to borrow our proof from the Shops of Vascasan or of
Plantin, than of what is to be seen in our own Village: Or else indeed, that we
have not the wit to cull out and make useful what we see before us, and judge
of it lively enough to draw it into Example. For if we say that we want
authority to procure faith to our testimony, we speak from the purpose;
forasmuch as, in my opinion, of the most ordinary, common, and known things,
could we but find out their light, the greatest miracles of Nature might be
formed, and the most wonderful Examples, especially upon the subject of humane
actions. Now upon the Subject I am speaking of, setting aside the Examples I
have gathered from Books, and what Aristotle says of Andron the Argian, that he
traveled over the arid Sands of Lybia without drinking; a Gentleman, who has
very well behaved himself in several Employments, said, in a place where I was,
that he had rid from Madrid to Lisbon in the heat of Summer, without any Drink
at all; He is very healthful, and vigorous for his Age, and has nothing
extraordinary in the usance of his Life, but this, to live sometimes two or
three months, nay, a whole year without drinking. He is sometimes a thirst, but
he lets it pass over, and holds, it is an Appetite which easily goes off of it
self, and drinks more out of humor, than either for need or pleasure. Here is
another Example; It Is not long ago, that I found one of the Learned men in
France, among those of the greatest Fortunes, studying in a corner of a Hall
that they had separated for him with Tapestry, and about him a rabble of his
Servants, that you may be sure were rude and loud enough. He told me, and
Seneca almost says the same of himself, he made an advantage of this noise; as
if beaten with this rattle, he so much the better recollected and retired
himself into himself for Contemplation, and that this tempest of Voices
repercuss'd his thoughts within himself. Being at Padua, he had his Study so
long situated in the rattle of Coaches, and the Tumult of the public place,
that he not only formed himself to the contempt, but even to the use of noise,
for the service of his Studies. Socrates answered Alcibiades, who being
astonished at his Patience, asked him how he could endure the perpetual
scolding of his Wife, Why, said he, as those do who are accustomed to the
ordinary noise of wheels to draw Water. I am quite otherwise, I have a tender
Head, and easily discomposed, when it is bent upon any thing, the least buzzing
of a Fly tears it into pieces. Seneca, in his youth, having, by the Example of
Sextius, put on a positive resolution of eating nothing but what died of it
self, passed over a whole year in this Diet, and, as he said, with pleasure,
and only left it off, that he might not be suspected of taking up this Rule
from some new Religion, by which it was prescribed. But he took up withal,
from the Precepts of Attalus, a custom, not to lie any more upon any sort of
bedding that yielded under a man's weight, but even to his old age made use of
such as would not yield to any pressure. What the usance of his time made him
account Authority, that of ours makes us look upon as Effeminacy and Ease. Do
but observe the difference betwixt the way of living of my Laborers, and that
of mine; the Indies have nothing more remote both from my Force and Method. I
know very well, that I have picked up Boys from begging to serve me, who soon
after have quitted both my Kitchen and Livery, only that they might return to
their former course of Life: and found one afterward gathering Mussels out of
the Sink for his Dinner, whom I could neither by Entreaties nor Threats,
reclaim from the sweetness he found in Indigence. Beggars have their
Magnificences and Delights as well as the Rich; and, it is said, their Dignities
and Politics. These are the Effects of Custom, she can mould us not only into
what form she pleases, (and yet the Sages say, we ought to apply our selves to
the best, which she will soon make easy to us) but also to change and
variation, which is the most noble and most useful of all she makes us perfect
in. The best of my bodily perfection is, that I am flexible, and very little
obstinate. I have Inclinations more proper and ordinary, and more agreeable
than others; but I am diverted from them with very little ado, and easily slip
into a contrary course. A young man ought to cross his own Rules to awake his
Vigor, and to keep it from growing faint and rusty. And there is no course of
Life so weak and sottish, as that which is carried on by Rule and Discipline.
Ad primum lapidem vectari complacet, Juven. Sat. 6.
hora
Sumitur ex libro, si prurit frictus ocelli
Angulus, inspecta genesi collyria quaerit.
If he but of a mile a walk would take,
He for the hour consults his Almanac;
If he but rub the corner of his eye,
He chooses Salve by his Nativity.
He shall often throw himself even into Excesses, if he will take my advice,
otherwise the least Debauch will ruin him. He will render himself uneasy, and
disagreeable in conversation. The worst quality in a well bred man is delicacy,
and an obligation to a certain particular way: and it is particular, if not
pliable and supple. It is a kind of reproach not to be able, or not to dare to
do what we see others do before us. Let such as those sit at home. It is in
every man indecent, but in a Soldier vicious and intolerable; who, as
Philopoemenes said, ought to accustom himself to all variety and inequality of
Life. Though I have been brought up, as much as was possible, to liberty and
indifference, yet so it is, that growing old, and having more settled upon
certain forms (my Age is now past Instruction, and I have henceforward nothing
to do but to keep it up as well as I can) Custom has already, e're I was aware,
so imprinted its Character in me, in certain things, that I look upon it as a
kind of excess to leave them off. And, without a force upon my self, cannot
sleep in the daytime, nor eat between meals, nor breakfast, nor go to bed,
without a great interval betwixt eating and sleeping, as of three hours after
Supper; nor get Children but before I sleep, and never standing upon my feet,
nor endure my own Sweat, nor quench my thirst either with pure Water or Wine,
nor keep my head long bare, nor cut my hair after dinner; and should be as
uneasy without my Gloves as without my Shirt, or without washing when I rise
from Table, or out of my bed; and could not lie without a Canopy and Curtains,
as if they were necessary things: I could dine without a Table-cloth, but
without a clean Napkin, after the German fashion, very incommodiously. I foul
them more than they, or the Italians do, and make but little use either of
Spoon or Fork. I am sorry that the same is not in use amongst us, that I see
the Example of in Kings; which is, to change our Napkins at every service, as
they do our Plates. We are told of that laborious Soldier Marius, that growing
old, he became nice in his Drinking, and never drank but out of a peculiar Cup
of his own. I, in like manner, have suffered my self to fancy a certain form,
of Glasses, and do not willingly drink in common Glasses, no more than from a
common hand: All metal offends me in comparison of a clear and transparent
matter: let my eyes taste too, according to their capacity. I owe several other
such niceties to Custom. Nature has also on the other side helped me to some of
hers, as no more to be able to endure two full meals in one day without
overcharging my Stomach, nor a total abstinence from one of those meals,
without filling my self with Wind, drying up my Mouth, and dulling my Appetite,
and finding great inconvenience in the Evening Air. For of late years, in night
marches, which often happen to be all night long, after five or six hours my
Stomach begins to be queasie, with a violent pain in my Head, so that I always
vomit before the day can break. When others go to breakfast I go to sleep, and
when I rise, am as brisk and gay as before. I had always been told, that the
serene never desperst it self but in the beginning of the Night; but for
certain years past, long and familiar frequenting a Lord possessed with this
Opinion, that the serene is more sharp and dangerous about the declining of the
Sun, an hour or two before his Set, which he carefully avoids, and despises
that of the Night; he had almost imprinted in me, not only his Discourse, but
his Opinion. What, shall the very doubt and inquisition wound our Imagination
so as to turn to our Inconvenience? Such as absolutely and on a sudden give way
to their Propensions, put a total ruin upon themselves. And I am sorry for
several Gentlemen, who, through the Folly of their Physicians, have in their
Youth and Health put themselves into Consumptions. It were yet better to endure
a Cough, than by disusance for ever to lose the commerce of the common Life in
an Action of so great use. Ill natured Science, to interdict us the sweetest
and most pleasant hours of the Day: Let us keep Possession of it to the last.
For the most part a man hardens himself by being obstinate, and corrects his
Constitution; as Caesar did the Falling Sickness, by dint of Contempt. A man
should addict himself to the best Rules, but not inslave himself to them; if
not to such, if there be any such, to which the Obligation and Servitude are of
Profit. Both Kings and Philosophers go to stool, and Ladies too; public Lives
are bound to Ceremony, mine that is obscure and private, enjoys all natural
Dispensation. Soldier and Gascon are also qualities a little subject to
Indiscretion, wherefore I shall say this of this action of exonerating Nature,
that it is necessary to referr it to certain prescribed and nocturnal Hours,
and force a man's self to it by Custom, as I have done; but not to subject
himself, as I have done in my declining years, to a particular Convenience of
Place and Seat for that purpose, and make it troublesome by long sitting: and
yet in the foulest Offices, is it not in some measure excusable to require more
care and cleanliness? Natura homo mundum, Seneca. Epist. 92.
and elegans animal est. Man is by Nature a clean and elegant Creature. Of all
the actions of Nature, I am the most impatient of being interrupted in that. I
have seen many Soldiers troubled with the unruliness of their Bellies, whilst
mine and I never fail of our punctual assignation, which is at leaping out of
Bed, if some indispensable Business, or Sickness do not molest us. I do then
think, as I said before, that sick men can better place themselves any where in
better safety than in sitting still in that course of Life wherewith they have
been bred and trained up. Alteration, be it what it will, does distemper and
astonish. Can any believe that Chest-nuts can hurt a Perigourdin, or one of
Luca; or Milk and Cheese the Mountain People: men enjoy them not only a new,
but a contrary Method of Life, a change that the more healthful could not
endure. Prescribe Water to a Breton of threescore and ten, shut a Seaman up in
a Stove, and forbid a Basque Footman walking, they will deprive them of
Motion, and in the end, of Air and Light. -- an vivere tanti est?
Cogimur a suctis animum suspendere rebus Aeneid. l. 6. Gallus. Elcg. 1.

Atque ut vivamus vivere desinimus.
Hoc superesse reor quibus and spirabilis aer
Et lux qua regimur, redditur ipsa gravis.
Is Life of such a mighty consequence?
We must accustomed things quite over give,
And that we may live, we must cease to live;
I cannot imagine they should longer live,
Whom light and air, by which they live, do grieve.
If they do no other good, they do this at least, that they prepare Patients
betimes for Death, by little and little undermining and cutting off the usage
of Life. Both well and sick, I have ever willingly suffered my self to obey the
Appetites that pressed upon me. I give great Authority to my propensions and
desires. I do not love to cure one Disease by another. I hate remedies that are
more troublesome than the Disease it self. To be subject to the Stone, and
subject to abstain from eating Oysters, are two Evils instead of one. The
Disease torments us on the one side, and the remedy on the other. Since we are
ever in danger of mistaking, let us rather hazard, rather deferr the discovery
of the mistake till after pleasure. The World proceeds quite contrary, and
thinks nothing profitable that is not painful; Facility stands suspected to it.
My Appetite is in several things of it self happily enough accommodated to the
health of my Stomach. Acrimony and quickness in Sawces were pleasant to me when
young, but my Stomach disliking them, since my Taste incontinently followed.
Wine is hurtful to sick People; and it is the first thing that my mouth
disrelishes when I am sick, and with an invincible distaste. Whatever I take
against my liking, does me harm; and nothing hurts me that I eat with Appetite
and delight; I never received harm by any action that was very pleasant to me;
and accordingly have made all Medicinal conclusions mightily give way to my
Pleasure. And have, when I was young, Quem circumcursans huc, atque huc saepe
cupido Catullus Number. 64.

Fulgebat crocina splendidus in tunica.
Whilst Cupid round me fluttering did fly,
In his rich mantle of the Tycian die.
given my self the reins as licentiously and inconsiderately to the desire that
was predominant in me, as any other whatever; Et militavi non sine gloria. Hor.
lib. 3. Ode 16.
yet more in continuation and holding out than in Sally. Sex me vix memini
sustinuisse vices. Ovid.
It Is certainly a misfortune, and a miracle at once, to confess at what a
tender age I was first subjected to Love: it was indeed by chance; for it was
long before the years of Choice or Discretion: I do not remember my self so
long ago. And my Fortune may very well be coupled to that of Quartilla, who
could not remember since she was a Maid. Inde tragus celeresque pili, Ovid.
mirandaque matri
Barba mea.
Physicians do ordinarily submit their Rules to the violent Longings that
happen to sick Persons, with very good success. This great desire, so strange
and vicious, cannot be imagined to be, but that Nature must have a hand in it.
And then how easy a thing is it to satisfy the Fancy? In my opinion, this
part wholly carries it, at least, above all the rest. The most grievous and
ordinary Wills are those that Fancy loads us with. This Spanish Saying mightily
pleases in several senses; Defienda me Dios de my. God defend me from my self.
I am sorry when I am sick, that I have not some longing that might give me the
contentment of satisfying it; all the Rules of Physic would hardly be able to
divert me; I do the same when I am well. I can think of very little more to be
hoped or wished for. It Is pity a man should be so weak and languishing, as to
have nothing left him but wishing. The Art of Physic is not so resolute, that
we should be without Authority for whatever we do; it changes according to the
Climates and Moons, according to Fernelius and Scala. If your Physician^ do not
think it good for you to sleep, to drink Wine, or to eat such and such Meats;
never trouble your self, I will find you another that shall not be of his
Opinion; the diversity of Physical Arguments and Opinions embraces all sorts of
Methods. I saw a miserable sick Person panting and burning for thirst, that he
might be cured; and was afterward laughed at by another Physician for his
pains, who condemned that advice as prejudicial to him: had he not tormented
himself to good purpose? A man of that Profession is lately dead of the Stone,
who had made use of extreme abstinence to contend with his Disease. His fellow
Physicians said, that on the contrary, this abstinence from Drink had dried his
Body up, and baked the Gravel in his Kidneys. I have observed, that both in
Wounds and Sicknesses, speaking discomposes and hurts me as much as any
disorder I can commit. My Voice spends and tires me, for it is loud and forced;
so that when I have gone to whisper some great Persons about Affairs of
Consequence, they have often desired me to moderate my Voice. This Story deserves
a place here. Some one in a certain Greek School, speaking loud as I do, the
Master of the Ceremonies sent to him to speak softly, Tell him then he must
send me, replied the other, the tone he would have me speak in. To which the
other replied, That he should take the tone from the Ears of him to whom he
spoke. It was well said, if to be understood, Speak according to the Affair you
are speaking about to your Auditor, for if it mean, it is sufficient that he
hears you, or govern your self by him; I do not find it to be reason. The tone
and motion of my Voice carries with it a great deal of the Expression and
Signification of my meaning, and it is I who am to govern it, to make my self
understood. There is a Voice to instruct, a Voice to flatter, and a Voice to
reprehend. I will not only that my Voice reach him, but peradventure that it
strike and pierce him. When I rattle my Footman with sharp and bitter
Language, it would be very pretty for him to say, Pray Master speak lower, I
hear you very well. Est quaedam Vox ad auditum accomodata, non Magnitudine sed
Proprietate. There is a certain Voice accomodated to the Hearing, not by the
Loudness, but Propriety. Speaking is half his that speaks, and half his that
hears; the last of which ought to prepare himself to receive it, according to
its motion and rebound. Like Tennis Players, he that receives the Ball, shifts
and prepares, according as he sees him move who strikes the stroke, and
according to the stroke it self. Experience has moreover taught me this, that
we lose our selves with impatience. Evils have their Life and Limits, their
Diseases, and their Recovery; the Constitution of Maladies is formed by the
pattern of the Constitution of Animals, they have their Fortunes and Days
limited from their Birth. Whoever attempts imperiously to cut them short by
force in the middle of their Course, does lengthen and multiply them, and
incenses instead of appeasing them. I am of Crantor's Opinion, that we are
neither obstinately and wilfully to oppose Evils, nor truckle under them for
want of Courage, but that we are naturally to give way to them, according to
their Condition and our own, we ought to grant free passage to Diseases: And I
find they stay less with me, who let them alone. And I have lost those which
are reputed the most tenacious and obstinate of their own defervescence,
without any Help or Art, and contrary to their Rules. Let us a little permit
Nature to take her own way; she better understands her own Affairs than we. But
such a one died, and so shall you, if not of that Disease, of another. And how
many have not escaped dying, who have their Physicians always at their tails?
Example is a bright and universal mirror, and in all Sciences. If it be a
delicious Medicine, take it, it is always so much present good. I will never
stick at the Name nor the Color, if it be pleasant and grateful to the
Pallat: Pleasure is one of the chiefest kinds of profit. I have suffered
Rheums, gouty Defluxions, Relaxations, Palpitations of the Heart, Meagrims, and
other Accidents, to grow old, and dye in me a natural Death, which I have been
rid of when I was half fit to nourish and keep them. They are sooner prevailed
upon by Courtesy than huffing; we must patiently suffer the Laws of our
Condition, we are born to grow old, to grow weak, and to be sick in despite of
all Medicine. It Is the first Lesson the Mexicans teach their Children; so soon
as ever they come out of their Mothers Wombs, they thus salute them, Thou art
come into the World Child, to endure, endure, suffer, and say nothing. It Is
injustice to lament that that is befallen any one, which may befall every one.
Indignare si quid in te iniqui, proprie constitutum est. Then be angry when
there is any thing unjustly decreed against thee alone. See an old man who
begs of God Almighty that he will maintain his Health vigorous and entire, that
is to say, that he will restore him to Youth: Ovid.
Stat quid haec frustra votis puerilibus optas?
Why pray'st thou Fool such childish Prayers in vain?
Is it not folly? his condition is not capable of it. The Gout, the Stone, and
Indigestion, are symptoms of long Years, as Heat, Rains and Winds, are of long
Voyages. Plato does not believe that Esculapius troubled himself to provide by
a good diet to prolong his Life in a weak and wasted Body, useless to his
Country, and to his Profession, and to beget healthful and robust Children;
and does not think this Solitude suitable to the Divine Justice and Prudence,
which is to direct all things to Utility. My good Friend, your Business is
done, no body can restore you, they can at the most but patch you up, and prop
you a little, and by that means prolong your misery an hour or two. Gal. Eleg.
1.
Non secus instantem cupiens fulcire ruinam,
Diversis contra nititur obicibus,
Donec certa dies omni compage soluta,
Ipsum cum rebus subruat auxilium.
Like one, who willing to deferr a while
A sudden ruin, props the tottering pile,
Till in short space the House, the props, and all
Together with a dreadful ruin fall.
We must learn to suffer what we cannot evade. Our Life, like the harmony of
the World, is composed of contrary things, of several notes, sweet and harsh,
sharp and flat, spritely and solemn; and the Musician who should only affect
one of these, what would he be able to do? He must know how to make use of them
all, and to mix them; and we likewise, the goods and evils which are
consubstantial with Life: Our Being cannot subsist without this mixture, and
the one are no less necessary to it than the other. To attempt to kick against
natural necessity, is to represent the folly of Ctesiphon, The folly of
Ctesiphon.
who undertook to kick with his Mule. I consult little about the alterations I
feel; for those People take advantage when they have you at their mercy. They
cudgel your ears with their Prognostics; and having formerly surpised me,
weakened with sickness, have injuriously handled me with their Doctrines and
magisterial fopperies; one while menacing me with great Pains, and another,
with approaching Death; by which threats I was indeed moved and shook, but not
subdued, nor justled from my place; and though my Judgment was neither altered
nor distracted, yet it was at least disturbed. It Is always Agitation and
Combat. Now I use my imagination as gently as I can, and would discharge it of
all trouble and contest if I could. A man must assist, flatter, and deceive it,
if he can. My mind is fit for that Office. It wants no appearances throughout.
And could it persuade, as it preaches, it would successfully relieve me. Will
you have an Example? It tells me that it is for my good to have the Stone: that
the compositions of my Age are naturally to suffer some decay: that it is now
time they should begin to disjoynt, and to confess a decay: it is a common
necessity, and there is nothing in it, either miraculous or new: I therein pay
what is due to old Age, and I cannot expect a better account: that Society
ought to comfort me, being fallen into the most common infirmity of my time.
The Stone ordinary in old men, especially men of Quality.
I see every where men tormented with the same Disease; and am honored by the
Fellowship, forasmuch as men of the best Quality are most frequently afflicted
with it; it is a noble and dignified Disease. That of such as are pestered with
it, few have it to a less degree of Pain, and yet they are put to the trouble
of a strict Diet, and the daily taking of nauseous Drugs and Potions; whereas I
owe my good intervals purely to my good Fortune. For some ordinary Broths of
Eringo's, or Burst-wort, that I have twice or thrice taken to oblige the
Ladies, who, with greater kindness than my Pain is extreme, would needs present
me half of theirs, seemed to me equally easy to take, and fruitless in
operation. They are to pay a thousand Vows to Aesculapius, and as many Crowns
to their Physician, for the voiding a little Gravel, which I often do by the
benefit of Nature. Even the decency of my Countenance is not disturbed in
Company, and I can hold my Water ten hours, and as long as any man that is in
perfect health. The fear of this Disease, says one, did formerly affright thee,
when it was unknown to thee; the crying and roaring of those that make it worse
by their impatience, begot a horror in thee: It Is an infirmity that punishes
the Members by which thou have most offended: thou art a conscientious fellow:
Quae venit indigne poena, dolenda venit. Ovid.

Punishments then to be complained of are
When laid upon a guiltless sufferer.
consider this chastisement, it is very easy in comparison of that of others,
and inflicted with a Paternal tenderness: Do but observe how late it comes; it
only seizes on and incommodates that part of thy Life, which is upon the matter
steril, and lost; having, as it were by compact, given way to the license and
pleasures of thy Youth. The fear and the compassion that the People have of
this Disease, serves thee for matter of glory. A quality, whereof if thou have
thy Judgment purified, and that thy Reason be right and sound, thy Friends will
yet notwithstanding discover some tincture in thy Complexion. It Is a pleasure
to hear it said of a man's self, here is great force, here is great patience.
Thou art seen to sweat with pain, to look pale and red, to tremble, vomit
blood, to suffer strange contractions and convulsions, by starts to let great
tears drop from thine eyes, to urine thick, black, and dreadful Water, or to
have it suppressed by some sharp and craggy stone, that cruelly pricks and
tears the neck of the Bladder, whilst all the while thou entertain'st the
Company with an ordinary countenance, drolling by fits with thy Servants,
making one in a continued discourse, now and then excusing thy pain, and making
thy suffrance less than it is. Do thou call to mind the men of past times,
who so greedily sought Diseases to keep their Virtue in breath and exercise?
Put the case that Nature force and put thee on to this glorious School, into
which thou would never have entered of thy own free will. If thou tell me,
that it is a dangerous and mortal Disease; what others are not? For it is a
Physical cheat to except any, and to say, that they do not go directly to
death: what makes matter if they tend that way by accident, and if they easily
slide and slip into the path that leads us to it? But thou do not dye because
thou art sick, thou die because thou art living. Death kills thee without the
help of Sickness: And in some, Sickness has deferred Death, who have lived
longer by reason that they thought themselves always dying. To which may be
added, that as in Wounds, so in Diseases, some are medicinal and wholesome. The
Cholick is often no less long-lived than you. We see men with whom it has
continued from their Infancy even to their extreme old Age, and if they had not
broke company, it would have afflicted them longer still; you ofter kill it,
than it kills you: And though it present you the image of approaching Death,
were it not a good Office to a man of such an Age, to put him in mind of his
end? And, which is worse, thou have no longer any thing that should make thee
desire to be cured. Common Necessity will however presently call thee away. Do
but consider how artificially and gently she puts thee out of taste with Life,
and weans thee from the World; not forcing and compelling thee with a
tyrannical Subjection, like so many other Infirmities which you see old men
afflicted withal, that hold them in continual Torment, and keep them in
perpetual and unintermitted Pains and Dolors; but by Advertisements and
Instructions at several intervals, intermixing long pauses of repose, as it
were to give thee leave to meditate and ruminate upon thy lesson at they own
ease and leisure: to give thee means to judge aright, and to assume the
Resolution of a man of Courage, she presents to thee the entire state of thy
Condition, both in good and evil, and one while a very cheerful, and another
an insupportable Life, in one and the same day. If thou imbracest not Death, at
least thou shak'st hands with ^t once a Month; by which thou have more cause to
hope that it will one day surprise thee without warning. And that being so often
conducted to the water side, and thinking thy self to be still upon the
accustomed terms, thou and thy Confidence will at one time or another be
unexpectedly wasted over. A man cannot reasonably complain of Diseases that
fairly divide the time with Health. I am obliged to Fortune for having so often
assaulted me with the same sort of weapons; she forms and fashions me by
usance, hardens and habituates me so, that I can know within a little for how
much I shall be quit. For want of natural memory, I make one of Paper; and as
any new symptom happens in my Disease, I set it down; from whence it falls out,
that being now almost past all sorts of Examples, if any astonishment threaten
me, tumbling over these little loose notes, as the Sybills Leaves, I never fail
of finding matter of Consolation from some favorable Prognostic in my past
Experience. Custom also makes me hope better for the time to come. For the
Conduct of this Evacuation having so long continued, it is to be believed that
Nature will not alter her course, and that no other worse accident will happen
than what I already feel. And besides, the condition of this Disease is not
unsuitable to my prompt and sudden Complexion. When it assaults me gently, I am
afraid, for it is then for a great while; but it has naturally brisk and
vigorous Excesses. It claws me to purpose for a day or two. My Reins hold out
an Age without Alteration, and I have almost now lived another since they
changed their state. Evils have their Periods as well as Goods, peradventure
the Infirmity draws toward an end. Age weakens the heat of my Stomach, the
Digestion of which being less perfect, it sends this crude matter to my Reins;
and why at a certain revolution may not the heat of my Reins be also abated, so
that they can no more petrifie my phlegm, and Nature find out some other way of
purgation: Years have evidently helped me to drain certain Rhumes; and why not
these excrements which furnish matter for Gravel? But is there any thing sweet
in comparison of this sudden change, when from an excessive pain, I come, by
the voiding of a Stone, to recover, as from a flash of Lightning, the beautiful
light of health, so free and full as it happens in our sudden and most sharp
Cholicks? Is there any thing in the pain suffered, that a man can counterpoize
to the pleasure of so sudden an amendment? Oh! Health more pleasant after
Sickness.
how much does Health seem so much the more pleasant to me after so near and
contiguous sickness, as that I can distinguish them in the presence of one
another in their greatest bravery, wherewith they dress themselves in
emulation, as if to make head against, and to dispute it with one another! What
the Stoics say, that Vices are profitably introduced, to give value to, and to
set off virtue; we can with better reason, and less temerity of censure, say of
Nature, that she has given us pain for the honor and service of pleasure and
indolence. When Socrates, after his Fetters were knocked off, felt the pleasure
of that itching which the weight of them had caused in his Legs, he rejoiced to
consider the strict alliance betwixt pain and pleasure, how they are linked
together by a necessary connection, so that by turn they follow and mutually
beget one another; and cried out to Aesop, that he ought out of this
consideration, to have taken a Body proper for a fine Fable. The worst that I
see in other diseases is, that they are not so grievous in their effect, as
they are in their issue. A man is a whole year in recovering, and all the while
full of weakness and fear. There is so much hazard, and so many steps to
arrive at safety, that there is no end on it. Before they have unmuffled you of
a Handkerchief, and then of a Callot, before they allow you to walk abroad and
take the Air, to drink Wine, lie with your Wife, and eat Melons, it is odds you
relapse into some new Distemper. The Stone has this privilege, that it carries
it self clean off. Whereas others always leave behind them some impression and
alteration, that renders the Body subject to some new disease, and lend a hand
to one another. These are excusable, that content themselves with possessing
us, without extending it farther, and introducing their consequences: But
courteous and kind are those whose passage brings us any profitable issue.
Since I have been troubled with the Stone, I find my self freed from all other
accidents, much more methinks than I was before, and have never had any Fever
since. I argue, that the extreme and frequent vomitings that I am subject to,
purge me; and on the other side, my nausities, and the strange Fasts I am
forced to keep, digest my present humors; and Nature in those Stones voids
whatever there is in me of superfluous and hurtful. Let them never tell me that
it is a medicine too dear bought. For what avails so many stinking Apozemes,
Causticks, Incisions, Sweats, Setons, Diets, and so many other methods of Cure;
which often, by reason we are not able to undergo their violence and importunity,
bring us to our Graves: So that when I am ill, I look upon it as Physic, when
well, for an absolute deliverance. And here is another particular benefit of my
disease; which is, that it almost plays its game by it self, and lets me play
mine, or else I only want Courage to do it; for in its greatest fury, I have
endured it ten Hours together on Horseback; do but endure only, you need no
other regiment: Play, Run, do this, and the the other thing too if you can, your
debauch will do you more good than harm. Say as much to one that has the Pox,
the Gout, or Bursten Belly. The other diseases have more universal obligations,
wrack our actions after another kind of manner, disturb our whole order, and to
their consideration engage the whole state of life. This only pinches the Skin,
it leaves the Understanding and the Will wholly at our own dispose, as also the
Tongue, Hands and Feet. It rather awakes than stupifies you. The Soul is struck
with the ardour of a Fever, overwhelmed with an Epilepsie, and displaced by a
sharp Megrim, and finally aastonish'd by all the Diseases that hurt the whole
Mass, and the most noble parts: This never meddles with the Soul. If any thing
goes amiss with her, it is her own fault, she betrays, dismounts, and abandons
her self. There are none but Fools who suffer themselves to be persuaded, that
this hard and massy body which is baked in our Reins is to be dissolved by
drinks; wherefore, when it is once stirred, their is nothing to be done but to
give it passage, and also it will take it of it self. I moreover observe this
particular convenience in it, that it is a disease wherein we have little to
guess at. We are dispensed from the trouble into which other diseases throw us,
by the incertainty of their Causes, Conditions and Progress. A trouble that is
infinitely painful. We have no need of Consultations and Doctoral
Interpretations, the sense well enough informs us both what it is and where it
is. By such like Arguments, weak and strong, as Cicero did the disease of his
Old Age, I try to rock asleep and amass my imagination, and to dress its
Wounds. If I find them worse to morrow, I will provide new remedies and
applications. That this is true, I am come to that pass of late, that the least
motion forces pure blood out of my Reins: And what of that, I stir
nevertheless as before, and ride after my Hounds with a Juvenile ardour; And
find that I have very good satisfaction for an accident of that importance,
when it costs me no more but a little heaviness and uneasiness in that part.
It Is some great Stone that wastes and consumes the substance of our Kidneys, and
of my Life, which I by little and little evacuate, not without some natural
pleasure, as an excrement henceforward superfluous and troublesome. Now if I
feel any thing to roll and stir, do not expect that I should trouble my self to
consult my Pulse or my Urine, thereby to put my self upon some tormenting
prevention. I shall soon enough feel the pain, without making it more and
longer, by the disease of fear. Who fears to suffer, does already suffer what
he fears. To which may be added, that the Doubts and Ignorance of those who
take upon them to expound the designs of Nature and her internal Progressions,
and the many false Prognostics of their Art, ought to give us to understand
that her ways are inscrutable and utterly unknown. There is great uncertainty,
variety and obscurity, The guessing at diseases by Urine very uncertain.
in what she either promises or threats. Old Age excepted, which is an
undoubted sign of the approach of Death, in all other accidents, I see few
signs of the future, wherein we may ground our Divination. I only judge of my
self by my real sense, and not by discourse: To what end, since I am resolved
to bring nothing to it but expectation and patience. Will you know how much I
get by this? Observe those that do otherwise, and who rely upon so many diverse
persuasions and counsels; how often and how much they labor under imagination,
without any bodily pain at all. I have many times pleased my self, being well
and in safety, and delivered from these dangerous accidents, to communicate
them to the Physicians, as but then beginning to discover themselves in me;
where I under-went the terrible sentences of their dreadful conclusions, being
very well at ease, and was so much the more obliged to the favor of Almighty
God, and better satisfied of the vanity of this Art. There is nothing that
ought so much to be recommended to Youth, as Activity and Vigilance. Our Life
is nothing but motion: I move with great difficulty, and am slow in every
thing, whether in Rising, going to Bed, or Eating. Seven of the Clock in the
Morning is early for me; and where I govern, I never Dine before Eleven, nor
Sup till after Six. I have formerly attributed the cause of the Fevers, and
other Diseases I have fallen into, to the heaviness that long sleeping had
brought upon me, and have ever repented my sleeping again in the morning. Plato
is more angry at the excess of sleeping, than that of drinking: I love to lie
hard, and alone, even without my Wife, as Kings and Princes do, but well
covered with Clothes: They never warm my Bed, but since my being grown Old,
they give me for need, warm Cloths to lay to my Feet and Stomach. They find
fault with the great Scipio, that he was a great Sleeper; not, in my opinion,
for any other reason, if not that men were displeased, that he alone should
have nothing in him to be found fault withal. If I have any thing curious in my
way of Living, it is rather in my Lying than any thing else; but generally, I
give way and accommodate my self as much as any one to necessity. Sleeping has
taken up a great part of my Life, and I yet continue at the Age I now am, to
sleep eight or nine hours together; I wean my self to my advantage, from this
propension to sloth, and am evidently the better for so doing. I find the
change a little hard indeed, but in three days it is over, and see but few that
live with less Sleep, when need requires* and that more constantly exercise
themselves, nor to whom long Journeys are less troublesome. My Body is capable
of a firm, but not of a violent or sudden Agitation. I evade of late all
violent exercises, and such as make me sweat, wherein my Limbs grow weary
before they are hot. I can stand a whole day together, and am never weary of
walking: But from my Youth, I never loved to Ride upon Pavements. On foot, I go
up to the Breech in dirt, and little Fellows as I am, are subject in the
Streets to be Elbow'd and Justled, for want of Presence and Stature, and I have
ever loved to repose my self, whether sitting or lying, with my Heels as high,
or higher than my Seat. There is no profession is more pleasant than the
military, a profession both noble in its execution, (for Valor, is the
strongest, proudest, and most generous, of all Virtues) and noble in its cause.
There is no Utility either more Universal, or more Just, than the protection of
the Peace and grandeur of a man's Country. The company of so many Noble, Young,
and Active men delights you, the ordinary sight of so many Tragic Spectacles;
the liberty of this Conversation without Art, with a Masculine and
unceremonious way of living, pleases you; the variety of a Thousand several
Actions, the encouraging Harmony of Martial Music, that ravishes and inflames
both your Ears and Souls, the Honor of this exercise, nay, even the sufferings
and difficulties of War, which Plato so little esteems, that he makes Women and
Children share in it in his Republic, are delightful to you. You put your
selves voluntarily upon particular Exploits and hazards, according as you judge
of their luster and importance, and see when even life it self is excusably
employed.

Aeneid. l. 2.
Pulchrumque mori succurrit in armis.
Mr Ogilby.
And we conceive it brave to die in Arms.
To fear common dangers that concern so great a multitude of men, not to dare
to do what so many sorts of Souls, and a whole people do, is for a heart that
is low, and mean beyond all measure. Company encourages so much as Children. If
others excel you in Knowledge, in Gracefulness, in Strength, or Fortune, you
have third causes to blame for that, but to give place to them in stability of
mind you can blame no one for that but your self. Death is more Abject, more
Languishing, and Painful in Bed than in Battle; and Fevers and Catharrs, as
Painful and Mortal as a Musquet-shott: And whoever has fortified himself
valiantly to bear the accidents of common life, would not need to raise his
courage to be a Soldier. Vivere, mi Lucilli, militare est. To live, Seneca
Epist. 961
my Lucillus, is to make War. I do not remember that I ever had the Itch, and
yet scratching is one of natures sweetest gratifications, and nearest at hand,
but the smart follows too near. I use it most in my Ears, which are often apt
to Itch. I came into the World with all my Senses entire, even to perfection.
My Stomach is commodiously good, as also is my Head and my Breath; and for the
most part, uphold themselves so in the height of Fevers. I have past the age to
which some Nations, not without reason, have prescribed so just a term of Life,
that they would not suffer men to exceed it; and yet I have some intermissions,
though short and inconstant, so clean and sound, as are little inferior to the
Health and Indolency of my Youth. I do not speak of Vigor and Spriteliness,
it is not reason that it should follow me beyond its limits.

Hor. lib. 3. ode 10.
Non hoc amplius est liminis, aut aquae.
-- Coelestis patiens latus.
My sides no longer can sustain
The hardships of the Wind and Rain.
My Face and Eyes presently discover me. All my alterations begin there, and
appear worse than they really are. My Friends often pity me, before I feel the
cause in my self: My Looking-glass does not fright me, for even in my Youth, it
has befaln me more than once to have a scurvy complexion, and of ill
Prognostic, without any great consequence; insomuch that the Physicians, not
finding any cause within, answerable to that outward alteration attributed it
to the mind, and some secret passion that tormented me within; but they were
deceived. If my Body would govern it self as well according to my Rule as my
Mind does, we should move a little more at our ease. My mind was then not only
free from Trouble, but moreover full of Joy and Satisfaction; as it commonly
is, half by Complexion, and half by its own Design.

Ovid. Trist.
Nec vitiant artus aegrae contagia mentis.
-- I never yet could find,
That e're my Body suffered by my mind.
I am of the opinion, that this temperature of my Soul, has often raised my Body
from its lapses: It is often deprest; and if the other be not brisk and gay, it is
at least quiet and at rest. I had a Quartan Ague four or five months, that had
made me look miserably ill; my mind was always, if not calm, yet pleasant; if
the pain be without me, the weakness and langour do not much afflict me: I see
several corporal faintings, that beget a horror in me but to name, which yet I
should less fear than a thousand passions and agitations of mind that I see in
use. I resolve no more to run, it is enough that I crawl along; and no more
complain of the natural decadency that I feel in my self, Quis tumidum guttur
miratur in Alpibus? Juvenal.
than I regret that my duration shall not be as long and entire as that of an
Oak. I have no reason to complain of my imagination, for I have had few
thoughts in my Life which have so much as broke my sleep, if not those of
desire, which have awaked without afflicting me; I dream but seldom, and then
of Chimera's, and fantastic things, commonly produced from pleasant thoughts,
and rather ridiculous than sad; and believe it to be true, that dreams are the
true Interpreters of our inclinations; but there is art required to sort and
understand them.

Res quae in vita usurpant homines cogitant,
curant, vident,
Quaeque agunt vigilantes, agitantque, ea sicut
Cicero de Div.
in fomno accidunt, minus nimirum est.
It Is no wonder if what men practice, think, care for, see, and do when waking,
should also run in their Heads, and disturb them when they are asleep.

Plato moreover says, that it is the office of Prudence to draw instructions of
Divination of future things from Dreams. I see nothing in it, if not the
wonderful experience that Socrates, Zenephon, and Aristotle, all men of
irreproachable authority relate. Historians say, The Atlants never dream.
that the Atlantes never Dream, who also never eat any thing that dyed of it
self: Which I add, forasmuch as it is peradventure the reason why they never
Dream, for Pythagoras ordered a certain preparation of Diet, to beget proper
Dreams; mine are always very gentle, without any agitation of Body or
expression of voice. I have seen several of my time wonderfully distur'd; Theon
the Philosopher walked in his sleep: as also did Pericles his Servant, and that
upon the Tiles, and tops of the House. I hardly ever choose my Dish at Table,
but fall to of the next at hand, and unwillingly change my Dish. A confusion of
Meats, and a clutter of Dishes displeases me as much as any thing whatever. I
am easily satisfied with few Dishes, and am an enemy to the opinion of
Favorinus, that in a Feast they must snatch from you the meat you like, and set
another Plate of another sort before you, and that it is a pitiful Supper, if
you do not sat your Guests with the Rumps of several Fowls, and that the
Beccafico only deserves to be all eaten. I usually eat salt meats, and yet I
love Bread that has no salt in it; And my Baker never sends up other to my
Table, contrary to the Custom of the Country* In my infancy, what they had
most to correct in me, was the refusal of things that Children commonly best
love; as Sugar, Sweetmeats, and March-panes. My Governor contended with this
aversion to delicate meats as a kind nicety. And indeed it is nothing else but a
difficulty of taste in any thing it applys it self unto. Whoever shall cure a
Child of an obstinate aversion to Brown-bread, Bacon, or Garlic, will cure him
of all kind of Delicacy. There are some who pretend to Temperance and Patience,
by wishing for Powdered Beef and Hams amongst Pheasant and Partridge; they have
a good time on it; it is the Delicacy of Delicacies, it is the taste of an
effeminate Fortune, that disrelishes ordinary and accustomed things, Per quae
luxuria divitiarum taedio ludit. Seneca Ep. 18.
To cease to make good cheer with what another does, and to be curious in what
a man eats, is the essence of this vice. Si Medita caenare times plus omne
patella.
Hor. l. 1. Epist. 5.
If an Herb ^oop in a small dish thou fear.
There is indeed this difference, that it is better to oblige a man's appetite to
things that are most easy to be had, but it is always Vice to oblige a man's
self. I formerly said a kinsman of mine was nice, who, by being in our Galleys,
had unlearned the use of Beds, and ^o put off his Clothes. If I had any Sons, I
should willingly wish them my fortune. The good Father that God gave me, (who
has nothing of me but the acknowledgment of his bounty, but truly it is a very
hearty one) sent me from my Cradle to be brought up in a Village of his, and
there continued me all the while I was at Nurse, and yet longer, bringing me up
to the meanest, and most common way of living: Magna pars libertatis est been
moratus venture. Seneca Ep. 123.
A well governed Belly is a great part of Liberty. Never take upon you your
selves, and much less give up to your Wives, That Mothers ought not to have the
Education of their Children.
the care of their Education, leave the forming them to fortune, under popular,
and natural Laws; leave it to Custom to train them up to Frugality, that they
may rather descend from hardships, than mount up to them. This humor of his
yet aimed at another end, that is, to make me familiar with those people, and
that condition of men which most need our assistance; believing that I should
be more obliged rather to regard them who extended their Arms to me, than those
who turned their backs upon me. And for this Reason also it was, that he
provided me Godfathers of the meanest Fortune, to oblige, and bind me to them.
Neither has his design succeeded altogether ill; for, whether it be upon the
account of glory, because there is no more honor in such a condescension, or
out of a natural compassion, that has a very great power over me, I have a very
kind inclination toward the meaner sort of people. The Faction which I condemn
in our Civil Wars, I shall more sharply condemn when I see them flourish. It
will half reconcile me to them, when I shall see them miserable, and suppressed.
How much do I admire the generous humor of Chelonis, Daughter, The noble
humor of Chelonis.
and Wife to the Kings of Sparta! whilst her Husband Cleombrotus, in the
commotion of her City, had the advantage over Leonidas, her Father, she, like a
good Daughter, stuck close to her Father in all his misery and exile, in
opposition to the Conqueror. But so soon as the chance of War turned, she
changed her Will with the change of Fortune, and generally turned to her
Husbands side, whom she accompanied throughout, where his ruin carried him:
Having, as it appears, no other choice, than to cleave to that side that stood
most in need of her, and where she could best manifest her Piety and
Compassion. I am naturally more apt to follow the example of Flaminius, who
still more readily gave his assistance to those that had most need of him, than
to those who had power to do him good; than I do to that of Pyrrhus, who was of
an humor to truckle under the great, and to domineer over the meanest sort of
people. Long sittings at meat both trouble me, and do me harm; for, be it for
want of better countenance, or that I have accustomed my self to it from a
Child, I eat all the while I sit. Therefore it is, that at my own House, though
the meals there are of the shortest, I usually sit down a little while after
the rest, after the manner of Augustus; but I do not imitate him in rising also
before the rest of the Company: On the contrary, I love to sit still a long
time after, and to hear them talk, provided I am none of the talkers, for I
tire, and hurt my self with speaking upon a full Stomach, as much as I find it
pleasant and very wholesome to argue, and to strain my voice before Dinner. The
ancient Greeks and Romans had more reason than we, Long meals of the Ancients.
in setting apart for Eating, which is a principal action of Life, if not
diverted by other extraordinary business, many hours, and the greatest part of
the night eating and drinking more deliberately than we do, who perform all our
Actions in Post haste; and in extending this natural pleasure to more leisure
and better use, intermixing with their meals several pleasant and profitable
offices of conversation. They whose concern it is have a care of me, may very
easily hinder me from eating any thing they think will do me harm; for in such
things I never covet nor miss any thing I do not see: But withal, if it once
comes in my sight, it is in vain to persuade me to forbear, so that when I
design to Fast, I must be parted from those that eat Suppers, and must have
only so much given me, as is required for a regular Collation; for if I sit
down to Table, I forget my resolution. When I order my Cook to alter the manner
of dressing any Dish of Meat, all my Family know what it means, that my Stomach
is out of order, and that I shall scarce touch it: I love to have all meats
that will endure it very little boiled or roasted, and love them mightily
mortified, and even to stinking in many. Nothing but hardness generally offends
me, (of any other quality) I am as patient and indifferent as any man I have
known: So that, contrary to the common humor, even in Fish, it often happens,
that I find them both too fresh and too firm: Not for want of Teeth, which I
ever had good, even to Excellence, and that Age does but now begin to threaten
at this time of my Life. I have ever been used every Morning to rub them with a
Napkin, and before and after Dinner. God is favorable to those whom he makes
to dye by degrees; it is the only benefit of old Age; the last Death will be so
much the less painful; it will kill but a quarter of a man; or but half a one
at most. I have one Tooth lately fallen out without drawing, and without pain:
it was the natural term of its duration. Both that part of my Being, and
several others, are already dead, and others half dead, of those that were most
active, and in highest esteem during my vigorous years; so that I melt and
steal away from my self. What a folly would it be in my understanding to
apprehend the height of this fall, already so much advanced, as if it were from
the utmost Precipice? I hope I shall not. I in truth receive a principal
Consolation in the meditations of my Death, that it will be just and natural,
and that henceforward I cannot herein either require or hope from Destiny any
other but unlawful Favor. Men make themselves believe that they have formerly
had, as greater Statures, so longer Lives. But they deceive themselves; and
Solon, who was of those elder times, does nevertheless limit the Duration of
Life to threescore and ten years. I, who have so much, and so universally
adored this (...), a mean is best of ancient times; and shall I, who have
concluded the most moderate measure the most perfect, pretend to an
immeasurable and prodigious old Age? Whatever happens contrary to the Course of
Nature, may be troublesome, but what comes according to her, should always be
acceptable and pleasant. Cicero.
Omnia quae secundum Naturam fiunt sunt habenda in bonis. All things that are
done according to Nature, are to be accounted good. And so Plato likewise says,
that the Death which is occasioned by Wounds and Diseases is violent; but that
which surprises us, old Age conducting us to it, is of all others the most
easy, and in some sort delicious. Vitam adolescentibus vis aufert, Ibid.
senibus maturitas. Young men are taken away by force, old men by Maturity.
Death mixes and confounds it self throughout with Life, decay anticipates its
Hour and Shoulders, even into the course of our growing up. I have Pictures of
my self taken at five and twenty, and five and thirty years of Age, I compare
them with that lately drawn, how often is it no more me, how much more is my
present Image unlike the former, than to that I shall go out of the World
withal? It is too much to abuse Nature, to make her trot so far that she must
be forced to leave us, and abandon our Conduct, our Eyes, Teeth, Legs, and all
the rest, to the mercy of a foreign and begged assistance; and to resign us
into the hands of Art, being weary of following us her self. I am not very fond
either of Sallets or Fruits, except Melons. My Father hated all sorts of
Sawces, and I love them all. Eating too much hurts me, but for the quality of
what I eat, I do not yet certainly know that any sort of Meat disagrees with my
Stomach; neither have I observed that either Full-moon or Decrease, Spring or
Autum, are hurtful to me. We have in us motions that are inconstant, and for
which no reason can be given. For Example, I found Radishes first grateful to
my Stomach, since that nauseous, and now at present grateful again. In several
other things likewise I find my Stomach and Appetite to vary after the same
manner. I have changed and changed again, from White to Claret, from Claret to
White. I am a great lover of Fish, and consequently make my Fasts, Feasts, and
my Feasts, Fasts; and believe what some People say, that it is more easy of
digestion than Flesh. As I make a Conscience of eating Flesh upon Fish-days, so
does my Taste make a Conscience of mixing Fish and Flesh, the difference
betwixt them seems to me to be too great so to do. From my Youth I have used
sometimes to be out of the way at Supper, either to sharpen my Appetite against
the next Morning, (for as Epicurus fasted and made lean Meals to accustom his
Pleasure to make shift without abundance; I on the contrary do it to prepare my
Pleasure to make better and more cheerful use of Abundance) or else I fasted to
preserve my Vigor for the service of some Action of Body or Mind: for both the
one and the other of those are cruelly dulled in me by Repletion (and above all
things, I hate that foolish coupling of so healthful and spritely a Goddess
with that little belching God, bloated with the fume of his Liquor) or to cure
my sick Stomach, and for want of fit Company. For I say as the same Epicurus
did, that a man is not so much to regard what he eats, as with whom; And
commend Chilo, that he would not engage himself to be at Perianders Feast, till
he first was informed who were to be the other Guests. No Dish is so acceptable
to me, nor no Sauce so alluring, as that which is extracted from Society. I
think it to be more wholesome to eat more liesurely and less, and to eat ofter:
but I will have the value of Appetite and Hunger enhanc'd. I should take no
pleasure to be fed with three or four pitiful and stinted Repasts a day, after
a Physical manner. Who will assure me, that if I have a good Appetite in the
morning, I shall have the same at Supper: But especially, let us old Fellows
take the first opportune time of eating, and leave to Almanack-makers the hopes
and Prognostics. The utmost fruit of my health is pleasure; let us take hold
of the present and known. I avoid constancy in these Laws of Fasting. Who will
that one Form shall serve him, let him evade the continuing of it; We harden
our selves in it, our Forces are there stupefied and laid asleep: six months
after you shall find your Stomach so inured unto it, that all you have got is
only the loss of your liberty of doing otherwise, but to your prejudice. I
never keep my Legs and Thighs warmer in Winter than in Summer, one single pair
of Silk-stockings is all: I have suffered my self for the relief of my Rheums
to keep my Head warmer; and my Belly upon the account of my Cholick: my
Diseases in a few days habituated themselves, and disdained my ordinary
Provisions. I was presently got from a single Cap to a Napkin, and from a
Napkin to a quilted Cap. The belly-pieces of my Doublet serve only for decency,
they signify nothing, if I do not add a Hares-skin or a Stomacher, and wear a
Callot upon my Head. Follow this gradation, and you will go a very fine way to
work. I am resolved to proceed no further, and would leave off those too, if I
durst. If you fall into any new inconvenience all this is labor lost; you are
accustomed to it; seek out some other way: thus do such ruin and destroy
themselves, who submit to be pestered with these enforced and superstitious
Rules; they must add something more, and something more after that, there is no
end on it. For what concerns our Affairs and Pleasures, it is much more
commodious; as the Ancients did, to lose a man's Dinner, and deferr making good
cheer, till the hour of retirement and repose, without breaking a day; and so
was I formerly used to do. For health, I since by experience find on the
contrary, that it is better to dine, and that the digestion is better made
waking. I am not very apt to be thirsty, either well or sick, my Mouth is
indeed apt to be dry, but without thirst; and commonly I never drink but with
thirst that is created by eating, and then I drink as hard as any. I drink
pretty well for a man of my pitch: In Summer, and at a hungry meal, I do not
only exceed the limits of Augustus, that drank but thrice precisely; but not to
offend Democrates his Rule, who forbad that men should stop at four times, as
an unlucky number; I proceed for need to the fifth glass, about three half
pints. For the little glasses are my favorites; and I take a delight to drink
them off, which other People avoid as an indecent thing. I mix my Wine
sometimes with half, sometimes the third part Water. And when I am at home, by
an ancient custom that my Fathers Physician prescib'd both to him and himself,
they mix that which is designed for me in the Buttery three or four hours
before it is brought in. It Is said, that Cranaus King of Athens was the inventer
of this Custom of dashing Wine with Water; whether profitable or no, I have
heard disputed. I think it more decent and wholesome for Children to drink no
Wine till after sixteen or eighteen years of age. The most usual and common
method of living is the most becoming: all particularity in my opinion is to
be avoided, and I should as much hate a German that mixed Water with his Wine,
as I should do a Frenchman that drank it pure. Public Vsance gives the Law in
those things. I fear a Fog, and fly from Smoke, as from the Plague, (the first
repairs I fell upon in my own house were the Chimnies and Houses of Office, the
common and insupportable nuisances of all old Buildings) and amongst the
difficulties of War, reckon the choking dust they make us ride in a whole day
together. I have a free and easy respiration, and my Colds for the most part
go off without offense to the Lungs, and without a Cough. The heat of Summer is
more an enemy to me than the cold of Winter; for, besides the incommodity of
Heat, less remediable than Cold, and besides the force of the Sunbeams that
strike upon the Head, all glittering light offends my eyes, so that I could not
now sit at dinner over against a flaming Fire. To dull the whiteness of Paper,
in those times when I was more wonted to read, I laid a piece of glass upon my
Book, and found my Eyes much relieved by it. I am to this hour ignorant of the
use of Spectacles, and can see as far as ever I did, or any other. It Is true,
that in the Evening I begin to find a little trouble and weakness in my Sight,
if I read; an exercise that I have always found troublesome, especially by
Night. Here is one step back, and a very sensible one; I shall retire another,
from the second to the third, and so to the fourth, so gently, that I shall be
stark blind before I shall be sensible of the age and decay of my sight: so
artificially do the fatal Sisters untwist our Lives. And yet I doubt that my
Hearing begins to grow thick, and you shall see I shall have half lost it, when
I shall still lay the fault on the Voices of those that speak to me. A man must
screw up his Soul to a high pitch, to make it sensible how it ebbs away. My
walking is quick and firm, and I know not which of the two, my Mind, or my
Body, I have most to do to keep in the same state. That Preacher is very much
my Friend, that can oblige my Attention a whole Sermon through. In places of
Ceremony, where every ones Countenance is so starched, where I have seen the
Ladies keep even their Eyes so fixed; I could never order it so, that some part
or other of me did not lash out; so that though I was set, I was never settled:
As the Philosopher Chrysippus his Chambermaid said of her Master, Chrysippus
drunk in his Legs.
that he was only drunk in his Legs, for it was his Custom to be always kicking
his Legs about in what place soever he sat; and she said it at a time when the
Wine having made all his Companions drunk, he found no alteration in himself at
all. The same may also be said of me from my Infancy, that I have either folly
or quicksilver in my feet, so much stirring and unsettledness there is in them
wherever they are placed. It Is indecent, besides the hurt it does to ones
Health, and even to the pleasure of eating, to eat so greedily as I do; I often
bite my Tongue, and sometimes my Fingers for haste, Greedy eating reproved by
Diogenes.
Diogenes meeting a Boy eating after that manner, gave his Tutor a box o'th
Ear. There were men at Rome that taught People to chew, Eating Schools at Rome.
as well as to walk with a good Grace. I lose the leisure of speaking, that
gives the best relish to Tables, provided the Discourse be suitable that is
pleasant and short. There is Jealousy and Envy amongst our Pleasures, they
cross and hinder one another. Alcibiades, a man very well read in making good
cheer, Music banished from Tables by Alcibiades, and why.
banished even Music from Tables, that they might not disturb the
entertainment of Discourse, by the Reason he had from Plato, that it is the
Custom of popular men to call Fiddlers and Singing-men to Feasts, for want of
good Discourse; and pleasant talk, with which men of Understanding know how to
entertain one another. Varro requires all this in great Entertainments, Persons
of graceful Presence, and agreeable Conversation, that are neither silent nor
bablers; Neatness and Delicacy both of Meat and Place, and fair Weather. A good
Treat is neither slightly artificial, nor a little voluptuous; neither the
greatest Captains, nor the greatest Philosophers have disdained either the Use
or Science of eating well, My Imagination has delivered three of them to the
Custody of my Memory, which Fortune rendered sovereignly sweet to me upon
several occasions in my most flourishing Age. My present state excludes me. For
every one, according to the good temper of Body and Mind wherein he then finds
himself, does from thence make out to his own use a particular grace and
liking; but I, who but crawl upon the Earth, hate this inhumane Wisdom, that
will have us despise and hate all culture of the Body. I look upon it as an
equal Injustice to loath natural Pleasures, as to be too much in love with
them. Xerxes was a Fop, who, environed with all humane Delights, proposed a
reward to him that could find him out others; but he is not much less so, who
cuts off any of those Pleasures that Nature has provided for him. A man should
neither pursue nor fly, but receive them. I receive them I confess a little
too affectionately and kindly, and easily suffer my self to follow my natural
Propension. We have nothing to do to exaggerate their inanity, they themselves
will make us sufficiently sensible of it. Thanks be to our sick Minds that
abate our Joys, and put them out of taste with them, as with themselves. They
entertain both themselves and all they receive, one while better, and another
worse, according to their insatiable, vagabond, and versatile Essence. Sincerum
est nisi vas, Hor. l. 1. Ode. 2.
quodcunque infundis acescit.
Unless the Vessel you would use be sweet
'Twill sour whatever you shall put into it.
I, who boast that I so curiously and particularly embrace the conveniences of
Life, do find, when I most nearly consider them, but very little more than
Wind. But what? We are all Wind throughout, and moreover the Wind it self loves
to bluster and shift from corner to corner more discreetly than we, and
contents it self with its proper Offices, without desiring stability and
solidity, Qualities that nothing belong to it. The pure Pleasures, as well as
the pure Displeasures of the Imagination, say some, are the greatest, as was
expressed by the balance of Critolaus. It Is no wonder. It makes them to its own
liking, and cuts them out of the whole Cloth. Of which I every day see notable
Examples, and peradventure to be desired. But I, who am of a mixed and heavy
Condition, cannot snap so soon at this one simple Object, but that I
negligently suffer my self to be carried away with the present Pleasures of the
general humane Law. Intellectually sensible, and sensibly intellectual. The
Cyrenick Philosophers will have it, that as corporal Pains, so corporal
Pleasures are more powerful, both as double, and as more just. There are some,
as Aristotle says, who out of a savage kind of Stupidity, pretend to disgust
them: and I know others, who out of Ambition do the same. Why do they not
moreover forswear breathing? Why do they not live of their own, and refuse
Light because it shines gratis, and costs them neither pains nor invention? Let
Mars, Pallas, or Mercury, afford them their light by which to see, instead of
Venus, Ceres, and Bacchus. Will they not seek the Quadrature of the Circle,
even when mounted upon their Wives? I hate, that we should be enjoined to have
our minds in the Clouds, when our bodies are at Table; I will have the mind
there nailed, not that it should wallow there, but I am willing it should apply
it self to that place, to sit, but not to lie down there. Aristippus maintained
nothing but the Body, as if we had no Soul; Zeno stickled only for the Soul, as
if we had no Body. Both of them faultily. Pythagoras, say they, followed a
Philosophy that was all Contemplation; Socrates, one that was all Manners and
Action. Plato found out a mean betwixt both; but they only say so for Discourse
sake, for the true mean is found in Socrates; and Plato is more Socratick than
Pythagorick, and it becomes him better. When I dance, I dance, when I sleep, I
sleep. Nay, and when I walk alone in a beautiful Orchard, if my Thoughts are
some part of the time taken up with strange Occurrences, I some part of the
time call them back again to my walk, to the Orchard, to the sweetness of the
Solitude, and to my self. Nature has with a Motherly tenderness observed this,
that the actions she has enjoined us for our necessity, should be also pleasant
to us, and invites us to them, not only by Reason, but also by Appetite: and
it is injustice to infringe her Laws. When I see both Caesar and Alexander in
the thickest of their greatest business, so fully enjoy humane and corporal
Pleasures, I do not say that they slackened their Souls, but wound them up
higher by Vigor of Courage, subjecting these violent Employments and laborious
Thoughts to the ordinary usance of Life. Wise, (...) they believed, that the
last was their ordinary Employment, the first, their extraordinary Vocation. We
are great fools. He has past over his Life in ease, say we: I have done nothing
yet that is new. What? have you not lived till now? It Is not only the
fundamental, but the most illustrious of all your Occupations. Had I been put
to the management of great Affairs; I should have made it seen what I could do.
Have you known how to meditate, and manage your Life; you have performed the
greatest work of all. For a man to show, and set out himself, Nature has no
need of Fortune, she equally shows her self in all degrees, and behind a
Curtain, as well as without one. Have you known how to compose your Manners?
you have done a great deal more than he who has composed Books. Have you known
how to take repose? you have done more than he who has taken Cities and
Empires. The glorious Masterpiece of man is, to know how to live to purpose;
all other things, to reign, to lay up treasure, and to build, are at the most
but little Appendixes, and little Props. I take a delight to see a General of
an Army at the foot of a Breach he intends presently to Assault, give himself
up entire and free at dinner, to talk and be merry with his Friends. And
Brutus, when Heaven and Earth were conspired against him and the Roman Liberty,
to steal some hour of the Night from his Rounds, to read and abridge Polybius
in all security (...) is for little Souls, that truckle under the weight of
Affairs, not to know how clearly to disingage themselves, and not to know how
to lay them aside, and take them up again. Hor. lib. 1. Ode 7.
O fortes, pejoraque passi
Mecum saepe viri, nunc vino pellite curas,
Cras ingens interabimus aequor.
Sir Thomas Hawkins.
Brave Spirits, who with me have suffered sorrow,
Drink cares away, we'll set up sails to morrow.
Whether it be in jest or earnest, that the Theological and Sorbonical Wine,
and their Feasts are turned into a Proverb; I find it Reason, they should dine
so much more commodiously and pleasantly, as they have profitably and seriously
employed the morning in the exercise of their Schools. The Conscience of having
well spent the other hours, is the just and savory sauce of Tables. The Sages
lived after that manner, and that inimitable emulation to Virtue, which
astonishes us both in the one and the other Cato; so did that humor of theirs,
severe even to importunity, gently submit it self, and yield to the Laws of the
humane Condition, both of Venus and Bacchus; according to the Precepts of their
Sect, that require a perfect wise man, should be as expert and intelligent in
the use of Pleasures, as in all other duties of Life. Cicero de fin. l. 2.
Cui cor sapiat ei and sapiat palatus. He that has a learned Soul, has a
learned Palate too. Yielding and facility, do, methinks, wonderfully honor,
and best become a strong and generous Soul. Epaminondas did not think, that to
dance, sing, play, and be intent upon them, with the young men of his City,
were things that did any way derogate from the honor of his glorious
Victories, and the perfect reformation of Manners that was in him. And amongst
so many admirable actions of Scipio, the Grandfather, a Person worthy the
Opinion of a heavenly Extraction; there is nothing that gives him a greater
Grace than to see him carelessly and childishly trifling, in gathering and
choosing Shells, and playing at Coits upon the Seashore with his friend
Laelius: and, if it was foul weather, amusing and pleasing himself in
representing in Comedies, by writing the meanest and most popular actions of
men: And having his head full of that wonderful enterprise of Hannibal and
Affrik, visiting the Schools, and being continually present at the
Philosophical Lectures, improving himself even to the envy of his Enemies at
Rome. Nor is there any thing more remarkable in Socrates, than that, old as he
was, he found time to make himself be instructed in dancing and playing upon
Instruments, and thought it time well spent; who nevertheless has been seen in
an Exstacy standing upon his feet a whole day and a night together in the
presence of all the Grecian Army, surpised and ravished with some profound
Thought. He was the first, who amongst so many valiant men of the Army, ran to
the relief of Alcibiades, oppressed with the Enemy, that shielded him with his
own Body, and disengaged him from the Crowd, by absolute force of Arms. It was
he who in the Delian Battle relieved and saved Xenophon, when dismounted from
his Horse; and who, amongst all the People of Athens, enraged as he, at so
unworthy a Spectacle, first presented himself to rescue Theramenes, whom the
thirty Tyrants were haling to Execution by their Guards, and desisted not from
his bold Enterprise, but at the remonstrance of Theramenes himself, though he
was only followed by two more in all. He has been seen, when courted by a
Beauty with which he was in love, yet maintain a severe abstinence in time of
need. He has been seen continually to go to the War, and with his bare feet to
trample upon the Ice; to wear the same Robe Winter and Summer, to surpass all
his Companions in Patience of suffering, and to eat no more at a Feast, than at
his own private Dinner. He was seen seven and twenty years together to endure
Hunger, Poverty, the Indocility of his Children, and the Talons of his Wife,
with the same Countenance; and in the end Calumny, Tyranny, Imprisonment,
Fetters, and Poison. But was that man obliged to drink to him by any Rule of
Civility? He was also the man of the Army to whom the advantage remained. And
he never refused to play at Cob-nut, nor to ride the Hoby-horse with the Boys,
and it became him well; for all Actions, says Philosophy, equally become, and
equally honor a wise man. We have enough wherewithal to do it, and we ought
never to be weary of representing the Image of this great man in all the
patterns and forms of Perfection. There are very few Examples of Life full and
pure, and we wrong our Instruction every day, to propose to our selves those
that are weak and imperfect, scarce good for any one service, that pull us
back, and that are rather Corrupters than Correctors of Manners. The People
deceive themselves; a man goes much more easily indeed by the ends, where the
extremity serve for a bound, a stop, and guide, than by the middle way, which
is large and open, and according to Art, than according to Nature; but withal,
much less nobly and commendably. The grandeur of Soul consists not so much in
mounting and in proceeding forward, as in knowing how to govern and
circumscribe it self. It takes every thing for great, that is enough; and
demonstrates it self better in moderate, than eminent things. There is nothing
so handsome and lawful, as well and duly to play the man; nor Science so hard
as well to know how to live this Life, and of all the Infirmities we have, it is
the most savage to despise our Being. Whoever has a mind to send his Soul
abroad, when the Body is ill at ease, to preserve it from the Contagion, let
him do it if he can: but, in all other things, let him on the contrary, favor
and assist it, and not refuse to participate of its natural Pleasures and
Delights with a Conjugal Complacency: bringing to it withal, if it be a wiser
Soul, Moderation, lest by Indiscretion they should confound them with
Displeasures. Intemperance is the best of Pleasure, and Temperance is not its
Scourge, but rather its seasoning. Eudoxus, who therein established the
sovereign good, and his Companions, who set so high a value upon it, tasted it
with a more charming sweetness by the means of Temperance, which in them was
most singular and exemplary. I enjoin my Soul to look upon Pain and Pleasure
with an Eye equally regular; Cicero. Thus. l. 4.
Eadem enim Vitio est effusto animi in laetitia, quo in dolor contractio: For
it is by the same Vice that we dilate our selves in Mirth, and contract them in
Sorrow: and equally firm; but the one gayly, and the other severely, and,
according to what it is able, to be as careful to extinguish the one as to
extend the other. The judging rightly of Goods, brings along with it the
judging soundly of Evils. Both Pain has something not to be avoided in its
tender beginnings, and Pleasure has something that may be avoided in its
excessive end. Plato couples them together, and will that it should be equally
the Office of Fortitude to fight against Pain, and against the immoderate and
charming blandishments of Pleasure. They are two Fountains, from which whoever
draws, when and as much as he needs, whether City, Man, or Beast, is very
happy. The first is to be taken physically, and upon necessity more scarcely;
the other for thirst, but not to drunkenness. Pain, Pleasure, Love and Hatred
are the first things that a Child is sensible of; if when his Reason comes to
him, he apply himself to it, that is Virtue. I have a peculiar method of my
own, I squander away my time when it is ill and uneasy; but when it is good I
will not squander it away. I run it over again, and stick to it; a man must run
over the ill, and insist upon the good. This ordinary Phrase of past-time, and
passing away the time, represents the usance of those wise sort of People, who
think they cannot have a better account of their Lives, than to let them run
out and slide away, to pass them over, and to baulk them, and, as much as they
can, to take no notice of them, and to shun them, as a thing of troublesome and
contemptible Quality: but I know it to be another kind of thing, and find it
both valuable and commodious, even in its latest decay, wherein I now enjoy it:
and Nature has delivered it into our hands in such and so favorable
Circumstances, that we commonly complain of our selves if it be troublesome to
us, or slide unprofitably away. Seneca. Epist. 15.
Stulti Vita ingrata est, trepida est, tota in futurum fertur. The Life of a
Fool is uneasy, timorous, and wholly bent upon the future. Nevertheless, I
compose my self to lose mine without regret, but withal, as a thing that is
loseable by its Condition, not that it troubles or importunes me. Neither does
it properly well become any, not to be displeased when they dye, excepting such
as are pleased to live. There is good husbandry in enjoying it. I enjoy it
double to what others do; for the measure in Fruition depends more or less upon
our application to it. Now especially that I perceive mine to be so short in
time, I will extend it in weight; I will stop the suddenness of its flight, by
the suddenness of my seizing upon it: and by the vigor of using it, recompense
the speed of its running away. By how much the possession of living is more
short, I must make it so much deeper and more full. Others are sensible of
Contentment, and of Prosperity, I feel it too, as well as they, but not only as
it slides and passes by; and also a man ought to study, taste, and ruminate
upon it, to render condign thanks to him that grants it to us. They enjoy the
other Pleasures as they do that of sleep, without knowing it; to the end, that
even sleep it self should not so stupidly escape from me, I have formerly
caused my self to be disturbed in my sleep, to the end that I might the better
and more sensibly relish and taste it. I consult with my self of a contentment;
I do not skin, but sound it, and bend my Reason, now grown perverse and ill
humored, to entertain it. Do I find my self in any calm composedness? is there
any Pleasure that tickles me? I do not suffer it to dally with my Senses only,
I associate my Soul to it too: not there to engage it self, but therein to take
delight; not there to lose it self, but to be present there; and employ it on
its part, to view it self in this prosperous Estate, to weigh, esteem, and
amplify the good hap. It reckons how much it stands indebted to Almighty God
that it is in repose of Conscience, and other intestine Passions, to have the
Body in a natural disposedness, orderly, and competently enjoying the soft and
flattering functions, by which he of his bounty is pleased to recompense the
sufferings wherewith his Justice at his good Pleasure does scourge and chastise
us. How great a benefit is it to man to have his Soul so seated, that which way
soever she turns her Eye the Heaven is calm and serene about her? No Desire, no
Fear or Doubt, that troubles the Air, nor any Difficulty past, present, or to
come, that his Imagination may not pass over without Offense. This
Consideration takes great luster from the comparison of different Conditions,
and therefore it is, that I propose to my self in a thousand faces, those whom
Fortune or their own Error torment and carry away; and moreover those, who more
like to me, so negligently and incuriously receive their good Fortune. They are
men who pass away their time indeed, they run over the present, and that which
they possess, to give themselves up to hope, and for vain Shadows and Images
which fancy puts into their Heads; Aenid. lib. 10.
Morte obita quales fama est volitare figuras,
Aut quae sopitos deludunt somnia sensus.
Mr. Ogilby.
Such shapes they say that dead men's Spirits have,
Or those in Dreams our drousie Sense deceive.
which hasten and prolong their flight, according as they are pursued. The
fruit and end of their pursuit is to pursue; as Alexander said, that the end of
his labor was to labor. Nil actum credens cum quid superesset agendum. Lucan.
l. 2.

Thinking naught done, if ought was left to do.
For my part then I love Life, and cultivate it, such as it has pleased God to
bestow it upon us; I do not desire it should be without the necessity of eating
and drinking; and I should think to offend no less excusably to wish it had
been double. Seneca. Epist. 119.
Sapiens divitiarum naturalium quaesitor acerrimus. A wise man is an avaricious
gaper after natural riches. Nor that we should support our selves by putting
only a little of that Drug into our Mouths, by which Epimenides took away his
Appetite, and kept himself alive. Nor that a man should stupidly beget
Children, with his Fingers or heels, but rather, with reverence I speak it,
that we might voluptuously beget them with our Fingers and heels. Nor that the
Body should be without desire, and void of delight. These are ungrateful and
wicked complaints. I accept kindly, and with acknowledgment, what Nature has
done for me; am well pleased with it, and proud of it. A man does wrong to the
Great and Potent Giver of all things, to refuse, disannull, or disfigure his
Gift; He has made every thing well. Omnia quae secundum Naturam sunt
aestimatione digna sunt. Cicero.
All things that are according to Nature are worthy of esteem. Of Philosophical
Opinions, I more willingly embrace those that are most solid; that is to say,
the most humane, and most our own: my Discourse is, suitably to my manners, low
and humble: I then bring forth a Child to my own liking, when it puts it self
upon its Ergo's, to prove that it is a barbarous alliance to marry the Divine
with the Earthly, the Reasonable with the Unreasonable, the Severe with the
Indulgent, and the Honest with the Dishonest. That Pleasure is a brutish
quality, unworthy to be tasted by a wise man. That the sole Pleasure that he
extracts from the enjoyment of a fair young Wife, is a pleasure of his
Conscience, to perform an action according to order; as to put on his Boots for
a profitable Journey. Oh, that his followers had no more right, nor nerves, nor
juice, in getting their Wives Maidenheads, than in his Lessons. It Is not what
Socrates says, who is both his Master and ours. He values as he ought Bodily
pleasure, but he preferrs that of the Soul, as having more force, constancy,
facility, variety and dignity. This, according to him, goes by no means alone,
he is not so fantastic, but only it goes first. Temperance in him is the
Moderatrix, not the Adversary of his Pleasures. Nature is a gentle guide, but
not more sweet and gentle than prudent and just. Cicero de fin. l. 5.
Intrandum est in rerum naturam and penitus quid ea postulet, per videndum. A
man must search into the Nature of things, and examine what she requires. I
hunt after her foot throughout, but we have confounded it with artificial
Truces. And that Academick and Peripatetick good, which is to live according to
it, becomes by this means hard to limit and explain. And that of the Stoics,
Cousin-German to it, which is to consent to Nature. Is it not an error to
esteem any Actions less worthy, because they are Necessary? And yet they cannot
beat it out of my Head, that it is not a convenient marriage of Pleasure with
Necessity, to which, says an Ancient, the Gods do always consent. To what end
do we dismember by Divorce, a building united by so mutual and brotherly a
Correspondence? Let us, on the contrary, repair and corroborate it by mutual
Offices, let the Mind rouse and quiken the heaviness of the Body, and the Body
stop and fix the levity of the Soul. Aug. verb. Apost. ser. 13. lib. 6.
Qui velut summum bonum laudat Animae Naturam, and tanquam malum, Naturam
Carnis accusat, profecto and Animam carnaliter appetit, and Carnem carnaliter
fugit, quoniam id Vanitate sentit humana, non veritale Divina. Who commends the
Nature of the Soul as the supreme good, and accuses the Nature of the Flesh as
evil, does certainly both carnally affect the Soul, and carnally flies the
flesh, because he is so possessed through humane vanity, and not by Divine
truth. In this Present that God has made us, there is nothing unworthy our
care; we stand accountable even to an hair. And it is no slight Commission to
man, to conduct man according to his condition. It Is express, plain, and the
principal injunction of all, and the Creator has seriously and strictly
enjoined it. Authority has alone the power to work upon common Understandings,
and is of more weight in a Foreign Language, and therefore let us again charge
it in this place. Stultitia proprium quis non dixerit ignave, and contumaciter
facere quae facienda sunt; and alio corpus impellere, alio animum, distrahique
inter diversissimos motus? Who will not say, that it is the property of folly,
slothfully and contumaciously to perform what is to be done, and to bend the
Body one way and the Mind another, and to be distracted betwixt most different
motions? Which to make apparent, makes any one another day tell you what
whimsies and imaginations he put into his own pate, and upon the account of
which he diverted his thoughts from a good meal, and complains of the time he
spends in eating: you will find there is nothing so insipid in all the Dishes
at your Table, as this wise meditation of his (for the most part we had better
sleep than wake to the purpose we do) and that his Discourses and Notions are
not worth the worst Mess there: Though they were the Raptures of Archimedes
himself, what were they worth? I do not here speak of, nor mix with the rabble
of us ordinary men, and the vanity of the thoughts and desires that divert us,
those venerable Souls, elevated by the ardour of Devotion and Religion, to a
constant and conscientious meditation of Divine things, who, by a lively
endeavor and vehement hope, prepossessing the use of the eternal nourishment,
the final aim and last step of Christian desires, the sole, constant, and
incorruptible pleasure, disdain to apply themselves to our necessitous, fluid,
and ambiguous conveniences, and easily resign to the Body the care and use of
sensual and temperate feeding. It Is a priviledg'd study. I have ever amongst us
observed, supercelestial opinions, and subterranean manners, to be of singular
accord. Aesop, that great man, saw his Master piss as he walked: What, said he,
must we then dung as we run? Let us manage our time as well as we can, there
will yet remain a great deal that will be idle and ill employed. As if the Mind
had not other hours enough wherein to do its business, without disassociating it
self from the Body, in that little space it needs for its necessity. They will
put themselves out of themselves, and escape from being men. It Is folly,
instead of transforming themselves into Angels, they transform themselves into
Beasts, and instead of elevating, lay themselves lower. These transcendent
Humors affright me, like high and inaccessible Cliffs and Precipices: And
nothing is hard for me to digest in the Life of Socrates, but his Ecstasies,
and communication with Devils. Nothing so Humane in Plato, as that for which
they say he was called Divine. And of our Sciences, those seem to be the most
terrestrial and low that are highest mounted. And I find nothing so humble and
mortal in the Life of Alexander, as his fancies about immortalization. Philotus
pleasantly quipt him in his answer. He congratulated him by Letter concerning
the Oracle of Jupiter Hammon, who had placed him amongst the Gods; Upon thy
account, I am glad of it, said he, but the men are to be lamented, who are to
live with a man, and to obey him, who exceeds, and is not contented with the
measure of a man. Diis te minorem quod geris, imperas. Because thou carriest
thy self lower than the Gods, thou do rule and command. The queint
Inscription wherewith the Athenians honored the entry of Pompey into their
City, is conformable to my sense: D'autant es tu Dieu, comme
Tu te recognois homme.
By so much thou a God appear'st to be,
By how much thou a man confessest thee.
It Is an absolute, and as it were, a Divine Perfection, for a man to know how
loyally to enjoy his Being: We seek other conditions, by reason we do not
understand the use of our own; and go out of our selves, because we know not
how there to reside. It Is to much purpose to go upon stilts, for when upon
stilts, we must yet walk upon our Legs; And when seated upon the most elevated
Throne in the World, we are but seated upon our Breech. The fairest Lives, in
my opinion, are those which regularly accommodate themselves to the common and
humane model; but without miracle, and without extravagance. But old Age stands
a little in need of a more gentle Treatment. Let us recommend it to God, the
Protector of Health and Wisdom, but withal, let us be gay and sociable: Frui
paratis and valido mihi
Latoe dones, and precor integra
Cum mente, nec turpem senectam
Degere, nec Cythara carentem.
Latona's Son,
In Mind, Sir Richard Fanshaw.
and Bodies health my own
To Enjoy; old Age from dotage free,
And solac'd with the Lute, give me.


The end of the Third and last Book of Montaign's Essays.

