MEGALOPSYCHY BEING A Particular and Exact ACCOUNT Of the last XVII. Years OF
Q. Elizabeth's Reign, Both MILITARY and CIVIL. The First written by Sir William
Monson, one of the Queens Admirals. The Second written by Heywood Townsend,
Esquire. WHEREIN Is a True and Faithful Relation of all the Expeditions, Attempts,
Designs, Successes, and Errors, both of the English and Spanish Wars, from the
Year 1585, to the Queens death. With a Full Account of the eminent Speeches and
Debates, etc. in the said time. To which is added Dr. Parry's Trial in the Year
1584. All written at the time of the Actions, by Persons eminently Acting
therein.

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook, and sold by W. Davis in Amen Corner.
M.DC.LXXXII.

A TRUE and EXACT ACCOUNT OF THE Wars with Spain, In the REIGN of Q. ELIZABETH,
(Of Famous Memory.) BEING The Particulars of what happened between the English
and Spanish Fleets, from the Years 1585 to 1602. SHOWING The Expeditions,
Attempts, Fights, Designs, Escapes, Successes, Errors, etc. on both sides. With
the Names of Her Majesty's Ships and Commanders in every Fleet. Being a Pattern
and Warning to Future Ages. Never Printed before.

Written by Sir William Monson, who was a Captain in most, and Admiral of
several of those Fleets in the said Wars, and Dedicated to his Son.

LONDON, Printed for W. Crook, and sold by W. Davis in Amen Corner.
M.DC.LXXXII.

TO THE READER By way of Advertisement.
YOu have here put into your hands a Piece of English History of a time of
great Actions. You will hardly meet more Truth in any History than you will
find in this. All circumstances considered, there could not in any thing be
greater opportunities of Truth, they being written by Persons of Eminent
Characters, and Considerable Actors in the same times. These very Authors Wise
and Heroic Actions make no inconsiderable part of the History it self.

The First is a Relation of the Military Transactions of the Nation for nigh
Twenty Years, beginning Anno Domini 1585, (from which time to Queen Elizabeth's
death there was yearly set out a Fleet against the Spaniards) with a full
Account of all the Expeditions, Stratagems, Attempts, Successes, and
Miscarriages, that happened in that War on both sides; wherein is showed the
Valor and Heroic Acts of those great Soldiers that were so plenty in that
Age; as, Cumberland Suffolk Essex Sheffeild Drake Rawleigh Hawkins Forbisher
Carlee Buroughs Bellingham Fenner Southwell Cross Seymour Cross Winter
Beeston Palmer Barker Bostock Sackvile Goring Norris Williams Leicester York
Greenvile Vavasor, etc.


And Sir William Monson, the Author of this, who was Admiral in several of the
said Expeditions against the Spaniards, and also a Member in her last
Parliaments.

The second part is the full and exact Account of the Four last Parliaments
(both Lords and Commons) of Queen Elizabeth, taken from the original Records of
their Houses, by Heywood Townsend Esquire, a Member thereof; with the
particular Speech and Behavior of the Wife and Learned Statesmen, Lawyers,
etc. which that time was fo fruitful of, viz. Egerton Burleigh Buckhurst Cecill
Walsingham Hatton Bacon Rawleigh Hobby Crook Coke Moore Fortescue Pophan
Yelverton Finch Maynard Spelman Wentworth Hobart Manwood Jones Digby Caesar
Anderson Winch, etc.


With other passages of History in those times, that is, runs contemporary with
Sir William Monsons Relation both together being the Account of the Military
and Civil State of Affairs, of nigh 20 Years of the last part of Queen
Elizabeth's Reign, being the most eminent time of Action in all her Government.

With Sir William Monsons Directions and Advice to his Son by way of
Dedication, to excuse its not coming forth sooner, may be to avoid such
Offenses, which must necessarily be given by a faithful and exact Historian,
that writes of the present Age, when the Parties are living that were Actors in
it; it may by this time be supposed that such Objections (against its now
coming forth) may be over. You have added at the end of this the Trial,
Condemnation, and Execution of Dr. Parry, for a Conspiracy against the said
Queen, written also at the time of his Trial and Execution.

So that what is here offered for thy use, is nothing but what was written at
the time of the Action, or by the Persons who were Actors, and of such Quality,
that it is quite out of all suspicion there should be the least Falsehood in
this; it being never at all designed for the public in the lifetime of the
Authors. Therefore neither Profit nor Honor did the Authors expect, although
their exact and careful Accounts of Truth must be no small benefit to the
curious Reader.

There is lately published a small Book of 1 s. 6 d. price, called, The
Connection, being choice Collections of some principal matters in King James his
Reign, and passages betwixt this Book and Rushworth, Nalson, and the rest that
begin at King Charles I.

Sir WILLIAM MONSON TO HIS Son JOHN.
Dear Son,
THE Custom of Dedicating Books has been ancient, and they have been usually
dedicated either to Great Persons, for protection or remuneration; or to
Familiars, out of friendship and affection; or to Children, in respect of
nature and for admonition. And to this end it is, that to you I commend the
reading of the Discourse following; that so beholding the 18 years War by Sea,
which for want of years you could not then remember; and comparing them with
the 18 years of Peace, in which you have lived, you may consider three things.
First, that after so many pains and perils God has lent Life to your Father to
further your Education. Secondly, what proportion his recompense and rewards
have had to his Services. Lastly, what just cause you have to abandon the
thoughts of such dangerous and uncertain courses; and that you may follow the
ensuing Precepts, which I commend to your often perusal.

And in the first place, I will put you in mind of the small Means and Fortune
I shall leave, that you may rate your Expenses accordingly; and yet as little
as it is, it is great to me, in respect I attained to it by my own endeavors
and dangers, and therefore no body can challenge Interest in it but my self,
though your Carriage may promise the best possibility.

Beware you presume not so much upon it, as thereby to grow disobedient to your
Parents; for what you can pretend to, is but the privilege of two years of age
above your younger Brother; and in such cases Fathers are like Judges, that can
and will distinguish of offenses and deserts according to truth, and will
reward and punish as they shall see cause.

And because you shall know it is no rare or new thing for a man to dispose of
his own, I will lay before you a Precedent of your own House, that so often as
you think of it, you may remember it with fear, and prevent it with care.

The Great Grandfather of your Grandfather was a Knight by Title, and John by
name, which name we desire to retain to our eldest Sons; God blessed him with
many earthly Benefits, as Wealth, Children, and Reputation; his eldest Son was
called John after his Father, and his second William like to your self and
Brother; but upon what displeasure I know not, (although we must judge the Son
gave the occasion) his Father left him the least part of his Fortune, though
sufficient to equal the best Gentleman of his Shire, and particularly the
ancient House called after his name. His other Son William he invested with
what your Uncle now enjoys. Both the Sons whilst they lived carried the port
and estimation of their Fathers Children, though afterward it fell out that
the Son of John, and Nephew to William, became disobedient, negligent, and
prodigal, and spent all his Patrimony; so that in conclusion he and his Son
extinguished their House, and there now remains no memory of them. As for the
second Line and Race, of whom your Uncle and I descended, we live as you see,
though our Estates be not great, and of the two mine much the least; which
notwithstanding is the greater to me in respect I achieved it with the peril
and danger of my Life; and you will make my contentment in the enjoyment of it
the greater, if it be accompanied with that comfort I hope to receive from you.

The next thing I will handle shall be Arms. Know that Wars by Land or Sea are
always accompanied with infinite dangers and disasters, and seldom rewarded
according to Merit: For one Soldier that lives to enjoy that Preferment which
becomes his right by Antiquity of Service, ten thousand fall by the Sword and
other casualties: And if you compare that of a Soldier with any other Calling
or Profession, you will find much difference both in the reward and danger

Although Arms have been esteemed in all Ages, and the more as there was
greater occasion to use them; yet you shall find they have been always subject
to jealousies and envy; Jealousies from the State, if the General or other
Officer grow great and popular; subject to envy from Inferiors, who through
their perverse and ill dispositions malign other men's Merits.

The Advancement of Soldiers is commonly made by Counselors at home, whose
eyes cannot witness the Services performed abroad; but a man is advanced as he
is befriended, which makes the Soldiers Preferment as uncertain as his Life is
casual.

Compare the estate and advancement of Soldiers of our time but with the mean
and mercenary Lawyer, and you shall find so great a difference, that I had
rather you should become Apprentice to the one, than make Profession of the
other.

A Captain that will seek to get the love of his Soldiers. as his greatest
praise and felicity, of all other vices must detest and abandon Covetousness;
he must live by spending as the Miser does by sparing; insomuch as few of them
can obtain by War wherewith to maintain themselves in peace, and where Wealth
wants Preferment fails.

Soldiers that live in peaceable Islands, as in England, their Profession is
undervalued, because we see not those dangers which make the Soldiers
necessary, as others do where Wars are practiced. And the good success in our
Wars has been such as makes us attribute our Victories, not so much to Valor
as to Chance.

I confess the base and ill behavior of some Soldiers, has made themselves
and their Callings the less esteemed; for the name of a Captain, which was ever
wont to be honorable, is now became a word of reproach and disdain.

Soldiers may have Reputation, but little Credit; Reputation enough to defend
their Honors, but little Trust in Commerce of the World; and not without
cause, for their security is the worse, by how much the danger of death is the
greater.

Learning is as much to be preferred before War, as the trade of a Merchant
before that of the Factor. By Learning you are made sensible of the difference
betwixt Men and other Creatures, and will be able to judge between the good and
the bad, and how to walk accordingly. By Learning you attain to the knowledge
of Heavenly Mysteries, and you may frame your Life accordingly, as God shall
give you grace. By Learning you are made capable of Preferment, if it concur
with Virtue and Discretion; and the rather because you are a Gentleman by
birth, and of good Alliance, which I observe next to Money in this Golden Age
is the second step to Advancement.

For one that is preferred by Arms, there are twenty by Learning; and indeed
the Soldier is but a Servant to the Learned, for after his many fought
Battles, and as many dangers of his Life, he must yield account of his Actions,
and be judged, corrected, and advanced as it shall please the other.

You may wonder to hear me extol Learning so highly above my own Profession,
considering the poor Fortune I shall leave was achieved by Arms; it is enough
therefore to persuade you what I say is not conjectural but approved: for if I
did not find this difference, the natural affection of a Father to a Son would
make me discover it to you, that you may follow that which is most probable and
profitable.

Good Son, love Soldiers for your Countries sake, who are the Defenders of it;
for my sake, who have made Profession of it; but shun the practice of it as you
will do Brawls, Quarrels, and Suits, which bring with them perplexities, and
dangers.

There are many things to be shunned, as being perilous both to Body and Soul;
as Quarrels and occasions of them, which happen through the enormities and
abuses of our Age. Esteem Valor as a special virtue, but shun Quarrelling as a
most detestable vice. Of two evils it were better to keep company with a Coward
than a Quarreller; the one is commonly sociable and friendly, the other
dangerous in his Acquaintance, and offensive to Standersby. He is never free
from peril, that is conversant with a Quarreller, either for offense given to
himself, or to others wherein he may be engaged.

A true valiant man shall have enough to do to defend his own Reputation.
without engaging for others: nor are all valiant that will fight, therefore
Discretion makes a difference betwixt Valor and Desperateness. Nothing can
happen more unfortunate to a Gentleman, than to have a Quarrel, and yet nothing
so ordinary as to give offense; it draws with it many mischiefs both to Body
and Soul: being slain he is danger of damnation, and no less if he kill the
other without great repentance. He shall perpetually live in danger of revenge
from the Friends of the Party killed, and fall into the mercy of the Prince and
Law where he lives; but if for fear and baseness he avoid and shun a Quarrel,
he is more odious living than he would be unhappy in dying.

Drinking is the foundation of other vices, it is the cause of Quarrels, and
then follows Murders. It occasions Swearing, Whoredom, and many other vices
depend upon it.

When you behold a Drunkard, imagine you see a Beast in the shape of a Man. It
is a humor that for the time pleases the Party drunk, and so bereaves him of
sense, that he thinks all he does delights the Beholders; but the day
following he buys his shame with repentance, and perhaps gives that offense in
his drunkenness, that makes him hazard both Life and Reputation in a Quarrel.
You have no man that will brag or boast so much of the word Reputation as a
Drunkard, when indeed there is nothing more to a man's imputation than to be
drunk.

A Drunkard is in the condition of an excommunicated person, whose Testimony
betwixt Party and Party is of no validity. Avoid (good Son) the company of a
Drunkard, and occasions of drinking, then shall you live free without fear, and
enjoy your own without hazard.

Whoredom is an incident to Drunkenness, though on the contrary all
Whoremasters are not Drunkards. It is a sin not washed away without the
vengeance of God to the third and fourth generation.

Besides the offense to God, it gives a disreputation to the party and his
Offspring, it occasioneth a breach betwixt Man and Wife, encourages the Wife
oftentimes to follow the ill example of her Husband, and then ensues Dislike,
Divorce, Disinheriting of Children, Suits in Law, and Consuming of Estates.

The next and worst sin I would have you shun is Swearing. I do not advise you
like a Puritan, that ties a man more to the observing of Sundays, and from
taking the Name of God in vain, than to all the rest of the Commandments: but I
wish you to avoid it for the greatness of the sin it self, for the Plague of
God hangs over the House of the Blasphemer. Swearing is odious to the
Hearers, it gives little credit to the words of him that uses it, it
affords no pleasure as other sins do, nor yields any profit to the party;
Custom begets it, and Custom must make one leave it.

For your Exercises let them be of two kinds, the one of Mind, the other of
Body; that of the Mind must consist of Prayer, Meditation, and your Book; let
your Prayers be twice a day, howsoever you dispose of your self the rest of the
time; Prayers work a great effect in a contrite and penitent Heart.

By this I do not seek to persuade you from such Exercises and Delights of body
as are lawful and allowable in a Gentleman; for such increase health and
agility of body, make a man sociable in company, and draw good Acquaintants;
many times they bring a man into favor with a Prince, and prove an occasion of
preferment in his Marriage; they are often times a safeguard to a man's Life, as
in vaulting suddenly upon a Horse to escape an Enemy.

I will especially commend unto you such pleasures as bring delight and content
without charge; for others are fitter for greater men than one of your Fortune
to follow.

Hawking and Hunting, if they be moderately used, are like Tobacco, in some
cases wholesome for the Body, but in the common use both laboursom and loathsome;
they alike bring one discommodity, (as commonly Vices do) that they are not so
easily left as entertained.

Tobacco is hot and hurtful to young Bodies and Stomachs, and augments the heat
of the Liver, which naturally you are subject to. It is offensive to company,
especially the Breath of him that takes it; it dries the Brain, and many
become Fools with the continual use thereof.

Let your Apparel be handsome and decent, not curious nor costly. A wise man is
more esteemed in his plain Cloth than gay Clothing. It is more commendable to
be able to buy a rich Suit than to wear one. A wise man esteems more of a man's
Virtues and Valor than of his Vesture; but seeing this Age is fantastical and
changeable, you must fashion your self to it, but in so mean and moderate a
manner, as to be rather praised for Frugality, than derided for Prodigality.

He that delights in curious Clothes is an Imitator of a Player, who measures
his Apparel by the part he acts. And as Players appear upon the Stage to be
seen of the Spectators, so do the Gallants proclaim their Braveries in open
Assemblies.

Whilst I live and you not marry, I shall temper this Expense; but when I die
remember what I say, seek Advancement rather by your carriage; the curiousness,
the reputation you gain by that will be lasting, when this will appear but like
a Flower fading.

Frame your Course of Life to the Country and not to the Court; and yet make
not your self such a stranger to great persons, as in Assemblies they should
ask others who you are. I confess the greatest and suddenest rising is by the
Court; yet the Court is like a hopeful and forward Spring, that is taken with
a sharp and cold Frost, which nips and blasts a whole Orchard except 2 or 3
Trees; for after that proportion commonly Courtiers are preferred. And he that
will thrive at Court must make his dependency upon some great person, in whose
Ship he must imbarque all his hopes; and how unfortunate such great persons are
oftentimes themselves, and how unthankful to their Followers, we want not
Precedents.

He that settles his Service upon one of them shall fall into the disfavour of
another; for a Court is like an Army ever in War, striving by stratagems to
circumvent and kick up one another heels, You are not ignorant of the aptness
of this Comparison by what you know of me, whose case will serve you for a
Prospective-glass, wherein to behold your danger afar off, the better to
prevent it. Yet reverence Lords because they are Noble, and one more than
another, as he is more notable in virtue.

Be choice of your Company; for as a man makes election of them he is censured:
Man lives by Reputation, and that failing he becomes a Monster. Let your
Company consist of your own rank, rather better than worse; for hold it for a
Maxim, The better Gentleman the more gentle in his behavior.

Beware they be not accused of Crimes, for so it may touch you in Credit; and
if you lose your Reputation in the bud of your Youth, you shall scarce recover
it in the whole course of your Life. Let them be civil in carriage, for
commonly such men are sensible above all; let them be learned, for Learning is
a Fountain from whence springs another Life; let them be temperate in Diet and
Expense, so shall you learn to live in health, and increase in wealth.

Beware they be not choleric in disposition, or arrogant in Opinion; for so
you shall become a Slave to their Humors, and base by suffering. A choleric
man of all others is the worst Companion, for he cannot temper his rage, but on
any slight occasion of a Friend becomes an Enemy. Value true Friendship next to
Marriage, which nothing but Death can dissolve; for the fickleness of
Friendship is oftentimes the ruin of ones Fortune.

Beware of Gaming, for it causes great vexation of Mind. If you lose, it begets
in you that humor, that out of hope of regaining your losses, you will
endanger the loss of all. Do not presume too much of your skill in Play, or
making wagers as if you were excellent above others, or have Fortune at
command; for she is like a Whore variable and inconstant, and when she
disfavours you, it is with more loss at once than she recompenceth at twice.

Love your Brother and Sisters for their own sakes, as you are bound by Nature,
but especially for mine whose they are. Remember you are all indifferent to me,
but that God chose you from the rest to be a strength and stay to them; think
you cannot honor your Father more being dead, than in showing affection to them
he dearly loved; and nothing will more approve you to be mine, than love and
kindness amongst your selves. You owe somewhat more to me than that I am your
Father, in that I seek your Advancement above theirs, of which Obligation I
will acquit you conditionally you perform what you ought to them. For because
Man cannot himself live ever, he desires to live in his Posterity; and if I had
an hundred Sons, my greatest hope must depend upon you as you are my eldest,
and seeing my care is of you above the rest, do not make my Memory so unhappy,
as to give the World an occasion to say, I left an unnatural Son. The only
request I make is, be kind and loving to them, who I know by their disposition
will give you no cause of offense. A discourtesie from you will be as sharp to
them as a Razor from another.

Be courteous and friendly to all, for men are esteemed according to there
carriage. There is an old Proverb, The courtesy of the mouth is of great
value, and costs little. A proud man is envied of his Equals, hated by his
Inferious, and scorned by his Superiors; so that betwixt Envy, Hate, and Scorn
he is friendless.

Many times a man is condemned to death out of presumption, especially when it
concurrs with an opinion of his former ill carriage: how much therefore does it
concern a man in the times of his Prosperity to lay up a stock of Love and
Reputation?

There cannot be a greater Honor than to gain a man's Enemy by a courtesy; it
far exceeds the kindness that is done to another, and doubly obliges him that
receives it. Love is a thing desired by a King from his Subjects, by a General
from his Soldiers, and by a Master from his Servants; he that has it is rich
by it, it maintains peace in time of peace, and is a safe Bulwork in time of
war.

Do not buy this Love with the ruin of your Estate, as many do with prodigal
Expenses, and then are requited with pity and derision. Let your Expense be
agreeable to the wearing of your Clothes, better or worse according to Company;
or the journying your Horse, the less way you go to day, you may travel the
further to morrow; but if you go every day a long and wearisom Journey, your
Horse will fail, and you be enforced to go on foot. And so will it be in your
Expenses, if you do not moderate them according to Days and Companies, your
Horse and you may travel faintly together.

If you are prodigal in any thing, let it be in Hospitality, as most agreeable
to the will of God, you shall feed the hungry, relieve the poor, and get the
love of the rich. What you spend among your Neighbors is not lost, but
procures their loves and helps when you have need, and thereby you shall find
Friendship in the Country as available as Favor at Court.

If you are called to any place of Magistracy, do justice with pity, revenge
not your self of your Enemy under color of Authority, for that shows baseness,
and will procure you hatred. In Money matters favor your Country, if it be not
against the present profit of the King, for many times his Name is used for the
gain of other men.

Study the Laws, not to make a mercenary practice of them, but only for your
own use, the good of your Neighbors, and the Government of your Country. Hold
the Laws in reverence next to the King; for that Kingdom is well governed where
the King is ruled by the Laws, not the Laws by the King.

Be not presumptuous in your Command, yet seek to be obeyed as you desire to
obey; for as you are above others, others are above you. Give your mind to
accommodate Controversies among your Neighbors, and you shall gain their Love,
which will more avail you than the hate of the Lawyers can hurt you.

Punish Idleness and other vices, as well for that they are such, as for
examples sake. Gain love by doing Justice, and hate doing wrong, though it were
to your immediate profit.

If you marry after my death, choose a Wife as near as you can suitable to your
Calling, Years, and Condition; for such Marriages are made in Heaven, though
celebrated on Earth.

If your Estate were great, your choice might be the freer; but where the
preferment of your Sisters must depend upon your Wives Portion, let not your
Fancy overrule your Necessity. It is an old Saying, He that marries for love
has evil days and good nights: Consider if you marry for Affection, how long
you will be raising Portions for your Sisters, and the misery you shall live in
all the days of your life; for the greatest Fortune that a man can expect is in
his Marriage. A wise man is known by his actions, but where Passion and
Affection sway, that man is deprived of sense and understanding.

It is not the Poverty or Meanness of her that is married that makes her the
better Wife, for commonly such Women grow elevated, and are no more mindful of
what they have been, than a Mariner is of his escape from a danger at Sea when
it is past. You must set your Wife a good example by your own carriage, for a
wise and discreet Husband usually makes an obedient and dutiful Wife. Beware of
Jealousy, for it causes great vexation of mind, and scorn and laughter from
your Enemies.

Many times it is occasioned by the behavior of the Husband toward other
Women: in that case do like the Physician, take away the cause of the
infirmity, if not you are worthy to feel the smart of it. Jealousy is grounded
upon conceit and imagination, proceeds from a weak, idle, and distempered
Brain; and the unworthy carriage of him that is jealous, many times makes a
Woman do what otherwise she would not.

If God be pleased to give you Children, love them with that discretion that
they discern it not, lest they too much presume upon it. Encourage them in
things that are good, and correct them if they offend. The love of God to Man
cannot be better expressed, than by that of a Father to his Children. Comforts
or Crosses they prove to their Parents, and herein Education is a great help to
Nature.

Let your Children make you to disrelish and abandon all other delights and
pleasures of the world, in respect of the comfort and joy you receive by them.
Make account then that Somer is past, and the melancholy Winter approaches;
for a careful and provident Father cannot take delight in the world and provide
for his Children.

For a conclusion I will recommend two principal Virtues to you, the one is
Secrecy, the other Patience. Secrecy is necessarily required in all, especially
public persons, for many times they are trusted with things, the revealing
whereof may cost them their lives, and hinder the designs of their Masters. It
is a folly to trust any man with a secret, that can give no assistance in the
business he is trusted with. Counselors of State and Generals, of Armies, of
all other ought to be most secret, for their designs being once discovered,
their Enterprises fail. Silence was so much esteemed among the Persians, that
she was adored for a Goddess. The Romans kept their Expeditions so secret, as
that alone was a principal cause of their Victories. But of all others trust
not Women with a Secret, for the weakness of their Sex makes them unsecret. Be
patient after the example of Job, and you shall become a true Servant of God.
Patience deserves to be painted with a Sword in her hand, for she conquers and
subdues all difficulties. If you will take advantage of your Enemy, make him
choleric, and by patience you shall overcome him.

Marcus Aurelius being both Emperor and Philosopher confessed, he attained not
the Empire by Philosophy but by Patience. What man in the world was ever so
patient as our Savior himself, by following whose example his Ministers have
converted more by their words, then all the persecuting Emperors could deterr
by rigor or cruelty of Laws. The impatient man contests with God himself, who
gives and takes away at his good will and pleasure.

Let me (good Son) be your Pattern of Patience, for you can witness with me,
that the Disgraces I have unjustly suffered, (my Estate being through my
misfortunes ruined, my Health by imprisonments decayed, and my Services
undervalued and unrecompensed) have not bred the least distaste or discontent
in me, or altered my resolution from my infancy; that is, I was never so base
as to insinuate into any man's favor, who was favored by the times. I was
never so ambitious as to seek or crave Employment, or to undertake any that was
not put upon me. My great and only comfort is, that I served my Princes both
faithfully and fortunately; but seeing my Services have been no better
accepted, I can as well content my self in being a Spectator, as if I were an
Actor in the world.

Before I treat of the Sea I will show what Laws Richard the First established
in his Expedition by Sea, which in some points are observed to this day.

1. That whosoever should kill a man, should be tied to him killed, and thrown
into the Sea with him.

2. If any be killed on Land, the party to be buried alive with him killed.

3. Whosoever shall strike another, and not draw blood, shall be duck'd three
times at the Yards Arm.

4. Whosoever revileth or curses another, so often as he revileth shall pay an
ounce of Silver.

5. Whosoever draws his Knife, or draws Blood, shall lose his Hand.

6. Whosoever does steal, shall have his Head shorn, and boiled Pitch poured
upon it, and Feathers strewed upon the same, whereby he may be known; and at
the first Landing place he shall be towed on shore.

A Yearly Account of the English and Spanish Fleets, which were set forth from
the Year 1585, when the Wars with Spain first began, until the Year 1602, when
King James made his happy Entrance into this Kingdom; showing the Designs,
Escapes, and Errors on both English and Spanish sides, with the Names of the
Queens Ships and Commanders in every Expedition.
A Voyage of Sir Francis Drake to the West Indies, Anno Dom. 1585.
Ships. Commanders. The Elizabeth Bonaventure Sir Francis Drake. The Aid Capt.
Forbisher. Capt. Carlee Lieutenant General by Land.

UPon the knowledge of the Imbargo made by the King of Spain in Anno 1585, of
the English Ships, Men, and Goods found in his Country; Her Majesty having no
means to help or relieve her Subjects by friendly Treaty, authorized such as
sustained loss by the said Arrest, to repair themselves upon the Subjects of
the King of Spain; and to that end gave them Letters of Reprisal, to take and
arrest all Ships and Merchandises that they should find at Sea, or elsewhere,
belonging to the Vassals of the said King.

Her Majesty at the same time to revenge the wrongs offered her, and to resist
the King of Spains Preparations made against her equipped a Fleet of 25 Sail of
Ships, and employed them under the command of Sir Francis Drake, as the fittest
man by reason of his Experience and Success in sundry Actions.

It is not my intent to set down all the particulars of the Voyages treated of,
but the Services done, and the Escapes and Oversights past, as a warning to
those that shall read them, and to prevent the like Errors hereafter.

This Voyage of Sir Francis Drake being the first undertaking on either side,
(for it ensued immediately after the Arrest of our Ships and Goods in Spain) I
will deliver my Opinion of it, before I proceed any further.

One impediment to the Voyage was, that to which the ill success of diverse
others that after followed, is to be imputed, viz. the want of Victuals and
other necessaries fit for so great an Expedition; for had not the Fleet by
chance met with a Ship laden with Fish, that came from New found Land, which
relieved their necessities, they would have found themselves reduced to great
extremity.

The Service that was performed in this Action, was the taking and sacking
Sancta Domingo in Hispaniola, Cartagena in Terra firma, and the Fonta aqua in
Florida; three Towns of great importance in the West Indies. This Fleet was the
greatest of any Nation but the Spaniards, that had been ever seen in those Seas
since the first discovery of them; and if it had been as well considered of
before their going from home, as it was happily performed by the Valor of the
Undertakers, it had more annoyed the King of Spain, than all other Actions that
ensued during the time of the War.

But it seems our long Peace made us incapable of advice in War; for had we
kept and defended those places being in our possession, and provided to have
been relieved and succored out of England, we had diverted the war from this
part of Europe: for at that time there was no comparison betwixt the strength
of Spain and England by Sea, by means whereof we might have better defended
them, and with more ease incroached upon the rest of the Indies, than the King
of Spain could have aided or succored them.

But now we see and find by experience, that those places which were then weak
and unfortified, are since so strengthened, as it is bootless to undertake any
Action to annoy the King of Spain in his West Indies.

And though this Voyage proved both fortunate and victorious, yet considering
it was rather an awakening than a weakening of him, it had been far better to
have wholly declined it, than to have undertaken it upon such slender grounds,
and with so inconsiderable Forces.

The second Voyage of Sir Francis Drake to the Road of Cadiz, and toward the
Islands of Tercera, Anno 1587.
Ships. Commanders. The Elizabeth Bonaventure Sir Francis Drake, General. The
Lion Sir William Borrough, Vice Admiral. The Rainbow Capt. Bellingam. The
Dread-nought Capt. Thomas Fenner.

HER Majesty having received several Advertisements, that while the King of
Spain was silent, not seeking revenge for the injuries the Ships of Reprisal
did him daily upon his Coasts, he was preparing an invincible Army to invade
her at home. She thereupon sought to frustrate his designs, by intercepting his
Provisions before they should come to Lisbon, which was their place of
Rendezvous, and sent away Sir Francis Drake with a Fleet of 30 Sail great and
small, 4 whereof were her own Ships.

The chief Adventure in this Voyage (besides those 4 Ships of Her Majesty's)
was made by the Merchants of London, who sought their private gain more than
the advancement of the Service; neither were they deceived of their expectation.

Sir Francis Drake understanding by two Ships of Middleborough, that came from
Cadiz, of a Fleet with Victuals, Munition, and other habiliments for War,
riding there, ready to take the first opportunity of a wind, to go to Lisbon
and join with other Forces of the King of Spain, he directed his course for
Cadiz Road, where he found the Advertisement he received from this Ships of
Middleborough in every point true; and upon his arrival attempted the Ships
with great courage, and performed the Service he went for, by destroying all
such Ships as he found in Harbor, as well of the Spaniards as other Nations
that were hired by them; and by these means he utterly defeated their mighty
Preparations which were intended against England that year 1587.

The second Service performed by him was, the assaulting the Castle of Cape
Sacre, upon the utmost Promontory of Portugal, and three other strong Holds;
all which he took some by force, and some by composition. From thence he went
to the mouth of the River of Lisbon, where he anchored near Caske Cadiz; which
the Marquess of St. Cruze beholding, durst not with his Galleys approach so
near as once to charge him.

Sir Francis Drake perceiving, that though he had done important Service for
the State by this fortunate Attempt of his, yet the same was not very
acceptable to the Merchants, who adventured only in hope of Profit, and
preferred their private gain before the security of the Kingdom, or any other
respect. Therefore from Caske Cadiz he stood to the Islands of Tercera, to
expect the coming home of a Carreck, which he had intelligence wintered at
Mosambique, and consequently she was to be home in that month. And though his
Victuals grew scarce, and his Company importuned his return home, yet with
gentle Speeches he persuaded, and so much prevailed with them, that they were
willing to expect the issue some few days at the Islands; and by this time
drawing near the Island of S. Michael, it was his good fortune to meet and take
the Carreck he looked for; which added more Honor to his former Service, and
gave great content to the Merchants, to have a profitable Return of their
Adventure, which was the thing they principally desired. This Voyage proceeded
prosperously and without exception, for there was both Honor and Wealth
gained, and the Enemy greatly endamaged.

The first Action undertaken by the Spaniards was in 1588, the Duke of Medina
General, who were encountered by our Fleet, the Lord Admiral being at Sea
himself in person.
Ships. Commanders. The Ark Royal The Lord Admiral. The Revenge Sir Francis
Drake, Vice Admiral. The Lion The Lord Thomas Howard. The Bear The Lord
Sheffeild. The Elizabeth Jonas Sir Robert Southwell. The Triumph Sir Martin
Forbisher. The Victory Sir John Hawkins. The Hope Capt. Cross. The Bonaventure
Capt. Reyman. The Dread-nought Capt. George Beeston. The Nouperil Capt. Thomas
Fenner. The Rainbow The Lord Henry Seymore. The Vanntguard Sir William Winter.
The Mary Rose Capt. Fenton. The Antilope Sir Henry Palmer. The Foresight The
Aid Capt. Barker. The Swallow The Tiger Capt. Fenner. The Scout The Swiftsure
Capt. Hawkins. The Bull The Tremontary Capt. Bostock. The Acatice Pinnaces,
Galleys, Hoyes -- 10 Capt. Ashley.

NOtwithstanding the great spoil and hurt Sir Francis Drake did the year past
in Cadiz Road, by intercepting some part of the Provisions intended for this
great Navy, the King of Spain used his utmost endeavors to revenge himself
this year, lest in taking longer time his Designs might be prevented as before,
and arrested all Ships, Men, and necessaries wanting for his Fleet, and
compelled them per force to seave in this Action.

He appointed for General the Duke of Medina Sidonia, a man employed rather for
his Birth than Experience; for so many Dukes, Marquesses, and Earls,
voluntarily going, would have repined to have been commanded by a man of less
quality than themselves. They departed from Lisbon the 19th. day of May 1588,
with the greatest pride and glory, and least doubt of Victory, that ever any
Nation did; but God being angry with their insolence, disposed of them contrary
to their expectation.

The directions from the King of Spain to his General were, to repair as wind
and weather would give leave, to the Road of Callice in Piccardy, there to
abide the coming of the Prince of Parma and his Army, and upon their meeting to
have opened a Letter directed to them both with further Instructions.

He was especially commanded to sail along the Coasts of Brittany and Normandy,
to avoid being discovered by us here; and if he met with the English Fleet, not
to offer to fight, but only seek to defend themselves. But when he came
athwart the North Cape, he was taken with a contrary wind and foul weather and
forced into the Harbor of the Groyne, where part of his Fleet lay attending
his coming. As he was ready to depart from thence, they had intelligence by an
English Fisherman, whom they took Prisoner, of our Fleets late being at Sea,
and putting back again, not expecting their coming that year; insomuch that
most part of the Men belonging to our Ships were discharged.

This Intelligence made the Duke alter his Resolution, and to break the
Directions given him by the King; yet this was not done without some
difficulty, for the Council was divided in their Opinions, some held it best to
observe the Kings Command, others not to lose the opportunity offered to
surprise our Fleet unawares, and burn and destroy them.

Diego Flores de Valdos, who had the command of the Andalusian Squadron, and on
whom the Duke most relied, because of his experience and judgment, was the main
man that persuaded the Attempt of our Ships in Harbor, and with that
resolution they directed their course for England.

The first Land they fell with was the Lizard, the Southermost part of
Cornwall, which they took to be the Rams Head athwart Plymouth, and the night
being at hand they tacked off to Sea, making account in the morning to make an
Attempt upon our Ships in Plymouth.

But whilst they were thus deceived in the Land, they were in the mean time
discovered by Capt. Flemminge a Pyrat, who had been at Sea pilfering, and upon
view of them, knowing them to be the Spanish Fleet, repaired with all speed to
Plymouth, and gave warning and notice to our Fleet, who were then riding at
Anchor; whereupon my Lord Admiral hastened with all possible expedition to get
forth the Ships, and before the Spaniards could draw near Plymouth, they were
welcomed at Sea by my Lord and his Navy, who continued fight with them until
he brought them to an Anchor at Callice. The particulars of the Fight, and the
Successes thereof, being things so well known, I purposely omit.

While this Armado was preparing, Her Majesty had from time to time perfect
intelligence of the Spaniards Designs; and because she knew his intent was to
invade her at Sea with a mighty Fleet from his own Coast, she furnished out her
Royal Navy under the Conduct of the Lord High Admiral of England, and sent him
to Plymouth, as the likeliest place to attend their coming, as you have heard.

Then knowing that it was not the Fleet alone that could endanger her safety,
for that they were too weak for any Enterprise on Land, without the assistance
of the Prince of Parma, and his Army in Flanders; therefore she appointed 30
Sail of Holland Ships to lie at an Anchor before the Town of Dunkirk, where the
Prince was to imbarque in Flat-bottom'd Boats, made purposely for the
Expedition of England.

Thus had the Prince by the Queens Providence been prevented, if he had
attempted to put out of Harbor with his Boats; but in truth neither his
Vessels nor his Army were in readiness, which caused the King ever after to be
jealous of him, and as it is supposed to hasten his end.

Her Majesty, notwithstanding this her vigilant care to foresee and prevent all
danger that might happen at Sea, would not hold her self too secure of her
Enemy, and therefore prepared a Royal Army to welcome him upon his Landing; but
it was not the will of God that he should set foot on English ground, the Queen
becoming Victorious over him at Sea, with little hazard or bloodshed of her
Subjects.

Having showed the Design of the Spaniards, and the course taken by Her Majesty
to prevent them; I will now collect the Errors committed as well by the one as
by the other, as I have promised in the beginning of my Discourse.

As nothing could appear more rational and likely to take effect, after the
Duke had gotten intelligence of the state of our Navy, than his design to
surprise them unawares in Harbor, he well knowing that if he had taken away
our strength by Sea, he might have landed both when and where he listed, which
is a great advantage to an Invader; yet admitting it had took that effect he
designed, I see not how he was to be commended in breaking the Instructions
given him by the King, what blame then did he deserve, when so ill an event
followed by his rashness and disobedience?

It was not the want of Experience in the Duke, or his laying the fault upon
Valdes, that excused him at his return; but he had smarted bitterly for it, had
it not been for his Wife, who obtained the Kings favor for him.

Before the Arrival of the Ships that escaped in this Voyage, it was known in
Spain, that Diego Flores de Valdes was he who persuaded the Duke to break the
Kings Instructions; whereupon the King gave commandment in all his Ports, where
the said Diego Flores de Valdes might arrive, to apprehend him; which was
accordingly executed, and he carried to the Castle of Sancta Andrea, and was
never seen or heard of after.

If the Kings Directions had been punctually followed, then had his Fleet kept
the Coast of France, and arrived in the Road of Callice before they had been
discovered by us, which might have endangered Her Majesty and the Realm, our
Ships being so far off as Plymouth, where then they lay; and thought the Prince
of Parma had not been presently ready, yet he had gained time sufficient by the
absence of our Fleet to make himself ready.

And whereas the Prince was kept in by the 30 Sail of Hollanders, so many of
the Dukes Fleet might have been able to have put the Hollanders from the Road
of Dunkirk, and possessed it themselves, and so have secured the Army and Fleets
meeting together; and then how easy it had been after their joining to have
transported themselves for England? And what would have ensued upon their
Landing here may be well imagined.

But it was the will of him that directs all men and their actions, that the
Fleets should meet, and the Enemy be beaten as they were, put from their
Anchorage in Callice Road, the Prince of Parma beleaguered at Sea, and their
Navy driven about Scotland and Ireland with great hazard and loss; which
shows how God did marvellously defend us against their dangerous Designs.

And here was opportunity offered us to have followed the Victory upon them;
for after they were beaten from the Road at Callice, and all their hopes and
designs frustated; if we had once more offered them fight, the General by
persuasion of his Confessor was determined to yield, whose example it is very
likely would have made the rest to have done the like. But this opportunity was
lost, not through the negligence or backwardness of the Lord Admiral, but
merely through the want of Providence in those that had the charge of
furnishing and providing for the Fleet; for at that time of so great advantage,
when they came to examine their Provisions, they found a general scarcity of
Powder and Shot, for want whereof they were forced to return home. Another
opportunity was lost not much inferior to the other, by not sending part of
our Fleet to the West of Ireland, where the Spaniards of necessity were to pass
after so many dangers and disasters as they had endured.

If we had been so happy as to have followed this course, as it was both
thought and discoursed of; we had been absolutely victorious over this great
and formidable Navy, for they were brought to that necessity, that they would
willingly have yielded, as diverse of them confessed that were shipwrecked in
Ireland.

By this we may see how weak and feeble the designs of Men are, in respect of
the Creator of Man, and how indifferently he dealt betwixt the two Nations,
sometimes giving one, sometimes the other, the advantage; and yet so that he
only ordered the Battle.

The Action of Portugal, 1589.
Ships. Commanders by Sea. Commanders by Land. The Revenge Sir Francis Drake
Sir John Norris The Dread-nought Capt. Thomas Fenner Sir Edward Norris The Aid
Capt. William Fenner Sir Henry Norris The Nonperil Capt. Sackvile Sir Roger
Williams The Foresight Capt. William Winter. Sergeant Major The Swiftsure Capt.
Goring Earl of Essex Voluntier

THE last overthrow of 1588 given to the Invincible Fleet, as they termed
themselves, did so encourage every man to the War, as happy was he that could
put himself into Action against the Spaniards, as it appeared by the Volunteers
that went in this Voyage; which the Queen (considering the great loss the King
of Spain received in the year past, whereby it was to be imagined how weakly he
was provided at home) was willing to countenance, though she undertook it not
wholly her self, which was the main cause of its ill success and overthrow.

For whosoever he be of a Subject, that thinks to undertake so great an
Enterprise without a Prince's Purse, shall be deceived; and therefore these two
Generals in my opinion never overshot themselves more, than in undertaking so
great a charge with so little means; for where there are Victuals and Arms
wanting, what hope is there of prevailing?

The project of this Voyage was to restore a distressed King to his Kingdom,
usurped as he pretended; and though the means for the setting forth of this
Voyage was not so great as was expedient; yet in the opinion of all men, if
they had directed their course whither they intended it, without landing at the
Groyne, they had performed the Service they went for, restored Don Antonio to
the Crown of Portugal, dissevered it from Spain, and united it in League with
England, which would have answered the present charge, and have settled a
continual Trade for us to the West Indies, and the rest of the Portugals
Dominions, for so we might easily have conditioned.

But the Landing at the Groyne was an unnecessary lingering and hinderance of
the other great and main design, a consuming of Victuals, a weakening of the
Army by the immoderate drinking of the Soldiers, which brought a lamentable
Sickness amongst them, a warning to the Spaniards to strengthen Portugal, and
(as great as all this) a discouragement to proceed further being repulsed in
the first Attempt.

But notwithstanding the ill success at the Groyne, they departed from thence
toward Portugal, and arrived at Penech, a Maritine Town twelve Leagus from
Lisbon, where with a small resistance they took the Castle, after the Captain
understood Don Antonio to be in the Army.

From thence General Norris marched with his Land Forces to Lisbon, and Sir
Francis Drake with his Fleet sailed to Caske Cadiz, promising from thence to
pass with his Ships up the River to Lisbon, to meet with Sir John Norris, which
yet he did not perform, and therefore was much blamed by the general consent of
all men; the overthrow of the Action being imputed to him.

It will not excuse Sir Francis Drake, for making such a Promise to Sir John
Norris, though, on the other hand, I would have accused him of great want of
Discretion, if he had put the Fleet to so great an Adventure to so little
purpose: For his being in the Harbor of Lisbon, signified nothing to the Taking
of the Castle, which was two Miles from thence; and had the Castle been taken,
the Town would have been taken of course.

Besides, the Ships could not furnish the Army with more Men or Victuals:
wherefore I understand not in what Respect his going up was necessary; and yet
the Fleet must have endured many Hazards to this little purpose.

For betwixt Cask Cadiz and Lisbon, there are three Castles, St. John, St.
Francis, and Bellin. The first of the three, I hold one of the most impregnable
Forts to Sea-ward in Europe; and the Fleet was to pass within Calliver Shot of
this Fort; though I confess, the passing it, was not the greatest Dander: For
with a reasonable Gale of Wind, any Fort is to be passed with small Hazard.

But at this time there was a General Want of Victuals; and being once entered
the Harbor, their coming out again was uncertain, the place being subject to
contrary Winds: In the mean while, the better part of the Victuals would have
been consumed, and they would have remained there in so desperate a Condition,
as they would have been forced to have fired one half of the Fleet, for the
bringing home of the rest: for being as they were, yet after the Army was
imbarqued for England, many died of Famine Homeward, and more would have done,
if the Wind had took them short; or, if by the Death of some of them, the rest
who survived had not been the bettr relieved.

And besides all these Casualties and Dangers, the Adilantado was then in
Lisbon with the Galleys of Spain; and how easily he might have annoyed our
Fleet, by towing Fireships amongst us: We may suppose the Hurt we did the
Spaniards the Year before in Cadiz Road; and greater we had done them, had we
had the Help of Galleys.

It was a wonder to observe every man's Opinion of this Voyage, as well those
that were Actions in it, as others that staid at Home; some imputing the
Overthrow of it, to the Landing at the Groyn; others to the Portugalls failing
us of those Helps and Assistances which were promised by Don Antonio; and
others, to Sir Francis Drake's not coming up the River with his Fleet.

Though any of these three Reasons may seem probable enough, and the Landing at
the Groyn, the chiefest of the three; yet if we weigh truly the Defect, and
where it was, it will appear, that the Action was overthrown before their
setting out from Home, they being too weakly provided of all things needful for
so great an Expedition.

For when this Voyage was first treated of, the Number of Ships was nothing
equal to the Proportion of Men: Wherefore they were forced to make Stay of
diverse Easterlings which they met with in our Channel, and compelled to serve
in this Action, for the Transportation of our Soldiers; and though these Ships
were an Ease to our Men, who would have been otherwise much pestered for want
of Room; yet their Victuals were nothing augmented; but they were put aboard
the Ships, like banished men, to seek their Fortunes at Sea, it being
confessed, that diverse of the Ships had not four days Victuals when they
departed from Plymouth.

Another Impediment to the good Success of this Voyage, was, the want of
Fieldpieces; and this was the main Cause why we failed of taking Lisbon: For
the Enemies Strength consisting chiefly in the Castle, and we having only an
Army to countenance us, but no means for Battery, we were the Loss of the
Victory our selves: For it was apparent by Intelligence we received, that if we
had presented them with Battery, they were resolved to parley, and by
Consequence to yield; and this too was made use of by the Portugalls, as a main
Reason why they joined not with us.

And there is as much to be said on the Portugalls behalf, as an Evidence of
their good Will and Favor to us, that though they showed themselves forward
upon this Occasion, to aid us, yet they opposed not themselves as Enemies
against us: Whereas if they had pursued us in our Retreat from Lisbon to Cask
Cadiz, our Men being weak, sickly, and wanting Powder, and Shot, and other
Arms, they had in all probability put us to a great Loss and Disgrace. And if
ever England have the like Occasion to aid a Competitor in Portugal, we shall
questionless, find, that our fair Demeanor and Carriage in this Expedition
toward the People of that Country, have gained us great Reconciliation among
them, and would be of singular Advantage to us: For the General strictly forbad
the Rifling of their Houses in the Country, and the Suburbs of Lisbon, which he
possessed, and commanded, just Payment to be made by the Soldiers for every
thing they took, without Compulsion, or rigorous Usage: And this has made
those that stood but indifferently affected before, now ready upon the like
Occasion to assist us.

A Voyage undertaken by the Earl of Cumberland, with one Ship Royal of her
Majesty's, and six of his own, and of other Adventures, Anno Dom. 1589.
Ships. Commanders. The Victory The Earl of Cumberland The Margaret, Capt.
Christopher Lister And Five other Capt. Monson, now Sir William Monson,
Vice-Amiral.

AS the Fleets of Sir John Norris and Sir Francis Drake, returned from the
Voyage of Portugal, my Lord of Cumberland proceeded upon his, toward that
Coast,; and meeting with diverse of that Fleet, relieved them with Victuals, who
otherwise had perished.

This Voyage was undertaken at his and his Friends Charge, excepting the
Victory, a Ship Royal of the Queen's, which she adventured.

The Service performed at Sea, was the taking of three French Ships of the
League in our Channel, and his encountering upon the Coast of Spain, with
Thirteen Hulks, who made some Resistance. Out of these he took to the Value of
7000 l. in Spices belonging to Portugal.

From thence he crossed over to the Island of Terceras, and coming to St.
Michaels, with Boats he fetched out two Spanish Ships from under the Castle,
which the same Night arrived out of Spain.

In this Course, from thence to Flores, he took a Spanish Ship, laden with
Sugars and Sweetmeats that came from the Maderas.

Being at Flores, he received Intelligencence of diverse Spanish Ships, which
were in the Road of Fayal, whereupon he suddenly made from that Island, where
Captain Lister and Captain Monson gave a desperate Attempt in their Boats upon
the said Ships; and after along Fight possessed themselves of one of them of
300 Tuns Burden, carrying Eighteen Pieces of Ordidinance, and Fifty Men. This
Ship, with one other, came from the Indies, two of the rest out of Guiney, and
another was Laden with Woad which that Island affords in great Plenty; who
putting from thence to Sea, and coming to the Island of Graciosa, after two
days Fight, yielded us by Composition some Victuals: Off that Island we
likewise took a French Ship of the League, of 200 Tuns, that came from
New Foundland.

Afterward, Sailing to the Eastward of the Road of Terceras, in the Even-we
beheld 18 Tall Ships of the Indies, entering into the said Road, one whereof we
after took in her Course to the Coast of Spain: She was laden with Hides,
Silver and Cochineal; but coming for England, she was cast away upon the Mounts
Bay in Cornwall, being valued at 100000 l.

Two other Prizes of Sugar we took in our said Course to the Coast of Spain,
esteemed each Ship at 7000 l. and one from under the Castle of St. Mary's to
the same Value.

There was no Road about those Islands, that could defend their Ships from our
Attempts; yet in the last Assault we gave, which was upon a Ship of Sugars, we
found ill Success, being sharply resisted, and two parts of our Men slain and
hurt: Which Loss was occasioned by Captain Lister, who would not be persuaded
from Landing in the View of their Forts.

The Service performed by Land, was the taking of the Island of Fayall, some
months after the surprising of those Ships formerly mentioned. The Castle
yielded us 45 Pieces of Ordinance, great and small: We sacked and spoiled the
Town, and after ransomed it, and so departed.

These Summer Services, and Ships of Sugar, proved not so sweet and pleasant as
the Winter was afterward sharp and painful: For in our Return for England, we
found the Calamity of Famine, the Hazard of Shipwreck and the Death of our Men
so great, that the like befell not any other Fleet during the time of the War.
All which Disasters must be imputed to Captain Lister's Rashness, upon whom my
Lord of Cumberland chiefly relied, wanting Experience himself.

He was the man that advised the sending the Ships of Wine for England,
otherwise we had not known the Want of Drink; he was as earnest in persuading
our Landing in the Face of the Fortifications of St. Mary's, against all Reason
and Sense. As he was rash, so was he valiant; but paid dearly for his unadvised
Counsel: For he was one of the first hurt, and that cruelly, in the Attempt of
St. Mary's, and afterward drowned in the Rich Ship, cast away at Mounts Bay.

Sir John Hawkins, and Sir Martin Forbisher, their Voyage undertaken, Anno 1590.
Ships. Commanders. The Revenge Sir Martin Forbisher The Mary-Rose Sir John
Hawkins The Lion Sir Edward York The Bonaventure Capt. Fenner. The Rainbow
Capt. George Beeston The Hope The Crane Capt. Bostock The Quittance The
Foresight Capt. Burnell The Swiftseur.

FRom the Yeear 1585. until this present Year 1590. there was the greatest
possibility imaginable of enriching our Nation, by Actions at Sea, had they
been well followed; the King of Spain was grown so weak in Shipping, by the
Overthrow he had in 1588, that he could no longer secure the Trade of his
Subjects.

Her Majesty now finding how necessary it was for her to maintain a Fleet upon
the Spanish Coast, as well to hinder the Preparations he might make against
Her, to repair the Disgrace he received in 1588. as also to intercept his
Fleets from the Indies, by which he grew Great and Mighty.

She sent this Year 1590. Ten Ships of her own, in two Squadrons; the one to be
Commanded by Sir John Hawkins, the other by Sir Martin Forbisher, two Gentlemen
of tried Experience.

The King of Spain understanding of this Preparation of hers, sent forth 20
Sail of Ships, under the Command of Don. Alonso de Bassan, Brother to the late
Famous Marquess of St. Cruz. His Charge was to secure home the Indian Fleet and
Carrecks.

But after Don Alonso had put off to Sea, the King of Spain becoming better
advised, than to adventure 20 of his Ships to 10 of outs, sent for Don Alonso
back, and so frustrated the Expectation of our Fleet.

He likewise made a Dispatch to the Indies, commanding the Fleets to Winter
there, rather than to run the hazard of coming Home that Summer: But this
proved so great a Hind'rance and Loss to the Merchants of Spain, to be so long
without Return of their Goods, that it caused many to become Bankrupts, in
Sevil and other places; besides, which was so great a weakening to their Ships,
to Winter in the Indies, that many years hardly sufficed to repair the Damage
they received.

Our Fleet being thus prevented, spent seven months in vain upon the Coasts of
Spain, and the Islands: but in that space, could not possess themselves of one
Ship of the Spaniards; and the Carrecks, upon which part of their Hopes
depended, came Home without Sight of the Islands, and arrived safe at Lisbon.

This Voyage was a bare Action at Sea, though they attempted Landing at Fayal,
which the Earl of Cumberland, the year before had taken and quitted; but the
Castle being re-fortified, they prevailed not in their Enterprise: And thence
forwards the King of Spain endeavored to strengthen his Coasts, and to increase
in Shipping, as may appear by the next ensuing Year.

Two Fleets, the one by Us, under the Lord Thomas Howard, the other by the
Spaniards, Commanded by Don Alonso de Bassan, Anno 1591.
Ships. Commanders. The Defiance The Lord Thomas Howard The Revenge Sir Richard
Greenvile, Vice Admiral The Nonperil Sir Edward Denny The Bonaventure Capt.
Cross The Lion Capt. Fenner The Foresight Capt. Vavasor The Crane Capt.
Duffeild.

HER Majesty understanding of the Indian Fleets Wintering in the Havana, and
that Necessity would compel them home this Year 1591. she sent a Fleet to the
Islands under the Command of the Lord Thomas Howard.

The King of Spain perceiving her Drift, and being sensible how much the safety
of that Fleet concerned him, caused them to set out thence so late in the Year,
that it endangered the Shipwreck of them all; chosing rather to hazard the
perishing of Ships, Men and Goods, than their falling into our Hands.

He had two Designs in bringing home this Fleet so late: One was, he thought
the Lord Thomas would have consumed his Victuals, and have been forced Home.
The other, that he might in the mean time furnish out the great Fleet he was
preparing, little inferior to that of 1588. In the first he found himself
deceived: For my Lord was supplied both with Ships and Victuals out of England;
and in the second, he was as much prevented: For my Lord of Cumberland, who
then lay upon the Coast of Spain, had Intelligence of the Spaniards putting out
to Sea, and advertised the Lord Thomas thereof, the very Night before they
arrived at Flores, where my Lord lay.

The day after this Intelligence, the Spanish Fleet was discovered by my Lord
Thomas, whom he knew by their Number and Greatness, to be the Ships of which he
had warning; and by that means escaped the Danger that Sir Richard Greenvile,
his Vice Admiral rashly ran into. Upon View of the Spaniards, which were 55
Sail, the Lord Thomas warily, and like a discreet General, weighed Anchor, and
made Signs to the rest of his Fleet to do the like, with a purpose to get the
Wind of them; but Sir Richard Greenvile, being a stubborn man, and imagining
this Fleet to come from the Indies, and not to be the Armado of which they were
informed, would by no means be persuaded by his Master, or Company to cut his
main Sail, to follow his Admiral; nay, so headstrong and rash he was, that he
offered violence to those that councelled him thereto.

But the Old Saying, that a wilful man is the Cause of his own Woe, could not
be more truly verified than in him: For when the Armado approached him, and he
beheld the Greatness of the Ships, he began to see and repent of his Folly; and
when it was too late, would have freed himself of them, but in vain: For he was
left a Prey to the Enemy, every Ship striving to be the first should board him.

This wilful Rashness of Sir Richard, made the Spaniards triumph as much as if
they had obtained a Signal Victory; it being the first Ship that ever they took
of Her Majesty's, and commended to them by some English Fugitives to be the
very best she had; but their Joy continued not long. For they enjoyed her but
five days before she was cast away with many Spaniards in her, upon the Islands
of Tercera.

Commonly one Misfortune is accompanied with another: For the Indian Fleet,
which my Lord had waited for the whole Summer, the day after this mishap, fell
into the Company of this Spanish Armado: who, if they had staid but one day
longer, or the Indian Fleet had come home but one day sooner, we had possessed
both them and many millions of Treasure, which the Sea afterward devoured: For
from the time they met with the Armado, and before they could recover home,
nigh an hundred of them suffered Shipwreck, besides the Ascension of Sevil, and
the double Fly-boat, that were sunk by the side of the Revenge.

All which was occasioned by their Wintering in the Indies, and the late
Disambogueing from thence: For the Worm which that Country, is subject to,
weakens and consumes their Ships.

Notwithstanding this cross and perverse Fortune, which happened by means of
Sir Richard Greenvile, the Lord Thomas would not be dismayed or discouraged;
but kept the Sea so long as he had Victuals; and by such Ships as himself and
the rest of the Fleet took, defrayed the better part of the Charge of the whole
Action.

The Earl of Cumberland to the Coast of Spain, 1591.
Ships. Commanders. The Garland of her Majesty's. The Earl of Cumberland. Capt.
under him Seven other Ships of his and his Friends Capt. Monson, now Sir
William Monson.

THE Earl of Cumberland keeping the Coast of Spain, as you have heard, while
the Lord Thomas remained at the Islands, and both to one end, viz. to annoy and
damnifie the Spaniards, though in two several Fleets, the Earl found Fortune in
a sort, as much to frown upon him, as it had done upon the Lord Thomas Howard.

In his Course from England to the Spanish Coast, he encountered with diverse
Ships of Holland, which came from Lisbon, wherein he found a great quantity of
Spices belonging to the Portugalls: So greatly were we abused by that Nation of
Holland, who, though they were the first that engaged us in the War with Spain,
yet still maintained their own Trade into those parts, and supplied the
Spaniards with Munition, Victuals Shipping and Intelligence against us.

Upon my Lord's Arrival on the Coast of Spain, it was his hap to take three
Ships at several times, one with Wine, which he unladed into his own; and two
with Sugars, which he enjoyed not long: no more did he the Spices, which he
took out of the Hollanders.

For one of the Ships of Sugar, by means of a Leak that sprung upon her, was
forced to be cast off, and the men, with much difficulty, recovered the Shore,
and saved their Lives.

The other being sent for England, and tossed with contrary Winds, was for want
of Victuals forced into the Groyn, where they rend'red themselves to the
Enemies mercy.

The Spices were determined to be sent for England, and a Ship appointed for
that purpose, with other Ships to guard her; and Captain Monson was sent on
Board her to the Islands of the Burlings, with a Charge to see her dispatched
for England.

But the other Ships, not observing the Directions which were given them, and
the Night falling calm; early in the Morning, this scattered Ship was set upon
by six Galleys; and after a long and bloody Fight, the Captain, and the
Principallest men being slain, both Ship and Spices were taken; but whether it
was the respect they had to the Queen's Ship which was Admiral of that Fleet,
or Honor to my Lord that commanded it; or Hope, by good Usage of our men, to
receive the like again, I know not; but true it is, that the ordinary men were
treated with more Courtesy than they had been from the beginning of the Wars.

My Lord of Cumberland considering the Disasters that thus befell him, and
knowing the Spanish Fleet's readiness to put out of Harbor; but especially
finding his Ship but ill of Sail, it being the first Voyage she ever went to
Sea, he durst not abide the Coast of Spain, but thought it more Discretion to
return for England, having (as you have heard) sent a Pinnace to my Lord Thomas
with the Intelligence aforesaid.

A Voyage undertook by Sir Walter Rawleigh; but himself returning, left the
Charge thereof to Sir Martin Forbisher, Anno 1592.
Ships. Commanders by Sea. Commander by Land. The Garland Sir Walter Rawleigh
Sir John Boroughs. The Foresight, with diverse Merchants Ships. Capt. Cross, and
others. Sir Walter went not, but Sir Martin Fobisher.

SIR Walter Rawleigh, who had tasted abundantly of the Queen's Love, and found
it now began to decline, put himself upon a Voyage at Sea, and drew unto him
diverse friends of great Quality, and others, thinking to have attempted some
place in the West Indies; and with this resolution he put out of Harbor; but
spending two or three days in fowl Weather, Her Majesty was pleased to command
his Return, and to commit the Charge of the Ships to Sir Martin Forbisher, who
was sent down for that purpose; but with an express Command, not to follow the
Design of the West Indies.

This sudden Alteration being known unto the rest of the Captains, for the
present made some Confusion, as commonly it happens in all voluntary Actions.
Their General leaving them, they thought themselves free in point of
Reputation, and at liberty to take what course they pleased: Few of them
therefore did submit themselves to the Command of Sir Martin Forbisher, but
chose rather each one to take his particular Fortune and Adventure at Sea.

Sir Martin, with two or three other Ships, repaired to the Coast of Spain,
where he took a Spaniard laden with Iron, and a Portugal with Sugar: He
remained there not without some danger, his Ship being ill of Sail, and the
Enemy having a Fleet at Sea.

Sir John Boroughs, Captain Cross, and another, stood to the Islands, where
they met with as many Ships of my Lord of Cumberland's, with whom they
consorted. After some time spent thereabouts, they had sight of a Carreck,
which they chased; but she recoverd the Island of Flores before they could
approach her; but the Carreck, seeing the Islands could not defend her from the
Strength and Force of the English, chose rather, after the men were got on
Shore to fire her self, than we the Enemy should reap Benefit by her.

The Purser of her was taken, and by Threats compelled to tell of another of
their Company behind, that had Order to fall with that Island; and gave us such
particular Advertisement, that indeed she fell to be ours.

In the mean time Don Alonso de Bassan was furnishing at Lisbon 23 of those
Gallions, which the Year before he had when he took the Revenge; he was
directed with those Ships to go immediately to Flores, to expect the coming of
the Carrecks, who had order to fall with that Island, there to put on Shore
diverse Ordnance for strengthening the Town and Castle.

Don Alonso breaking his Directions, unadvisedly made his repair first to St.
Michaels, and there delivered his Ordnance before he arrived at Flores; and in
the mean time one of the Carrecks was burnt, and the other taken, as you have
heard.

This he held to be such a Disreputation to him, and especially for that it
happened through his own Error and Default, that he became much perplexed, and
pursued the English 100 Leagues; but in vain, they being so far a Head.

The King of Spain being advertised of his two Carrecks mishap, and the Error
of Don Alonso, though he had much favored him before, in respect of diverse
Actions he had been in with his Brother, the Marquess of St. Cruz, and for what
he had lately performed, by taking the Revenge: Yet -- the King held it for
such a Blemish to his Honor, not to have his Instructions obeyed; and observed,
that he did not only take from Don Alonso his Command; but he lived and died
too in Disgrace; which, in my Opinion, he worthily deserved.

The Queens Adventure in this Voyage, was only two Ships; one of which, and the
least of them too, was at the taking of the Carreck; which title, joined with
her Regal Authority, she made such use of, that the rest of the Adventures were
fain to submit themselves to her Pleasure, with whom she dealt but
indifferently.

The Earl of Cumberland to the Coast of Spain, Anno Dom. 1593.
Ships Commanders. The Lion The Earl of Cumberland The Bonaventure, and seven
other Ships. Capt. under him, Capt. Monson Sir Edward York.

THE Earl of Cumberland finding, that many of his Voyages had miscarried
through the Negligence, or Unfaithfulness of those who were entrusted to lay in
necessary Provisions; and yet, being encouraged by the good Success he had the
last year, obtained two of her Majesty's Ships; and Victualled them himself,
together with seven others that did accompany them; and arriving upon the Coast
of Spain, He took two French Ships of the League, which did more than treble
the Expense of his Voyage. My Lord, being one day severed from his Fleet, it
was his hap to meet with 12 Hulks, at the same place where Captain Monson was
taken the same day two years before: He required that Respect from them that
was due unto Her Majesty's Ship, which they peremptorily refused, presuming
upon the Strength of their 12 Ships against one only; but they found themselves
deceived: For after two hours Fight he brought them to his Mercy, and made them
acknowledge their Error; and not only so, but they willingly discovered, and
delivered up to him a great quantity of Powder and Munition, which they carried
for the King of Spain's Service.

My Lord of Cumberland having spent some time thereabouts, and understanding
that Fervanteles de Menega, a Portugal, and the King's General of a Fleet of 24
Sail, was gone to the Islands; he pursued them, thinking to meet the Carrecks
before they should join together. At his coming to Flores, he met, and took one
of the Fleet, with the Death of the Captain, who yet lived so long as to inform
him both where the Fleet was, and of their Strength: The day after, he met the
Fleet it self; but being far too weak for them, he was forced to leave them,
and spent his time thereabouts, till he understood the Carrecks were passed by,
without seeing either Fleet or Island.

Sir Martin Forbisher, with a Fleet to Breast in Brittany, Anno 1594.
Ships. Commanders. The Vauntguard Sir Martin Forbisher The Rainbow Capt.
Fenner The Dreadnought Capt. Clifford The Quittance. Capt. Savil

ABout three years past, Anno 1591. the Queen sent Sir John Norris with 3000
Soldiers, to join with the French King's Party in those Parts. The King of
Spain, who upheld the Faction of the League, sent Don John de Aquila with the
like Forces, to join with the Duke de Merceur, who was of the contrary side.
The Spaniards had fortified themselves very strongly near the Town of Breast,
expecting new Succors from Spain by Sea; which the French King fearing, craved
Assistance from the Queen, which her Majesty was the more willing to grant,
because the Spaniards had gotten the Haven of Breast to entertain their Shipping
in, and were like to prove there very dangerous Neighbors: Wherefore she sent
Sir Martin Forbisher thither in this year, 1594, with four of her Ships: And
upon his Arrival there, Sir John Norris, with his Forces, and Sir Martin with
his Seaman, assailed the Fort; and though it was as bravely defended as men
could do; yet in the end it was taken with the loss of diverse Captains, Sir
Martin Forbisher being himself sore wounded, of which Hurt he died at Plymouth
after his return.

A Fleet to the Indies, Sir Francis Drake, and Sir John Hawkins Generals,
wherein they adventured deeply, and died in the Voyage. Anno 1594.
Ships. Commanders by Sea. Commander by Land. The Defiance Sir Francis Drake
Sir Tho. Baskervile The Garland Sir John Hawkins The Hope Capt. Gilbert York
The Bonaventure Capt. Troughton The Foresight Capt. Winter The Adventure Capt.
Tho. Drake.

THese two Generals, presuming much upon their own Experience and Knowledge,
used many Persuasions to the Queen, to undertake a Voyage to the West Indies,
giving much assurance to perform great Services, and promising to engage
themselves very deeply therein, with the Adventure of both Substance and Life.
And as all Actions of this Nature promise fair, till they come to be performed,
so did this the more, in the Opinion of all Men, in respect of the two Generals
Experience.

There were many Impediments and Letts to this Voyage, before they could clear
themselves of the Coast, which put them to greater Charge than they expected;
the chiefest cause of their Lingering, was a mistrust our State had of an
Invasion, and the Danger to spare so many good Ships and men out of England as
they carried with them.

The Spaniards with their usual subtilty, let slip no opportunity to put us in
amazement, thereby to dissolve the Action; and sent four Galleys to Bleuret in
Brittany, from thence to seize some part of our Coast, that so we might
apprehend a greater Force was to follow. These Galleys landed at Pensants in
Cornwall, where, finding the Town abandoned, they sacked and burnt it; but this
Design of theirs took little effect; for the Voyage proceeded notwithstanding.

The Intent of the Voyage, was to land at Nombre de dois, and from thence to
march to Panuma, to possess the Treasure that comes from Peru; and if they saw
reason for it, to inhabit and keep it. A few days before their going from
Plymouth, they received Letters from her Majesty, of an Advertisement she had
out of Spain, that the Indian Fleet was arrived; and that one of them, with
loss of her Mast, was put room to the Island of Porto Ricom. She commanded
them, seeing there was so good an opportunity offered, as the readiness of this
her Fleet, and the weakness of Porto Ricom, to possess themselves of that
Treasure; and the rather, for that it was not much out of their way to Nombre
de dois. It is neither Years, nor Experience, that can foresee and prevent all
mishaps, which is a manifest Proof, that God is the Guider and Disposer of Men's
Actions: For nothing could seem more probable to be effected, than this later
Design, especially considering the Ability and Wisdom of the two Generals; and
yet was unhappily prevented, and failed in the Execution: For there being five
Frigates sent out of Spain, to fetch this Treasure from Porto Ricom, in their
way it was their hap to take a Pinnace of the English Fleet, by whom they
understood the Secrets of the Voyage; and to prevent the Attempt of Porto
Ricom, they hastened thither with all speed (whilst our Generals lingered at
Quadrupa, to set up their Boats) and at their Arrival, so strengthened the Town
with the Soldiers, brought in the Prigats, that when our Fleet came thither,
not expecting Resistance, they found themselves frustrate of their Hopes, which
indeed they themselves were the occasion of, in managing their Design with no
more Secrecy. This Repulse bred so great a Disconceit in Sir John Hawkins, as
it is thought to have hastened his days; and being great and unexpected, did
not a little discourage Sir Francis Drake's great Mind, who yet proceeded upon
his first resolved Design, for Nombre de dios, though with no better Success:
For the Enemy having knowledge of their coming, fortified the Passage to
Panuma, and forced them to return with loss. Sir Francis Drake, who was wont to
rule Fortune, now finding his Error, and the difference between the present
strength of the Indies, and what it was when he first knew it, grew melancholy
upon this Disappointment, and suddenly, and I hope naturally, died at Nombre de
dios, where he got his first Reputation. The two Generals dying, and all other
Hopes being taken away by their Deaths, Sir Thomas Baskervile succeeded them in
their Command, and began now to think upon his return for England; but coming
near Cuba, he met and fought with a Fleet of Spain, though not long, by reason
of the Sickness and Weakness of his Men. This Fleet was sent to take the
Advantage of ours in its Return, thinking, as indeed it happened, that they
should find them both weak, and in want; but the swiftness of our Ships, in
which we had the Advantage of the Spaniards, preserved us. You may observe,
that from the year the Revenge was taken, until this present year 1595. there
was no Summer, but the King of Spain furnished a Fleet for the guarding of his
Coasts, and securing of his Trade; and though there was little fear of any
Fleet from England to impeach him, besides this in the Indies; yet because he
would show his greatness, and satisfy the Portugal of the care he had in
preserving their Carrecks; he sent the Count of Feria, a young Nobleman of
Portugal, who desired to gain Experience, with 20 Ships to the Islands; but the
Carrecks did, as they used to do in many other years, miss both Islands and
Fleets, and arrived at Lisbon safely. The other Fleets of the King of Spain in
the Indies, consisted of 24 Ships, their General Don Bernardino de Villa nova,
an approved Coward, as it appeared when he came to encounter the English Fleet;
but his Defects were supplied by the Valor of his Vice Admiral, who behaved
himself much to his Honor: His Name was John Garanay.

The Earl of Essex, and the Lord Admiral of England, Generals, equally, both by
Sea and Land, Anno 1596.
Ships. Commanders. The Repulse The Earl of Essex. Capt. under him The
Ark-royal Sir Will. Monson The Mere-honor The Lord Admiral. Capt. under him The
Warspite Ames Preston The Lion The Lord Thomas Howard The Rainbow Sir Walter
Rawleigh The Nonperil Sir Robert Southwell The Vauntguard Sir Francis Vere The
Mary Rose Sir Robert Dudley The Dreadnought Sir John Wingfield The Swiftsuer
Sir George Carew The Quittance Sir Alexander Clifford The Tremontary, with
several others. Sir Robert Cross Sir George Clifford Sir Robert Mansfield
Capt. King.

THE first of June 1596. we departed from Plymouth; and our Departure was the
more speedy, by reason of the great pains, care and industry of the 16
Captains, who in their own Persons, labored the Night before, to get out some
of their Ships, riding at Catwater, which otherwise had not been easily
effected. The Third, we set Sail from Cansom Bay, the Wind, which when we
weighed, was at West and by South, instantly cast up to the North East, and so
continued until it brought us up as high as the North Cape of Spain; and this
fortunate beginning put us in great hopes of a lucky Success to ensue.

We being now come upon our Enemies Coast, it behoved the Generals to be
vigilant in keeping them from Intelligence of us, who therefore appointed the
Litness, the True Love, and the Lion's Whelp (the three chief Sailors of our
Fleet) to run a Head, suspecting the Spaniards had some Carvels of Advice out,
which they did usually send to discover at Sea, upon any Rumor of a less Fleet
than this, was made ready in England.

No Ship or Carvel escaped from us, which I hold a second Happiness to our
Voyage: For you shall understand hereafter, the Inconvenience that might have
happened upon our Discovery.

The 10th. of June, the said three Ships, took three Fly-Boats that came from
Cadiz 14 days before; by them we understood the State of the Town, and that
they had no suspicion of us, which we looked on as a third Omen of our good
Fortune to come.

The 12th. of June, the Swan, a Ship of London, being commanded, as the other
three, to keep a good way off the Fleet, to prevent discovery, she met with a
Fly-boat, which made Resistance, and escaped from her. This Fly-boat came from
the Streights, bound Home, who discovering our Fleet, and thinking to gain
Reputation and Reward from the Spaniards, shhaped her Course for Lisbon; but
she was luckily prevented by the John and Francis, another Ship of London,
commanded by Sir Marmaduke Darrel, who took her within a League of the Shore;
and this we may account a fourth Happiness to our Voyage. The first (as has
been said) was for the Wind to take us so suddenly, and to continue so long:
For our Soldiers being Shipped, and in Harbor, would have consumed their
Victuals, and have been so pestered, that it would have endangered a Sickness
amongst them. The Second, was the taking all Ships that were seen, which kept
the Enemy from Intelligence. The Third, was the intercepting of the Fly-Boats
from Cadiz, whither we were bound, who assured us, our coming was not
suspected, which made us more careful to hail from the Coast than otherwise we
should have been: They told us likewise of the daily expectation of the
Gallions to come from St. Jacar to Cadiz, and of the Merchantmen that lay
there, and were ready bound for the Indies. These Intelligences were of great
moment, and made the Generals presently to contrive their business both by Sea
and Land, which otherwise would have taken up a longer time, after their coming
thither, and whether all men would have consented to attempt their Ships in
Harbor, if they had not known the most part of them to consist of Merchants, I
hold very doubtful. The Fourth, and fortunatest of all, was the taking of the
Fly-boat by the John and Francis, which the Swan let go: For if she had reached
Lisbon, she had been able to make report of the number and greatness of our
Ships, and might have endangered the loss of the whole Design, she seeing the
course we bore, and that we had passed Lisbon, which was the place the Enemy
most suspected, and made there his greatest preparation for Defense: But had
the Enemy been freed of that doubt, he had then no place to fear but Andulozia
and Cadiz above the rest, which upon the lest warning might have been
strengthened, and we put to great Hazard; he might also have secured his Ships,
by towing them out with Galleys; and howsoever the Wind had been, might have
sent them into the Streights, where it had been in vain to have pursued them,
or over the Bar of St. Lucar, where it had been in vain to have attempted them.

And indeed, of the good and ill of Intelligence, we had had sufficient
experience formerly, Of the good in 1588. For how suddenly had we been taken
and surprised when it we lest suspected, had it not been for Captain Flemming?
Of the ill in the year before this, by the Spaniards taking a Barque of Sir
Francis Drake's Fleet, which was the Occasion of the Overthrow of himself and
the whole Action?

The 20th. of June we came to Cadiz, earlier in the morning than the Masters
made reckoning of. Before our coming thither, it was determined in Council,
that we should land at St. Sebastians, the Westermost part of the Land; and
thither came all the Ships to an Anchor, every man preparing to land as he was
formerly directed; but the Wind being so great, and the Sea so grown, and four
Galleys lying too, to intercept our Boats, there was no attempting to land
there, without the hazard of all.

This day was spent in vain, in returning Messengers from one General to
another; and in the end, they were forced to resolve upon a Course which Sir
William Monson, Captain under my Lord of Essex, advised him to, the same
morning he discovered the Town; which was to surprise the Ships, and to be
possessors of the Harbor before they attempted landing.

This being now resolved on, there arose a great Question, who should have the
Honor of the first going in? My Lord of Essex stood for himself; but my Lord
Admiral opposed it, knowing if he miscarried, it would hazard the Overthrow of
the Action; besides, he was straightly charged by Her Majesty, that the Earl
should not expose himself to Danger, but upon great necessity.

When my Lord of Essex could not prevail, the whole Council withstanding him he
sent Sir William Monson that night, on Board my Lord Admiral, to resolve what
Ships should be appointed the next day to undertake the Service. Sir Walter
Rawleigh had the Vaward given him, which my Lord Thomas Howard hearing,
challenged in right of his place of Vice Admiral, and it was granted him; but
Sir Walter having Order over night to ply in, came first to an Anchor; but in
that distance from the Spaniards as he could not annoy them: And he himself
returned on Board the Lord General Essex, to excuse his coming to Anchor so far
off, for want of Water to go higher; which was thought strange, that the
Spaniards which drew much more Water, and had no more Advantage than he of
Tide, could pass where his could not: But Sir Francis Vere, in the Rainbow, who
was appointed to second him, passing by Sir Walter Rawleigh his Ship, Sir
Walter the second time, weighed and went higher. The Lord General Essex, who
promised to keep in the midst of the Fleet, was told by Sir William Monson,
that the greatest Service would depend upon three or four Ships; and Sir
William put him in mind of his Honor; for that many Eyes beheld him.

This made him forgetful of his Promise, and to use all means he could to be
foremost in the Fight. My Lord Howard, who could not go up in his own Ship, the
Mere-honor, betook himself to the Nonperil; and in respect the Rainbow, the
Repulse and Warspight, had taken up the best of the Channel, by their first
coming to an Anchor, to his grief he could not get higher: Here did every Ship
strive to be the headmost; but such was the narrowness of the Channel, as
neither the Lord Admiral, nor any other Ship of the Queens could pass on. There
was Commandment given, that no Ship should shoot but the Queens, making
account, that the Honor would be the greater, if the Victory were obtained with
so few. This Fight confinued from Ten, till Four in the Afternoon: The
Spaniards then set Sail, thinking either to run higher up the River, or else to
bring their other Broad Sides to us, because of the heat of their Ordnance; but
howsoever it was, in their floating, they came a ground, and the men began to
forsake the Ships: Whereupon there was Commandment given, that all the Hoys,
and Vessels that drew least Water should go unto them. Sir William Monson was
sent in the Repulse Boat, with like directions. We possessed our selves of the
great Gallions, the Matthew, and the Andrew; but the Philip and Thomas fired
themselves, and were burnt down before they could be quenched.

I must not omit to describe the manner of the Spanish Ships and Galleys,
riding in Harbor at our first coming to Cadiz. The four Gallions singled
themselves from out the Fleet, as Guards of their Merchants. The Galleys were
placed to flank us with their Prows before Entry; but when they saw our
Approach, the next morning the Merchants ran up the River, and the Men of War
of Port Royal to the Point of the River, brought themselves into a good Order
of Fight, moving their Ships a Head and a Stern, to have their Broad Sides upon
us. The Galleys then betook themselves to the Guard of the Town, which we put
them from before we attempted the Ships.

The Victory being obtained at Sea, the L. General Essex landed his men in a
Sandy Bay, which the Castle of Poyntull commanded; but they seeing the Success
of their Ships, and mistrusting their own strength, neither offered to offend
his Landing, nor to defend the Castle; but quitted it, and so we became
Possessors of it.

After my Lord's peeceable Landing, he considered what was to be done; and
there being no place from whence the Enemy could annoy us, but the Bridge of
Swasoe, which leads over from the main Land to the Island; by our making good
of which Bridge, there would be no way left for the Galleys to escape us. He
sent three Regiments under the Command of Sir Conniers Clifford, Sir
Christopher Blunt, and Sir Thomas Garret to the Bridge; who at their first
coming were encountered by the Enemy, but yet possessed themselves of it, with
the loss of some men; but whether it was for want of Victuals, or for what
other reasons, our men quitted it, I know not, and the Galleys breaking down
diverse Arches passed it, and by that means escaped.

My Lord dispatched a Messenger to my Lord Admiral, entreating him to give
Order to attempt the Merchants that rode in Port Royal, for that it was
dangerous to give them a Night's respite, lest they should convey away their
Wealth, or take example by the Philip and Thomas, to burn themselves. This
Message was delivered by Sir Anthony Ashley, and Sir William Monson, as my Lord
Admiral was in his Boat, ready with his Toops of Seamen to land, fearing the
Lord General Essex should be put to Distress with his small Companies, which
were but three Regiments, hastened by all means to second him, and gave order
to certain Ships the next day to pursue him.

Seeing I have undertaken to show the Escapes committed in any of our English
Voyages, such as were committed here, shall without Fear or Flattery appear to
the Judicious Reader.

Though the Earl of Essex his Carriage and Forwardness merited much, yet if it
had been with more Advisement, and less Haste, it would have succeeded better:
And if he were now living, he would confess, Sir William Monson advised him,
rather to seek to be Master of the Ships, than of the Town; for it was that
would afford both Wealth and Honor: For the Riches in Ships could not be
concealed, or conveyed away as in Towns they might. And the Ships themselves
being brought for England, would be always before men's Eyes there, and put them
in remembrance of the greatness of the Exploit; as for the Town, perhaps it
might be soon won, but probably not long enjoyed, and so quickly forgotten: And
to speak indifferentiy, by the Earl's sudden Landing, without the Lord
Admirals Privity; and his giving Advice by a Message to attempt the Ships,
which should have been resolved of upon mature Deliberation, no doubt, the Lord
Admiral found his Honor a little Eclipsed, which perhaps hastened his Landing
for his Reputation sake, whenas he thought it more advisable to have possessed
himself of their Fleet.

Before the Lord Admiral could draw near the Town, the Earl of Essex had entered
it; and although the Houses were built in that manner, as that every House
served for a Platform; yet they were forced to quit them, and to retire into
the Castle.

My Lord at last, in despite of the Enemy, gained the Market place, where he
found greatest Resistance from the Houses thereabouts; and where it was that
that Worthy Gentleman Sir John Wingfield was unluckily slain. The Lord General
Essex caused it to be proclaimed by Beat of Drum through the Town, that all
that would yield, should repair to the Townhouse, where they should have
promise of Mercy, and those that would not, to expect no Favor. The Castle
desired Respite to consider until the morning following; and then by one
general Consent, they surrend'red themselves to the two Lord Generals Mercies.
The Chief Prisoners, Men and Women, were brought into the Castle, where they
remained a little space, and were sent away with Honorable Usage. The noble
treating of the Prisoners, has gained an everlasting Honor to our Nation, and
the General's in particular.

It cannot be supposed the Lord Generals had leisure to be idle the day
following, having so great business to consider of, as the securing the Town,
and enjoying the Merchants Ships: Wherefore, for the speedier dispatch, they
had Speech with the best men of the City, about the Ransom to be given for
their Town and Liberties, 120000 Ducats was the Sum concluded on; and for
Security thereof, many of them became Hostages. There was likewise an Overture
for the Ransom of their Ships and Goods, which the Duke of Medina hearing of,
rather than we should reap any profit by them, he caused them to be fired.

We found by Experience, that the destroying of this Fleet (which did amount to
the value of six or seven Millions) was the general impoverishing of the whole
Country: For when the Pledges sent to Sevil, to take up money for their
Redemption; they were answered, that all the Town was not able to raise such a
Sum, their Loss was so great by the loss of their Fleet. And to speak truth,
Spain never received so great an Overthrow, so great a Spoil, so great an
Indignity at our Hands as this: For our Attempt was at his own Home, in his
Port, that he thought as safe as his Chamber, where we took and destroyed his
Ships of War, burnt and consumed the Wealth of his Merchants, sacked his City,
ransomed his Subjects, and entered his Country without Impeachment.

To write all Accidents of this Voyage, wete too tedious, and would weary the
Reader; but he that would desire to know the Behavior of the Spaniards, as well
as of us, many confer with diverse English men that were redeemed out the
Galleys in exchange for others, and brought into England.

After we had enjoyed the Town of Cadiz a Fortnight, and our men were grown
rich by the Spoil of it, the Generals imbarqued their Army, with an intent to
perform greater Services before their Return; but such was the Covetousness of
the better Sort, who were enriched there, and the fear of Hunger in others, who
complained for want of Victuals, as they could not willingly be drawn to any
farther Action, to gain more Reputation. The only thing that was afterward
attempted, was Pharaoh, a Town of Algarula in Portugal, a place of no
Resistance or Wealth, only famous by the Library of Osorius, who was Bishop of
that place; which Library was brought into England by us, and many of the Books
bestowed upon the new erected Library of Oxford.

Some Prisoners were taken; but of small account, who told us, that the
greatest Strength of the Country was in Lawgust, the chief Town of Argarula,
twelve miles distant from thence; because most part of the Gentlemen
thereabouts were gone thither, to make it good expecting our coming. This News
was acceptable to my Lord of Essex, who preferred Honor before Wealth: And
having had his Will, and the Spoil of the Town of Pharaoh and Country
thereabouts: He Shipped his Army, and took Council of the Lord Admiral how to
proceed. My Lord Admiral diverted his course for Lawgust, alleging the place
was strong, of no Wealth, always held in the nature of a Fisher-Town, belonging
to the Portugals, who in their Hearts were our Friends; that the winning of it,
after so eminent a place as Cadiz, could add no Honor; though it should be
carried, yet it would be the Loss of his best Troops and Gentlemen, who would
rather to die, than receive Indignity of a Repulse. My Lord of Essex, much
against his Will, was forced to yield unto these Reasons, and desist from that
Enterprise.

About this time there was a general Complaint for want of Victuals; which
proceeded rather out of a desire that some had to be at home, than out of any
necessity: For Sir William Monson and Mr. Darrel, were appointed to examine the
Condition of every Ship, and found seven weeks Victuals (Drink excepted) which
might have been supplied from the Shore in Water; and this put the Generals in
great hope to perform something more than they had done. The only Service that
was now to be thought on, was to lie in wait for the Carrecks, which in all
probability could not escape us, though there were many Doubts to the contrary;
but easily answered by men of Experience: But in truth, some men's desire
homeward, were so great, that no Reason could prevail with, or persuade them.

Coming into the height of the Rock, the Generals took Council once again, and
then the Earl of Essex, and the Lord Thomas Howard, offered with great
earnestness, to stay out the time our Victuals lasted; and desired to have but
12 Ships furnished out of the rest to stay with them; but this would not be
granted, though the Squadron of the Hollanders offered voluntarily to stay. Sir
Walter Rawleigh alleged the scarcity of Victuals, and the Infection of his
Men. My Lord General Essex, offered, in the Greatness of his Mind, and the
Desire he had to stay, to supply his want of Men and Victuals, and to exchange
Ships; but all Proposals were in vain: For the Riches kept them that got much,
from attempting more; as if it had been otherwise pure want, though not Honor
would have enforced them to greater Enterprises.

This being the last Hopes of the Voyage, and being generally withstood, it was
concluded to steer away for the North Cape, and afterward, to view and search
the Harbors of the Groyn and Ferrol; and if any of the King of Spain's Ships
chanced to be there, to give an Attempt upon them.

The Lord Admiral sent a Carvel of our Fleet into these two Harbors, and
aparrelled the men in Spanish Clothes, to avoid Suspicion. This Carvel returned
the next day, with a true Relation, that there were no Ships in the Harbors:
And now passing all places where there was any hope of doing good, our Return
for England was resolved upon; and the 8th. of August, the Lord Admiral arrived
in Plymouth, with the greatest part of the Army: And the Lord General Essex,
who staid to accompany the St. Andrew, which was under his Charge, and reputed
of his Squadron, two days after us, the 10th. of August, where he found the
Army in that perfect Health, as the like has not been seen, for so many to go
out of England, to such great Enterprises, and so well to return home again,

He himself rid up to the Court, to advise with her Majesty, about the winning
of Callis, which the Spaniards took the Easter before: Here was a good
opportunity, to have re-gained the Ancient Patrimony of England; but the French
King, thought he might with more ease re-gain it from the Spaniard, who was his
Enemy, than recover it again from us, who were his Friends.

My Lord Admiral, with the Fleet, went to the Downs, where he landed, and left
the Charge of the Navy, to Sir Robert Dudley, and Sir William Monson. In going
from thence to Chatham, they endured more foul Weather, and contrary Winds,
than in the whole Voyage besides.

A Voyage to the Islands, the Earl of Essex General, Anno 1597.
Ships. Commanders. The Mere-honor The Earl of Essex. Capt. under him After in
the Repulse Sir Robert Mansell The Lion The Lord Thomas Howard The Warspite Sir
Walter Rawleigh The Garland The Earl of Southampton The Defiance The Lord
Mountioy The Mary Rose Sir Francis Vere The Hope Sir Richard Lewson The Matthew
Sir George Carew The Rainbow Sir Will. Monson The Bonaventure, Sir Will. Harvey
The Dreadnought Sir Will. Brook The Swiftsuer Sir Gilly Merick The Antelope
Sir John Gilbert, he went not. The Nonperil Sir Tho. Vavasor The St. Andrew
Capt. Throgmorton.

HER Majesty having Knowledge of the King of Spain's drawing down his Fleet and
Army to the Groyn and Ferrol, with an intent to enter into some Action against
Her; and that, notwithstanding the loss of thirty six Sail of his Ships that
were cast away upon the North Cape, in their coming thither: He prepared with
all possible means, to revenge the Disgraces we did him the year last past at
Cadiz. Her Majesty likewise prepared to defend her self, and fitted out the
most part of her Ships for the Sea; but at length, perceiving his Drift was
more to afright than offend her, though he gave it it out otherwise, because
she should provide to resist him at home, rather than to annoy him abroad. She
was unwilling the great Charges she had been at, should be bestowed in vain;
and therefore turned her Preparations another way, than that for which she
first intended them.

The Project of this Voyage, was to assault the King of Spain's Shipping in the
Harbor of Ferrol, which the Queen chiefly desired to do for her own Security at
home; and afterward to go and take the Islands of Tercera; and there to expect
the coming home of the Indian Fleet. But neither of these two Designs took that
effect which was expected: For in our setting forth, the same day we put to
Sea, we were taken with a most violent Storm, and contrary Winds; and the
General was separated from the Fleet, and one Ship from another, so that the
one half of the Fleet were compelled to return home, and the rest that kept the
Sea, having reached the Coast of Spain, were commanded home, by order of the
Lord General.

Thus after their return, they were to advise upon a new Voyage, finding by
their Ships and Victuals, they were unable to perform the former: Whereupon it
was thought convenient all the Army should be discharged, for the prolonging of
the Victuals, except a thousand of the prime Soldiers of the Low Countries,
which were put into her Majesty's Ships, that they might be the better
prepared, if they should chance to encounter the Spanish Fleet. Thus the second
time they departed England, though not without some danger of the Ships, by
reason of the Winter's near approach.

The first Land in Spain we fell withal, was the North Cape, the place whither
our Directions led us, if we happened to lose Company; being there descried
from the Shore, and not above 12 Leagues from the Groyn, where the Spanish
Armado lay. We were in good hopes to have enticed them out of the Harbor to
fight us; but spending some time thereabouts, and finding no such Disposition
in them, it was thought fit no longer to linger about that Coast, lest we
should lose our opportunity upon the Indian Fleet; therefore every Captain
received his Directions to stand his Course into 36 Degrees, there to spread
our selves North and South, it being a height that commonly the Spaniards sail
in from the Indies.

At this time the Lord General complained of a Leak in his Ship; and two days
after, toward midnight, he brought himself upon the Lee to stop it. Sir Walter
Rawleigh, and some other Ships, being a head the Fleet, and it growing dark,
they could not discern the Lord General's Working; but stood their Course as
before directed; and through this unadvised working of my Lord, they lost him
and his Fleet.

The day following, Sir Walter Rawleigh was informed by a Pinnace he met, that
the great Armado, which we supposed to be in the Groyn and Ferrol, was gone to
the Islands, for the Guard of the Indian Fleet. This Pinnace, with this
Intelligence it gave us, Sir Walter Rawleigh immediately sent to look out the
General. My Lord had no sooner received this Advice, but at the very instant he
directed his Course to the Islands, and dispatched some small Vessels to Sir
Walter Rawleigh, to inform him of the sudden Alteration of his Course, upon
the News received from him, commanding him with all Expedition, to repair to
Flores, where he would not fail to be at our Arrival. At the Islands we found
this Intelligence utterly false: For neither the Spanish Ships were there, nor
were expected there: We met likewise with diverse English men, that came out of
the Indies; but they could give us no assurance of the coming home of the
Fleet; neither could we recive any Advertisement from the Shore, which made us
half in despair of them.

By that time we had watered our Ships, and refreshed our selves at Flores, Sir
Walter Rawleigh arrived there, who was willed by the Lord General, after he was
furnished of such Wants as that poor Island afforded, to make his repair to the
Island of Fayal, which my Lord intended to take. Here grew great Questions and
Heart-burnings against Sir Walter Rawleigh: For he coming to Fayal, and missing
the Lord General, and yet knowing my Lord's Resolution to take the Island, he
held it more advisable to land with those Forces he had, than to expect the
coming of my Lord: For in that space the Island might be better provided:
whereupon he landed, and took it before my Lord's approach. This Act was held
such an Indignity to my Lord, and urged with that Vehemence, by those that
hated Sir Walter, that if my Lord, though naturally kind, and flexible, had not
feared how it would have been taken in England, I think Sir Walter had smarted
for it.

From this Island we went to Graciosa, which did willingly relieve our Wants,
as far as it could; yet with humble entreaty to forbear landing with our Army,
especially, because they understood there was a Squadron of Hollanders amongst
us, who did not use to forbear Cruelty wherever they came; and here it was that
we met the Indian Fleet, which in manner following, unluckily escaped us.

The Lord General having sent some men of good Account into the Island, to see
there should be no Injury offered to the Portugals, he having passed his word
to the contrary; those men advertised him of four Sail of Ships descried from
the Shore, and one of them greater than the rest, seemed to be a Carreck: My
Lord received this News with great Joy, and divided his Fleet into three
Squadrons, to be commanded by himself, the Lord Thomas Howard, and Sir Walter
Rawleigh. The next Ship to my Lord, of the Queen's, was the Rainbow, wherein
Sir William Monson went, who received direction from my Lord to steer away
South that Night; and if he should meet with any Fleet, to follow them,
carrying Lights, or shooting off his Ordnances or making any other Sign that he
could; and if he met with no Ships, to direct his Course the next day, to the
Island of St. Michael; but promising that Night to send 12 Ships after him. Sir
William besought my Lord, by the Pinnace that brought him this Direction, that
above all things he should have a care to dispatch a Squadron to the Road of
Angra in the Tercera's: For it was certain, if they were Spaniards, thither
they would resort.

Whilst my Lord was thus contriving his Business, and ordering his Squadrons, a
small Barque of his Fleet happened to come to him, who assured him, that those
Ships discovered from the Land, were of his own Fleet; and that they came in
immediately from them. This made my Lord countermand his former Direction; only
Sir William Monson, who was the next Ship to him, and received the first
Command, could not be recalled back. Within three hours of his Departure from
my Lord, which might be about 12 of the Clock, he fell in company of a Fleet of
25 Sail, which at the first he could not assure himself to be Spaniards;
because the day before, that number of Ships was missing from our Fleet. Here
he was in a Dilemma and great perplexity with himself; for in making Signs, as
he was directed, if the Ships proved English, it were ridiculous, and he would
be exposed to scorn; and to respite it until morning, were as dangerous, if
they were the Indian Fleet: For then my Lord might be out of View, or of the
hearing of his Ordnance: Therefore he resolved rather to put his Person, than
his Ship in Peril. He commanded his Master to keep the Weather-Gage of the
Fleet, whatsoever should become of him; and it blowing little Wind, he betook
himself to his Boat, and rowed up with the Fleet, demanding of whence they
were: They answered, of Sevil in Spain; and asked of whence he was? He told
them of England; and that the Ship in sight was a Gallion of the Queen's of
England, single and alone, alleging the Honor they would get by winning her;
his Drift being to draw and entice them into the Wake of our Fleet, where they
would be so entangled, as they could not escape; they returned him some Shot,
and ill Language; but would not alter their Course to the Tercera's, whither
they were bound, and where they arrived to our misfortune. Sir William Monson
returned aboard his Ship, making Signs with Lights, and Report with his
Ordnance; but all in vain: For my Lord altering his Course, as you have heard,
stood that Night to St. Michaels, and passed by the North side of Tercera, a
farther way, than if he had gone by the way of Augra, where he had met the
Indian Fleet.

When day appeared, and Sir William Monson was in hope to find the 12 Ships
promised to be sent to him, he might discern the Spanish Fleet two miles and a
little more a Head him, and a Stern him a Gallion, and a Pinnace betwixt them;
which putting forth her Flaggs, he knew to be the Earl of Southampton in the
Garland: The Pinnace was a Frigate of the Spanish Fleet, who took the Garland
and the Rainbow to be Gallions of theirs; but seeing the Flag of the Garland,
she found her Error, and sprang a loof, thinkink to escape; but the Earl
pursued her with the loss of some Time, when he should have followed the Fleet;
and therefore was desired to desist from that Chase by Sir William Monson, who
sent his Boat to him. By a Shot from my Lord, this Frigate was sunk; and while
his Men were rifling her, Sir Francis Vere and Sir William Brook came up in
their two Ships, who the Spaniards would have made us believe were two Gallions
of theirs; and so much did my Lord signify to Sir William Monson, wishing him
to stay their coming up: for that there would be greater hope of those two
Ships, which there was no doubt but we were able to Master, than of the Fleet,
for which we were too weak.

But after Sir William had made the two Ships to be the Queen's, which he ever
suspected them to be, he began to pursue the Spanish Fleet afresh; but by
reason they were so far a Head of him, and had so little way to sail, they
recovered the Road of Tercera; but he and the rest of the Ships pursued them,
and himself led the way into the Harbor, where he found sharp Resistance from
the Castle; but yet so battered the Ships, that he might see the Masts of some
shot by the Board, and the men quit the Ships; so that there wanted nothing but
a Gale of Wind to enable him to cut the Cables of the Hawsers, and to bring
them off: Wherefore he sent to the other 3 great Ships of ours, to desire them
to attempt the cutting their Cables; but Sir Fra. Vere rather wished his coming
off, that they might take a Resolution what to do. This must be rather imputed
to want of Experience than Backwardness in him: For Sir William sent him word,
that if he quitted the Harbor, the Ships would tow near the Castle; and as the
Night drew on, the Wind would freshen, and come more off the Land, which indeed
proved so, and we above a League from the Road in the morning.

We may say, and that truly, there was never that possibility to have undone
the State of Spain as now: For every Royal of Plate we had taken in this Fleet,
had been two to them, by our converting it by War upon them.

None of the Captains could be blamed in this Business: All is to be attributed
to the want of Experience in my Lord, and his flexible Nature to be overruled:
For the first hour he anchored at Flores, and called a Council, Sir William
Monson advised him upon the reasons following, after his Watering, to run West,
spreading his Fleet North and South, so far as the Eastern Wind that then blew
would carry them; alleging, that if the Indian Fleet came home that Year, by
computation of the last light Moon, from which time their disimboguing in the
Indies, must be reckoned, they could not be above 200 Leagues short of that
Island; and whenever the Wind should chop up Westernly, he bearing a slack
Sail, they would, in a few days overtake him.

This Advice my Lord seemed to take, but was diverted by diverse Gentlemen, who
coming principally for Land Service, found themselves tired by the tediousness
of the Sea. Certain it is, if my Lord had followed his Advice, within less than
40 hours, he had made the Queen owner of that Fleet: For by the Pilot's Card,
which was taken in the Frigate, the Spanish Fleet was but 50 Leagues in traverse
with that Eastern Wind, when my Lord was at Flores, which made my Lord wish,
the first time Sir William Monson repaired to him, after the Escape of the
Fleet, that he had lost his Hand so he had been ruled by him.

Being met Aboard Sir Francis Vere, we consulted what to do, and resolved to
acquaint my Lord with what had happened, desiring his Presence with us, to see
if there were any possibility to attempt the Shipping, or surprise the Island,
and so to possess the Treasure.

My Lord received this Advertisement, just as he was ready with his Troops to
have landed in St. Michaels; but this Message diverted his Landing, and made
him presently cast about for the Islands of the Tercera's, where we lay all
this while expecting his coming. In his Course from St. Michaels, it was his
hap to to take three Ships that departed the Havana the day after the Fleet:
Which three Ships did more than countervail the whole Voyage.

At my Lord's meeting with us at Tercera, there was a Consultation how the
Enemies Ships might be fetched off, or destroyed as they lay; but all men with
one consent, agreed the impossibility of it. The attempting the Island was
propounded; but withstood for these reasons, the difficulty in Landing, the
strength of the Island, which was increased by fourteen or fifteen Hundred
Soldiers in the Ships, and our want of Victuals to abide by the Siege. Seeing
then we were frustrate of our Hopes at the Tercera, we resolved upon landing in
St. Michaels, and arrived the day following at Punta Delgada, the Chief City.
Here my Lord imbarqued his small Army in Boats, with offer to Land; and having
thereby drawn the Enemies greatest Force thither to resist him, suddenly he
rowed to Villa Franca, three or four Leagues distant from thence; which, not
being defended by the Enemy, he took. The Ships had order to abide in the Road
of Delgada; for that my Lord made account to march thither by Land; but being
on Shore at Villa Franca, he was informed that the March was impossible, by
reason of the high and craggy Mountains, which diverted his purpose.

Victuals now grew short with us, and my Lord General began discreetly to
foresee the danger in abiding toward Winter upon these Coasts, which could not
afford him an Harbor, only open Roads that were subject to Southern Winds; and
upon every Wind, he must put to Sea for his safety. He considered, that if this
should happen, when his Troops were on Shore, and he not able to reach the Land
in a Fortnight or more, which is a thing ordinary, what a desperate case he
should put himself into, especially in so great a want of Victuals: And so
concluding, that he had seen the end of all his Hopes, by the Escape of the
Fleet, he imbarqued himself and Army, though with some difficulty, the Seas
were now grown so high.

By this the one half of the Fleet that rid in Punta Delgada, put room for
Villa Franca, and those that remained behind, being thought by a Ship of
Brazile to be the Spanish Fleet, she came in amongst them, and so was betrayed:
After her there followed a Carreck, who had been served in the like manner; but
for the hasty and indiscreet weighing of a Hollander, which made her run a
Shore under the Castle; when the Wind lessened Sir William Monson weighted with
the Rainbow, thinking to give an Attempt upon her, notwithstanding the Castle;
which she perceiving, as he drew near unto her, she set her self on fire, and
burned down to the very Keel. She, was a Ship of 1400 Tuns Burden, that the
year before was not able to double the Cape of bona Esperansa, in her Voyage to
the East Indies; but put into Brazile, where she was laden with Sugars, and
afterward thus destroyed. The Spaniards, who presumed more upon their
Advantages than Valors, thought themselves in too weak a Condition to follow us
to the Islands, and put their Fortunes upon a days Service, but subtly
devised how to intercept us as we came Home, when we had least Thought or
Suspicion of them; and their Fleet, that was all this while in the Groyn and
Ferrol, not daring to put forwards while they knew ours to be upon the Coast,
their General the Adelantada came for England, with a Resolution to land at
Falmouth, and fortify it, and afterward, with their Ships, to keep the Sea,
and expect our coming home scattered.

Having thus cut off our Sea Forces, and possessing the Harbor of Falmouth,
they thought with a second supply of 37 Levantisco's Ships, which the Marquess
Arumbullo commanded, to have returned and gained a good footing in England.

These Designs of theirs were not foreseen by us: For we came Home scattered,
as they made reckoning, not 20 in number together.

We may say, and that truly, that God sought for us: For the Adalantada being
within a few Leagues of the Island of Silly, he commanded all his Captains on
Board him to receive his Directions; but whilst they were in Consultation, a
violent Storm took them at East, insomuch that the Captains could hardly
recover their Ships, but in no case were able to save their Boats, the Storm
continued so furious, and happy was he that could recover home, seeing their
Design thus overthrown by loss of their Boats, whereby their means of Landing
was taken away. Some who were willing to stay, and receive the farther Commands
of the General, kept the Seas so long upon our Coast, that in the end they were
taken; others put themselves into our Harbors for Refuge and Succor; and it is
certainly known, that in this Voyage the Spaniards lost eighteen Ships, the St.
Luke, and the St. Bartholomew, being two and in the rank of his best Gallions.

We must ascribe this Success to God only: For certainly the Enemies Designs
were dangerous, and not to be diverted by our Force; but by his Will, who would
not suffer the Spaniards in any of their Attempts, to set footing in England,
as we have done in all the Quarters of Spain, Portugal, the Islands, and both
the Indies.

The Lord Thomas Howard Admiral to the Downs, from whence he returned in one
Month, Anno 1599.
Ships. Commanders. The Elizabeth Jonas The Lord Thomas Howard The Ark Royal
Sir Walter Rawleigh The Triumph Sir Fulke Grivel The Mere-honor Sir Henry
Palmer The Repulse Sir Tho. Vavasor The Garland Sir Will. Harvey The Defiance
Sir Will. Monson The Nonperil Sir Robert Cross The Lion Sir Richard Lewson The
Rainbow Sir Alexander Clifford The Hope Sir John Gilbert The Foresight Sir Tho.
Sherley The Mary Rose Mr. Fortescue The Bonaventure, Capt. Troughton. The Crane
Capt. Jonas The Swiftsuer Capt. Bradgate The Tremontary Capt. Slingsby The
Advantage Capt. Hoer The Quittance Capt. Reynolds

I Cannot write of any thing done in this Year of 1599. For there was never
greater Expectation of War, with less Performance. Whether it was a Mistrust
the one Nation had of the other, or a Policy held on both sides, to make Peace
with Sword in Hand, a Treaty being entertained by consent of each Prince, I am
not to examine; but sure I am, the Preparation was on both sides very great, as
if the one expected an Invasion from the other; and yet it was generally
conceived, not to be intended by either; but that ours had only relation to my
Lord of Essex, who was then in Ireland, and had a Design to try his Friends in
England, and to be revenged of his Enemies, as he pretended, and as it proved
afterward by his Fall: Howsoever it was, the Charge was not so great as
necessary: For it was commonly known, that the Adalantada had drawn both his
Ships and Galleys to the Groyne; which was not usually done, but for some
Action intended upon England or Ireland, though he converted them after to
another use, as you shall hear.

The Galleys were sent into the Low Countries, and passed the Narrow Seas,
while our Ships lay there, and with the Fleet the Atalantada pursued the
Hollanders to the Islands, whither he suspected they were gone. This Fleet of
Hollanders, which consisted of 73 Sail, were the first Ships that ever
displayed their Colors in Warlike sort against the Spaniards, in any Action of
their own: For how cruel soever the War seemed to be in Holland, they
maintained a peaceable Trade in Spain, and abused us. This first Action of the
Hollanders at Sea proved not very successful: For after the Spoil of a Town in
the Canary's, and some Hurt done at the Island of St. Ome, they kept the Sea
for some seven or eight months, in which time their General and most of their
Men sickned and died, and the rest returned with Loss and Shame. Another
Benefit which we received by this Preparation, was, that our Men were now
taught suddenly to Arm, every man knowing his Command, and how to be
commanded, which before they were ignorant of: and who knows not, that sudden
and false Alarms in an Army, are sometimes necessary? To say truth, the
Expedition which was then used in drawing together so great an Army by Land,
and rigging so great and Royal a Navy to Sea in so little a space of Time, was
so admirable in other Coutreys, that they received a Terror by it; and many
that came from beyond Sea, said, the Queen was never more dreaded abroad for
any thing she ever did.

Frenchmen that came Aboard our Ships, did wonder (as at a thing incredible)
that her Majesty had rigged, victualled and furnished her Royal Ships to Sea in
12 days time: And Spain, as an Enemy, had reason to fear, and grieve to see
this sudden Preparation; but more, when they understood how the Hearts of Her
Majesty's Subjects joined with their Hands, being all ready to spend their
dearest Blood for her and her Service. Holland might likewise see, that if they
became insolent, we could be as soon provided as they; not did they expect to
find such celerity in any Nation but themselves.

It is probable too, that the King of Spain, and the Archduke, were hereby
drawn to entertain Thoughts of Peace: For as soon as our Fleet was at Sea, a
Gentleman was sent from Brussells, with some Overtures, although for that time
they succeeded not. However, whether it was, that the intended Invasion from
Spain was diverted, or that her Majesty was fully satisfied of my Lord of
Essex, I know not; but so it was, that she commanded the sudden Return of her
Ships from Sea, after they had layn three weeks or a month in the Downs.

Sir Richard Lewson to the Islands, Anno Dom. 1600.
Ships. Commanders. The Repulse Sir Richard Lewson The Warspight Capt.
Troughton The Vauntguard Capt. Summers.

THE last Year, as you have heard, put all men in expectation of War, which yet
came to nothing. This Summer gave us great hope of Peace; but with the like
effect: For by consent of the Queen, the King of Spain, and the Archduke,
their Commissioners met at Bulloign in Piccardie, to treat of Peace; a place
chosen indifferently, the French King being in League and Friendship with them
all. Whether this Treaty were intended but in show only, or, that they were out
of hopes, to come to any conclusion; or, what else was the true and real cause
of its breaking off so suddenly, I know not; but the pretense was but slender,
for there grew a difference about Precedence, betwixt the two Crowns, though it
was ever due to England; and so the hopes of Peace were frustrated, though had
it been really intended, matters might easily have been accommodated.

The Queen suspecting the Event hereof, before their meeting, and the rather,
because the Spaniards entertained with the like Treaty, in 1588 when at the
same instant, his Navy appeared upon her Coast to Invade her; therefore, least
she should be guilty of too great security, in relying upon the success of this
doubtful Treaty, she furnished the Three Ships before named, under pretense to
guard the Western Coast, which at that time was infested by the Dunkirkers.

And because there should be the less notice taken, part of the Victuals was
provided at Plymouth; and Sir Richard Lewson, who was then Admiral of the
Narrow Seas, was appointed General, for the more secret carriage of the
business; so as it could not be conjectured, either by their Victualling, or by
their Captain, being Admiral of the Narrow Seas, that it was a Service from
home. As they were in a readiness at Plymouth, expecting Orders, the Queen
beingfully satisfied, that the Treaty of Bulloign would break off without
effect, she commanded Sir Richard Lawson to hasten to the Islands, there to
expect the Carrecks, and Mexico Fleet. The Spaniards on the other side, being
as circumspect to prevent a mischief, as we were subtle to contrive it; and
believing (as we did) that the Treaty of Peace would prove a vain, hopeless
show of what was never meant, they furnished Eighteen tall Ships to the
Islands, as they had usually done, since the Year 1591. The General of this
Fleet was Don Diego de Borachero.

Our Ships coming to the Islands, they and the Spaniards had intelligence of
one another, but not the sight, for that Sir Richard Lewson hailed Sixty
Leagues Westward, not only to avoid them, but in hopes to meet with the
Carrecks, and Mexico Fleet, before they could join them: But the Carrecks being
formerly warned by the taking of one of them, and burning of another, in 1591.
had ever since that year, endeavored to shun the sight of that Island, so that
our Fleet being now prevented, as they had often before been, (nothing being
more uncertain, than Actions at Sea, where Ships are to meet one another
casually) they returned home, having consumed time and Victuals, to no purpose,
and seen not so much as one Sail, from the time they quitted the Coast of
England, till their return, two Ships of Holland excepted, that came from the
East Indies (for then began their Trade thither) which Ships Sir Richard Lewson
relieved, finding them in great distress and want.

Sir Richard Lewson into Ireland, Anno 1601.
Ships. Commanders. The Warsight Sir Richard Lewson The Garland Sir Amias
Preston The Defiance Capt. Goer The Swiftsuer Capt. Summers The Crane Capt.
Mainwaring

IN the Year 1600. and part of the Year 1601. there was a kind of cessation
from Arms, though not by agreement, for this Year gave a hope of Peace; which
failing, the former course of annoying each other was revived; we in relieving
the Low Countries, the Spaniards in assisting the Rebels in Ireland. This was
the Summer, that the Archduke besieged Ostend, which was bravely defended, but
principally, by the Supplies out of England. And toward Winter, when the
Spaniards thought we least looked for War, Don Diego de Borachero, with 48 Sail
of Ships, and 4000 Soldiers was sent to Invade Ireland.

In his way thither he lost the company of his Vice Admiral, Siriago, who
returned to the Groyn, which when the King heard, he was much distasted with
Siriago, and commanded him upon his Allegiance, to hasten with all speed for
Ireland, as he was formerly directed; Don Diego, his Landing being known in
England, when it was too late to prevent it; yet, least he should be supplied
with further Forces, Sir Richard Lewson valiantly entered the Harbor, drew near
their Fortifications, and fought the Enemy for the space of one whole day, his
Ship being an Hundred times shot through, and yet but Eight men slain. God so
blessed him, that he prevailed in his Enterprise, destroyed their whole Shipping,
and made Siriago fly by Land into another Harbor, where he obscurely Imbarqued
himself in a French Vessel, for Spain. All this while was the main Army, which
Landed with their General, Don Juan de Aquila, seated in Kinsale, expecting the
aid of Tyroen, who promised every day to be with him. Our Army commanded by the
Lord Montjoy, Lord Deputy of Ireland, besieged the Town, so that he prevented
their meeting, and many skirmishes past betwixt them.

The Siege continued, with great miseries to both the Armies, and not without
cause, considering the Season of the Year, and the condition of the Country,
that afforded little relief to either: some few days before Christmas, Tyroen
appeared with his Forces, which was some little heartning to the Enemy, in
hopes to be freed of their Imprisonment, for so may I call it, they were so
strictly beleagured. The day of agreement, betwixt the Spaniards and Tyroen,
was Christmas Eve, on which day, there happened an Earthquake in England; and,
as many times such Signs prove aut bonum, aut malum Omen; this proved Fortunate
to us, the Victory being obtained, with so little loss, as it is almost
incredible.

This was the day of Trial, whether Ireland should continue a parcel of our
Crown, or no; for if the Enemy had prevailed in the Battle, and a Treaty had
not afterward obtained more then Force, it was to be feared, Ireland would
hardly have been ever recovered. The Spaniards in Ireland, seeing the success
of Tyroen, and the impossibility for him to reinforce his Army, being hopeless
of supplies out of Spain, and their Poverty daily increasing, they made offers
of a Parley, which was granted, and after ensued a Peace there: The Conditions
whereof are extant in Print. They were furnished with Ships, and secured of
their Passage into Spain, where arriving in English Vessels, the Ships returned
back for England.

Sir Richard Lewson, and Sir William Monson, to the Coast of Spain, Anno 1602.
Ships. Commanders. The Repulse Sir Richard Lewson, Admiral The Garland Sir
Will. Monson, Vice Admiral. The Defiance Capt. Goer The Mary Rose Capt.
Slingsby The Warspight Capt. Summers The Nonperil Capt. Reynolds The
Dreadnought Capt. Mainwaring The Adventure Capt. Trevor The English Carvel
Capt. Sawkel

THE last Attempt of the Spaniards in Ireland awakened the Queen, who, it
seems for two or three Years together, entertained the Hopes of Peace, and
therefore was sparing in setting forth her Fleets. But now perceiving the Enemy
had found the way into Ireland; and that it behoved her to be more vigilant
than ever; she resolved, as the safest course to infest the Spanish Coasts with
a continual Fleet; and in this year furnished the Ships aforesaid, having
Promise from the States of Holland, to join to them twelve Sail of theirs; and
because this important Service required great speed, she had not time enough to
man them, or supply them with Provisions altogether so well as they were
usually wont to be; but was content with what could be gotten in so short a
warning, so desirous was she to see her Ships at Sea.

Sir Richard Lewson set sail with five of them the 19th. of March, and left Sir
William Monson behind with the other four, to attend the coming of the
Hollanders; though within two or three days after, Sir William received Command
from the Queen, to hasten with all speed to Sir Richard Lewson; for that she
was advertised, that the Silver Ships were arrived at the Tercera's. Sir
William Monson hereupon neglected no time, nor stayed either to see himself
better Manned, or his Ships better furnished; but put to Sea the 26th. of March.

This Intelligence of the Queen's was true: For the Plate Fleet had been at the
Tercera's, and departing from thence, in their Course for Spain, Sir Richard
Lewson, with his few Ships, met them; but to little purpose, wanting the rest
of his Fleet, and the help of the 12 Hollanders. We may very well account this
not the least Error or Negligence that has been committed in our Voyages: For
if the Hollanders had kept touch according to Promise, and the Queen's Ships
had been fitted out with Care, we had made her Majesty Mistress of more
Treasure than any of her Progenitors ever enjoyed.

Sir Richard Lewson's Design against the Indian Fleet, notwithstanding his
Renowned Valor, being thus frustrated, and by the Hollanders slackness crossed,
he plied toward the Rock, to meet Sir William Monson, as the place resolved on
between them; but Sir William having spent 14 days thereabouts, and hearing no
Tidings of him, went round to the Southward Cape, where he was likewise
frustrated of a most promising Hope: For meeting with certain Frenchmen and
Scots, at the same instant, he descried three Ships of ours, sent by Sir
Richard to look him. These French and Scottish Ships came from St. Lucas, and
made report of five Gallions, ready the next Tide to set sail for the Indies:
They likewise told him of two others that departed three days before, wherein
went Don Petro de Valdes, to be Governor of the Havana, who had sometimes been
Prisoner in England.

These two later Ships were met one Night by the Warspight, whereof Capt.
Summers was Conmander; but whether it was by the Darkness of the Night, or by
what other Casualty (for the Sea is subject to many) I know not, but they
escaped.

This News of the five Gallions, and the three Ships of the Queen's so happily
meeting together, made Sir William direct his Course into the height wherein
the Spaniards were most likely to sail in; and coming into that height, he had
sight of five Ships, which in respect of their Number and Course, he made
reckoning to be the five Gallions; and thought that day should fully determine
and try the difference between the Strength and Puissance of the English and
Spanish Ships, their number and greatness being equal: But his Joy was soon
quailed: For coming up with them, he found them to be English Ships coming out
of the Streights, and bound home; but yet this did not discourage the Hope he
had conceived that the Spaniards might be met withal; and the next day he gave
Chase to one Ship alone that came out of the Indies, which he took, though he
had been better without her: For she brought him so far to Leeward, that that
Night the Gallions passed to Wind-ward, not above eight or ten Leagues off us,
by report of an English Pinnace that met them, who came into our Company the
day following. These Misfortunes lighting first upon Sir Richard, and after
upon Sir William, might have been sufficient Reasons to discourage them; but
they knowing the Accidents of the Sea, and that Fortune could as well laugh as
weep, having good Ships under foot, their Men sound and in health, and plenty
of Victuals, they did not doubt but that some of the Wealth which the Indies
sent forth into Spain would fall to their Shares.

Upon Tuesday, the first of June, to begin our new Fortune with a new Month,
Sir Richard Lewson and Sir William Monson, who some few Nights before had met
accidentally in the Sea, were close on board the Rock, where they took two
Ships of the East Country, bound for Lisbon; and while they were romaging these
Ships, they descried a Carvel from Cape Picher bearing with them; which by
Signs she made, they perceived had a desire to speak with them. Sir Richard
immediately chased her, and left Sir William with the two Easterlings to abide
about the Rock till his return. The Carvel being fetched up, made a relation of
a Carreck and 11 Galleys to be in Cisembre Road; and that she was sent by two
Ships of ours, the Nonperil and the Dreadnought which lay thereabouts to look
out the Admiral. With what Joy this News was apprehended may be easily
imagined: Sir Richard made Signs to Sir William to stand with him; and lest he
should not be discerned, he caused the Carvel to ply up with him, wishing him
to repair to him; but before they could approach the Cape, it was midnight, and
nothing chanced all that time, but the exchanging of some Shot, that passed
betwixt the Admiral and the Galleys.

Upon Wednesday, the second of June, every man looked early in the morning what
Ships of her Majesty's were in sight, which were five in number, the Warspight,
wherein Sir Richard was: For the Repulse he had sent for England some few days
before, by reason of a Leak; the Garland, the Nonperil, the Dreadnought, and
the Adventure, besides the two Easterlings taken the day before. All the
Captains resorted on Board the Admiral, to council, which took up most part of
the day. At first there was an Opposition by some, who alleged the Danger and
Impossibility of taking the Carreck, being defended by the Castle and 11
Galleys: But Sir William Monson prevailed so far, as that all consented to go
upon her the next day, and concluded upon this Course following, that he and
Sir Richard should anchor as near the Carreck as they could, the rest to ply up
and down, and not anchor. Sir William was glad of this occasion, to be revenged
of the Galleys, hoping to requite the Slavery they put him to when he was
Prisoner in them; and singled himself from the Fleet a League, that the Galleys
might see it was in defiance of them; and so the Marquess of St. Cruz, and
Frederick Spaniola, the one General of the Portugal, the other of the Spanish
Galleys, apprehended it, and came forth with an intent to fight him; but being
within Shot, were diverted by one John Bedford an Englishman, who undertook to
know the Force of the Ship, and Sir William that commended her. Before I go
farther, I will a little digress, and acquaint you with the Situation of the
Town, and the manner of placing the Galleys against us. The Town of Cisembre
lies in the bottom of a Road, which is a good Succor for Ships with a
Northerly Wind. It is built with Freestone, and near the Sea is erected a
strong and spacious Fort, well replenished with Ordnance: Above the Town, upon
the top of a Hill, is seated an ancient, strong Fryery, whose Situation makes
it impregnable, and able to command the Town, Castle and Road; close to the
Shore lay the Carreck, like a Bullwork to the West side of the Castle; so as it
defended both that, and the East part of the Town: The 11 Galleys had flancked
and fortified themselves with the small Neck of a Rock on the West side of the
Road, with their Prows right forward, to play upon us, every one carrying a
Cannon in their Cruzia, besides other Pieces in their Prows; and they were no
way to be damaged by us, till our Ships came so nigh the Town, that all these
Forces might play upon us in one instant.

The Galleys being placed to this great Advantage, they made account (as a
Captain of one of them we took confessed) to have sunk our Ships of themselves,
without any farther Help. We saw the Tents pitched, and great Troops of
Soldiers drawn together; which was no less than the whole Country in Arms
against us: The Boats passed betwixt the Shore and the Carreck all the day
long, which we supposed was to unlade her; but we found afterward it was
rather to strengthen her with Men and Munition: Here appeared many Difficulties
and Dangers, and little hope of taking her; but rather of sinking or burning
her, as most men conjectured. The Danger from the Galleys was great, they being
flancked with the point of a Rock at our Entrance, as you have heard, it being
likewise calm, and they shooting low: Another Danger was, that of the Wind: For
if it had come from the Sea, the Road being open, and the Bay deep, our Attempt
must have been in vain. And notwithstanding these, and many more apparently
seen; and that there was no man but imagined, that most of the Carrecks Lading
was on shore, and that they would hale her on ground, under the Castle, where
no Ship of ours should be able to fleet to her; all which objections, with many
more, were alleged, yet they little prevailed, procrastination was perilous,
and therefore with all expedition, they thought convenient to charge the Town,
the Fort, the Galleys, and Carreck, all at one instant. And they had
determined, if the Carreck had been on ground, or so nigh the shore, that the
Queens Ships could not fleet to her, that the Two Easterlings, the day before
taken, should Board her, and Burn her.

Thursday the Third day, early in the morning, every man commending himself to
God's Tuition and Protection, expected when to begin, according to the
agreement the day before. A gale of Wind happening about Ten of the Clock, the
Admiral weighed; shot off a Warning-piece, and put forth his Flag in the
Maintop: the Vice Admiral did the like in his Foretop, according to the Custom
of the Sea; every Captain encouraged his men, which so imboldened them, as
though they were grown weak and feeble before, they were now revived, and
bestirred themselves, as if a new Spirit had been infused into them; the
Admiral was the first that gave the charge, after him followed the rest of the
Ships, showing great Valor, and gaining great Honor; the last of all, was the
Vice Admiral, at whose entrance into the Fight, he still strived to get up as
near the shore as he could, where he came to an Anchor, continually fighting
with the Town, the Fort, the Galleys, and Carreck, all together, for he brought
them betwixt him, that he might play both his Broad Sides upon them; there
might be seen the Prowess of the Galleys, swim by the sides of them, the Slaves
forsake them, and every thing in confusion amongst them, and thus they Fought,
till Five of the Clock in the Afternoon.

The Vice Admiral was Anchored to such an advantage, as the Galleys rowed from
one side to another, seeking to shun him, which Sir Richard Lewson observing,
came on Board him, and openly, in the view and hearing of his whole Company,
embraced him, and told him, He had won his heart for ever.

The rest of the Ships, as they were directed, plied up, except the Admiral,
who by the negligence of his Master, or some other impediment, when he should
have Anchored, fell so far to Leeward, as the Wind and Tide carried him out of
the Road, so that it was the next day, before his Ship could be fetched in
again; whereat the Admiral was much enraged, and put himself into the
Dreadnought, and brought her to an Anchor close to the Vice Admiral, about Two
of the Clock in the Afternoon: There was no opportunity let pass, for where the
Admiral saw defect in any other Ship, he presently caused it to be supplied,
and the Easterlings, who were appointed to Board the Carrek, beginning to
saint, and fail of observing the directions given them, the Vice Admiral
perceiving it, went on Board them himself, vowing, that if they seemed backward
in putting in Execution the design of firing the Carreck, they should look for
as little Life from the English, as they could expect from the Enemy. Whilst
the Vice Admiral was thus ordering things, Sir Richard Lewson came to him, and
would in no case suffer him to Board the Carreck himself, but carried him into
the Dreadnought, where they consulted how to preserve the Carreck, and enjoy
her.

The result of this Reference was, to offer her parley, which they presently
put in practice, and commanded all the Ships to leave shooting, until the
return of the Messenger: The man employed, was one Captain Sewell, who had
escaped, and swam to us, having been Four Years Prisoner in the Galleys, and so
did many Turks and Christians; the effect of this Parley, was to persuade them
to yield, promising honorable Conditions, and he was to intimate, as from
himself, that the Galleys, whose strength they presumed upon, were beaten, some
burnt, the rest fled; that we had the possession of the Road, the Castle not
being able to abide our Ordinance, much less the Carreck, and if they refused
this offer of Mercy, they were to expect all the Cruelty and Rigor, that a
Conpueror could impose upon his Enemy: After some Conference to this effect,
the Captain of the Carreck told him, He would send some Gentlemen of Quality,
with Commission to Treat, and desired, that some of the like Quality fromus,
might repair to him, to the same purpose.

These Gentlemen came aboard the Dreadnought, where the Admiral and
Vice Admiral were, attending the return and success of Captain Sewell; after
the delivery of their Message, they would needs hasten on Board the Carreck
again, for that, as it seemed, there was an uproar and a division in her, some
being of opinion to entertain a Parley, others to save themselves, and set her
on fire: which Sir William Monson hearing, without further delay, or
conference, with Sir Richard, what was to be done, he leaped suddenly into his
Boat, and rowed unto the Carreck; when he drew near to her, he was known by
diverse Gentlemen on Board her, he having once been a Prisoner among them: they
seemed to be very glad of this meeting, and their passed diverse Imbracements
between them, in remembrance of their old acquaintance: The Captain was called
Don Diego de Lobo, a Gallant young Gentleman, of a Noble House. He descended
down upon the bend of the Ship, and commanded his men to stand aside; Sir
William did the like to his company, in the Boat; the Captain demanded of him,
if he had the Portugal Language; he told him, he had sufficient to Treat of
that business; acquainted him of the Place he commanded in the Fleet, intimated
the affection and respect he bore the Portugal Nation, and that the Treaty
which was offered, proceeded out of his motion, and wished him to make his
proposals, which were as follows, The first demand he made, was, That they
should be safely put on shore with their Arms. The Second, That it should be
done the same Night: The Third, That they should enjoy their Ship and
Ordinance, as appertaining to the King, but we the Wealth. The Fourth, That the
Flag and Ancient should not be taken down, but worn while the Carreck was
unlading, His Speech being ended, Sir William told him, That his Demands gave
suspicion, that under pretense of Parley, they meant Treachery, or that their
hopes were greater, than there was cause; and, but that he knew it was the use
of some men, to demand great things, when less will serve them, he would not
lose his advantage, to entertain a Parley; he desired, that what they intended,
might be quickly concluded, for Night growing on, might advantage them, and for
his Resolution, he should understand it in few words, viz. To his first Demand,
He was willing to yield, That they should be put on shore with their Arms. To
the Second, That he was contented, that they should be set on shore that Night,
except Eight or Ten of the Principal Gentlemen; whom he would detain Three
Days. To the Third, He held it idle and frivolous, to imagine, he would consent
to separate Ship and Goods, and esteemed it Por Cosa de burla. To the Fourth,
He would not consent, being resolved, never to permit a Spanish Flag to be worn
in the presence of the Queens Ships, unless it were disgracefully, over the
Poop. There was long expostulations upon these points, and Sir William Monson
seeing the obstinacy of the Captain, offered, in a great rage, to leap into his
Boat, resolving to break the Treaty, which the rest of the Gentlemen
perceiving, and that he had propounded nothing but what might very well stand
with their Reputation, they entreated him once more to ascend into the Carreck,
and they would enter into new Capitulations: The effect whereof, as it was
agreed upon, were these that follow;

That a Messenger should be sent to the Admiral, to have his Confirmation of
the points concluded on; and that in the mean time the Flag and Ancient should
be taken down; and if the Admiral should not consent to the Agreement, they to
have leisure to put out their Flag and Ancient tofore the Fight should begin.
That the Company should be presently set on Shore; but the Captain, with eight
other of the principal Gentlemen three days after. That the Ship with her
Goods, should be surrendered without any Practice or Treason. That they should
use their endeavors, that the Castle should forbear shooting whilst we rid in
the Road; and this was the effect of the Conditions agreed upon. This Carreck
Wintered in Mosambicke, in her return from the Indies, a place of great
Infection, as appeared by the Mortality among them: For of 600 and odd men,
twenty of them lived not to return Home. After a great deal of Calamity and
Mortality, she arrived at this Port of Cisembre, as you have heard, the Viceroy
of Portugal, having sent 11 Galleys to her Rescue, and 400 mocas de Camera,
which is a Title of Gentlemen that serve the King upon any Honorable Occasion,
when they are commanded. That she was brought to this pass, and forced to yield
on these Conditions, Sir Robert Cecil was wont to impute to the Gentlemen's
Acquaintance with Sir William Monson. Although three days were limited for
setting the Captain on Shore, yet it was held Discretion not to detain them
longer than until the Carreck was brought off safely to our Ships; and
therefore Sir William Monson having carried the Captain, and the rest of the
Gentlemen on board him, where they Supped, had variety of Music, and spent the
Night in great Jollity; the Morning following, accompanied them on Shore
himself, whither the Conde de Vitagera had drawn down all the Force of the
whole Country, amounting to the number of 10000 men.

I must not omit to describe the Behavior of the Galleys in the Fight, that
every Man may have that Honor that is due to him: Those of Portugal, being of
the Squadron of the Marquess of St. Cruz, betook themselves, with their
General, to Flight in the middle of the Fight; but Frederico Spinola, who was
to convey his Galleys out of Spain into the Low Countries, followed not the
Example of the Marquess, but made good the Road; which the other seeing, with
Shame returned; but to both their Costs: for before they departed, they found
the Climate so hot, as they were forced to fly, their Galleys being so
miserably beaten, and their Slaves so pitifully slain, as there wanted nothing
but Boats to possess them all, as well as the two we took and burnt; which is a
thing has been seldom seen or heard of, for Ships to take and destroy Galleys.
The number of Men slain in the Town, the Castle, the Carreck and Galleys, are
unknown, though they could not choose but be many; the Wealth of the Carreck
could then as ill be estimated, though after found to be great; the Value of
the two Galleys burnt with their Loading of Powder, is hard to judge, though
it is known to have been a Service of great Importance. For our Loss, it was not
much, only one man killed in the Fly-Boat, five slain, and as many hurt in the
Garland, and one hurt in the Adventure: Sir William Monson had the left Wing of
his Doublet shot off, but received no other Hurt.

The day following, with a favorable Wind, we stood our Course for England,
which brought us into 47 Degrees; and there we met a Pinnace, sent with a
Packet from the Lords, signifying the readiness of a second Fleet to supply
us, and the setting out of the Hollanders, which were so long looked for; which
Fleet of Holland was in View of the Pinnace the same Night; but passed by us
unseen. This unlooked for Accident made the Admiral and Vice Admiral consider
what to do, and concluded, they could not both appear at Home, and have a Fleet
of so great Importance upon the Enemies Coast without a Guide or Head; and
therefore they held it fit the Vice Admiral should put himself into the
Nonperil, as the ablest Ship of the Fleet, and make his Return once more to the
Coast of Spain; but he having taken his Leave, and standing his Course for the
Coast, a most violent Storm, with a contrary Wind took him, which continued ten
days, and discovered the weakness of his Ship, who had like to have foundered
in the Deep. The Carpenters and Company seeing the apparent Danger, if he bore
not up before the Wind, presented him with a Petition, beseeching him to have a
regard to their Lives; for by keeping the Seas they should all perish. Thus was
he forced by mere Extremity to bear room for England; and coming for Plymouth,
he found the Carreck safely arrived, and the Fleet he went back to take Charge
of, not to have quitted the Coast of England.

Though it be somewhat impertinent to this Voyage, to treat of more than the
Success thereof; yet I will a little digress, and relate the Mishap of that
worthy Young Gentleman Don Diego de Lobo, Captain of the Carreck; and because
his Worth will more appear by his Answer to Sir William Monson's Offer to him
when he was his Prisoner; thus it was: Sir William Monson told him, he doubted,
that by the loss of the Carreck, he had lost his best Means; for that he
supposed, what he had gained in the Indies, was laden in her; and therefore
offered, that what he would challenge upon his Reputation to be his own, he
should have Freedom to carry along with him. The Gentleman acknowledged the
Favor to be extraordinary; but replied, that what he had, he had gained by his
Sword; and that his Sword, he doubted not, would repair his Fortunes again,
utterly refusing to accept any Courtesy in that kind: But, poor Gentleman, ill
Fortune thus left him not: For the Viceroy, Don Cristoball de Moro, holding it
for a great indignity to have the Carreck taken out of the Port, that was
defended by a Castle, and guarded with 11 Galleys, and especially in his
hearing of the Ordnance to Lisbon, and in the view of thousands of People who
beheld it; some of them feeling it too, by the loss of their Goods that were in
her, others grieving for the Death of their Friends that were slain; but every
man finding himself touched in Reputation.

The Names of the Carrecks and Eleven Galleys.
The St. Valentine, a Carreck of one Thousand seven Hundred Tuns. The
Christopher, the Admiral of Portugal, wherein the Marquess de Sancta Cruz went.
The St. Lewis, wherein Frederick Spinola went General of the Galleys of Spain.
The Forteleza, Vice Admiral to the Marquess. The Trividad, Vice Admiral to
Frederick Spinola, burnt. The Snis, in which Sir William Monson was Prisoner,
1591. The Occasion burnt, and the Captain taken Prisoner. The St. John Baptist.
The Lazear. The Padillar. The Philip. The St. John.
And the Viceroy not knowing how to clear himself so well, as the laying it
upon the Gentlemen he put on Board her, the same Night they returned to their
Lodging, he caused the most part of them, with their Captain, to be
apprehended, imputing the loss of the Carreck to their Cowardice and Fear, if
not Treason and Connivance with the Enemy. After some time of Imprisonment, by
mediation of Friends, all the Gentlemen were released but the Captain, who
received secret Advice, that the Viceroy intended his Death, and that he should
seek by Escape to prevent it. Don Diego being thus perplexed, practiced with
his Sister, who finding means for his Escape out of a Window, he fled into
Italy, where he lived in Exile, from 1602. when this happened, until 1615. His
Government in the Indies, for which he had a Patent in Reversion, was
confiscate, and he left hopeless ever to return into his Native Country, much
less to be restored to his Command; an ill Welcome after so long and painful a
Navigation. Having thus spent thirteen years in Exile, at the last he advised
with Friends, whose Council he followed, to repair into England, there to
enquire after some Commanders, that had been at the taking of the Carreck, by
whose Certificate he might be cleared of Cowardice or Treason in the loss of
her, which would be a good Motive to restore him to his Government again. In
the Year 1515. he arrived in London, and after some Enquiry found out Sir
William Monson, to whom he complained of his hard Mishap, craving the
Assistance of him and some others, whom Sir William knew to be at the taking of
the Carreck, and desired him to testify the manner of surprising her, which he
alleged, was no more than one Gentleman was bound to afford another in such a
case.

Sir William wondered to see him, and especially upon such an Occasion: For the
present, he entertained him with all Courtesy; and the longer his stay was in
England, the Courtesies were the greater, which Sir William did him. Sir
William procured him a true and effectual Certificate from himself, Sir Francis
Howard, Captain Barlow, and some others who were Witnesses of that Service; and
to give it the more Reputation, he caused it to be enrolled in the Office of
the Admiralty. The Gentleman being well satisfied with his Entertainment, and
having what he desired, returned to Flanders, where he presented his
Certificate to the Archduke and the Infanta, by whose means he got Assurance,
not only of the King's Favor, but of Restitution likewise to his Government.
The poor Gentleman having been thus tossed by the Waves of Calamity, from one
Country to another, and never finding rest; Death that masters all men, now cut
him off short, in the midst of his hopes, as he was preparing his Journey for
Spain; and this was an end of an unfortunate gallant young Gentleman, whose
Deserts might justly have challenged a better reward, if God had pleased to
afford it him.

Sir William Monson to the Coast of Spain, Anno 1602.
Ships. Commanders. The Swiftsuer Sir Will. Monson The Mary Rose Capt. Trevers
The Dreadnought Capt. Cawfield The Adventure Capt. Norris The Answer Capt.
Brodgate The Quittance Capt. Brown The Lions Whelp Capt. May The Paragon, A
Merchant. Capt. Jason A small Carvel Capt. Hooper

THe Fleet of Sir Richard Lewson being happily returned, with the fortune of a
Carreck, as you have heard, and the Queen having now no Ships upon the Spanish
Coast, to impeach the Enemies preparations, she feared, the Fleet which was
ready at the Groyne, would give a Second Assault upon Ireland; whereupon Sir
William Monson, who by this time was arrived at Plymouth, was sent for in great
haste, by her Majesty, to advise about, and take on him the charge of the
Fleet, then at Plymouth. After a long Conference with Sir William Monson, in
the presence of her Majesty, her Lord Admiral, Treasurer, and Secretary, it was
Resolved, That Sir William should repair to Plymouth, and with all speed get
forth those Ships, and others that were there making ready. His directions
were, to present himself before the Harbor of the Groyne, being the place where
the Spaniards made their Randevouz, and if he found any likelihood of a design
upon Ireland, not to quit that Coast until he saw the Issue, but if he found
Ireland secure, and the Enemies preparations to be intended only for defense of
their own Coasts, then his instructions led him thence, to the place where the
Holland Fleet had order to attend, and expect him; and afterward, the whole
carriage of the Action was referred to his discretion, but with this caution,
that above all respects of other profit or advantage, he attended the affair of
Ireland. The Wind this part of the Summer hung contrary, and it was Six Weeks
before he could clear the Coast, during which time, he lost his greatest hopes,
by the return of the Carrecks of the Indian Fleet, which happened a full Month
before his arrival: He set Sail from Plymouth the last of August, with a scant
Wind, which continued with foul Weather, until he recovered the Groyne,
choosing rather to keep the Sea, then hazard the overthrow of the Voyage by his
return.

He stayed at the Groyne, until he understood that the Fleet which was
suspected to be prepared for Ireland, was gone to Lisbone, to join with Don
Diego de Borachero, who all that Summer durst not budge forth, for fear of our
Fleet, that made good the Coast thereabouts: Sir William in his way to the
Rock, commanded his Carvel to repair to the Islands of Bayon, as the likeliest
place to procure Intelligence of the State of those parts; as the Carvel drew
near the Islands, he discerned the Spanish Fleet, consisting of Twenty Four
Sail, whose design was, as she understood by a Boat she took, to look out the
English Fleet, whose coming they daily expected upon the Coast; and meeting
Sir William with this news, he held it a good Service to be thus warned of
them. Here he took two goodly Ships of France, bound for Lisbone, which Harbor
he put them from, and took Pledges that they should directly return into
France, without touching in any Harbor of Spain, for that he understood, the
Spanish Fleet was ill provided of men, and many other things which these Ships
could supply. Sir William and the Dreadnought, were carried with a chase into
the Road of Cisimbre, where the Carreck was taken not long before, and after
some Fight with the Castle, who defended the Vessel chased, they came to a
friendly Treaty, and Presents past between them.

That Night, while the Admiral rid in the Road, a Carvel coming in, not
mistrusting him, was taken, but dismissed in a friendly manner; by whom he
understood the affairs of Lisbone, but could get no notice of the Holland
Fleet, which was appointed to attend at the Rock, whither once more he repaired.

Coming thither the 26th of September, a light was espied in the Night, which
the Admiral chased, thinking it had been the Fleet of St. Omer, or Brazil,
bound for Lisbone, where they were expected; but drawing so near them, that he
might hail them, he found them, by the hugeness of their Vessels, and the
number which answered the relation the Carvel made, to be the Armado of Spain:
whereupon he sought means how to clear himself, being engaged amongst them, and
made a Spaniard which served him call to them, but they could not hear him; the
Adventure only, and the Whelp, were left with him, the rest losing company,
Four nights before in a Storm; the Enemy perceiving our lights, and thinking it
to be some Fleet of Flemmings, stood in amongst us, but the Adventure being
discovered to be an Enemy, the Alarm was soon taken, and they shot at her, and
slew and hurt some of her men; as soon as the day appeared, the Spaniards
beheld the Three Enlish Ships a head them, which they chased, and Three of
them, which were better of Sail than the rest, fetched upon us, and drew near
the Whelp, who was of small Force to resist them.

But the Admiral resolving, though it was to his own evident Peril, not to see
a Pinnace of her Majesty's so lost, if so be he could rescue her with the loss
of his Life, though it was much against the persuasions of his Master, and
company, he stroke his two Sails for the Whelp, and commanded her to stand her
course, while he staid for the Three Spanish Ships, with hope to make them have
little list to pursue us: The Admiral of the Spaniards perceiving how little he
cared for his Three Ships, in that he lingered for their coming up, took in
with the shore, and shot off a piece for his Three Ships to follow him. It may
appear by this, as by several other expeditions of ours, how much the swift
Sailing of Ships does avail, being the principal advantage in Sea Service, and
indeed the main thing we could presume upon, in our War against the Spaniards.
Sir William having thus escaped the Enemy, in his traverse at Sea, there
happened, as there does upon all Coasts, where there is plenty of Trade, diverse
occasions of chases; and one day Sir William following one Ship, and the
Adventure another, they lost company for the whole Voyage.

Sir William was advertised by a Ship he took, being a Frenchman, who came from
St. Lucas, that the St. Domingo Fleet was looked for daily, which Intelligence
made him bear up for the South Cape, as well in hopes to meet with them, as to
have news of his Fleet.

He was no sooner come to the Cape, but he was informed by some English men of
War, that the Domingo Fleet was past by two days before; here he met with Ships
of several Nations, some he rescued from Pirates, and to others that were in
League with her Majesty, he gave his safe conduct, for their free passage on
the Sea; he kept that Coast until the 21th of October, on which morning he gave
chase to a Gallion of the King of Spain, who recovered the Castle of Cape
Sacre, before he could fetch her up; although he knew the strength of the
Castle, yet he attempted, and had carried her, had it not been for the fear and
cowardice of him at the Helm, who bore up, when he was ready to Board her: The
Fight was not long, but sharp and dangerous, for there never past shot between
them, till they were within a Ships length one of another: The Castle played her
part, and tore his Ship, so that a man might have crept through her: Between
the Castle and Gallion, they slew in the Admiral Ten men, and hurt many more,
in the view of Sireago and his Quadron, to the Westward, and of diverse English
men of War, to the Eastward, who durst not put themselves upon the rescue of
Sir William, for fear of the Castle: Sir William being now left alone, and
seeing what head Land soever he came unto, he was to encounter a Spanish
Squadron, stood his course that night to Sea, thinking to try, if the Islands
of Terceras would afford him any better Fortune, but coming within Forty or
Fifty Leagues of the Islands, he was taken short with the Wind, yet still,
bearing up what he could for the Rock; but at length finding his Victuals grew
short, his Mast perished, and the dangers he was exposed to, by keeping that
Coast, he directed his course for England, and came to Plymouth, the 24th of
November, where he found the Mary-rose and Dreadnought, most part of their men
being dead or sick.

The Adventure arrived within an hour after him, who in her way homewards fell,
amongst the Braizl Fleet, and encountering with them, lost diverse men, but took
none: The Paragon was at home long before, with a Prize of Sugar, and Spices,
which countervailed the charge of the Voyage. The Quittance in her return, met
Two Ships of Dunkirk, and in fight with them, her Captain was slain, but she
acquitted her self very well, without further harm. This Fleet, as you have
heard, was to keep the Enemy busied at home, that he might be diverted from the
thoughts of Ireland; what hazard it endured by the Enemy, the fury of the Sea,
and foul Weather, does appear; and no marvel; for it was the latest Fleet in
Winter, that ever kept upon the Spanish Coast, as it was likewise the last
Fleet her Majesty employed; for in March after she died, and by her Death all
War ceased. As Sir William Monson was General of this last Fleet, so was he a
Soldier, and a Youth, at the beginning of the Wars, and was at the taking of
the first Spanish Prize, that ever saw the English Coast, which yet was
purchased with the loss of Twenty Five of our men, besides Fifty hurt. This
Prize was afterward a Man of War, and served against the Spaniards, and was in
those days reckoned the best Ship of War we had; she was called the Commander,
and belonged to Sir George Carew, then Governor of the Isle of Wight.

Sir Richard Lewson and Sir William Monson into the Narrow Seas, Anno 1603.
Ships. Commanders. The Repulse Sir Richard Lewson The Mere-honor Sir William
Monson The Defiance Capt. Goer The Warspight Capt. Seymers The Rainbow Capt.
Trevor The Dreadnought Capt. Reynolds The Quittance Capt. Howard The Lions
Whelp Capt. Polwheele

SIR William Monson returning with his Fleet, in November, there was a
Resolution to furnish another against February, which should be recruited with
fresh Ships, Men and Victuals in June. Sir Richard Lewson was to command the
former Fleet, and Sir William Monson the later: For the Queen found it a Course
both secure and profitable, to keep a continual Force upon the Spanish Coast,
from February to November, that being the time of greatest Peril to her
Majesty; and she was the rather encouraged thereto, by the safty she found the
last Summer, and the Wealth and Riches she had from time to time taken from the
Enemy. The Complaint of the ill furnishing out of her Ships in other Voyages,
made it more carefully to be looked unto now, and there was better Choice of
Victuals and Men than usually had been; but in the mean time, it pleased God to
visit her Majesty with Sickness, which caused a lingering, though no absolute
dissolving of the Fleet; but when her Danger was perceived to increase, the
Ships were hastened out to Sea, it being a point of good Policy, to keep our
Seas guarded from any Foreign Attempt, until his Majesty should be peaceably
settled in England.

This Fleet departed from Quinborough the 22th. of March, and arrived in the
Downs the 25th. of the same, being the day after her Majesty's Death: The News
whereof, and Commandment to proclaim King James the Sixth of Scotland, our
Lawful King, and the rightful Inheritor to the Crown, arrived both together;
which put us into two contrary Passions, the one of Grief, the other of Joy:
Grief for the Loss of the Queen, Joy for accepting of the King in that
peaceable manner, which was a Happiness beyond all Expectation, either at home
or abroad.

As the Design of this Fleet was to guard and defend our own Coasts from any
Incurison that might be made out of France or the Low Countries; so the
Commanders were vigilant to appear on those Coasts once in two days, to
dishearten them, in case they had any such Thought; but the truth is, it was
beyond their Abilities, whatever was in their Hearts to impugn his Majesty. And
because the Archduke would make the Candidness of his Intention apparent to
the World, he called in his Letters of Reprizal against the English; and
published an Edict for a free and unmolested Traffic into Flanders: So that
now our Merchants might again trade peaceably into those Parts from which they
had been debarred the space of Eighteen Years. The King finding, that France
neither impeached his Right, nor gave any Jealousy by the raising of an Army;
and that the Archduke made a Demonstration of his desire of Peace, his Majesty
did the like, acknowledging the League he had with those Princes, with whom the
late Queen had Wars: For Wars betwixt Countries are not hereditary; but
commonly end with the Death of their Kings: Wherefore he commanded his Ships to
give over their Southern Employment, and to repair to Chatham, giving manifest
Testimonies, how desirous he was that his Subjects should recover that Wealth
and Freedom by Peace, which they had formerly lost by War.

FINIS.
A true and plain DECLARATION OF THE Horrible Treasons Practiced by WILLIAM
PARRY Against the Queens Majesty; AND OF His Conviction and Execution for the
same, The 2d. of March 1584. according to the account of England.
THis William Parry being a man of very mean and base Parentage, but of a most
proud and insolent Spirit, bearing himself always far above the measure of his
Fortune, after he had long led a wasteful and dissolute life, and had committed
a great Outrage against one Hugh Hare, a Gentleman of the Inner Temple, with an
intent to have murdered him in his own Chamber, for the which he was most
justly convicted; seeing himself generally condemned with all good men for the
same, and other his Misdemeanors, he left his natural Country, and gave
himself to travel into foreign parts beyond the Seas. In the course of this
his Travel, he forsook his Allegiance and dutiful Obedience to her Majesty, and
was reconciled, and subjected himself to the Pope. After which, upon conference
with certain Jesuits, and others of like quality, he first conceived his most
detestable Treason to kill the Queen (whose life God long preserve;) which he
bound himself by Promise, Letters, and Vows, to perform and execute: and so
with this intent he returned into England in January 1583; and since that did
practice at sundry times to have executed his most devilish purpose and
determination: yet covering the same, so much as in him lay, with a vail and
pretense of great Loyalty to her Majesty.

Immediately upon his return into England, he sought to have secret Access to
her Majesty, pretending to have some matter of great importance to reveal unto
her: which obtained, and the same so privately in her Highness's Palace at
Whitehal, as her Majesty had but one only Counselor with her at the time of
his Access, in a remote place, who was so far distant, as he could not hear his
Speech. And there then he discovered unto her Majesty (but shadowed with all
crafty and traitorous skill he had) some part of the Conference and Proceeding,
as well with the said Jesuits, and other Ministers of the Popes, as especially
with one Thomas Morgan, a Fugitive, residing at Paris, who above all others did
persuade him to proceed in that most devilish Attempt, (as is set down in his
voluntary Confession following,) bearing her Majesty notwithstanding in hand,
That his only intent of proceeding so far with the said Jesuits, and the
Popes Ministers, tended to no other end, but to discover the dangerous
Practices devised and attempted against her Majesty by her disloyal Subjects,
and other malicious persons in foreign parts. Albeit it has since appeared
most manifestly, as well by his said Confession, as by his dealing with one
Edmond Nevil Esquire; That his only intent of discovering the same in sort as he
craftily and traitorously did, tended to no other end, but to make the way the
easier to accomplish his most devilish and wicked purpose.

And although any other Prince but her Majesty (who is loath to put on a hard
Censure of those that protest to be loyal, as Parry did,) would rather have
proceeded to the punishment of a Subject that had waded so far, as by Oath and
Vow to promise the taking away of her life (as he to her Majesty's self did
confess;) yet such was her goodness, as instead of punishing, she did deal so
graciously with him, as she suffered him not only to have Access unto her
presence, but also many times to have private Conference with her; and did
offer unto him, upon opinion once conceived of his fidelity toward her (as
though his wicked pretense had been, as he protested, for her service) a most
liberal Pension.

Besides, to the end that he might not grow hateful to the good and
well-affected Subjects of the Realm, (from whom he could in no sort have
escaped with safety of his life, if his devilish purpose had been revealed) her
Majesty did conceal the same, without communicating it to any creature, until
such time as he himself had opened the same unto certain of her Council; and
that it was also discovered, that he sought to draw the said Nevil to have been
a party in his devilish and most wicked purpose.

A very rare Example! and such as does more set forth the singular goodness and
bounty of her Majesty's Princely nature, than commend (if it be lawful for a
Subject to censure his Sovereign) her providence such as ought to be in a
Prince and person of her Majesty's wisdom and quality. And as the goodness of
her Majesty's nature did hereby most manifestly show it self to be rare in so
extraordinary a case, and in a matter of so great peril unto her own Royal
Person; so did the malice of Parry most evidently appear to be in the highest
and extremest degree: who notwithstanding the said extraordinary grace and
favor extended toward him, did not only persuade the said Nevil to be an
Associate in the said wicked Enterprise, but did also very vehemently (as Nevil
confesses) importune him therein, as an Action lawful, honorable, and
meritorious, omitting nothing that might provoke him to assent thereunto.

But such was the singular goodness of Almighty God, (who even from her
Majesty's Cradle, by many evident Arguments, has showed himself her only and
especial Protector) that he so wrought in Nevil's heart, as he was moved to
reveal the same unto her Majesty; and for that purpoce made choice of a
faithful Gentleman, and of good quality in the Court, unto whom upon Monday the
8th of February last, he discovered at large all that had passed between Parry
and him; who immediately made it known to her Majesty: whereupon her Highnesses
pleasure was, That Nevil should be examined by the Earl of Leicester, and Sir
Christopher Hatton; who in the evening of the same day did examine him; and he
affirmed constantly all which he had before declared to the said Gentleman.

In the mean time, her Majesty continued her singular and most Princely
magnanimity, neither dismayed with the rareness of the Accident, nor appaled
with the horror of so villainous an Enterprise, tending even to the taking away
of her most gracious life; (a matter especially observed by the Counselor that
was present at such time as Parry, after his return, did first discover unto
her Majesty his wicked purpose; who found no other alteration in her
countenance, than if he had imparted unto her some matter of contentment;)
which shows manifestly how she reposeth her confidence wholly in the defense
of the Almighty. And so her Majesty, following the wonted course of her
singular Clemency, gave order that Parry the same Monday in the evening (though
not so known to him) should be sent to Mr. Secretaries house in London, he
being then there; who according unto such direction as he received from her
Majesty, did let him understand, That her Highness (in respect of the good will
she knew he bare unto the said Parry, and of the Trust that Parry did outwardly
profess to repose in Mr. Secretary) had made especial choice of him to deal
with him in a matter that concerned her highly; and that she doubted not but
that he would discharge his duty toward her, according unto that extraordinary
devotion that he professed to bear unto her.

And thereupon told him that her Majesty had been advertised that there was
somewhat intended presently against her own Person, wherewith she thought he
could not but be made acquainted, considering the great Trust that some of her
worst-affected Subjects reposed in him; and that her pleasure therefore was,
That he should declare unto him his knowledge therein: and whether the said
Parry himself had let fall any speech unto any person (though with an intent
only to have discovered his disposition) that might draw him in suspicion, as
though he himself had any such wicked intent. But Parry with great and vehement
protestations denied it utterly; whereupon Mr. Secretary, the rather to induce
him to deal more plainly in a matter so important, declared unto him, That
there was a Gentleman of Quality, every way as good or better than himself, and
rather his Friend than Enemy, that would avouch it to his face: Yet Parry
persisted stubbornly in his former denial, and justification of his own
innocence; and would not in any respect yield that he was party or privy to any
such Motion, Enterprise, or intent. And being lodged that night at Mr.
Secretaries house, the next morning he desired earnestly to have some further
speech with Mr. Secretary; which granted, Parry declared to him, that he had
called to remembrance that he had once some speech with one Nevil a Kinsman of
his (so he called him) touching a point of Doctrine contained in the Answer
made to the Book, entitled, The Execution of Justice in England; by which book
it was resolved, That it was lawful to take away the Life of a Prince, in
furtherance of the Catholic Religion: But he protested that they never had any
speech at all of any Attempt intended against her Majesty's Person. Which
Denial of his (at two sundry times, after so much light given him) does set
forth most apparently both the Justice and Providence of God: His Justice, for
that (though he was one of a sharp conceit) he had no power to take hold of
this Overture, thereby to have avoided the danger that Nevil's Accusation might
bring him into by confessing the same, as a thing propounded only to feel
Nevil's mind, whom before he had reported unto Master Secretary he found a
person discontented, and therefore his Confession might to very great purpose
have served to have cleared himself touching the intent: His Providence, for
that of his great Mercy he would not suffer so dangerous and wicked a member to
escape, and to live to Her Majesty's peril.

The same day at Night Parry was brought to the Earl of Leicester's house, and
there eftsoons examined before the said Earl of Leicester, Master
Vice-Chamberlain, and Master Secretary: He persisted still in his denial of all
that he was charged with. Whereupon Nevil, being brought before him face to
face, justified his Accusation against him. He notwithstanding would not yet
yield to confess it, but very proudly and insolently opposed his Credit against
the Credit of Nevil, affirming that his No was as good as Nevil's Yea; and as
by way of recrimination, objected the Crime to Nevil himself. On the other
side, Nevil did with great Constancy affirm all that he had before said, and
did set down many probable Circumstances of the Times, Places, and Manners of
their sundry Conferences, and of such other Accidents as had happened between
them in the course of that Action. Whereupon Parry was then committed to the
Tower, and Nevil commanded by their Honors to set down in writing under his
Hand, all that which before he had delivered by words: which he did with his
own hand, as follows.

Edmund Nevil his Declaration the 10th of February, 1584. subscribed with his
own Hand.
WIlliam Parry the last Summer, soon after his repulse in his Suit for the
Mastership of St. Katherines, repaired to my Lodging in the White Friars, where
he showed himself a person greatly discontented, and vehemently inveighed
against Her Majesty, and willed me to assure my self, that during this time and
state, I should never receive Contentment. But since, said he, I know you to be
Honorably descended, and a Man of Resolution, if you will give me assurance,
either to join with me, or not to discover me, I will deliver unto you the only
means to do your self good. Which when I had promised him, he appointed me to
come the next day to his House in Fetterlane: and repairing thither
accordingly, I found him in his Bed; whereupon he commanded his men forth, and
began with me in this order. My Lord, said he, (for so he called me) I protest
before God, that three Reasons principally do induce me to enter into this
Action, which I intend to discover unto you; the replanting of Religion, the
preferring of the Scottish Title, and the advancement of Justice, wonderfully
corrupted in this Commowealth: And thereupon entered into some Discourses what
places were fit to be taken, to give entrance to such Foreign Forces as should
be best liked of, for the furtherance of such Enterprises as were to be
undertaken. And with these Discourses he passed the time, until he went to
Dinner: after which, the Company being retired, he entered into his former
discourses. And if I be not deceived, (said he) by taking of Quinborough-
Castle, we shall hinder the passage of the Queens Ships forth of the River.
Whereunto when he saw me use no contradiction, he shook me by the hand; Tush,
said he, this is nothing: If men were resolute, there is an Enterprise of much
more moment, and much easier to perform; an Act honorable and meritorious to
God and the world. Which seeing me desirous to know, he was not ashamed to
utter in plain terms, to consist in killing of her Majesty: Wherein, says he,
if you will go with me, I will loose my Life, or deliver my Country from her
bad and tyrannous Government. At which Speeches finding me discontented, he
asked me, if I had read Doctor Allen's Book, out of which he alleged an
Authority for it. I answered, No, and that I did not believe that Authority.
Well, said he, what will you say, if I show further Authority than this, even
from Rome itself a plain Dispensation for the killing of her, wherein you shall
find it (as I said before) meritorious? Good Cousin, said I, when you shall
show it me, I shall think it very strange, when I shall see one to hold that
for meritorious, which another holds for damnable. Well, said Parry, do me
but the favor to think upon it till to morrow: And if one man be in the Town,
I will not fail to show you the thing it self: and if he be not, he will be
within these five or six days; at which time if it please you to meet me at
Chanon-row, we may there receive the Sacrament to be true each to other, and
then I will discover unto you both the party, and the thing itself. Whereupon I
prayed Parry to think better upon it, as a matter of great charge both of Soul
and Body. I would to God, said Parry, you were as perfectly persuaded in it as
I am, for then undoubtedly you should do God great service.

Not long after, eight or ten days, (as I remember) Parry coming to visit me at
my lodging in Herns rents in Holborn, as he often used, we walked forth into
the fields, where he renewed again his determination to kill her Majesty, whom
he said he thought most unworthy to live, and that he wondered I was so
scrupulous therein. She has sought, said he, your ruin and overthrow, why
should you not then seek to revenge it? I confess, quoth I, that my case is
hard, but yet am I not so desperate as to revenge it upon my self, which must
needs be the event of so unhonest and unpossible an enterprise. Unpossible,
said Parry, I wonder at you; for in truth there is not any thing more easy:
you are no Courtier, and therefore know not her customs of walking with small
train, and often in the Garden very privately, at which time my self may easily
have access unto her, and you also when you are known in Court. Upon the fact
we must have a Barge ready to carry us with speed down the River, where we will
have a ship ready to transport us if it be needful: but upon my head, we shall
never be followed so far. I asked him, How will you escape forth of the Garden?
for you shall not be permitted to carry any men with you, and the Gates will
then be locked, neither can you carry a Dagge without suspicion. As for a
Dagge, said Parry, I care not: my Dagger is enough. And as for my escaping,
those that shall be with her, will be so busy about her, as I shall find
opportunity enough to escape, if you be there ready with the Barge to receive
me. But if this seem dangerous in respect of your reason before showed, let it
then rest till her coming to St. James, and let us furnish our selves in the
mean time with men and horse fit for the purpose: we may each of us keep eight
or ten men without suspicion. And for my part, said he, I shall find good
fellows that will follow me without suspecting mine intent. It is much, said
he, that so many resolute men may do upon the sudden, being well appointed
with each his Case of Dagges: if they were an hundred waiting upon her, they
were not able to save her; you coming of the one side and I on the other, and
discharging our Dagges upon her, it were unhappy if we should both miss her.
But if our Dagges fail, I shall bestir me well with a sword ere she escape me.
Whereunto I said, Good Doctor give over this odious enterprise, and trouble me
no more with the hearing of that, which in heart I loath so much. I would to
God the enterprise were honest, that I might make known unto thee whether I
want solution. And not long after, her Majesty came to St. James's; after
which, one morning (the day certain I remember not,) Parry revived again his
former discourse of killing her Majesty, with great earnestness and importunity
persuading me to join therein: saying, he thought me the only man of England
like to perform it, in respect of my valor, as he termed it.

Whereupon, I made semblance as if I had been more willing to hear him than
before, hoping by that means to cause him to deliver his mind to some other
that might be witness thereof with me; wherein nevertheless I failed. After all
this, on Saturday last, being the sixth of February, between the hours of five
and six in the afternoon, Parry came to my Chamber, and desired to talk with me
apart: whereupon we drew our selves to a window. And where I had told Parry
before, that a learned man whom I met by chance in the fields, unto whom I
proponed the question touching her Majesty, had answered me that it was an
enterprise most villainous and damnable, willing me to discharge my self of it:
Parry then desired to know that learned man's name, and what was become of him,
saying, after a scornful manner, No doubt he was a very wise man, and you wiser
in believing him: and said further, I hope you told him not that I had any
thing from Rome. Yes in truth, said I. Whereunto Parry said, I would you had
not named me, nor spoken of any thing I had from Rome. And thereupon he
earnestly persuaded me estsoons to depart beyond the Seas, promising to procure
me safe passage into Wales, and from thence into Britain; whereat we ended. But
I then resolved not to do so, but to discharge my conscience, and lay open this
his most traitorous and abominable intention against her Majesty: which I
revealed in sort as is before set down.

Edmund Nevil.

After this confession of Edmund Nevil, William Parry the 11th. day of February
last, being examined in the Tower of London, by the Lord Hunsdon, Lord
Governor of Barwick, Sir Christopher Hatton knight, Vicechamberlain to her
Majesty, and Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, principal Secretary to her Majesty,
did voluntary and without any constraint, by word of mouth make confession of
his said Treason; and after, set it down in writing all with his own hand in
his Lodging in the Tower, and sent it to the Court the 13th. of the same, by
the Lieutenant of the Tower. The parts whereof concerning his manner of doing
the same, and the Treasons wherewith he was justly charged are here set down,
word for word, as they are written and signed with his own hand and name, the
11th. of February, 1584.

The voluntary Confession of William Parry, in writing all with his own hand.
The voluntary Confession of William Parry Doctor of the Laws, (now Prisoner in
the Tower) and accused of Treason by Edmund Nevil Esquire, promised by him
(with all faith and humility) to the Queens Majesty, in discharge of his
Conscience and Duty toward God and her. Before the Lord Hunsdon, Lord
Governor of Barwick, Sir Christopher Hatton Knight, Vicechamberlain, Sir
Francis Walsingham Knight, principal Secretary,

the 13th. of February, 1584. Parry.

IN the year 1570. I was sworn her Majesty's servant, from which time until the
year 1580. I served, honored, and loved her with as great readiness, devotion,
and assurance as any poor subject in England. In the end of that year, and
until Midsummer 1582. I had some trouble for the hurting of a Gentleman of the
Temple. In which action I was so disgraced and oppressed by two great men (to
whom I have of late been beholden) that I never had contented thought since.
There began my misfortune, and here follows my woeful fall.

In July after, I labored for license to travail for three years, which (upon
some consideration) was easily obtained. And so in August, I went over with
doubtful mind of return, for that being suspected in Religion, and not having
received the Communion in twenty two years, I began to mistrust my advancement
in England. In September I came to Paris, where I was reconciled to the Church,
and advised to live without scandal, the rather, for that it was mistrusted by
the English Catholics, that I had Intelligence with the greatest Counselor
of England. I stayed not long there, but removed to Lions (a place of great
Traffic) where, because it was the ordinary passage of our Nation to and fro,
between Paris and Rome, I was also suspected.

To put all men out of doubt of me, and for some other cause, I went to
Millain, from whence, as a place of some danger (though I found favor there)
after I had cleared my conscience, and justified my self in Religion before the
Inquisitor, I went to Venice. There I came acquainted with father Benedicto
Palmio, a grave and a learned Jesuit. By conference with him of the hard state
of the Catholics in England, and by reading of the Book De persecutione
Anglicana, and other discourses of like argument, 1 I conceived a possible mean
to relieve the afflicted state of our Catholics, if the same might be well
warranted in religion and conscience by the Pope, or some learned Divines. I
asked his opinion; he made it clear, commended my devotion, comforted me in it,
and after a while made me known to the Nuntio Campeggio, there resident for his
Holiness. By his means I wrote to the Pope, presented the service, and sued for
a Pasport to go to Rome, and to return safely into France. Answer came from
Cardinal Como, that I might come, and should be welcome. I misliked the
warrant, sued for a better, which I was promised: but it came not before my
departure to Lions, where I promised to stay some time for it. And being indeed
desirous to go to Rome, and loath to go without countenance, I desired
Christofero de Salazar, Secretary to the Catholic King in Venice, who had some
understanding by conference, of my devotion to the afflicted Catholics at home
and abroad, to commend me to the Duke di Nova Terra, Governor of Millain, and
to the County of Olivaris Embi, then Resident for the King his Master in Rome:
which he promised to do effectually for the one, and did for the other. And so
I took my journey toward Lions, whither came for me an ample Passeport (but
somewhat too late,) that I might come and go in verbo Pontificis per omnes
jurisdictones Ecclesiasticas, absque impedimento. I acquainted some good
Fathers there, of my necessity to depart toward Paris by promise, and prayed
their advises upon diverse points; wherein I was well satisfied. And so assuring
them that his Holiness should hear from me shortly, it was undertaken that I
should be excused for that time.

In October I came to Paris, where (upon better opinion conceived of me amongst
my Catholic Countrymen) I found my credit well settled, and such as mistrusted
me before, ready to trust and embrace me. And being one day at the Chamber of
Thomas Morgan a Catholic Gentleman (greatly beloved and trusted on that side)
amongst other Gentlemen, talking (but in very good sort) of England, I was
desired by Morgan to go up with him to another Chamber, where he brake with me,
and told me that it was hoped and looked for, that I should do some service for
God and his Church. I answered him, I would do it, if it were to kill the
greatest subject in England; whom I named, and in truth then hated. No, no,
said he, let him live to his greater fall and ruin of his house:

2 It is the Queen I mean. I had him as I wished, and told him it were soon
done, if it might be lawfully done, and warranted in the opinion of some
learned Divines. And so the doubt once resolved (though as you have heard I was
before reasonably well satisfied) I vowed to undertake the enterprise, for the
restitution of England to the ancient obedience of the Sea Apostolic. Diverse
Divines were named. Doctor Allein I desired, Parsons I refused. And by chance
came Master Wattes a learned Priest, with whom I conferred, and was overruled.

3 For he plainly pronounced (the case only altered in name) that it was
utterly unlawful: with whom many English Priests did agree as I have heard, if
it be not altered since the book made in answer of The execution of the English
Justice was published, which I must confess has taken hard hold in me, and (I
fear me) will do in others, if it be not prevented by more gracious handling of
the quiet and obedient Catholic subjects, whereof there is good and greater
store in England, than this age will extinguish. Well notwithstanding all these
doubts, I was gone so far by letters and conference in Italy, that I could not
go back, but promised faithfully to perform the enterprise, if his Holiness
upon my offer and letters would allow it, and grant me full remission of my
sins. 4 I wrote my letters the first of January 1584. by their computation;
took advice upon them in confession of Father Anibal a Codreto a learned
Jesuit in Paris, was lovingly embraced, commended, confessed, and communicated
at the Jesuits at one altar with the Cardinals of Vandosmi, and Narbone,
whereof I prayed certificate, and enclosed the same in my Letter to his
Holiness, to lead him the rather to absolve me; which I required by my Letters,
in consideration of so great an enterprise undertaken without promise or
reward. 5 I went with Morgan to the Nuntio Ragazzoni, to whom I read the Letter
and certificate enclosed, sealed it, and left it with him to send to Rome: he
promised great care of it, and to procure answer: And so lovingly embraced me,
wished me good speed, and promised that I should be remembered at the altar. 6
After this I desired Morgan, that some special man might be made privy to this
matter, lest he dying, and I miscarrying in the execution, and my intent never
truly discovered, it might stick for an everlasting spot in my Race. Diverse
were named, but none agreed upon for fear of beraying. 7 This being done,
Morgan assured me, that shortly after my departure, the L. Fernehurst (then in
Paris) should go into Scotland, and be ready upon the first news of the Queens
fall to enter into England with 20 or 30000 Men to defend the Queen of
Scotland, (whom, and the King her Son, I do in my conscience acquit of any
privity, liking, or consent to this, or any other bad action, for any thing
that ever I did know.) I shortly departed for England, and arrived at Rye in
January 1583. from whence I wrote to the Court, advertised some, that I had a
special service to discover to the Queens Majesty; 8 which I did more to
prepare access and credit, than for any care I had of her Person, though I were
fully resolved never to touch her (notwithstanding any Warrant) if by any
device, persuasion, or policy she might be wrought to deal more graciously with
the Catholics than she does, or by our manner of proceeding in Parliament
means to do, or any thing yet seen. I came to the Court, (then at Whitehall,)
prayed audience, had it at large, and very privately discovered to her Majesty
this Conspiracy, much to this effect, though covered with all the skill I had:
she took it doubtfully, I departed with fear. And amongst other things, I
cannot forget her Majesty's gracious speech then uttered touching the
Catholics, which of late, after a sort I avowed in Parliament: she said to me,
that never a Catholic should be troubled for Religion or Supremacy, so long as
they lived like good Subjects. Whereby I mistrusted that her Majesty is born in
hand, that none is troubled for the one or the other. It may be truly said,
that it is better than it has been, though it be not yet as it should be.

In March last, while I was at Greenwich (as I remember) suing for St.
Katherines, came Letters to me from Cardinal Como, dated at Rome, the last of
January before, whereby I found the enterprise commended, and allowed, and my
self absolved (in his Holiness name) of all my sins, and willed to go forward
in the name of God. That Letter I showed to some in Court, who imparted it to
the Queen: what it wrought, or may work in her Majesty, God knows: only this
I know, 9 that it confirmed my resolution to kill her, and made it clear in my
conscience, that it was lawful and meritorious. And yet was I determined never
to do it, if either policy, practice, persuasion, or motion in Parliament could
prevail. I feared to be tempted, and therefore always when I came near her, I
left my Dagger at home. 10 When I looked upon her Majesty, and remembered her
many excellencies, I was greatly troubled: And yet I saw no remedy, for my Vows
were in Heaven, my Letters and Promises in Earth, and the case of the Catholic
Recusants, and others, little bettered. Sometimes I said to my self, Why should
I care for her? what has she done for me? have I not spent 10000 Marks since I
knew her service, and never had penny by her? It may be said, she gave me my
life. But I say (as my case stood) it had been Tyranny to take it: And I fear
me it is little less yet. If it please her graciously to look into my
discontentments, I would to Jesus Christ she had it, for I am weary of it. And
now to come to an end of this tragical discourse: In July I left the Court,
utterly rejected, discontented, and as her Majesty might perceive by my
passionate Letters, careless of my self. I came to London: Doctor Alleins Book
was sent me out of France: 11 it redoubled my former conceits: Every word in it
was a warrant to a prepared mind: It taught that Kings may be excommunicated,
deprived, and violently handled: It proves that all Wars Civil or Foreign
undertaken for Religion, is Honorable. Her Majesty may do well to read it, and
to be out of doubt (if things be not amended) that it is a warning, and a
Doctrine full dangerous. This is the Book I showed, in some places read, and
lent it to my Cousin Nevil (the accuser) who came often to mine house, put his
finger in my Dish, his hand in my Purse; and the night wherein he accused me,
was wrapped in my Gown, six months at least after we had entered into this
Conspiracy: In which space her Majesty, and ten Princes in several Provinces
might have been killed. God bless her Majesty from him: for before Almighty
God, I joy and am glad in my soul, that it was his hap to discover me in time;
though there were no danger near.

And now to the manner of our meetings. He came to me in the beginning of
August, and spoke to me in this or like sort. Cousin, let us do somewhat,
since we can have nothing. I offered to join with him, and gladly heard him,
hoping because I knew him to be a Catholic, that he would hit upon that I had
in my head: but it fell not out so. He thought the delivery of the Queen of
Scotland easy, presuming upon his Credit and Kindred in the North: I thought
it dangerous to her, and impossible to men of our fortunes: He fell from that
to the taking of Barwick: I spoke of Quinborough and the Navy, rather to
entertain him with discourse, than that I cared for those motions, my head
being full of a greater matter: 12 I told him that I had another manner of
Enterprise, more honorable and profitable to us, and the Catholics
Commonwealth, than all these, if he would join in it with me, as he presently
vowed to do: He pressed to know it; I willed him to sleep upon the motion: He
did so, (and belike overtaken) came to me the next morning to my Lodging in
London, offered to join with me, and took his Oath upon a Bible, to conceal and
constantly to pursue the enterprise for the advancement of Religion; which I
also did, and meant to perform: the killing of the Queen was the matter.

The manner and place, to be on Horsback, with eight or ten horses, when she
should ride abroad about St. James, or some other like place. It was once
thought fit in a Garden, and that the escape would be easiest by water into
Shepey, or some other part: but we resolved upon the first.

This continued as agreed upon many months, until he heard of the death of
Westmoreland, whose Land and Dignity (whereof he assured himself) bred belike
this Conscience in him to discover a Treason in February, contrived and agreed
upon in August. If it cost him not an ambitious Head at last, let him never
trust me. He brought a tall Gentleman (whom he commended for an excellent
Pistolier) to me to Chanon-Row, to make one in the match: but I refused to deal
with him, being loath to lay my head upon so many hands.

Master Nevil has (I think) forgotten, that he did swear to to me at diverse
times, that all the advancement she could give, should serve but for her
scourge, if ever time and occasion should serve: and that though he would not
lay hand upon her in a corner, his heart served him to strike off her Head in
the field. Now leaving him to himself, this much (to make an end) I must
confess of my self, I did mean to try what might be done in Parliament, to do
my best to hinder all hard courses, to have prayed hearing of the Queens
Majesty, to move her (if I could) to take compassion upon her Catholic
Subjects; and when all had failed, to do as I intended. If her Majesty by this
course would have eased them, though she had never preferred me; I had with all
comfort and patience born it: 13 but if she had preferred me without ease or
care of them, the Enterprise had held.

Parry
God preserve the Queen, and incline her merciful heart to forgive me this
desperate purpose; and to take my Head (with all my heart) for her better
satisfaction.
After which, for the better manifesting of his Treasons, on the 14th of
February last, there was a Letter written by him to her Majesty, very
voluntarily, all of his own Hand, without any motion made to him: The tenor
whereof, for that which concerns these his Traitorous dealings, is as
follows.

A Letter written by Parry to Her Majesty.
YOur Majesty may see by my voluntary Confession, the dangerous fruits of a
discontented mind; and how constantly I pursued my first conceived purpose in
Venice, for the relief of the afflicted Catholics; continued it in Lions, and
resolved in Paris to put it in adventure, for the Restitution of England to the
ancient Obedience of the Sea Apostolic. You may see withal, how it is
Commended, Allowed, and Warranted in Conscience, Divinity, and Policy, by the
Pope and some great Divines: Though it be true or likely, that most of our
English Divines (less practiced in matters of this weight) do utterly mislike
and condemn it.

The Enterprise is prevented, and Conspiracy discovered by an honorable
Gentleman, my Kinsman and late familiar Friend, Master Edmund Nevil, privy and
by solemn Oath (taken upon the Bible) party to the matter, whereof I am hardly
glad, but now sorry (in my very Soul) that ever I conceived or intended it, how
commendable or meritoritous soever I thought it. God thank him, and forgive me,
who would not now (before God) attempt it (if I had liberty and opportunity to
do it) to gain your Kingdom. I beseech Christ, that my Death and Example may
as well satisfy you Majesty and the world, as it shall glad and content me.

The Queen of Scotland is your Prisoner; let her be honorably entreated, but
yet surely guarded.

The French King is French, you know it well enough, you will find him
occupied when he should do you good; he will not loose a Pilgrimage to save you
a Crown. I have no more to say at this time, but that with my Heart and Soul I
do now honor and love you; am inwardly sorry for mine Offense, and ready to
make you amends by my Death and Patience. Discharge me a culpa, but not a
poena, good Lady. And so farewell, most gracious, and the best-natured and
qualified Queen that ever lived in England.

From the Tower, the 14th of February, 1584. W. Parry.


After which, to wit, the 18th of February last past, Parry, in further
acknowledging his wicked and intended Treasons, wrote a Letter all of his own
hand, in like voluntary manner, to the Lord Treasurer of England, and the Earl
of Leicester, Lord Steward of her Majesty's house; the Tenor whereof is as
follows.

William Parry's Letter to the Lord Treasurer, and the Earl of Leicester.
MY Lords, now that the Conspiracy is discovered, the Fault confessed, my
Conscience cleared, and Mind prepared patiently to suffer the Pains due for so
heinous a Crime: I hope it shall not offend you, if crying Miserere with the
poor Publican, I leave to despair with cursed Cain. My Case is rare and
strange, and, for any thing I can remember, singular: A natural Subject
solemnly to vow the Death of his natural Queen (so born, so known, and so taken
by all men) for the Relief of the afflicted Catholics, and Restitution of
Religion. The Matter first conceived in Venice, the Service (in general words)
presented to the Pope, continued and undertaken in Paris; and lastly, commended
and warranted by his Holiness, degested and resolved in England, if it had not
been prevented by Accusation, or by her Majesty's greater Lenity and more
gracious Usage of her Catholic Subjects. This is my first and last Offense
conceived against my Prince or Country, and does (I cannot deny) contein all
other faults whatsoever. It is now to be punished by Death, or most graciously
(beyond all common expectation) to be pardoned. Death I do confess to have
deserved; Life I do (with all Humility) crave, if it may stand with the Queens
Honor, and Policy of the Time. To leave so great a Treason unpunished, were
strange: To draw it by my Death in example, were dangerous: A sworn Servant to
take upon him such an Enterprise, upon such a ground, and by such a warrant,
has not been seen in England: To Indict him, Arraign him, bring him to the
Scaffold, and to publish his Offense, can do no good: To hope that he has more
to discover than is Confessed, or that at his Execution he will unsay any thing
he has written, is in vain: To conclude, that it is impossible for him in time
to make some part of amends, were very hard, and against former Experiences.
The Question then is, whether it be better to kill him, or (lest the matter be
mistaken) upon hope of his amendment to pardon him. For mine own opinion
(though partial) I will deliver you my Conscience. The Case is good Queen
Elizabeth's, the Offense is committed against her Sacred Person, and she may (of
her Mercy) pardon it without prejudice to any. Then this I say, in few words,
as a man more desirous to discharge his troubled Conscience, than to live.
Pardon poor Parry, and relieve him: for life without living is not fit for him.
If this may not be, or be thought dangerous, or dishonorable to the Queens
Majesty (as by your favors, I think it full of Honor and Mercy) then I
beseech your Lordships (and no other) once to hear me before I be Indicted, and
afterward (if I must dye) humbly to entreat the Queens Majesty to hasten my
Trial and Execution, which I pray God (with all my heart) may prove as
honorable to her, as I hope it shall be happy to me; who will, while I live,
(as I have done always) pray to Jesus Christ for her Majesty's long and
prosperous Reign.

From the Tower, the 18th of February, 1584. W. Parry.


And where in this mean time Sir Francis Walsingham, Secretary to her Majesty,
had dealt with one William Creichton, a Scot for his Birth, and a Jesuit by his
Profession, now Prisoner also in the Tower, for that he was apprehended with
diverse Plots for Invasions of this Realm, to understand of him, if the said
Parry had ever dealt with him in the parties beyond the Seas touching that
Question, Whether it were lawful to kill her Majesty, or not: the which at that
time the said Creichton called not to his remembrance; yet after upon better
calling it to mind, upon the 20th day of February last past, he wrote to
Master Secretary Walsingham thereof voluntary, all of his own hand, to the
effect following.

William Creichtons Letter. February 20.
RIght honorable Sir, when your Honor demanded me if Mr. Parry did ask me, If
it was reason to kill the Queen, indeed and verity, then I had no remembrance
at all thereof. But since, thinking on the matter, I have called to mind the
whole fashion of his dealing with me, and some of his Arguments: for he dealt
very craftily with me, I dare not say maliciously. For I did in no ways think
of any such design of his, or of any other, and did answer him simply after my
conscience and knowledge to the verity of the question. For after that I had
answered him twice before, Quod omnino non liceret, he returned late at Even,
by reason I was to depart early in the next Morning toward Chamberie in Savoy
where I did remain, and being returned out of the Close within one of the
Classes of the College, he proponed to me of the new matter, with his Reasons
and Arguments. First, he alleged the utility of the deed for delivering of so
many Catholics out of misery, and restitution of the Catholic Religion. I
answered, that the Scripture answers thereto, saying, Non sunt facienda mala,
ut veniant bona. So that for no good, how great that ever it be, may be wrought
any evil, how little that ever it be. He replied, that it was not evil to take
away so great evil, and induce so great good. I answered, That all good is not
to be done, but that only, Quod been and legitime fieri potest. And therefore,
Dixi, Deum magis amare adverbia quam nomina. Quia in actionibus magis ei
placent been and legitime, quam bonum. Ita ut nullum bonum liceat facere, nisi
been and legitime fieri possit. Quod in hoc casu fieri non potest. Yet said he,
that several learned men were of the opinion, Quod liceret. I answered, that
they men perhaps were of the opinion that for the safety of many in Soul and
Body, they would permit a particular to his danger, and to the occult judgment
of God: Or perhaps said so, moved rather by some compassion and commiseration
of the miserable estate of the Catholics, not for any such Doctrine that they
did find in their Books. For it is certain, that such a thing is not licite to
a particular, without special revelation Divine, which exceeds our Learning
and Doctrine. And so he departed from me.

Out of the Prison in the Tower, the 20th of February. Your Honors poor
servitor in Christ Jesu. William Creichton Prisoner.


And where also the same Parry was on the same 20th day of February examined by
Sir Francis Walsingham Knight, what was become of the Letter contained in his
Confession to be written unto him by the Cardinal de Como, he then answered,
that it was consumed and burnt: and yet after, the next day following, being
more vehemently urged upon that point in examination (because it was known that
it was not burnt) he confessed where he had left it in the Town: whereupon, by
Parrys direction it was sent for, where it had been lapped up together with
other frivolous papers, and written upon the one side of it, The last Will of
William Parry, the which Letter was in the Italian Tongue, as hereafter
follows, with the same in English accordingly Translated.

A mon Signore, mon Signore Guglielmo Parry.
MOn Signore, la Santita di N. S. ha veduto le Lettere di V. S. del primo con
la feed inclusa, and non puo se non laudare la buona disposittione and
risolutiene che scrive di tenere verso il servitio and beneficio publico, nel
che la Santita sua lessorta di perseverare, con farne riuscire li effetti che
V. S. promette: Et accioche tanto maggiormente V. S. sia ajutata da quel buon
Spirito che l'ha mosso, le concede sua Beneditione, plenaria Indulgenza and
remissione di tutti li peccati, secondo che V. S. ha chiesto, assicurandos si
che oltre il merito, che n'havera in cielo, vuole anco sua Santita constituir
si debitore a riconoscere li meriti di V. S. in ogni miglior modo che potra,
and cio tanto piu, quanto che V. S. usa maggior modestia in non pretender
niente. Metta dunque ad effetto liesuoi santi and honorati pensieri, and
attenda astar sano. Che per fine io me le offero di core, and le desidero ogni
buono and felice suceesso.

Di Roma a 30 di Gennaro, MDLXXXIV. Al piacer di V. S. N. Cardinale di Como, Al
Sig. Guglielmo Parri.


Cardinal de Como's Letter to Will. Parry, January 30th 1584. by account of
Rome.
MOnsignor, the Holiness of our Lord has seen the Letter of your Signory of
the first, with the assurance included, and cannot but commend the good
disposition and resolution, which you write to hold toward the Service and
Benefit public: Wherein his Holiness does exhort you to persevere, with
causing to bring forth the effects which your Signorie promises. And to the
end you may be so much the more helped, by that good Spirit, which has moved
you thereunto, his Blessedness does grant to you plenary Indulgence and
Remission of all your Sins, according to your request. Assuring you, that
besides the Merit that you shall receive therefore in Heaven, his Holiness will
further make himself Debtour, to re-acknowledge the deservings of your Signorie
in the best manner that he can. And that so much the more, in that your
Signorie uses the greater Modesty, in not pretending any thing. Put therefore
to effect your holy and honorable thoughts, and attend your Health. And to
conclude, I offer my self unto you heartily, and do desire all good and happy
success.

From Rome the 30th of January, 1584. At the pleasure of your Signorie, N.
Card. of Como.


UPon all which former Accusation, Declaration, Confessions, and Proofs, upon
Monday the 22th day of February last past, at Westminster Hall, before Sir
Christopher Wray Knight, Chief Justice of England, Sir Gilbert Gerrard Knight,
Master of the Rolls, Sir Edmund Anderson Knight, Chief Justice of the Common
Pleas, Sir Roger Manwood Knight, Chief Baron of the Exchequer, Sir Thomas Gaudy
Knight, one of the Justices of the Pleas before her Majesty to be holden, and
Will. Perriam, one of the Justices of the Common Pleas, by virtue of her
Majesty's Commission to them and others in that behalf directed; The same Parry
was Indicted of High Treason, for intending and practicing the Death and
Destruction of her Majesty, whom God long prosper, and preserve from all such
wicked attempts. The tenor of which Indictment appears more particularly in
the course of his Arraignment following.

The manner of the Arraignment of Will. Parry the 25th of February, 1584. at
Westminster, in the place where the Court, commonly called the King's Bench, is
usually kept, by virtue of her Majesty's Commission of Oyer and Terminer,
before Henry Lord Hunsdon Governor of Barwick, Sir Francis Knolles Knight,
Treasurer of the Queens Majesty's Household, Sir James Croft Knight, Comptroller
of the same Household, Sir Christopher Hatton Knight, Vice-Chamberlain to her
Majesty, Sir Christopher Wray Knight, Chief Justice of England, Sir Gilbert
Gerrard Knight, Master of the Rolls, Sir Edmund Anderson Knight, Chief Justice
of the Common Pleas, Sir Roger Manwood Knight, Chief-Baron of the Exchequer,
and Sir Thomas Hennage Knight, Treasurer of the Chamber.
FIrst, three Proclamations for silence were made, according to the usual
course in such cases. Then the Lieutenant was commanded to return his Precept;
which did so, and brought the Prisoner to the Bar, to whom Miles Sands
Esquire, Clerk of the Crown, said, William Parry, hold up thy hand; and he did
so. Then said the Clerk of the Crown, Thou art here Indicted by the Oaths of
twelve good and lawful men of the County of Middlesex, The Indictment.
before Sir Christopher Wray Knight, and others, which took the Indictment by
the name of William Parry, late of London, Gentleman, otherwise called William
Parry, late of London, Doctor of the Law; for that thou, as a false Traitor
against the most Noble and Christian Prince, Queen Elizabeth, thy most gracious
Sovereign and Liege-Lady, not having the fear of God before thine eyes, nor
regarding thy due Allegiance; but being seduced by the instigation of the
Devil, and intending to withdraw and extinguish the hearty Love and due
Obedience which true and faithful Subjects should bear unto the same our
Sovereign Lady, did at Westminster in the County of Middlesex, on the first
day of February, in the 26th year of her Highness Reign, and at diverse other
times and places in the same County, maliciously and traitorously conspire and
compass, not only to deprive and depose the same our Sovereign Lady of her
Royal Estate, Title and Dignity; but also to bring her Highness to Death and
final Destruction, and Sedition in the Realm to make, and the Government
thereof to subvert, and the sincere Religion of God established in her Highness
Dominions to alter and subvert. And that, whereas thou William Parry, by thy
Letters sent unto Gregory Bishop of Rome, did signify unto the same Bishop
thy purposes and intentions aforesaid, and thereby did pray and require the
same Bishop to give thee Absolution; that thou afterward, that is to say, the
last day of March in the 26th year aforesaid, did traitorously receive
Letters from one called Cardinal de Como, directed unto thee William Parry,
whereby the same Cardinal did signify unto thee, that the Bishop of Rome had
perused thy Letters, and allowed of thine intent; and that to that end he had
absolved thee of all thy Sins, and by the same Letter did animate and stir thee
to proceed with thine Enterprise; and that thereupon, thou, the last day of
August, in the 26th year aforesaid, at Saint Giles in the fields, in the same
County of Middlesex, did traitorously confer with one Edmund Nevil Esquire,
uttering to him all thy wicked and traitorous devises, and then and there did
move him to assist thee therein, and to join with thee in those wicked Treasons
aforesaid, against the Peace of our said Sovereign Lady the Queen, her Crown
and Dignity. What say thou, William Parry, Art thou guilty of these Treasons
whereof thou stand here Indicted, or not guilty?

Then Parry said, Parry's answer to the Indictment.
Before I plead not guilty, or confess my self guilty, I pray you give me leave
to speak a few words: and with humbling himself, began in this manner. God save
Queen Elizabeth, and God send me grace to discharge my duty to her, and to send
you home in charity. But touching the matters that I am Indicted of, some were
in one place, and some in another, and done so secretly, as none can see into
them, except that they had eyes like unto God; wherefore I will not lay my
Blood upon the Jury, but do mind to confess the Indictment. It contains but
the parts that have been openly read, I pray you tell me? Whereunto it was
answered, that the Indictment contained the parts he had heard read, and no
other: whereupon the Clerk of the Crown said unto Parry, Parry, thou must
answer directly to the Indictment, whether thou be guilty or not.

Then said Parry, Parry confesses that he is guilty of all things contained in
the Indictment.
I do confess that I am guilty of all that is therein contained: And further
too, I desire not life, but desire to die. Unto which the Clerk of the Crown
said, If you confess it, you must confess it in manner and form as it is
comprised in the Indictment. Whereunto he said, I do confess it in manner and
form as the same is set down, and all the circumstances thereof. Then the
Confession being Recorded, the Queens learned Council being ready to pray
Judgment upon the same Confession, Master Vice-chamberlain said, These matters
contained in this Indictment, and confessed by this man, are of great
importance: they touch the Person of the Queens most excellent Majesty in the
highest degree, the very state and well-doing of the whole Commonwealth, and
the truth of Gods Word established in these her Majesty's Dominions, and the
open demonstration of that capital envy of the man of Rome, that has set
himself against God and all godliness, all good Princes and good Government,
and against good men. Wherefore, I pray you, for the satisfaction of this great
Multitude, let the whole matter appear, that every one may see that the matter
of it self is as bad as the Indictment purporteth, and as he has Confessed.
Whereto in respect that the Justice of the Realm has been of late very
impudently slandered, all yielded as a thing necessary to satisfy the world in
particular, of that which was but summarily comprised in the Indictment, though
in the Law, his Confession served sufficiently to have proceeded thereupon unto
Judgment. Whereupon the Lords and others the Commissioners, her Majesty's
learned Council, and Parry himself agreed, that Parry's Confession (taken the
11th and 13th of February 1584. before the Lord of Hunsdon, Master
Vice-chamberlain, and Master Secretary,) and Cardinal de Como his Letters, and
Parry's Letters to the Lord Treasurer and Lord Steward, should be openly read.

And Parry, for the better satisfying of the people and standers by, offered to
read them himself: but being told that the Order was, the Clerk of the Crown
should read them, it was so resolved of all parts. And then Master
Vice-chamberlain caused to be showed to Parry his said Confession, the
Cardinals Letter, and his own Letter aforesaid; which after he had particularly
viewed every leaf thereof, he confessed, and said openly they were the same.

Then said Master Vice-chamberlain, Before we proceed to show what he has
Confessed, what say you, said he to Parry, is that which you have Confessed
here true, and did you Confess it freely and willingly of your self, or was
then any extort means used to draw it from you?

Surely, said Parry, I made that Confession freely without any constraint, and
that is all true, and more too: for there is no Treason that has been since
the first year of the Queen, any way touching Religion, saving receipt of Agnus
Dei, and persuading of others, wherein I have not much dealt, but I have
offended in it. And I have also delivered mine opinion in writing, who ought to
be Successor to the Crown, which he said to be Treason also.

Then his Confession of the eleventh and thirteenth of February, Parry's
Confession of his Treasons was read by his own assent.
all of his own hand writing, and before particularly set down, was openly, and
distinctly read by the Clerk of the Crown. And that done, the Cardinal di Como
his Letter in Italian was delivered unto Parry's hand by the direction of
Master Vicechamberlain, which Parry there perused, A Letter of Cardinal di Como
to Parry, also read.
and openly affirmed to be wholly of the Cardinals own hand writing, and the
Seal to be his own also, and to be with a Cardinals Hat on it: And himself did
openly read it in Italian, as before is set down. And the words bearing sense
as it were written to a Bishop, or to a man of such degree, it was demanded of
him by Master Vice-Chamberlain, Whether he had not taken the degree of a
Bishop? He said, No: But said at first, those terms were proper to the Degree
he had taken. And after said, that the Cardinal did vouchsafe, as of a favor,
to write so to him. Then the Copy of that Letter in English, as before is also
set down, was in like manner openly read by the Clerk of the Crown; which Parry
then acknowledged to be truly translated.

And thereupon was showed unto Parry his Letter of the 18th of February,
Parry's Letter of the 18th of February to the Lord Treasurer and the Earl of
Leicester, read.
written to the Lord Treasurer, and the Lord Steward: which he confessed to be
all of his own Handwriting, and was as before is set down.

These matters being read openly, for manifestation of the matter, Parry prayed
leave to speak: Whereto Master Vice-chamberlain said, If you will say any thing
for the better opening to the world of those your foul and horrible Facts,
speak on: but if you mean to make any excuse of that which you have confessed,
which else would have been and do stand proved against you, for my part, I will
not sit to hear you.

Then her Majesty's Attourney-General stood up and said, It appears before
you, my Lords, that this man has been Indicted and Arraigned of several most
heinous and horrible Treasons, and has confessed them, which is before you of
Record; wherefore there rests no more to be done, but for the Court to give
Judgment accordingly, The Queens Atturny requires Judgment.
which here I require in the behalf of the Queens Majesty.

Then said Parry, I pray you hear me for discharging of my Conscience. I will
not go about to excuse my self, nor to seek to save my Life, I care not for it;
you have my Confession of record, that is enough for my Life. And I mean to
utter more, for which I were worthy to die. And said, I pray you hear me, in
that I am to speak to discharge my Conscience.

Then said Master Vice-Chamberlain, Parry, then do thy Duty according to
Conscience, and utter all that thou can say concerning those thy most wicked
Facts.

Then said Parry, My cause is rare, singular and unnatural, conceived at
Venice, presented in general words to the Pope, undertaken at Paris, commended
and allowed of by his Holiness, and was to have been executed in England, if it
had not been prevented. Yea, I have committed many Treasons, for I have
committed Treason in being reconciled, and Treason in taking Absolution. Parry
had for his credit aforetime said very secretly, that he had been solicited
beyond the Seas to commit the fact, but he would not do it; wherewith he
craftily abused both the Queens Majesty, and those tw^ Counselors whereof he
now would help himself with these false Speeches, against most manifest proofs.
There has been no Treason since the first year of the Queens Reign touching
Religion, but that I am guilty of (except for receiving of Agnus Dei, and
persuading as I have said:) And yet never intended to kill Queen Elizabeth. I
appeal to her own knowledge, and to my Lord Treasurers, and Master Secretaries.

Then said my Ld Hunsdon, Have thou acknowledged it so often, and so plainly in
writing under thy hand, and here of record; and now, when thou should have
thy judgment according to that which thou have Confessed thy self guilty of,
do thou go back again, and deny the effect of all? How can we believe that
thou now say?

Then said Master Vice-chamberlain, Master Vice-chamberlains Speeches, proving
manifestly Parry's Traitorous intentions.
This is absurd. Thou have not only Confessed generally, that thou were guilty
according to the Indictment, which summarily, and yet in express words does
contain that thou had Traitorously compassed and intended the death and
destruction of her Majesty; but thou also said particularly that thou were
guilty of every of the Treasons contained therein, whereof the same was one, in
plain and express letter set down, and read unto thee. Yea, thou said that
thou were guilty of more Treasons too besides these. And did thou not upon
thy examination voluntarily confess, how thou wast moved first thereunto by
mislike of thy state after thy departure out of the Realm, And that thou did
mislike her Majesty for that she had done nothing for thee; How by wicked
Papists and Popish Books, thou were persuaded that it was lawful to kill her
Majesty; How thou were by reconciliation become one of that wicked sort, that
held her Majesty for neither lawful Queen nor Christian, And that it was
meritorious to kill her? And did thou not signify that thy purpose to the
Pope by Lettersand, receivedst Letters from the Cardinal, how he allowed of
thine intent, and excited thee to perform it, and thereupon did receive
Absolution? And did thou not conceive it, promise it, vow it, swear it, and
receive the Sacrament that thou would do it? And did not thou thereupon
affirm, that thy Vows were in Heaven, and thy Letters and Promises on Earth to
bind thee to do it? And that whatsoever her Majesty would have done for thee,
could not have removed thee from that intention or purpose, unless she would
have desisted from dealing as she has done with the Catholics, as thou
call them? All this thou have plainly Confessed: And I protest before this
great Assembly, thou have Confessed it more plainly and in better sort, than my
memory will serve me to utter: And say thou now, that thou never meant'st it?

Ah, said Parry, your Honors know, how my Confession upon mine Examination was
extorted.

The both the Lord Hunsdon and Master Vice-Chamberlain affirmed, that there was
no Torture or threatening words offered him.

But Parry then said, that they told him, that if he would not confess
willingly, he should have torture: whereunto their Honors answered, that they
used not any speech or word of torture to him.

You said, said Parry, that you would proceed with rigor against me, if I
would not confess it of my self.

But their Honors expressly affirmed, that they used no such words. But I will
tell thee, said Master Vice-chamberlain, what we said. I spoke these words: If
you will willingly utter the truth of your self, it may do you good, and I wish
you to do so: If you will not, we must then proceed in ordinary course to take
your Examination. Whereunto you answered, that you would tell the truth of your
self. Parry reproved of false Speeches, and so by himself also confessed.
Was not this true? Which then he yielded unto.

And hereunto, her Majesty's Attourney-General put Parry in remembrance what
Speeches he used to the Lieutenant of the Tower, the Queens Majesty's Sergeant
at Law, Master Gaudie, and the same Attorney, on Saturday the twentieth of
February last, at the Tower, upon that he was by them then examined by Order
from the Lords: which was, that he acknowledged he was most mildly and
favorably dealt with, in all his Examinations: which he also at the Bar then
acknowledged to be true.

Then Master Vice-chamberlain said, that it was wonder to see the magnanimity
of her Majesty, which after that thou had opened those Traiterous Practices
in sort as thou have laid it down in thy Confession, was nevertheless such, and
so far from all fear, as that she would not so much as acquaint any one of her
Highness Privy Council with it, to his knowledge, no not until after this thine
Enterprise discovered and made manifest. And besides that which thou have set
down under thine own hand, thou did confess, that thou had prepared two
Scottish Daggers, fit for such a purpose; and those being disposed away by
thee, thou did say, that another would serve thy turn. And withal, Parry,
did thou not also confess before us, how wonderfully thou were appaled and
perplexed upon a sudden, at the presence of her Majesty at Hampton Court this
last Summer, saying, that thou did think, thou then saw in her, the very
likeness and image of King Henry the Seventh? And that therewith, and upon some
Speeches used by her Majesty, thou did turn about and weep bitterly to thy
self? And yet did call to mind that thy Vows were in Heaven, thy Letters and
Promises on Earth; and that therefore thou did say with thy self, that there
was no remedy but to do it? Did thou not confess this? The which he
acknowledged.

Then said the Lord Hunsdon, The L. of Hunsdon's Speeches, convincing Parry
manifestly of his Treason.
Say thou now, that thou did never mean to kill the Queen? Did thou not
confess, that when thou did utter this practice of treachery to her Majesty,
that thou did cover it with all the skill thou had, and that it was done by
thee, rather to get credit and access thereby, than for any regard thou had
of her Person? But in truth thou did it, that thereby thou might have
better opportunity to perform thy wicked Enterprise. And would thou have run
into such fear as thou did confess that thou were in, when thou did utter
it, if thou had never meant it? What reason can thou show for thy self?
With that he cried out in a furious manner, I never meant to kill her: I will
lay my Blood upon Queen Elizabeth and you, before God and the World: And
thereupon fell into a rage and evil words with the Queens Majesty's
Attourney-General.

Then said the Lord Hunsdon, This is but thy Popish Pride and Ostentation,
which thou would have to be told to thy fellows of that Faction, to make them
believe that thou die for Popery, when thou die for most horrible and
dangerous Treasons against her Majesty, and thy whole Country. For thy laying
of thy Blood, it must lie on thine own Head, as a just Reward of thy
wickedness. The Laws of the Realm most justly condemn thee to die, out of thine
own mouth, for the conspiring the Destruction both of her Majesty, and of us
all: Therefore thy Blood be upon thee; neither her Majesty nor we at any time
sought it, thy self have spilt it.

Then he was asked, What he could say, why Judgment of Death ought not to be
awarded against him.

Whereto he said, he did see that he must die, because he was not settled.

What meanest thou by that, said Master Vice-Chamberlain? Said he, Look into
your Study, and into your new Books, and you shall find what I mean.

I protest (said his Honor) I know not what thou meanest: thou do not well
to use such dark Speeches, unless thou would plainly utter what thou meanest
thereby. But he said, he cared not for Death, and that he would lay his Blood
amongst them.

Then spoke the Lord Chief Justice of England, The Lord Chief-Justices Speech
to Parry.
being required to give the Judgment, and said, Parry, you have been much
heard, and what you mean by being settled, I know not; but I see you are so
settled in Popery, that you cannot settle your self to be a good Subject. But
touching that you should say, to stay Judgment from being given against you,
your Speeches must be of one of these kinds, either to prove the Indictment
(which you have confessed to be true) to be insufficient in Law; or else to
plead somewhat touching her Majesty's Mercy, why Justice should not be done of
you. All other Speeches, wherein you have used great Liberty, is more than by
Law you can ask. These be the matters you must look to, what say you to them?
Whereto he said nothing.

Then said the Lord Chief Justice, Parry, thou have been before this time
Indicted of diverse most horrible and hateful Treasons, committed against thy
most gracious Sovereign and Native Country: the matter most detestable, the
manner most subtle and dangerous, and the occasions and means that led thee
thereunto, most ungodly and villainous. That thou did intend it, it is most
evident by thy self. The matter was the destruction of a most Sacred and an
Anointed Queen, thy Sovereign and Mistress, who has showed thee such Favor,
as some thy betters have not obtained: Yea, the Overthrow of thy Country
wherein thou were born, and of a most happy Commonwealth whereof of thou art a
Member, and of such a Queen, as has bestowed on thee the Benefit of all
benefits in this world, that is, thy Life, heretofore granted thee by her
Mercy, when thou had lost it by Justice and Desert. Yet thou her Servant,
sworn to defend her, meant'st with thy bloody hand to have taken away her Life,
that mercifully gave thee thine, when it was yielded into her hands: This is
the matter wherein thou have offended. The manner was most subtle and
dangerous, beyond all that before thee have committed any Wickedness against
her Majesty. For thou, making show as if thou would simply have uttered for
her safety the Evil that others had contrived, did but seek thereby credit
and access, that thou might take the apter opportunity for her Destruction.
And for the occasions and means that drew thee on, they were most ungodly and
villainous, as the persuasions of the Pope, of Papists, and Popish Books. The
Pope pretends that he is a Pastor, when as in truth, he is far from feeding
of the Flock of Christ; but rather as a Wolf, seeks but to feed on and to
suck out the blood of true Christians, and as it were thirsts after the blood
of our most Gracious and Christian Queen. And these Papists and Popish Books,
while they pretend to set forth Divinity, they do indeed most ungodly teach and
persuade, that which is quite contrary both to God and his Word. For the Word
teaches Obedience of Subjects toward Princes, and forbideth any private man to
kill: But they teach Subjects to disobey Princes, and that a private wicked
person may kill; yea, and whom? A most godly Queen, and their own natural and
most gracious Sovereign. Let all men therefore take heed how they receive any
thing from him, hear or read any of their Books, and how they confer with any
Papists. God grant her Majesty, that she may know by thee, how ever she trust
such like to come so near her Person. But see the end, and why thou did it;
and it will appear to be a most miserable, fearful, and foolish thing: For thou
did imagine, that it was to relieve those, that thou call Catholics, who
were most likely amongst all others to have felt the worst of it, if thy
devilish practice had taken effect. But since thou have been Indicted of the
Treasons comprised in the Indictment, The Form of the Judgment against the
Traitor.
and thereupon Arraigned, and have confessed thy self Guilty of them, the Court
does award, that thou shall be had from hence to the place whence thou did
come, and so drawn through the open City of London upon an Hurdle to the place
of Execution, and there to be hanged and let down alive, and thy privy parts
cut off, and thy entrals taken out and burnt in thy sight, then thy Head to be
cut off, and thy Body to be divided in four parts, and to be disposed at her
Majesty's pleasure: And God have mercy on thy Soul.

Parry nevertheless persisted still in his rage and fond Speech, and ragingly
there said, he there summoned Queen Elizabeth to answer for his Blood before
God: wherewith, the Lieutenant of the Tower was commanded to take him from the
Bar, and so he did. And upon his departure, the people stricken as it were at
heart with the horror of his intended Enterprise, ceased not, but pursued him
with outcries, as, Away with the Traitor, away with him, and such like:
whereupon he was conveyed to the Barge, to pass to the Tower again by water,
and the Court was adjorned.

After which, 2. Martii. William Parry the Traitor Executed.
upon the second day of this instant March, William Parry was by virtue of
process in that behalf, awarded from the same Commissioners of Oyer and
Terminer, delivered by the Lieutenant of the Tower early in the morning, unto
the Sheriffs of London and Middlesex, who received him at the Tower Hill, and
thereupon, according to the judgment, caused him there to be forthwith set on
the Hurdel. From whence he was drawn thereupon threw the midst of the City of
London, unto the place for his Execution in the Palace at Westminster: where,
having long time of stay admitted unto him before his Execution, he most
maliciously and impudently, after some other vain discourses eftsoons and often
delivered in Speech, that he was never guilty of any intention to kill Queen
Elizabeth, and so (without any request made by him to the people to pray to God
for him, or prayer publicly used by himself for ought that appeared; but such
as he used, if he used any, was private to himself) he was executed according
to the judgment. And now for his intent, howsoever he pretended the contrary in
words, yet by these his own Writings, Confessions, Letters, and many other
proofs before here expressed, it is most manifest to all persons, how horrible
his intentions and Treasons were, and how justly he suffered for the same; and
thereby greatly to be doubted, that as he had lived a long time vainly and
ungodly, and like an Atheist and godless man, so he continued the same course
till his death to the outward sight of men.

Here ends the true and plain course and process of the Treasons, Arrest,
Arraignment, and Execution of William Parry the Traitor.
An addition not unnecessary for this purpose.
FOr as much as Parry in the abundance of his proud and arrogant humor, has
often both in his Confession, and Letters, pretended some great and grievous
causes of coffeehouse against her Majesty, and the present State: It shall
not be impertinent, for better satisfaction of all persons, to set forth simply
and truly, the condition and quality of the man, what he was by Birth and
Education, and in what course of life he had lived.

This vile and Traitorous Wretch was one of the younger Sons of a poor man,
called Harry ap David: he dwelled in North Wales in a little Village called
Northoppe, in the County of Flint: there he kept a common Alehouse, which was
the best and greatest stay of his living. In that house was this Traitor Born,
his Mother was the reputed Daughter of one Conway a Priest, Parson of a poor
Parish called Halkin, in the same County of Flint: his his eldest Brother
dwells at this present in the same House, and there keeps an Alehouse as
his Father did before him. This Traitor in his Childhood, so soon as he had
learned a little to Write and Read, was put to serve a poor man dwelling in
Chester, named John Fisher, who professed to have some small skill and
understanding in the Law. With him he continued diverse years, and served as a
Clerk, to write such things, as in that Trade which his master used, he was
appointed. During this time, he learned the English Tongue, and at such times
of leisure, as the poor man his Master had no occasion otherwise to use him, he
was suffered to go to the Grammer-School, where he got some little
understanding in the Latin Tongue. In this his Childhood he was noted by such
as best knew him, to be of a most villainous and dangerous nature and
disposition. He did often run away from his Master, and was often taken and
brought to him again. His Master, to correct his perverse and froward
conditions, did many times shut him as Prisoner in some close place of his
house, and many times caused him to be chained, locked, and clogged, to stay
his running away. Yet all was in vain: For about the third year of her
Majesty's Reign, for his last farewell to his poor Master, he ran away from him,
and came to London to seek his Adventures. He was then constrained to seek what
Trade he could to live by, and to get meat and drink for his belly, and clothes
for his back. His good hap in the end was to be entertained in place of Service
above his Desert; where he staid not long, but shifted himself diverse times
from Service to Service, and from one Master to another. Now he began to forget
his old Home, his Birth, his Education, his Parents, his Friends, his own Name,
and what he was. He aspired to greater matters, he challenged the Name and
Title of a great Gentleman, he vaunted himself to be of Kin and allied to Noble
and Worshipful; he left his old Name, which he did bear and was commonly called
by in his Childhood, and during all the time of his abode in the Country, which
was William ap Harry (as the manner in Wales is.) And because he would seem to
be indeed the man which he pretended, he took upon him the Name of Parry, being
the Surname of diverse Gentlemen of great Worship and Honor. And because his
Mother Name by her Father (a Priest) was Conway, he pretended Kindred to the
Family of Sir John Conway, and so thereby made himself of kin to Edmund Nevil.
Being thus set forth with his new Name and new Title of Gentleman, and
commended by some of his good Favorers, he matched himself in Marriage with a
Widow in South Wales, who brought him some reasonable Portion of Wealth. She
lived with him but a short time, and the wealth he had with her lasted not
long: it was soon consumed with his dissolute and wastful manner of life. He
was then driven to his wonted shifts, his Creditor were many, the Debt which he
owed great, he had nothing wherewith to make Payment, he was continually
pursued by Sergeants and Officers to Arrest him, he did often by slight and
shifts escape from them. In this his needy and poor estate, he sought to repair
himself again by a new match in Marriage with another Widow, which before was
the Wife of one Richard Heywood; this matter was so earnestly followed by
himself, and so effectually commended by his Friends and Favorers, that the
Woman yielded to take him to Husband: a Match in every respect very unequal and
unfit; her Wealth and yearly Livelihood was very great, his poor and base
Estate worse than nothing; he very young, she of such age, as for years she
might have been his Mother. When he had thus possessed himself of his new Wives
wealth, he omitted nothing that might serve for a prodigal, dissolute, and most
ungodly course of Life. His Riot and Excess was unmeasurable; he did most
wickedly deflower his Wives own Daughter, and sundry ways pitifully abuse the
old Mother: He carried himself for his outward port and countenance (so long as
his Old wives Bags lasted) in such sort, as might well have sufficed for a man
of very good haviour and degree. But this lasted not long; his proud heart and
wastful hand had foon poured out of Heywood's Wealth. He then fell again to his
wonted shifts, borrowed where he could find any to lend, and engaged his
Credit so far as any would trust him. Amongst others, he became greatly
indebted to Hugh Hare, the Gentleman before-named; who after long forbearing of
his Money, sought to recover it by ordinary means of Law. For this cause Parry
conceived great displeasure against him, which he pursued with all Malice, even
to the seeking of his Life. In this murtherous intent, he came in the
nightime to Mr. Hares Chamber in the Temple, broke open the door, assaulted
him, and wounded him grievously, and so left him in great danger of Life. For
this Offense he was Apprehended, Committed to Newgate, Indicted of Burglary,
Arraigned, and found Guilty by a very substantial Jury, Parry Condemned for
Burglary, Pardoned of the Queen.
and Condemned to be Hanged, as the Law in that Case requires He standing thus
Convicted, her Majesty, of her most gracious Clemency, and pitiful Disposition,
took compassion upon him, pardoned his Offense, and gave him his Life, which by
the Law and due course of Justice he ought then to have lost. After this he
carried not long, but pretending some causes of coffeehouse, departed the
Realm, and traveled beyond the Seas. How he demeaned himself there from time
to time, and with whom he conversed, is partly in his own Confession touched
before. This is the man, this is his Race, which he feared should be spotted,
if he miscarried in the execution of his Traitorous Enterprise; this has been
the course of his Life, these are the great causes of his Coffeehouse.

And whereas at his Arraignment and Execution he pretended great care of the
disobedient Popish Subjects of this Realm, whom he called Catholics, and in
very insolent sort seemed to glory greatly in the Profession of his pretensed
Catholic Religion: The whole course and action of his Life shows plainly,
how profanely and irreligiously he did always bear himself. He vaunted, that
for these two and twenty years past he had been a Catholic, and during all
that time never received the Communion: Yet before he traveled beyond the
Seas, at three several times within the compass of those two and twenty years,
he did voluntarily take the Oath of Obedience to the Queens Majesty, set down
in the Statute made in the first year of her Highness Reign; by which, amongst
other things, he did testify and declare in his Conscience, that no Foreign
Prince, Person, Prelate, State, or Potentate, has or ought to have any
Jurisdiction, Power, Preeminence, or Authority, Ecclesiastical or Spiritual,
within this Realm; and therefore did utterly renounce and forsake all Foreign
Jurisdictions, Powers, and Authorities; and did promise to bear Faith and true
Allegiance to the Queens Highness, her Heirs and lawful Successors.

With what Conscience or Religion he took that Oath so often, if he were then a
Papist indeed, as sithence the discovery of his Treasons he pretended, let his
best friends the Papists themselves judge. But perhaps it may be said, that he
repented those his Offenses past; that since those three Oaths so taken by him,
he was twice reconciled to the Pope, and so his Conscience cleared, and he
become a new man; and (which is more) that in the time to his last Travel, he
cast away all his former lewd manners: that he changed his degree and habit,
and bought or begged the grave Title of a Doctor of Law, for which he was well
qualified with a little Grammar School Latin; that he had Plenary Indulgence,
and Remission of all his Sins, in consideration of his undertaking of so holy
an Enterprise as to kill Queen Elizabeth, a sacred anointed Queen, his Natural
and Sovereign Lady: That he promised to the Pope, and vowed to God to perform
it: that he confirmed the same by receiving the Sacrament at the Jesuits, at
one Altar with his two Beaupeers, the Cardinals of Vendosme and Narbonne: And
that since his last return into England, he did take his Oath upon the Bible to
execute it. These Reasons may seem to bear some weight indeed amongst his
Friends the Jesuits, and other Papists of State, who have special Skill in
matters of such importance.

But now lately in the beginning of this Parliament in November last, he did
eftsoons solemnly in public place take the Oath before mentioned, of obedience
to her Majesty. How that may stand with his reconciliations to the Pope, and
with his Promises, Vows, and Oath to kill the Queen, it is a thing can hardly
be warranted, unless it be by some special privilege of the Popes omnipotency.

But let him have the glory he desired, to live and die a Papist. He deserved
it, it is fit for him, his death was correspondent to the course of his life,
which was disloyal, perjured, and Traitorous toward her Majesty, and false and
perfidious toward the Pope himself, and his Catholics, if they will believe
his solemn protestations which he made at his Arraignment and Execution, that
he never meant nor intended any hurt to her Highness Person. For if that be
true, where are then his Vows which he said were in Heaven, his Letter and
Promise upon Earth? Why has he stolen out of the Popes shop so large an
Indulgence and plenary Remission of all his Sins, and meant to perform nothing
that he promised? Why was his Devotion and Zeal so highly commended? Why was he
so specially prayed for and remembered at the Altar? All these great favors
were then bestowed upon him without cause or desert: for he deceived the Pope,
he deceived the Cardinals, and Jesuits, with a false semblance, and pretense
to do that thing which he never meant.

But the matter is clear, the Conspiracy, and his traitorous intent is too
plain and evident: it is the Lord that revealed it in time, and prevented their
malice: there lacked no will, or readiness in him to execute that horrible
fact. It is the Lord that has preserved her Majesty from all the wicked
Practices and Conspiracies of that Hellish Rabble: it is he that has most
graciously delivered her from the hands of this Traitorous miscreant. The Lord
is her only defense, in whom she has always trusted.

A Prayer for all Kings, Princes, Countries and People which do profess the
Gospel; and especially for our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth: used in Her
Majesty's Chapel, and meet to be used of all persons within Her Majesty's
Dominions.
O Lord God of hosts, most loving and merciful Father, whose power no creature
is able to resist, who of thy great goodness have promised to grant the
petitions of such as ask in thy Sons Name: We most humbly beseech thee to save
and defend all Princes, Magistrates, Kingdoms, Countries and People which have
received and do profess thy holy Word and Gospel; and namely this Realm of
England, and thy servant Elizabeth our Queen, whom thou have hitherto
wonderfully preserved from manifold Perils and sundry Dangers, and of late
revealed and frustrated the Traitorous Practices and Conspiracies of diverse
against her: for the which, and all other thy great goodness toward us, we
give thee most humble and hearty thanks, beseeching thee in the Name of thy
dear Son Jesus Christ, and for his sake, still to preserve and continue her
unto us, and to give her long life and many years to rule over this Land. O
Heavenly Father, the practices of our Enemies, and the Enemies of thy word and
truth, against her and us, are manifest and known thee. Turn them, O Lord, if
it be thy blessed Will, or overthrow and confound them, for thy Names sake:
Suffer them not to prevail: Take them, O Lord, in their crafty Willness that
they have invented, and let them fall into the Pit which they have dug for
others. Permit them not ungodly to triumph over us: Discomfort them, discomfort
them, O Lord, which trust in their own multitude, and please themselves in
their subtle devices, and wicked Conspiracies. O loving Father, we have not
deserved the least of these thy Mercies which we crave: For we have sinned, and
grievously offended thee; we are not worthy to be called thy Sons: We have not
been so thankful unto thee as we should, for thy unspeakable benefits powered
upon us: We have abused this long time of Peace and Prosperity; We have not
obeyed thy Word: We have had it in Mouth, but not in heart; in outward
appearance, but not in deed: We have lived carelessly: We have not known the
time of our visitation: we have deserved utter destruction. But thou, O Lord,
art merciful, and ready to forgive; therefore we come to thy Throne of Grace,
confessing and acknowledging thee to be our only refuge in all times of peril
and danger: And by the means of thy Son, we most heartily pray thee to forgive
us our Unthankfulness, Disobedience Hypocrisy, and all other our Sins; to turn
from us thy heavy wrath and displeasure, which we have justly deserved; and to
turn our hearts truly unto thee, that daily we may increase in all goodness,
and continually more and more fear thy holy Name: So shall be glorify thy
Name, and sing unto thee in Psalms, and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs: And thy
enemies and ours shall know themselves to be but men, and not able by any means
to withstand thee, nor to hurt those whom thou have received into thy
protection and defense. Grant these things, O Lord of Power, and Father of
Mercy, for thy Christ's sake; to whom with thee and thy Holy Spirit, be all
Honor and Glory for ever and ever. Amen.

A Prayer and Thanksgiving for the Queen, used of all the Knights and Burgesses
in the High Court of Parliament, and very requisite to be used and continued of
all her Majesty's loving Subjects.
O Almighty and most merciful God, which do pitch thy tents round about thy
people, to deliver them from the hands of their enemies; we thy humble
Servants, which have ever of old seen thy Salvation, do fall down and prostrate
our selves with Praise and Thanksgiving to thy glorious Name, who have in thy
tender Mercies from time to time saved and defended thy Servant ELIZABETH, our
most gracious Queen, not only from the hands of strange Children, but also of
late revealed and made frustrate his bloody and most barbarous Treason, who
being her natural Subject, most unnaturally violating thy Divine Ordinance,
has secretly sought to shed her blood, to the great disquiet of thy Church,
and utter discomfort of our Souls: his snare is hewn in pieces, but upon thy
Servant does the Crown flourish. The wicked and bloodthirsty men think to
debour Jacob, and to lay waste his dwelling place: But thou (O God) which
rulest in Jacob, and unto the ends of the world, do daily teach us still a
trust in thee for all thy great Mercies, and not to forget thy merciful
Kindness showed to her, that fears thy Name. O Lord, we confess to thy Glory
and Praise, that thou only have saved us from destruction, because thou have
not given her over for a prey to the wicked: Her Soul is delivered, and we are
escaped. Hear us now we pray thee, (O most merciful Father) and continue forth
thy loving Kindness toward thy Servant, and evermore to thy Glory and our
Comfort, keep her in health, with long Life, and Prosperity; whose rest and
only refuge is in thee, O God of her Salvation. Preserve her, as thou art wont,
preserve her from the snare of the Enemy, from the gathering together of the
froward, from the insurrection of wicked Doers, and from all the traitorous
Conspiracies of those which privily lay wait for her life. Grant this, O
Heavenly Father, for Jesus Christ's sake, our only Mediator and Advocate, Amen.

Io. Th.

A Prayer used in the Parliament only.
O Merciful God and Father, forasmuch as no counsel can stand, nor any can
prosper, but only such as are humbly gathered in thy Name, to feel the sweet
taste of thy Holy Spirit; we gladly acknowledge, that by thy favor stands
the peaceable protection of our Queen and Realm, and likewise this favorable
liberty granted unto us at this time to make our meeting together; which thy
bountiful Goodness we most thankfully acknowledging, do withal earnestly pray
thy Divine Majesty so to incline our hearts, as our counsels may be subject in
true obedience to thy Holy Word and Will. And sith it has pleased thee to
govern this Realm by ordinary assembling the three Estates of the same: Our
humble Prayer is, that thou will graff in us good minds to conceive, free
liberty to speak, and on all sides a ready and quiet consent to such wholesome
Laws and Statutes, as may declare us to be thy people, and this Realm to be
prosperously ruled by thy good guiding and defense: So that we and our
Posterity may with cheerful hearts wait for thy appearance in Judgment, that
art only able to present us faultless before God our Heavenly Father: To whom
with thee our Savior Christ, and the Holy Spirit, be all Glory both now and
ever. Amen.

FINIS.

