THE CASE OF IRELAND's Being BOUND by Acts of Parliament IN ENGLAND, Stated. BY
William Molyneux, of Dublin, Esquire

Dublin, Printed by Joseph Ray, and are to be Sold at his Shop in Skinner-Row.
M DC XC VIII.

TO THE KING.
SIR,
THE Expedition Your MAJESTY Undertook into England, to Rescue these Nations
from Arbitrary Power, and those Unjust Invasions that were made on our
Religion, Laws, Rights and Liberties, was an Action in it Self so Great, and of
such Immense Benefit to our Distressed Countries, that it is Impossible to give
it a Representation so Glorious as it Deserves. Of all Your Majesty's Kingdoms,
none was more Sensible of the Happy Effects thereof, than Your Kingdom of
Ireland, which from the Depth of Misery and Despair, is Raised by your Majesty
to a Prosperous and Flourishing Condition. And we presume most humbly to
Implore the Continuance of Your Majesty's Graces to us, by Protecting and
Defending those Rights and Liberties which we have Enjoyed under the Crown of
England for above Five Hundred Years, and which some of late do Endeavor to
Violate. Your most Excellent Majesty is the Common Indulgent Father of all your
Countries; and have an Equal Regard to the Birthrights of all Your Children;
and will not permit the Eldest, because the Strongest, to Encroach on the
Possessions of the Younger: Especially considering with what Duty, Loyalty, and
Filial Obedience, we have ever behaved our selves to Your Majesty: Insomuch
that I take leave to Assert, That Your Majesty has not in all Your Dominions a
People more United and Steady to Your Interests, than the Protestants of
Ireland: Which has manifestly Appeared in all our Actions and Parliamentary
Proceedings, since Your Majesty's Happy Accession to the Throne. To Relieve the
Distressed, has ever been the Peculiar Character of Your Majesty's Glorious
Family. The United Provinces have found this in Your Famous Ancestors: And all
Europe has been Sensible of this in Your Royal Person. To this End more
particularly You came into these Kingdoms, as Your Majesty has been pleased to
Declare: And as You have Established the Rights and Liberties of England on a
Foundation that, we hope, can never be shaken; So we doubt not but Your Sacred
Majesty will have a Tender Care of Your Poor Subjects of Ireland, who are
Equally Your Subjects, as the rest of Your People.

Pardon, I most Humbly beseech Your Majesty, my Presumption, in Appealing to
You on this Occasion: Nothing but the Dignity and Weight of the Subject, can
Excuse my Boldness herein: But if That be Considered, it Deserves the Regard of
the Greatest Prince; It Is no less than the Rights and Liberties of one of His
Kingdoms, on which their Religion, their Property, their All Depends; and which
they have Enjoyed for Five Hundred Years past. This, I think, I have clearly
shown in the following Leaves: I am sure, if my Management thereof, were
suitable to the Justice of our Cause, our Friends of England can no longer
Doubt it.

At Your Majesty's Feet therefore, I throw it; and with it the Unworthy Author
thereof,

(May it please Your Majesty)

Your Majesty's Most Dutiful, Loyal, and Obedient Subject and Servant, William
Molyneux.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
I Have nothing to Offer in this Preface, more than to let the Reader know, how
Unconcerned I am in any of those Particular Inducements, which might seem at
this Iuncture to have Occasioned the following Discourse.

I have not any Concern in Wool, or the Wooll-Trade. I am no wise Interested
in the Forfeitures, or Grants. I am not at all Solicitous, whether the Bishop,
or Society of Derry Recover the Land they Contest about.

So that, I think, I am as Free from any Personal Prejudice in this Cause, as
it is possible to Expect any Man should be, that has an Estate and Property in
this Kingdom, and who is a Member of Parliament there in. I hope therefore it is
a Public Principle that has moved me to this Undertaking: I am sure, I am not
Conscious to my Self of any other Intention.

I have heard it has been said, That perhaps I might run some Hazard in
Attempting this Argument; But I am not at all Apprehensive of any such Danger:
We are in a Miserable Condition indeed, if we may not be Allowed to Complain,
when we think we are Hurt; and to give our Reasons with all Modesty and
Submission. But were it otherwise, it would not in the least Affect, or
Discourage me in an Attempt, where I think my Cause Good, and my Country
Concerned, and where I am fully persuaded, the True Interest of England is as
Deeply Engaged, as the Protestant Interest of Ireland.

The Great and Just Council of England freely Allow^ all Addresses of this sort
T^ Receive and Hear Grievances is a great part of their Business; and to
Redress them, is their Chief Glory. But this is no to be done, till they are
laid before them, and fairly Stated for their Consideration.

This I have endeavored (...) the following Paper. What S^cess it may have, I
am not ve^ solicitous about. I have Done what I thought was my Duty, and Commit
the Event to GOD Almighty, and the Wise Council of England.

Dublin, Febr. 8. 7 School. W. MOLYNEUX.

The CASE OF IRELAND's Being Bound by Acts of Parliament IN ENGLAND, STATED.
I HAVE ever been se Introduction, and Occasion of this Disquisition.
fully persuaded of the strict Justice of the Parliament of England, that I
could never think that any of Their Proceedings, which might seem to have the
least Tendency to Hardship on their Neighbors, could arise from any thing but
want of Due Information, and a right State of the Business under their
Consideration. The want of which, in Matters wherein another People are chiefly
Concerned, is no Defect in the Parliament of England, but is highly Blameable
in the Persons whose Affair is Transacting, and who permit that Illustrious
Body of Senators to be Mis-inform'd, without giving them that Light that might
Rectify them.

I could never Imagine that those Great Assertors of their Own Liberties and
Rights, could ever think of making the least Breach in the Rights and Liberties
of their Neighbors, unless they thought that they had Right so to do; and this
they might well surmise, if their Neighbors quietly see their Enclosures
Invaded, without Expostulating the Matter at least, and showing Reasons, why
they may think that Hardships are put upon them therein.

The Consideration hereof has Excited me to undertake this Disquisition, which
I do with all Imaginable Diffidence of my own Performance, and with the most
profound Respect and Deference to that August Senate. The present Juncture of
Affairs, when the Business of Ireland is under the Consideration of both Houses
of the English Parliament, Bishop of Derry in the House of Lords, and
Prohibiting Exportation of our Woollen Manufacture in the House of Commons.
seems to require this from some Person; and seeing all Others silent, I
venture to Expose my own Weakness, rather than be wanting at this time to my
Country. I might say indeed to Mankind; for it is the Cause of the whole Race of
Adam, that I Argue: Liberty seems the Inherent Right of all Mankind; and on
whatsoever Ground any one Nation can Challenge it to themselves, on the same
Reason may the Rest of Adam's Children Expect it.

If what I Offer herein seems to carry any Weight, in relation to my own Poor
Country, I shall be abundantly happy in the Attempt: But if after all, the
Great Council of England Resolve the contrary, (...) shall then believe my self
to be ^n an Error, and with the lowest Submission ask Pardon for my Assurance.
However, I humbly presume I shall not be hardly Censured by them, for offering
to lay before them a fair State of our Case, by such Information as I can
procure; especially when at the same time I declare my Intention of a
Submissive Acquiescence in whatever they Resolve for or against what I Offer.

The Subject therefore of our Subject of this Enquiry.
present Disquisition shall be, How far the Parliament of England may think it
Reasonable to intermeddle with the Affairs of Ireland, and Bind us up by Laws
made in their House.

And seeing the Right which England may pretend to, for Binding us by their
Acts of Parliament, can be founded only on the Imaginary Title of Conquest or
Purchase, or on Precedents and Matters of Record; We shall Enquire into the
following Particulars.

(1.) First, How Ireland became a Kingdom Annexed to the Crown of England. And
here we shall at large give a faithful Narrative of the First Expedition of the
Britains into this Country, and King Henry the Second's Arrival here, such as
our best Historians give us.

(2.) Secondly, We shall Enquire, Whether this Expedition, and the English
Settlement that afterward followed thereon, can properly be called a Conquest?
Or whether any Victories obtained by the English, in any succeeding Ages in
this Kingdom, upon any Rebellion, may be called a Conquest thereof?

(3.) Thirdly, Granting that it were a Conquest, we shall Enquire what Title a
Conquest gives.

(4.) Fourthly, We shall Enquire what Concessions have been from time to time
made to Ireland, to take off what even the most Rigorous Assertors of a
Conquerour's Title do pretend to. And herein we shall show by what Degrees the
English Form of Government, and the English Statute-Laws, came to be received
among us: And this shall appear, to be wholly by the Consent of the People and
Parliament of Ireland.

(5.) Fifthly, We shall Enquire into the Precedents and Opinions of the Learned
in the Laws, relating to this Matter, with Observations thereon.

(6.) Sixthly, We shall Consider the Reasons and Arguments that may be farther
Offered on one side and the other; and shall Draw some General Conclusions from
the Whole.

As to the First, We shall find Britain's first Expedition into Ireland.
the History of the First Expedition of the English into Ireland, to be briefly
thus: In the Reign of King Henry the Second, Dermot Fitzmurchard, commonly
called Mac-Morrogh, Prince of Leinster, who was a Man Cruel and Oppressive,
after many Battles with other Princes of Ireland, and being Beaten and put to
Flight by them, Applied for Relief to King Henry the Second, who was then
busied in Aquitain; the King was not then in such Circumstances as to afford
him much Help: However thus much he did for him, By Letters Patents he granted
License to all his Subjects throughout his Dominions, to Assist the said Prince
to Recover his Dominions. These Letters Patents are to be seen in Giraldus
Cambr. Hib. Expug. Lib. I. C. 1,
Giraldus Cambrensis, who was Historiographer and Secretary to King Hen. II.
and Accompanied him in his Expedition into Ireland, and from him it is that we
have this Relation. The Irish Prince brought these Letters into England, and
caused them to be Read in the Audience of many People; Beating up, as it were,
for Volunteers and free Adventurers into Ireland. At length, Richard Earl of
Strigul (now Chepstow in Monmouthshire) Son of Earl Gilbert, called Strongbow,
Agreed with him, to Assist him in the Recovery of his Country, on Condition
that Dermot should give him his Eldest Daughter in Marriage, and his Kingdom of
Leinster after his Death. About the same time Robert Fitz-Stephen, Governor of
Aberlefie in Wales, Agreed likewise with Dermot to help him, on Condition that
he would grant to him and Maurice Fitzgerald in Fee the City of Wexford, with
two Cantreds or Hundreds of Land near adjoining.

These Adventurers afterward went over, and were successful in Treating with
the Irish, and Taking Wexford, Waterford, Dublin, and other Places. Whereupon
Earl Richard Strongbow married Dermot's Daughter, and according to Compact,
succeeded him in his Kingdom.

A little after the Descent of these Hen. II. comes into Ireland.
Adventurers, King Henry II. himself went into Ireland with an Army, in
November 1172. and finding that his Subjects of England had made a very good
hand of their Expedition, he obtained from Earl Richard Strongbow a Surrender
of Dublin, with the Cantreds adjoining, and all the Maritine Towns and Castles.
But Strongbow and his Heirs were to Enjoy the Residue of Dermot's Principality.

King Hen. II. Landed at Waterford Irish submit to him.
from Milford in Pembrookshire, and staying there some few days, (says Giraldus
Cambrensis) Rex Corcagiensis Dormitius advenit ei, and tam Subjectionis vinculo
quam fidelitatis Sacramento Regi Anglorum se sponte submisit. He freely swore
Fealty and Subjection to the King of England.

From thence he went to Lismore, and thence to Cashel, where Dunaldus King of
Lymerick, se quoque fidelem Regi exhibuit. The like did all the Nobility and
Princes in the South of Ireland.

Afterward he marched to Dublin, and there the Princes of the Adjacent
Countries came to him, and sub Fidelitatis and Subjectionis obtentu a Rege
Pacem impetrabant. Thus Cambrensis in his Hibernia Expugnata; and there he
mentions the several Princes that came in, vizt. Macshaghlin King of Ophaly, O
Carrol King of Uriel (now Lowth) O Rourk King of Mead, Rotherick O Connor King
of Connaught, and Monarch as it were of the whole Island, with diverse others,
qui firmissimis fidelitatis and subjectionis vinculis Domino Regi innodarunt
and in singulari Rotherico Conactiae Principe tanquam Insulae Monarcha subditi
redduntur universi, nec alicujus fere in Insula vel nominis vel ominis erat qui
Regiae Majestati and Debitam Domino Reverentiam, non exhiberet.

The same Relation we have from Roger Hoveden (Annal. parsposter. fol. 301.)
About the Kalends of November 1172. (says he) King Henry II. of England, took
Shipping for Ireland at Milford, and Landed at Waterford, and ibi venerunt ad
eum Rex Corcagiensis, Rex de Lymerick, Rex de Oxenie, Rex Midiae, and fere
omnes Hiberniae Potentes. And a little afterward in the same place speaking of
King Henry the Second's being at Waterford, ibidem venerunt ad Regem Angliae
omnes Archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and Abbates totius Hiberniae, and receperunt eum
in Regem and Dominum Hiberniae jurantes ei and heredibus suis Fidelitatem and
Regnandi super eos Potestatem in perpetuum and inde Dederunt ei Chartas suas.
Exemplo autem Clericorum predicti Reges and Principes Hiberniae receperunt
simili modo Henricum Regem Angliae in Dominum and Regem Hiberniae, and sui
devenerunt, and ei and Heredibus suis Fidelitatem contra omnes Iuraverunt.

Matthew Paris likewise in his History speaking of King Hen. II. being in
Ireland, says, Archiepiscopi and Episcopi ipsum in Regem and Dominum
receperunt, and ei Fidelitatem and Homagium Iuraverunt.

John Brampton Abbot of Iorna^ in his Historia Iornalensi, page 1070. speaking
of Hen. II. has these words, Recepit ab unoquoque Archiepiscopo and Episcopo
Hiberniae Literas cum Sigillis suis in modum Chartae pendentibus, Regnum
Hiberniae sibi and Haeredibus suis Confirmantes, and Testimonium perhibentes
ipsos in Hibernia eum and Heredes suos sibi in Reges and Dominos in perpetuum
Constituisse. All the Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots of Ireland came to the
King of England, and Received him for King and Lord of Ireland, swearing Fealty
to him and his Heirs for ever. The Kings also and Princes of Ireland, did in
like manner Receive Henry King of England, for Lord of Ireland, and became his
Men, and did him Homage, and swore Fealty to him and his Heirs against all Men.
And he received Letters from them with their Seals pendent in manner of
Charters, confirming the Kingdom of Ireland to him and his Heirs; and
Testifying, that they in Ireland had Ordained him and his Heirs to be their
King and Lord of Ireland for ever. After which, he returned into England in
April following, vizt. April 1173.

I come now to Enquire into our Second Particular proposed, Viz. Ireland
whether ever Conquered.
Whether Ireland might be properly said to be Conquered by King Henry the
Second, or by any other Prince in any succeeding Rebellion. And here we are to
understand by Conquest, an Acquisition of a Kingdom by Force of Arms, to which,
Force likewise has been Opposed, if we are to understand Conquest in any other
sense, I see not of what Use it can be made against Irelands being a Free
Country. I know Conquestus signifies a Peaceable Acquisition, as well as an
Hostile Subjugating of an Enemy. Vid. Spelman's Glos. And in this sense William
the First is called the Conqueror, and many of our Kings have used the Epoch
post Conquestum. And so likewise Henry the Second styled himself Conquestor and
Dominus Hiberniae; but that His Conquest was no violent Subjugation of this
Kingdom, is manifest from what foregoes: For here we have an Entire and
Voluntary Submission of all the Ecclesiastical and Civil States of Ireland, to
King Henry II. without the least Hostile Stroke on any side; We hear not in any
of the Chronicles of any Violence on either Part, all was Transacted with the
greatest Quiet, Tranquillity, and Freedom, imaginable. I doubt not but the
Barbarous People of the Island at that time were struck with Fear and Terror of
King Hen. Il's Powerful Force which he brought with him: but still their Easy
and Voluntary Submissions Exempts them from the Consequents of an Hostile
Conquest, whatever they are; where there is no Opposition, such a Conquest can
take no place.

I have before taken Notice of Henry the Il's using the Style of Conquestor
Hiberniae; Mr. Seldom will not allow that ever H. 2. used this Style. Tit. Hon.
Par. 2. G. 5. Sect. 26.
I presume no Argument can be drawn from hence, for Ireland's being a Conquered
Country; for we find that many of the Kings of England have used the Era of
post Conquestum; Edward the Third was the first that used it in England, and we
frequently meet with Henricus post Conquestum Quartus, etc. as taking the
Norman Invasion of William the First, for a Conquest. But I believe the People
of England would take it very ill to be thought a Conquered Nation, in the
sense that some impose it on Ireland: And yet we find the same Reason in one
Case, as in the other, if the Argument from the King's Style of Conquestor
prevail. Nay, England may be said much more properly to be Conquered by William
the First, than Ireland by Henry the Second: For we all know with what Violence
and Opposition from Harrold, K. William obtained the Kingdom, after a Bloody
Battle nigh Hastings. Whereas Henry the Second received not the least
Opposition in Ireland, all came in Peaceably, and had large Concessions made
them of the like Laws and Liberties with the People of England, which they
gladly Accepted, as we shall see hereafter. But I am fully satisfied, that
neither King William the First, in his Acquisition of England, or Henry II. in
his Acquest of Ireland, obtained the least Title to what some would give to
Conquerours. Though for my own part, were they Conquerours in a sense never so
strict, I should enlarge their Prerogative very little or nothing thereby, as
shall appear more fully in the Sequel of this Discourse.

Another Argument for Henry the Second's Hostile Conquest of Ireland is taken
from the Opposition which the Natives of Ireland gave to the first Adventurers,
Fitz-Stephens, Fitzgerald, and Earl Strongbow, and the Battles they sought in
assisting Mac-Morogb Prince of Leinster, in the Recovery of his Principality.

It Is certain there were some Conflicts between them and the Irish, in which
the Latter were constantly beaten; but certainly the Conquests obtained by
those Adventurers, who came over only by the King's License and Permission, and
not at all by his particular Command (as is manifest from the words of the
Letters Patents of License recited by Giraldus Cambrensis, Hib. Expug. page
760. Edit. Francof. 1603. Angl. Norm. Hiber. Camd.) can never be called the
Conquest of Henry the Second especially considering that Henry the Second
himself does not appear to have any Design of Coming into Ireland, or Obtaining
the Dominion thereof, when he gave to his Subjects of England this License of
Assisting Mac-Morrogh. But I conceive rather the contrary appears, by the
Stipulations between Mac-Morrogh and the Adventurers, and especially between
him and Strongbow, who was to succeed him in his Principality.

From what foregoes, I presume Suppressing Rebellions, whether a Conquest.
it Appears that Ireland cannot properly be said so to be Conquered by Henry
the Second, as to give the Parliament of England any Jurisdiction over us; it
will much more easily Appear, that the English Victories in any succeeding
Rebellions in that Kingdom, give no Pretense to a Conquest: If every
Suppression of a Rebellion may be called a Conquest, I know not what Country
will be excepted. The Rebellions in England have been frequent; in the Contests
between the Houses of York and Lancaster, one side or other must needs be
Rebellious. I am sure the Commotions in King Charles the First's time, are
styled so by most Historians. This Pretense therefore of Conquest from
Rebellions, has so little Color in it, that I shall not insist longer on it: I
know Conquest is an hateful word to English Ears, and we have lately seen a
Book Bishop of Salisbury's Pastoral Letter.
undergo a severe Censure, for offering to broach the Doctrine of Conquest in
the Free Kingdom of England.

But, to take off all Pretense from What Title is obtained by Conquest.
this Title by Conquest, I come in the third Place to enquire, What Title
Conquest gives by the Law of Nature and Reason.

And in this particular I conceive, No Title gained by an Unjust Conquest.
that if the Aggressor or Insulter invades a Nation Unjustly, he can never
thereby have a Right over the Conquered: This I suppose will be readily granted
by all men: If a Villain with a Pistol at my Breast, makes me convey my Estate
to him, no one will say that this gives him any Right: And yet just such a
Title as this has an Unjust Conqueror, who with a Sword at my Throat forces me
into Submission; that is, forces me to part with my Natural Estate, and
Birthright, of being governed only by Laws to which I give my Consent, and not
by his Will, or the Will of any other.

Let us then suppose a Just Invader, What Title by a Just Conquest.
one that has Right on his side to Attack a Nation in an Hostile manner; and
that those who oppose him are in the Wrong: Let us then see what Power he gets,
and over whom.

First, It Is plain he gets by his None over the Assisters in the Conquest.
Conquest no Power over those who Conquered with him; they that fought on his
side, whether as private Soldiers or Commanders, cannot suffer by the Conquest,
but must at least be as much Freemen, as they were before: If any lost their
Freedom by the Norman Conquest, (supposing King William the First had Right to
Invade England) it was only the Saxons and Britains, and not the Normans that
Conquered with him. In like manner supposing Hen. II. had Right to Invade this
Island, and that he had been opposed therein by the Inhabitants, it was only
the Ancient Race of the Irish, that could suffer by this Subjugation; the
English and Britains, that came over and Conquered with him, retained all the
Freedoms and Immunities of Freeborn Subjects; they nor their Descendants could
not in reason lose these, for being Successful and Victorious; for so, the
state of Conquerours and Conquered shall be equally Slavish. Now it is manifest
that the great Body of the present People of Ireland, are the Progeny of the
English and Britains, that from time to time have come over into this Kingdom;
and there remains but a mere handful of the Ancient Irish at this day; I may
say, not one in a thousand: So that if I, or any body else, claim the like
Freedoms with the Natural Born Subjects of England, as being Descended from
them, it will be impossible to prove the contrary. I conclude therefore, That a
Just Conqueror gets no Power, but only over those who have Actually Assisted
in that Unjust Force that is used against him.

And as those that joined with None over the Non-Opposers
the Conqueror in a Just Invasion, have lost no Right by the Conquest; so
neither have those of the Country who Opposed him not: This seems so reasonable
at first Proposal, that it wants little Proof. All that gives Title in a Just
Conquest, is the Opposers using Brutal Force, and quitting the Law of Reason,
and using the Law of Violence; whereby the Conqueror is entitled to use him as
a Beast; that is, Kill him, or Enslave him.

Secondly, Let us consider what Just Conqueror entitled to the Lives of the
Opposers.
Power that is, which a Rightful Conqueror has over the Subdued Opposers: And
this we shall find extends little farther than over the Lives of the Conquered;
I say, little farther than over their Lives; for how far it extends to their
Estates, and that it extends not at all to Deprive their Posterity of the
Freedoms and Immunities to which all Mankind have a Right, I shall show
presently. That the Just Conqueror has an Absolute Power over the Lives and
Liberties of the Conquered, appears from hence, Because the Conquered, by
putting themselves in a State of War by using an Unjust Force, have thereby
forfeited their Lives. For quitting Reason, (which is the Rule between Man and
Man) and using Force (which is the way of Beasts) they become liable to be
destroyed by him against whom they use Force, as any savage wild Beast that is
Dangerous to his Being.

And this is the Case of Rebels in a settled Commonwealth, who forfeit their
Lives on this Account. But as for forfeiting their Estates, it depends on the
Municipal Laws of the Kingdom. But we are now Enquiring what the Consequents
will be between two Contesting Nations.

Which brings me to Consider how far a Just Conqueror has Power over the
Posterity and Estates of the Conquered.

As to the Posterity, they not having Just Conqueror how far empowered over
the Posterity of the Opposers.
Joined or Assisted in the Forcible Opposition of the Conquerours Just Arms,
can lose no Benefit thereby. It Is unreasonable any Man should be punished but
for his own fault. Man being a free Agent, is only Answerable for his own
Demerits; and as it would be highly Unjust to Hang up the Father for the Sons
Offense, so the Converse is equally Unjust, that the Son should suffer any
Inconvenience for the Fathers Crime. A Father has not in himself a power over
the Life or Liberty of his Child, so that no Act of his can possibly forfeit
it. And tho we find in the Municipal Laws of particular Kingdoms, that the Son
loses the Fathers Estate for the Rebellion or other Demerit of the Father, yet
this is Consented and Agreed to, for the Public Safety, and for deterring the
Subjects from certain Enormous Crimes that would be highly prejudicial to the
Commonwealth. And to such Constitutions the Subjects are bound to submit,
having consented to them, though it may be unreasonable to put the like in
Execution between Nation and Nation in the State of Nature: For in Settled
Governments, Property in Estates is Regulated, Bounded and Determined by the
Laws of the Commonwealth, consented to by the People, so that in these, it is no
Injustice for the Son to lose his Patrimony for his Fathers Rebellion or other
Demerit.

If therefore the Posterity of the How far over their Estates.
Conquered are not to suffer for the Unjust Opposition given to the Victor by
their Ancestors, we shall find little place for any Power of the Conquerours
over the Estates of the Subdued. The Father by his Miscarriages and Violence
can forfeit but his own Life, he involves not his Children in his Guilt or
Destruction. His Goods, which Nature (that wills the Preservation of all
Mankind as far as possible) has made to belong to his Children to sustain
them, do still continue to belong to his Children. It Is true indeed, it usually
happens that Damage attends Unjust Force; and as far as the Repair of this
Damage requires it, so far the Rightful Conqueror may invade the Goods and
Estate of the Conquered; but when this Damage is made up, his Title to the
Goods ceases, and the Residue belongs to the Wife and Children of the Subdued.

It may seem a strange Doctrine, that any one should have a Power over the Life
of another Man, and not over his Estate; but this we find every day, for though I
may Kill a Thief that sets on me in the Highway, yet I may not take away his
Money; for it is the Brutal Force the Aggressor has used, that gives his
Adversary a Right to take away his Life, as a noxious Creature. But it is only
Damage sustained, that gives Title to another Man's Goods.

It must be confessed that the Practice of Conquerors otherwise.
Practice of the World is otherwise, and we commonly see the Conqueror (whether
Just or Unjust) by the Force he has over the Conquered, compels them with a
Sword at their Breast to stoop to his Conditions, and submit to such a
Government as he pleases to Afford them. But we Enquire not now, what is the
Practice, but what Right there is to do so. If it be said the Conquered submit
by their own Consent: Then this allows Consent necessary to give the Conqueror
a Title to Rule over them. But then we may Enquire whether Promises Extorted by
Force without Right, can be thought Consent, and how far they are Obligatory;
And I humbly conceive they Bind not at all. He that forces my Horse from me,
ought presently to Restore him, and I have still a Right to retake him: So he
that has forced a Promise from me, ought presently to Restore it, that is, quit
me of the Obligation of it, or I may choose whether I will perform it or not:
For the Law of Nature obliges us only by the Rules she prescribes, and
therefore cannot oblige me by the Violation of her Rules; such is the Extorting
any thing from me by Force.

From what has been said, I presume it pretty clearly appears that an Unjust
Conquest gives no Title at all; That a Just Conquest gives Power only over the
Lives and Liberties of the Actual Opposers, but not over their Posterity or
Estates, otherwise than as before is mentioned; and not at all over those that
did not Concur in the Opposition.

They that desire a more full Disquisition of this Matter, may find it at large
in an Incomparable Treatise concerning the True Original, Extent and End of
Civil Government, Chap. 16. This Discourse is said to be written by my
Excellent Friend, JOHN LOCK, Esquire Whether it be so or not, I know not; This I
am sure, whoever is the Author, the Greatest Genius in Christendom need not
disown it.

But granting that all we have said in this Matter is Wrong, and granting that
a Conqueror, whether Just or Unjust, obtains an Absolute Arbitrary Dominion
over the Persons, Estates, Lives, Liberties and Fortunes of all those whom he
finds in the Nation, their Wives, Posterity, etc. so as to make perpetual
Slaves of them and their Generations to come; Let us next Enquire whether
Concessions granted Concessions granted by a Conqueror, whether Obligatory.
by such a Victorious Hero, do not bound the Exorbitancy of his Power, and
whether he be not Obliged strictly to Observe these Grants.

And here I believe no Man of Common Sense or Justice, will Deny it; None that
has ever Considered the Law of Nature and Nations, can possibly hesitate on
this matter; the very Proposing it, strikes the Sense and Common Notions of all
Men so forcibly, that it needs no farther proof. I shall therefore insist no
longer on it, but hasten to consider how far this is the Case of Ireland: And
that brings me naturally to the fourth Particular proposed, vizt. To show by
Precedents, Records, and History, what Concessions and Grants have been made
from time to time to the People of Ireland, and by what steps the Laws of
England came to be introduced into this Kingdom.

We are told by Matthew. Paris, Historiographer What Concessions have been made
from the Crown of England to the Kingdom of Ireland.
to Hen. III. that Henry the Second, a little before he left Ireland, in a
Public Assembly and Council of the Irish at Lismore, did cause the Irish to
Receive, and swear to be Governed by the Laws of England: Rex Henricus (says
he) By Henry II.
antequam ex Hibernia Rediret apud Lismore Concilium Congregavit ubi Leges
Angliae sunt ab omnibus gratanter receptae, and Iuratoria cautione prestita
Confirmatae, Vid. Matthew. Paris, ad An. 1172. Vit. H. 2.

And not only thus, but if we Irish Modus Tenendi Parliamentum.
may give Credit to Sir Edward Cook, in the 4th Instit. Cap. 1. and 76. and to
the Inscription to the Irish Modus Tenendi Parliamentum, it will clearly
Appear, that Henry the Second did not only settle the the Laws of England in
Ireland, and the Jurisdiction Eclesiastical there, by the Voluntary Acceptance
and Allowance of the Nobility and Clergy, but did likewise Allow them the
Freedom of Holding of Parliaments in Ireland, as a separate and distinct
Kingdom from England; and did then send them a Modus to Direct them how to Hold
their Parliaments there. The Title of which Modus runs thus: Henricus Rex
Angliae Conquestor and Dominus Hiberniae, etc. Mittit hanc formam
Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus, Comitibus, Baronibus,
Iusticiariis, Vicecomitibus, Majoribus, Praepositis, Ministris and omnibus.
Fidelibus suis Terrae Hiberniae Tenendi Parliamentum. In primis Summonitio
Parliamenti praecedere debet per Quadraginta Dies.

And so forth.

This Modus is said to have been sent into Ireland by Hen. II. for a Direction
to Hold their Parliaments there. And the sense of it agrees for the most part
with the Modus Tenendi Parl. in England, said to have been Allowed by William
the Conqueror; when he obtained that Kingdom; where it is altered, it is only to
fit it the better for the Kingdom of Ireland.

I know very well the Antiquity of this Modus, so said to be Transmitted for
Ireland by Hen. II. is questioned by some Learned Antiquaries, particularly by
Mr. Seldom Tit. Hon. Par. 2. C. 5. Sect. 26. Edit. Land. An. 1672
and Against Cook's 4th Instit. C. 76.
Mr. Pryn, who deny also the English Modus as well as this. But on the other
hand, my Lord Chief Justice Cook, in the 4th Instit. page 12. and 349. does
strenuously Assert them both. And the late Reverend and Learned Dr. Dopping
Bishop of Mead, has Published the Irish Modus, with a Vindication of its
Antiquity and Authority in the Preface.

There seems to me but two Objections of any Moment raised by Mr. Pryn against
these Modi. The One relates both to the English and Irish Modus; the other
chiefly strikes at the Irish. He says the Name Parliament, so often found in
these Modi, was not a name for the great Council of England known so early as
these Modi Pretend to. I confess I am not prepared to Disprove this Antiquary
in this Particular: But to me it seems reasonable enough to Imagine that the
Name Parliament, came in with William the Conqueror: It Is a Word perfectly
French, and I see no reason to doubt it is Coming in with the Normans. The other
Objection affects our Irish Modus, for he tells us, That Sheriffs were not
established in Ireland in Henry II's. time, when this Modus was pretended to be
sent hither, yet we find the Word Vicecomes therein. To this I can only Answer,
That Hen. II. intending to Establish in Ireland the English form of Government,
as the first, and Chief step thereto, he sent them Directions for Holding of
Parliaments, Designing afterward by degrees and in due time to settle the
other Constitutions agreeable to the Model of England. If therefore England had
then Sheriffs, we need not wonder to find them named in the Irish Modus, tho
they were not as yet established amongst us, for they were designed to be
appointed soon after, and before the Modus could be put regularly in execution;
and accordingly we find them established in some Counties of Ireland in King
John's Time.

This Irish Modus is said to have been in the Custody of Sir Christopher
Preston of Clane in Ireland, An. 6. Hen. 4. and by Sir John Talboi Lord
Lieutenant of Ireland, under King Hen. 4. It was Exemplified by Inspeximus
under the great Seal of Ireland, and the Exemplification was sometimes in the
Hands of Mr. Hackwel of Lincolns Inn, and by him was Communicated to Mr.
Seldom. The Tenor of which Exemplification runs thus.

Henricus Dei Gratia Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae, omnibus
ad quos presents* Literae pervenerint salutem Inspeximus Tenorem Diversorum
Articulorum in quodam Rotulo Pergameneo Scriptorum cum Christophero Preston,
Milite Tempore Arrestationis suae apud Villam de Clare, per Deputatum Dilecti
and Fidelis nostri Johannes Talbot de Halomshire Chivaler locum nostrum
Tenentis Terrae nostrae Hiberniae, nuper factae inventorum ac coram nobis and
Concilio nostro in eadem terrae nostra apud Villam de Trim. Nono die Ianuarii
ultimo praeteriti in haec verba,

Modus Tenendi Parliament^ Henricus Rex Angliae, Conquestor and Dominus
Hibernia, Mittit have formam Archiepiscopis, etc.

and so as before, Et omnibus Fidelibus suis Terrae Hiberniae Tenendi
Parliamentum Imprimis Summonitio, etc. and then follows the Modus, agreeable in
most things with that of England, only fitted to Ireland. Then the
Exemplification concludes:

Nos autem tenores Articulorum praedictorum de Assensu praefati Locum tenentis
and Concilii praedicti tenore praesentium duximus Exemplificandum and has
Literas nostras fieri fecimus Patentes. Test Praefato Locum nostrum tenente
apud Trim. 12 diae Ianuarii Anno Regni nostri sexto.

Per ipsum Locum tenentem and Concilium.

Now we can hardly think it credible, (says the Bishop of Mead) that an
Exemplification could have been made so solemnly of it by King Henry the
Fourth, and that it should refer to a Modus transmitted into Ireland by King
Henry II. and Affirm that it was produced before the Lord Lieutenant and
Council at Trym, if no such thing had been Done: This were to call in question
the Truth of all former Records and Transactions, and make the Exemplification
contain an Egregious Falsehood in the body of it.

The Reverend Bishop of Mead, in his forecited Preface does believe that he
had obtained the very Original Record, said by my Lord Cook to have been in the
Hands of Sir Christopher Preston: It came to that Learned Prelates Hands
amongst other Papers and Manuscripts of Sir William Domviles, late Attorney
General in this Kingdom, who in his Lifetime, upon an occasional Discourse
with the Bishop concerning It, told him that this Record was bestowed on him
(Sir W. Domvile) by Sir James Cuffe, late Deputy Vice-Treasurer of Ireland,
that Sir James found it among the Papers of Sir Francis Aungier, Master of the
Rolls in this Kingdom; and the present Earl of Longford (Grandson to the said
Sir Francis Aungier) told the Bishop, that his said Grandfather had it out of
the Treasury of Waterford.

Whilst I write this, I have this very Record now before me, from the Hands of
the said Bishop of Meath's Son, my Nephew, Samuel Dopping; and I must confess
it has a Venerable Ancient Appearance, but whether it be the True Original
Record, I leave on the Arguments produced for its Credit by the said Bishop.

This I am sure of, that whether Parliaments very early in Ireland.
this be the very Record Transmitted hither by King Henry the Second, or not;
yet it is most certain from the Unanimous Concessions of all the forementioned
Antiquaries, Cook, Seldom, Pryn, etc. That we have had Parliaments in Ireland
very soon after the Invasion of Henry II. For Pryn confesses that Against the
4th Inst. c. 76. p. 249.
King Hen. II. after his Conquest of Ireland, and the General Voluntary
Submission, Homages, and Fealties of most of the Irish Kings, Prelates, Nobles,
Cities and People, to him, as to their Sovereign Lord and King, Anno 1170, (it
should be 1172.) held therein a General Council of the Clergy at Cashal,
wherein he Rectified many Abuses in the Church, and Established sundry
Eclesiastical Laws, agreeable to those in the Church of England; Ecclesiae
illius statum ad Anglicanae Ecclesiae formam Redigere Modis omnibus elaborando;
To which the Irish Clergy promised Conformity, and to observe them for time to
come, as Togograph Hibern. l 3. c. 18 Hib. Expug. l. 11. c. 33, 34.
Giraldus Cambrensis, who was then in Ireland, and other Hoveden Annal
parspost. p. 302. Brampton Chr. Col. 1071. Knighton de Even. Angl. l. c. c. 10
col. 2394, 2395. Pol. Virg. Hist. Angl. l. 13. Radul. de Diceto. Walsingbam,
etc.
Histoans, relate: Et ut in singulis Observatio similis Regnum Colligaret
utrumque (that is England and Ireland) passim omnes unanimi voluntate communi
Assensu, Pari desiderio Regis imperio se subjiciunt, omnibus igitur hoc modo
Consummatis, in Concilio habito apud Lismore Leges Angliae ab omnibus sunt
gratantur receptae, and juratoria cautione praestita Confirmatae, says Math.
Paris.

Can any Concession in the Original Compact for Ireland.
World be more plain and free than this? We have heard of late much Talk in
England of an Original Compact between the King and People of England; I am
sure it is not possible to show a more fair Original Compact between a King and
People, than this between Henry the Second, and the People of Ireland, That
they should Enjoy the like Liberties and Immunities, and be Governed by the
same Mild Laws, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, as the People of England.

From all which, It is manifest that there were no Laws Imposed on the People
of Ireland, by any Authority of the Parliament of England; nor any Laws
introduced into that Kingdom by Henry the Second, but by the Consent and
Allowance of the People of Ireland: For both the Civil and Ecclesiastical State
were settled there Regiae sublimitatis Authoritate, solely by the Kings
Authority, and their own good Wills, as the Irist Statute, 11 Eliz. C. 1.
expresses it. And not only the Laws of England, but the manner of Holding
Parliaments in Ireland to make Laws o^ their own (which is the Foundation and
Bulwark of the Peoples Liberties and Properties) was Directe^ and Established
there by Henry the Second, as if he were Resolve^ that no other Person or
Persons should be the Founders of the Government of Ireland, but himself and
the Consent of the People, who submitted themselves to him against all Persons
whatsoever.

Let us now see by what farther Degrees the Government of Ireland grew up
Conformable to that of England.

About the Twenty-third year of Henry the Second, (which was King John made
King of Ireland.
within Five years after his Return from Ireland) he created his younger Son
John, King of Ireland, at a Parliament held at Oxford. Soon after King John
being then about Twelve Years of Age, came into Ireland, from Milford to
Waterford, as his Father had formerly done. The Irish Nobility and Gentry
immediately repaired to him; but being Received by him and his Retinue with
some Scorn and Derision, by reason of their long rude Beards, quas more Patrio
grandes habebant and prolixas, (says Giraldus Cambrensis, Hib. Expug. Cap. 35.)
they took such Offense thereat, that they departed in much Discontent; which
was the occasion of the young Kings staying so short a time in Ireland, as he
did this his first time of being here.

And here, before we proceed any farther, we shall observe, That By this
Ireland made an Absolute separate Kingdom.
by this Donation of the Kingdom of Ireland to King John, Ireland was most
eminently set apart again, as a Separate and Distinct Kingdom by it self from
the Kingdom of England; and did so continue, until the Kingdom of England
Descended and came unto King John, after the Death of his Brother Richard the
First, King of England, which was about Twenty two years after his being made
King of Ireland; during which space of Twenty two years, both whilst his Father
Henry the Second, and his Brother Richard the First, were living and Reigning,
King John made diverse Grants and Charters to his Subjects of Ireland, which are
yet in being in this Kingdom; wherein he styles himself Dominus Hiberniae, (the
constant Style till Henry the Eighth's time) and in others, Dominus Hiberniae
and Comes Meritoniae. By which Charters both the City of Dublin, and diverse
other Corporations enjoy many Privileges and Franchises to this day. But after
the said Grant of the Kingdom of Ireland to King John, neither his Father Henry
II. nor his Brother King Richard I. Kings of England, ever styled themselves,
during their Lives, King or Lord of Ireland; for the Dominion and Regality of
Ireland was wholly and separately vested in K. John, being absolutely Granted
unto him without any Reservation. And he being Created King in the Parliament
at Oxford, under the Style and Title of Lord of Ireland, Enjoyed all manner of
Kingly Jurisdiction, Pre-eminence, and Authority Royal, belonging unto the
Imperial State and Majesty of a King, as are the Express words of the Irish
Statute, 33 Hen. VIII. c. 1. by which Statute the Style of Dominus was changed
to that of Rex Hiberniae.

Let us then suppose that Richard the First, King John's Elder Brother, had not
died without Issue, but that his Progeny had sat on the Throne of England, in a
Continued Succession to this Day: Let us suppose likewise the same of King
John's Progeny, in relation to the Throne of Ireland; where then had been the
Subordination of Ireland to the Parliament, or even to the King of England?
Certainly no such thing could have been then pretended: Therefore if any such
Subordination there be, it must arise from something that followed after the
Descent of England, to King John; for by that Descent England might as properly
be Subordinate to Ireland, as the converse; Ireland being vested in the Royal
Person of King John, Two and Twenty years before his Accession to the Crown of
England, and being a more Ancient Kingdom than the Kingdom of England. As the
English Orators in the Council of Constance, An. 1417 Seldens Tit. Hon. Par. 1.
C. 8 Sect. 5. Usher Archbibishop of Armagh, of the Religion of the Ancient
Irish, Cap. 11.
confessed and alleged, as an Argument in the Contest between Henry the
Fifth's Legates, and those of Charles the Sixth King of France, for Precedence:
Satis Constat (say they) Act. Council. Constant. Ses. 28. MS. in Bib. Reg. not
in the Printed Acts.
secundum Albertum Magnum and Bartholomeum de Proprietatibus Rerum, quod toto
Mundo in tres parts Diviso, scilicet in Europam, Asiam and Africam (for
America was not then Discovered) Europa in quatuor Dividitur Regna scilicet,
Primum Romanum, Secundum Constantinopolitanum, Tertium Regnum Hiberniae (quod
jam translatum est in Anglos) and Quartum Regnum Hispaniae. Ex quo patet, quod
Rex Angliae and Regnum suum sunt de Eminentioribus Antiquioribus Regibus and
Regnis totius Europae. The Antiquity and Precedence of the King of England, was
allo'wd him wholly on the Account of his Kingdom of Ireland.

Perhaps it will be said, That Ireland in what sense Annexed to England.
this Subordination of the Kingdom of Ireland, to the Kingdom of England,
proceeds from Ireland's being Annexed to, and as it were united with the
Imperial Crown of England, by several Acts of Parliament both in England and
Ireland, since King John's time. But how far this Operates, I shall Enquire
more fully hereafter; I shall only at present Observe, that I conceive little
more is Effected by these Statutes Than that Ireland shall not be Alien'd or
Separated from the King of England, who cannot hereby dispose of it otherwise
than in Legal Succession along with England; and that whoever is King of
England, is ipso facto King of Ireland, and the Subjects of Ireland are obliged
to Obey him as their Liege Lord.

To proceed therefore. After both Crowns were united, on the King John comes a
second time into Ireland. The People submit to him
Death of Richard the First without Issue, in the Royal Person of King John:
He, about the Twelfth Year of his Reign of England, went again into Ireland,
viz. the Twenty Eight day of June, 1210. and Math. Paris tells us, page 220.
Cum Venisset ad Dublinensem Civitatem Occurrerunt ei ibidem plus quam 20 Reguli
illius Regionis qui omnes Timore maximo preterriti homagium ei and Fidelitatem
fecerunt. Fecit quoque Rex ibidem, Construere Leges and Consuetudines
Anglicanas, ponens Vicecomites aliosque Ministros, qui populum Regni illius
juxta Leges Anglicanas Judicarent.

His Son King Henry the Third Concess^* from Hen. III.
came to the Crown the Nineteenth of October 1216. and in November following he
Granted to Ireland a Magna Charta, Dated at Bristol 12 November, the First Year
of his Reign. It Is Prefaced, that for the Honor of God, and Advancement of
Holy Church, by the Advice of his Council of England, (whose names are
particularly recited) He makes the following Grant to Ireland; And then goes on
Exactly Agreeable to the Magna Charta which he granted to England; only in ours
we have Civitas Dublin, and Avenliffee, instead of Civitas London, and Thamesis
with other Alterations of the like kind where Needful. But ours is Eight years
older than that which he granted to England, it not being till the Ninth Year
of his Reign, and ours is the First Year. This Magna Charta of Ireland
Concludes thus, Quia vero sigillum nondum Habuimus presentem Cartam Sigillis
Venerabilis Patris nostri Domini Gualt. Apost. Sedis Legati and Willelmi Mar
eschalli Comitis Pembrooke Rectoris nostri and Regni nostri secimus Sigillari.
Testibus omnibus praenominatis and alijs Multis D^t per Manus Praedictorum
Domini Legati and Willelmi Marescalli. Apud Bristol Duodecimo die Novembr.
Regni nostri Anno Primo. An Ancient Copy of this Magna Charta of Ireland is to
be found in the Red Book of the Exchequer Dublin.

In February following in the First Year like wise of his Reign, by Advice of
all his Faithful Counselors in England, to gratify the Irish (says Pryn
against the 4th Inst. c. 76. p. 250.
Pryn) for their eminent Loyalty to his Father and Him, he granted them out of
his Special Grace, that they and their Heirs for ever should enjoy the
Liberties granted by his Father and Himself to the Realm of England; which he
Reduced into Writing, and sent Sealed thither under the Seal of the Popes
Legate, and W. Earl Marshal his Governor, because he had then no Seal of his
own. This as I conceive Refers to the forementioned Magna Charta Hiberniae. The
Record as Recited by Mr. Pryn, here follows.

Rex Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Pa. 1 H. III. m. 13. intus.
Abbatibus, Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus and Libere Tenentibus, and omnibus
Fidelibus suis per Hiberniam Constitutis, Salutem: Fidelitatem vestram in
Domino Commendantes quam Domino Patri nostro semper Exhibuistis and nobis estis
diebus nostris Exhibituri: Volumus quod in signum Fidelitatis vestrae, tam
praeclarae, tam Insignis Libertatibus Regno nostro Angliae a Patre nostro and
nobis Concessis, de gratia nostra and Dono in Regno nostro Hiberniae guadeatis
vos and vestri Haeredes in perpetuum. Quas Distinct in Scriptum Reductas de
Communi Consilio omnium Fidelium nostrorum vobis Mittimus Signatas Sigillis
Domini nostri G. Apostolicae Sedis Legati and Fidelis nostri Com. W. Maresc.
Rectoris nostri and Regni nostri quia Sigillum nondum habuimus, easdem processu
temporis de Majori Consilio proprio Sigillo Signaturi.

Test apud Glouc. 6 Februar.

Here we have a free Grant of all the Liberties of England to the People of
Ireland. But we know the Liberties of Englishmen are Founded on that Universal
Law of Nature, that ought to prevail throughout the whole World, of being
Governed only by such Laws to which they give their own Consent by their
Representatives in Parliament.

And here, before I proceed farther, Record out of Mr. Petyt of the Antiquity
of Parliaments in Ireland.
I shall take Notice, That in the late Raised Controversy, Whether the House
of Commons were an Essential part of Parliament, before the 49th year of Henry
the Third; The Learned Mr. Petyt, Keeper of the Records in the Tower, in his
Book on that Subject, page 71. Deduces his 9th Argument From the Comparison of
the Ancient Generale Concilium, or Parliament of Ireland, instanced An. 38 Hen.
III. with the Parliament in England, wherein the Citizens and Burgesses were;
which was Eleven years before the pretended beginning of the Commons in England.

For thus we find it in that Author.

As great a Right and Privilege surely was and ought to be allowed to the
English Subjects, as to the Irish, before the 49th of Hen. III. And if that be
admitted, and that their (the Irish) Commune Concilium, or Parliament, had its
Platform from ours (the English) as I think will not be Denied by any that have
considered the History and Records touching that Land (Ireland) we shall find
the ensuing Records, Ann. 38 Hen. III. clearly evince that the Citizens and
Burgesses were then a part of their (the Irish) Great Council or Parliament.

That King being in partibus Rot. 38 H. III, in 4. Hibernta
Transmarinis, and the Queen being left Regent, she sends Writs (or a Letter)
in the Kings Name, directed Archiepiscopis, Episcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus,
Comitibus, Baronibus, Militibus, Liberis Hominibus, Civibus and Burgensibus,
Terrae suae Hiberniae; telling them that, Mittimus Fratrem Nicholaum de Sancto
Neoto, Fratrem Hospitii Sancti Iohannis Jerusalem in Anglia ad parts Hiberniae
ad exponendum vobis (together with I. Fitz-Geoffery the Kings Justice) the
State of his Land of Vascony, endangered by the Hostile Invasion of the King of
Castile, qui nullo Iure sed potentia sua Confisus Terram nostram Vasconiae per
ipsius Fortitudinem, a manibus nostris Auferre and a Dominio Regni Angliae
segregare Proponit. And therefore universitatem Vestram Quanta possumus
Affectione Rogantes quatenus no^ and jura nostra totaliter indefens^ non
deserentes nobis in tanto periculo quantumcunque poteritis d^ Gente and Pecunia
subveniatis; which would turn to their Everlasting Honor; concluding. His
nostris Augustiis taliter Comp^tientes, quod nos and Heraedes nostri vobis and
Haeredibus vestris sumus non immerito Obligati. Test Regina, and R. Comite
Cornubiae, apud Windesor, 17 die Februar.

Per Reginam.

Thus far Mr. Petyt.

Here we have a Letter from the Queen Regent to the Parliament in Ireland, in
an humble manner beseeching them for an Aid of Men and Money against the King
of Castiles Hostile Invasion of Gascony; from whence we may perceive that in
those days, no more than at present, Men and Money could not be Raised but by
Consent of Parliament. I have been the more particular in Transcribing this
Passage out of Mr. Petyt, to show that we have as Ancient and Express an
Authority for our present Constitution of Parliaments in Ireland, as can be
shown in England. And I believe it will not be thought Advisable in these
latter Days, to break in upon Old Settled Constitutions: No one knows how fatal
the Consequents of that may be.

To return therefore where we Farther Concessions from Hen. III
Digress'd. Henry the Third, about the Twelfth year of his Reign, did specially
Empower Richard de Burgh, then Justice of Ireland, at a certain day and place,
to summon all the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, Knights,
Freeholders and Sheriffs of each County, and before them to cause to be Read
the Charter of his Father King John, whereunto his Seal was Appendant, whereby
he had granted unto them the Laws and Customs of England, and unto which they
swore Obedience: And that he should cause the same Laws to be observed and
Proclaimed in the several Counties of Ireland, that so none presume to do
contrary to the Kings Command. The Record I have taken out of Mr. (a) Pryn, (b)
Against Cook's 4th Instit. p. 252.
in these words:

Rex Dilecto and Fideli suo Claus. 12 H. III in 8 de Legibus and
Consuetudinibus Observandis in Hibern.
Richardo de Burgo Justie' suo Hibern. Salutem. Mandamus vobis firmiter
praecipientes quatenus certo die and Loco faciatis venire coram vobis
Archiepiscopos Episcopos Abbates Priores Comites and Barons Milites and libere
Tenentes and Ballivos singulorum Comitatum and coram eis Public legi faciatis
Chartam Domini J. Regis Patris nostri cui Sigillum suum appensum est quam fieri
fecit and jurari a Magnatibus Hibern. de Legibus and Consuetudinis Angliae
Observandis in Hibernia. Et praecipiatis eis ex part nostra quod Leges illas
and Consuctudines in Charta praedicta contentas de caetero firmiter teneant and
observent and hoc idem per singulos Commitatus Hiberniae clamari faciatis and
teneri prohibentes firmiter ex part nostra and super foris facturam nostram
nequis contra hoc Mandatum nostrum venire praesumat, etc. Test Me ipso Apud
Westm' 8 die Maii An. Reg. nostri 12.

By what foregoes, I presume it plainly appears, that by three several
Establishments under the three first Kings of Ireland of the Norman Race, the
Laws and Liberties of the People of England, were granted to the People of
Ireland. And that neither of these three Kings Established those Laws in
Ireland by any Power of the Parliament of England, but by the free Consent,
Allowance and Acceptance of the People of Ireland.

Hen. II. first introduced the Laws Recapitula tion.
of England into Ireland, in a Public Assembly of the Irish at Lismore, and
Allowed them the Freedom of Parliaments to be held in Ireland, as they were
held in England.

King John at the Request, and by the Consent of the Irish, did appoint the
Laws of England to be of Force in Ireland; and though he did not this till the
Twelfth year of his Reign of England, yet he did it not as King of England, but
as Lord of Ireland: For the Crown of England came to him by Descent from his
Brother Richard, who had no Regal Power in Ireland; and what his Brother had
not, could not descend to him.

Henry the Third in the first year of his Reign gave Ireland a Magna Charta;
and in the Twelfth year of his Reign did provide, That all the Laws of England
should be observed in Ireland; and that the Charter granted to the Irish by his
Father King John under his Seal, when he was in that Kingdom, should be kept
inviolably.

And from the Days of these Three Kings, have England and Ireland been both
Governed by the like Forms of Government under one and the same Supreme Head,
the King of England; yet so, as both Kingdoms remained Separate and Distinct in
their several Jurisdictions under that One Head, as are the Kingdoms of England
and Scotland at this day, without any Subordination of the One to the Other.

It were endless to mention all Records and Precedents that might be quoted for
the Establishment of the Laws of England in Ireland; I shall therefore enter no
farther into that Matter, but therein refer to Lord Chief Justice Cook, Fourth
Instit.
Pryn, Against the 4th Instit.
Reyly, Placita Parliamentaria. English Laws Established in Ireland.
etc.

If now we Enquire, What were those Laws of England that became thus
Established in Ireland? Surely we must first reckon the Great Law of
Parliaments, which England so Law of Parliament.
justly Challenges, and all Mankind have a Right to. By the Law of Parliament,
I mean that Law where by all Laws receive their Sanction, The Free Debates and
Consent of the People, by Themselves, or their Chosen Representatives. That
this was a main Branch of the English Law Established in this Kingdom, and the
very Foundation of our Future Legislature, appears manifest from Parliaments
being so early convok'd in Ireland, as the forementioned Precedents express.

Mr. Pryn acknowledges one in Hen. II's time, (page 259. against the 4th
Instit.) but makes a very false Conclusion, that there appears no Footsteps of
a Parliament afterward, till the third year of Edward the Second, because the
Acts of that Parliament are the first that are Printed in our Irish
Statute-Book: For so we may argue the Parliaments of England to be of later
Date than pretended, when we find the first Printed Acts in Keeble to be no
older than the 9th of Hen. III. Whereas it is most certain, that Parliaments
have been held in England some Ages before that.

After this Great Law of Parliaments, Common Law.
we may reckon the Common Law of England, whether it relates to Regulating and
Settling of Property, and Estates in Goods or Land, or to the Judiciary and
Executive parts of the Law, and the Ministers and Process thereof, or to
Criminal Cases. These surely were all Established in this Country, by the three
first Kings of Ireland of the Norman Race.

Let us now consider the state of Statute Law.
the Statute Laws of England under these three Kings, and their Predecessors:
For by the Irish Voluntary Submission to, and Acceptance of the Laws and
Government of England, we must repute them to have submitted themselves to
these likewise; till a Regular Legislature was Established amongst them, in
pursuance of that Submismission and Voluntary Acceptance.

And here we shall find, that in Statute Law of England from the Norman
Conquest to Hen. III.
those Times, viz. from the Norman Conquest to Henry the Third's time
inclusive, the Statute-Laws of England were very few and slender. It Is true,
that before the 12th of Hen. III. we find amongst the English Historians
frequent mention of the Laws of Edward the Confessor, William the Conqueror,
Hen. I. Hen. II. King John, and Hen. III. All which are only Charters, or
several Grants of Liberties from the King; which nevertheless had the force of
Acts of Parliament, and laid as great Obligations both upon Prince and People,
as Acts of Parliament do at this day: Whereof we may read several Proofs in the
Princes Case, Cook's 8th Report. But these were only so many Confirmations of
each other, and all of them Sanctions of the Common Laws and Liberties of the
People of England, ab Antiquo Usitatae and comprohatae per totam terram and in
quibus ipsi and eorum Patres nati and nutriti sunt, as the words of the
Manuscript Chronicle of Litchfield express it.

The Laws of Edward the Confessor, Law of Edward the Confessor.
held in so great Veneration in Ancient Times, and per universum Regnum
corroboratae and confirmatae, prius inventae and Constitutae fuerunt Tempore
Regis Edgari Avi sui. Verum tamen post mortem ipsius Regis Edgari, usque ad
Coronationem Sancti Regis Edwardi (which was 67 years) praedictae Leges Sopitae
sunt and penitus intermissae. Sed postquam Rex Edwardus in Regno sublimatus
fuit Consilio Baronum Angliae Legem illam sopitam Excitavit, Excitam Reparavit,
Reparatam Decoravit, Decoratam Confirmavit; and confirmatae vocantur Lex Sancti
Regis Edwardi, non quod ipse primus eam ad invenisset; sed quod Reparavit,
Restituitque, Seldom (...) and speci^* ad eadmerum, page 17^
as the said Litchfield Chronicle has it. These Laws of Edward the Confessor
were transcribed by Ingulphus Abbot of Croy land under William the Conqueror
and are annexed to his History.

The Laws of William the Conqueror are but a Confirmation of the Of Will. Conq.
Laws of Edward the Confessor, with some small alterations, as the very Letter
of those Laws themselves express it. Leges W. 1. Cap. 63. apud Seldom in not^
^d eadmerum p. 192.
Hoc quoque praecipimus ut omnes habeant and teneant Leges Edwardi Regis in
omnibus Rebus adauctis his quas constituimus ad Utilitatem Anglorum.

The Laws of Henry I. which are in the Red Book of the Exchequer, Of Hen. I.
in the custody of the Kings Remembrancer in England, are but a summary
confirmation both of the Laws of Edward the Confessor and William the First, as
the Charter it self expresses it, Vid. Seldom ut supra.
Lagam Regis Edwardi vobis Reddo cum illis emendationibus quibus Pater meus
emendavit Consilio Baronum suorum.

The Laws of Henry II. called Of Hen II.
Constitutiones Clarendoniae, and the Assize of Clarendon in the 2d part of
Cooks Inst. p. 6. are all but confirmations and vindications of the King's just
Prerogative against the Usurpations of the Pope and Clergy: As we find at large
in Chron. Gervasii. Doroborn p. 1387. Edit. Land. an. 1652.

The Laws of King John, called Of K. John.
The Great Charter of King John, granted in the 17th Year of his Reign, upon
the Agreement made between him and his Barons at Running-Mead between Stains
and Windsor, was but a Confirmation of the Laws of Edward the Confessor and
Henry the First, as Mat. Paris ad an. 1215. page 253. etc.
Mat. Paris relates it. Anno Regis Johannis 17. venientes ad Regem magnates
petierunt quasdam Libertates and Leges Regis Edwardi cum aliis libertatibus
sibi and Regno Angliae and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concessis confirmari prout in
Charta Regis Hen I. ascriptae continentur. The same Historian gives us also at
large both Charta Libertatum, and Charta de Foresta, which are not extant in
the Rolls of those times, nor to be found in any till the 28th of Edward I. and
that but by inspeximus.

The Laws of Henry III. contained in Magna Charta and Charta de Forresta, Of
Hen. III.
both which are called Magnae Chartae Libertatis Angliae, and were established
about the 9th Year of Henry III. are for the most part but declaratory of the
common municipal Laws of England, and that too no new declaration thereof; for
King John in the 17th year of his Reign had granted the like before, which was
also called Magna Charta. Cook's Pref. to the 2d Inst.
And by the English Statute 25 Ed. 1. c. 1. it is Enacted, That the Great
Charter, and the Charter of the Forest be taken as the Common Law of England.

By what foregoes, I conceive, it is very clear, That all the Charters and
Grants of Liberties from Edward the Confessor's time down to the 9th of Henry
the Third were but Confirmations one of another, and all of them Declarations,
and Confirmations of the Common Law of England. And by the several
Establishments, which we have formerly mentioned, of the Laws of England to be
of force in Ireland: First, in the 13th of Henry II. Secondly in the 12th of
King John. Thirdly, in the 12th of Henry III. All those Laws and Customs of
England, which by those several Charters were Declared and Confirmed to be the
Laws of England, were established to be of force in Ireland. And thus Ireland
came to be governed by one and the same Common Law with England; and those Laws
continue as part of the municipal and fundamental Laws of both Kingdoms to this
day.

It now remains that we enquire, Engl. Statutes since the 9th. Hen. III.
introduced in Ireland.
How the Statute Laws and Acts of Parliament made in England since the 9th of
Henry the Third came to be of force in Ireland; And whether all or any of them,
and which, are in force here, and when and how they came to be so.

And the first Precedent that occurs in our Books, of Acts of Parliament in
Ireland particularly mentioning and confirming special Acts of Parliament in
England, is found in a Marginal Note of Sir Richard Bolton's formerly Lord
Chief Baron of the Exchequer in Ireland, affixed in his Edition of the Irish
Statutes to Stat. 10 Hen. 7. Cap. 22. to this purport, That in 13 Edw. II. by
Parliament in this Realm of Ireland the Statutes of Merton, made the 20th
Statutes of Merton. Marlebr. Westminster. Gloucest.
of Hen. II. and the Statutes of Marlbridge, made the 52 of Henry the Third;
The Statute of Westminster the First, made the 3d of Edward the First; The
Statute of Gloucester, made the 6th of Edward the First* And the Statute of
Westminster the Second, made the 13th of Edward the First, were all confirmed
in this Kingdom, and all other Statutes which were of force in England, were
referred to be Examined in the next Parliament; and so many as were then
Allowed and Published, to stand likewise for Laws in this Kingdom. Vid. Lib.
Rubr. Scaccar. Dubl.
And in the 10th of Henry the Fourth, it was Enacted in this Kingdom of
Ireland, That the Statutes made in England should not be of force in this
Kingdom, unless they were Allowed and Published in this Kingdom by Parliament.
And the like Statute was made again in the 29th of Henry the Sixth. These
Statutes are not to be found in the Rolls, nor any Parliament Roll of that
time; but he (Sir Richard Bolton) had seen the same Exemplisy'd under the Great
Seal, and the Exemplification remains in the Treasury of the City of
Waterford. Thus far the Note. If we consider the frequent Troubles and
Distractions in Ireland, we shall not wonder that these, and many other Rolls
and Records, have been lost in this Kingdom: For from the third year of Edward
the Second, which was Anno 1310. through the whole Reigns of Edward III.
Richard II. Henry IV. and Henry V. and so to the Seventh year of Henry the
Sixth, Anno 1428. which is about 118 years, there are not any Parliament Rolls
to be found, Annals of Ireland, at the End of Camden's Britan. Edit. 1637. page
196, 197, etc.
yet certain it is, that diverse Parliaments were held in Ireland in those
times. Ibid. p. 160. Pryn against the 4th Instit. Chap, 76.
The same may be said from Henry the Second's coming into Ireland, Anno 1172.
to the third year of Edward the Second, Anno 1310. about 138 years.

Perhaps it may be said, That if here were such Statutes of Ireland as the said
Acts of the 10th of Henry the Fourth, and the 29th of Henry the Sixth; As they
show, that the Parliaments of Ireland did think that English Acts of Parliament
could not bind Ireland; yet they show likewise, that even in those days the
Parliaments of England did claim this Superiority; or else, to what purpose
were the said Acts made, unless in denial of that Claim?

All which I hope may be readily granted without any prejudice to the Right of
the Irish Parliaments: There is nothing so common, as to have one Man claim
another Man's Right: And if bare Pretense will give a Title, no Man is secure:
And it will be yet worse, if when another so Pretends, and I insist on my
Right, my Just Claim shall be turned to my Prejudice, and to the Disparagement
of my Title.

We know very well that many of the Judges of our Four Courts have been from
time to time sent us out of England; and some of them may easily be supposed to
come over hither Prepossessed with an Opinion of our Parliaments being
subordinate to that of England. Or at least, some of them may be Scrupulous,
and desirous of full Security in this Point; and on their Account, and for
their Satisfaction, such Acts as aforesaid, may be devised, and Enacted in
Ireland. But then, God forbid, that these Acts should afterward be laid hold
of to a clear other intent than what they were framed for; and instead of
Declaring and Securing our Rights, should give an Handle of Contest, by showing
that our Rights have been questioned of Ancient Time.

In conclusion of all, If this Superiority of the Parliament of England have
been Doubted a great while ago, so it has been as great a while ago Strenuously
Opposed, and Absolutely Denied by the Parliaments of Ireland. And by the way, I
shall take Notice, That from whencesoever this Ancient Pretense of Ireland's
Subordination proceeded in those days, it did not arise from the Parliament of
England it self: For we have not one single Instance of an English Act of
Parliament Expressly Claiming this Right of Binding us: But we have several
Instances of Irish Acts of Parliament, Expressly Denying this Subordination, as
appears by what foregoes.

Afterward by a Statute made in Ireland the 18th of Hen. VI. Cap. 1. All the
Statutes made in England against the Extortions and Oppressions of Purveyors,
are Enacted to be holden and kept in all Points, and put in Execution in this
Land of Ireland.

And in the 32d year of Henry the Sixth, Cap. 1. by a Parliament in Ireland,
it is Enacted, That all the Statutes made against Provisors to the Court of
Rome, as well in England as in Ireland, be had and kept in force.

After this, in a Parliament at Drogheda the 8th of Edward IV. cap. 1. it was
Ratified, That the English Statute against Rape, made the 6th of Richard the
Second, should be of Force in Ireland from the 6th day of March last past: And
that from henceforth the said Act, and all other Statutes and Acts made by
Authority of Parliament within the Realm of England, be Ratified and Confirmed,
and Adjudged by the Authority of this Parliament in their Force and Strength,
from the said sixth day of March. We shall hereafter have occasion of taking
farther Notice of this Statute upon another Account.

Lastly, In a Parliament held at All English Statutes before the 10th of Hen.
VII. in force in Ireland.
Drogheda the 10th of Henry the Seventh, cap. 22. it is Enacted, That all
Statutes late (that is, as the Cook's 4th Instit. Cap. 76. P. 351.
Learned in the Laws expound it, before that time) made in England, concerning
the Common and Public Weal of the same, from henceforth be Deemed effectual
in Law, and be Accepted, Used and Executed within this Land of Ireland in all
Points, etc.

Vid. Irish Stat.
And in the 14th year of the same Kings Reign, in a Parliament held at
Tristle-Dermot, it was Enacted, That all Acts of Parliament made in England for
Punishing Customers, Controulers, and Searchers, for their Misdemeanors; or for
Punishment of Merchants or Factors, be of Force here in Ireland, Provided they
be first Proclaimed at Dublin, Drogheda, and other Market Towns.

Thus we see by what Steps and Degrees all the Statutes which were made in
England from the time of Magna Charta, to the 10th of Henry the Seventh, which
did concern the Common Public Weal, were Received, Confirmed, Allowed, and
Authorized to be of Force in Ireland; all which was done by Assent of the Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and the Commons in the Parliament of Ireland Assembled,
and no Otherwise.

We shall next Enquire, Whether English Statutes Declaratory of the Common Law
in force in Ireland.
there are not other Acts of the English Parliament, both before and since the
10th of Henry the Seventh, which were and are of Force in Ireland, though not
Allowed of by Parliament in this Kingdom. And we shall find, That by the
Opinion on of our best Lawyers, there are diverse such; but then they are only
such as are Declaratory of the Ancient Common Law of England, and not
introductive of any New Law: For these become of Force by the first General
Establishment of the Common Laws of England in this Kingdom, under Henry the
Second, King John, and Henry the Third; and need no particular Act of Ireland
for their Sanction.

As to those English Statutes English Acts introductive of a New Law, not of
force in Ireland.
since the 10th of Henry the Seventh, that are Introductive of a New Law, it
was never made a Question whether they should Bind Ireland, without being
Allowed in Parliament here; till of very late years this Doubt began to be
moved; and how it has been Carried on and Promoted, shall Appear more fully
hereafter.

I say, Till of very late years; for the Ancient Precedents which we have to
the contrary, are very numerous. Amongst many, we shall mention the following
Particulars.

In the 21th of Henry the 8th an Act was made in England making it Felony in a
Servant that runs away with his Masters or Mistresses Goods. This Act was
not received in Ireland till it was Enacted by a Parliament held here in the
33d of Henry the 8th. c. 5. Ses. 1.

In the 21th of Henry VIII. c. 19. there was a Law made in England, That all
Lords might Distrain on the Lands of them holden, and make their Avowry not
naming the Tenant, but the Land. But this was not of force in Ireland till
Enacted here in the 33d of Henry VIII. C. 1. Ses. 1.

An Act was made in England, anno 31. Henry VIII. That Joint-Tenents and
Tenants in Common should be compelled to make Partition, as Coparceners were
compellable at Common Law. But this Act was not Received in Ireland till
Enacted here An. 33. Henry VIII. c. 10.

Anno 27. Henry VIII. c. 10. The Statute for Transferring Uses into Possession
was made in England; but not admitted in Ireland till 10. Car. 1. Ses. 2.

In like manner, the English Statute 33. Henry VIII. c. 1. directing how Lands
and Tenements may be disposed by Will, etc. was not of force in Ireland till
10. Car. 2. Ses. 2.

The Act of Uniformity of Common Prayer and Administration of the Sacraments
was made in England the 1st. of Eliz. c. 2. but was not established in Ireland
till the 2d. of Eliz. c. 2. And so that of England 14. Car. 2. c. 14. was not
received in Ireland till 17. and 18. Car. 2 c. 6.

The Statute against Wilful Perjury made in England 5. Eliz. c. 9. was not
Enacted in Ireland till 28 Eliz. c. 1.

So the English Act against Witchcraft and Sorcery made 5 Eliz. c. 16. And
another Act against Forgery 5 Eliz. c. 14. were neither of them in force in
Ireland till the 28th of Her Reign, Cap. 3 and 4.

The English Statutes against Pirates was made the 28th of Hen. 8. c. 15. but
not in Ireland till the 12th of King James, c. 2.

In England an Act was made the 27th of Eliz. c. 4 against Fraudulent
Conveyances; but it was not in force in Ireland till Enacted here the 10th of
Charles, c. 3. Ses. 2.

In the 15th year of King Charles the 1st. in a Parliament held at Dublin there
were Six English Statutes made Laws of this Kingdom, with such Alterations as
best fitted them to the State thereof, viz.

21 Iac. c. 14. For pleading the General Issue in Intrusions brought by the
King, by Chap. 1. of the Irish Statutes.

31 Eliz. c. 2. For Abridging of Proclamations on Fines, by Chap. 2. 2 and 3
Edw. 6. c. 8. Concerning Offices before the Escheator, by Chap. 4.

31 Eliz. c. 1. Discontinuance of Writs of Error in the Exchequer Chamber, by
Chap. 5.

8 Eliz. c. 4. and 18 Eliz. c. 7. concerning Clergy, by Chap. 7.

24 Hen. 8. c. 5. Concerning Killing a Robber, by Chap. 9.

There are Six English Statutes likewise passed in the time of King Charles the
2d. upon and soon after the Restoration, some of which were not passed into
Laws in Ireland till a year, two or three, afterward: As will appear by
consulting the Statute Books. Irish Stat. 13 C. 2. c. 2. 13 C. 2. c. 3. 14 and
15 C. 2. c. 1. 14 and 15 C. 2. c. 19. 17 and 18 C. 2. c. 3. 17. and 18 C. 2. c.
11. English Stat. 12 C. 2. c. 12. 12 C. 2. c. 3. 12 C. 2. c. 14, 12 C. 2. c.
24. 12 C. 2. c. 33. 16 and 17 C. 2. c. 5.


And in the First year of William and Mary, Ses. 2. c. 9. an Act passed in
England declaring all Attainders and other Acts made in the late pretended
Parliament under King James at Dublin void: But was not Enacted here in Ireland
till the 7th year of K. William c. 3. And this was thought requisite to be done
upon mature consideration thereon before the King and Council of England, For
we had two several Acts transmitted to us at different times, to this very
purpose. One we rejected in the Lord Syd^eys Government, the other we passed
under the Lord Capell.
notwithstanding that the English Act does particularly name Ireland, and was
wholly designed for, and relates thereto.

The like may we find in several other Statutes of England passed since his
present Majesty's Accession to the Throne, which have afterward been passed
here in Ireland, with such Alterations as make them practicable and agreeable
to this Kingdom. Such as are amongst others, the Act for Disarming Papists. The
Act of Recognition. The Act for taking away Clergy from some Offenders. The
Act for taking Special Bail in the Country, etc. The Act against Clandestine
Mortgages. The Act against Cursing and Swearing.

These, with many more, are to to be found in our Statute Books in the several
Reigns of Henry the 8th. Edward the 6th. Queen Elizabeth, King James, King
Charles the 1st and 2d. and King William. But it is not to be found in any
Records in Ireland, that ever any Act of Parliament introductive of a new Law
made in England since the time of King John, was by the judgment of any Court
received for Law, or put in Execution in the Realm of Ireland before the same
was Confirmed and Assented to by Parliament in Ireland.

And thus I presume we have pretty clearly made out our Fourth Enquiry
forementioned: and shown plainly the several steps by which the English form of
Government, and the English Statute Laws were received in this Kingdom; and
that this was wholly by the Peoples consent in Parliament, to which we have had
a very ancient Right, and as full a Right as our next Neighbors can pretend to
or challenge.

I shall now consider the Objections and Difficulties that are moved Objections
Answered.
on this Head drawn from Precedents, and Passages in our Law Books that may
seem to prove the contrary.

First it is urged, That in the Irish Act concerning Rape passed anno Objection
from the Stat. of Rape.
8 Edward 4, c. 1. it is expressed, That a Doubt was conceived whether the
English Statute of the 6th of Richard the 2d. c. 6. ought to be of force in
Ireland without a Confirmation thereof in the Parliament of Ireland. Which
shows (as some alledg) that even in those days it was held by some, That an Act
of of Parliament in England might bind Ireland before it be consented to in
Parliament here.

But I concieve this Gloss is raised merely for want of Expressing the Reason
of the said Doubt in the Irish Statute of the 8th of Edward the 4th. c. 1.
which we may reasonably judge was this. By the Statute of Westminster the 2d.
c. 34. a Woman that eloped from her Husband and lived with the Adulterer, or a
Wife that being first Ravished did afterward consent, and lived with the
Ravisher, she should loose her Dower. This Statute of Westminster the 2d, was
made of force in Ireland by an Act passed here the 13th of Edward the 2d, as we
have seen before, page 68, 69. Afterward by the English Statute of the 6th of
Rich. the 2d. c. 6. there was a farther addition made to the said Statute of
Westminster the 2d. to this effect, That a Maiden or Wife being Ravished, and
afterward consenting to the Ravishers, as well the Ravisher as she that was
Ravished shall be disabled to claim all Inheritance or Dower after the death of
her Husband or Ancestor.

On this account the Doubt was here raised in Ireland in the 8th of Edward the
4th. c. 1. Whether this latter English Statute of the 6th of Richard the 2d. c.
6. were not in force in Ireland by virtue of the Irish Statute of the 13th of
Edward the 2d. which confirmed the Statute of Westminster the 2d. c. 34. And
for settling this Doubt the said Statute of the 8th of Edward the 4th c. 1. was
passed in Ireland, and we find very good reason for the said Doubt. For the
English Statute of the 6th of Richard the 2d. c. 6. contained but a small
addition to the Statute of Westminster the 2d c. 34. and we see that even this
ad dition it self was judged not to be of force in Ireland till Enacted here.
For the said Irish Statute of the 8th of Edward the 4th. c. 1. makes the said
Statute of the 6th of Rich. 2d. c. 6. of Force in Ireland only from the 6th of
March, then last past.

It Is urged secondly, That though perhaps such Acts of Parliament in England
which do not Name Ireland, shall not be construed to Bind Ireland, yet all such
English Statutes as mention Ireland, either by the General Words of all his
Majesty's Dominions, or by particularly Naming of Ireland, are and shall be of
Force in this Kingdom.

This being a Doctrine first broached Directly (as I conceive) by Will. Hussy,
Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench in England, in the first year of Henry
the Seventh and of late Revived by the Lord Chief Justice Cook, and strongly
urged, and much relied upon i^ these latter Days; I shall take the Liberty of
Enlarging thereon, tho I venture thereby to swell this Pamphlet to a size
greater than I desire or designed.

First therefore, As to such English Object. English Statutes comprehending
Ireland by general Words.
Statutes as seem to comprehend Ireland, and to Bind it, under the General
Words of all his Majesty's Dominions or Subjects, whatever has been the Opinion
of Private and Particular Lawyers in this Point, I am sure the Opinions of the
Kings of England, and their Privy Council, have been otherwise: It Is well known
since Poyning's Act in Ireland, the 10th of Henry the Seventh, no Act can pass
in our Parliament here, till it be first Assented to by the King and Privy
Council of England, and Transmitted hither under the Broad Seal of England: Now
the King and his Privy Council there, have been so far from surmising that an
Act of Parliament of England, mentioning only in General All the Kings
Dominions, or Subjects, should Bind Ireland, that they have clearly shown the
contrary, by frequently Transmitting to Ireland, to be passed into Laws here,
English Statutes, wherein the General Words of all the Kings Dominions or
Subjects were contained; which would have been to no purpose, but merely Actum
Agere, had Ireland been Bound before by those English Statutes.

Of this I shall give the following Examples, amongst many others.

The Act of Parliament in England Act against Appeals to Rome.
against Appeals to Rome, 24 Hen. 8. c. 12. by express words extends to all his
Majesty's Dominions, yet the same was not in force, nor received in Ireland,
till it was Enacted by Parliament there, the 28th of Hen. 8. c. 6.

In like manner the Statutes made Acts of First Fruits and Faculties.
in England concerning First Fruits, 26 Hen. 8. c. 3. and the Act of Faculties,
Title in the English Statutes is, No Imposition shall be paid to the Bishop of
Rome.
25 Hen. 8. c. 21. though each of them by express words comprize All his
Majesty's Subjects and Dominions, were not received as Laws in Ireland, till
the former was Enacted there, 28 H. 8. c. 4. and the latter the 28 Hen. 8. c.
19. and so the Stature Restoring to the Crown all Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical
made in England, Anno 1 Eliz. c. 1. and therein giving Power to Erect an
Ecclesiastical High-Commission-Court in England and Ireland, yet was not of
Force in Ireland till Enacted there, Anno 2 Eliz. c. 1. And tho the said
English Act, in relation to Erecting such an High Commission Court, was
Repealed 17 Car. 1. c. 11 and the Repeal confirmed the 13 Car. 2. c. 12 And the
late Bill of High-Commission-Court*
Rights, 1 W. and M. Ses. 2. c. 2. in England, has damned all such Courts. Yet
the Act in Ireland 2 Eliz. c. 1. remains still in force here; and so it was
lately declared here by the Lord High-Chancellour Porter, Lord Chief Justice
Reynel, Lord Chief Baron Hely, Mr. Justice Cox, Mr. Justice Ieffreyson, in the
Case of Dr. Thomas Hacket, late Bishop of Down, who was deprived of the said
Bishopric by such a Commission, for great Enormities; the Commissioners being
Dr. Dopping late Bishop of Mead, Dr. King, the present Bishop of Londonderry,
and Dr. Wiseman, late Bishop of Dromore.

And truly I see no more Reason By the same Reason Scotland may be bound.
for Binding Ireland by the English Laws under the General Words of all his
Majesty's Dominions or Subjects, than there is for Binding Scotland by the
same; for Scotland is as much his Dominion, and Scots-men as much his Subjects
as Ireland and Irish-men: If it be said, That Scotland is an Ancient Separate
and Distinct Kingdom from England; I say, So is Ireland: The Difference is,
Scotland continued separate from the Kings of England till of late years, and
Ireland continued separate from England but a very little while in the Person
of King John, before the Death of his Father, and of his Brother Richard the
First, without issue. But then it is to be considered, that there was a
Possibility, or even a Probability, that Ireland might have continued separate
from the Crown of England, even to this very day, if Richard the First had left
behind him a Numerous Progeny.

Secondly, As to such English English Statutes naming Ireland.
Statutes as particularly Name Ireland, and are therefore said to be of Force
in this Kingdom, though never Enacted here; I shall consider only the more
Ancient Precedents that are offered in Confirmation of this Doctrine: For as to
those of later Date, it is these we complain of, as bearing hard on the
Liberties of this Country, and the Rights of our Parliaments, and therefore
these ought not to be produced as Arguments against us. I presume, if I can
show, that the Ancient Precedents that are produced, do not conclude against
us; it will follow that the Modern Instances given, ought not to conclude
against us; that is to say plainly, These ought not to have been made as they
are, as wanting Foundation both from Authority and Reason.

The Ancient Precedents of English Statutes, particularly Naming Ireland, and
said to be made in England with a Design of Binding Ireland, are chiefly these
three: 1. Statutum Hiberniae, 14 H. 3. 2. Ordinatio pro Statu Hiberniae, 17
Edw. 1. 3. And the Act that all Staple Commodities passing out of England or
Ireland, shall be carried to Callis, as long as the Staple is at Callis, 2 Hen.
6. c. 4. on which Hussy delivered his Opinion, as we shall see more fully
hereafter.


These Statutes, especially the two first, being made for Ireland, as their
Titles import, have given occasion to think, that the Parliament of England
have a Right to make Laws for Ireland, without the Consent of their Chosen
Representatives. But if we Enquire farther into this matter, we shall find this
Conclusion not fairly Deduced.

First, The Statutum Hiberniae, 14 Hen. 3. as it is to be found in the
Collection of English Statutes, is plainly thus: The Judges in Ireland
conceiving a Doubt concerning Inheritances devolved to Sisters or Coheirs, viz.
Whether the younger Sisters ought to hold of the Eldest Sister, and do Homage
unto her for their Portions, or of the Chief Lord, and do Homage unto him;
therefore Girald Fitz Maurice, the then Lord Justice of Ireland, dispatched four
Knights to the King in England, to bring a Certificate from thence of the
Practice there used, and what was the Common Law of England in that Case.
Whereupon Hen. 3. in this his Certificate or Rescript, which is called Statutum
Hiberniae, merely informs the Justice what the Law and Custom was in England,
viz. That the Sisters ought to hold of the Chief Lord, and not of the Eldest
Sister. And the close of it commands, that the foresaid Customs that be used
within our Realm of England in this Case, be Proclaimed throughout our Dominion
of Ireland, and be there observed. Test meipso apud Westminst. 9. Feb. An.
Reg. 14.

From whence it is manifest, that this Statutum Hiberniae was no more than a
Certificate of what the common Law of England was in that Case, which Ireland
by the Original Compact was to be governed by. And shows no more, that
therefore the Parliament of England may bind Ireland, than it would have
proved, that the Common Wealth of Rome was subject to Greece, if, after Rome
had received the Law of the Twelve Tables, they had sent to Greece to know what
the Law was, in some Special Case.

The Statute called Ordinatio pro Or dinatio pre Statu Hiberniae.
Statu Hiberniae, made at Notingham the 17th of Edward the First, and to be
found in Pultons Collection page 76. Edit. Land. 1670. was certainly never
Received, or of Force, in Ireland. This is Manifest from the very first Article
of that Ordnance, which Prohibits the Justice of Ireland or others the Kings
Officers, there to Purchase Land in that Kingdom, or within their respective
Balliwicks without the Kings License, on pain of Forfeitures. But that this has
ever been Otherwise, and that the Lords Justices, and other Officers here have
Purchased Lands in Ireland, at their own Will and Pleasure, needs no Proof to
those who have the least knowledge of this Country. Nor does it appear by any
Inquisition, Office, or other Record, that any one ever Forfeited on that
Account.

Moreover this Ordinatio pro Statu Hiberniae, is really in it self No Act of
Parliament, but merely an Ordinance of the King and his Privy Council in
England; which appears as well from the Preamble to the said Ordinance, as from
this Observation likewise, That King Edward the First held no Parliament in the
17th year of his Reign: Or if this were a Parliament, this Ordinatio pro Statu
Hiberniae, is the only Act thereof that is Extant: But it is very improbable,
that only this single Ordinance should Appear, if any such Parliament were
called together.

Thirdly, As to the Staple-Act, Staple-Act,
2 Hen. 6. c. 4. which expressly names Ireland, and Hussey's Opinion thereon.
The Case, as we find it in the Year-Books of Mich. 2 Rich. 3. fol. 11. and
Mich. 1 Hen. 7. fol. 3. is in short thus: The Merchants of Waterford Merchants
of Waterford's Case.
having Shipped off some Wool, and consigned it to Sluice in Flanders, the Ship
by stress of Weather was put in at Callis, where Sir Thomas Thwaits, Treasurer
of Callis, seized the said Wool as forfeited, half to himself, and half to the
King, by the said Statute; hereupon a Suit was commenced between the said
Merchants and the said Treasurer, which was brought before all the Judges of
England into the Exchequer Chamber: The Merchants pleaded the King's License to
the Citizens of Waterford and their Successors, for carrying Wool where they
pleased; and the Questions before the Judges were two, Viz. Whether this
Staple-Act Binds Ireland; And Secondly, Whether the King could grant his
License contrary to the Statute, and especially where the Statute gives half
the Forfeiture to the Discoverer.

The first Point only relates to our present purpose; and herein we find the
foresaid Year-Book of 2 Rich. 3. fol. 12. to Report it thus: Et ibi (in the
Exchequer Chamber) quoad Primam Questionem Dicebant quod Terr. Hibern. inter se
habent Parliament. and omnimodo Curprout in Angl. and per Idem Parliamentum
faciunt Leges and Mutant Leges and non Obligantur per Statuta in Anglia, quia
non hic habent Milites Parliamenti (and is not that an unanswerable Reason?)
sed hoc intelligitur de terris and rebus in terris illis tantum efficiendo; sed
Personae eorum sunt Subject. Regis and tanquam Subjecti erunt Obligati ad
aliquam rem extra Terram illam faciend. contra Statut. sicut habitantes in
Calesia, Gascoignie, Guien, etc. dum fuere Subjecti; and Obedientes erunt sub
Admiral. Angl. de re fact. super Altum Mare; and similit. Brev. de Errore de
Iudicio reddit. in Hibern. in Banco Reg. hic in Angl.

I have verbatim transcribed this Passage out of the foresaid Year-Book, that I
might be sure to omit nothing that may give the Objection its full weight. And
all that I can answer to it, is this:

1. That when the foresaid Case came a second time under the Consideration of
the Judges in the Exchequer Chamber in Mich. 1 Hen. 7. fol. 3. we find it
Reported thus: Hussy the Chief Justice said, That the Statutes made in England
shall bind those of Ireland, which was not much gainsaid by the other Judges,
notwithstanding that some of them were of a contrary Opinion the last Term in
his Absence. How the Presence and Opinion of the Chief Justice came to
influence them now, I leave the Reader to judge.

2. That Brook in Abridging this Case of the first of Hen. 7. fol. 3. Title
Parliament, Sec. 90. adds, Tamen Nota, That Ireland is a Kingdom by it self,
and has Parliaments of its own; intimating thereby, That therefore Hussey's
Opinion herein was Unreasonable.

3. That it is manifest, if Hussy mean by his words, That All Acts of
Parliament in England shall bind Ireland, it is directly contrary to the Judges
Opinion in the second of Richard the Third, before recited; for within the Land
of Ireland, they are all positive, That the Authority of the Parliament of
England will not Affect us. They seem at the utmost reach to extend the
Jurisdiction of the English Parliament over the Subjects of Ireland, only in
relation to their Actions beyond Seas, out of the Realm of Ireland, as they are
the King of England's Subjects; but even This will Appear Unreasonable, when we
consider, that by the same Argumentation, Scotland it self may be bound by
English Laws, in relation to their Foreign Trade, as they are the King of
Englands Subjects. The Question is, Whether England and Ireland be two Distinct
Kingdoms, and whether they have each their Respective Parliaments; neither of
which will be denied by any Man: And if so, there can be no Subordination on
either side, each is complete in its own Jurisdiction, and ought not to
interfere with the other in any thing. If being the King of England's Subjects,
be a Reason why we ought to submit to Laws, (in relation to our Trade abroad,
in places where the Parliament of England has no Jurisdiction) which have not
received our Assent; the People of England will consider whether they also are
not the King's Subjects, and may therefore (by this way of Reasoning) be bound
by Laws which the King may Assign them without their Assent, in relation to
their Actions Abroad or Foreign Trade: Or whether they had not been Subjects to
the King of France, had our Kings continued their Possession of that Country,
and there kept the Seat of the Monarchy; and then, had France been stronger
than England, it might seem that the Subjects of these Kingdoms might have been
bound by Laws made at Paris, without their own Consent. But let this Doctrine
never be mentioned amongst the Freeborn Subjects of these Nations.

Thus I have done with the Three Principal Instances that are usually brought
against us, on the Stress that is laid on English Acts of Parliament,
particularly Naming Ireland.

There have been other Statutes Members from Ireland in the Parliament of
England.
or Ordinances made in England for Ireland, which may reasonably be of force
here, because they were made and Assented to by our own Representatives. Thus
we find in the White Book of the Exchequer in Dublin, in the 9th year of Edward
the First, a Writ sent to his Chancellor of Ireland, wherein he mentions
Quaedam Statuta per nos de Assensu Prelatorum Comitum Baronum and Communitates
Regni nostri Hiberniae, nuper apud Lincoln and quaedam alia Statuta postmodum
apud Eborum facta. These we may suppose were either Statutes made at the
Request of the States of Ireland, to Explain to them the Common Law of England;
or if they were introductive of New Laws, yet they might well be of force in
Ireland, being Enacted by the Assent of our own Representatives, The Lords
Spiritual and Temporal, and Commons of Ireland; as the Words afore-mentioned do
show: And indeed, these are Instances so far from making against our Claim,
that I think nothing can be more plainly for us; for it manifestly shows, that
the King and Parliament of England would not Enact Laws to Bind Ireland,
without the Concurrence of the Representatives of this Kingdom.

Formerly, When Ireland was but thinly Peopled, and the English Laws not fully
current in all parts of the Kingdom, it is probable that then they could not
frequently Assemble with convenience or safety to make Laws in their own
Parliaments at home; and therefore during the Heats of Rebellions, o^ Confusion
of the Times, they were forced to Enact Laws in England. But then this was
always by their proper Representatives. For we find that in the Reign of Edward
the Third, (and by what foregoes, it is plain 'twas so in Edward the First's
Time) Knights of the Shire, Citizens, and Burgesses, were Elected in the
Shires, Cities and Buroughs of Ireland, to serve in Parliament in England, and
have so served accordingly. For amongst the Records of the Tower of London,
Rot. Claus. 50. Edw. 3. Parl. 2. Membr. 23. We find a Writ from the King at
Westminster, directed to James Butler, Lord Justice of Ireland, and to R.
Archbishop of Dublin, his Chancellor, requiring them to issue Writs under the
Great Seal of Ireland, to the several Counties, Cities and Buroughs, for
satisfying the Expenses of the Men of that Land, who last came over to serve in
Parliament in England. And in another Roll the 50th of Edw. III. Membr. 19. On
Complaint to the King by John Draper, who was Chosen Burgess of Cork by Writ,
and served in the Parliament of England, and yet was denied his Expenses by
some of the Citizens, Care was taken to re-imburse him.

If from these last mentioned Records, it be concluded that the Parliament of
England may Bind Ireland; it must also be Allowed that the People of Ireland
ought to have their Representatives in the Parliament of England. And this, I
believe we should be willing enough to embrace; but this is an Happiness we can
hardly hope for.

This sending of Representatives out of Ireland to the Parliament in England,
on some occasions, was found in process of time to be very Troublesome and
Inconvenient; and this, we may presume, was the Reason, that afterward, when
Times were more settled, we fell again into our old Track, and regular course
of Parliaments in our own Country: and hereupon the Laws afore-noted, page 64.
were Enacted, Establishing that no Law made in the Parliament of England,
should be of force in Ireland, till it was Allowed and Published in Parliament
here.

I have said before, page 85. that Modern Acts of the Parliament of England,
naming Ireland.
I would only consider the more Ancient Precedents that are offered to prove,
That Acts of England particularly Naming Ireland, should bind us in this
Kingdom; and indeed it were sufficient to stop here, for the Reason above
alleged. However, I shall venture to come down lower, and to enquire into the
Modern Precedents of English Acts of Parliament alleged against us: But still
with this Observation, That it is these we Complain against as Innovations, and
therefore they ought not to be brought in Argument against us.

I do therefore again assert, that before the Year 1641. there was no Statute
made in England introductory of a New Law that interfered with the Right which
the People of Ireland have to make Laws for themselves, except only those which
we have before mentioned, and which we have discussed at large, and submit to
the Readers ^udgment.

But in the Year 1641. and afterward in Cromwell's time, and since that, in
King Charles II. and again very lately in King William's Reign, some Laws have
been made in England to be of Force in Ireland. But how this came to pass, we
shall now Enquire.

In the 17th Year of K. Charles I. Acts in favor of Adventurers in 1641.
which was in the Year 1642. there were three or four Acts of Parliament made
in England for encouraging Adventurers to raise Money for the speedy
suppression of the Horrid Rebellion which broke out in Ireland the 23d of
October 1641* The Titles of these Acts we have in Pulton's Collection of
Statutes: But with this Remark, That they are made of no Force by the Acts of
Setlement and Explanation passed in King Charles Il's. time in the Kingdom of
Ireland. So that in these we are so far from finding Precedents for England's
Parliament binding Ireland, that they plainly show, that the Parliament of
Ireland may Re^ an Act passed in England, in relation to the Affairs of
Ireland. For it is very well known, that Persons who were to have Interests and
Titles in Ireland by virtue of those Acts passed in England, are cut off by the
Acts of Settlement and Explanation. And indeed there is all the Reason in the
World that it should be so, and that Acts made in a Kingdom by the Legal
Representatives of the People, should take place of those made in another
Kingdom. But however, it will be said, that by those Acts it is manifest that
England did presume they had such a Right to pass Acts binding Ireland, or else
they had never done it. To which I answer, That considering the condition
Ireland was in at that time, viz. under an horrid Intestine Rebellion, flaming
in every corner of the Kingdom; 'twas impossible to have a Parliament of our
own; yet it was absolutely necessary that something should be done toward
suppressing the Violences then raging amongst us: And the only means could then
be practiced, was for the Parliament of England to interpose, and do something
for our Relief and Safety; these were the best Assurances could be had at that
juncture: But when the Storm was over, and the Kingdom quieted, we see new
Measures were taken in a Legal Parliament of our own.

As to what was done for Ireland Acts in Cromwels time.
in the Parliament of England in Cromwell's time, besides the Confusion and
Irregularity of all Proceeding in those days, which hinders any of them to be
brought into Precedent in these times; We shall find also that then there were
Representatives sent out of this Kingdom, who sat in the Parliament of
England, which then was only the House of Commons. We cannot therefore argue
from hence, that England may bind us; for we see they allowed us
Representatives, without which, they rightly concluded, they could not make
Laws Obligatory to us.

I come now to King Charles the 2ds time: And in it we shall find the following
English Statutes made, in which the Kingdom of Ireland is concerned.

The first is an Act against Importing Cattle Act.
Cattle from Ireland or other Parts beyond Seas. It was only temporary by 18
Chapter 2. c. 2. but made perpetual 20 Chapter 2. c. 7. and 32 Chapter 2. c. 2. This Act,
however prejudicial to the Trade that was then carried on between Ireland and
England, does not properly Bind us, more than it does any other Country of the
World. When any thing is Imported, and Landed in England, it becomes
immediately subject to the Laws thereof, so that herein we cannot be said
properly to be bound.

Secondly, The Acts against Planting Tobacco Act.
Tobacco in England and Ireland, 12 Chapter 2. c. 34. and 15 Chapter 2. c. 7. and 22
and 23 Chapter 2. c. 26, etc. do positively Bind Ireland. But there has never been
an Occasion of Executing it here; for I have not heard that a Rood of Tobacco
was ever Planted in this Kingdom. But however that takes not off the Obligation
of the Law: It Is only want of our Consent, that I urge against that. I see no
more Reason for sending a Force to Trample down an Acre of Tobacco in Ireland
by these Statutes, than there would be for Cutting down the Woods of Shelela,
were there an Act made in England against our Planting or Having Timber.

Thirdly, The Act for Encouraging Navigation Act.
Shipping and Navigation, by express name Mentions and Binds Ireland; and by
the last Clause in the Act, Obliges all Ships belonging thereto importing any
Goods from our Foreign Plantations, to touch first at England.

Fourthly, The Acts Prohibiting Note, Exporting Wool from Ireland, is made
penal by the Irish. Stat. 13 Hen. 8. c. 2. 28 Hen. 8. c. 17. But both these
Statutes are obsolete: The like may we observe of the 11 Eliz. c. 10. and 13
El. c. 4.
the Exportation of Wool from Ireland, to any Country except to England, do
likewise strongly Bind us, and by the 12 Car. 2. c. 32. it was made highly
penal on us, and by the 14th of Car. 2. c. 18. it is made Felony.

To these three last Acts, I must confess, I have nothing to urge, to take off
their Efficacy; Name us they do most certainly, and Bind us so, as we do not
transgress them. But how Rightfully they do this, is the matter in Question.
This I am sure of, that before these Acts in King Charles the Second's Time,
(the Eldest of which is not over Thirty-Seven years) there is not one positive
full Precedent to be met with in all the Statute-Book, of an English Act
Binding the Kingdom of Ireland. And on this Account we may venture to assert,
That these are at least Innovations on us, as not being warranted by any former
Precedents.

And shall Proceedings only of Thirty-Seven Years standing, be urged against a
Nation, to Deprive them of the Rights and Liberties which they Enjoyed for Five
Hundred Years before, and which were Invaded without and against their Consent,
and from that day to this have been constantly complained of? Let any English
Heart that stands so Justly in Vindication of his own Rights and Liberties,
answer this Question, and I have done.

I am now arrived at our Present English Acts Binding Ireland since King
William's Reign.
Days, under the Happy Government of His Majesty King WILLIAM the Third; and I
am sorry to reflect, That since the late Revolution in these Kingdoms, when the
Subjects of England have more strenuously than ever Asserted their own Rights,
and the Liberty of Parliaments, it has pleased them to bear harder on their
Poor Neighbors, than has ever yet been done in many Ages foregoing. I am sure
what was then done by that Wise and Just Body of Senators, was perfectly out of
Good Will and Kindness to us, under those Miseries which our Afflicted Country
of Ireland then suffered But I fear some Men have since that, made use of what
was then done, to other Purposes than at first intended. Let us now see what
that was, and consider the Circumstances under which it was done.

In the year 1689. when most o^ the Protestant Nobility, Gentry, and Clergy of
Ireland, were driven out of that Kingdom by the Insolences and Barbarities of
the Irish Papists, who were then it Arms throughout the Kingdom and in all
Places of Authority under King James, newly Returned to them out of France; the
only Refuge we had to fly to was in England, where Multitudes continued for
many Months, destitute of all manner of Relief, but such as the Charity of
England afforded, which indeed was very Munificent, and never to be forgotten.

The Protestant Clergy of Ireland Act for the Protestant Irish Clergy.
being thus Banished from their Benefices, many of them Accepted such small
Ecclesiastical Promotions in England, as the Benevolence of well disposed
Persons presented them with. But this being directly contrary to a Statute in
this Kingdom, in the 17 and 18 of Charles the Second, Cap. 10. Entitled, An
Act for Disabling of Spiritual Persons from holding Benefices or other
Ecclesiastical Dignities in England or Wales, and in Ireland at the same time.
The Protestant Irish Clergy thought they could not be too secure in avoiding
the Penalty of the last mentioned Act, and therefore Applied themselves to the
Parliament of England, and obtained an Act in the first year of King William
and Queen Mary, c. 29. Entitled, An Act for the Relief of the Protestant Irish
Clergy. And this was the first Attempt that was made for Binding Ireland by an
Act in England, since his Majesty's Happy Accession to the Throne of these
Kingdoms.

Afterward in the same year, and Act against Commerce with France.
same Session, Chap. 34. there passed an Act in England, Prohibiting all Trade
and Commerce with France, both from England and Ireland. This also binds
Ireland, but was during the Heat of the War in that Kingdom, when 'twas
impossible to have a regular Parliament therein, all being in the hands of the
Irish Papists. Neither do we complain, of it, as hindering us from corresponding
with the King's Enemies, for it is the Duty of all Good Subjects to abstain from
that. But as Scotland, though the King's Subjects, Claims an Exemption from all
Laws but what they Assent to in Parliament; so we think this our Right also.

When the Banished Laity of Ireland observed the Clergy thus careful to secure
their Properties, and provide for the worst as well as they could in that
Juncture, when no other means could be taken by a Regular Parliament in
Ireland; they thought it likewise advisable for them to do something in
relation to their Concerns. And accordingly they obtained the Act for Act for
Security of the Protestants of Ireland.
the better Security and Relief, of their Majesty's Protestant Subjects of
Ireland, 1 W. and M. Ses. 2. c. 9. Wherein King James's Irish Parliament at
Dublin, and all Acts and Attainders done by them, are declared void. It Is
likewise thereby Enacted, that no Protestant shall suffer any Prejudice in his
Estate or Office, by reason of his absence out of Ireland, since December 25.
1685. and that there should be a Remittal of the Kings Quit-Rent, from 25
December 1688. to the end of the War. Thus the Laity thought themselves secure.

And we cannot wonder that during the Heat of a Bloody War in this Kingdom,
when it was impossible to Secure our Estates and Properties by a Regular
Parliament of our own; we should have recourse to this Means, as the only which
then could be had. We concluded with our selves, that when we had obtained
these Acts from the Parliament in England, we had gone a great way in securing
the like Acts to be passed in a regular Parliament in Ireland, whenever it
should please God to re-establish us in our own Country: For we well knew our
own Constitution under Poynings Law, That no Act could Pass in the Parliament
of Ireland till approved of by the King and Privy Council of England. And we
knew likewise, That all the Lords and others of his Majesty's Privy Council in
England are Members of the Lords or Commons House of Parliament there. And that
by obtaining their Assent to Acts of Parliament in Favor of the Irish
Protestants, they had in a manner pre-engaged their Assent to the like Bills
when they should hereafter come before them as Privy Counselors, in order to
be regularly Transmitted to the Parliament of Ireland, there to be passed into
Laws of that Kingdom. But instead of all this, to meet with another
Construction of what was done herein, and to have it pleaded against us as a
Precedent of our Submission, and absolute Acquiescence in the Jurisdiction of
the Parliaments of England over this Kingdom, is what we complain of as an
Invasion (we humbly conceive) of that Legislative Right which our Parliament of
Ireland, claims within this Kingdom.

The next Act passed in the Parliament Act appointing New Oaths
of England, Binding Ireland, is that for Abrogating the Oath of Supremacy in
Ireland, and Appointing other Oaths, 3 and 4 William and Mary, c. 2. To this
the Parliament convened at Dublin, Anno 1692. under Lord Sydney, and that
likewise Anno 1695. under Lord Capel, paid an entire Obedience. And by this
('it is alleged) we have given up our Right, if any we had, and have for ever
acknowledged our Subordination to the Parliament of England. But let us a
little consider the force of this Argument.

I readily grant, that this and the other forementioned Acts in England since
the Revolution, when they were made, were looked upon highly in our Favor, and
for our Benefit; and to them as such, we have conformed our Selves. But then,
in all Justice and Equity, our Submission herein is to be deemed purely
voluntary, and not at all proceeding from the Right we conclude thereby in the
Legislators. If a Man, who has no Jurisdiction over me, command me to do a
thing that is pleasing to me, and I do it; it will not thence follow, that
thereby he obtains an Authority over me and that ever hereafter I must Obey him
of Duty. If I voluntarily give my Money to a Man when I please, and think it
convenient for me; this does not Authorize him at any time to command my Money
from me when he pleases. If it be said, this allows Subjects to Obey only
whilst it is convenient for them. I pray it may be considered, whether any Men
Obey longer, unless they be forced to it; and whether they will not free
themselves from this Force as soon as they can. It Is impossible to hinder Men
from desiring to free themselves from Uneasiness, it is a Principle of Nature,
and cannot be eradicated. If Submitting to an Inconvenience be a less Evil than
endeavoring to Throw it off, Men will Submit. But if the Inconvenience grow
upon them, and b^ greater than the hazard of getting rid of it, Men will Offer
at putting it by, let the Statesman or Divine say what they can.

But I shall yet go a little further, and venture to Assert, That the Right of
being subject Only to such Laws to which Men give their own Consent, is so
inherent to all Mankind, and founded on such Immutable Laws of Nature and
Reason, that it is not to be Alien'd, or Given up, by any Body of Men
whatsoever: For the End of all Government and Laws being the Public Good of
the Commonwealth, in the Peace, Tranquillity and Ease of every Member therein;
whatsoever Act is contrary to this End, is in it self void, and of no effect:
And therefore for a Company of Men to say, Let us Unite our selves into a
Society, and let us be absolutely Governed by such Laws, as such a Legis^ator,
without ever Consulting us, shall devise for us; it is always to be understood,
Provided we find them for our Benefit: For to say, We will be Governed by those
Laws, whether they be Good or Hurtful to us, is absurd in it self: For to what
End do Men join in Society, but to avoid Hurt, and the Inconveniences of the
State of Nature?

Moreover, I desire it may be considered, whether the General Application of
the Chief part of the Irish Protestants, that were at that time in London, to
the Parliament at Westminster, for obtaining these Laws, may not be taken for
their Consent, and on that Account, and no other, these Acts may acquire their
Binding Force. I know very well, this cannot be looked upon as a Regular and
Formal Consent, such as might be requisite at another more favorable Juncture:
But yet it may be taken talis qualis, as far as their Circumstances at that
time would allow, till a more convenient Opportunity might present it self.

I am sure, if some such Considerations as these, may not plead for us, we are
of all his Majesty's Subjects the most Unfortunate: The Rights and Liberties of
the Parliament of England have received the greatest Corroborations since his
Majesty's Accession to the Throne; and so have the Rights of Scotland; but the
Rights of the People of Ireland, on the other hand, have received the greatest
Weakening under his Reign, by our Submission (as it is alleged) to these Laws
that have been made for us.

This certainly was not the Design of his Majesty's Glorious Expedition into
these Kingdoms; That, we are told by Himself, (whom we cannot possibly
mistrust) was to Assert the Rights and Liberties of these Nations; and we do
humbly presume that his Majesty will be graciously pleased to permit us to
Enjoy the Benefits thereof.

And thus I have done with the The Opinions of the Lawyers thereon.
Fourth Article proposed. As to the Fifth, viz. The Opinions of the Learned in
the Laws relating to this Matter; it is in a great measure dispatched by what I
have offered on the Fourth Head; I shall therefore be the more brief thereon.
And I think indeed the only Person of Note that remains to be considered by us,
is the Lord Chief Justice Lord Chief Justice Cook's Opinion Discussed.
Cook, a Name of great Veneration with the Gentlemen of the Long Robe, and
therefore to be treated with all Respect and Deference.

In his Seventh Report in Calvin's Case, he is proving that Ireland is a
Dominion Separate and Divided from England; for this he quotes many Authorities
20 H. 6. 8. Pilkington' s Case. 32 H. 6. 25. 20 Eliz. Dyer. 360. Flowd. Com.
360.
out of the Year-Books and Reports; and amongst others, he has that which I
have before mentioned, page 91. 2 R. 3. f. 12. which he Transcribes in this
manner, Hibernia habet Parliamentum, and faciunt Leges, and nostra Statuta non
ligant eos, quia non mittunt Milites ad Parliamentum; and then adds, in a
Parenthesis, (which is to be understood, unless they be specially named) sed
Personae eorum sunt subjecti Regis sicut inhabitants in Calesia, Gasconia, and
Guyan. The first thing I shall observe hereon, is the very unfaithful and
broken Citation of this Passage, as will manifestly appear by comparing it with
the true Transcript I have given thereof before, page 91. Were this all, 'twere
in some measure pardonable. But what cannot be excused, is the Unwarrantable
Position in his Parenthesis, without the least color or ground for it in his
Text. Herein he concludes down right Magisterially, So it must be, this is my
Definitive Sentence; as if his Plain Assertion, without any other Reason, ought
to prevail; nay, even point blank against the irrefragable Reason of the Book
he quotes. I confess in another place of Calvin's Case, viz. fol. 17. b. he
gives this Assertion a Color of Reason, by saying, That though Ireland be a
Distinct Dominion from England, yet the Title thereof being by Conquest, the
same by Judgment of Law might by Express Words be bound by the Parliaments of
England How far Conquest gives a Title, we have Enquired before: But I would
fain know what Lord Cook means by Judgment of Law: Whether he means the Law of
Nature and Reason, or of Nations; or the Civil Laws of our Commonwealths; in
none of which Senses, I conceive, will he, or any Man, be ever able to make out
his Position.

Is the Reason of England's Parliament not Binding Ireland, Because we do not
send thither Representatives? And is the Efficacy of this Reason taken off, by
our being Named in an English Act? Why should sending Representatives to
Parliament, Bind those that send them? Merely because thereby the Consent of
those that are Bound, is obtained, as far as those sort of Meetings can
possibly permit; which is the very Foundation of the Obligation of all Laws.
And is Ireland's being Named in an English Act of Parliament, the least step
toward obtaining the Consent of the People of Ireland? If it be not, then
certainly my Lord Cook's Parenthesis is to no purpose. And it is a wonder to me,
that so many Men have run upon this vain Imagination, merely from the Assertion
of this Judge: For I challenge any Man to show me, that any one before him, or
any one since, but from him, has vended this Doctrine: And if the bare
Assertion of a Judge, shall Bind a whole Nation, and Dissolve the Rights and
Liberties thereof, We shall make their Tongues very powerful, and constitute
them greater Lawgivers than the greatest Senates. I do not see why my Denying
it, should not be as Authentic as his Affirming it. It Is true, He was a great
Lawyer and a powerful Judge; but had no more Authority to make a Law, than I or
any Man else. But some will say, He was a Learned Judge, and may be supposed to
have Reason for his Position. Why then does he not give it us? And then what he
Asserts would Prevail, not from the Authority of the Person, but from the Force
of the Reason. The most Learned in the Laws have no more power to make or alter
a Constitution, than any other Man; And their Decisions shall no farther
prevail, than supported by Reason and Equity. I conceive my Ld. Chapter Justice
Cook applied himself so wholly to the Study of the Common Laws of England,
that he did not enquire far into the Laws of Nature and Nations; if he had,
certainly he could never have been Guilty of such an Erroneous Slip; He would
have seen demonstrably, that Consent only gives Humane Laws their Force, and
that therefore the Reason in the Case he quotes is unanswerable, Quia non
mittunt Milites ad Parliamentum. Moreover, the Assertion of Cook in this point
is directly contrary to the whole tenor of the Case which he cites: For the
very Act of Parliament on which the Debate of the Judges did arise, and which
they deemed not to be of Force in Ireland, particularly names Ireland. So that
here again Ld. Cooke's Error appears most plainly. For this I refer to the
Report, as I have exactly delivered it before page 90, 91. By which it appears
clearly to be the unanimous Opinion of all the Judges then in the Exchequer
Chamber: That within the Land of Ireland, the Parliaments of England have no
Jurisdiction, whatever they may have over the Subjects of Ireland on the open
Seas: And the reason is given, Quia Hibernia non mittit Milites ad Parliamentum
in Anglia.

This Assertion likewise is inconsistent with himself in other parts of his
Works. He tells us in his 4th. Inst. page 349. That it is plain that not only
King John (as all Men allow) but Henry the Second also, the Father of King
John, did Ordain and Command, at the Instance of the Irish, That such Laws as
had been in England should be Observed and of Force in Ireland. Hereby Ireland
being of it self a distinct Dominion, and no part of the Kingdom of England,
was to have Parliaments holden there as in England. And in page 12. he tells
us, That Henry the Second sent a Modus into Ireland, directing them how to hold
their Parliaments. But to what end was all this, if Ireland nevertheless were
subject to the Parliament of England? The King and Parliaments of these
Kingdoms are the supreme Legislators; If Ireland be subject to Two (its Own,
and that of England) it has Two Supreams; it is not impossible, but they may
Enact different or contrary Sanctions; which of these shall the People Obey? He
tells us in Calvin's Case fol. 17. b. That if a King has a Christian Kingdom
by Conquest, as Henry the Second had Ireland, after King John had given to
them, being under his Obedience, and Subjection, the Laws of England for the
Government of that Country, no succeeding King could alter the same without
Parliament. Which, by the way, seems directly contradictory to what he says
concerning Ireland six lines below this last cited passage. So that we may
observe my Lord Cook enormously stumbling at every turn in this Point.

Thus I have done with this Reverend Opinions of other Judges, in Favor of
Ireland.
Judge; and, in him, with the only Positive Opinion against us I shall now
consider what our Law Books offer in our Favor on this Point.

To this purpose we meet a Case fully apposite, reported in the Year-Book of
the 20th of Henry the 6th, fol. 8. between one John Pilkington and one A.

Pilkington brought a Scire Facias Pilki^s Case.
against A. to show Cause, why Letters Patents whereby the King had granted an
Office in Ireland to the said A. should not be repealed, since the said
Pilkington had the same Office granted to him by former Letters Patents of the
same King to be occupied by himself or his Deputy. Whereupon A. pleaded, That
the Land of Ireland, time out of Memory, has been a Land separated and
distinct from the Land of England, and Ruled and Governed by the Customs of the
same Land of Ireland. That the Lords of the same Land, which are of the King's
Council, have used from time to time, in the absence of the King, to Elect a
Justice, who has Power to Pardon and Punish all Felons, etc. and to call a
Parliament, and by the Advice of the Lords and Commonalty to make Statutes. He
alleged further, That a Parliament was Assembled, and that it was Ordained by
the said Parliament, This Statute we may reckon. amongst the number of those
that are lost during the long Intervals of our Irish Acts, noted before page
65. to be above 118 Years.
That every Man who had an Office within the said Land, before a certain day,
shall occupy the said Office by himself, otherwise, he should forfeit. He
showed that Pilkington Occupied by a Deputy; and that therefore his Office was
void, and that the King had granted the said Office to him the said A. Hereupon
Pilkington Demurred in Law; and it was debated by the Judges, Yelverton,
Fortescue, Portington, Markham, and Ascough, whether the said Prescription in
relation to the State and Government of Ireland, be good o^ void in Law.
Yelverton and Portington held the Prescription void But Fortescue, Markham, and
Ascough held the Prescription good; and that the Letters Patents made to A were
good, and ought not to be Repealed. And in this it was agreed by Fortescue and
Portington, That if a Tenth or Fifteenth be granted by Parliament in England,
that shall not Bind Ireland, although the King should send the same Statute
into Ireland under his Great Seal: Except they in Ireland will in their
Parliament Approve it; Because they have not any Commandment by Writ to come to
the Parliament of England: And this was not Denied by Markham, Yelverton, or
Ascough.

The Merchants of Waterford's Case Merchants of Waterfords Case.
which I have observed before, page 90. as Reported in the Year Book of the 2d.
of Richard the 3d. fol. 11, 12, is notorious on our behalf, but needs not be
here repeated.

The Case of the Prior of Lanthony Prior of Lanthonys Case.
in Wales, mentioned by Mr. Pryn against the 4th Inst. chapter 76. p. 313. is
usually cited against us. But I conceive it is so far from proving this, that
it is very much in our Behalf. The Case was briefly thus. The Prior of Lanthony
brought an Action in the Com. Pleas of Ireland against the of Prior Mollingar,
for an Arrear of an Annuity, and Judgment went against the Prior of Mollingar;
hereon the Prior of Mollingar brought a Writ of Error in the King's Bench of
Ireland, and the Judgment was affirmed. Then the Prior of Mollingar Appealed to
the Parliament in Ireland held 5 Hen. 6. before James Butler Earl of Ormond,
and the Parliament Reversed both Judgments. The Prior of Lanthony removed all
into the King's Bench in England; but the King's Bench refused to intermeddle,
as having no Power over what had passed in the Parliament of Ireland. Hereupon
the Prior of Lanthony Appealed to the Parliament of England. And it does not
appear by the Parliament Roll Rot. Parl. An. 8. H. 6. in ult.
that any thing was done on this Appeal; all that is Entered being only the
Petition it self at the end of the Roll. Vid. Pryn against the 4th Instit.
chap. 76. p. 313.

Now whether this be a Precedent proving the Subordination of our Irish
Parliament to that of England, I leave the Reader to judge. To me it seems the
clear contrary. For first we may observe, the King's Bench in England
absolutely disclaiming any Cognizance of what had passed in the Parliament of
Ireland. And next we may observe, That nothing at all was done therein upon the
Appeal to the Parliament of England: Certainly if the Parliament of England had
thought themselves to have a Right to Enquire into this Matter, they had so
done, one way or the other, and not left the Matter Undetermined

It has ever been acknowledged Argument from Acts of Succession and Recognition
passed in Ireland.
that the Kingdom of Ireland is inseparably annexed to the Imperial Crown of
England. The Obligation that our Legislature lies under by Poyning's Act, 10 H.
7. c. 4. makes this Tie between the two Kingdoms indissoluble. And we must ever
own it our Happiness to be thus Annexed to England: And that the Kings and
Queens of England are by undoubted Right, ipso facto Kings and Queens of
Ireland. And from hence we may reasonably conclude, that if any Acts of
Parliament made in England, should be of force in Ireland, before they are
Received there in Parliament, they should be more especially such Acts as
relate to the Succession and Settlement of the Crown, and Recognition of the
Kings Title thereto, and the Power and Jurisdiction of the King. And yet we
find in the Irish Statutes, 28 Hen. VIII. c. 2. An Act for the Succession of
the King and Queen Ann; and another, Chap. 5. declaring the King to be Supreme
Head of the Church of Ireland; both which Acts had formerly passed in the
Parliament of England So likewise we find amongst the Irish Statutes Acts of
Recognition of the Kings Title to Ireland, in the Reigns of Henry the Eighth,
Queen Elizabeth, King James, King Charles the Second, King William and Queen
Mary. By which it appears that Ireland, though Annexed to the Crown of England,
has always been looked upon to be a Kingdom Complete within it self, and to
have all Jurisdiction to an Absolute Kingdom belonging, and Subordinate to no
Legislative Authority on Earth. Though, it is to be Noted these English Acts
relating to the Succession, and Recognition of the Kings Title, do particularly
Name Ireland.

As the Civil State of Ireland is Ireland's State Ecclesiastical Independent.
thus Absolute within it self, so likewise is our State Ecclesiastical: This is
manifest by the Canons and Constitutions, and even by the Articles of the
Church of Ireland which differ in some things from those of the Church of
England And in all the Charters and Grant of Liberties and Immunities to
Ireland, we still find this, That Holy Church shall be Free, etc. I would fain
know what is meant here by the word Free: Certainly if our Church be Free and
Absolute within it self, our State must be so likewise; for how our Civil and
Ecclesiastical Government is now interwoven, every body knows. But I will not
enlarge on this head, it suffices only to hint it; I shall detain my self to
our Civil Government.

Another Argument against the Argument from a Record in Reyley.
Parliament of England's Jurisdiction over Ireland, I take from a Record in
Reyley's Placita Parliamentaria, page 569. to this effect: 14 Ed. 2. Par. 2.
Memb* 21 Int.
In the 14th of Edward the Second, the King sent his Letters Patents to the
Lord Justice of Ireland, leting him know, That he had been moved by his
Parliament at Westminster, that he would give Order that the Irish Natives of
Ireland, might enjoy the Laws of England concerning Life and Member, in as
large and ample manner as the English of Ireland enjoyed the same. This
therefore the King gives in Commandment, and orders accordingly, by these his
Letters Patents. From hence, I say, we may gather, That the Parliament of
England did not then take upon them to have any Jurisdiction in Ireland, (for
then they would have made a Law for Ireland to this Effect) but instead
thereof, they Apply to the King, that he would interpose his Commands, and give
Directions that this great Branch of the Common Law of England should be put in
Execution in Ireland indifferently to all the Kings Subjects there, pursuant to
the Original Compact made with them on their first Submission to the Crown of
England.

Let us now consider the great Objection drawn from a Writ of Error.
Objection drawn from a Writ of Error's lying from the Kings Bench of England,
on a Judgment given in the Kings Bench in Ireland; which proves (as it is
insisted on) that there is a Subordination of Ireland to England; and that if
an Inferior Court of Judicature in England, can thus take cognizance of, and
overruled the Proceedings in the like Court of Ireland; it will follow, that
the Supreme Court of Parliament in England may do the same, in relation to the
Proceedings of the Court of Parliament in Ireland.

It must be confessed that this has been the constant Practice; and it seems to
be the great thing that induced my Lord Cook to believe that an Act of
Parliament in England, and mentioning or Including Ireland, should Bind here.
The Subordination of Ireland to England, he seems to infer from the
Subordination of the Kings Bench of Ireland, to the Kings Bench of England. But
to this I answer:

1. That it is the Opinion of several Learned in the Laws of Ireland, That this
Removal of a Judgment from the Kings Bench of Ireland, by Writ of Error, into
the Kings Bench of England, is founded on an Act of Parliament in Ireland,
which is lost amongst a great number of other Acts, which we want for the space
of 130 years at one time, and of 120 at another time, as we have noted before,
page 65. But it being only a General Tradition, that there was such an Act of
our Parliament, we only offer it as a Surmise, the Statute it self does not
appear.

2. Where a Judgment in Ireland is Removed, to be Reversed in England, the
Judges in England ought, and always do judge, according to the Laws and Customs
of Ireland, and not according to the Laws and Customs of England, any otherwise
than as these may be of Force in Ireland; but if in any thing the two Laws
differ, the Law of Ireland must prevail, and guide their Judgment. And
therefore in the Case of one Kelly, Removed to the Kings Bench in England, in
the beginning of King Charles the First, one Error was assigned that the
Praecipe was of Woods and Underwoods, which is a manifest Error, if brought in
England; but the Judges finding the Use to be Otherwise in Ireland, judged it
No Error. So in Crook, Charles, fol. 511. Mulcarry verse. Eyres. Error was
assigned for that the Declaration was of one hundred Acres of Bogg, which is a
word not known in England; but 'twas said, It was well enough understood in
Ireland, and so adjudged No Error.

From whence, I conceive, it is manifest, that the Jurisdiction of the Kings
Bench in England, over a Judgment in the Kings Bench of Ireland, does not
proceed from any Subordination of one Kingdom to the other; but from some other
Reason, which we shall endeavor to make out.

3. We have before observed, That in the Reign of K. Henry the Third, Gerald
Fitz-Maurice, Lord Justice of Ireland, sent four Knights to know what was held
for Law in England in the Case of Coparceners. The Occasion of which Message
(as before we have noted out of the Kings Rescript) was, because the Kings
Justice of Ireland was ignorant what the Law was. We may reasonably imagine
that there were many Messages of this kind; for in the Infancy of the English
Government, it may well be supposed, that the Judges in Ireland were not so
deeply versed in the Laws of England: This occasioned Messages to England,
Before Judgment given in Ireland, to be informed of the Law. And After Decrees
made, Persons who thought themselves aggrieved by Erroneous Judgments, applied
themselves to the King in England for Redress. Thus it must be, that Writs of
Error (unless they had their Sanction in Parliament) became in use. Complaints
to the King by those that thought themselves injured, increased; and at last
grew into Custom, and obtained the Force of Law.

Perhaps it may be Objected, That if the Judges of the Kings Bench in England
ought to Regulate their Judgment by the Customs of Ireland, and not of England,
it will follow, that this Original which we assign of Writs of Error to
England, is not right.

I Answer, That this may be the Primary Original, and yet consist well enough
with what we have before laid down: For though the Common Law of England was to
be the Common Law of Ireland, and Ireland at the beginning of its English
Government might frequently send into England to be informed about it; yet this
does not hinder, but Ireland, in a long Process of Time, may have some smaller
Customs and Laws of its own, gradually but insensibly crept into Practice, that
may in some measure differ from the Customs and Practice of England; and where
there is any such, the Judges of England must regulate their Sentence
accordingly, though the first Rise of Writs of Error to England, may be as we
have here suggested. In like manner, where the Statute Law of Ireland differs
from that of England, the Judges of England will regulate their Judgments by
the Statute Law of Ireland: This is the constant Practice, and notoriously
known in Westminster Hall: From which it appears, that removing a Judgment from
the Kings Bench of Ireland, to the Kings Bench of England, is but an Appeal to
the King in his Bench of England, for his Sense, Judgment, or Exposition of
the Laws of Ireland. But of this more hereafter.

4. When a Writ of Error is Returned into the Kings Bench of England, Suit is
made to the King only; The Matter lies altogether before Him; and the Party
complaining applies to No Part of the Political Government of England for
Redress, but to the King of Ireland only, who is in England: That the King only
is sued to, our Law Books make Plain. This Court is called Curia Domini Regis,
and Aula Regia, because the King used to sit there in Person, as Lambard tells
us; And every Cause brought there, is said to be coram Domino Rege, even at
this very day, Cook 4 Inst. p. 72. Therefore if a Writ be returnable coram
nobis ubicunque fuerimus, it is to be Returned to the Kings Bench. But if it be
Returnable coram Iusticiariis nostris apud Westminster. it is to be Returned into the
Common Pleas. This Court (as Glavnil and other Ancients tells us) used to
Travel with the King, wherever he went. And Fleta, in describing this Court,
says, Habet Rex Curiam suam and Iusticiarios suos, coram quibus, and non alibi
nisi coram semet ipso, etc. falsa Iudicia and Errores revertuntur and
Corriguntur. The King then (as Britton says) having Supreme Jurisdiction in his
Realm, to judge in all Causes whatsoever; therefore it is, that Erroneous
Judgments were brought to him out of Ireland. But this does not argue that
Ireland is therefore Subordinate to England; for the People of Ireland are the
Subjects of the King to whom they Appeal. And it is not from the Country where
the Court is held, but from the Presence and Authority of the King (to whom the
People of Ireland have as good a Title as the People of England) that the
Praeeminence of the Jurisdiction does flow, And I question not, but in former
times, when these Courts were first Erected, and when the King Exerted a
greater Power in Judicature than he does now, and he used to sit in his own
Court, that if he had Traveled into Ireland, and the Court had followed him
thither; Erroncous Judgments might have been removed from England before him
into his Court in Ireland; for so certainly it must be, since the Court
Traveled with the King. From hence it appears, that all the Jurisdiction, that
the Kings Bench in England, has over the Kings Bench in Ireland, arises only
from the Kings Presence in the former. And the same may be said of the Chancery
in England, if it will assume any Power to Control the Chancery in Ireland;
because (as Lambard says, p. 69, 70.) The Chancery did follow the King, as the
Kings Bench did; and that, as he tells us out of the Lord Chief Justice
Scroope, the Chancery and the Kings Bench were once but one Place. But if this
be the ground of the Jurisdiction of the Kings Bench in England over the Kings
Bench in Ireland, (as I am fully persuaded it is) the Parliament in England
cannot from hence claim any Right of Jurisdiction in Ireland, because they
claim a Jurisdiction of their own; and their Court is not the Kings Court, in
that proper and strict sense that the Kings Bench is.

But granting that the Subordination of the Kings Bench in Ireland, to the
Kings ^ch in England, be rightly concluded from a Writ of Error out of the
latter, ^ying on a Judgment in the former. I see no Reason from thence to
conclude, that therefore the Parliament of Ireland is Subordinate to the
Parliament in England, unless we make any one sort of Subordination, or in any
one part of Jurisdiction, to be a Subordination in all Points, and all parts of
Jurisdiction. The Subjects of Ireland may Appeal to the King in his Bench in
England, for the Expounding of the Old common and Statute Law of Ireland; will
it therefore follow that the Parliament of England shall make New Laws to bind
the Subjects in Ireland? I see no manner of Consequence in it; unless we take
Expounding Old Laws, (or Laws already made) in the-Kings Bench, and making New
Laws in Parliament, to be one and the same thing. I believe the best Logician
in Europe will hardly make a Chain of Syllogisms, that from such Premises, will
regularly induce such a Conclusion.

To close this Point, We find that a Judgment of the Kings Bench in Ireland,
may be Removed by a Writ of Error to the Parliament in Ireland: But the
Judgment of the Parliament of Ireland was never questioned in the Parliament of
England. This Appears from the Prior of Lanthony's Case aforegoing.

I shall conclude this our Fifth Article with a memorable Passage Declaration
in the Irish Act of Faculties.
out of our Irish Statutes, which seems to strengthen what we have delivered on
the Business of a Writ of Error, as well as the chief Doctrine I drive at; and
that is 28 H. VIII. Chap. 19. The Act of Faculties. This Statute is a Recital
at large of the English Act of the 25 Hen. VIII. c. 21. In the Preamble of
which English Act it is Declared, That this Your Graces Realm Recognizing no
Superior but Your Grace, has been and yet is free from any Subjection to any
Man's Laws, but only such as have been Devised within this Realm; for the Wealth
of the same, or to such others, as by Sufferance of Your Grace and Your
Progenitors, the People of the Realm have taken at their Free Liberties by
their own Consent; and have bound themselves by long Use and Custom to the
Observance of, etc.

This Declaration, with the other Clauses of the said English Act, is verbatim
recited in the Irish Act of Faculties; and in the said Irish Act it is Enacted,
That the said English Act, and every thing and things therein contained, shall
be Established, Affirmed, Taken, Obeyed and Accepted within this Land of
Ireland as a good and perfect Law, and shall be within the said Land of the
same Force, Effect, Quality, Condition, Strength and Virtue, to all Purposes
and Intents, as it is within the Realm of England; (if so, then the said Clause
declares our Right of being bound only by Laws to which we Consent, as it does
the Right of the People of England) And that all Subjects within the said Land
of Ireland, shall enjoy the Profit and Commodity thereof, in like manner as the
Kings Subjects of the Realm of England.

I am now Arrived at our Sixth and Last Article Proposed, viz. The Farther
Reasons offered in behalf of Ireland.
Reasons and Arguments that may be be farther Offered on one side and the other
in this Debate.

I have before taken notice of the England's Title to Ireland by Purchase.
Title England pretends over us from Conquest: I have likewise enquired into
the Precedents on one side and the other, from Acts of Parliament, from Records,
and from Reports of the Learned in the Laws. There remains another Pretense or
two for this Subordination, to be Considered; and one is founded on Purchase.

It Is said, That vast Quantity of Treasure, that from time to time has been
spent by England in Reducing the Rebellions and carrying on the Wars of
Ireland, has given them a just Title at least to the Lands and Inheritances of
the Rebels, and to the absolute Disposal thereof in their Parliament; And as
particular Examples of this, we are told of the great Sums Advanced by England
for suppressing the Rebellion of the Irish Papists in 41. and Opposing the late
Rebellion since King WILLIAM's Accession to the Throne.

To this I Answer, That in a War there is all Reason imaginable that the
Estates of the Unjust Opposers should go to repair the the Damage that is done.
This I have briefly hinted before. But if we consider the Wars of Ireland, we
shall perceive they do not resemble the common Case of Wars between two Foreign
Enemies; Ours are rather Rebellions, or Intestine Commotions; that is, The
Irish Papists rising against the King and Protestants of Ireland; and then it is
plain, that if these Latter, by the Assistance of their Brethren of England,
and their Purse, do prove Victorious, the People of England ought to be fully
Repaid* But then the manner of their Payment, and in what way it shall be
Levied, ought to be left to the People of Ireland in Parliament Assembled: And
so it was after the Rebellion of 41. The Adventurers then were at vast Charges,
and there were several Acts of Parliament in England made for their
Re-imbursing, by disposing to them the Rebels Lands. But after all, it was
thought Reasonable that the Parliament of Ireland should do this in their own
way; and therefore the Acts of Settlement and Explanation, made all the former
English Acts of No Force; or at least did very much Alter them in many
Particulars, as we have Noted before. In like manner we allow that England
ought to be repaid all their Expenses in supressing this late Rebellion: All we
defire is, That, in Preservation of our own Rights and Liberties, we may do it
in our own Methods regularly in our own Parliament: And if the Re-imbursement
be all that England stands upon, what avails it whether it be done this way
or that way, so it be done? We have an Example of this in Point between England
and Holland in the Glorious Revolution under His Present Majesty: Holland in
Assisting England Expended 600000 Pounds, and the English Parliament fairly
repaid them: It would have looked oddly for Holland to have insisted on
Disposing of Lord Powis's and other Estates, by their own Laws, to re-imburse
themselves.

It Is an Ungenerous thing to villifie good Offices, I am far from doing it, but
with all possible Gratitude Acknowledge the Mighty Benefits Ireland has often
received from England, in helping to suppress the Rebellions of this Coun^ry;
To England's Charitable Assistance our Lives and Fortunes are owing: But with
all humble Submission, I desire it may be considered, whether England did not
at ^he same time propose the Prevention of their own Danger, that would
necessarily have attended our Ruin; if so, 'twas in some measure their own
Battles they fought, when they fought for Ireland; and a great part of their
Expense must be reckoned in their own Defense.

Another thing alleged against Ireland is this: If a Foreign Nation, as France
or Spain for instance, Object. Ireland prejudicial to England's Trade,
therefore to be Bound.
prove prejudicial to England, in its Trade, or any other way; England, if it
be stronger, redresses it self by Force of Arms, or Denouncing War; and why may
not England, if Ireland lies cross their Interests, restrain Ireland, and bind
it by Laws, and maintain these Laws by Force?

To this I answer: First, That it will hardly be instanced, that any Nation
ever Declared War with another, merely for over-topping them in some signal
Advantage, which otherwise, or but for their Endeavors, they might have
reaped. War only is Justifiable for Injustice done, or Violence offered, or
Rights detained. I cannot by the Law of Nations, quarrel with a Man, because
he, going before me in the Road, finds a Piece of Gold, which possibly, if he
had not taken it up, I might have light upon and gotten. It Is true, we often
see Wars commenced on this Account underhand, and on Emulation in Trade and
Riches; but then this is never made the Open Pretense, some other Color it
must receive, or else it would not look fair; which shows plainly, that this
Pretense of being Prejudicial, or of reaping Advantages which otherwise you
might partake of, is not Justifiable in it self. But granting that it were a
good Justification of a War with a Foreign Nation, it will make nothing in the
Case between England and Ireland; for if it did, why does it not operate in the
same manner between England and Scotland, and consequently in like manner draw
after it England's binding Scotland by their Laws at Westminster: We are all
the same Kings Subjects, the Children of one Common Parent; and though we may
have our Distinct Rights and Inheritances absolutely within our selves; yet we
ought not, when these do chance a little to interfere to the prejudice of one
or the other side, immediately to treat one another as Enemies; fair Amicable
Propositions should be proposed, and when these are not hearkened to, then it is
time enough to be at Enmity, and use Force.

The last thing I shall take Notice Object. Ireland a Colony.
of, that some raise against us, is, That Ireland is to be looked upon only as
a Colony from England: And therefore as the Roman Colonies were subject to, and
bound by, the Laws made by the Senate at Rome; so ought Ireland by those made
by the Great Council at Westminster. Of all the Objections raised against us, I
take this to be the most Extravagant; it seems not to have the least Foundation
or Color from Reason or Record: Does it not manifestly appear by the
Constitution of Ireland, that it is a Complete Kingdom within it self? Do not
the Kings of England bear the Style of Ireland amongst the rest of their
Kingdoms? Is this Agreeable to the nature of a Colony? Do they use the Title of
Kings of Virginia, New England, or Maryland? Was not Ireland given by Henry
the Second in a Parliament at Oxford to his Son John, and made thereby an
Absolute Kingdom, separate and wholly Independent on England, till they both
came United again in him, after the Death of his Brother Richard without Issue?
Have not multitudes of Acts of Parliament both in England and Ireland, declared
Ireland a Complete Kingdom? Is not Ireland styled in them All, the Kingdom, or
Realm of Ireland? Do these Names agree to a Colony? Have we not a Parliament,
and Courts of Judicature? Do these things agree with a Colony? This on all
hands involves so many Absurdities, that I think it deserves nothing more of
our Consideration.

These being the only remaining Arguments that are sometimes mentioned Against
us, I now proceed to offer what I humbly conceive Demonstrates the Justice of
our Cause.

And herein I must beg the Reader's Patience, if now and then I am forced
lightly to touch upon some Particulars foregoing. I shall Endeavor all I can
to avoid prolix Repetitions; but my Subject requires that sometimes I just
mention, or refer to, several Notes before delivered.

First therefore, I say, That Ireland should be Bound by Acts of Parliament
made in England, is against Reason, and the Common Rights of all Mankind.

All Men are by Nature in a state Against the Rights of Mankind.
of Equality, in respect of Jurisdiction or Dominion: This I take to be a
Principle in it self so evident, that it stands in need of little Proof. It Is
not to be conceived, that Creatures of the same Species and Rank, promiscuously
born to all the same Advantages of Nature, and the use of the same Faculties,
should be Subordinate and Subject one to another; These to this or that of the
same Kind. On this Equality in Nature is founded that Right which all Men
claim, of being free from all Subjection to Positive Laws, till by their own
Consent they give up their Freedom, by entering into Civil Societies for the
common Benefit of all the Members thereof. And on this Consent Consent only
gives Law force.
depends the Obligation of all Humane Laws; insomuch that without it, by the
Unanimous Opinion of all Iurists, no Sanctions are of any Force. For this let
us Appeal, amongst many, only to the Judicious Mr. Hooker's Eccles. Polity,
Book 1. Sec. 10. Land. Ed it. 1676. Thus He.

Howbeit, Laws do not take their Constraining force from the Quality of such as
Devise them, but from that Power which does give them the strength of Laws.
That which we spoke before, concerning the Power of Government, must here be
applied to the Power of making Laws whereby to Govern, which Power God has
over All; and by the Natural Law, whereunto he has made all subject, the
Lawful Power of making Laws, to command whole Politic Societies of Men,
belongs so properly unto the same entire Societies, that for any Prince or
Potentate, of what kind soever upon Earth, to exercise the same of himself, and
not either by express Commission immediately and personally received from God,
or else by Authority derived at the first from their Consent, upon whose
Persons they impose Laws, it is no better than mere Tyranny. Laws they are not
therefore, which Public Approbation has not made so: But Approbation not only
they Give, who Personally declare their Assent by Voice, Sign, or Act; but also
when others do it in their Names, by Right Originally, at the least, derived
from them: As in Parliaments, Councils, etc.

Again, Since Men Naturally have no full and perfect Power to command whole
Politic Multitudes of Men; therefore utterly without our Consent, we could in
such sort be at no Man's Commandment living. And to be commanded we do consent,
when that Society whereof we are part, has at any time before consented,
without revoking the same after by the like Universal Agreement. Wherefore as
any Man's Deed past is good, as long as himself continues, so the Act of a
Public Society of Men, done five hundred years sithence, stands as theirs
who presently are of the same Societies, because Corporations are Immortal; we
were then alive in our Predecessors, and they in their Successors do still
live. Laws therefore Humane of what kind soever, are available by Consent, etc.

And again, But what matter the Law of Nations does contain, I omit to search;
the strength and virtue of that Law is such, that no particular Nation can
lawfully prejudice the same by any their several Laws and Ordinances, more then
a Man by his Private Resolutions the Law of the whole Commonwealth or State
wherein he lives; for as Civil Law being the Act of a whole Body Politic,
does therefore overruled each Civil part of the same Body; so there is no
Reason that any one Commonwealth of it self, should to the Prejudice of
another, annihilate that whereupon the whole World has Agreed.

To the same purpose may we find the Universal Agreement of all Civilians,
Grotius, Puffendorf, Lock's Treat. Government, etc.

No one or more Men, can by Nature challenge any Right, Liberty or Freedom, or
any Ease in his Property, Estate or Conscience, which all other Men have not an
Equally Just Claim to. Is England a Free People? So ought France to be. Is
Poland so? Turkey likewise, and all the Eastern Dominions, ought to be so: And
the same runs throughout the whole Race of Mankind.

Secondly, It Is against the Common Against the Common Law of England.
Laws of England, which are of Force both in England and Ireland, by the
Original Compact before hinted. It is Declared by both Houses of the Parliament
of England, 1 Iac. cap. 1. That in the High Court of Parliament, all the whole
Body of the Realm, and every particular Member thereof, either in Person, or by
Representation (upon their own Free Elections) are by the Laws of this Realm
deemed to be Personally present. Is this then the common Law of England, and
the Birthright of every Freeborn English Subject? And shall we of this Kingdom
be denied it, by having Laws imposed on us, where we are neither Personally,
nor Representatively present? My Lord Cook in his 4th Inst. cap. 1. says,
That all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and all the Commons of the whole
Realm, ought ex Debito Justiciae to be Summoned to Parliament, and none of them
ought to be Omitted. Hence it is called Generale Concilium in the Stat. of
Westminst. 1. and Commune Concilium, because it is to comprehend all Persons
and Estates in the whole Kingdom. And this is the very Reason given in the Case
of the Merchants of Waterford foregoing, why Statutes made in England, should
not bind them in Ireland, Quia non habent Milites hic in Parliamento; Because
they have no Representatives in the Parliament of England. My Lord Hobbard in
the Case of Savage and Day, pronounced it for Law, That whatever is against
Natural Equity and Reason, is against Law; Nay, if an Act of Parliament were
made against Natural Equity and Reason, that Act was void. Whether it be not
against Equity and Reason, that a Kingdom regulated within it self, and having
its own Parliament, should be Bound without their Consent, by the Parliament of
another Kingdom, I leave the Reader to consider. My Lord Cook likewise in the
first Part of his Institutes, fol. 97. b. says, Nihil quod est contra Rationem
est Licitum. And in the old Modus Tenendi Parliamenta of England, said to be
writ about Edward the Confessor's time, and to have been Confirmed and Approved
by William the Conqueror: It is expressly declared, That all the Lords Spiritual
and Temporal, and the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses ought to be summoned to
Parliament. The very same is in the Modus sent into Ireland by Henry the 2d.
And in King John's Great Charter dated 17. Iohannis, it is granted in these
words, Et ad habend. Commune Concilium Regni de Auxiliis and Scutagiis
Assidendis, Submoneri faciemus Ar^hiepiscopos, Episcopos, Abbates, Comites, and
Majores Barons, Regni Sigillatim per Literas Nostras, and faciemus submoneri
in generali per Vicecomites omnes alios, etc. Math. Paris ad An. 17. Iohann.
All are to be Summoned to Parliament, the Nobility by special Writts; the
Commons by general Writts to the Sheriffs. And is this the Common Law of
England? Is this part of those Liberae Consuetudines, that were contained in
the Great Charter of the Liberties of the People of England; And were so
solemnly granted by Henry II. King John, and Henry the 3d, to the People of
Ireland, that they should Enjoy and be Governd by; and unto which they were
Sworn to be Obedient; And shall they be of Force only in England, and not in
Ireland? Shall Ireland Receive these Charters of Liberties, and be no Partakers
of the Freedoms therein contained? Or do these words signify in England one
thing, and in Ireland no such thing? This is so repugnant to all Natural Reason
and Equity, that I hope no Rational Man will Contest it: I am sure if it be so,
there is an end of all Speech amongst Men; All Compacts, Agreements, and
Societies, are to no purpose.

3. It is against the Statute Laws Against the Statute Law both of England and
Ireland.
both of England, and Ireland: this has been pretty fully disuss'd before;
however I shall here again take notice, That See before page 65.
in the 10. of Henry the 4th it was Enacted in Ireland, that Statutes made in
England should not be of Force in Ireland, unless they were Allowed and
Published by the Parliament of Ireland. And the like Statute was made the 29th
of Henry the 6th. And in the 10th Year of Henry the 7th. Chap. 23 Irish
Statutes, The Parliame^ which was held at Drogheda, before Sir Christopher
Preston, Deputy to Iaspar Duke of Bedford, Lieut^ nant of Ireland, was declared
Void for this Reason amongst others That there was no General Summons of the
said Parliament to all the Shires, but only to Four. And if Acts of Parliament
made in Irelan^ shall not Bind that People, because some Counties were omitted:
how much less shall either their Persons or Estates be Bound by those Acts made
in England, whereat no one County, or Person of that Kingdom is present? In the
Pultons Col. Eng. Stats. Edit. 1670. page 63.
25t^ of Edward the 1st. Cap. 6. It was Enacted by the Parliament of England in
these Words, Moreover from henceforth we shall take no manner of Aid, Taxes, or
Prizes, but by the Common Assent of the Realm. ibid. page. 75.
And again in the Statute of Liber ties, by the same King, Cap. 1. D^ Tallag.
non Concedend. it is Enacted in these Words. No Tallage or Aid shall be Taken
or Levied by Us, or Our Heirs, in Our Realm, without the Good Will and Assent
of Archbishops, Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and other Freemen
of the Land. The like Liberties are specially Confirmed to the Clergy, ibid.
page. 113.
the 14th of Edward the 3d. And were these Statutes, and all other Statutes and
Acts of the Parliament of England Ratified, Confirmed, and Adjudged by several
Parliaments of Ireland to be of Force within this Realm: And shall the People
of Ireland receive no Benefit by those Acts? Are those Statutes of Force in
England only; And can they add no Immunity or Privilege to the Kingdom of
Ireland, when they are received there? Can the King and Parliament make Acts in
England to Bind his Subjects of Ireland without their Consent; And can he make
no Acts in Ireland with their Consent, whereby they may receive any Privilege
or Immunity? This were to make the Parliaments of Ireland wholly Illusory, and
of no Effect. If this be Reasonable Doctrine, To what end was Poyning's Law in
Ireland, 10 H. 7. c. 22
that makes all the Statutes of England before that, in Force in this Kingdom?
This might as well have been done, and again undone, when they please, by a
single Act of the English*Parliament. But let us not make thus light of
Constitutions of Kingdoms, it is Dangerous to those who do it, it is Grievous to
those that suffer it.

Moreover, Had the King or his Council of England, in the 10th year of Hen.
VII. in the least dreamt of this Doctrine, to what end was all that strict
Provision made by Poyning's Act, Irish Stat. cap. 4. That no Act of Parliament
should pass in Ireland, before it was first Certified by the Chief Governor
and Privy Council here, under the Broad Seal of this Kingdom, to the King and
his Privy Council in England, and received their Approbation, and by them be
remitted hither under the Broad Seal of England, here to be passed into a Law?
The design of this Act, seems to be the Prevention of any thing passing in the
Parliament of Ireland Surreptitiously, to the Prejudice of the King, or the
English Interest of Ireland. But this was a needless Caution, if the King, and
Parliament of England, had Power at any time to revoke or annul any such
Proceedings. Upon this Act of Poynings, many and various Acts have passed in
Ireland, relating to the Explanation, Suspension, or farther Corroboration
thereof, in diverse Parliaments, both in Henry the Eighth's, Phil. and Mary's,
and Q. Eliz. Reigns; for which see the Irish Statutes. 28 H 8. c. 4. 28 H. 8.
c. 20. 3 and 4 Ph. and M. c. 4. 11 Eliz. Ses. 2. c. 1. 11 Eliz. Ses. 3. c. 8.
All which show that this Doctrine was hardly so much as Surmised in those
Days, however we come to have it raised in these Latter Times.

Fourthly, It Is against several Against several Concessions made to Ireland.
Charters of Liberties Granted unto the Kingdom of Ireland: This likewise is
clearly made out by what foregoes. I shall only add in this place, That in the
Patent-Roll of the 17 Rich. 2. m. 34. de Confirmatione, There is a Confirmation
of several Liberties and Immunities granted unto the Kingdom and People of
Ireland by Edw. III. The Patent is somewhat long, but so much as concerns this
Particular, I shall render verbatim, as I have it Transcribed from the Roll by
Sir William Do^vile, Attorney General in Ireland during the whole Reign of King
Charles II. Rex omnibus, etc. Salutem: Inspeximus Literas Patentes Domini
Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae, Avi nostri fact. in haec verba: Edwardus Dei Gra.
Rex Angliae and Franciae, and Dominus Hiberniae, Archiepiscopis, Episcopis,
Abbatibus, Prioribus, Ministris nostris tam Majoribus quam Minoribus, and
quibuscunque aliis de Terra nostra Hiberniae fidelibus nostris ad quos
Praesentes Literae pervenerint, Salutem: Quia, etc. Nos haec quae sequuntur
Ordinanda Duximus and firmiter observanda, etc. Imprimis, vizt. Volumus and
Praecipimus quod Sancta Hibernicana Ecclesia suas Libertates and Liberas
Consuetudines illesas habeat, and eis Libere gaudeat and Utatur. Item volumus
and praecipimus quod nostra and ipsius Terrae Negotia presertim Majora and
Ardua in Consiliis per Peritos Consiliaros nostros ac Praelatos and Magnates
and quosdam de Discretioribus and Probioribus Hominibus de partibus vicinis ubi
ipsa Concilia teneri Contigerit propter hoc evocandos, in Parliamentis vero per
ipsos Conciliaros nostros ac Praelatos and Proceres aliosque de terra predicta
prout Mos Exegit secundum Iusticiam Legem Consuetudinem and Rationem tractentur
deducantur and fideliter timore favore odio aut praetio post positis
discutiantur ac etiam terminentur, etc. In Cujus Rei Testimonium has Literas
nostras fieri fecimus Patentes Test meipso Apud Westminst. 25 die October. Anno
Regni nostris Angliae 31, Regni vero Franciae 18. Nos autem Ordinationes
Voluntates and Praecepta Praedicta ac omnia alia and singula in Litteris
praedictis Contenta Rata Habentes and Grata Ea pro nobis and Haeredibus nostris
quantum in nobis est Acceptamus, Approbamus, Ratificamus, and Confirmamus prout
Literae praedictae rationabiliter testanter. In Cujus, etc. Test. Reg. apud
Westminst. 26 die Iunii.

Fifthly, It is inconsistent with Inconsistent with the Royalties of a Kingdom.
the Royalties and Praeeminence of a Separate and Distinct Kingdom. That we are
thus a Distinct Kingdom, has been clearly made out before. It Is plain, the
Nobility of Ireland are an Order of Peers clearly Distinct from the Peerage of
England, the Privileges of the one, extend not into the other Kingdom; a Lord
of Ireland may be Arrested by his Body in England; and so may a Lord of England
in Ireland, whilst their Persons remain Sacred in their respective Kingdoms: A
Voyage Royal may be made into Ireland, as the Year-Book, 11 Hen. 4. 17. fol. 7.
and Lord Cook tells us; and King John in the 12th year of his Reign of England,
made a Voyage Royal into Ireland; and all his Tenants in Chief, which did not
attend him in that Voyage, did pay him Escuage, at the Rate of Two Marks for
every Knights Fee; which was imposed super Praelatis and Baronibus pro Passagio
Regis in Hibernia, as appears by the Pipe-Roll, Scutag* 12 Iohannis Regis in
Scaccario Angl. Which shows that we are a Complete Kingdom within our selves,
and not little better than a Province, as some are so Extravagant as to Assert;
none of the Properties of a Roman Province agreeing in the least with our
Constitution. It Is Resolved in Sir Richard Pembrough's Cafe in the 44th of Edw.
III. That Sir Richard might lawfully refuse the King, to serve him as his
Deputy in Ireland, and that the King could not Compel him thereto, for that
were to Banish him into another Kingdom, which is against Magna Charta, Chap.
29. Nay, even tho Sir Richard had great Tenures from the King, pro servitio
Impenso and Impendendo, for that was said must be understood within the Realm
of England, Cooks 2d Inst. page 47. And in Pilkington's Case aforementioned,
Fortescue declared, That the Land of Ireland is and at all times has been a
Dominion Separate and Divided from England. How then can the Realms of England
and Ireland, being Distinct Kingdoms and Separate Dominions, be imagined to
have any Superiority or Jurisdiction the one over the other. It Is absurd to
fancy that Kingdoms are Separate and Distinct merely from the Geographical
Distinction of Territories. Kingdoms become Distinct by Distinct Jurisdictions,
and Authorities Legislative and Executive; and as Rex est qui Regem non habet,
so Regnum est quod alio non Subjicitur Regno: A Kingdom can have no Supreme;
it is in it self Supreme within it self, and must have all Jurisdictions,
Authorities and Praeeminencies to the Royal State of a Kingdom belonging, or
else it is none: And that Ireland has all these, is declared in the Irish Stat.
33 Hen. VIII. c. 1. The chief of these most certainly is, the Power of Making
and Abrogating its own Laws, and being bound only by such to which the
Community have given their Consent.

Sixthly, It is against the Kings Against the Kings Prerogative.
Prerogative, that the Parliament of England should have any Coordinate Power
with Him, to introduce New Laws, or Repeal Old Laws Established in Ireland. By
the Constitution of Ireland under Poyning's Act, the King's Prerogative in the
Legislature is advanced to a much higher Pitch than ever was Challenged by the
Kings in England, and the Parliament of Ireland stands almost on the same
bottom as the King does in England; I say almost on the same Bottom, for the
Irish Parliament have not only a Negative Vote (as the King has in England) to
whatever Laws the King and his Privy Councils of both or either Kingdom, shall
lay before them; but have also a Liberty of Proposing to the King and his Privy
Council here, such Laws as the Parliament of Ireland think expedient to be
passed. Which Laws being thus Proposed to the King, and put into form, and
Transmitted to the Parliament here, according to Poyning's Act, must be Passed
or Rejected in the very Words, even to a Tittle, as they are said before our
Parliament, we cannot alter the least Iota. If therefore the Legislature of
Ireland stand on this Foot, in relation to the King, and to the Parliament of
Ireland; and the Parliament of England do Remove it from this Bottom, and
Assume it to themselves, where the Kings Prerogative is much Narrower, and as
it were Reversed, (for there the King has only a Negative Vote) I humbly
conceive it is an Incroachment on the Kings Prerogative: But this I am sure, the
Parliament of England will be always very Tender of, and His Majesty will be
very loath to have such a Precious Jewel of his Crown handled rufly. The
Happiness of our Constitutions depending on a Right Temperament between the
Kings and the Peoples Rights.

Seventhly, It is against the Practice Against the Practice of former Ages.
of all former Ages. Wherein can it appear, that any Statute made in England,
was at any time since the Reign of Henry the Third, allowed and put in practice
in the Realm of Ireland, without the Authority of the Parliament of Ireland. Is
it not manifest by what foregoes, that from the Twentieth of King Henry the
Third, to the Thirteenth of Edward the Second, and from thence to the
Eighteenth of Henry the Sixth, and from thence, to the Thirty-Second of Henry
the Sixth, and from thence, to the Eighth of Edward the Fourth, and from
thence, to the Tenth of Henry the seventh, there was special care taken to
Introduce the Statutes of England, (such of them as were necessary or
convenient for this Kingdom) by degrees, and always with Allowance, and Consent
of the Parliament and People of Ireland. And since the General Allowance, of
all the English Acts and Statutes in the Tenth of Henry the Seventh, there have
several Acts of Parliament, which were made in England in the Reigns of all the
Kings from that Time, Successively to this very Day, been particularly Received
by Parliament in Ireland; and so they become of force here, and not by reason
of any General Comprehensive words, as some Men have lately fancied. For if by
General Comprehensive Words, the Kingdom of Ireland could be bound by the Acts
of Parliament of England, what needed all the former Receptions in the
Parliament of Ireland, or what use will there be of the Parliament of Ireland
at any time? If the Religion, Lives, Liberties, Fortunes, and Estates of the
Clergy, Nobility, and Gentry of Ireland, may be disposed of, without their
Privity and Consent, what Benefit have they of any Laws, Liberties, or
Privileges granted unto them by the Crown of England? I am loath to give their
Condition an hard Name; but I have no other Notion of Slavery; but being Bound
by a Law to which I do not Consent.

Eighthly, It Is against several Against the Resolution of Judges.
Resolutions of the Learned Judges, of former times in the very Point in
Question. This is manifest from what foregoes in the Case of the Merchants of
Waterford, Pilkington's Case, Prior of Lanthony's Case, etc. But I shall not
here enlarge farther thereon.

Ninthly, The Obligation of all Laws having the same Foundation, Destroys
Property.
if One Law may be Imposed without Consent, any Other Law whatever, may be
Imposed on us Without our Consent. This will naturally introduce Taxing us
without our Consent; and this as necessarily destroys our Property. I have no
other Notion of Property, but a Power of Disposing my Good as I please, and not
as another shall Command: Whatever another may Rightfully take from me without
my Consent, I have certainly no Property in. To Tax me without Consent, is
little better, if at all, than downright Robbing me* I am sure the Great
Patriots of Liberty and Property, the Free Peo Ple of England, cannot think of
such a thing, but with Abhorrence.

Lastly, The People of Ireland Greates Confusion.
are left by this Doctrine in the Greatest Confusion and Uncertainty
Imaginable. We are certainly bound to Obey the Supreme Authority over us; and
yet hereby we are not permitted to know Who or What the same is; whether the
Parliament of England, or that of Ireland, or Both; And in what Cases the One,
and in what the Other: Which Uncertainty is or may be made a Pretense at any
time for Disobedience. It is not impossible but the Different Legislatures we
are subject to, may Enact Different, or Contrary Sanctions: Which of these must
we obey?

To conclude all, I think it highly Inconvenient to England to Assume this
Power.
Inconvenient for England to Assume this Authority over the Kingdom of Ireland:
I believe there will need no great Arguments to convince the Wise Assembly of
English Senators, how inconvenient it may be to England, to do that which may
make the Lords and People of Ireland think that they are not Well Used, and may
drive them into Discontent. The Laws and Liberties of England were granted
above five hundred years ago to the People of Ireland, upon their Submissions
to the Crown of England, with a Design to make them Easy to England, and to
keep them in the Allegiance of the King of England. How Consistent it may be
with True Policy, to do that which the People of Ireland may think is an
Invasion of their Rights and Liberties, I do most humbly submit to the
Parliament of England to Consider. They are Men of Great Wisdom, Honor, and
Justice: and know how to prevent all future Inconveniences. We have heard
Great Outcries, and deservedly, on Breaking the Edict of Nantes, and other
Stipulations; How far the Breaking our Constitution, which has been of Five
Hundred years standing, exceeds that, I leave the World to judge. It may
perhaps be urged, That it is convenient for the State of England, that the
Supreme Council thereof should make their Jurisdiction as Large as they can.
But with Submission, I conceive that if this Assumed Power be not Just, it
cannot be convenient for the State. What Cicero says in his Offices, Nihil est
Utile, nisi idem sit Honestum, is most certainly true. Nor do I think, that
it is any wise necessary to the Good of England to Assert this High Jurisdiction
over Ireland. For since the Statutes of this Kingdom are made with such
Caution, and in such Form, as is prescribed by Poyning's Act 10 H. 7. and by
the 3d and 4th of Phil. and Mar. and whilst Ireland is in English hands, I do
not see how it is possible for the Parliament of Ireland to do any thing that
can be in the least prejudicial to England. But on the other hand, If England
assume a Jurisdiction over Ireland, whereby they think their Rights and
Liberties are taken away; That their Parliaments are rendered merely nugatory,
and that their Lives and Fortunes Depend on the Will of a Legislature wherein
they are not Parties; there may be ill Consequences of this. Advancing the
Power of the Parliament of England, by breaking the Rights of another, may in
time have ill Effects.

The Rights of Parliament should be preserved Sacred and Inviolable, wherever
they are found. This kind of Government, once so Universal all over Europe, is
now almost Vanished* from amongst the Nations thereof. Our Kings Dominions are
the only Supporters of this noble Gothic Constitution, save only what little
remains may be found thereof in Poland. We should not therefore make so light
of that sort of Legislature, and as it were Abolish it in One Kingdom of the
Three, wherein it appears; but rather Cherish and Encourage it wherever we meet
it.

FINIS.

