DON JUAN LAMBERTO: Or, a Comical HISTORY OF THE Late Times.

The First Part.

By MONTELION Knight of the Oracle, etc.

The second Edition Corrected.

LONDON: Printed by I. Brudenell for Henry Marsh at the Princes Arms in
Chancery Lane near Fleetstreet. 1661.



Don JUAN LAMBERTO: OR, A COMICAL HISTORY OF The late Times.
CHAP. 1. How Cromwell Sultan of Britain dyed, and what befell his Son the Meek
Knight.
NOw had Cromwell the dread Sultan of Britain through the importunity of death,
with much unwillingness left this World, and his Son Ricardus, surnamed for his
great valor the Meek Knight, reigned in his stead: When lo fortune having now
a mind to eat sauce with his meat, resolves to gather this great Mushrome, and
lay him in pickle. There were at that time in England many good Knights who had
been greatly despised and evilly entreated by the Sultan in his life time, who
sought all advantages to reck their most ^implacable malice on his Son the Meek
Knight who was placed on the Throne in the room of his Father: The chief of
these was Sir Lambert, the Knight of the Golden Tulep; One of an eager and
revengeful spirit; and beside that very ambitious, so that he not only sought
to be revenged on the Meek Knight for the injuries he had received from his
Father, but to make himself chief Soldon also; however he was very slye and
close, and would by no means discover himself until that by his fair carriage
he had won to his side made many of the chief Soldans Knights, who had him in
great honor and esteem, for that they took him to be a right cunning and
valorous Champion.

CHAP. II. Of the Birth of Sir Vane, Knight of the most mystical Allegories.
WHen nature by true consanguinity had created him in his Mothers Womb, she
dreamed to be conceived of a Firebrand, that should set on fire her Mansion
House, which dream she long concealed and kept secret until her painful burden
was grown so heavy that she was scarce able to endure it: so finding at length
an opportunity to reveal it to her husband, she revealed her dream in this
manner, My most honorable Lord, you know that I am your true and lawful Wife,
yet never was in in hope of Child till now, or that by me your name should
survive: Therefore I conjure you by the pleasures of your youth, and the dear
and natural love you bear unto the Infant conceived in my Womb, that either by
art, wisodome, or some other inspiration you calculate upon my trouble; some
dreams, and tell me what they are; For night by night no sooner does sweet
sleep seize upon my senses, but I dream that I am conceived of a dreadful
firebrand, the which shall set on fire our Mansion House: To which her husband
answered in this manner, My most dear and beloved Lady, what art or learning can
perform with all convenient speed shall he accomplished; for never shall rest
take possession of my heart, nor sleep close up the closets of my eyes, till I
understand the signification of this troublesome matter.

Thereupon he traveled through many Deserts and Wildernesses, hoping to meet
with the Hermitage of some Inchantress, but he could find none: For then Yilil
the Necromancer dwelt not in the Strand, neither were there any Sorcerers in
Southwark; Whereupon seeing no other means to attain his desired end, he went
and bought him a Fortune-Book and a Bale of Dice, and carried them home to his
beloved Lady, who with great earnestness expected his return for two reasons,
first out of curiosity, and then because that supper was like to be spoiled.
Being returned home, and having refreshed his weary body with corporal Food; as
he was sitting at the Table, after the cloth was taken away, he called for the
said Fortune-Booke, and ^aused his Wife to throw three Dice, under the
Philosopher Pythagoras, who directed them to this following saying of Haly the
Conjurer, which gave them full satisfaction of the nature of the Infant. The
Uerses were these.

This Son is thine with Heavens good leave,
His Tongue all people shall deceive;
Folks shall thee curse for thy nights work,
When thou him got'st, nor Christian, nor Turk.
Throw Dice no more on any Day,
For it is truth what ere I say.
CHAP. III. How the Knight of the mysterio^s Allegories grew up, and how he put
strife between his Mother and her Maids, and caused his Father and Mother to go
together by the ears.
While both the Father and the Mother were scanning what the meaning should be
of this same Oracle; The Child himse^fe gave still an exposition more and more
clear as he grew in years: It Is true that when he was a Child he acted but
the Child's part, and exercised his Talents on more mean subjects, though he
were not unmindful of his work in what ever Sphere he moved: He began with his
Mothers Maids, between whom and his Mother he made perpetual discords and
dissentions, by accusing either the Maid to the Mistress, or the Mistress to
the Maid; nor could he endure to see his Father and Mother in peace, using the
same policies to set them also at variance, which he did with so much
dexterity, that one might perceive how he made it his study: What ever he knew
his Father disliked in his Mother, that he made her continually acting: and
what his Mother approved not of in his Father, of that he rendered his Father
always most guilty.

CHAP. IV. How his Father sent him to School, and how he there set the Boys
against their Master, and bred differences between the Master and his Wife.
BUT when these tricks of the young stripling were revealed to his Father, he
bethought himself of ridding this little vermin out of his house: Wherefore he
caused great search to be made after a worthy Pedagogue: and at length one was
found and brought unto him: To whom the Father of the stripling thus said, Sir
Pedagogue, I have here a Son whom I would have thee to instruct, and bring up
with great care; therefore if thou will take him, and keep him seven years, and
give him such instruction as thou art able, I will after that greatly advance
thee and thy generation. Sir Pedagogue made the Father of the youth a great
bow, and a most obsequious leg, and said unto him, Sir Knight, I will perform
all thy commands. Thereupon he took the stripling home, and endoctrinated him
with very exceeding pains. But long had not the young Lad bin there, but
according to his usual course he sowed such seeds of dissension among the
Boys, that instead of their former obedience and respect, they exercised now
nothing but rebellion and disobedience: It was enough for the Master who before
could frown every Scholar he had into a looseness, now to beseech them to lay
down their Brick-brats. His Wife too, who had before so long been loving to
him, now scolds at him like a Butter-whore, and he hates her that so lately was
so dear to him. Fathers complain* the Master fumes, the Mistress rants* the
Husband vexes; in a word, all things are so much out of order, that Sir
Pedagogue preferring his present peace before his future advancement resolves
to carry back this primum mobile of mischief, for such he soon discovered him
to be. to his own Parent, not being able him else longer to endure the trouble
of his vexatious contrivances: When the ancient Seer beheld his Son so soon
returned unto him he said unto the Pedagogue, What are the seven years expired
already? Then said the Pedagogue, I well know Sir Knight, that the seven years
are not yet expired; but so great do I find the capacity of your Son, that
should I keep him as my poor gymnasyolum, I should both wrong you* and injure
the Youth: Therefore have I restored him to you again, that you may provide for
him according to his wonderful and most forward genius. The crasty Fox his
Father too well knew the disposition of his young Cub, therefore said he unto
the Pedagogue, O no! This is not the cause of my Sons so soon return, I fear
something worse, and therefore I conjure thee to tell me the truth: Was he not
wont to set thee and thy Boys together by the ears? Did she not cause much
strife and contention between thee and thy Wife, so that neither thou, nor
they, nor she could rest in quiet for him: To which the Pedagogue made answer,
that since he must confess the truth, 'twas even as he had said, and no
otherwise. At which words of the Pedagogue, the old man shook his head as if he
would have shaken his teeth out of his mouth* for he was very sorrowful to hear
of the evil courses which his young Son p^oceeded in.

CHAP. V. How Sir Vane sent his Son to the King's School, and of the tumults
which he raised there by his Sorceries; how he plotted with the other Boys to
break the Preceptor's neck, and of his Allegory.
SIR Vane having had so ill success with his Son in one place. resolves to send
him to another, where he might be more severely looked after: He had not
thought long, but he thought of the Kings School: Now it so came to pass, that
at that time there lived there a Giant, who was a very cruel and imperious
Dominator over the buttocks of youth, one that spared none, but very grievously
and sorely lashed all alike: he was hight Sir O beston, whose School was liks
Kalybs Rock, where you heard nothing all day long, but the screeks and ruful
groans of children and boys elaborately corrected. Hither the little Fox came,
his Father intending that he should be in this place terrified out of all his
designs: But what mortal is able to stop the course of the splendiferous Son,
who can quell the raging Boreas, or change the wild nature of the roaring
Lion? Even so impossible was it to drive back the ill nature of this Youth,
though it were with Pitch-forks; wherefore he went on in his old trade, putting
in practice his wonted spells and magical words: the effects whereof did
presently appear, for in a little while the Scholars were all in an uproar,
some would only study on holy days, and play upon working days, others would
begin at the end of their Books, and read toward the beginning, saying it was
the best way, and that the Preceptor was a Dunce: Then because that one of the
Preceptors knowing the dangerous consequence of these innovations, st^ove to
oppose them, young Sir Vane contrives with them how to break his neck, and so
ordered the matter that they should follow the Preceptor to the top of the
stairs, and throw him down headlong. But the plot being discovered, he was
called to a very strict account. Sirrah quoth the Giant of the Kings School,
what fury has possessed thy overwhelmed mind, proud princock thus to adventure
thy feeble contrivances against the violence of my strong arm: The Youth though
confounded with the threatening words of the Giant, durst not deny what he knew
was so well known; and therefore he sought to put it off with an Allegory, for
he was full sore afraid of the Giant, who had then in his hand a great Tree
which he managed with as much dexterity, as if it had been a Ferula; Sir
Giant, quoth he, I do deny that ere I advised any Person to break the
Preceptors neck. How quoth the Giant, can you deny what is already proved to
your face? Then answered the youn Sorcerer I am not rightly understood, for I
persuaded them not to break the substantial neck of the Preceptor, but the
invisible neck of his pride. Then quoth the Giant, Oh Uarlet! have thou such
fine excuses so early for thy mischief? but the shall stand thee in little
stead. Then the Giant caused his breeches to be taken down, and his shixt to be
taken up, and with his Tree so nimbly bestirred himself, and laid such vehement
blows upon his flesh, that they seemed to shake the Earth. There quoth the
Giant, take the deserved reward of thy treasons, and be gone from hence thou
wicked and destructive vermin, for I will no more endure thee, since I have
now broken thy charms wherewith thou did intend to have enchanted my Castle.

CHAP. VI. How he was sent into Nova Anglia, and how he prevailed there also by
his Sorceries, how he was thrust out again by the people of that place, and
what the Seer Cotton said to him at his departure.
AFter that the Giant of the Kings School had thus expelled him, he betook
himself to the Court, but because he could be pleased with nothing, he also
took very great distaste at the government of the king who then reigned in
Britain. Wherefore he began to give his enchanted Cup about, and many drank
thereof and were poisoned so that there appeared great signs of future
contentions and confusions among those of the Court who were the Kings subjects
by reason of his coming thither, which when his father saw, he greatly feared
the inconveniences which might arise from the sorceries of his Son, wherefore
he contrived how he might send him out of the Land. Therefore he devised with
the King that he might be sent away unto Nova Anglia as Governor of that
place; Now so it was that at that time the people of that Country, as most
people that are but newly seized in their possessions lived in great peace and
quiet, and served the God of their Country with exceeding unity, but no sooner
was Sir Vane come thither, but he caused a wonderful alteration of affairs
among the people. He had delivered into his hands all the chief Castles of the
Country, so that he commanded with a very great controuls; Then said Sir Vane
unto the people of the Land, is it fit that ye should maintain a company of
idle persons here only for talking unto you in your Temples once a week; are
not ye your selves able to do as much? yea and more if you would set your
selves thereunto, why should you then part with such a considerable share of
the swe^t of your brows, and that upon so trivial a score; When the people
examin^d these things, they seemed very plausible at first, whereupon some of
them denied to pay the Priest his due, others drew away the people from their
Priests, and instructed them in the Fields, and their private Houses, having
the Temples in great contempt and derision, which when the Priests perceived,
they were greatly displeased, and cursed the people, then the people cursed
them, so that in a short while their private animosities brake forth into
public rage one against the other. When the Elders of the Land saw the
confusion which was likely to happen, they resolved to remove the cause of
their mischief; therefore they went to Sir Vane and sharply rebuking him, bid
him prepare to be gone out of their Country, for that they had provided a
ship, and a Coach to carry him to the sea. Sir Vane who was an errant Coward,
durst not deny them, so they placed him in a Cart, causing him to sit down on
an old Trunck on that part which is over the Horse; after this said the Elders
unto the people, this is he that has caused all this mischief among us; Then
the people followed him, hooping and hollowing, not ceasing to throw dirt and
stones at him till he was got into the Ship; The Seer Cotton seeing him
departed said unto the people, let us now return with joy that this Uiper has
left us, for he is the bane of Nations, nor can any greater unhappiness befall
a Land than for him to set his foot there. When with tears in his eyes he cried
out Oh England, England, better is it that that Ship should perish with the
Master, and all the Mariners, then that that young Man whom thou did breed
should return unto thee again.

CHAP. VII. How Sir Vane was honored by the Priest of the Temple of Blind
Zeal, and how he was by the said Priest anointed Knight of the Order of the
most misterious Allegories.
AFter this it came to pass that when the Priest of the Temple of Blind Zeal
heard of the great fame of Sir Vane, and of the opinions which he held, he
thought the time long till he could come to interparley with him. For said he
to himself our Religion is built upon the bases of anarchy and confusion, to
the establishing of which all the imaginations of this Man's brains do tend;
Wherefore the Priest sent unto him two fellows that were shabby, whose Shoes
were tied with packthread, and in whose eyes Cuffs were as the abominations of
the Heathen, who calling for the Man of the House, presented him with this
Epistle.

The Priest of the Order of Blind Zeal, to the most mischievous of men Sir
Vane, high in his imaginations, low in his deserts, and most imperious in his
Council.
My Son,
HAving lately heard of thy great virtues so agreeable with the Heresies which
I profess, according to the dictates of that powerful Goddess whose chief
Priest I am, I could not choose but send unto thee these two slovenly fellows
partly to confirm thee, and partly to scrape acquaintance with thee. I do find
that thou do imitate Mahomet very well and do endeavor to root up one
Religion by letting in another to overpower it. Stay ye^ but a little while,
and I will be with thee and help thee with my exhortations, in the mean time be
kind unto those two whom I have sent unto thee, for the one is a Tinker, the
other a Currier, but both great Deceivers. Farewell.


When Sir Vane had read this Epistle, he was then also covetous of the
acquaintance of the High Priest, and immediately sent for him; when he was
come, they discoursed together, and when they had so done, they were filled
with joy at the sight of each other: For he talked unto the High Priest in most
high and misterious Allegories, saying unto him that Magistracy was the Throne
and Seat of the Beast. That the Rulers of the Earth must be brought at last to
serve him and his faction; That his people are not to be subject to the
Judicials of Mo^es; That the new Creature is faith, which translates a Man out
of the natural into the spiritual body, and is called his new Creature state;
That all Ministers that have the Father and the Son, need not run to the
Majestrate for maintenance. That all Ministers that upheld Steeple Houses were
the relicts of Popery; That the fal^ of Adam was only a type of the instability
of fortune. That the Devil is the universal worldly spirit, exercising
dominion and rule under various forms and administrations of government. That
learning and Universities are of dangerous consequences in a well ordered
government.

When the High Priest heard him speak these things he marvelled very much, and
greatly praised him, for that quoth he, if these things were well taught, and
well believed, they would doubtless destroy the religion of the Christians,
who are our most mortal enemies. Then did the High Priest bow unto Sir Vane
saying to him, Thou art in power, and as thou endeavourest to do our work so
is it fit that thou should receive honor from us. It Is true quoth he, thou
art a Knight after the order of the Christians, but throw it off, for it will
be very injurious unto thee; and take from me a title which shall be more
beneficial, and comfort thy self in this that then thou shall be a better
Knight then any in the World. Then did the High Priest ask him whether he
could fight or no. To which Sir Vane replied that he never could nor never
would fight. The High Priest was right glad of this, for that he could now
perform the office himself by anointing, whereas otherwise he must have been
forced to have sent for a Warrior on purpose to have dubbed him. Thus the High
Priest took leave for the time, telling him that in three days he would
return; desiring him in that space to prepare himself for the honor he was
to receive. He was to eat nothing but emblematicall diet, as round cabbages
which seem to resemble the Earth, and its destruction by fire, in that they
are to be boiled before they can be eaten. He was likewise to feed upon Swines
flesh because a Hog was the emblem of ingratitude: he might likewise feed upon
Horse flesh, because the Bible spoke much of them, and that eating them out of
the way was the only means to keep Men from not putting their trust in them; He
might drink botled Claret by reason of its emblematicall life and quickness,
and he might likewise take Tobacco if his Pipe had this motto on it, Evanescit
ut su nus; but he was forbid to drink Greek Wine because that the Christians
used it at their Communions.

In the mean while the High Priest, being loath to defile so great a solemnity
with any oil that had been unhallowed by the touch of the Christians, sent two
of his Disciples to cut off a great piece of a certain Whale which was killed a
little before in the River of Thame^is, which accident they attributed to the
kind provision of the Goddess blind Zeal, thereof to make a sacred oil of
their own, and which they prayed the Goddess blind Zeal to allow of for their
purpose; This done, after the end of three days the High Priest returned to
Sir Vane, whom he first questioned concerning the performance of what he had
commanded, who whether he had done it or no, so well dissembled his past
obedience that the High Priest often times gave credit unto his saying; Then the
High Priest proceeding, it is now Sir Vane quoth he, that I must cause thee to
kneel, that others after this may be bound to kneel to thee; To which when Sir
Vane had yielded, he poured the Trane Oil upon his locks, bidding him then to
rise up Sir Vane, Knight of the Order of the most mysterious Allegories. Then
giving him some few instructions, as that he should be zealous in carrying on
the great work of building up Babell, which the God of the Christians had for
so long time hindered from being finished, and that he should seek nothing but
the advancement of confusion and Atheism, most solemnly he took his leave of
Sir Vane, and retired into his Temple which was situate in that part of the
Metropolis of Britain called Colemanstreet,

CHAP. VIII. How Sir Lambert Knight of the Golden Tulep, and Sir Vane Knight of
the most mysterious Allegories, made a League together.
THE honor done to Sir Vane being greatly noised abroad, and his dexterity in
mischief being very well known, Sir Lambert thinking him a fit instrument for
the effecting his design, came to him and exceedingly desired his assistance.
Then said Sir Vane unto the Knight of the Golden Tulep, I am right glad to see
so good a Knight at my Castle. Know then Sir Lambert that I have always bare
you a very great lov^, neither is there any Knight in Britain whom I honor
like unto your self, I know right well that thou do far exceed in feats of
Arms, and that I am right craftier in council; wherefore then should we
suffer the Meek Knight to be chief Sultan over us. who is not at all like unto
thee for Chivalry? Why do we not revenge on him the injuries done us by his
Father? When Sir Lambert heard this, he waxed greatly in wrath with the Meek
Knight, and swear by his sturdy steed Snorter, that he would not cease till he
had pulled the Souldan out of his Palace by the ears, so that he might have the
advice of the Knight of the most mysterions Allegories. Then Sir Vane promised
to assist Sir Lambert all that he might, on condition that he should be the
next in dignity to him when he was chief Sultan. Then Sir Lambert swore unto
Sir Vane by all the souls of his Ancestors that so it should be; And moreover
quoth Sir Lambert, in token of this friendship between us, I freely give the
fair Maid of Wimbleton my Daughter unto thy eldest Son so well known by the
name of the overgrown Child; and know right well Sir Vane that she is a right
comely Dame, and one for whom many a sturdier Knight then he would be content
to try the sharpness of their blood thirsty lances. She shall have for her
Dowry my Palace of Wimbleton, once the Dowry of a Queen, and ^f my sword fail
me not I may chance to make her chief Soldaness of Britain. When Sir Vane
heard this he looked full jocandly upon Sir Lambert; Then they clipped and
hugged one another, and swear to be as true to one another interest, as the
Cripples of the Forest of Covent Garden are to one another in concealing the
Rogueries which they commit.

CHAP. IX. How the Knight of the Golden Tulep, and the Knight of the mysterious
Allegories came to the Castle of Sir Fleetwood the contemptible Knight, where
they met with the grim Giant Desborough, and how they went all three and pulled
the Meek Knight who was then chief Sultan out of his Palace by night.
SIR Lambert seeing now fortune begin again to cast her wonted smiles upon him,
resolved to make use of her while she was in a good humor, wherefore he showed
great willingness to Sir Vane to go on in his intended design. Then said Sir
Vane, why should our delay be any hindrance unto us. Let us incontinently go
unto Sir Fleetwood the contemptible Knight, who has great power over the
Soldans Forces, I know right well that I can with ease cause him to do
whatever I list, for that his understanding is exceeding shallow, and we will
make him to believe that he shall be chief Sultan, on condition that he will
help us for to depose the Meek Knight Sir Lambert was right glad of this
advice, so they rode on toward the Forest of Saint James, near unto which
stood the Castle of the contemptible Knight. They were no sooner come to the
Gate, but they were conducted by gentle Stamford, (who was chief Squire to Sir
Fleetwood,) up unto his Masters lodging. Then said Sir Vane unto the
Contemptible Knight, rouse up thy self thou Man of courage, and let us not be
in bondage unto the Meek Knight, who is young and has not understanding and
wisdom su^ficing for so great an employment. Have thou not been ^n all the
Soldans Wars? Think then how treacherously the Sultan has dealt with thee, in
preferring the Meek Knight his Son before thee. It Is true then answered Sir
Fleetwood, that it is the desire of my heart to make my self chief Sultan, but
there are so many valorous Knights that will oppose me, that I fear much to
undertake the enterprise. Then said sir Lambert I know right well sir
Flee^wood, that without force we can little avail, but of that I make no
question, knowing the great honor and reverence which the Host of the Sultan
bears to me. Moreover I have told many of them that which I intend, and they
are resolved with me to live and dye. Then said sir Fleetwood right cunningly,
since that you sir Lambert can prevail so much by your own power, let not me
interpose my weak force to injure the fame of so worthy a Knight, But sir
Lambert who was as cunning as he, replied that he would not adventure without
him, that as he was chief in power he should be chief in the undertaking. Alas
sir Fleetwood quoth the Knight of the Golden Tulep, think you that I am arrived
here to rob so hardy a Knight as you are of your prize; No sir Fle^twood for I
only come at the request of the good Knight sir Vane to proffer my assistance,
which if you shall not think fit to receive, I am ready to retire, for that
there be other Forests and Castles to seek adventures in besides those which
are in this Country. Sir Fleetwood was right glad of what Sir Lambert said, so
that according to his custom he wept for joy, not thinking that the Knight of
the Golden Tulep had spoken treacherously. As they were thus parlying together
in came the grim Giant Desborough, who lived in the Forest of Saint James that
was close by. With your leave Sir Knights quoth he, I am come here to visit my
Brother the Contemptible Knight, and I ho^e that does not offend ye If ye
think your selves affronted, and that any of ye be so hardy as to dare fight
in defense of the meek Knight, I do here openly challenge him the combat, for
that I do abominably hate the Meek Knight and all his adherents; Then answered
sir Lambert and sir Vane, that they were as mortal enemies to the Soldane as
he was, and therefore they desired the Giant not to think amiss of them. Say
you so quoth the Giant Desborough, then you say well, else had I crushed ye to
pieces in my fury, like rotten apples; then proceeding, quoth he, what shall we
do with this proud Prin^^^^ who has raised himself to be a Soldane over us? Is
it fit that the Uncle should be governed by the Nephew? Sir Vane willing all he
could to incense the Giant to anger; told him that it was an allegory of the
Worlds confusion, when Children rule their Parents. Upon that the Giant
Desborough stamped so hard upon the floor, that you might have heard it a mile
off, and swore by all his Country Gods, that his Nephew the Meek Knight should
no longer live, if he refused to resign his Soldanship; the words were no
sooner out of his mouth, but he draws out a whole Canon out of his pocket,
charged which a brace of Bullets, each weighing twenty pound, and cocking the
same, commanded the Contemptible Knight, with the Knight of the Golden Tulep,
to follow him. It was now night, and pale Cinthia had withdrawn her light from
the World, unwilling to behold the treacherous actions of mortals; when they
began their journey toward the Palace of the Soldane, they rode hard, and being
soon arrived there, they went directly to the Soldans lodging, for that the
Soldans janisaries being before corrupted, gave them free access. Then said
the Giant to the Soldane, proud Peacock think thou to perch over thy betters
any longer? resign thy power, thy Scepter, and thy Royal Robes, and dissolve
thy Council that thou keep to plot against us, or I will take thee such a
blow on the pate* that I will make thy head ring noon, and send thee to the
infernal shades, there so make vain complaints to Pluto of thy misfortunes,
wi^h that the Giant Desborough heaved up his weighty Instrument of death, on
purpose to have given him such a blow as should have rent the foundations of
his noddle; The Meek Knigh^ was astonished at the sight, and stood for a while as
one that were dumb, but seeing the danger that his brains were in, he fell on
his knees before the Giant Desborough, beseeching him in gentle courtesy to
distressed Knights, that he would spare his life, and he would submit to
whatever the Giant should command; Hereupon they disrobed him of his apparel,
and attired him in simple and base array, his arms that were lately employed
to weild the mighty Scepter, they now strongly fettered up in Iron bolts, and
so conveyed him to a desolate Dungeon, which belonged unto his own Palace,
where he had nothing to do but to make these sad Lamentations,

O cruel destinies, why is this grievous punishment allotted to my penance;
have I conspired against the Majesty of Heaven, that they have thrown this
vengeance on my head, shall I never recover my former liberty, that I may be
revenged one way or other upon the causers of my imprisonment; May the Plagues
of Pharaoh light upon their Counties, and the miseries of Oedipus on their
Tenants, that they may be eye witnesses of their daughters ravishment, and
behold their Mansion houses flameing like the burning battlements of Troy. Thus
lamented he the loss of his liberty, accursing his birth day, and the hour of
his creation; his sighs exceeded the number of the Ocean sands, and his tears
the Water-bubbles in a rainy day, in which condition we shall leave him, and go
to talk of something else.

CHAP. X. How Sir Vane's Son Icleped (the overgrown Child) courted the fair
Maid of Wimbleton, and of the gown which she bespoke, and how 5000. Jewellers
wrought day and night to finish it.
LEave we now to speak of the Meek Knight, and return we to relate what
happened between the Son of Sir Vane, Icleped the overgrown Child, and the
fair Maid of Wimbleton, whom partly in pursuance of his Fathers commands,
partly out of an eager desire he had to be doing, he did very hotly pursue in
the way of love, and so forth. Sir Van^ was very glad of the match, hoping
thereby that after the death of the Knight of the Golden Tulep, his Son might
come to be chief^ Soldane; And Sir Lambert liked it, knowing that well he could
not come to be Soldane himself without his friendship and assistance; which he
had no other way to make sure to himself but by so near an alliance between
their Families. Therefore when the overgrown Child had dressed himself as fine
as any fippence, he called straightway for his Fathers Chariot, and bid the
Charioter drive unto the Palace of Sir Lambert: When he came unto the Gate, the
Porter oftsoones opened the Gate, that he might have entrance; Then was he
straightway beheld by one of the Pages to the Fair Maid, who with great
reverence met him and conducted him to the chamber where his Lady did repose
her self; When the overgrown Child came into the room, he was exceedingly
amazed to behold the beauty of his Mistrisse, so that he remained dumb for a
great space. While he stood in this posture, his backside being ashamed that
his mouth should be so silent, opened it self, and with one single monosyllable
did so alarm the company, that it is thought that the fair Maid of Wimbleton
would have been very angry had he come only as an ordinary Suitor. Some say the
overgrown Child, did this unawares, but others more probably affirm, that he
had a double end in it, either because he saw himself in such an amaze, to make
his Mistrisse amazed at him as well as he was at her, or else hopeing that the
good nature of his Lady might cause her to blush for his miscarriage, whereby
he might have an opportuni^y to see the full blown roses of her cheeks; but as
soon as he was recovered of his ecstasy, he began to bethink himself of saying
something that might be acceptable unto the fair Lady, whom he so admired; Most
divine and peerlesse Paragon, quoth he, Thou only wonder of the World for
beauty, and excellent parts of nature, know that thy two twinkling eyes that
shine more bright then the stars of Heaven, being the true darts of love, have
pierced my heart, and those thy crimson cheeks as lovely as Aurora's
countenance have wounded me with love. Therefore except thou grant me kind
comfort, I am like to spend the rest of my days in sorrow, care and
discontent. To this the Fair Maid of Wimbleton replied, that she returned him
many thanks for the courteous proffer of his affection. Gentle Sir, quoth she,
seeing that it is the will of my Father, that we two should lie together in one
bed, let not his will be resisted, but let us enjoy one another as soon as we
can, for often has my Nurse spoken proverbially unto me, saying, Happy is that
woing, which is not long a doing. When it was known that the two parties had
got one the others affection, the Bonefires blaze, the Bells rang, and Sir
Lambert and Sir Vane were both drunk that night for joy. Then were there great
preparations for the solemnization of these most Royal Nuptials, but that which
surpassed all, was the Gown in which she was to appear when she was to go unto
the Temple; indeed so great was the rarity of it, that it requires a golden Pen
to write it, and a tongue washed in the conservatives of the Muses honey, to
declare it; for it was to be made of Diamonds, set in Kings of Barbery Gold.
The toil was great, so that it required a multitude of Artificers to
accomplish the same; therefore they sought far and near for Men of Art, and in
a short space they got together to the number of five thousand, who wrought day
and night in their several employments to carry on the great work. These
Diamonds were all enchanted by Magic Art, and the virtues of them were so
precious, that it is almost incredible to report: For therein one might behold
the secret mysteries of all the liberal Sciences, and by art discover what was
practiced in the Courts of other Princes; If any Hill within a thousand miles
of the place were enriched wi^h a Mine of Gold, they would describe the place
and Country, and how deep it lay closed in the Earth. By t^em you might truly
calculate upon the birth of Children, succession of Princes, and the
continuance of Commonwealths, with many other excellent virtues, which I omit
for this time.

CHAP. XI. How Sir Lambert went to fight against the Christians in the Land of
Cheshire, how he overthr^w them, and of the challenge that was sent him by the
Swinh^ard of Maxfield.
SIR Lambert and the Giant Desborough having as we said before, divested the
Soldane of his power, and cast him into Prison, they set up in his stead ^^urty
Tyrants to govern in his room, until Sir Lambert could come to be Soldane
himself; For you must know that all the Paynims that were in arms, were under
the command of Sir Lambert. Now these forty Tyrants being in power, for they
were Paynim^ also, tyrannized over the Christian^ in most grievous wise; So
that when the Christians could no longer endure the sad and heavy oppressions
of the Paynim^, which were indeed more lamentable then tongue can express,
they were resolved to be avenged of the Paynims, and to rise up in arms
against them. For you are to understand, that the Christians had a King of
their own, a just and mild Prince, whose right it was to rule over them; but
the Paynims having overthrown him in battle, forced him to quit his lawful
inheritance, and to dye out of his Kingdom. But when the Christians groaned
under the heinous cruelties of the Paynims, then they bethought themselves
again of recalling their King, and of freeing themselves from the power of the
Paynims; Then did the Christians assemble together in many places of the Realm
of Bri^ain, forming themselves into Bands and Troops in most Souldier-like
fashion, but no where did they rise in so great numbers as they did in the
famous Country of Wa^e^, and the Forests of Chester; This so alarmed the
forty panim Tyrants, that they forthwith sent Sir Lambert with a very great
Army against them. When Sir Lambert drew near unto them, he encamped his whole
Army exceeding strongly. But when the Christians saw how near the Army of Sir
Lambert was unto them, and how weak they were, by reason that they were
disappointed of those succors that were promised them, they were sore afraid,
for that their number was but small, and besides this, they were most of them
young Men, that never had practiced feats of arms before. The Paladine of
Chester saw right well in what an ill plight his Troops were; wherefore he had
no mind to have fought with Sir Lambert at that time: for that Sir Lambert's
Forces were all men approved in War, right hardy and courageous, and exceeding
many more in number. Sir Lambert well knowing the advantage he had in his
numerous Pagans, marched toward the Christians, who were encamped beyond the
Dangerous Bridge, with great fury, with an intention for to give them an
immediate assault, and force them from the Dangerous Bridge: whereupon the
Christians were in great doubt whether they should resist the Pagans, or return
again every one to his own home: when lo, upstood the Swinheard of Maxfield,
otherwise called the namelesse Knight, and uttered his mind in these words, My
most dearly beloved Countrymen, quoth he, the badnesse of our present condition
right well I understand and how basely we are betrayed through the vile
enchan^ments of Scoto the Necromancer; However I question not but to break all
his charms, whereby we may be free from the fury of those cursed Pagans that
seek nothing but our ruin. When the Paladine heard this, he bad him take his
course. Then the Swinheard of Maxfield mounted himself on a Courser, and by his
trusty Squire sent him this defyance, himself staying under a Tree to receive
his answer.

The Swinheard of Maxfield to Sir Lambert Knight of the Golden Tulep.
Sir Lambert, I have heard ere now of thy valor, but know that I fear thee no
more then the Lion fears the timorous Hare; I am resolved therefore to meet
thee at the head of all thy Troops, there to try the force of thy Sword, nor
do thou disdain to accept the challenge of a Swinheard, who may chance to prove
as good a Knight as thy self;


When Sir Lambert read the challenge, he said no more to the Squire, but only
bad him to take notice of the color of his Horse, and of his Burgonet. Then
the Squire rode away, and Sir Lambert pressed forward toward the Dangerous
Bridge, to encounter the Christians; Then ther^ began a sharp conflict betwixt
the Christians and the Panims, wherein for a while the Christians behaved
themselves with great confidence and prowess. For the Swinheard beholding the
Horse and Burgonet that his Squire had described unto him, with great courage
spurred on his faithful steed, (which was a most remarkable one, for that it
was a Horse that had but lately belonged to the Knight of the enchanted Mill)
and without giving him the least notice of what he intended, he struck him so
terrible a blow upon the visor of his Helmet, that with the fury thereof, he
made sparkles of fire to issue out in great abundance, and forced him to bow
his head unto his breast; but Sir Lambert soon returned unto him his
salutation, and struck the Swinheard such a desperate blow on the top of the
Helmet, that the great noise thereof made a sound in all the mountains, and so
began between them a most mavelous and fearful battle; for now Sir Lambert
and the Swinheard, thought no other thing but how to overthrow each other,
striking each at other such terrible blows, as many times it made either of
them senseless, and both seeing the force of one another, were marveilously
incensed with anger. At length the Sw^^hear^ gave Sir Lambert such a terrible
blow, that if it had hit right upon him, it would have cloven his head in
pieces but with great discretion Sir Lambert cleared himself thereof, so that
it was stricken in vain, so that with great lightness he retired and struck
the Swinheard so furiously, that he fell quite astonished to the Earth, without
any feeling, then might you soon perceive by the abundance of blood that issued
out of his mouth, and through the visor of his Helmet that the Swinheard was
now ready to breath his last. Sir Lambert having thus overthrown the Swinheard,
with great eagerness pursued the Christians, who being over-powred by the
numbers of the Pagans, thought it safer to commit themselves to the protection
of bypath, and ways unknown to the enemy, rather then to yield to the
cruelty of the merciless Pagans* When Sir Lambert had obtained this victory,
he caused it to be spread far and near, making it ten times as great as indeed
it was, and he wrote unto the ^ourty Tyrants, to give them notice thereof, who
thereupon honored him as a God, and sent him presents of gold, and precious
stones; but he cared not for the forty Tyrants, nor for their presents
neither, but gave them unto his Soldiers, who admired him for his courtesy;
for he thought that because he had overcome this small handful of the
Christians, that he was now able to overcome all the World; However as then he
held fair correspondence with the ^ourty Tyrants, because he was at a far
distance for them, and for that he could not do any thing farther, till he had
consulted with Sir Van^, how far he might presume upon his new success.

CHAP. XII. How Sir Lambert returned to the good City of London, and of the
Feast which Sir Vane made him, and how they consulted to put down the forty
Tyrants.
AFter this battle sir Lambert returned with great joy and triumph to the good
City ^f London, where he was expected with much earnestness by sir Vane the
Giant Desborough, and sir Fleetwood the Contemptible Knight. When sir Vane
heard that ^ir Lambert was returning, he was ^ight glad, and resolved forthwith
to go and meet him, and conduct him to the City. Eftsoons therefore he called
his dwarf to bring him his palfrey, and being mounted, he took on his journey.
He was clad (...)a slame colored suit of Neapol^* an silk, which was partly
^mblematical, partly for instruction; emblemetical in regard it signified his
zeal to what he undertook; and as to instruction, it showed us, that though the
silk came from Naples, an abominable and sinful City, yet that a Man was never
the worse for wearing it, so that he did (...)upon an enigmaticall score. His
Hat was likewise of a strange fashion, for behind it hang down on his back with
a long flappet to keep off the rain; but before it had no brim at all to show
that a M^n ought to put away all things that hinde^ him from looking toward the
heavens. O^ his Shield was pictured fortune standing on a Rock with this
inscription underneath, She is thus mine; In this mysterious garb he came into
the Forest of Barnet, where when he saw sir Lambert, he al^ghted from his
Palfrey, and sir Lambert did the like, and then they embraced one another most
lo^ingly, quoth sir Vane, I am right glad Sir Lambert of this your safe and
happy return* and for the great victory which you have won, whereby you are now
esteem^d one of the most worthy Champions of Europe, and right well I know that
you have done your part, and that now it remains for me to do mine, therefore
let us proceed on our journey, and if I do not play the Fox as well as you
have played the Lion, let me be deprived of my Knighthood, which I hold the
greatest honor which I have in the World. For you must know, that although sir
Lambert were indeed as right cunning a Knave as Sir Vane, yet in council sir
Vane would never give him the superiority, though at knocks he always let him
go before him. Sir Lambert submitted with all gentleness unto the speech of
sir Vane, and so they came together unto the good City of London; When they
pass^d through the Town, the people of the City were all very sad, and in great
perplexity, for they cared not at all for sir Lambert, nor for his success,
but wished with all their hearts that he had been slain by the Swinheard o^
Maxfield. But they on the other side who had no reason to be in such heavy
plight, made great rejoycings among themselves, feasting and banqueting one
another in most ample manner; but the banquet which sir Vane made exceeded all
the rest, not so much for the riches, as for the strangeness thereof, for he
made use not only of the meats and drinks of the Christians, but of those
also of the Heathen, as Pillaw, and Sherbet, intimating thereby, that as he
made use of all sorts of diet to sustain nature, so sir Lambert ought to make
use of all sorts of interests to make himself great. When they had ended their
feasting, sir Vane and sir Lambert retired into a private room, there to take
council concerning their affairs. Sir Lambert disclosed then unto sir Vane
all that was hidden in his breast, of his desire to make himself Sultan, and his
intention to put down the Forty Tyrants; but withal he discovered his fear to
attempt such an enterprise which would be so dangerous if not accomplished. But
sir Vane, who out of his cowardly nature loved to keep himself out of all
peril, but cared not upon what dangers he put others* replied, That sir
Lambert had no cause at all to be timorous, for that the forty Tyrants were ill
beloved of the people, and he will beloved of all the old Soldans Host. That
the Giant Desborough, and sir Fleetwood the Contemptible Knight, were sure to
him. To which sir Lambert answered, That 'twas true that he thought he could
with much ease put down the forty Tyrants, but what must we do then? cries he;
To which sir Vane replied, Leave that to me, I have a Plot in my head; and the
more to encourage sir Lambert, he repeated to him a certain Prophesy, the which
ran in these words.

The Prophesy.
When the dead shall awake to join themselves with the living, then shall
valor be at her height and beauty in the supremest point of her glory.

This prophesy, know right well sir Lambert, so said sir Vane, can concern no
Person living but thy self, as I shall show thee by the easy exposition
thereof, which flows without any force from the words.

When the dead shall come to join themselves with the living, that is, when we
who in the time of the Sultan were dead as to the affairs of this World, shall
come to join our selves with the living, that is, with the Giant Desborough,
and sir Fleetwood, who were in great authority while the Sultan was in being,
then shall valor be at her height, that is then shall your self who are right
valourous be Sultan, and beauty be in the supreamest point of her glory; as
much as to say, your passing beauteous Lady shall be Sol^anesse.

When sir Lambert heard this, he took up a new resolution, and resolved to
venture what ere come of it. Then said sir Lambert to the Knight of the
Mysterious Allegories, Sir Vane thy wisdom is to be extolled, and thy words to
be prized above fine Gold. Wherefore let us as (...)as we gave smoaked out our
pipes go and talk with sir Fleetwood, and my cousen the Giant Desborough
concerning it; for it they ^ but join with us, I Will go presently about my work.

CHAP. XIII. How do^ Hizlerigo the Knight with the hot head, being one of the
forty Tyrants, suspected the intention of sir Lambert, and how he would have
had Scoto the egromancer have enchan^ed him, and put him into his Castle at
Lambethe, and how he cuft his Dwarf for playing at Span-Fa^thing.
SIR Lambert being now full of hopes, and greatly swelled with the prophesy
which Sir Vane had told him of, h^ began now to be very active in the
prosecution of his design; But when he saw that the two Giants Icleped, Creed
and Berry were come to join with him, and that sir Lilburn the degraded Viceroy
was also come in unto his party, he eftsoons resolved by the advice of sir
Vane to make known some of his desires to the Forty Tyrants. When the forty
Tyrants read them, they liked them not at all, but were highly provoked,
especially Don Hazlerigo, the Knight ^ith the hot head, who being the most
passionate Person in the World, fell into such a rage, that many of the forty
Tyrants themselves, though they knew his kindness to them, did greatly tremble
thereat Quoth he, how dares thie Princock thus presume; am not I the wisest,
and the most valarous Knight that ever Oceana brought forth, how happens it
then that the gods permit this contest between us? Hare they no Thunderbolts to
lend me that I may nail this bo^d audatious Traitor to the Earth, Then turning
to the forty Tyrants, am not I above ye all, quoth he, why do ye then not do
what I command? Let there be a great Caldron fetched and let this presumptious
Traitor be boiled th^rein, and where he is boy^d, he is boiled, and there will
be an end of him Hereupon one of the forty Tyrants said that Don Hazlerigo had
spoken like a right worthy Cavali^r; and if all m^n were of his mind there
want^d nothing but a Caldron. ^on H^zlerigo rep^y'd, that he had one at whom
wherein his ^amsels did boil foul clothes, and (...)Livers for his meaner
Servants, and thereupon he called his Dwarf to fetc^ it; but the Dwarf not
answering to the call, Don Hazlerigo in great fury went forth to seek him. Oh
the sad disastrous fate of the unfortunate Dwarf? For Don Hazlerigo no sooner
sought for him, but he beheld him playing at Span-farthing in the Yard
belonging to the Palace of Westmonasterium, Dare you there, quoth Don Hazlerigo
in great despite, I Will be with you eftsoons. He was no sooner near him, but
he reached the Dwarf such a cuffe on the ear that you might have heard the
blow cross the River of Thamesis unto the Temple of Saint Maryovers, crying
out in great rage, fetch me the huge Caldron, sirrah: the Dwarf who neither
knew the meaning of his words nor of his blows, was in a great amaze, but at
length recollecting himself quoth he, am not I as good a Squire as he that
belonged unto the Baron of Stamfordia, yet he be at the famous Don Hazlerigo,
why may not I? with that he laid his truncheon on the breast of Don Hazlerigo,
with such a force that he was scarce able to keep himself from failing
backward. Don Hazlerigo having thus missed of the Caldron. returns again with
as much haste as he could (for the Dwarf hard pursued him) unto the forty
Tyrants. with whom he saw it was much safer to contend then with his Dwarf. He
sum'd, and they star'd he ^oamed, and they were astonished he could not speak
for anger, neither durst they speak to him seeing him so angry, Yet they could
not choose but ask him where the Caldron was, to which after much stamping and
staring, he replied that he had found out another sort of punishment which he
esteemed far better. Then turning himself to Scoto the Negromancer, he thus
reviled him. Where are all thy charms nocturnall Scoto, have all thy spirits
for sake^ thee, have thou now no power over the great Beelzebub, who is also
Icleped Lucifer, to what end have thou thy enchanted Castle at Lambetho, if
thou make no use thereof; awake great Scoto from thy dreaming trance, and
raise a troop of infernal feinds to shelter thee from the ruin that will else
befall thee; When Scoto heard Don Hazlerigo say thus, quoth he, Right valiant
Knight, if thou w^^t bring sir Lambert unto me, that my charms may lay hold of
him, I will put him in my Castle of Lambetho, from whence it shall be in the
power of no Knight to free him, but at present I cannot prevail, for that the
spirits which belong to Sir Vane the Sorcerer, are as strong to defend him, as
mine are to do him annoyance, Yet is there one way left, and that is for thee
to take with thee some three or four other Knights like thy self, then must you
be sure to lay hold on him at such a time when he has nothing on him but his
shirt, for then he shall not be able to resist the charms which are laid upon
him, so that we shall have our wills of him to do what we please with him.
When Don Hazlerigo heard this, he vanished immediately from the forty Tyrants,
telling them what strange exploits he would do ere he came back.

CHAP. IX. How sir Lambert put down the Forty Tyrants, and how he and the Baron
of Sussex jested together.
When sir Lambert heard of the intention of Don Hazlerigo, and the rest of the
forty Tyrants, and of their cruel plot which was to have him sodden to death,
he waxed sore in wrath, and caused the muster rolls to be numbered of those that
were resolved to stand by him, and when he saw himself strong enough to deal
with the fo^^y Ty^ants, he went into the Chamber of Council, where he found
Sir Vane, the Giant Desborough, Sir Berry the Knight of the Colepit, the Giant
Creed, the Contemptible Knight, and the Giant Husonius called also Polyphem, to
whom he spoke in these words, Right worthy Champions*
YE know right well that I am not apt to seek that by force which I could
obtain by fair means. How I am injured by the forty Tyrants you understand,
neither am I ignorant how ye are all affronted for my sake, should I therefore
now forsake you, I should be a greater Traitor to you my friends then to my
self; but since it is so, I vow never to sleep in bed of down, nor to unbuckle
my Shield from my weary arms till I have q^^lled your foes, and given you full
power over your enemies.



These heroical speeches were no sooner finished, but the Champions arming
themselves with approved Corselets, and taking unto them their trusty swords,
told him how ready they were to follow him in any undertaking.

Now had Aurora chased away the all to be spangled darkness, when lo sir
Lambert, intending to do by the forty Tyrants as Aurora had done before by the
black brow'd Night, assembles his forces together, and pitches his tent close
by the palace of the forty Tirants. But they having no^ice of his coming,
musterd their powers also together, and sent them against Sir Lambert under the
command of a right valiant Knight called the Baron of Sussex, and now they stood
opposite each to other within the reach of the dismal Gun; It was thought that
these engines would have by and by breathed out their fury in flames of fire,
and have sent their leaden Messengers to sear up the vains of mortals, and dam
up the passages of life, but Sir Lambert, who was as valiant as he was cunning,
and as cunning as he was valiant, and so either both valiant and cunning, or
else neither cunning nor valiant was loath to fight, for he feared the party
which was for the lawful King of Britain, least they while he was combating
against the forty Tyrants, should come and take the power from them both:
wherefore he would not engage but sought all other means to suppress the forty
Tyrants that he could. Now as he was riding about, he met the chief of the
forty Tyrants, who was the Knight of the gilt Mace, whom they had made General
of the Forces of Sir Lambert, coming to the assistance of the forty Tyrants,
and all the way he came he cried to the Soldiers of sir Lambert, that they
should desert Sir Lambert, and yield obedience to him who was their chieftain.
But Sir Lambert, unwilling that the Soldiers should hear with that ^are,
lights off his Horse, takes up a great brickbat, and fling ^ it full at the
head of the Knight of the Gilt Mace, and but for the mercy of a kind fate, had
dashed out Sir Lenthal's brains, and then taking the Horses by their bridles,
he thrust them, the chariot, and all that were in it quite out of the City of
Westmonasterium, as you would thrus^ a rolling stone before ye through a
Bowling green Nor were the Soldiers idle all this while, for what vollies they
could not discharge out of their Guns they discharged out of their mouths,
calling one another Dogs, Rogues, and Sons of Whores* and that their hands
might be (...)likewise, they throw at one another* Hand granados, the which
according to a new invention among Soldiers, were made of the tops of Turnips
bound together with a with; While the two ^^e^ce Armies, stood looking so
grimly each on the other. Scoto the Negromancer was gotten privately into a
high Tower built on the top of the west end of the Temple of Westmonasterium,
that when the combat did begin he might assist the forces of the Baron of
Sussex by his magic spells.

Now quoth he is the battle surely begun, for me thinks I hear the Baron of
Sussex cry for help, now is the time that my charming spells must work Sir
Lambert's overthrow; which being said, thrice he kissed the flower of the said
Tower, and thrice besprinkled the Circle with his own blood, which with a
silver razer he let out from his left arm and after that he began to speak in
this manner. Stand still ye wandering Lamps of heaven, move not sweet stars
till Scoto's charms be brought to full effect. O thou great Demon, Prince of
the damned Ghosts, thou chief Commander of those ghastly shapes that rightly
glide by misbeleeving Travelers, even thou that hold a s^aky Scepter in thy
hand sitting upon a Throne of burning steel, even thou whose eyes are like
Sawcers, and who tossest burning fire brands abroad like Tennis balls, I charge
thee to open thy brazen gates, and send forth thy Legions of infernal fiends,
for that of them I now do stand in great need. Beelzebub being so severely
charged took the pains not only to ascend to the Earth, but to go up also to
the top of the Tower, to receive the commands of Scoto the Negromancer, who
longed for the encounter that he might set him on work; But the Devil having
staid till night, and seeing nothing for him to do, was so sorely enraged
against Scoto, that he took him by the Legs, intending to have thrown him from
the top of the Tower, but afterward be thinking with himself that he should
loose a good Servant, and that he should spoil the story, for that it was
never heard in any Romance that any Negromancer was over punished till some
Knight had ended his enchantments, he ^et Scoto on his legs, and in great ^ury
flung down to hell again. For to tell ye the truth there was no combat of
note all that day, excepting between the Baron of Sussex and sir Lambert; for
sir Lambert knowing that he was well beloved by the Soldiers belonging to the
Baron of Sussex, was resolved to go and speak to them, thinking by fair
speeches to win them to his side; when the Baron saw him, he was likewise
resolved to hinder him, whereupon they prepared to the career, but they only
brake their Lances in the first encounter; whereupon the Baron drew his sword,
but sir Lambert entreated him to just once more; most willingly replied the
Baron, then meeting together, Sir Lambert's Horse was almost down, for the
Horse that he rode on all that day was none of the best, and the Baron likewise
lost his stirrops* being glad to catch hold by the maine of his Horse; Sir
Lambert having more mind to be chief Sultan, then to be bast inadoed, seeing
the Baron maintain the fight so equally against him took his leave, telling
the Baron he should take another time to be quit with him. But the forty
Tyrants seeing no hope of relief, and that they were unequal in power to sir
Lambert, were content to submit unto him which they did accordingly, giving him
possession of the Palace and of all that was therein, causing the Baron of
Sussex to draw off his forces; which done, Sir Lambert went home with much glee
and content, supp't quietly and lay with his saltanesse in most pleasant-wise.

CHAP. XV. How Sir Lambert and Sir Vane being Pagans, went about to set up the
worship of their Heathen Idols; and how they intended to have altered the Laws
and Government of Britain.
WHen sir Lambert had thus by his power put down the forty Tyrants, sir Vane
and he doubted not now to carry all before them; therefore they fell into
consideration how they might secure to themselves the chief power which they
had got into their own hands as well as they could: Sir Vane was of an opinion,
that seeing it was their intent to erect a new Empire, they ought to change the
Religion of the Country, and to make a new one as near the humor as they could
of these people whom they saw adhering to them upon the hopes of such an
alteration, and already inclined to such a change as might well agree with
their interest. First and foremost there fore, knowing that they must take
assunder what was already established, before they could put their own
together, they resolved to abolish wholly the Religion of the Christians, for
that it was so opposite to what they intended, that it was impossible for them
to let the least title thereof remain: And because it is no hard matter to
beware by other men's harms, seeing that the too much pretending to knowledge
among the vulgar Christians) It being dangerous for any person to have more
knowledge then he is able to manage) had been the cause of their confusion;
they resolved to reform that error, and to take from the people all means of
diving into hidden things, to which end they had ordered that all Schools of
learning should be taken away; and so far they were from having any teachers
among the people, that they ordered it should be death for any one to teach his
children the primer, Yet because they knew that the aw of a deity was very
necessary, though never so airy and national, Sir Lambert being now chief
Sultan caused Proclamation to be made whereby the God of the Christians was
deposed and eight other deities erected in his room; Four of these deities
were of the feminine gender and four of the newter; Of the female deities two
were Latin Destinia, and Ig^ora^tia. One Italian, La Potta del Papa Giovanna;
and the fourth French, foutre du diable; Of the male deities one was Latin,
Summum Imperium. One Spanish, Puerco del Paradiso; The third Italian, Cazzo nel
culo; and the last of Scotch extraction called the Piper of ^ilbarchen; and he
further proclaimed that his subjects should attribute divine worship unto
these, and that these only should be adored as the only and most supreme
Gods powers over the Earth, as to future expectations Sir Vane took it all from
Mahomet, changing little or nothing; Having thus settled religion, they proceed
to alter the civil government. Sir Lambert said that he did not like the
laws, and therefore would have new ones; but sir Vane sade it was altogether
unnecessary as yet to have any at all, for that necessity would compel their
party to be yet a while unanimous and loving one to another, and if the
Christians had any laws to fly to, it would hinder their party for dstroying
those their enemies, which was to be done no other way but by giving their
party leave to practice all manner of tyrannies and violencies over them.

Yet one law sir Vane liked well that it should be made, which was a law
against the importing of Barrel-Figgs, least thereby the Christians should
learn Unity, seeing things of the same nature stick so close together. Then in
imitation of Joshua who drove out the Canaanites sheere out of the Land to give
his people a full possession thereof, they intended to have destroyed all the
old inhabitants of Britain, both Nobles, Gentry and Yeomen, by making their
own party Lords over them, who were all of a new race, as being the Sons of the
Earth, and such therefore whom no ties of consanguinity had interest to make
them in the least wise merciful; When these things were divulged among the
Christians, there was a famous divine among them that went to Sir Vane to
reason the case with him, Quoth he unto him, it is a very dangerous thing to
alter the religion, and take away the Laws of a Nation; Sir Vane replies, that
as to the alteration of religion, it was a thing which they thought convenient,
and therefore since they had the power in their hands, they were resolved to
do it; and as for taking away the Laws, he thought 'twas very well done also;
for that was the difference between thieves and honest men, Thieves indeed were
necessitated to make Laws among themselves, and to observe them; but honest
Men, said he* such as we and our party, have no need thereof; for that we are
no thieves, but robbers; and if we do possess other Men's goods, it is because
we have right thereunto, being born to inherit the Earth; Alas quoth Sir Vane,
Laws are the guides of the soul, and therefore those who would be counted most
free, ought to live without um; for if it be a mark of slavery to have the legs
or hands bound, certes it is a sign of far greater subjection to suffer the
mind to be in fetters. When the ancient Seer heard these arguments he was
convinced, not by the strength of Sir Vane's reason, but because he saw it was
in vain to contend with an unreasonable strength; and therefore with great
sorrow for the affliction which he saw was like to fall upon the Christians, he
took his leave of the Knight of the mysterious Allegories, and departed.

CHAP. XVI. How the Christians rebelled against Sir Lambert, and how he marched
against them into the North, and what happened thereupon.
THe Christians were now in a sad condition, for that the Heathens having vowed
their destruction went about to put in practice all these designs which they
could think on for the effecting of their purpose. But they had one Champion
yet alive, who was height sir George, who was the most worthy Champion that
ever the Britains had Who seeing the destruction that was like to fall upon
the Christians, resolved to oppose himself in their defense; whereupon sir
Lambert sent defyance unto the Loyal Knight, telling him that he would shortly
meet him in the Plains of Northimbira. But before he went, he consulted with
the Knight of the Mysterious Allegories, how he might secure unto him the
Metropolis of Britain, which he was now going to leave behind him, and what
persons he might entrust for to manage his great affairs in his absence,
Whereupon they agreed to constitute several Seer's of the Square Table, which
being assembled together, should have the name of a Council of Safety. Now
that they might not cross the proverb as they were to have new Laws, so they
resolved to make new Lords. And indeed sir Vane, who was altogether for
Allegories, told sir Lambert, that there were no Men fitter then those from
whose trade or occupation; he might dravv some allusion that he might teach him
still what to do; Therefor he advised him to choose one Grocer, that it might
mind him of braying his Enemies in the Mortar of affliction* and grinding them
as small as Pepper. He bid him take one Drawer of Cloth, such was the Seer
Brandritho* to show that there ought not to be any differences among factions
of the same Stamp: He bid him take one that was employed in the Cole-Pits such
was Sir Berry the Knight of the Cole-Pit, to show that a Politician ought
always to be undermining. One Scotchman, such was the Seer Wareston, to show
the Treachery and Falsehood that Politicians ought to use. One Ploughman, such
wa^ the Byant Desborough, to show the care that a Politician ought to have, and
how he ought to observe times and seasons. And one Cobbler intimating thereby
that a Politician ought to look after no man's ends but his own When Sir Lambert
had made choice of his Council he spoke unto them in these Words.

Right Worthy Patriots.
I Have here made choice of ye* that ye may assist me in the carrying on my
great work, I must leave ye for a time, for that I am going to meet the Loyal
Knight in the Plains of Northimbria, who has bid me defyance, wot ye well that
ye have to deal with a proud and insolent City; if therefore they will not be
ruled, smoke um to death in their own Hives, as they do Bees. He was famous
that burnt the Temple of Diana, and Nero was famous that burnt Rome; then be ye
famous also, and burn London. I shall say no more, because I repose a
confidence in ye, not doubting but that ye will stick close unto me if not for
my sake, yet for your own ends, which by no means but mine ye can ever be able
to attain.

When he had uttered these sayings, they all stood up and cried long live the
Sultan of Britain.

CHAP. XVII. How the Seer Wareston lay with a Lady of pleasure that came to him
with a Petition upon the Council Table, and what happened thereupon.
LEave we now Sir Lambert a while, and let us rehearse what happened at the
Council of Safety, of which the Seer Wareston was Chief President, who was a
right notable Knave and exceeding salacious, as you shall understand by that
which follows. There was a Lady at that time, who had certain sad occasions co
visit the Council of Safety for the redress of certain grievances, but could
never find a fit opportunity to deliver her supplication; but at length finding
that the Seer Wareston was all alone in the Council Chamber* she prevailed with
money of the Door keeper to let her in. When she came in, she appeared right
comely unto the Seer, and related her Story unto him with such a grace, that he
was streight-way enamoured of her; Quoth he, well do you deserve fair Lady to
have your Petition granted, but should I grant you your Petition, would you
grant me mine? Alas! said the Lady, it is not for you to petition, who have so
much power in your hands. Ah! replied the Seer, you have wounded me; and I hope
you will cure the wound which you have made, and saying these words, he pulled
her by the Gown upon his knee as he sat in his great Chair, and would have
kissed her. The Lady not ignorant, how much coyns inflamed, made great
resistance; but the more she resisted, the more was he on fire; so that there
was exceeding great contention, and strungling between them; at length the
lustful Seer being the stronger, had thrown her upon the Council Table, and
there laid her flat on her back, where at length she gave him leav to quench
his desires with the spoils of her seeming Chastity, on condition that he would
grant her Request. He had not sooner finished, but in came Sir Fleetwood the
contemptible Knight, and some others, who seeming the Seer in a strange
posture, with his Band rumpled, his Cap off, the Sleeve of his Gown torn, and
his Face more redder then ordinary, desired to know of him what had happened
unto him. The Seer not at all abashed told them the whole Story: Who entered
thereupon into great consultations among themselves. Some were of an opinion,
that since the Seer Wareston Genealogy was likely to increase, that the Sold'an
should allow him a larger stipen'd, One stood up and said that it was
requisite, that the Contemptible Knight, and the Knight of the Allegories
should be sent to the Temple of the Gods, La potta del Papa Giovanna, to
enquire of the Oracle, whither it were a Boy or a Girl, that provision for the
birth and education might be made accordingly. Others were of opinion that
'twas convenient to know what his Name should be; This debate took up above a
weeks time, with continual pro's and con's, and at length they concluded that
it were a Boy he should be called by the Name of young FINBRANDUS, and that he
should be sent to the enchanted Castle NEWGATE, to be bred up in all the
secrets of that place by the several Giants yhat frequented the Castle. But if
it were a Girl that she should be delivered to witch Creswellia to be taught
all kind of sorceries and enchantments; and so the Council was dismissed for
that time.

CHAP. XVIII. How Sir Lambert marched against the Loyal Knight as far as the
Forest of Northimbria; and how the Council of Safety sent the Giant Husonius
to kill the Christians for playing at Football.
SIR Lambert was now gone toward the Fo^r^w of Northimbria to encounter the
Loyal Knight, leaving behind him Sir Vane the Contemptable Knight. Now you must
know that before Sir Lambert departed out of the good City of London there came
unto him the Seer Feko High Priest in the Temple of the Idol, icleped Foutre
le Diable, and the Seer Rogero High Priest of the Idol Cuzzo nel Culo and
Declared unto him, how they had that night seen a Uision, and having told what
they had seen each unto the other, that they had both Dreamed the same Dream;
Me thought quoth the Seer Feko, that I was in a great field, where I saw sir
Lambert's Horse feeding among a multitude of other Horses, when on a sudden sir
Lambert's horse elevating his rump set an exceeding great Fart, so that ths
Noise thereof caused the Ualleys to sound and the Hills to echo, and with the
strength thereof blew away all the laid Horses, so that when I looked about
again, I could not see one Horse left. Now while I was musing upon the
strangeness of the accident, there came a young man to me clothed in Blew, who
bid me declare what I had seen unto Sir Lambert, for that as his Horse had
Farted away all the other horses, so should he scatter all his enemies. When
sir Lambert heard this, he caused his Butler to be sent for, and commanded him
to carry the two high Priests into the Buttery, and set the Bread and Cheese
before them and to give them as much Ale as they would drink; which as soon as
he had faid he gollop'd away as fast as he could to encounter the Loyal Knight.
Now after that he had been gone a good while, it hapn'd one morni^g that the
weather being cold, the young men of the City of London went to play at
Football in the streets; Which being related in to the Council of Safety, they
were sore afraid, fearing lest the Christians having such a pretense to
assemble together might rise against them; wherefore they sent command
immediately to the Giant Husonius to go into the City, for fear of the worst.
Now such was the have he was in, that because he could not readily find his own
Arins he was forced to put on his head, a great iron porridge pot which was
next at hand; instead of his shield he took the p^t^lid, and in lieu of his
Mace, he pulled up one of the great Elms in the Forest of St. James; and thus
accoutred, away he goes, taking a great Band of soldiers along with him. The
Christians hearing of his coming, shut the Gates of the City, thinking to keep
him out; but the Giant pusht them open, with as much ease, as if they had been
made of Past-board; and finding his own Shield defective, he made use of one of
the Gates for his Buckler all that day. Yet notwithstanding his coming, the
Christians continued playing at Football, not dreaming that their sport had
been offensive. But so it fell out, that one of the Christians striking the
Ball right strenuous, by which his foot kicked the Ball full in the Giants
Face, so that his Eye was in greatdanger. The Giant who had but one Eye, and
being jealous that the Christians intended to put out that too, was sorely
enraged; wherefore in great fury he laid about him with his huge Elm among the
multitude, killing six of the Christians at one blow; which the Christians
beholding they incontinently fled away: That, when the Giant Husonius saw, he
thought it good time to satisfy his hunger, as well as his revenge. Thereupon
he streightway went and took up one of the dead Christians, and so sitting down
upon the ridge of a house in a moment, devoured him raw without either bread or
salt; and having finished his bloody Meal, Now, quoth he, have I dined as well
as ever I did in my life had I but half a Child to close my stomach. The Young
men seeing this, would have all together fallen upon the Giant, so little they
cared either for his arms, or the vastness of his proportion; but the chief
Governor fearing the danger of popular Tumults, chose rather to put up in
silence the injuries of the Giant, then hazard the safety of the City, when
there seemed other probable means of securing it: wherefore the Giant seeing at
length none to oppose him, returned with great triumph to the place from whence
he came, and was receiv^d with much gladness by the Council of Safety, only
they rebuked him that he did not bring the rest of those Christians along with
him which he had killed, that he might have had them for his supper.

CHAP. XIX. How the Forty Tyrants were set up again, and how Don Hazlerigo
caused several Children to be whipped to death for calling him RUMPER.
SIr Lambert being now at a great distance from the City of Londinum. The forty
Tyrants conspired together, and in a short time they so managed their
business, that they vanquished the Council of Safety, and all that adhered
unto sir Lambert; For Don Hazlerigo having got some few armed Troops together,
came to Londinum with so much have and Fury, that both the Giants, Desborow and
Husonius, were much appel'd; and besides that he had joined himself with the
Knight of hhe Green Ocean. When the forty Tyrants heard that Don Hazlerigo was
coming to town, they went forth to meet him, every one clad with a Gown of
Tyrean Purple, embroidered with Gold; for they never cared what they spent so
it were of the public money and before each person went 20 squires bare, with
Cognizances on their sleeves, every one carrying in his hand the Arms and
Pedigree of his Lord. Don Hazlerigo was on a Hill; when he saw um coming
toward him with their Hats on about a mile off; wherefore immediately he sent
away one of bis Squires, to know of them how they durst be so bold as to keep
their hats on before him while he was in sight; whether they knew who he was?
and whether that were their grateful acknowledgment of the Favors which they
were then about to receive from him? whereupon with many humble expressions of
sorrow for their offense they presently unv^ild; when they approached near, he
gave them the farthest end of the Lash of his whip to Kiss, having rebuked
them first for their sauciness. As he returned he rode hindm^st in a silver
Coach, gilded with gold, besides which ran 200 Pages and Footmen attired in
blew U^lvet, The Trumpets that went before him sounding his pr^ises were like
the sands on the sea for number making such a dreadful noise, that many report
that they saw the Graves in many Churchyards to open, and men start up in
their shirts to ask what the matter was. Coming into the Chamber of Council,
they p^ac'd him under a Canopy of State; when on a sudden rising up with a
Look as Furious as Tamerlaines. What rage quoth he, did possess that vain
Fool Sir Lam^ert, to lift himself up against me, who am in worth as much above
him as the Heaven is above the Earth: proud vaunting pie^e of insolence,
shortly shall he too late repent, when he shall receive the same punishment
from my hands, as the Haughty Almidor King of Morocco did from the hand of St.
George. Behold ye are now once more estoblished by my power; therefore let us
to Work, and handle this insolent Nation without Mittens; Above all things
beware of consideration, knowing that delays are dangerous. If we must burn,
let us burn; if kill, kill, it is no matter whom what or when: we loose our
Authority while we enter into such consultations: consulting shows fear, and
fear was never the mark of ebsolute Dominion: The Devil, their Fire and his
Dam go with all Consultalions, and Deliberations, and sage Thoughts; but be
ruled by me and I vvarrant you all things will go well: When he had spoken
these words* he departed home to his spouse: now not long after, it happened
that he was going in great state to the House, certain little children playing
together cried one to another, There goes one of the Rump, which was a term of
Ignominy that the people of Britain had thrown upon the Forty Tyrants; which
when it came to the ear of Don Hazlerigo, he caused the said children to be
sent for; when they came before him, with a stern countenance, he commanded
that they should be forthwith taken away and whipped to Death with whips of
Knotted whipcord: And when one said unto him that it was too c^^el a Sentence,
he replied that it was too merciful? for that they might thank him that he did
not cause them to be offered up to the Idol Molock in the Ualleys of the
Chimeron; and with that he slu^g away in a great rage in order to his other
Affairs.

CHAP. XX. How Sir Lambert submitted, and how the Giants, Desborow, Cobbet,
Creed, and Hewson, seeing themselves disappointed of their Designs, went to
fight against Heaven.
WHen Sir Lambert saw that he could not get unto the Loyal Knight, who seeing
himself far unequal to sir Lambert in number, kept himself in his strong Holds;
he thought upon a way how to keep the Loyal Knight from coming to him: he saw
his soldiers wanted work, and therefore to keep them from mutining, and being
idle, which two inconveniences commonly go together, like a Citizen and his
wife, He gave them a command that they should build up a Wall in the Land of
Northumbria, the which in breadth should reach from sea to sea, and in height up
unto the clouds, and which should be so thick that fifty Coaches might go a
breast; and to secure it from the thunder-thumping-bullets of the
dismall-noise-making Canon, he sent for the Seer Feko to enchant it. Now where
Travelers were to pass to and fro, he ordered that there should be a great
Gate made of Massy Brass, which should be bolted with Bolts as big about as
an ordinary Steeple, the Shooter of the Lock was to be as broad as an Acre of
Ground; Then said the Artificer unto Sir Lambert, Who shall turn the Key? and
Sir Lambert replied* Let there be a Mill to turn it. Now as Sir Lambert was
contriving about this wall* Sir Vane hearing of his design, sent him a Letter;
the substance whereof was, that he had heard of the Wall which he was going to
build; and therefore he advised him, because Love would break through stone
walls to make it of Brick: in answer to which Sir Lambert sent him another,
wherein he assured him that the Wall should be of Brick accordingly, and that
if he would not believe him, he might come down and see. Sir Lambert had a
double Design in making this wall; First, because that being he was not
ignorant that his soldiers must dig very deep to lay the foundations of such a
wall, he knew nothing to the contrary but that they might find some Mine or
other whereby to enrich both themselves and him, but his main drift was to keep
the Loyal Knight from coming into Britain: moreover this wall was to be guarded
by never-sleeping Dragons, which were to be sent for from Lydia, as also by
Mastiff Dogs, which were to be kept hungry for that purpose. You Will say now he
was in a fair way: but woe unto a man when ill luck follows him. Now said the
Knight of the golden Tulip unto himself, shall I have such a wall, as there
will not be in the world such another, nor was there ever such a one before?
Travelers shall come to see this wall of mine, from all parts of the Earth,
and shall bring money in their pockets and shall enrich my Land; then will I
plant Apricocks and Peaches against this wall, and when they are ripe I will
say unto my wife, lo, the fruits of my Wall. While he was thus solacing himself
under his wall, came unto him the sad news how that the Forty Tyrants were got
into power again, and that Don Hazlerigo with an Army had forced all his one
and twenty S^ers to run away, swearing that he would not only boil Sir Lambert
now, but make Porridge also of his Flesh* he fell streightway into a swoon,
continuing so for eight and forty hours; when his friends saw that, they sent
for Physicians, who were in a great amaze; but at length they agreed that he
should be laid under a Pump, the well being first cleans'd and filled with
Aniseed-water; which was done accordingly, and so they laid him under the spout
and pumped strong-water into his mouth for ten days together: at the end
whereof, through the heat of the water he began ot revive, and elevating his
drowzy head, Oh! quoth the Knight of the golden Tulip, groaning like a soul in
Purgatory, Accursed be the Loyal Knight; for my Cakes dow, and all by his
means. But the Giant Desborow cursed the Knight of the Mysterious Allegories,
being very free of his Malediction, because that by his means they had put down
the Forty Tyrants, saying that he was the arrantest Knave that ever pissed with
a Prick. Sir Lambert now considering the sadness of his condition, was in a
bushel of troubles, so that he knew not what in the world to do. Should I go
to the Town of London, quoth he, what should I do there? walk about the
streets with my hands in my pocket like a Dutch Saylor? That befits not him
that once rode about the streets of Westmonasterium, like a Country Hagler,
causing his enemies to creep into Crevises. That becomes not him who once
vanquished the Baron of Cheshire, and laid the Swineheard of Maxfield sprawling
on the ground. But it is a folly to talk, I must either go or stay; well I Will go:
But God knows my heart it is even as a Bear goes to the stake* and I know I
shall be baited like a Bear too: and what then? why a Bear's a Bear, and a
Knight's a Knight: Nay, and a Knight's a Bear too; for by the same Consequence
that I a Knight am made an Ass, shall I a Knight be likewise made a Bear; But
let um take heed of their Bears, that is let um look to themselves; for if ever
I get um in my paws again, I Will gripe um a little faster then I did before. When
sir Lambert had spoken these words, he threw his clo^ke over his shoulders, and
in very melancholy-wise spurred his Steed forward. The Forty Tyrants hearing
that he was come unto the good Town of London, they sent for him to have him in
Examination; But when he came before them, Don Hazlerigo looked upon him with a
very grim aspect, Si^rah, quoth he, Sir Knight what made thy overventurous,
foolhardy, memirrot presumption dare to advance it self against oxcombly ehur
of Knighthood? Did thou not know that I was choleric; how then daredst thou
to provoke me? Sir Lambert, then pleaded for himself, saying, That he had not
done what he did but that he thought 'twas for the good of the Nation. Thou
lie like a Rogue, replies Don Hazlerigo; and having said those words
commanded him to be taken away forthwith, and to be thrown into the Caldron of
boiling Lead, which was prepared in a place not far off: and they say he had
certainly been boiled to death had not the Knight of the Mysterious Allegories
interceded for him; though indeed he did not prevail so much upon him, but
rather prevailed upon the intentions of some of the forty Tyrants, who liking
not the proceedings of the loyal Knight, resolved to make use of him again, in
case any such quarrel should happen as they suspected.

When the Giant Cobbetto, the Giant Credo, the Giant Hackero, the Giant
Husonio, and the Giant Rodesbo heard of the ill success of sir Lambert, they
grew very mutinous against the Gods of their Religion; they wondered that their
Gods would use them so discourteously, that it was neither a friendly part nor
the part of Gentlemen to deal with their Ido^aters in that fashion: they taxed
them with the want of morality, and common civility; and at length one thing
aggravating another they resolved to make them know themselves and if they
would not do that, to pull them out of Heaven by the head and ears. But how
shall we come at them? quoth one; well enough cries another; are there not
mountains enough in the world? let us never leave setting one upon another till
we reach them.

Hereupon Credo and Cobeto, were sent to bring away Arthur's Seat, and the rest
of the Mountains in Scotland, Husonio was sent to fetch Atlas out of Africa,
and Hackero was sent to fetch the Mountains of Caucasus. Then did the Giants
Husonio and Hackero, prepare them wonderful Stilts wherewith to wade through
the deep Ocean: Now because that the len^th of them was such and so vast, they
took the largest steps that ever were known one Stilt being always ten Mile
before the other, which may seem incredible, but that we do not find it set
down in the Apochrypha.

The Giant Credo seeing them preparing them such Stilts he presently made
himself such too; for, qu^th he, surely they must be excellent for disp^tch,
which he found to be true; for by the help of these Stilts he went to the
furthest parts of old Scotia, and back again in less then a quarter of an hour
bringing a huge and mighty Hill upon his head with more ease then a Turk
carries his Turbant: now because the Hill covered him all over, so that he
could not be perceived, some say that the Hill walked and it was taken for a
great Miracle throughout all Albion. When he came to the place appointed, he
took the said mountain off his head, as one would take off his Cap and with one
hand set it upon the top of Plimlemmon; he had no sooner done it, but the
Caverns of his belly roared, and immediately sent forth such a mighty tempest
as blow the said M^untain quite away some 15 Miles into the Ocean, as you would
blow away a Feather with a Smiths pair of Bellows, and so was all that labor
loft. Scarcely had this misfortune befallen them, when the Giants Husonio and
Hackero returned the ore from Tenariff, the other from Africa, They related
strange things; how that as they were taking up the Mountains on their backs,
the Knights of those Countries came upon them so that they were forced to fight
with all Comers and Goers for six days and nights together: Husonio said that
he had slain three Millions of Knights, and Hackero reported how he had killed
five Millions and ten Knights, besides two dwarfs; but at length hearing that
Atlas was coming to defend his own mountain being very weary, they retired
forthwith; for they were loath to venture rubbers with a Giant of such Fame as
he was. However they brought with them four of five smaller Hills which were
not above two or three Miles high a piece, which they had put in their pockets
for fear of being discovered. But as they were going to place these one upon
another according to their first resolutions, lo* another accident that spoiled
all; For early in the morning, beho^d there came five Milk-maids forth to milk
the Kin^ that were grazing in the adjoining pasturel; when the Giants saw them
al, in white with Milk-pails on their heads they admired at the strangeness of
their Head-gear; For were they Mortals, quoth they, they would not approach as
they do, but seeing us would certainly be affrighted at our shapes: Hereupon
the Giant Credo went down to meet them, and when he came near, he said unto
them, with a stern countenance, Are ye spirits of the North, or of the South,
or are ye spirits of the lower Regions, or spirits of the Spears? If ye be
such, Think you that we who are now going to revenge our selves upon the Gods,
will let you escape who are but their Ministers? with that he gave one of the
Milk-maids such a blow on her Pail as made her Pail and her Head come almost to
the ground together; which when the rest espied, they threw down their
Milk-pails with great indignation, and fell upon the Giant with such a fury,
that he not being able to resist their strong Violence, was forced to yield,
while they dragged him to the ground by the h^ir of the head: being in this
plight he began to call and cry; but 'twas well if the rest of the Giants had
enough of courage to see him; for they durst not stir one inch to his
assistance. Uillain that thou art, Quoth one of the Amazon Uirgins, I Will teach
thee to hurt Jane, and with that she gave him a claw that plowed up his Face
from ear to ear. Nay, quoth another, for the honor of Saint George let us
cross him; and so she made a furrow from his Chin to his Forehead; One would
have cut off his Gingumbobs, but that fear made him swell so strong, that they
were forced to quit him. Which blessed time being come, with a countenance full
of the effects of a sad conquest, he went to his fellow-Gyants, who partly
affrighted at the direful mortifications of his Uisage, partly seeing the
Milk-wenches advance, and considering that they should never be able to conquer
the Gods, who were beaten only by two or three sprights, as to them the
Milk-wenches seemed to be, they took up their Heels, and with no small
diligence, ran away, leaving their intended Design to any body else that durst
undertake it.

CHAP. XXI. How the Loyal Knight entered Londinum, and what happened thereupon.
NOt long ago we left the Loyal Knight in the Country of Scotia, devising with
his Company concerning the welfare of the Country of Britain. He at length
seeing the Forces of Sir Lambert dissipated by the power of the forty Tyrants
rode toward the City of Londinum, meeting many Knights by the way that followed
the King, whom he still directed in their course, who made to him report of the
dealings of the forty Tyrants at Londinum: When he entered into the City of
Londinum, he caused Don Lamberto to be cast into prison; but long had he not
been there but he made his escape, thinking to have gathered his Forces
together again, and to have encountered the Loyal Knight; but being hardly
pursued he was again retaken, and again committed to the care of the Knight of
the Lions. Which the forty Tyrants saw that they could make no disturbance
against the Loyal Knight, neither of themselves nor by any other means, they
came to the Loyal Knight, saying unto him, We thought till now, my Lord that
ye were one of the best advised Knights of the whole world but that we now by
proof perceive the contrary. You think that what ye do is for safety of your
Honor, but you will find it to be the loss of you and your men. But the
Loyal Knight replying, Full well, quoth he, do you manifest your horrible
Treason; for besides your Treachery in compacting the Death of your Lord, you
would have me also a Traitor to his Posterity, as ye have proved. Then said the
forty Tyrants, to hinder us from ruling in London? To which the Loyal Knight
making answer, Never, quoth he, shall Traitor reign in London while the most
Honorable King of the World lives. When this debate was ended, He summoned
the Kings Friends together, and gave them the chief power over Britain, which
was no sooner restored unto them, but they sent for the true and lawfvl King of
Britain, who not long after was received into his chief City of Londinum with
great Joy and Triumph: And so concludes the First Part of this History.

FINIS.
READER,
EPistles like Prologues of plays are many times skipt over, seldom read: and
to say the truth I know not that they are of any great use: and therefore that
I may not sin against your patience, and my own opinion I shall say no more for
what is here writ, but only thus much, that the Ladys may read here what they
never read in their lives: for whereas all other Knights fought for their
sakes, our Knights fought for Nobody's sakes but their own* as you shall find
by the sequel, And so farewell.

Books Printed and Sold by H. Marsh, at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane, near
Fleetstreet.
Folio
THe Sovereign's Prerogative and the Subjects Privilege, comprised in several
Speeches, Cases, and Arguments of Law, discussed between the King's most sacred
Majesty, and the most eminent Persons of both Houses of Parliament: Collected
by T. Fuller, B.D. Leonards Reports -- A Complete History of the Wars of the
Greeks; written by the learned Polibius, and Translated by Ed. Grimston, Esquire.
Sergeant at Arms to his late Majesty.
Quarto.
The History of Independency complete, being the 1.2. 3.4 and last part; which
may be had single by such as has bought the others. A Comical History of these
late Times: by Montelion. Richard Hanam's Exploits. The Faithful Lapidary,
being a History of all precious Stones, very useful for Gentlemen, Merchants
and others. Blood washed away by the Tears of Repentance, or the Relation of
Butler's murdering of Knight in Milk-street. Rumps Looking-glass, or a
Collection of such pieces of Dro lery as was prepared by several Wits to purge
the Rump. A New Discovery of the Highway Thieves; by a Gentleman lately
Converted. A short View of the Life and Actions of the Illustrious James Duke
of York, together with his Character.
In large Octavo.
Royal History completed in the life of his sacred Majesty Charles the 2d,
James Duke of York, and Henry D. of Gloucester, with their Restoration, happily
concluded by his Excellency the Lord Moncke now D. of Albemarle. That useful
Book for Gentlemen and Travelers, being an exact Description of the several
Counties and Shires in England: by Ed. Leigh, Esquire. The Rogue or the life of
Gusman, De Alfaray, the Witty Spaniard, the Fifth and Last Edition. Fuller's
Treple Reconciler.
Small Octavo.
Modern Polity completed, or the public Actions and Councels, civil and
military of his Excellency the Lord General Moncke, under all Revolutions
since 1640, to 1660. with the Principles moral and political upon which they
were grounded; Illustrated out of the best masters of policy, ancient and
modern. The complete Attorney, the fifth and last Edition. The History of the
Affairs of Scotland under the conduct of the illustrious and truly valiant
James Marquess of Montrose. Advice to Baalam's Ass, or Momus Catechized in
answer to a certain scribler called I. Heydon, Author of advice to a Daughter.
The Royal Buckler, or Salmasius in English. The Devils Cabinet-councel
Discovered, or the plots and contrivances of O. Cromwell and the Long
Parliament, in Order to the taking away the Life of his sacred Majesty of
Blessed memory. The crafty Whore, or the mystery and iniquity of Bawdy-Houses,
with Dehortations from Lust: published for the good of Young men; by R. H. Esquire.
The Rump, or a Collection of such Songs and Ballads as were made upon them who
would be a Parliament, and were but the Rump of an House of Commons, five times
Dissolved; Collected by I. B. Esquire. Cleavland's P^ems. -- Montelion's Comical
Alminacks for 1660, and 1661. The Baptized Turk, or the Conversion of a Native
Turk to the Christian Religion: by Dr. VVarmestrey, Dr. Gunning, etc. Dr.
Griffith's Sermon. Assent to Elisse by 3 steps, Philosophy, History, Theology,
discovering man's true Felicity, whereunto is added that excellent Dialogue of
Dr. Thaulerus with a Poor Beggar. Shimeies Curses on King David lighting on
himself, or a Parallel between the Sufferings of King David and his late
Majesty.
Quarles last Poems.
An Exact History of the Life and Actions of Hugh Peter's; as also his Diary now
in the Press. Montelion's Introduction to Astrology; a thing long expected, in
the Press now a printing.
Large Twelve,
Fathers Blessing, or a Legacy to his Son, fitting him to carry himself through
the various Incounters of this world. Whites Peripatetical Institutions in the
way of Sir Kenelm Digby. Hook's Fatal Doom to the Reprobate, or an excellent
Comment on the 1. of Cor. 16.22: Magerine Polity
Small 12.
Reynold's Word of Caution to the Atheists, and Errourists of our Time. The
Christian Diary containing the whole Duty of man; by N. Causin. A physical
Discourse of the Cure of Diseases by Signature; by R. Bunworth. Man in
Paradise, a Philosophical Discourse. A New Discovery of the French Disease and
Running of the Reins, their causes, signs, with plain and easy Directions of
perfect curing the same; by R. Bunworth, Doctor of Physic, now in the Press,
the 2 d Edition.
In Twenty four.
Lucius Florus. Salust -- Lessius of Health, with Cornaroes Treatise of
Temperance. Dr. Warmestry on the Sacrament.
FINIS.
The Giant Husonio.


DON JUAN LAMBERTO: Or, a Comical HISTORY Of the Late Times.

The second and last Part.

By Montelion Knight of the ORACLE. etc.

LONDON, Printed by T. Leach, for Hen. Marsh, at the Princes Arms in
Chancery Lane near Fleetstreet, 1661.

Don Juan Lamberto: OR, A COMICAL HISTORY OF The Late TIMES.
CHAP. I. How the Seer Lisle hearing of the return of the lawful King of
Britain, devised for to fly out of the Land; how he made him a Periwig of
Camels hair, and how he fled into Egypt in a winged Chariot.
NOw as they were resting themselves in the Forest under the forsaken Tree,
Sir Lambert unbuckled his Armor, and was laying himself down in a posture to
sleep, when lo there came a Snayl creeping toward him, O^ that I could now
pray quoth he as well as the old Sultan could, for certanly this is an evil
Spirit, but when he gathered up his resolution and struck it, the poor Snayl
pulled in its horns, and then he had compassion thereon, for said he, this poor
Snayl is in my condition, and pulls in its horns even as I am forced to pull in
mine because of the tapp which the forty Tyrants have given me. But the forty
Tyrants though they had vanquished Sir Lambert, did not yet enjoy their
intended ease and quiet, for they were sorely pressed upon by the Loyal Knight,
and the rest of the Christans that were with him, who were indeed too Cunning
for them; For the Loyal Knight seeing that his Forces were not powerful enough
for them, at first feigned himself to be a Pagan likewise, at which they were
right glad, and commanded him to pull down the Gates of the City of Londinum,
which when he had done, they said one to another* now the Town's ours, for they
thought that they had made the Loyal Knight Cock sure to them, but when he saw
how they had abused him, he called for one of the City Giants, who was seven
yards high, and fifteen foot about the waste, and bid him go and pull those
proud and furious Dominatours from their imperious Thrones who presently took
his March, and being come to the place where they were met, he put his hand in
at the window, and took them out one by one, as men take out young Squabs out
of Pigeon holes. Then did the forty Tyrants howl, and bawl, and yawl, and fume,
and swear, and tear, as the Poet most elegantly has it, -- rending their
Throats for Anger.


But little good did it do them, even no more than Scur^y grass* Ale does a
man good that drinks it to cure his Corns; for the Giant had no more
compassion on them, than the Lion has upon his Prey. They begged it is true,
but he frowned, then they begged again, and he frowned again, then they begged
again, but then he frowned terribly, so that his brows came down to his Chin,
and then they trembled like Aspin leaves. It Is well quoth the Giant that I give
you time to consider of the evil which ye have done, and that I do not
presently gobble you up, as for example with that; It is reported for certain,
that he took up the Seer Cornellolanelus, and having first rubbed him between
his forefinger and his thumb, as they do damsons, to make him tender, he
tossed him into his mouth, and swallowed him whole, the which I take to be more
probable, because he has since been much sought after and could never be
found, nor so much as heard of. When the Seer Lisle saw that, he was full sore
afraid, for quoth he, There is no man that deserves less from the Christians
than I have done; For ye must know my dearly beloved friends, that this Samen
Seer was one of the chief of the forty Tyrants, who upon all occasions did
sentence the innocent Christians to death, sitting upon a Throne made for that
purpose, clad in Scarlet and fine Linen. Wherefore espying his opportunity, he
ran hastily away from the face of the Giant, and fled unto a certain Castle
which appertained to the Witch who was called the Sable-brow'd-Enchantresse,
which stood near the Hamlet of Bloomesbury, where he remained hidden certain
days under the Coats of one of the Harlots of that place, till the heat of the
search ^eas over. Now that our His^ory may be the clearer, seeing that we are
^allen to speak of this right notorious Seer, we thought it necessary, to
discover something of his genealogy. His Father was a Cow keeper, who derived
his Pedigree from the fierce Fireanton, who was the first Switzer that ever was
in the world, and his Mother was the fair Elisabetha, who noised hot Chaldron
Pyes about the Sreets of Londinum, and was descended from the beautiful
Scourandirona, who was chief Cha^^woman to Nimcodds Clerk of the Kitchen. It is
reported that the Babe being born did fart right often, whence some out of the
depth of their foresight did strangly conjecture, that the time should come
when he should stink for fear in his latter days; When he grew up he was much
given to thrust himself into joynt-stools with the bottomes upward, Hereupon
some said he would come to be the Pontisex Maximus; but others that were of a
deeper fores^ght did right sapiently conjecture, that though he might arrive to
high degree, yet in one part of his life or other he should come to be in a
very straight condition. Now trust me, and how is it in the power of man to
help it? For as the proverb says right well, Fortune is fickle; so that there
is nothing more inconstant than wayward Fortune. This made that potent
Magnifico Don Slaolfolko Guasta Campo cry out when he was vanquish^d by the
most potent and most furious Knight Don Fernando Ferenomano; Oh quoth he, The
stripes of cruel Fortune what are they like? like the dashing of the proud
Billows against the sturdy Rocks? no: like the roaring of the untamed Lion? no:
like a noise of Fiddlers? no, neither What then? there is nothing to be compared
unto them. The lashes from a Hangman at the Carts tail, are but ticklings of
the Skin in comparison of them; for they make Ladies weep, Knights to howl, and
Giants to roar; But let us return to out story, leaving Don Slaolfolko to
bewail his misfortunes himself. Now you must know, or else you know nothing at
all, that the Seer L^sle was that cursed man that had the cursed mishap to fall
into the gripes of this accursed and cruel Fortune. But mark ye right well what
I shall say, he may thank himself for it; For when he came to those years.
which are ycleped years of discretion, he began to feel in his little pocket,
The Devil in the shape of a Sea horse.
but found therein no money; Then quoth he, O my accursed Stars, why suffer ye
this evil for to befall me; Then there arose a thing out of the Earth like a
great Seahorse, with long hair as black as Charcoal, at the sight whereof he
fell fla^ on his back to the ground, and as he lay along, the spirit walked and
walked over him, and at length pissed in his face: after which it spoke, unto
him in this phrase, The Tears of the Lady, He was a Poet.
and Blood of her Lord,
Shall unto thee great Riches afford.


The Seer ponderd this saying in his mind. and laid it up in his breast as
charily as a Country Gentlewoman keeps her Jewels; long looked he for this
time. O when will it be, quoth he, that I shall increase this my small
pittance, which with so covetous and sparing a hand Fortune has measured me
out? when shall I dine with a dozen dishes of meat, and look pleasantly to see
my Consort carve up the second and third course? when shall Honor attend me,
and the respect of the people wait upon the train of my gown^ These are the
things I gape for, and to obtain, what would I not do? I think there is nothing
that I would not do; stay, let me examine my self. Could I renounce the
Religion of my Country? A Pecadillo, a poor pitiful Pecadillo; Could I perjure
my self? Yes I think I could, nay I am sure I could. Could I dispense with the
murdring of one or two, or two or three, or forty or fifty, or so? not by way
of Duel, for I am none of your hardy Knights, but as a Judge I could, which is
both safe and honorable.

These his resolves were not long undiscovered (...)the subtle searchers into
the dispositions of men, of which the chief Sultan of Britain, and the forty
Tyrants had then good store. Now mark ye, there is nothing more luckie in the
world than for a man to be booted* and spar^'d, and to have nothing to do but
to get up and ride upon an occasion when it offers it self* Even so it fell out
with our Seer. For the Sultan, whose intention it was to extirpate all the
Nobles of Britain, that were friends to the lawful King of Britain, had framed
sundry* and several grievous accusations of heinous crimes and offenses against
them, that so he might bereave them of their estates and of their lives at
once. Now left the people of Britain should think that he did any thing
contrary to the Laws which were used in that Realm, he devised with himself to
erect a Tribunal in imitation of a Court of true Justice; which when he had
brought to p^sse, yet still he wanted one who would undertake to sit as chief
Judge, and to pronounce the dire sentence of untimely death upon such innocent
Knights whose hard mishap it was to be sacrificed to his wrath and fiery
indignation. Then the Sultan of Britain casting about, and revolving in himself
where he might and a at instrument to perform that office, he was at length
informed of the Seer Lisle; wherefore he immediately caused him to be sent for,
to appear before him: who incontinently made his address unto him, and that
with so much readiness, that for have he put on both his stockings the wrong
side outward, which mark of obedience and willingness the Sultan was right
glad to see. Gentle Lisle, quoth he, thou can not be ignorant, how that I
have many a right worthy Knight who are professed enemies to my greatness now
within my power, which I must cause to be put to death, that so I may be
secured in my great Dominions; Now so it is that I have chosen thee to be their
Condemnator. Then the Seer Lisle made him three great bows, and sev^n congies
and a half, promising him faithfully to do effectually whatever he commanded:
For quoth he, Great Sultan thy behests are just, therefore have I forsaken the
God of the Christians, to serve the God whom thou servest, and to submit to
thee in all things; for who is like unto thee among all the Princes in the
world. Thereupon he was without delay clothed in Skarlet, and a Throne was
provided for him where he might sit in majesty to exercise cruelty as he
pleased upon the distressed Christians; and indeed so dextrous was he and
Lordly in his office, that few or none of the Christians escaped his bloody
sentences. Wherefore the Sultan was right glad, and it pleased him to see that
the Seer was so faithful unto him; Therefore he gave unto him the Lands and
Palaces of the Christian Princes, so that the Seer lived right illustriously,
his heart being at eafe and wallowing in plenty. But as after Winter comes
Summer, and after Summer comes Winter again as after fair weather comes fowl,
and after fowl fair, so after the long tranquillity which our Seer enjoyed,
ensued the boystrous storms of heart killing sorrow: for lo he that before
looked big and haughty, and sat upon high places, where all men might view
him, yet feared not the paw of the Bailiff, nor the fury of the Soldans
Ianisary's, is now not to be seen by any, sculking sometimes in Ovens,
sometimes under the coats of Harlots, sometimes in old Trunks, sometimes like
Diogenes living in Tubs, yet no where in security, but still asf^righted with
continual fears; which kind of life, through the excess of trouble and
discontent that was in it growing irksome unto the Seer Lisle, he bethought
himself how he might escape out of the Land of Britain into some other Country.
But quoth he into what Country shall I go? shall I go into Swedland? no: why?
first and foremost because that in that place the Winters are long and the
Summers are short. Secondly, because the Summers are short and the Winters are
long. Thirdly and lastly, because it is an unfortunate Country, and they can
never keep what they get, which is too much my own condition. As for France and
Spain they be Kingdoms, which are no places for me: for even as the Stork
delights in Commonwealths, even so do I. No I will go into Egypt, for that
is a pleasant Country, and because the people of that Country be of my own
Religion, and there lived the Jews, of whose number was Achan, from whom I am
lineally descended by the Fathers side: and though there be no Kings, yet there
be Tyrants, who are men after my own heart; And I will go into Egypt because
of the Red Sea, for ye must know that I have been bred up near Red seas most
part of my life, and was a maker of Red seas my self; Therefore as it is the
nature of Ducks, Teal, and Mallard to frequent the shores of great Rivers, as
also of the Ocean, and as it is the nature of the Soland Gec^e to build about
the impregnable I stand of the Bass, so does it agree with my desire to inhabit
near the Red^sea.

CHAP. II. Yet of the Seer Lisle, and of other things.
WHen he had thus forti^ied his mind with the Barricado's of Constancy, and
Rampires of Resolution, so that it was impossible to force it with the
Ma^terpeices of Persuasion; he then be thought himself which might be the best
way to conceal himself in his flight. Hereupon he entered into a very great
Consultation, and debate concerning what was to be done with the
Sable-browd-Inchantresse, and other of his Friends; some were of opinion that
he should wrap himself in a Lions skin, and so walk to the seashore upon all
four; But this enterprise was left off, because that after they had tried the
Sage three or four times, they found him very insufficient to roar, of which
there was an exceeding great necessity, if the Country people should come too
near to view or handle him as he went along. But there was nothing that pleased
him so well as the way which last of all he devised with himself which was to
put on a Perewig and a Beard of Camels hair, for quoth he a Camel is a Beast
that bears great burdens, and I bear a great burden of woe and misery, and
therefore since I must carry this great burden, it is fit that I should be as
like a Camel as I may. Then did the Sable-browd-Inchantress send away
incontinently three spirits Rimbombo, Nachor, and Rantantamboro into Arabia to
fetch away the tails of 4 Camels, who went and came in less than a quarter of
an hour, for they went as if the Devil had drove um, which is 10000. mile in a
minute. When the Sable-browd-Enchantress had the Camels tails in her
possession, then did she with wonderful Art frame thereof a certain large
Perewig, the locks whereof reached down to his middle, and it was very graceful
and comely to behold. Now when the Sage had put it on, he and the Enchantress
communed together in this wise. Quoth he, most renowned Mariana, for so was the
Sable browd-Enchantress named, who do I now look like? for certes it cannot be
that I should be taken for who I am indeed, No quoth she, my most worthy Seet;
It is for thy sake that I have run my self into very great hazzads, nor would I
by any means that after all the pain which I have taken, that thy face should
be no whit altered; But be thou assured that the Gods have prosper'd my
undertakings, for thou look not like thy self, but thou look even like
Hector of Troy; Most assuredly I could like Circe have changed thee into a
Swine, but I thought it better that thou should look rather like Hector than
a Hog. Most courteous Enchantress replied the Seer, I can never end celebrating
your most high and more than humane Art, especially in the curling of my
Perewig, which is done with so much art that I never saw the like in all my
life. Gentle-Seer, replied the Enchantress, know right well, that so great is
the respect which I bear unto thee, both in respect of the kindness which I
have received from thee, and which thou have afforded unto my Damsells, that I
would not thou should want any assistance that I can afford thee. Therefore
now I call it to mind, there is one Gyges, who is in great esteem with the
famous sir Pluto Knight of the Infernal shades, who has a Ring, the virtue
whereof is such, that he who ever wears the same shall walk invisible; That
quoth the Seer would be of great advantage unto me, and I would when I had made
use of it return it unto sir Gyges with all possible speed, and the choicest of
my courteous thanks, Hereupon Rimbombo, Nachor, and Rantantamboro were again
dispatched unto sir Gyges, ^o desire him in the name of the
Sable-browd-Enchantress* that he would in courtesse lend her his Ring, the
which had such excellent virtue, that she might pleasure a distressed Knight
who was one of her Friends, who had great occasion thereof, Sir Gyges replied
that he was always courteous unto distressed Knights, and had no less respect
to the Sable-browd-Enchantress, so that he was right sorry that he could not do
as she desired, for that he had lost the Ring that she sent for most
unfortunately; for having left it off one morning when he went to wash his
hands, the Damsel of the Castle swept it away. and threw it among the rubbish
out of the Castle gates. When the Sage Lisle and the Inchantresse heard this,
they were right sorry, and were ready to weep for the anguish that fell upon
their Spirits. But quoth the Sable-browd-Inchantresse, since I cannot have
that, I will try my Spells for another. So she prepared all things in a
readiness, and first she drew a large long Circle, which was the strangest
that ever was seen, In the midst of this Circle they placed a Bed, the which
had never been lain in before, into which the Sage Lisle was commanded to
enter, and put himself naked between the Sheets. Then the Inchantresse sitting
down upon the Bed side, uttered several Charms in the Slavonian language, at
the end whereof there arose from the four corners of the wind, four black
Horses, with Spirits on their backs, in the shape of Monkeys, who demanded of
the Enchantresse what was her pleasure, who presently commanded them to fetch
unto her one of the Nimphs of the Hesperian Orchard, who presently hurr^'d away
with such a Tempest as made the Earth to shake like an Aspin leaf, at the noise
whereof the Mountains hoped and danced up and down, making a noise like the
chopping of Pot Herbs; but they appeared again in the twinkling of an eye
together with the Damsel, who seemed unto the eye as plump as a Patridge, and
as ruddy as a Queen Apple. Being come, the Inchantresse caused her to be laid
in the Bed, by the side of the Sage Lisle, then drawing the Curtains and
telling the Seer, that if he used the fair Uirgin well, that he should have his
hearts desire. She departed out of the Room. Now when the Seer and the Uirgin
were alone in Bed together, they enjoyed one the other all that night in a most
pleasant wise, so that the fair Philothera for so was the Uirgin ycleped,
having received great content from the Seer Li^le; quoth she, I am the happiest
person in the world, for I thought when I dyed, that I should have lost all the
pleasures of this earth, but thou have given me new satisfaction, when I
thought I should never have enjoyed the sweet solace of a man more. For to tell
thee truth, right worthy Seer, I am the Soul of a Poulterers Wife, who when my
Husband broke, was preserved by the Charity of such Knights as frequented this
Castle, to which I was daily invited by the Inchantresse, how I came hither
again, I know not, however I have reason to give thee thanks ^or the marvelous
courtesies which thou have afforded to me this night, so pulling off a Ring
which she wore upon her thumb, she gave it him, desiring him to accept it as a
token of her love, and having so said, she immediately vanished out of his
sight. When he had thus obta^n'd the Ring, he found there was one thing more
which would be a great hindrance unto him, which was the tediousness of the
Journey, by reason of certain great Corns which he had upon his feet;
wherefore calling unto him again Dame Mariana, the Black-browd-Inchantresse,
they thereupon entered into new debates, and at length she resolved to make him
a flying Chariot. It was made o^ the Cawie of a Sea Mare four months gone,
which she caused to be killed in the night, three minutes past the sixth hour
the Sun entering into the Oriental Nadir, for being taken from the Sea Mare at
that nick of time though it were as light as a feather, it became as hard as
steel. The frame thereof was like a Sedan, the Poles thereof were smaller than
the smallest Needles. Now the Inchantresse having prepared all things ready,
took the Seer and put him into the Chariot, together with a Bottle of
Aniseed-water, and four Tabern Biskets; then she embraced and kissed the Seer,
and hugged him, giving unto him a Bird-Call, telling him that he should soon
find the virtue thereof, and bidding him withal be sure that he never left
whistling till he came into Egypt. And indeed so-cunningly had she charmed
this Bird-Call, that as soon as the Seer began to whistle, there came four
Ostriches, which placing themselves under the four Poles of the Chariot,
spread their wings, and being mounted high into the Air, steered their course
directly to the Land of King Pharaoh. The Inchantress with heavy sorrow looked
after him, till the noise of other Knights knocking at her Castle Gate called
her to look after her other affairs.

CHAP. III. How the Giant Husonio went to seek a Den and a Mountain, and what
happened thereupon.
NAy by my says quoth the Giant Husonio, for I m^^not tarry any longer in the
Land of Britain, seeing that the Enchanted Castles are all pulled down, and
the Sun defying Forests are all rooted up by ^he forty Tyrants. Oh this
Britain has been an old swinger of Giants; for there ^ere Giants that
inhabited therein of yore, but there came a people out of the Cast, who did so
lam-baste their great sides, that they were enforced to leave their
Habitations: Certes even so is it now with me. When he had uttered these
speeches he called for an Astrologer and a Book of Mapps. Then quoth he unto
the Astrologer, where is the greatest Mountain in the World, and where may I be
most likely to find a Den? The Astrologer estsoones replied, that men of his
Profession did not look after Mountains in this World: but if he would go into
the World of the M^on, he could show him Mountains enough, with Dens ready
furnished with Turkey Chairs and Couchches of right curious Workmanship. When
the Giant Husonio heard that he waxed exceeding wroth, and took the Astrologer
upon the palm of his hand, and thrust him into his mouth, as you would put a
brown Loaf into an Oven, with a Peel. Quoth he to the Seer or Astrologer,
either find me out a better Mountain and a Den, or tarry there, for till that
time thou shall have no other Study but this; and therefore sit thee down upon
one of the stumps of my teeth, and consider of it. Now you must know that the
Astrologer being so near his ears could not choose but put many things therein:
Among the rest he put thereinto a certain great and puissant Flea: Hoh quoth
the Giant, what is that? It is replied the Astrologer, the Spirit Pipantabor,
who is to conduct thee in the Roads and in thy Iourneys. When he heard that, he
was well pleased, for he was right well contented therewith, although many
times it tickled him full sore. But it now was high time for the Giant to take
up his Pack, for that he was informed of the hot pursuit which the Loyal Knight
made after him, whom he dreaded more than the Dove does the Eagle. Wherefore
the Giant incontinently took his Club, and thrust it into a Ring which was as
big about as a Chariot Wheel, whereunto was fastened a Cloak-bag, which was
near a quarter of a mile about, and a quarter of a mile in length; for it was
as thick as it was long, and as long as it was thick; when he had so done, he
laid his Club upon his shoulder, and his Pack hung behind like a Hare upon a
Hunters Staff; Then putting one leg before another, he began his Journey,
praying for a good success all the way as he went unto the Spirit Pipantabor,
in this manner.

O thou mighty Pipantabor, who dwell in the car of a great Giant, yet
fear not the quagmires of wax which are therein, hearken unto my words, and
listen to my sayings, as a Chambermaid listens to hear the private discourse of
her Master and Mistress. If thou say thou do not hear me thou lie,
neither art thou the mighty Pipantabor; And if thou say I cannot hear thee,
thou lie yet more, for art not thou locally in my ear, and close by the
Timpamuci thereof, which by reverberation, communicates sounds unto the brain?
Therefore thou must and shall hear me: But what would I have thee do? Why I
would have thee to show me a Mountain and a Den; yea I say unto thee, show me a
Mountain and a Den, where the loyal Knight may not find me out, and I shall
sacrifice unto thee for thy pain, an Hecatomb of black listed Lice, well fatted
with humane Blood. If thou do not, thou art neither civil nor courteous, for
what Guest will not be kind to his Host who has entertained him and given him
harbor, as I have done unto thee.

Having uttered these words he came unto the Sea, the which he waded through,
though in many places thereof it was a full Inch above his Chin: Neith^r was it
altogether without Impediment, as ye shall hear eftsoons. For ye must know
that he could not wade over so suddenly, but that there befell him a certain
accident, the which it was this. Neptune and his Wife Thetis, having been at
supper with King Eolus, were coming home late, attended by many Tritons and
Mermaids of Honor: when by the multitude of the Torches that attended them,
they discovered the Giant, which was to them an unusual sight; seeing such a
monstrous Giant, with such a monstrous Cloakbag at his back. Certainly quoth
Neptune unto Thetis our House is rob^d; Then Thetis also espying him, cried
out, O quoth she my best Basin and Ewer, what shall I do for it. Neptune seeing
his Wife so much concerned, thought it no time to dally; therefore out of the
Chariot he comes; Which when the Giant Husonio beheld, and saw also by the
looks of him that he was plaguie mad, he resolved to take what advantage he
could* and therefore squeezing his Hypochondrions he let such a Fart as blew
out all the Torches, then taking his Cloakbag in his right hand, and his Club
in his lest he put himself into a posture of defense. The Fart as it was great
so it was strong, and the sent thereof so much offended the Nose of Thetis,
that she was not able to endure it; O come away Neptune quoth she, and do not
poison thy self and me too; Let my Basin and Ewer go to the Devil, so as I may
but get out of this stink, I care not, Neptune, unto whom Thetis was always
dear, would not displease her but retired; yet in his retreat resolving to have
one blow, struck at random; Now you must know that Neptunes Mace lighted upon
the Headpiece of Husonio, which was of Steel* with so much violence* that
through the force thereof, sparcles of fire issued forth of his said Helmet;
The which lighting upon some of the Torches that were next set them on a flame;
When the Torches were lighted, Neptune could not hold, he being also inflamed
like his Torches, with a desire his Thetis should see him fight, wherefore he
dings again to the Giant with mighty fierceness, and boldy in the words of Sir
Lancelot thus bespeaks him, Lay down thy Load Sr. Giant though.


But to this Husonio made answer, My Load's mine own, my Answer's no.


And saying those words, for he feared the multitude that was about him, he
sank into the Sea, and letting another most formidable Fart, he blew the Sea up
in such a manner, that there was a leagues distance from the bottom of the Sea,
and bottom of the waters; whereby it came to pass, that the Giant walked under
the Sea as dry as if it had been in his own Dining Room, and so escaped
Neptunes fury, until he came unto the Strond of Normania. Right happy was it
that this strange adventure fell out; for the people that dwelt near the Sea
shore, during this separation which continued twenty four hours, so violent was
the force, that was the occasion thereof; greatly enriched themselves with the
spoils of wracked ships, which had been heaped up by Neptune and his Tritons
for their own use many ages before.

I need not tell you how the Giant Husonio made him a fire when he came on
shore, for what need he make him a fire to dry himself, who walked so dry as he
did through the Sea; yet others say he did make a fire, but it was not to dry
himself, but to parboyl his supper; which as soon as he came on shore, without
much meditation he went to provide. Quoth he, I can do no more mi^chief in my
own Country, therefore I will do it in another; And upon those words he went
and cut down a whole Forest, without considering in the least who was the
Landlord, or whether the Landlord held it only for Life or in Fee. Nor was it
not long ere opportunity put meat into his mouth, as I shall prepare to tell
you. There was a certain great Town some leagues distant from the place where
the Giant Husonio had made his great fire, thither two men and a Boy were
driving a numerous he^d of large Oxen; The Giant seeing them coming laughed for
joy; and when they approached near he took the said Oxen one by one, and
swallowed them down whole, and when he had swallowed them all, he took the two
men and the Boy, and swallowed them also; for quoth he these Knabes may chance
to go and raise the Country. When he had swallowed all the said Oxen, he found
his stomach indifferent full, which caused in him a desire to rest his bones,
which desire caused him to lay himself all along before the said fire; He had
not laid there long but he fell into a deep sleep, which being preceived by one
of the men that he had swallowed, by the terrible snoaring that he made, the
man not unwilling to miss so notable an oppertunity crept out at his mouth, and
seeing him so fast asleep, he went in again, and told his fellows thereof,
urging the benefit of the occasion, with such a pithy and well ordered speech,
he so wrought upon his Companions, that they gross, and with great secrecy
drove the Cattle toward his mouth, but coming to his teeth, they found them so
close shut, that it was not was not possible to open them without waking the
Giant, wherefore they were fore afflicted: But what will not the invention of
man do, when it is in a straight? for seeing themselves stopped here, they
bethought themselves that the Giant had another hole through which they hoped
to pass more securely because it was not so near his ears; whereupon they
drove the Oxen back again, and searching they found the back passage without
any barricado's at all, so that with great content they at length got clear of
their p^^son; when they were got loose they were as merry as Crickets, but the
Giant awaking, quoth he, what a huge stooll have I had, but it was well I had
it, for certes at the middle of the night the Oxen began to rise plaguily in my
stomach.

CHAP. IV. How Sr. Vane and Sr. Lambert disputed together, and how Sr. Vane
made Sr. Lambert believe that the Moon was made of green Cheese.
NOw you must understand that after the Knight of the Golden Tulip was retaken
through the great Courage of the Knight of the Bath, he was secured in the
Castle of the Lions, and eke the Knight of the Mysterious Allegories was there
secured also, so that they had often opportunities to discourse together. Now
when they saw each they congratulated one another right lovingly; Quoth Sr.
Vane I am right glad to see you Sr. Lambert, though not so glad to see you
here, however it is better to be here than in the open Fields, where there is
no shelter against the Rain, nor any other kind of storm that should happen,
for here we have Houses over our heads, so that if it should rain Dogs and Cats
we could have no harm. And by the Mass quoth Sr. Lambert you speak right
cunningly Sr. Vane; And besides this we do not fear to have our Corns trod upon
by the Horses of the enraged Charrioters, nor are we in danger to be bruised by
those sturdy Giants ycleped Carrmen, nor need we fear to have our Mantles
snatched from us going late in the dire^ul plain of Lincolns-Inna; However
Liberty is worth its weight in pure Gold. If that be all replied Sr. V^ne,
comfort thy self Sr. Lambert; for this restraint which is put upon us ought to
make us esteem the better of our selves: For experience tells us that have
lived long in the World, how that men lock up their choicest Jewels in the most
secure places of their Houses; And you see that though at first the Nightingal
be moody, yet eftsoons will she sing in her Cage as pleasantly as in the open
Air; And I pray what is the Body but the prison of the Soul? and yet our Souls
fear nothing more than to be set at liberty. Then said Sr. Lambert to Sr. Vane,
since that we are here met so fortunately together, I entreat you to accept of
a small entertainment from me this night, for that I have many things
concerning which to confer with you; Most willingly replied Sr. Vane, for that
your company is right pleasing unto me. When Supper was brought in, they
commanded their Servants to depart, for that they intended to be very private.
Then quoth Sr* Lambert, most renowned Knight of the Mysteriou^ Allegories,
methinks that we being Knights should not be here without our Ladies: though as
for mine, I might have the same Opinion of her as Helion had of the fair
Constantia, because of the reported familiarity which was between her and the
Sultan of Britain. As for that replied Sr. Vane, I will show thee many
examples of Ladies whose fame has been blasted, which yet before the end of
the sting have made a shift to rectify the mistakes between their Knights and
them. But quoth Sr. Lambert, suppose that may not be, but that the error be
committed, can that be said to concern me any way which was never any pain to
me in the World, and of which never any part of my body was sensible. Then
replied the Knight of the Mysterious Allegories, Cuckoldry is a very great
mystery, and every man understands it not, for true it is, that though you be
at Gran Cairo, and your Wife be in any part of the Land of Britain, yet at
that very moment of time that she admits a stranger to copulate with her,
shall the invisible Horn find shelter under the thicket of your Foretop. That
quoth Sr. Lambert full hardly can I believe, for that you may as well make me
believe the Moon is made of green Cheese. Certes replied Sr. Vane, you are very
ignorant, for the thing by which you seek to prove the impossibility of what I
aver, is the greatest Argument of the truth thereof. Why quoth Sr. Lambert is
the Moon then made of green Cheese? then will I be hanged. Mark ye, quoth Sr.
Vane how you confound your self, and how I shall use your own Arguments against
you, for if it be not then will I be hanged. But have you no other Argument
replied Sr. Lambert. Most surely replied Sr. Vane; First because I have said
it, whose wisdom by which you have so long beed governed would receive no
small affront, and your self not a little disparage your self, should you not
believe me in this thing as well as in other; Then proceeded Sr. Vane saying,
Know ye then right well Sr. Lambert, that in Metaphysics the Notional
difference makes a clear distinction, as falling into an incapacitated sense of
the objected Medium. As for example, I say the Moon is made of green Cheese;
For green metaphysically distinguished is white, by reason of the objected
Medium which is the blew Air; For if you look upon green through a blew Glass,
then it will appear -- Hereupon Sr, Lambert interrupting him said unto him,
what! thou will by and by make me believe the Moon is made of blew Cheese. No
replied Sr. Vane, for I am no Changling though the Moon be one; I say the Moon
is made of green Cheese; For mark ye what I shall say; Behold your Uirgnis
afflicted with the green Sickness, they are said to look green, when they are
in verity white; We call Geese green, yet who is such a Goose as does not
perceive them to be many times gray; Most is said to be green roasted, when it
is all over red with blood; And all the World that hnows what green Fish is,
knows it to be white. And thus the Moon being either red, gray, or white, may
properly be said to be green; Now that it is a Cheese, the Allegorical
Configuration of the Supernatural Ideas does make manifest; For you see how
that a Cheese in its Spherical Rotundity waines and waines till it come to be
all eaten, and then presently appears a new Cheese; Even ^o you see it is with
the Moon, which when it is at its smallest decrease, that is all eaten up by
the Gods, then comes a new Moon. Moreover do you not see holes in a Cheese? and
did not the Necromancer Galileo discry Holes and Concavities in the Moon. When
Sr. Lambert heard this, he twisted his Mustachio's with his fore finger and
thumb, listening unto the words of Sr. Vane like unto a Sow in the Beans: But
quoth he, Sr. Vane, for all this you tell a strange story, certes I know not
how to believe it. When Sr. Vane heard that, he waxed wroth, and swear by his
Gods, that unless he would believe that the Moon was made of green Cheese he
would not give his Daughter unto his Son. Sr. Lambert was much appalled
thereat, and incontinently altered his Opinion, saying that if he would swear
it he would believe it. Then Sr. Vane putting the top of his little Finger upon
the top of his No^e swear in this following manner.

I Henry Vane, Knight of the Order of Mysterious Allegories, do swear by the
Smock of Dejanica, that the Moon is made of green Cheese, and if it be a lie
the Devil confound me. Then Sir Lambert putting his forefinger in his Tail,
swear as follows.

I Sir Lambert, the valiant Knight of the Golden Tulip, swear by the Beard of
Hercules, that both directly and indirectly, I do believe that the Moon is made
of green Cheese, and that it is agreeable to the litteral ^ence of Allegorical
conclusions. When they had both sworn in this manner, they sho^k hands in most
friendly manner; and Sir Vane being mightily pu^t in his mind for so great a
Conquest, went to Bed.

CHAP V. How Sir. Baxtero, Knight of the Lions, went in quest after Sir Ludlow,
Knight of the powdring-Tub, and how he encountered the Giant Thomabedlamus, and
how he prevented the lust of the said Giant, and afterward departed toward
Assyria.
NOw it felt out that Sir Baxtero having heard how that Sir Ludlow was departed
out of Britain, he made great lamentation and moaning; there be that say how
he wept even like a young Damosel, who being sent to the Alehouse, looses her
money by the way. O quoth he, is Sir Ludlow departed? then what do I make here?
Surely it is to no more purpose for me to stay here, than for an Astrologer to
live in an Oven; Alas if he do fly the encounter of those Knights that are in
pursuit of him, who is as valiant as Hector, how is it possible for me to
encounter them, who am so much inferior to him? Now by all the Gods, I am like
a man in a Wood, like a man in a Mist, yea in a thick Mist, like a man in a
Forest, yea like a man in a thick Forest. Farewell great mirror of Chivalry;
now do not I know whither to go after him, neither is there any one that can
tell me: for should he be gone to the South, and I should go to the Cast, what
were I the nearer? Therefore great Fortune be thou my guide, and direct my
stick to fall the right way, for I do intend to go that way my stick falls.
Then greatly perplexed in his soul, he set up his ^^affe, and it fell toward
the South-East; Then did he incontinently buckle on his Helmet, and bestriding
his sturdy Courser, who was ycleped Stanfurder, he pricked forward toward the
Seacoast. Now was glittering Phoebus riding with a swift carear through the
midst of Heaven, causing the hand of the Dyal to point to that hour of the day
when men in Towns and Cities prepare to satisfy their hunger, when the Knight
of the Lions, weary with long travel, laid him down under the shadow of a
spreading Oak, nor was it long ere the cares of his mind hung plummets upon his
eyelids, which were closed thereby so close together, that you could not
thrust the point of a needle between them, by which you may guess that he was
fast asleep. But Fortune that intended nothing less than to let him sleep, was
resolved to awaken him, for lo, the Giant Thomabedlamus full of high soaring
thoughts, set his bugle to the corner of his mouth, and blew such a blast, as
if all the Bulls of Basan had been roaring together; all the Trees in the
Forest shook for fear, and bowed their lofty heads as they are wont to do when
blustering Boreas comes in the Devils name among them to gather Acornes. Now
you must know this, or else you know nothing, that the fair Damosel, ycleped
Tatterdemalliona, was fled from the rage of the cruel wight her Father, who had
as she said, and the story does also aver, sent her to pick Daisies, for that
she had yielded up her Maiden head too inconsiderately to K^lmaddox the Knight
of the Bloody Cleaver: Long had she wandered, so that her feet looked like
claryfi'd Whey, and she panted ^ike a broken-winded-horse, clambring up the
King Ludd's Mountain: Sometimes as she sat, she picked the gravel out of her
feet, for the Author of the H^story says, that she was very sore by reason of
the same; sometim^s she was in chase of certain evil creatures, ycleped F^eas,
that did delacerate her snowy bosom, which caused those Ivory Mountains to be
displayed unto the view of burning Phoebus, so that whoever was near her might
discern the beauty of her nakedness, and the nakedness of her beauty, without
the Prospective Glass of Tychobrahe. Now you must know that the Giant
Thomabedlamus as he was leaning over a high Oak into the green plast, whereas
the distressed Damosel sat, espied her in this condition and posture: now wot
ye well when he saw her, that he was in a great Agony, for his goggle eyes
rolled up and down, and the drivil ran down his Beard for joy, for that the
Lady was passing beauteous; but he did not study to woo her with Love-verses,
neither did he sigh for sorrow, neither did he beat his breast, or make
complaints of her disdain, for said he to himself, is not this Forest mine,
and all that is therein? Then who shall give me any disturbance? Seeing that
there is no Knight so hardy who dares approach these enchanted Shades, I will
enjoy this Damosel as many times as there be leaves in this Forest, for that
she pleases me wondrous well; Then the Giant rushed in unto her, and said,
Hail fair Damosel, if thou will yield unto me I will do thee no harm; whenas
she heheld so great a Giant, she squeeked right effeminately, and made such a
loud Yell, as she had been a young Grayhound tied up in her Kennel. Then the
Giant bespake her, saying, squeek not fair Damosel so loud, for thou squeekest
in vain. Alas quoth she, Sir Giant, it is time for me to squeek, when thou
seek to croppe my Uirgin-flower; Then quoth the Giant, tell me not of thy
Uirgin flower, What signifies thy flower, or thy Uirgin-flower to me? we
Giants never consider them at all. When the Damosel heard him speak so
terribly, the blood forsook her pale cheeks, and though her feet were so sore,
as we told you before, yet she assayed to run away, but the Giant catching her
about the waste, laid his great paw upon her corral lips, and stopped her
mouth, beginning to deal with her as men deal with Curtezans at Venice. The
Damosel finding her mouth stopped, made a noise like a Pig that is grasped
about the Snout. Now you m^st know that the Knight of the Lions, being as we
said, awakened out of his sleep, heard the noise which came out of the Damsels
Nose, her mouth being stopped, at which he greatly marvelled, for he wondered
what it should be; Peeping therefore through the bushes, he saw the Giant and
the Damosel together, and how the Giant tumbled the Damosel, as Children tumble
great Snow-balls in the streets. Ah quoth the Knight of the Lions, certes this
fair Damosel must needs be in a peck of troubles, but how to relieve her I
cannot tell, for if I should assay to strappe his Iacket, and he should c^rry
my Coat, than were the Damosel and I both in a worse condition than before.
However great pity it is that she should suffer, and great shame for me to let
her. And having said these words, he rushed in upon the Giant, and ere that he
could be aware of him, and as the story says, while he was at rem^in^re, he
gave him such a remembrance upon the small of the b^ck, that had he not been a
Giant, most certainly he had broken his chine. The Giant was hereupon in great
wroth; Could you blame him? but finding himself so weak by reason of the
stroke, that he could not go, he spatt at the Knight of the Lions, and spatt so
violently in his face, that he had almost beaten the Knight of the Lions
backward; But the Knight of the Lions recovering himself, saw how that his
Tassel gentle lay like a bridge between his belly and the fair Damosel,
wherefore without delay, with a courage Monsieur, he smote thereon so hardily,
that he cut it in twain, as it had been a silken thread, and the sword glancing
along, took away also one half of his Testicles, as you would slit a Walnut in
twain, the pain thereof made the Giant Thomabedlamus to roar like any Lion. Ay
me, quoth he, hard hearted Girl, now by all the Gods I do curse thee from the
bottom of my heart to the bottomless pit of the infernal shades. When the
Knight of the Lions had performed this adventure, he departed toward the Land
of Assyria, but because he was hard pursued by the Loyal Knight, he changed his
upper garments to Palmers gray, the best means to pass without molestation.

CHAP. VI. How Sir Ludlojus Knight of the green Powdring Tub, was hid under a
Tree, and so escaped his enemies because of a Bird.
ANd it fell on a day, how that Sir Ludlojus Knight of the green Powdring Tub,
was riding all alone toward the Land of Assyria, which being heard at the Court
of the King of Britain* several Knights were sent to pursue him, and take him;
and certes they pursued him right ^orely, for he was much hated by them; but
when the Knight of the green Powdring Tub saw them coming, his heart was almost
drowned in fear, and his lungs had e'ne forgot to what purpose they were made.
Alas quoth he unfortunate Knight, what will thou do* If thou runnest for it,
thou will certainly be overtaken, and wilt only give thy enemies the mirth of a
pleasant Chase. And why should thou hazard thy life by staying, which kind
Fortune may save? Then seeing no other remedy, he cast himself from his Horse,
and peeping about, he espied a Bush, and crept thereinto, for the Wood was very
thick there. Now when his enemies came to seek him there, they could not find
him, but they saw a Bird sit on a Tree, the which Bird men call an Owl, and
then said they that there was no man, for the Bird sat there; and so they went
away. So when sable night had curtain'd the world in darkness, he proceeded on
his journey, and from that time unto this day, it is said that Sir Ludlojus
has that Bird in great reverence, and worships it above all other Birds in the
world.

CHAP. VII. How the Giant Okey wandered up and down the world in great terror,
and how he was afterward found in a Wood by the Sultan of Britain's Daughter,
in whose presence he slew himself, with other accidents that after happened.
YOu do well remember that when the Christian Champions had discomfited the
H^st of the meek Knight, as also of the forty Tyrants, that the disloyal Giant
Okey secretly fled, partly out of anger for the loss, partly for the
preservation of his life. So in great grief and terror of Conscience he
wandered like a fugitive up and ^own the world, sometimes remembering of his
past prosperity, and sometimes thinking upon the Rapes that he had committed
and how he had sorely afflicted several Knights who were thrown into his power
by the Necromancer Hugo Petros. Sometime his guilty mind imagined, that the
bleeding Ghost of the good King of Britain, whom he had mudered, followed him
up and down, haunting him with fearful exclamations, and filling each corner of
the earth with clamors of revengement. Such fear and terror raged in his soul,
that he thought all places where he traveled, were filled with multitudes of
Knights, and that the strength of Countries pursued him, to heap vengeance upon
his guilty head for those wrongs that he had wrought, whereby he cursed the
hour of his birth, and blamed the cause of his creation, wishing the Fates to
consume his body with a flash of fire. In this manner he traveled up and down,
filling all places with echoes of his grief, which brought him into such, that
many times he would have slain himself.

But it happened that one morning very early, by the first light of Titans
burning Torch, he entered into a narrow and straight passage, which conducted
him into a very thick and solitary Forest, wherein he traveled, till such
time as glistering Phoebus had passed the half part of his journey. And being
weary with the long way, and the great weight of his Armor, he sat him down,
and began anew to have in remembrance his former committed cruelty; and
complaining of Fortune, he thus published his grief, for seeing himself without
remedy he resolved like the Swan, to sing a while before his death and so
thinking to give ease to his tormented heart, he warbled forth these verses
following.

MOurnful Melpomene approach with speed,
And show thy sacred face with tears bespent,
Let all thy Sisters hearts with sorrow bleed,
To hear my plaints, and rueful discontent;
And with your moans, sweet Muses all assist
My mournful Song, that does on woe consist,
Time wears out life, it is reported so,
And so it may, I will it not deny,
Yet have I tried, and by experience know,
Time gives no end to this my misery;
But rather Fortune, Time, and Fates agree,
To plague my heart with woe eternally.
Ye Silvian Nymphs that in these Woods do shroud,
To you my mournful sorrows I declare;
You Savage Satyrs let your ears be bowed
To hear my woe your nimble selves prepare,
Trees, Herbs, and Flowers, in Rural Fields that grow*
Are never troubled with such lasting woe.
You furious beasts that feed on Mountains high,
And restless run with rage your prey to find,
Draw near to him whose brutish cruelty
Has cropped the budde of Virgins chaste and kind.
I know no means to yield my heart relief,
It Is only death which can dissolve my grief.
When as I think upon my pleasures past,
Now turned to pain, it makes me rue my state;
And since my joy with woe is overcast,
O Death give end to my unhappy state;
For only death will lasting ease provide,
Where living thus, I sundry deaths abide*
Wherefore all you that hear my mournful Song.
And ^asted have the grief that I sustain;
All lustful Murderers that have done wrong,
With tear-fill'd eyes assist me to complain;
All that have being, do my being hate,
Crying, haste, haste, this Wretchet dying state.
This sorrowful Song being ended, he laid himself all along upon the green
grass, closing up the Closets of his Eyes, in hope to repose himself in a
quiet sleep, in which silent Contemplation we will leave him a while, and
return to Mistress Francisca, the Sultan of Britains Daughter; For she was
beloved by two right famous Knights, Sr. Reynoldo, the vailant Knight of the
Castle Dunkirkum, and the young Knight of the Flaming Fan, ycleped Don Ricco,
who both did greatly contend for her; But it so fell out, that Sr. Reynoldo was
drowned in the green Ocean; for he went about to fly over the Sea, but he could
not; for either his Wings were too short or too long, or else something else
was the matter, for it so happened that he failed in his enterprise; Now when
Sr. Reynoldo was dead, Don Ricco did incontinently enjoy his Love; but he was
likewise betwitched by the cruel Pockyhora, who was the most notable
Inchantresse of her time, and so he dyed like wise. Whereupon the beautiful
Mistress Francisca made great moans and lamentations, but it was all to no
purpose; therefore she departed secretly from her Fathers Court, for that she
was made believe by the Inchantresse Pockyhora, how that Don Ricco was not
dead, but was gone to pursue an Adventure in the Court of the King of Morocco,
against two Knights of the Pewter Syringe who had right sorely abused him; Now
in her Travels she wandered over Hills and Dales, over Mountains and Ualleys,
and one Night among all the rest she lay in a Gravel-pit all night, and as she
lay asleep, a right vehement shower fell from Heaven and moistened her garments
to her Oriental skin, then she arose and rung her l^lly white smock, and so she
went on her way; And at length she came to the Forest, where the disloyal
Giant Okey lay under a Chestnut Tree: Now when they beheld each other, they
greeted one another in a most wonderful manner, and the Giant would have lain
with her, but she refused, saying that she was not in a condition to do any
such thing. Then said the Giant unto her in the name of all the Gods what make
you here? to which she replied, I pray Sr, Giant what make you here? Oh quoth
the Giant, I am stuffed up with sorrow; And I quoth the Lady, am almost stifled
with woe. Oh quoth the Giant than surely our Cases are both alike; Certes quoth
the Lady, they are so, even just so like as Four-pence is to a Groat. Then the
Giant would have persuaded her to have slain him; but she refused, bidding him
to do it himself, for she said, that the Sultan of Britain had never bred her
up to be any bodies servant. The Giant hearing her words was right sorrowful,
and lay still a good space as he had been in a Trance, but anon rising up
again, and staring about him, some three or four times, there he is quoth he,
and then he ran with great fury toward the Body of a great Oak that stood hard
by, for he took it to be the Knight of the Black Armor; Accursed Wight quoth
he, now shall thou pay for all thy Uillanies, and so saying he struck so
violently against the Tree with his Iron Mace, that he brake it all in shivers:
How quoth the Giant, art thou able to bear so great a blow, and yet stand?
Certes I will cast thee down to the ground eftsoons, and tread out thy guts:
And having said those words he ran his head so violently against the Tree,
thinking to have born down the Knight of the Black Armor with the weight of
his Body, that with the force of the shock he dash't out his own brains; Ah
quoth the Giant, Sr. Knight right valiantly thou have overcome me; yet I could
have wish'^ thou might have fallen likewise, And anon he groaned like an
expiring Whale, and then he gaped so wide, that his Chaps were almost a quarter
of a Mile asunder, and then his Soul went forth in the shape of a Seahorse,
but whither I wot not.

CHAP. VIII. How the Archpriest Hugo Petros, made love unto the fair
Dolcomona, who was married to Kilmaddox Knight of the Bloody Cleaver, and of
the Letter which he wrote unto her, and what happned thereupon.
NOw you must understand that in Londinum there lived an Archpriest who was
ycleped Hugo Petros; to him had the Sultan of Britain given large possessions,
and did often times discover unto him his bosom thoughts; This made him rich,
and his riches made him insolent, he was also greatly lustful, so that he never
looked upon any Danisel that was fair but he lusted after her. Now it happened on
a day, that he went to buy Offerings for his Paynim God, the which it was
ycleped Greedy-Colon, which he worshipped more than any other God; and as he was
buying his said Offering, he chanced to epsy the fair Dolcomona Wife to Sr.
Kilmadd^x Knight of the Bloody Cleaver; she was sitting under a Bower, with a
Fan in her hand made of an old Beaver wherewith she kept off the Flies from the
Sacrifices; Her Face it was full fairly fat, and her Arms were plump and round
like two Collars of Brawn, her Cheeks were as red as scarlet, and her Eyes were
like the eyes of a Ram, her Fingers were thick and small, and at her side hung
a large Pouch, and the Keys of Sr. Kilmaddox's Castle. Now when the Archpriest
beheld her, he was marvellously enamont'd on her, and greatly desired for to
enjoy her; Many opportunities he sought, and many he failed of; Wherefore with
a heart full of despair, and much wasted, for that the Fat thereof was almost
dript away, through the heat of those flames that continually tossed it, he
went to the Knight of the Sack-but, who dwelt in a Castle close by, and before
the Gate of his Castle there was a Ship which hung in the Air by Magic Art,
and when men saw that ship, then they said one to another, this is the Castle
of the Knight of the Sack-but. To him the Archpriest disclosed all the secrets
of his heart desiring his asistance withal. The Knight of the Sack-but replied
right courteously, that he was ready to serve him to the uttermost of his
power; Nor do I imagine quoth he, that the fair Dolcomona has a Heart so stony
which will not be broken by the Hammer of thy Eloquence. When the Archpriest
heard him say so, he was much comforted, and determined to give her notice of
his love in the most passionate lines, the ^enor whereof were as follows.

Most incomparable Dolcomona,
I Am both your Servant and your Chaplain, I beseech you not to stop your ears,
for that I am burnt up in affection toward your fair person, but rather to set
them wide open to hear my rude lines; For you must know most redoubted Lady,
that the beauty of your admirable person, and the supernatural form wherein you
are framed and composed, has even ravished my spirits, broken my heart, split
my whole senses insunder, and quite bereft me of all rest both day and night,
and only with doting on your peerlesse beauty; Again fair Lady my meat, drink,
manners, yea and my very countenance, they all plead at the Bar of thy fair
Face, and resplendant Countenance; If you refuse me, denying these my unrestful
thoughts, I can look for nothing but present death, nay I rather covet therein
to be locked fast as in a prison, than receive denial from your fair lips. O
most fair, most courteous, most amiable, gentle, and also right youthful Lady,
be not thou the cause that I should determine my life by losing your love, but
rather grant what I desire, and thereby make me for ever yours in hearty
affection. If you urge how I dare offend the Gods by this unlawful act? To that
fair Lady I answer, that I am one of the Vicars of the Gods upon Earth, and
therefore it wholly rests in my power to absolve you from your sins, and enjoin
you penance, which trust me Lady shall be very easy, so you will grant me your
love.


Then the Archpriest sealed up this Letter, and gave it the Knight of the
Sack-but, and he gave it to his doughty Squire, who was ycleped Anonanonsir,
chargeing him that he should deliver it into the hands of the fair Lady
Dolcomona, with as much privacy as could be imagined. But sometimes the Fates
will not perm^t those things to come to pass, which men do in their own
thoughts contrive. For Sr. Kilmaddox seeing the Squire whisper in the fair
Dolcomona's ear, with an angry Countenance demanded the cause of the Squires
coming; she asked him what that was to him? Then Sr. Kilmaddox struck her so
hard upon the Cheek that he had almost stunned her, whereupon she cried out
murder with a loud voice; after that she ran with a great fury out of the
doors, with one of her teeth in her hand, which Sr. Kilmaddox had struck out of
her head, vowing in great wrath to be revenged on him. So the went to the
Castle of the Knight of the Sack-but, and incontinently the Squire waited on
her up to the Archpriest. When the Arch Priest be held her, he ran unto her
and embraced her, and kissed her so hard, that she cried out through the
anguish of the pain* what ailes the joy of my life quoth the Archpriest? Alas
replied the fair Dolcomona, the cruel Sr. Kilmaddox wou^d have s^^i^ me, raging
with jealousy. Now by the Gods quoth the Archpriest, if I were a Knight I
would slay him my self, but I will hire one that shall do it* and that shall be
all one; Thereupon the Archpriest went and hired the Knight of the
Coal-wharse, who was a right grim Knight, and he went and fought with Sr.
Kilmaddox, and killed him straightway. Then was the Archpriest right glad, and
he said to the fair Dolcomona, let us now enjoy those pleasures which with so
much hazard we have purchased; which when she had readily consented to, because
they would be private, he carried her forth in a Chariot toward the Forest of
Maribona; Now was scorching Phoebus raging in the midst of Heaven, when these
two loving Couple laid themselves down under the shade of a spreading Chestnut
Tree; nor was it long ere the Archpriest raging with Concupisence, began the
combat of love; when a Country Swain searching for some Cattle that he had
lost, espied them at their sport: Then the Swain ran presently and called
others that were hard by, and when they came, they were right joyful to see
what they saw, for the Archpriest was ill b^lov'd of all the people of
Britain. When the Arch^Priest saw that he was so surpri'sd, he withdrew his
File from the Iron, and rising on his feet, quoth he, My good friends, first
read ye the lives of the holy Fathers, and then condemn me if you think fit to
the Gallows, it was Pluto in my shape, and with my voice that has done this
mischief, and not I, for the Archpriest of Britain could do no such evil.
However it was related abroad, and believed for a truth, so that the
Arch^Priest suffered great Insamy thereupon.

CHAP. IX. How the Necromancer Scoto seeing the devices of the Forty Tyrants to
fail, would have raised up the Devil to his Assistance.
THe night was as dark as black pitch* and a thick M^st covered the face of the
Sky, so that a man could in no wise have seen the Stars, though he had the
eyes of the quick sighted Lynceus, when a dark cloud of melancholy thoughts
enveloped the brow of Scoto the Nec^omancer. I was, quoth he, in former time,
so long as Fortune smiled upon me, one of the chief Commanders of the Land of
Britain, but now pale be the brightness of the clear Sun, and cover the earth
with everlasting darkness; Skies turn to pitch, Elements to flaming fire; roar
Hell, quake Earth, swell Seas, blast Earth, Rocks rend in twain, for now will I
try the utmost of my Magic Spells, for men do fall me, therefore Devils must
help me. So he got him a great Hoop, made of black Ebony, and tied it round
about with long thread Laces. In the midst thereof he stood, y^lad in a
vestment of Seagreen perpetuana, on his head he had a Pastboard Hat, covered
with a green Case, oyld, his loins were girt about with a Girdle made of Bulls
pizzles, enchanted by Magic Art, at the first peeping of the new Moon; before
his b^c^^ he wore a plate of Tin, whereon was pictured a Gorgon head. Then he
muttered a hundred and ten hard words, as fast as he could tumble them out of
his mouth, and read a whole Sermon, made by the Seer Strong, the which he had
written in Characters of Short hand. When the Devil heard that, he was greatly
amazed, not knowing what it meant, for that it was one of the latest inventions
among Mortals. Then he came unto the Seer Scoto, and said unto him, what
would thou have thou vain fool? get thee about thy business, and come to me
when I call for thee, which will be very suddenly: with that he departed, but
whither I wot not.

CHAP. X. How a certain Vandall, y^leped Vennero, came to Londinum, and defied
all the Christians; and how his fury was abated.
NOW you must know that in those days, there lived a Uandal in a wood, who was
hight Vennero, for when he was born, his Mother left him in this wood, being
pursued by two blood-thirsty Satyrs, who would have done something to her, that
it seems she would not have them do. Now being so left there, this ^amen young
Uandal, was suckled by a wild Mare, and he grew up* and fed upon the Barks of
trees; now it came to pass, that in process of time there came a Christian
wandering to the wood, and he rushed forth, and flew him, and drank up his
blood, and liked it wondrous well, so that he desired to have a whole Ocean
full, some to keep in Hogsheads* for the winter, and some to draw out in Bo^ies
for the summer; Then they told him if he would go into the City of Londin^m and
kill Christians, he might have as much as he would drink; with that he pulled
up a hollow Oak by the roots, and cut therein holes for his Arms, and it was
unto him as a Coat of Male; Then he came unto the City of Londinum in great
wrath; for he swear that he valued the Christians no more than Butchers Dogs
valued Rubies. So as I told you before, he pressed into the City of Londinum by
Night, and then the Folk were all charmed up with the Charms of Morpheu^; But
when they rose in the Morning to go about their business* they had better have
kept themselves in their warm Beds, for why? Why because this cruel Uandal met
them, as they came out of their Doors, and destroyed them; And when he had so
destroyed them, he eat them without either Capers or Sampire. What a
disturbance this bred in the City of Londinum you may well conjecture. When
these tidings came to the Ears of the Christian Knights, they resolved to
purchase Fame with the Blood of this Uandal; Many other rewards were also
promised to him that should vanquish, beside that of Fame, by the fair Dames of
Londinum, as Bevers, new Suits, Purses of Gold, Nights lodgings, and the like,
for they would have given any thing at that time to have been rid of this
Uandal. There came Don Contumeliano the Knight of Fortune, but the Uandal
eftsoons laid him upon the cold Earth, and then sawed off his Ears with the
rough end of a Bone o^ a Sirloyn of Beef. Then there was the Knight of the Blew
Apron, and then there was the mighty Vulcan, with twenty grim Cyclops's
besides, and they laid upon his Head, as they used to bang their Anviles, when
they made the Armor of Achilles; B^t the Uandal was mad to hear such a noise
about his Ears, which caused him so to lay ahout him, that his Enemies fel^
before him like mowed Barley. Then fear came upon the people of Londinum, and
they knew not what to do; At length some wiser than some, caused great Trapps
to be made like Mouse-Trapps, which they set in the Street, having first bai^ed
them with Bread and Cheese, but the cunning Uandal took away the Bread and the
Cheese, and yet the Trapp fell not down, for he made no more of the Trapp, than
St. George made of an Enchanted Castle. Which when Don Crisp^ano the Knight of
the Golden Last perceived, he gave the Uandal so fierce an Encounter, that the
Uandal lost his Stirrups, and had fallen, but that he held by his Hors's Neck;
for he now had got him a Horse, but how I am not able to inform you. But for
Don Crispiano, he measured his length on the Ground, and his Shield was taken
from him; Then the Ua^dal demanded his name, but he answered, he had no other
name than the Knight of the Golden Last. The ne^^ that s^t upon him, was the
Knight of the Eagle; so ^a^led, for that the Castle where he ^ived, was known
by that s^^n. The Uandal and he right valiantly cou^ned their Spears, and the
first course proved so valiant, that their Spears s^ivered all in splinter^^*
Each Combatant perceiving Ualour to brandish on the top of his Helmet, they
thought fit to make a pause. Right valiant Mortal, quoth the Uandal, I am glad
that I have met with thee, for thou seem to be right strong, but for all
this, I care not a Button for thee; the other bout I Am resolved to have with
thee; But what said the Thatcher to his man? First let us drink. So he called
for a whole gallon of Aqua Vitae, and mixed it with the blood of the Knight of
the Golden Last* who was last slain, and drank it up at one draught. After that
they made a second course wherein the Knight of the Eagle got the better; for
he pressed so hard upon him, that ^he ^ran ^his Lance into his neck, the
anguish of which wound, caused the Uandal to fall to the ground: when he was
fallen to the ground, the Christians came in sholes, and took him, and bound
him with iron hoopes, and threw him into a Dungeon, and after that they hanged
him, and so there was an end of this Vandal.

CHAP. XI. How Pacolet the Dwarf, cousened the Necromance^ Scoto, when he had
him upon his Horse, and instead of carrying him into the Territories of the
King of Hispania, brought him to Londinum, where he was hanged.
NOW Scoto the Necromancer seeing that he could not avoid the fury of the
Christians; and for that his Charms did also fail him, he fled away, for he
prayed right fervently unto blustering Boreas; wherefore blustering Boreas
hearing his prayers, took him, and carried him away in a Cloakbag into the Land
of Flandria. Now as soon as Pacolet the Dwarf espied him; Quoth he unto the
Seer; Right worthy Seer, In the Name of the Ruler of the Air, what make you
here? Quoth he, if I make any thing, I make Buttons, for I am in deadly fear of
the Christians. Then said the Dwarf, Right worthy Seer know this, that I am
lately come out of the Land of Hispania, where I know to secure thee as safe as
a Thief in a Mill, therefore come along with me, and slay no longer to
expostulate, for upon my Horse we will su^denly arrive in Hispania, where thou
shall be kept as secure as Medlers in Hay. So the Seer Scoto caused the Dwarf
to be highly feasted, setting before him Ma^ar^^es and Hippocrisse; So on the
morrow they went toward their journey, but mark what sokewa^, ^aving thus
or^ered his affairs, he came in the dead than of the Night unto the Tent where
Scoto say, crying out so loud to him that he awoke him; Sir quoth he, little
appears in you the love of your safety, seeing that for it you are unwilling
to break your sleep. Whereunto the Seer replied, Thou have done well to awaken
me, for I was even now in a most fearful Dream; Me thought a Crow did bear me
swiftly through the Air, and as she was flying away with me, another great ^ird
met me, and struck so hard at me, that the blood issued out in great abundance;
now this Dream makes me to fear that the Christians have some Intelligence of
my Designs. Away quoth the Dwarf with this Childish fear, will you for this
neglect the love of your own life? By Mahomet quoth the Seer, thou say the
truth. Then the Dwarf took the Seer behind him upon his Wooden Horse, and
turning the Pin, the Horse rose up into the Air so swiftly, that in a little
space they were come to the City of Londinum. The Seer perceiving the Horse to
fray, said thus unto him, Friend are we at our journeys end. Yea said the
Dwarf, and fear nothing. By Mahomet quoth the Seer, the Devil has born us
hither very quickly. So he brought him into a great Hal^, which belonged unto
the Palace of the King of Britain, and bid him enter thereinto, and so he
entered therein. Now when the Christians heard that Scoto the Necromancer was
in the great Hall, they came into the Hall where Scoto sat. Then Scoto
perceiving himself betrayed, would have crept into an Augur hole, but they
would not let him, and then he cried out with a loud voice, Thou false Traitor
quoth he to my person, I vow to be revenged of thee for this Fact; and know
this right well, that I never Dyed yet in any man's Debt to whom I ought a
mischief; therefore assure thy self, that if ever I come again to be one of the
Forty Tyrants, I will remember thy Box at Christmas, nay though I stay till
Easter I care not much. Then the Dwarf told the Christian Knights, that if this
right Diabolical Necromancer did escape them this time, a world of miseries
might ensue thereon. Whereupon they incontinently took him, and hanged him up
with a new Rope, upon the highest Pinnacle of the Palace, in the sight of many
Sarazins that came to view and behold his fatal end.

CHAP. XI. How the Giant Husonio went and built him a Castle in the Air,
intending to live a private life; and how Sir Boreas quarreled with him; and
how he thought to have affrighted Sir Boreas, and what happened thereupon.
THE Giant Husonio having met with many misfortunes, as I told you before, or
whether I did or no it is no great matter; he resolved upon a very strange
adventure, as you shall hear anon. Most miraculous it is quoth he, that I can
live no where in quiet for these same Christians; However if I cannot live
quiet upon the Earth, by Mohomet I will live quiet in the Air, and there I will
build me a Castle. How, in the Air, quo his Dwarf, that is impossible. Slave,
quoth the Giant, thou lie; For do thou not see how our God Mahomet lives in
the Air? even so will I live there also; For why may not I live in the Air that
am a Giant, as well as a little Sparrow that I can crush to pieces between my
thumb and my fore finger. The Dwarf then s^eing him begin for to wax wroth; nay
Sir quoth h^, i^ you are resolved to live in the Air, you shall live in the
Air. B^ing thus recon^^'d, the Giant went on with his Proj^ct; Quoth the Giant
then to himself, what is there that will abide in the Air? Feathers most
certainly! Why then suppose I should compose this Castle of Feathers* certes it
would be right easy, but very light, the better for that, and the wind should
blow me up and down like the down of a This^ie. With that the Giant so fled to
himself, as Jupiter smiled, when he Cuckolded Amphi^ryo, for he was right well
pleased to think how he should dayce in the Air. Nay b^t quo his Dwarf, though
Feathers be light, yet thou art right ponderous, and it is against the Rules of
Philosophy, for heavy things to maunt up; With that the Giant rafl'd against
Philosophy, like a Tankard-bearer, for three hours together, and would
presently have armed himself, upon an adventure which was to knock all the
Philosophers in the world o'th head; But his Dwarf, less in bulk but larger in
wit, told him that the building of his Castle would be of far greater
concernment, than the killing Philosophers: Then quoth the Giant, as concerning
this Castle, for I would fain have this Castle built, and built in the Air. And
when that he had vented his mind in such ^ise* he went into the North, and cut
a Rock o^ Adamart all into shivers; they say that if ^ is Dwarf had not pulled
him by the elbow, he would have cut the said Rock as small as herbs to the
Pot, for that when he was hewing, he never considered what he did; Then he
bethought himself* how that the nature of the Loadstone was to cleave to the
North Pole, as close as he was wont to s^ick unto his fair Leman; So then quoth
he, if I can but make a Castle of this Loadstone, and fix it thereon, the Dev^l
himself can never remove it. So he made him a Castle of the pieces of Loadstone
which he had hewed out of the Rock, and when he had done, he fastened several
Rings of Iron unto the sides thereof; Then he toss'^ it up with a vengeance,
and wished it good luck, ^or quoth he, the Devil is in it, if the top of the
Pole do not catch hold of some one or other of the Rings which I have made on
the sides, as in sooth it happened. Now when it was fast, he bid his Dwarf to a
fast about his middle, and then he gave a Iump, and leaped in at one of the
windows. Now when this Castle was thus hang by Geometry, it seemed unto the
Samoedes, and People of Groynlands, as a Uinegar-Bottle upon the Top of
Sali^bury S^ire. And when it was dark, that the Giant lighted Cu^dles they took
it for they (...)not with at themselves, for they never dreamed that it was a
Castle in the Air. Now when Sr. Boreas saw this strange thing he was
astonished, and h^ whist^^^ so ^ou^ that he awoke the Giant: so he looked out
at the window, with his night Cap on, and asked Sr. Boreas why he whistled so
loud; I will whistle yet louder quoth Sr. Boreas and with that he whistled so
furiously, that the Giant Husonio was tor^ed to pull in his Ears* Then the
Giant was tight grievously ^ag^d and went and struck fire, and lighted a T^rch,
and caused his Dwarf to ^rick it in his Tail, and so he went ^ac^war^s, with
^is Head between his Legs, to meet Sr. Boreas, as the Fellow went to fright the
Tanners D^st. But Sr. Bo^eas was a right hardy Knight, and teared him no more
than if he had been an ordinary man; for he presently blew out the Giants
Torch, and then gave him such a blow on the bare flesh, that he struck him back
again into his Castle over the, ^all. Now the Giant though himself s^^e; But
Sr. Bo^eas swore his Castle should not hang there; so he cut the Ring by which
it was held, and rubbed the North Pole with Garlic, which caused it to lose
its Magnetic force; And so the Castle, with the Giant, and his Dwarf, fell
into the bottomless Pit.

CHAP. XII. How the Knight of the Lions cast himself headlong from the top of a
Tower, and broke his neck; And of the several misfortunes that befell the Forty
Tyrants; And of several other delectable passages, and so good buy to ye,
NOW you must know that the Knight of the Lions, before he executed the fatal
Tragedy which he intend^d, made a speech but that speech is lost, for f^^^ the
Records thereof are not to be found. But (...), that that very Evening he
abandoned the sight of all Company, and repaired to the top of an hi^h ^o^er
the which it was built all of Marble, wherein he ^a^e ^ himself so ^ast wit^
Iron bolts, that none could (...) h^a^i^g of his lamentations. Then ra^^d he up
and down like fra^^ick Oedipus, tearing his ^^es from their natural C^^^s*
accusing the Heavens of Injustice con^^^i^^ the Earth of Iniquity, and cursing
man, because he could not h^ Knight o^ the Lions s^ill: Another while ^e wis^ed
that some unlucky Planet would desead from the Firmament, and fall upon his
miserable Head. B^ing ^t ^t is extreme despair, because he was put away from
the Castle of the Lions, he never hoped to return thither again; And so about
midnight, being a time when desperate men practice their own destructions, he
cast himself headlong from the top of the Tower, and broke his Neck, and all
besprinkled the flinty pavements with his Blood and Brains.

Then was Sr. Haringtonius, Knight of the Rota, also in deep distress, for he
fled from the fury of the Christians, as Dust flies before a Whirlwind; And he
cried out, Oh ye fatal Torches of the Elements, why are you not clad in
mou^nful Habiliments, to cloak my wandering steps in eternal darkness? More he
would have said, but that a certain salt Rheum sell upon his Lungs, which
caused him to have a very great Burre in his Throat, so that thereupon he was
in wonderful despair; Now as he was in despair so was he in Arabia likewise,
and being in both together, a most desperate whimsey came into his head;
Wherefore he got to himself Odours and Spices of sundry kinds, as also the
odoriferous branches of Lignum Rhodium, and several other sweet woods; And when
he had piled them in a heap together, he put thereunto fire, and then threw
himself into the flames; for that it is said, he had long before resolved, if
misfortunes came thick upon him, to dye like a Phe^ix: For that the Knight of
the Lions was always accounted a Phoenix; Now if he were a Phoenix, then men
said true, but if he were not a Phoenix, then men did not say true.

But as for Sr. Ludlojus, the Knight of the Green powdering Tub, though he did
not dye, yet there be^el him an Accident, quite contrary to that of the Knight
of the Lions. For when he came to the Enchanted Castle of Parismus, he demanded
entrance right boldly. But the Giant Parismus had made his House o^ Office,
just before his Castle gate, so that if Knight^ were not very wary, they fell
thereinto up to the Hea^ and Ears, as it happened to Sr. Ludlojus, so that he
came to be in the strangest pickle that ever Knight was in. Now you must know,
that by the Knights falling into the Privy, the Enchantments of Parismus were
dissolved, as it has many times happened in story; So that the fair Maid of
Wimbleton, being now freed from the bondage she was in, came forth, and scraped
Sr. Ludlojus so clean, that he smelt as sweet as a Razor. Then she and the
Knight departed together, but whither, or what became of them after, I here of
no Body that kenneth.

The Seer Feko hearing of these things, was sorely grieved; so he told the
Emperor, who was ycleped Prester-John, that if he would protect him in his
Dominions, he would Convert all his People to the true Faith; What is that
quoth the Emperor? The Seer replied, that there was required a multitude of
words to declare what the true Faith was; So he began a long speech; But when
the Emperor heard him talk in his proper phrases, telling him of Rolling upon
the Promises, Quickening of the Spirit, Subduing the Outward Man, and the like;
it is said that the Emperors hair stood an end, for that he thought he had
been Conjuring; And he called for his Guard, and caused them to put him out of
his Court; Now being thus put out, he departed into the Land of Mesopotamia,
which borders upon the Red Sea. But if you would know what is become of the
Seer Rogero, who was the intimate Companion of the Seer Feko, I must tell you,
that he is now practicing the noble Science of Corn cuting, in the Kingdom of
Kathaia.

I must also inform you, that many of the Forty Tyran^s, falling into the hands
of the Christians, were hanged, which was the chiefest occasion that we can
here of that they lived no longer. So that it is not fitting that we should
take notice of the Dead, because that after their deaths, they never did any
thing Considerable Only it is said that Sr. Harrymartino, the Knight of the
Turpentine Pill, begged and entreated hard ^^r his lif^, offering both his
Testicles for the Redemption of his Neck; But Dame Waradina would by no means
let him after his property, willing he he should be hanged, rather than disable
himself for her ser^ice; and so being hanged amongst the rest, he took his
leave of this World; but whether he changed this Li^^ for a better, He himself
b^^t (...).

(...)quoth Sr. Wallopius, and ha^^ the L^^al Knight dissolved the Charm^s of
(...)cer: Most certainly replied Sr. (...) ycleped the Slovenly Knight. (...)
of us* quoth Sr. Wallopius. So ^h^y w^^t ^^to a cert^in Necromancer, and he
made (...) Lamb, which was enchanted by Magic Art. No^ this Sepulcher was
encompassed about with a Wall of Iron* ^o when this Monument was framed by Art,
Sr. Wallopius, and Sr. Munsonius, caused themselves to be enclosed therein;
where we shall leave them Conversing with Furies, walking Spirits, and black
pots of (...); according to the Tenor of a certain Prophesy, ^o^told some Ages
agon.

FINIS.

