A SPEECH MADE IN THE HOUSE OF PEERS, By the Right Honorable the Earl of
MONMOUTH, on Thursday the 13. of January. 1641.

Upon the occasion of the present distractions, and of his Majesty's removal
from White Hall.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London, for I. Benson, 1641.

A Speech made in the House of Peers, by the Right Honorable Earl of
Monmouth on Thursday the 13. of January, 1641.
My Lords,
I Shall desire to be heard speak a few words, which I would much rather have
heard spoken by any of your Lordships, that so they might have a happier and a
more handsome expression; though with a better heart, and clearer intentions
they could not have been spoken.

The sad condition we are now in (my Lords) is such as is too apparent to any
man, who has but half an eye: the City of London is full of jealousies and
apprehensions, we sit not here free from fears; the King has with-drawne
himself from hence, together with his Queen and Children, out of a belief,
(as I conceive) that his Majesty's Person was not safe here. While things
continue in this posture (my Lords) we may well fear an impairing, we can
hardly hope for the bettering of affairs: God has placed us (my Lords) in the
Medium betwixt the King and his people; let us play our parts (my Lords) let us
do our duties, and discharge our consciences; let us really prove, what we
are by Name, Noblemen; let us endeavor to work a perfect and a true
understanding, between the King and his people: let us freely unbosome our
selves to his Majesty; and desire that his Majesty will be pleased to do so
to us; and to this end, (my Lords) which is the end of my motion, if it shall
be approved of by your Lordships, I do humbly move, that by way of conference,
or any other way, we may desire the house of Commons to join with us; first
in an humble petition to his Majesty that he would be graciously pleased to
return to his good City of London, as the safest place we conceive for his
sacred Person in these distempered times; and then that they will likewise
join with us in a Profession or Protestation, that we will do what in us lies
to free his Majesty from his fears; to take from the Citizens of London, and
his Majesty's other subjects their jealousies and apprehensions; and that we
will live and dye his Majesty's faithful Advisors, Counselors and Loyal
Subjects.

FINIS.

