Monmouth Routed, and taken PRISONER, With his Pimp the Lord Gray. A SONG
To the Tune of King James's Jigg.
I.
FIve thousand Pound for James the Scot,
That squeezed out the Garbish and Guts of the Plot,
The Roaring Cannons did fright him away,
Yet Lumley secured his Pimp the Lord Gray;
Ferguson with his Preaching Tools,
Was fairly Killed with his Knaves and Fools,
King James will show them who it is that Rules,
While the Whigs look as Muddy as Midnight Owls.
II.
Brave Feversham, and Grafton did stand,
And Eagle-Ey'd Oglethorp's worthy Command;
He 'spy'd the Rebels like Thieves draw near,
At One in the Morning, e're Day did appear;
Yet all was in readiness took the Alarms,
The Word was given to Arms, to Arms:
The Cannons sweet Music, the Soldiers charms
Whilst Mars was Assistant against Rebels and harms.
III.
Brave Albamarle lay fair for their Flight,
And Beausord in Bristol scoured the Kings Right:
As soon as ever the Day did appear,
Brave Pembrook fell foul of the Rout in the Rear,
Then began the stress of the Fray,
Gray turned Tails, with his Horns made away:
God Curse me quoth Gray; if longer I stay,
I never before saw so Bloody a Day.
IV.
Then Monmouth cried out, O Gray for my Life
Stand by me this Brunt and I Will Kiss thy Wife,
Then Gray swore Damn me, thou'st made me a Beast,
My Breeches are foul, I Run home to be dressed:
The Kings Army, both Horse and Foot,
Fought through the Rebels through Fire and Blood
And Cut down the Enemies, all that stood,
Then Monmouth ran foremost, and thought it was good.
V.
This was the success of our fine Fop-Things,
That came for to conquer the greatest of Kings,
Whose Commanders and Soldiers sooner would dye
In the Field of Honor than ever to fly:
We all their Standards there did gain,
And all their Cannons add to our Train,
While our Army does flourish upon the Plain,
With Trophies of Honor, and lasting Fame.
VI.
And now they are beating the Bushes to find,
A King that left all his great Champions behind;
Who R^b'd the Churches in three weeks Reign,
And Ravished Young Virgins within the same;
Three Golden Bibles in his Flag,
Three Hackney Whores and his running Nag,
True Protestant Prince of which Presbiters brag
Is caught under a Hedge in a lousie rag
VII.
A fair Conclusion of the King in the West,
His Knights of the Garter instaled in have;
Lord Keeper, and Secretaries of State,
Made under a Hedge, at his Court without Gate;
The George and Starr without Crack or Fledge,
To Fools not deserving a Porters Badge;
Like the King of the Gypsies, tuch'd Mall and Madge,
At his Majesty's Court, given under a Hedge.
FINIS
LONDON; Printed for James Dean, Bookseller, between the Royal Grove. and the
Helmet in Drury Lane, 1685.


