A Magical Vision, Or a Perfect DISCOVERY Of the FALLACIES Of WITCHCRAFT As it
was lately represented in a pleasant sweet Dream to a Holy sweet Sister, a
faithful and precious Assertor of the Family of the Stand-hups, for
preservation of the Saints, from being tainted with the Heresies of the
Congregations of the Doe-Littles.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Palmer, at the Crown in Westminster Hall. 1673.

TO THE READER.
KInd Reader ben't a shamed to embrace Truth,
Though Naked couched in these few sheets (insooth.)
She is but little ('it is folly for to lie.)
But than sh' as the other good commodity,
She Is Pretty, pleasant, brisk and debonaire.
And no less witty, that I can assure;
Which I dare to avouch, you will not deny
So soon as once observed Her linx his eye,
How she does launch out in discovery,
Of The juggling tricks e' the fond Fraternity.
The Humors, Fopperies, which now do reign,
In these impost'rous elements o'th brain.
Then vieu Her well; and tell me when you have don.
How often you have met with such a one,
So little, and so pretty, and so all
Complete * if you in love do with her fall
I shall be glad, and may a thousand more
Be of your mind, and buy them by the score.
I shall be glad, for you will reap Delight
I trust, and I the Profit; So good Night.
T.P.

WHat strange conjunction 's this? here is grown
A Molehill and the towering Alps in one.
Or rather truth; the golden Legend shut
Once more within the cloister of a Nut.
Then throw your Euclids by, andonly look
To the propositions of this little Book;
And you will conclude, Truth does as clearly lie
Here, as in the maxims of Philosophy.
But (naked) properly I cannot say
Cause clad in so most sumptuous array;
As if the Author meant in this small piece,
Forthwith to sum the Arts and Sciences.
But some may say this Volume is too small,
To rear an Hermian Arch, or Escural
To his dilated Fame -- O, it is not much
Perpetuates our Memory, but such.
Age is not sum'd by years but hours, as Times
So Works are balanced* not by Leafs but Lines.
In contract, (Sir) the naked truth is this,
Your pithy Treatise most ingenious is.
And more than that, just is the Accusation
You Are charged with, this learned Accumulation
Subverts the Fundamentals, it is your crime
TO upbraid the State Poeticks of this time
With wit so exquisite, though Phoebus be
The Pleader, our votes never can set you free.
There Is none needs now go travel* we may see
At home both Sodom and fond Nineveh
You Have made the Devil blacker; dressed in white*
Proving the zelot the worst Hyppocrite.
Pulling the Veil from the Reformers face,
To expose the fond Fiend to just disgrace.
The splay-mouth'd Brother and his Tabitha
In their Caresses unawares betray.
The reeking steam sure of their Villainies
Would spot the Stars, and menstruate the Skies
Had you not their lewd paths and ways uncouth
So dexterously discry'd in naked Truth.
FINIS.
THat there are Witches (in the common signification of the word) has been
confidently asserted, and as briskly opposed by the ingenious Penns of several
modern Authors: Henceforwards none need doubt of it, that have but Faith enough
to credit our relation of the following adventure; whereby we seek not to
commit a Rape on any man's belief: But if any will persist in a state of
infidelity, we leave them to be converted from their Errors by the horrors of
some such like ghastly Apparition.

It Is something above a Month ago, that having trifled away the best part of a
Morning, in amusing my self with Doctor Dee's Legend of Spirits; I resolved on
a walk to dissipate those vain ridiculous imaginations, which had thence
invaded my Brain: To this purpose, I carelessly steered my course to a small
Grove, whose stately Trees view their Branches in the Crystal streams of a
Neighboring Brook. In which pleasing solitude I had not wandered half an hour,
but a sudden drowsiness seized my Spirits, and I perceived an intruding
Broomstaffe that violently thrust it self between my Legs, making me (spite of
my Teeth) bestride it; mounted (like a delinqent Soldier) on the wooden
Pegasus: I presently felt my self fly swister than a Parthian Arrow through the
yielding Air, and without remembering the place where I was taken up, was set
down again on my feet in the midst of a vast desert; where I could find no
path, seeing there no footsteps of humanity: I presently fancied it to be some
new World, and like an adventrous Columbus would needs discover further, but
all my struggling endeavors only satisfied me in the impossibility of getting
forwards, and to add to my astonishment, in a moment (as if I had journyed to
the Antipodes) Noon was turned to midnight, I saw the Stars shine in the
Firmament, with a faint bluish Fire like wasted Candles sunk into their
Sockets, the Moon was in her full, but paler much than ordinary, she was thrice
Ecclipsed, and thrice sunk down below her Circle: The murmuring fountains were
now grown mute, and the Birds had forgot their Chattering; not a Cock durst
crow, and yet the Lions throughout the Wood trembled like the leaves of Asps,
neither the Serpents dreadful hisses, not the howlings of Ravenous Wolves, nor
the screechings of Male-ominous Ravens could be heard, all Creatures had no
more motion than was necessary to express their fear by, and the horror of an
astonishing silence that governed in every place, made it appear Nature was in
suspense of some terrible accident: my fear began to grow as great as that,
which the face of the Horizon seemed troubled withal, when by the glimmering
Moonlight, I saw ascending out of a vast Grot or Cave situate at the foot of
a Craggy Rock, over spread with Ivy and Bushes, a tall venerable old man
clothed in a party colored Vest of White and Green, with an austere
countenance and swarthy Face, his Eybrows thick as a Cops, and long as a Horses
main, were curiously turned back, and wound up about his Ears, a wall and
frightful Eye he had, sunk above two Inches into his Head, his Beard carelessly
thrown over his left Shoulder, and his Temples anointed with Oil of
Nightshade: On his Head he had a large Hood of Vervain, and about him a Girdle
of May-Fearne Artificially wooven in Tresses; upon his Gown, near his Heart was
fastened a Bat and a Toad both half dead, and about his Neck he wore a Collar,
set with seven several precious stones, each of which wore the Character of
that Planet that governed it: Thus mystically dressed, and carrying in his left
hand a Triangular Vial full of May-Dew, with his right a Sappy Elder Rod, one
end of which was well tipped with a mixture of all Metals, and the other served
as a handle to a little Brazen Censer filled with the choicest susfumigations:
He kissed thrice the floor of his Grot with a kind of superstitious Reverence,
and having pulled off his right foot shoe, and flung it over his left Shoulder,
and grumbling brought out certain words from the bottom of his Stomach; he went
backwards Nine paces, till he came under the Boughs of an old Oak overrun with
Misseltoe, Four foot from which he drew three Circles one within the other, and
the Earth obedient to his Necromantick charms, which ready trembling, put her
self into those figures, which he designed to have made in her. In these
Circles he wrote with his Middle finger, the names of the intelligences, as
well of the age and Country as of the Year, Season, Month, Weak, Day, Hour and
Minute, each in its different Character and proper place, every one under its
constellation, and with their respective due Ceremonies.

This tedious operation being dispacht, he put his Glass in the midst of the
Circles, and opening it made a report louder than that of Cannon or Thunder,
the small sharp end of his Rod, he placed between his fore-teeth, lay down with
his face toward the East, and betook himself to his Repose; I (who you may
think at that time had little mind to sleep) watch't him very narrowly,
admiring what might be the upshot of so many strange formalities: about the
midst of his Nap (which exceeded not half an hour) I saw Seven Fearn-seeds drop
into the Vial, which when he waked he took out, and put two in each Ear,
another into his Mouth, the Sixth again into the Glass, and the last he threw
out of the Circles; but no sooner was it out of his Hand, but I saw it
encompassed by more than a Million (if my Arithmetic fail me not) of
Mal-ominous Creatures, as well insects as others: He touched with his
enchanting Caduceus, an Owl, a Fox and a Mole, which making a frightful Noise,
instantly flung themselves into the Innermost Circle; And he with no less speed
began to rip open their bodies with a brass Knife, and taking out their Hearts,
he wrapped them up in three Bayleaves, and a litte Moss, and swallowed them, he
took away their livers, which he squeezd over an Hexagonal Vessel, and then
reiterating the suffumigations, mixed the Dew and the Blood together in a Basin,
dipped in it a Glove of Virgin Parchment, which he put on his right Hand, and
after Four or Five horrible howlings, closed his Eyes, and thus began his
invocations.

Conjuro and confirmo vos Schamaim Athaliel Chiliarchus raquiem, Alchocodonean,
Tapthathara, Tossoffacan, Hamaguliel, Zonthonphanchia, Heydonia, with a many
more cracking, thumping, blustering Terms, which had not my fears frighted the
Art of memory out of my Head, and the place been inconvenient for Writing
Shorthand, I would have registered for supplying the courteous Reader with
terrible words, to still his bawling Children with. During all this Divelish
Prayer, he was raised from the Ground above a hands breadth, and ever now and
then would fix his Eye on the Nail of his left forefinger; his Face was
inflamed, and he foamed at Mouth, like an over-ridden Hackney. But after this
exercise concluded, and many groanings and ghastly contortions, he fell
prostrate on his face, and I heard in his Throat a humming as of many Voices
together, from whence arising he became more strong than man, insomuch that
without stirring, he stood the monstrous shock of a horrible wind, able to blow
a Mountain up by the Roots, he caught a falling Thunderbolt in his Hand, and
puffed out a Cloud full of Lightning; all which dreadful Artillery (I percieve)
was discharged to force the old Gentleman to abandon his Circle, but he with an
undaunted resolution maintaining his ground, the Circles themselves began with
an incredible swiftness to whisk about under him: this was followed by a storm
of Hail redder than Blood, which gave place to a much more terrible torrent of
Bituminous Fire, that roared like Mount Gibello when it burst, and seemed to
rend the Air with dreadful claps of Thunder.

This served as an Epilogue to all this Tragedy of Horror, for immediately a
fair Light dissipated these sad meteors, and a brisk young man in a Flame
colored Mantle appeared, he came riding post through the Air mounted with his
right Leg on an Eagle, and the other on a Lynx, and in as Gentile and
respective a manner, as if he had been one of Belzebubs Pages of honor,
presented the Magus with three small Vials full of Nobody knows what Liquor:
The cunning man in requital made him a present of three Hairs, one plucked off
from his Forehead, the other two from his Temples, whereupon he was gently
struck over the Shoulders, and between the Eyes with a small wand that his
Spirit held, and then every thing vanished, and methoughts it appeard about that
time, when Stars grown pale at the arrival of their illustrious Monarch the
Sun, joined color with the Heavens, I emboldned by this approach of day was
just going to seek my way home.

But the old Magitian it seems was unwilling we should part so, and therefore
once more presented himself, he did not walk but glide along, and got home
before I saw him stir, his Hand was so cold, that mine whereon he laid it, was
benumbed for a fortnight after, he neither opened his Eyes nor his Mouth, but
in deep silence conducted me out of the wood, and over some Fields to the
dreadful ruins of a long since dismantled Castle, where the ages for this 100
years have been laboring to carry the Chambers into the Cellars, under which
in a deep Vault was his constant Residence.

As soon as we entered this Enchanted Mansion, boast thy self young man (said he
turning toward me) to have seen face to face the famous Agrippa whose Soul by
Metempsichosis heretofore was incorporated in the renowned Doctor Faustus, and
long since inspired the Learned Zoroastes King of the Bactrians: Since (almost
two ages) that I have disappeared to men, I have preserved my self with aurum
potabile in such a vigorous state of health, that no disease durst ever invade
me, every twenty years I swallow a quantity of the Universal Medicine, which
renews my youth, and restores to my Body its decayed forces: did thou
(continued he) consider the three Vials presented to me by the Prince of the
Fiery Doemons: The first of them was full of this Elixar, the second of powder
of projection, and the third of Oil of Bones. Nor art thou a little obliged to
me since I have made choice of thee amongst all mortal Race, to be present at
these mysteries, which I celebrate but once in four Lustres; and that thou
may not be ignorant who it is has done thee this honor; let me tell thee,
it is (by my charms) in my power at my pleasure to render a Country fruitful or
barren, I stir up Wars by breeding dissension amongst those Genii that govern
Kings; I teach the Wolfs Pater Noster, and the cunning man how to manage the
Sheers and turn the Seive; I send Iacks with Lanthorns, and Will with Wisps to
Marshes and Fens, to allure benighted Travelers out o^f their way, over
Hedges, and drown them in Ditches, I send out the Fairies and Elves to Dance
and Revel together by Moonlight, and encourage the Gamesters to look under the
Gallows for the Four of Clubs; I raise at Midnight the silent Ghosts from
their Dormities, wrapped in a sheet to plague their negligent Heirs, for not
performing those Vows they made to them at their Deaths; I command Spirits to
haunt old Monasteries, and uninhabited castles, and to strangle all that come
to Lodge there, till some resolute fellows compells them to discover the
treasure they so long have Brooded over; I make those whom I would enrich find
hidden wealth, and teach Thieves to burn Candles of Deadmens Grease to lay
Folks asleep, whilst they Rob their Houses. I give the flying Money that return
again to the Pocket after it is spent, and cheat covetous Misers with a bagfull
of dry Oak Leaves instead of Guinnys and Georges; I make those Amulets that
render the wearers Musket proof, and Philters to ingratiate Lovers with their
mistresses. It Is I clatter the doors when they are fast bolted, and invisibly
humble the Dishes and Glasses without breaking them; I learn Mountebanks to
drive away an Ague by writing Abacadabra on Virgin Parchment, and old Women to
cure a Fever by another charm equally Nonsensical and blasphemous; I awaken
the Country Fellow on Midsummer Eve to gather his Herb fasting and in silence,
and young Wenches to watch on St. Agnes Night; I teach Witches to assume the
shape of Wolves and eat Children, to turn themselves into Hares, and be hunted
all Day, and at Night make their escape from the Hounds in at a Window, and
when any happen to cut off one of their Legs (which to morrow proves such an
old woman's Arm) I forsake them; when they are tried, I keep them above Water
like bladders, that they cannot sink, and leave them in the power of Justice,
yet at the Gallows allow nothing to Tuck them up but a With; I send to the
discontented and envious, the tall man in black with the Cloven Foot, who makes
them promises of great riches and other felicities: If they will but make him a
Feeoffment with Livery and Seizing of their Souls, and then blind them that
take bargains of him; for when they agree for a term of Life of thirty years, I
make them see the (3) before the (o) which I have placed after it; it is I that
strangle those that raise me out of a wanton curiosity, and give me neither
employment nor reward, but very civilly take leave of those, that when they
have called me up, give me a hair, an old Shoe, or a straw; I take away from
dedicated Churches the stones that are not paid for, and often demolish in the
Night what was built in the Day; I make a Conventicle of Witches seem to those
that are invited to Sabat, nothing but a troop of Cats, of which Marton is
Prince; I send all the confederates to the offering, and give them the Goats
Tail (seated on a Joynt-stool) to kiss; I treat them splendidly, but allow them
no salt to their meat, and if any stranger ignorant of their laudable customs
offer to say Grace, I cause all forthwith to Vanish, and leave him Five hundred
Miles from his own home in a desert of Nettles and Bramble-bushes; I sometimes
play the Pimp by sending plump succuba's to old Leachers Beds, and furnish with
incubusses those wanton Widows that will not go to the charge of Dil -- I am
the Sire of the Oak, and the first that contrived the Legerdemain of the
Changling; I convey Hobgoblings in the shape of a long piece of Marble, to lie
by those that go to bed without making the Sign of the Cross; I teach
Necromancers to destroy their Enemies by making a little image in Wax, which
they throwing into the Fire of pricking. The original is sensible of those
Torments they expose the Figure to; I make Witches insensible in those parts
where the Ram has set his Seal, and give a secret virtue to Nolite fieri, when
said backwards that it hinders the Goodwives Butter from coming, whom yet I
teach to be even with the Hagg, by stabbing the Cream with a red hot Spit* I
entrusted Bla -- to disposess persons Bedivel'd, and white Witches to marvel
the enchantments of black ones, I taught plow Jobbers to lay under the ground
of that Sheepfold they have a mind to destroy, a Lock of hair or a Toad with
three curses that kills all the Sheep that pass over it, as also to stick a
broken Needle in the threshold of the Bridal Chamber, or tie such a knot at the
moment that the Ring is first put on, as shall make an eager lusty young
Bridegroom, impotent; I let loose the Hobgoblin against the Christmas Holy
days, and order him to roll a Barrel, draw a Chain, or hutry a Coach along
Streets in the Night, that he may have the happy opportunity of wringing off
their Necks that look out at Windows; I teach Crundal the composure of Charms,
Lamens, Sigils, Talisman, spells, Christals, Pentacles, Magic Looking-glasses,
and Geomantick Figures, how to find the Misselto of the new Year, the wandering
Herbs, the Gamahely, the Weapon Salve, and magnetique Plaster; I send the
Gobblins, the Shodmule, the Nightmare, the Sprites, the Hobgoblins, the Hags,
the Night-bats, the Break-necks, the black Men and green Women, the Familiars,
the Pugs, the Ghosts, and the Shadow. In fine I am the Prince of the Airs
Viceroy, Deputy Lieutenant to the degraded Seraphin, the fairy Protector, the
Jew-Errant, the High Priest of the Holy Crofs, the Genius of Nostredamus, the
Doemon of Mascoon, and the Drummer of Tedworth; I am he would have proceeded
with a tedious Harangue of his power and Titles, had not a small spiritual
officer in the shape of a Flitter-mouse interrupted him by a whisper in the
Ear, which obliged the Magician to tell me, he must omit the rest he intended
to have said, till another opportunity, for at present he was staid for by a
gang of Lap-Land Witches that came to treat with him about a new Bargain of
Bottled wines, whereby they proposed to themselves to make very considerable
advantages during these Wars, saying thus, he mounts a flying Dragon that
presented it self ready Bridled and Sadled, and in the twinkling of an Eye
disappeared.

When thinking to Ruminate a while on the strange Novelties of this uncoucht
Adventure: I found my self in the before mentioned Grove, under the shade of a
spreading Sycamore, carelessly laid along, on a rising Bank that was covered
with a fresh green Mantle Embroidered with Cowslips and Violets, and have ever
since strongly suspected not only this formidable apparition, but most other
stories of that Nature to be nothing but Dreams.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of Books Printed for Thomas Palmer at the Crown in
Westminster Hall. 1671.
1. ROme exactly described, or a Relation of the present State of that Court,
made at the late Council of Pregadis, in two curious Discourses, by the most
Excellent the Lord Angelo Corcaro Ambassador from the most serene Republic of
Venice, written in Italian and made English by John Bultol Gent. large Octavo.
price 1 s. 6. d.

2. Putanism de Roma, or the History of the Whores and Whoredoms of the Popes
Cardinals and Clergy of Rome, discovered by a Conclave of Ladies convened for
the Election of a new Pope, written in Italian by the Author of Cardinalismo
and Nepotismo and now made English by I. D. Esquire in large Octavo, price 1.i s. 6
d.

3. Oxford Drollery Refined, being new Poems and Songs written and collected by
a Person of Quality, the Author of westminster Drollery made upon several
Occasions, by the most Famous and Eminent Wits of the said University, price 1
s.

4. Venus Cabinet unlocked, and Natures chief Miracle and Rarities laid open,
being a curious Collection out of the two Eminet Physicians, Levinus Lemnius
and Simbaldus made English by R. Miller; M. D. in Twelves, price 1 s. 6 d.

5. Naked Truth, or a Plain Discovery of the Intrigues of Amorous Fops, and
Humors of several other whimsical Persons, in a pleasant and profitable
Dialogue, between a Precious Saint-like Sister called Terpole, and Mimologus a
Scoffing Buffoon, written by Don Francisco Baltheo de Montalvan, and faithfully
translated out of the Original by W. H. M. D. 1. s.

6. Little Venus unmasked, or a perfect Discovery of the French Pox, comprising
the opinions of most Ancient and Modern Physicians, which the Authors Judgment
and Observations upon the Rise, Nature, Subject, Causes, Kinds, Signs, and
Prognostics of the said Disease; together with several nice Questions, and
twelve different Ways, and Methods of curing that Disease, and running of the
Reins: the second Edition, with large Additions of new matter, and of a new
Tract of a Scorbutick-pox, a second Tract of a Mangy-pox, together with their
several Cures. price 1 s.

FINIS.

