HOLLANDS INGRATITUDE: Or, A SERIOUS EXPOSTULATION WITH THE DUTCH. Showing
their Ingratitude to this Nation, and their inevitable Ruin, without a speedy
Compliance and Submission TO HIS Sacred Majesty OF BRITAIN. By CHARLES MOLLOY
of Lincoln's Inn, Gent.

LONDON: Printed by ^. I. for Fr. K. at the Princes Arms in Chancery Lane. 1666.

The Explanation of the Frontis-piece.
WHat may this Emblem mean? A Cow with Kings?
A Miter'd Prince? These are mysterious things!
Fed by a KING too, O, I have it now:
Holland is represented by the Cow.
Englands Great Monarch gives this Beast its food,
Which is the Issue of a Vip'rous Brood.
Intuitively view this bellied Creature,
And you shall find it both in form and feature
The Dutch Resemblance, and to come more near,
A Flemish Vroe and Cow both Calves do bear.
See how her Neck she does extend to feed,
Yet (damned Ingrate) would make her Feeder bleed.
Her Essence she received from England, yet
Ungrateful She does now disown that Debt.
Grateful Acknowledgement this Beast now scorns,
But strives to goar her Maker with her horns.
Now since it is so ( GREAT KING) Commission give,
How long this base unthankful Beast shall live.
Her sides with fat ambitiously do swell;
It Is only seeming fat, She is not well;
She Is out of tune, her looks declare her sick
Of Tumult, and Disorder, Lunatic.
She must have Doctors, and she must endure
Phlebotomizing, to enjoy a Cure.
Our KING's the Balsom, and the Hellebore,
That must preserve our Interest, and restore
Hollands dead Stupor, to a just quick sense
Both of Ingratitude and Recompense.
He Will teach Her both at once to feel, and know,
These two deep points; what She does want and owe.
He that enjoys the Danish Regal Seat,
Holds by the Horns, who in a Bergen heat
Pretends much friendship, and with Pitch and Tar,
And her own Moneys, carries on the War.
Denmark beware, lest we hereafter Scoff;
Her turn being served, She then will turn you off.
Rather, since she will not bear her Sovereigns yoke,
Hold her Head fair for Englands fatal stroke.
When by that blow She falls, we must conclude
The Judgment just against Ingratitude.
Sit fast brave Don, since Mounted, let her know
Who was her Master once, who must be now.
Spur to the quick this Slow-paced Animal;
Though She may wince or kick, thou can not fall.
Be bold, She is thy own, spare not her side,
Hold fast the Horns, thou may command her Hide.
Make her to bellow, if She will not own
Her just Allegiance to the Spanish Crown.
Make known, the World's not come to that strange pass,
That the right Owner dares not Ride his Ass.
Munster stick close, forth own and CHARLES his sake,
And leave her not, till that her heart does ache.
Thou hitherto most glorious things have done;
Go on, and perfect what thou have begun
What do my Eyes behold upon the Ground?
The Cow's Close stool-pan is the Gallick Crown.
That Prince that sides with a Rebellious S^em,
Is sure to have Dirt thrown on his Diadem.
By that he makes Homespun Rebellion swell,
And so does teach his Subjects to Rebel.
Lastly, you see a Prince that strongly ^uggs,
And boldly sucks this Sullon Beast's rich duggs.
Many attend her, and I hope concur
(^n distinct Interests) to Ruin her.
Great CHARLES and Munster will conjoyn in one,
To share her Flesh, Let Lewis pick the Bone.
TO THE WORLDS VVONDER, THEIR ENEMIES TERROR, AND Noble Defenders of their
KING, and Countries Honor, THE BRITISH NATION.
Dear Contrymen,
IT may be in this conjuncture of Affairs, you may think I have said too
little, as things now stand between His Majesty of Britain, and the Flemings,
truly I could say more, it being my duty to vindicate my Countries Honor and
Interest, as far as such high Provocations, multiplied by the weight of so many
Obligations, may justly bear; yet have I been so far from setting Wounds
bleeding afresh, (since I hope there is an An^idote making ready in Holland)
that I have labored (perhaps without thanks) to salve with as much gentleness
as modesty could give me leave, the sad and fatal Breaches; However, I shall be
more ready to ask pardon, than offend by being too censorious, or violent
against an Enemy; for, give me leave to tell you, I think we live in an Age
that cannot well be flattered by fine words, truth and the matter is that they
expect, I hope I have laid it down, and that without gilded Sentences. Accept
them, and weigh them justly for on my word they come from a faithful and loyal
Subject to His Majesty, though never in his pay.

Charles Molloy.

Hollands ingratitude TO ENGLAND.
CAESAR endured without exclamation the Senators Poniards, as whetted by
interest or Revenge; but when that of his own Imp Brutus was presented against
him, he covered his face, leaving the world with no less shame then indignation
against so much unnatural ingratitude. The like might we do in relation to the
Dutch. As to impute the fomenting of a War now against our Royal Sovereign:
their base and barbarous dealings with us at both the Indyes against our
Factories and Trade; and their many and horrible outrages committed, as well on
the Seas and other Ports in the World; as also at Amboyna, as at Guyny, to be
only the same hand that assisted the Enemy toward the loss of Rochel, in one
word only to the sordidness of their East and West-Indy Companies, and other
Merchants; who have not only been known to sell Ammunition to the Turks and
other Mahometans, the very blasphemers of their Religion, ( -- if they own any
by retail) but even to his Catholic Majesty, when he was bound in Honor no
less then Interest, to be their Enemy, In gross.

Neither had I ever wished the charming those Frogs, but that I see them so
ready to become an Egyptian Plague, by croaking against us in our own Waters;
yet though most of their Gentry were buried in the cruelty of such as formerly
governed them, and all marks of Honor almost blended amongst them, in those of
Profit; they shall find so much civility in me, as to endeavor rather to bind
up then enlarge the Rupture their indiscretion has made with his Sacred
Majesty; to whom I shall in modesty show how far they stand obliged, and offer
reasons to dissuade them from those wild courses, by which they do no less
tickle the hearts of their Enemies with delight, then wound those with shame
and fear who do affect them.

Here then let me crave leave to address my Speech to this ungrateful
Neighbor, and thus expostulate with him.

After that France, tired with labor, the striving of her own Children had
caused in the Bowels of her State, and child by the cold distrust conceived of
Your success, Against his Catholic Majesty.
had deserted you in despair,

1. You may remember how England opened her tender Arms to receive your
Fugitives, and her Purse to pay your Soldiers. So that a foot of ground cannot
be called yours, that owes not a third part to the expense, Valor, or Counsel
of the English; of whom such glorious spirits have expired in your defense, as
have been thought at too too mean a rate to double the value of what they
fought for. Brave Sidney falling upon such ground as his glorious Mistress
thought too base and ignoble to bury him in; though you offered to purchase
that Honor, at the price of the richest Monument you were then able to erect.

2. Did not the English dispute your Title at Ostend, till they had no earth to
plead on, the very ground failing them, before their Valors? Yet whilst
fighting there, not only against the Flower of the Spanish Army, but the
Plague, Hunger, and Cold despair; their fellows put you in possession of
Sluice beyond your hopes. So as it may be said without Hyperbole; The Nobility
and Gentry Queen Elizabeth lost, doubled the number, the Cruelty of Spaines
great Philip had left you?

3. Do not the Maritim Towns of Kent, Essex, Suffolk and Norfolk, etc. abound
with the Issue of those Swarms, the very sound of their fellows Calamities,
and miseries had driven out of their Hives?

4. Have you not had Liberty to Trade, and to become free Denizons, nay so
Graciously have you been used by His Sacred Majesty, and his Royal Father, and
by his now generous Parliament to admiration, witnessing but the Acts of
Natuarallizing so many of your spawne in 12o. 13o. and 14o. of His now
Majesty's Reign with Power to buy and purchase Land in Fee simple, Tale or
otherwise in any of His Cities, or Countries, no mark of distinction being
imposed in relation either to Honor, profit, or Justice?

5. Has not His Sacred Majesty been always so Tender of his Royal word that he
made with you before he left the Hague, and the Preservation, whilst you needed
it, and friendship, since God has enabled you to subsist, as he scarce had set
foot on his Royal Throne here, before the sense of your safety no less then
His own Nature and Religion, Inspired him with an earnestness to renew or
strengthen His Royal Alliance with you, not so observable in respect of any
Neighbor beside, doubling I am sure, no less in their Retaliation, then
acceptance, the poor and few marks of gratitude, have dropped from you; Rather
expunging them, with your more frequent Injuries, as being more willing to
impute your failings to the less Courtly nature of the Soil and People, then
the want of gratitude and Civility in so prudent a State to such a Potent
Neighbor as Britain, who next to God may justly be styled her Maker, in
dispensing with so many dangers and inconveniences for your sake?

6. Can you think so wise a Counsel as this Nation was steered by, did not
apprehend; that though the making you free might fortify the Queens out works;
Queen Elizabeth's assistance against the Spaniard.
yet it could not but as much dismantle the Royal Fort of Monarchy, by teaching
Subjects the way to Depose their Princes, and be no loosers by the Bargain,
which (by the way) would have rendered you unacceptable to all neighbor
Monarchs, for thereby you would furnish their Subjects with a pretense upon all
occasions of advantage to do the like?

Was not the assisting you, an occasion of our Invasion in eighthly eight, by a
Navy held invincible in the Creed of Rome, till the more glorious valors of
the English, (assisted by the Lord of Hosts) had clearly confuted the Popes
Title, Dover.
even to the amazement of the Clif^s, and wonder of the World. The only reason
then that kept King Philip from heading a Royal Army in his own Person, was
fear he did apprehend of being cast in his passage out of Spain (as his Father
Charles the fifth was) upon the British shore, knowing the English more cordial
in your preservation, then ever to suffer him to come and go in peace, when he
came on so bloody an errand?

7. And though he as a magnanimous Prince, and so great a Monarch as he was,
yet he did often desire his Sister of England to hear his just defense for his
so rigorous proceedings; She refusing to dispute the truth of your Complaints,
presuming it more probable for a stranger to be a Tyrant, then that the natural
Inhabitants should upon a slighter cause, cast themselves into the no less
bloody, then scorching flames of a civil and uncertain War: She seeming rather
to forget the Obligations She owed him, either as a private Person or Brother,
when he was King of England, then her neighbors oppressions. I shall not here
need draw blood in your Faces by Application, your own conscience does it.

8. Were not your Messengers received into England in the quality of
Ambassadors, they being then too modest to own higher Ti^les then of Poor
Petitioners, casting themselves prostrate at the feet of no less Potent
Tribunal, then what you were admitted to in the quality of Ambassadors but the
other day, and the which you now fight against? Ha! tell me, Was it not such an
honor you could never have attained to, but through the clemency of a gracious
Prince? Your own Messengers at the very time, in the same quality, but narrowly
escaped the Gallows, when they went with their own Petition to his Catholic
Majesty. And did not his late Sacred Majesty, out of his Princely goodness, One
made a Lord, ^he other a Knight, at Oxford.
imbroider your Messengers with Titles unworthy such ingratitude, as you
afterward showed him and his against your alliance then made and professed?

9. Have not you opened your Arms to receive those into your Counsels and Pay,
that even the whole world does blush at the reflection of so horrid an Act;
such is it, that at its Relation Tears fall on my Pen, as if it should say,
Thou art not able to express its blackness. Wherein Holland can thou glory?
Not with coloring it with a charritable Protection? O! no, for sure I am that
will veil it self at the Relation of so horrid a Villainy; then what
satisfaction can you give the world, or fancy to your selves, when you show a
President how to protect the horridst Regicide that ever drew breath, such as
are culpable of no less Crime then the Blood of Kings, Christian Kings; nay
such a one as the world when living never could (nor though dead) be able to
match; it was that glorious Prince, when living, that espoused you, as it were,
into his Royal Family; it was he when your Ambassadors were jeered, that out of
the great Mass of Holland, could not afford them selves Cuffs, could answer, It
was never good world when States men took notice of such trifles. It was He
that could part with his Royalty and Prerogative, and give you the honor and
profit then to fish in his Seas, when otherwise you might have starved for
Fish; It was He that gave you those many Privileges that your own Cronologers
have ingraved to posterity, yet have you been so far from managing this
Partiality or Charity, within the ordinary careere of Prudent Princes (who upon
a less desertion of Fortune then was observed, withdraw their assistance from
all parties, looked upon with an unbiassed Aspect) especially such who are not
only Traitors to us, but also in State Policy to all Princes and States
whatsoever.

10. Nay see further your ingratitude, that no sooner providence had measured
out the Kingdom into Peace, by restoring of us our Dread Sovereign unto his
undoubted Right, and the* very words of a firm Alliance and Amity (concluded
betwixt you and him) scarce cold in his mouth; but what wonderful outrages you
committed in our Ships and Merchants in almost all places and Ports where you
could either find or meet them, but especially there, where you found your
selves able to treble the English power and strength, who if equally but Manned
or Ship't, would have reduced your Brandy courages into that combustion, which
they say that Wine bears, and that only by its flames to behold your own
Ruins. Nay such was your Ingratitude, as if nothing were more indifferent to
you, Then who were happy, so England were miserable. Nay after our good God had
given their Royal Highnesses that Triumphant Conquest over you, and dispersed
that Invincible Fleet (as you thought) of yours; and contrary to all
expectation, broke your Swords, and knapt your Spears in sunder, yet you then
let your Ribald Pen vomit out floods of Reproaches, in hope to involve us in a
Civil War again, who was then in a strong labor with a peace to An Angry and
justly displeased God; yet blessed be his Name, it was such a punishment as the
Man after his own heart chose. Nor did you in all your horrid Libels, Pamphlets
and Pictures forget any one thing that could be said to his Sacred Majesty's
Court, Parliament and Kingdom disparagement, the which with an impartial eye,
would only delineate your own.

No Indecency I am sure in any of them observable during their proceedings,
that is not easily to be matc'd with an Enormity of yours.

So as the Phanaticks Ringleaders, or your Pilates in our Vessel by accident
then, proved more His Majesty's Friends and made better use of reason of Sta^e.
For finding their Faction here was able to return them no more then a bare
compliance of mock-God-Prayers, and also finding that Prince of Wonder the Duke
of Albemarle was ready to give them the Reward of Traitors and Rebels they did
(as I hope you will) dissolve, and it may be returned to their first Principal,
the Devil: yet such was your ingratitude, that there was nothing wanting
toward the fomenting and stirring up the same.

Now I have in part drawn, to the knowledge of all, your Ingratitudes, yet not
one hundred part of what they are, and for their hainousness deserve only a
Pen of Steel, to Record them in the wrinkled brow of time, there to remain to
posterity.

Give me leave to expostulate with you, for I in Conscience, and as an English
man, cannot but pay that duty which I in honor owe to this famous Nation, but
ask who made you so far our Surveyors, as to limit out the extent of their
conveniences, that are found to have laid out themselves to purchase yours?

Was ever so high an intrusion offered, as for a Neighto prescribe how another
should be regulated in matter of Trade, and what Bottoms are fittest to be
employed? Would you not scorn the like Usurpation, though made by your --
France, or new sworn Ally Denmark, who for so many years has ground your faces
with a Tole, never yet imposed upon you by our Kings in our Seas? For the proof
of whose Propriety, I leave you to Learned Seldom, in his MARE CLAVSVM, and
another excellent Piece Entitled DOMINIVM MARIS, etc. Translated out of
Italian by a Person of Honor.

And if you were not unwilling for those many years to come stealing, and
bribing the Usurpers so long, for your Fishing, why should you be so touchy
now, with such as inquire whether it was worth your Cost? And though I was
pleased to hear so rich a Town as Amsterdam could be founded on Herring-bones,
The Lord of Hosts is my faithful witness how afflicted I should be to see it
hazard the reducing into its first Principle by a war with England.

And thus much I understand of your Trade, that the late Usurpers did not only
give you the Fish but baits to catch them, Lamprics
laden by boats full out of the Thames, which they would never have done, had
they been as full of circumspection as that creature is reported to be of eyes.

Now this considered pray why may not his Majesty assume to himself the rights
of disposure, and Regulating that which undoubtedly is his own, and why may not
he take that undoubted Style of Lord of the British Ocean? as well as you at
Guiney, and the Indies, that strive with your Maker who shall be most High and
Mighty.

There are three things principally insisted upon, by which the United
Provinces pretend to have fixed an Obligation upon England and expunged their
former Score, which nevertheless upon an impartial debate will rather prove
wholly chargeable upon their own account then ours; so far are they from having
given a full satisfaction for all the Love, Cost, and Blood, expended by us in
their preservation.

1. The first is the assistance lent us in Eighty Eight which was no more then
the professed Antagonists to the quiet of Italy, did freely contribute against
the common Enemy in the battle of Lepanto, who did there oppose the Grand
Signior in relation to their Respective safeties. Besides it was a true
received maxim in the wise Counsel of Spain and holds so still;

That he that desires to subdue the United Provinces, must first Conquer
England, or draw her from their succor;

And finding the latter impossible, they fell upon the the other as more
feazible.

2. The second is your Entertainment given to those paterns of wonder in
suffering, the distressed King and Queen of Bohemia, which according to the
rest of your pretended Courtesies unto England, you have strained far higher
then the string is able to bear in its natural extent, therefore I shall take
leave to tune it right in the ears of all impartial Judgments, and after
setting open the Cabinet give men free leave to value the Jewel, which in
truth amounts to no more then giving house room to a virtuous Prince undone by
your Council and the rest of the union

3. For the third is your entertainment likewise which you gave his Sacred
Majesty in his exile and those of his Loyal Nobility and followers, that run
the same hazard with their dear Master in his afflictions, during the Usurpers,
the which truly was no more but house room. It is true, you did it, but wherein
could you be endangered by it, for by that Act you had only showed some part of
your acknowledgements to the living branches, nay the very Images and children
of those famous men that had formerly expired in your preservation, but also
purchased that, from the Princes in the world, which you could never have done
otherwise, An eternal love; such, that had not Almighty God made his Sacred
Majesty a second Cause in the same, your own Interests could never have
purchased the like; in one word, his Majesty, his Counsel, and those of his
Royal Trayn, were the best Arrow in the Belgic Lions Paw. I need not give the
Reasons for what I say, I say I need not, for I am sure that there is scarce a
Man amongst you all but were the better by it, and you know it too too well
ever to demand the same, therefore I shall wave all that touches that matter.

As for the business of Amboyna cast into the Balance, whose very Name, whilst
Son and Moon shall keep their course, or an English Spirit breath, can never be
forgot or (I fear) forgiven; yet Heaven knows my Soul, I shall be so far from
opening the horror of its Act to the world, that I will close it with these
few Lines, the which I wish you may truly follow.

SO Priam grieved, when he too late did find,
The Grecian Horse with Armed men was lind:
So brave Agamemnon looked with sad eyes,
When he beheld his Daughters Sacrifize.
So sight Achilles, when in sorrow sent
His loved Brices to Alcides Tent:
Or, as that brave Thebeam Wife that mourned
To see her Hectors body robbed, Andremacha.
Entombed.
Such for those Cruelties at Amboyna done
By your back fiends, may you for ever mourn,
In sighs and sable tears, nay such that may
Wash clear your hands against worlds judging day.
For my part really I doubt not, but that upon a more serious reflection of
your Wisdoms on your own Interest, you will return to a more straight Alliance
with his Majesty, by making just satisfaction for what you and yours have most
ungratefully done to this Nation, unless that God in his anger has suffered
you, to mingle Lethe with the rest of your Liquor.

Nay further, give me leave to tell you, that it is impossible for you to
subsist without contracting a straight Alliance with us, and complying with his
Majesty's just requests, the which if not done, you will find a Britans Courage
within few months give Laws, and Command, that which you denied Sir George
Downing, upon so many of his Majesty's Gracious Messages by him to you, the
which you then as it were scorned, but I believe since have paid soundly for
that Ingratitude; but to return, I say it is impossible for you to subsist
without his Alliance.

1. For first you cannot trust Spain, or your new sworn Ally France, The one
laying cla^^ to what you possess, the other to what you are ambitions to obtain.

Whereas England stands free from all such pretenses, Queen Elizabeth refusing
to hold you in gross, and only accepted of Flushing and the Brill, the which
King James was so weary of, as he returned them for a far less sum then they
were pawned.

2. Neither is his Majesty ambitious of any of your Dutch Lands, because he has
more Marsh Lands already within his Dominions, then is well known how to be
disposed of; besides it were a madness for any true English man who may live
quietly in Ireland (which for Ports Soil and Plenty is inferior to no Island in
the whole world, to venture fighting for an Estate in Holland

3. Is our Alliance likely to change if once firmly established? whereas there
is no longer hold with France, then whilst the two Potent Factions of
Protestant and Papist shall subsist within her in peace; by the clashing of
which, or any other inland or foreign matter, they immediately will flag off,
and so leave you to be your own Guardians. Nay if you but go a little further,
and thoroughly Scan your Alliance with France, you will find Poison at the
bottom of their friendship, more danger then protection, it having been always
the humor of that people to swagger with their Neighbors for room, upon the
least enjoyment of quiet, being seldom or never able to serve their Allies, but
when they are in worse case to help themselves.

Nay if you were but sensible of the happiness of that condition you are in,
and of the most scorching slavery in the World that that famous Nation now lies
under by their Kings there -- me thinks should terrify you, who by so many
brave Conquests jointly with the English, to the worlds amazement freed and
redeemed you from the Spanish Yoke, should now forsake them and clea^e to a
French Mushroome, who was ever accounted to say one thing, write another, and
mean another; nay admit them into your very Bowels, the which I fear will be
too too late repented, when like a brood of Vipers you shall behold them
gnawing their way through the body of their Succourer, whose life inevitably
perishes thereby.

For pray what can you build by his admittance into your Country of advantage?
O, he is to assist you against the Prince of Munster; is that it, well very
good: but pray if so, why must there be no less then fourscore or a hundred
thousand men in Arms in and about you: Thanks be to God, it is none of Englands
smallest blessings that they are not able to come hither on Horseback, and you
very well know the French Proverb, Never Peace at home, unless they be at War
with other States: Holland is rich and good plunder, therefore look to it; in
one word, you have good store of Ships, and they have good store of Men, which
I believe you want; and you had best do with them as the English Nobility did
William the Conqueror, invite him for succor, and he proved their Murderer,
and then Crowned himself; which was but the French Proverd verified, Baston
port paix quand and soy. The Sword or Club where ere it comes it brings Laws
with it.

Lastly, The French are not so suitable to your ^um^urs as the English, who look
upon Merchants as Gentlemen, they as Pedlers; in one word, you have only a
friend at a Sneeze, the which, in plain English, is only God help you.

I know you are too wise to expect real friendship from Spain, or a continuance
of your never to be broken agreement made with his Catholic Majesty, if you
conti^ue as you have begun with Us.

It not being likely he should oversee, the advantage will be offered him, of
catching of Gudgeons in your Inland Waters, whilst we are out at Sea scuffling
for Sprats.

If you be prohibited Trading hither but one year long^r, I wonder what the
Devil will become with the French Wines, the most staple Comodity they have to
barter for? The East Countries being as unable to take them off, by reason of
Cold, as you to consume them in burnt Wines.

Monarchs neither do, nor can look upon you under a milder aspect then
Traitors, without a Tacit consent of the like Power resident in their People
explode them, as consciant of giving the same cause; whereas England does and
ever did esteem you in a more Honorable Relation and Interest; For though you
like the Dial of Ahaz recoyled so many Degrees back in the Sphere of Policy, it
is naturally more proper for that hand, and that Power which first made you a
Free State to be touched with an Inclination ever to maintain that Honor and
Interest, which the blood of so many of their Brave Countrymen, has expired in
the setting of it up.

Experience the true Politician has made it apparrent how advantageous an
English Confederacy and Alliance has been always to you: For if you consider
how Honorable it would be to Spain, who has long endeavored it. And
convenient to France in regard of her claim to Artoys and Hannault, to convert
you into a Colony, you would not be so intent upon Profit as to encroach the
very whole Trade in the world out of your (under God) Makers mouths as you now
do, for I know your Wisdoms do know it is esteemed by all prudent Nations far
inferior to Safety. As for your Alliance with Denmark truly that is likelier
to ad number then weight to friendship, being liable to bewhistled off, or on,
according to the Inclination of His Imperial Majesty so twisted in marriages
with the Catholic King, with whom His Majesty has made a firm Alliance, that
the difficulty is as great to distinguish between their Interest^ as
Consanguinity: and it may be, he may find his Country too hot t^ hold him, if
his Neighbor the Swede does but think they have got any thing Rich since 1657.
Besides those Eastern Countries have been ever looked upon, not only as a
Storehouse, wherein God hoards up the miseries of the Winter, but also the
Cruel Plagues of Incursions; apparent in the Goths and Vandals, whose barbarous
hands assisted Time, in the destruction of such Monuments in Italy, as she
alone amongst her Heroes, Pompey and Caesar, and all her other Intestine
Civilians had not been able to demolish.

To conclude with a few Queries, let me Humbly desire you to consider,

1. Whether such as do now Foment this Division, do not Act the Ingenious
Policy of the Wolf in the Fable, that persuaded the Sheep to give over their
Mastives?

2. What other Alliance can afford you so safe Harbourage, in case of foul
weather at Sea, as England, Scotland, and Ireland? if none; whether
Contingencies driven in by storm under our shelter, your East and West India,
and Straits-men, may not exceed all the Coals and Tobacco-Prizes De Rutyer, or
young Van-Trump, shall scrape up upon the Sea?

3. If the raising a flying Army in the Netherlands, may not one time or other
be reduced to such a Faction, especially when headed by one that cannot keep
the same consort with you; be a great cause of Resolving you into your first
Principle of both Poor, Distressed, and Oppressed. Nay, it may be, further
reduce you to be Vassals to some of your right or left hand Neighbors, whose
Aim is wholly to Root up that Vine, which they perceive is likely to Eclipse
their Glories in Traffic and Trade?

4. If Venice may not unproperly be called the Signet on Neptunes Right Hand;
Whether England and the Netherlands, being in a straight Confederacy, may not
be styled his two Arms? By which, in relation to their Shipping, he embraces
the Universe.

5. Whether your Maiden-Towns, as you call them, may not longer enjoy that
Title under the Alliance of England, who has many more rich and beautiful
Harbors and Havens then the French King, that cannot brag of the like Plenty,
or Convenience for Situation, by the half?

6. Whether your admitting those Taterdemalion Mushrooms of Fortune, (the
French) into your Country, may not conjure up the Old Devil, which they were
ever possessed of, to be no man's friend, but for their own end? Your Wisdoms may
understand what manner of Title they can broach, etc. when once they are in the
Sadle: they have got the Bridle in their hands already, (I do not tell you it is
a Dunkirk-one) but I believe the Stirrup likewise. Which if so, I can but smile
to think how your High and Mighty Cedars will so Artificially be turned into
poor and low Shrubs.

7. Whether the sixth Querie does not come too late?

8. Whether the making an honorable Peace with England, by complying to her
Demands, may not be said putting of money to Interest?

9. In case it so happens, whether their Wisdoms do not cease two dangerous
and chargeable Wars, the which if not done, may not (if there be any such thing
as a British spirit) be the sole cause of having it said, Their blood was upon
their own heads?

10. If a Candle being extinguished, whether the snuff is pleasing to any of the
senses?

11. Whether in case Zealand, or any other of your Provinces, irritated by the
Inconveniences that must inevitably follow, may not be tempted to divide, and
adhere to the Stronger and Honester side? and which that is, your Wisdoms may
easily resolve, from the Dispute his Royal Highness, and the brave Rupert, gave
you Min-here Opdam?

12. Whether the Dutch are not convinced of an heresy that they broacht, that
their Highnesses died, and rose again the thirtieth day after?

13. Lastly, Whether the World may not afford Us, and You, sufficient Trade,
without Intruding on each others Interests? And if in case there be any Wolves
in Sheeps-skins amongst us, that seek to destroy us; have we not that blessed
saying ready, Is there not a David for a Shepherd to smite?

A Panegyric, on the Illustrious GEORGE Duke of Albemarle, etc.
WHat Blustering Noise, thus interrupts our Sleeps,
And Ecchoing Shouts, thus cleave the Cristal Deeps?
And seems to call, Great George, from Royal Court.
What noise of Canon, and what Mars-like sport
Se-ecchoe hither, by the Issean Spring?
Hark, with what shouts the Dales, and Rocks, do ring;
And in unusual Pomp, on Tip-toes stand,
And (full of Wonders) overlook the Land.
What Load-star Eastward, draws thus all Eyes?
Whence does this noise of Guns and Drums arise?
Sure Heaven has seen our wrongs, our just desires
Obtained are, no higher now aspires
Our wishing Thoughts, since to his Native clime,
The Flower of Princes, Honor of his time
Is now returned to give Imperial Laws,
To France her glory, and proud Belgick's Paws.
Thy life was kept, His Life.
till the Three Sisters spun
Their Threads of Gold, and then it was begun;
Scarce wast thou born, when joined in friendly bands,
Two mortal foes with other Clasped hands.
With Virtue, Fortune strove, which most should grace
Thy place for Thee, Thee for so high a place;
One vowed thy sacred Breast not to forsake,
The other on I he not to turn her back;
And that Thou more Her loves Effects might feel,
For Thee, she left her Globe, and broke her Wheel.
When Years Thee Vigor gave, O then how clear
Did smothered Sparkles in bright Flames appear!
O Thou! far from the Common-pitch did rise,
With thy Designs, to dazzle Envies eyes.
Thou soughtst to know this Alls-eternal Source
Of ever-turning Heavens, their restless Course:
Their fixed Lamps, their Light which wandering run,
Whence Moon her Silver has, his Gold the Sun,
The light Aspiring fire, the liquid Air,
The Flaming Dragons, Comets with Red Hair;
Heavens Tilting Lance, Artillery, and Bow,
Loud sounding Trumpets; Darts of Hail and Snow;
The Roaring Element, with People dumb
The Earth, with what conceived is in her Womb;
What on her moves, were set unto thy sight,
Till thou did find their causes, Essence, might,
In chief thy mind did give to understand,
A Kingdoms Steerage, and how to Command.
Though Crowned thou were not, nor a Prince by Birth,
Thy worth deserved a Coronet on Earth.
Search this half Sphere, and the Antartick Ground,
Where is such Counsel, Courage to be found;
As into silent Night, when near the Bear,
The Virgin-Huntress shines at full, most clear;
And strives to match her Brothers golden Light,
The Host of Stars, does vanish in her sight.
So Britains Dukes, shine bright in their degree,
All else loose Lusture, paralleled with Thee;
By just descent, As a Plantangen^t.
from Honor thou did shine,
By just desert, Imblazon'd is thy Line;
For by thy Counsels, more then any Law,
Straid gone sheep to Loyalty Thou did draw,
Ever more prizing a true Loyal Breast
Then Peru's Gold, enclosed in Marble Chest.
No Mists of greatness ever could thee blind,
No stormy Passions do disturb thy Mind.
Submitting Belgic Foes, thou life did give
Ungrateful souls that would not have us live.
What Man by Goodness, has such Glories gained,
Whose Princes right and Peoples so maintained?
Not where the Swain sits piping on a Reed,
But where the wounded Knight his life does bleed.
Not where the Huntsman winds his shril-tun'd Horn,
But where the Canon does Joves Tbunder scorn.
Not where the Panick Shepherds keep their Flocks,
But where the Bloud-di'd-Sea does dash the Rocks.
Thou art this Isle's Palladium, neither can,
Whilst thou command'st it, be overcome by man.
If sure the World above, did want a Prince,
The World above too soon, would take Thee hence.
O Virtues Pattern! Glory of our Times,
Sent of Past-dayes, to expiate our Crimes;
Great Prince, but better far then thou art Great,
Whom State not honors, but who honors State.
By wonder born, by wonder first instal'd;
By wonder, after to new Gloryes called.
Young kept by wonder, from homebred Alarms,
Old saved by wonder, from the Ungrateful hands,
To be for this Command, which wonder brings:
A Prince of wonder, wonder unto Kings.
This was that Brave man, who should right each wrong,
Of whom the Bards, and Mystic Sibyls sung;
Long since foretold, by whose Victorious power,
This Isle, Her Ancient Gloryes should restore;
And more of Fortunate, deserved the style,
Then those, where Heaven's with double Summers smile.
Run on Great Prince thy Course in Gloryes way:
The End, the Life, the Evening crowns the Day.
Heap worth on worth, and strongly soar above
Those Heights, which made the World, Thee first to love.
Surmount thy Self, and make Thine Actions past,
Be but as Gleams, or Lightnings of thy last;
Let them exceed those of thy Younger time,
As far as Autumn, does the Flowery prime.
So ever Gold, and Bays, Thy Brows adorn,
So never Time, may see Thy Race out worn;
So of Thine own, still may thou be desired,
Of Holland feared, and by the World admired;
Till Thy great Deeds, all former deeds surmount,
Thou'st quail'd the Nimrods of our Hellespont.
Neptunes Triumph, in a Welcome to the most Illustruous Rupert, Prince
Palatine, and Duke of Cumberland; beseeching him to put a Period to his
well-begun Conquest at Sea.
AM I wake? Or have some Dreams conspired
To mock my Sense, with what I most desired?
View I the Undaunted face, see I those looks,
Which with delight, were wont t'amaze my brooks?
Do I behold that Mars, that man Divine,
The Worlds great Glory by those Waves of Mine?
Then find I true, what long I wished in vain,
My much-beloved Prince is come again.
So unto them, whose Zenith is the Pole,
When six black Months, bright Sol begins to Roll;
So comes Arabia's wonder from the VVoods, Phoenix.

And far, far off is seen by Memphis Floods.
The feathered Sylveans, Cloud-like by her fly,
And with triumphing Plaudits beat the Sky.
Nyle marvels, Serap's Priests, entranced rave,
And in Migdonean stone, her shape ingrave:
In lasting Cedars, they do mark the time,
In which Apollo's Bird came to their Clime.
To Virgins, Flowers; to Sunburned Earth, the Rain;
To Mariners, fair Winds amidst the Main;
Cold shades, to Pilgrims with hot glances burn,
Are not so pleasing as thy blessed return.
That day (dear Prince) which robbed us of thy sight,
(Day? no, but darkness, and a duskie Night)
Did fill our breasts with sighs, our eyes with tears,
Turned Minutes to sad Months, sad Months to Years.
For while my Court enjoyed thy Princely gleams,
She did not envy Belgick's haughty streams,
Nor wealthy Tagus, with his golden Ore,
Nor clear Hydaspes which on Pearls does roar,
Nor Floods which near the Elysium fields do fall;
For why? Thy sight did serve to them for all.
Swell proud my Billows, faint not to declare
Your Ioys as ample as his Conquests are;
For murmurs hoarse, sound like Arions Harp,
Now delicately flat, now sweetly sharp.
And you my Nymphs, rise from your moist repair,
And crown this lofty Prince with Lillies fair;
Kiss each his floating Castles that do run
Swift as the Rising or the Setting Sun.
Eye of our western World, Mars-daunting Prince,
Whose valiant Deeds the World cannot recompense;
For they not only claim those Diadems,
To which the Imperial Rhyne subjects her streams,
But to thy Virtues and thy deeds is due
All that the Planet of the year does view.
O days to be desired! Age happy thrice,
If you your Heaven-sent-good could daily prize!
But we (half Palsie-sick) think never right
Of what we hold, till it be from our sight;
Prize only Summers sweet perfumed breath,
When armed Winter threatens us with death.
I see an Age when after some few years,
And Revolutions of the slow-paced Spears:
These days shall be 'bove other far esteemed,
So like the Worlds great Conquerours be deemed.
The Names of Caesar, and feigned Paladine,
Grav'n in Times surly brows, in wrinkled Time;
Of Henry's, Edwards, famous for their fights,
Their French Conquests, and Orders new of Knights;
Shall by this Princes Name be past as far,
As Meteors are by the Idalian Star.
For to Great Britains Isle, thou shall restore,
Her MARE CLAUSUM; Guard her pearly shore:
The Lions passant, of Dutch-bands shall free,
To the true Owner of the Lillies three.
The Seas shall shrink, shake shall the spacious Earth,
And tremble in her Chamber, like pale death.
The hills amazed shall stand, the vales, the rocks,
The roaring Cannon with its Sulpherous pocks,
Shall thunder thy Conquests, that the world may see
Great Britains Arms triumphing under Thee.
Vouchsafe, blessed people, ravished here with me,
To think my thoughts, and see what do I see;
A Prince all Gracious, Affable, Divine,
Meek, Wise, Just, Valiant, and whose radiant shine
Of Virtues (like the Stars about the Pole,
Guilding the Night, enlightneth every soul
That ^eads my blew Chariot) born in this age,
To guard the Innocents from Tyrants rage;
Restore our Sovereigns right, who rising high
To grace his Throne, makes Britains Name to fly
On Halcyon's wings, her Glories which restores,
Beyond Oceanus to the Indean shores.
O love this Prince with an eternal love!
Since your loves Object does Immortal prove;
Pray that that Crown his Ancestors did wear,
His Temples long (more happy) he may bear:
That Heaven on him her blessings may bestow,
That so his Conquests may for ever grow:
That Victory his brave Exploits attend,
Or West or South, where e're his force shall tend.
So Memory praise him, so precious hours,
May Character his Name in starry Flowers.
So may his high Exploits at last make even,
With Earth his Honor, Glory with the Heaven;
So when his well-spent care, all care becalmes,
He may in peace sleep in a shade of Palms;
And rearing up fair Trophies, that Heavens may
Extend his Life to th'worlds extremest day.
Of a Dutchman.
HE is an unfinisht man, or else one that Nature made less then others (not for
person for that is loustick enough) but in soul. A right Dutchman can never be a
true Friend, a Loyal Subject, or a good Neighbor; for his Trade carries away
his heart; r^ches his Allegiance, and thieving his soul: he is the mere spawn
of the worst of Spaniards, but far now from bearing one spark of their brave
Natures. That he is nothing but a confused heap of Butter, Oil, Cheese and
Brandy, so blended together, as if the Almighty when he created the Universe,
had designed their beings in Ditches; for they are mere Frogs,
Egyptian-plagues, croaking in other men's waters, they having none of their own,
but such as they bury their dead in; they are truly the Almighties Rods, sent
to vex his people; and the Devils Kitchin-stuff, to fry the damned. They hate
Drink, as the parched Earth does Rain, and cram their Guts with no more zeal,
then a starved Epicurus. They are always men to morrow morning: they will make
Indentures with their heels as they go, and swear snick or snee, if you make
them stand; they are a living Sponge soused in Liquour, and sometimes so far
drowned, that they need a Coroner. If an Englishman but fights them, they look
as if their eyes would run into their souls, and their souls out of their eyes,
for the sight of an English Sword wounds those Water-Rats more sensibly then a
stroke, and that is the reason they dam up their Windows with Brandy, and are
drunk ever when they engage: Every English man is his Hogan Mogan, that dare
beat him; and every one that knows him dare do it. He is a kind of Chemist and
Poet, turns all into Gold and Liquor; a right Dunghill-Cock, that scrapes in
dirt and mire, to find the Gem: He knows not how to use it, unless it be to
cut his Makers throat, or to study the Kitchen Alchymy, in which he is so
learned, that he wears his brains in his belly, being eternally chained by the
Teeth unto Meat and Drink, for the salvation of his damned Gut. He is never
contented full nor fasting, for it grieves his soul (if he has any) to see his
Neighbor have an ounce of Peper, or as much Callico as will make a pair of
socks for a Flea, and he nor concerned: No way is indirect for wealth to a
Dutchman, whether of fraud or violence; gain is his Religion, which if
Conscience goes about to hinder or exclaim against, immediately condemned for a
common Barrater. For wealth he will loose his Friend, betray his Country, pine
his Body, and damn his Soul. To conclude, -- He is no less,
Then the perfection of all wickedness,
The Quintessence and abstract of all evil,
And Clothed in Flesh, to act the closer Devil.


The Character of a French Man.
HIs rise, is a Vine-presser at Bourdeaux, a Fiddler in Orleans, A Play so
called, written by the Marquess of Newcacastle.
a Barbar in Paris, a Gentleman in England, and a Lord in the Variety; He is a
false Friend, a fawning Spanel, that will bite an Englishman if he can: The
worst kind of Courtier, by so much as he acts the better part. He has always
two Faces, sometimes two hearts, but ever wants a Soul: Witness, the Ingenious
Italian, That Plant that wants a Root.
who ever calls him Mushroom. He can compose his Forehead with a smile, while
his heart curses the person, and then laughs in himself that he has cozened
him. His Tongue and his Lips are true Friends to the Devil; for he never sees
Vices, but with a blear eye. If your English Gentlemen but Travel to Normandy,
to see Henry the seconds Tomb, it costs him as much as if he had buried him;
for he in half an hour shall have more Wasps about his Yellow Jacobuses, then
his Mother a Twelvemonth about her Bee-hives: Such Legs, such Hats, and
Services are tendered, that the Traveller thinks himself in a second Jerusalem:
His Tongue shall over-walk in the Tract of unjust praises; For a Frenchman can
no more tell how to Discommend; then to speak True: his speeches are full of
wondering Interjections, and cries Jesus Maria, and then shrinks his shoulder
with as much Zeal, as a Spaniard at Confession.

His Praises are always in the Superlative Degree, and that ever in the
presence of the new arrived Object, the which are so stuffed with such damned
Hypocrisy of ma foy at the English suite he had on, and then tells him with a
Countenance twisted like a Cart-rope, that begar Mounsieur you have a vary bon
body, but de Englishman have ad sported ad you; then tells of Device the French
Kings Tailor, who must straight be fetched, who like a Jacanapes with the Bears,
is so be Scarleted and Sworded, that at first you would take him for a Low Country
Soldier, whose base mind is well suited with his Mercenary Tongue: who does
so close up the matter, that in one Summers Month in April, Fidling, Dancing,
Boulting, Fencing, and Frigating, the young Gallant is so Tired with them, that
without summons he returns as Butterflies in September, so Metamorphised and
o're-grown with Hair, that he looks as if he had been with Nebuchadnazzer.

A French man's Art is nothing but a delightful Cozinage in smooth Phrases,
gilded with Perjury, that makes such fools, who tickle themselves to death
with over-valuing themselves: If his English Scholar in the French Tongue,
does but utter a Complement indifferent, both his hands are little enough to
bless himself: He extols his Ingenuity in his abs^nce, but always so, that it
may not want a safe conveyance to his Ear, by the which he so Obliges the Young
Gallant, that he shall sooner take some French Rascal for his waiting
Gentleman, with whom he goes snips, then any Englishman, though he be never so
well accomplished. In fine, he is Ingenious in hiding Imperfections, but not in
carrying* he has a Complexion for every Face: The World has not a more
Artificial Instrument of Fawning Hypocrisy, or a more Impudent Bawd of
Dishonesty, then this Mushroom; Honesty to him is Nice Singularity, and
Religion a mere Cheat, for he will adore the Sanctified Chair, and if possible,
he will S -- in it: Al^ Gravity to him i^ Dullness, They Invaded Italy, 1662.
and Virtue is only an Innocent conceit of the Melancholy and base-minded.

Lastly, He is a Moth in the English-mans Coat, so Earwig in the Dutch, a
Caterpillar in the Italian^ the Destruction of the Glory and Reputation of ou^
British Court; a friend and Slave to the Trencher, and good for nothing but ^n
Ambassador for the Devil.

FINIS.

