THE TRVE PROTESTANT SOVLDIER, Fighting valiantly under Truths Banner, AND By
the glorious light of Gods Word overthrowing the strongest Bulwarks, and
subtle Stratagems of the Church of Rome.

By HAMNET WARD.

printer's device of George Miller ANCHORA SPEI

LONDON, Printed by G. M. for William Lee at the Sign of the Turks-Head in
Fleet Street. 1642.

TO THE HONORABLE AND TRVLY VIRTUOUS THE LADY BRIDG^T BRIANT, all Happiness
in CHRIST JESUS.
Madam,
THe true zeal which you have for the maintenance of the Truth (together with
those many favors which your Ladyship has been pleased to bestow on me, my
deceased, and surviving friends) has encouraged me, or rather enforced me to
present this little Manual, being the first fruits of mine endeavors, to your
Ladyships acceptance.

In that short stride of the World, which I have traveled, having found many
strong oppositions from our adversaries of the Church of Rome (as well at home
as beyond Sea) touching the Protestant Religion, I began somewhat to doubt of
the truth thereof: But by Gods providence lighting on this short Treatise,
after the perusal thereof, I found the Religion of the Church of Rome (if I
may so call it) so slightly poasted upon the quicksands of men's frivolous
opinions, and contrariwise, the Protestant Religion so soundly founded on the
true and lively rock of our salvation Christ Jesus, that by Gods grace
as^isting me, neither the bewitching charms of their devilish temptations,
nor the fiery darts of their hottest persecutions, shall ever be able to divert
me from the profession thereof.

Wherefore having received so great comfort thereby my self, I have labored
with as much as in me lies, to translate it verbatim out of French into
English, that others also may have benefit thereby, humbly beseeching your
Ladyship to accept thereof, as a token of my ever bounden duty, and your
Ladyship shall thereby encourage me to pray for your long and happy life here
on earth, and your eternal happiness with God in heaven.

Madam, Your Lad^ps most humble and truly devoted Servant, Hamnet Ward.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
MOnsieur Pierre Monginot, a Gentleman as well learned, as truly noble,
forsaking the Church of Rome, and turning to the Protestant, his friends being
much discontented thereat, wrote this short Treatise, to satisfy them, showing
them the causes which moved him to change his Religion: Which I have translated
for thy good out of French into English; take but as much heed in reading it,
as I did labor in the translating it, and God grant thee as much benefit by
the Copy, as I had comfort by the Original.

Thine in Christ Jesus, Hamnet Ward.

CHAPTERS.
1. Of the true Church. 2. Of the Popes power. 3. Of the worshipping of Images.
4. Of Prayer and Service in an unknown tongue. 5. Of the Invocation of Angels
and Saints departed this life. 6. Of Abstinence from Meats. 7. Of Abstinence
from Marriage. 8. Of Purgatory. 9. Of Merits, and Justification by Works. 10.
Of works of Super-erogation. 11. Of the superaboundant satisfactions of Saints
and Monks, which the Pope distributes by Indulgences. 12. Of the real
presence of the Lords body in the Sacrament, and of Transubstantiation. 13. Of
the Sacrifice of the Mass. 14. Of the taking away the cup in the Sacrament.
December. 1^ 1641.

Imprimatur,

THO. WYKES

THE TRVE PROTESTANT SOVLDIER.
CHAPTER I. Of the true Church.
THe holy Scripture tells us of diverse kinds of Churches: There is that Church
which is spoken of in the Creed, which the Apostle S. Paul calls the body of
Christ, against which says our Savior, Mat. 16. The gates of Hell shall not
prevail; which is the Assembly of the truly faithful and elect people of God,
whereof part do already enjoy the heavenly pleasures of Gods kingdom, part now
live here on Earth among sinful men and infidels, and cannot be discerned by
the eyes of man: Others not yet borne.

But besides this Church of Gods elect, there is another universal and visible
Church, which is the Assembly of all such as profess themselves Christians,
and to believe in Jesus Christ. This is that Church which Saint Paul, 1 Timothy 3.
calls the pillar and ground of the truth, as being bound to defend, and
maintain the truth against all those who labor to corrupt or suppress it.

This universal visible Church is composed of diverse particular Churches; such
as were in the Apostles time the Church of Jerusalem, the Church of Corinth,
the Church of Rome, and that of the Galatians, etc. Of these particular
Churches, some are puter than others, nay, and there may be some so corrupted,
as that it is impossible for them to be saved; namely, as where Idolatry
reigns, and where the benefits of Jesus Christ are abused.

The Church of Rome is one of these particular Churches, wherein reigns
Idolatry. First, in that they call God a Sacrifice made by men. Secondly,
because the honor appertaining to God is by them attributed to Saints, in that
they say the Saints know the hearts of all men, and because they give them and
their relics and Images, a religious worship and adoration. Lastly, because
they call the Virgin Mary Queen of Heaven and Earth; for the Sovereign Royalty
of the world is not communicable to the creature.

Likewise the benefits of Jesus Christ are therein abused; in that they teach
that Jesus Christ by his death delivers us from sins committed before
Bapisme, but as for sins committed after Baptism, he has left us to
satisfy Gods justice for them, by satisfactory pains, as well here as in
Purgatory. Thus then let it be; that the Church of Rome be a particular visible
Church, and it more corrupt than any other, although she term her self, the
universal Church, as if there were no other Church besides; whereas indeed the
Churches of Syria, Greece, Armenia, and Africa be more pure and more ^cient
then the Roman, and no way subject thereunto. All th(...)h the holy Scripture,
and the Creed attribute to the universal Church of Gods elect, or the
universal visible Church, the Church of Rome by an intolerable abuse and
usurpation attributes unto her self; as if in the holy Scripture, there were no
other Church spoken off, but the Church of Rome; or as if she alone were the
pillar and ground of the truth. And when Jesus Christ, Mat. 18. sends two
Brothers being at strife to the judgment of the Church, saying, Tell it the
Church, and if he neglect to hear the Church, let him be unto thee as an
Heathen man and a Publican; these Gentlemen would needs make us believe that he
sends such as doubt in matters of Faith and Doctrine to the judgment of the
Church of Rome, which they call universal; but read the passage and you shall
see that our Savior speaks not there of doubts touching Religion, but of
quarrels and broils which happen between man and man, and consequently he
speaks not of the Church universal, but of the Ministers of some particular
Church; for to appease a quarrel between two Neighbors, men do not betake
themselves to the universal Church.

In this then there appears a very great abuse, that the Church of Rome, being
indeed but a particular Church styles her self the universal Church, and in
that she being full of errors, vaunts her self nevertheless to be without
any error; nay more, that it is impossible for her to err, and least her
errors should be discovered by the glorious light of Gods holy Word, the
writings of the Prophets and Apostles, she does not only hinder the people from
reading the word, and read it in the Church in a language which the people
understands not, but endeavors also to take away all its force and
authority, for they make the people believe that the Church of Rome is
sovereign Judge in all matters of difference in Religion, by this means he
that will accuse the Church of Rome of any error may be sure to loose his
process, seeing she alone is sovereign Judge in her own cause. The Church of
Rome does likewise affirm that it is impossible for her to err in the
interpretations of the holy Scripture, and that it is in her power to make
constructions of the like authority with the word of God; which is indeed no
less then to place her self in Gods seat. For as there is none but the King
that can give an interpretation to his edict, that may be of equal force with
the edict it self: So there is none but God alone that may give such a
construction unto the Word of God, as may be of the like power and authority
with the Word of God. And there is nothing more certain then that such an
interpreter is greater then the Lawgiver, sithence he gives unto the Law such
a sense as he pleases, and the people taught to rely more on that, then on the
Law it self.

And to be sure that the Church of Rome be not any way subject unto the holy
Scripture, they maintain that it is the Church that does authorize the
Scripture, and which gives it all its power and authority, as if the Subject
could give authority unto Laws, or as if the Word of God did receive its
authority from men.

To this end the Doctors of the Church of Rome say, that the Church is more
ancient then the holy Scripture; but does it therefore follow that the Church
must be above the Scripture: the people are they not many of them older then
the King, yet are they nevertheless subject both to the King and to his Laws,
however there be many Doctrines in the holy Scripture more ancient then the
Church.

But say they we should not know that it were the Scripture, if the Church did
not tell us so; but does it follow thence I pray you that the Church must be
above the Scripture? If I should say I do not know which is the King, and if
my friend should show me, does it therefore follow that my friend must be above
the King? Many serve for witnesses unto persons unto whom they are far
inferior.

Likewise to undervalue the authority of the Scripture, and to strengthen that
of the Church, they say, that the holy Scripture is a dead thing and cannot
speak, and consequently may not be Judge, for say they a Judge must be able to
speak, as the Church is. This is most false and deceitful, for the holy
Scripture speaks enough, and if it speaks not, enough it is that it guides
us. But the Church of Rome forsooth will be the rule it self, and not subject
to any Law, but will be Judge both of the Law, and of the Word of God.

Thus are men become Gods Judges, and guilty persons shall be infallible and
sovereign Judges of the sense and authority of the Law, which concerns their
own crime; by this means they need not fear to be condemned, but will they,
nill they at the day of Judgment, they shall be judged by this very word, over
which they now thus usurp authority, then shall that prattling Judge be
constrained to keep silence.

So then these Gentlemen in sending the people to the Church for the deciding
of doubts in faith, distract their minds with an innumerable company of doubts
and difficulties, for how shall an ignorant man know that there must be a
Church in the world? If they say he may know it by the Scripture, it is then
necessary that he be acquainted with the Scripture; and thus the authority of
the Church should be founded on the Scripture; and when the Church teaches
this or that, how shall the people know whether it be conformable to the Word
of God, sithence the reading of Gods Word is absolutely forbidden them, and
there being many Churches disagreeing one with the other, how can the poor
people discern that which teaches lies, from that which teaches the truth;
seeing the very rule of truth, which is the holy Scripture, is a book utterly
forbidden them?

Shall they follow the multitude? Jesus Christ says, Mat. 7. That the gate is
wide which leads to perdition, and there are ten times as many Turks and
Pagans as there are Christians, shall they believe miracles? our Savior faith
Mark 13. There shall come false teachers, working miracles whereby to seduce,
if it were possible the very elect: shall they have regard to seats and
successions? The Churches of Greece have also had their seats since the
Apostles, and the Churches of Syria theirs, and brag of S. Peter's chair; and
yet all these are quite contrary to the Church of Rome, and indeed more
ancient. Jesus Christ himself and his Apostles having preached there, and
being the first Institutours of them.

We do not here dispute of S. Peter's superiority over the rest of the
Apostles; he might be the first in order, authority or virtue, and yet not have
any superiority of jurisdiction. But that matters not; the question is, whether
the Pope of Rome be S. Peter's successor, as the head of the universal Church?
which is the principal point of the Papists Religion, whereof nevertheless
there is not one word spoken in all the Scripture. The Bishops of Corinth and
Thessalonica were Saint Paul's Successors, not as Apostles but as particular
Bishops of those cities: So the question is not whither the aforesaid Bishop
of Rome be Saint Peter's Successor in the Bishopric of Rome, but whether he
succeeds him in the Apostleship, as the head of the whole Church. This is that
which we slatly deny, and which they can never prove; or if they could so
prove it, yet the Pope having corrupted Saint Peter's Doctrine, and changed his
Bishopric into an abs^lute temporal Monarchy, had long since that lost his
succession.

To conclude there being but one holy Scripture, and there being many contrary
Churches, and the Doctors of these Churches being apt to seek their own
profit, and subject to be carried away with diverse evil affections, but the
holy Scripture being an incorruptible Judge; let us have recourse to this holy
Word of God, in the which if there be any obscurity, there is notwithstanding
enough left, which needs no interpretation, which is sufficient to make us wise
unto Salvation, as the Apostle Saint Paul says, 1 Timothy 3.

CHAPTER II. Of the Popes power.
THe Bishop of Rome calls himself Saint Peter's Successor, not only as being
Bishop of Rome, but as being also the Head of the univers^ll Church. Which
power he extends so far as to give and take away Kingdoms, to distribute of
crowns, to dispense with Christians from keeping their oaths and vows, to
canonize Saints, to give Laws to the universal Church, to forgive sins, to
take souls out of Purgatory, to judge soveraignly and without control of all
points and differences in Religion, vaunting that it is impossible for him to
err in faith, and for these considerations qualifying himself god on Earth,
the Spouse of the Church, and a divine Majesty, causing Kings to kiss his
feet, and making himself a religious worship, terming himself Gods Vicar.

For this cause I have read very carefully Saint Peter's Epistles, and have
compared them with the Popes Bulls, whereby he thunders down Kings, and degrades
them, publishes grand pardons; but I can find no concordance at all, the one
with the other; for Saint Peter in his Epistles speaks not any wise of his
Superiority, not of his power, neither is there one word spoken of his
Sovereignty, or as being head of the Church, which is a very strange thing,
that a Sovereign should write unto his subjects, without mentioning one word
that might intimate his Sovereignty.

I find also that the Apostles did contest among themselves concerning the
priority; and that Jesus Christ did decide the controversy, not telling them
that he had made Saint Peter chief over the rest, but forbidding them all, not
so much as to speak of the priority any more, Luke 22. The Kings of the
Gentiles (says he) exercise Lordship over them, but it shall not be so with
you.

Saint Peter having confessed our Savior to be the Christ, the son of the
living God, our Saviors answer to him is not, Tu es Petrus, and super te
Petrum, adificabo ecclesiam meam, but tu es Petrus, and super hanc petram, etc.
which rock is Christ Jesus himself, as it is said 1 Cor. 10. That rock was
Christ, and in the second chapter to the Ephesians. he is called the corner stone,
and S. Peter 1. cp. 2. calls him, a living Stone.

The reason why our Savior spoke to S. Peter alone, was because S. Peter had
there alone confessed him to be the Christ; but the same power that he gave to
S. Peter, to bind and to loose, and to remit sins, he gives elsewhere also to
the rest of the Apostles, Mat. 18. 18. etc. John 20. 23. Likewise in the second
chapter to the Ephesians, all the Apostles are set for the foundation of the
Church, being built upon the foundation of the Apostles and of the Prophets.
See also Revel. 21.14.

And certainly if the Apostles had understood that Jesus Christ had given S.
Peter the Superiority, never would they again after that have contested
between themselves for the pre-eminence, as they do in Luke 22. one day before
the death of the Lord.

The Apostle S. Paul also in Galat. 2. says, that he withstood St. Peter to
the face; which shows sufficiently that he was nothing subject to S. Peter,
and in the same Chapter a little before, he says, That the Gospel of
uncircumcision was committed to him, as the Gospel of circumcision was unto
Peter: here we see them fellow laborers together, Saint Peter was to preach to
the Jews, and Saint Paul to the Gentiles.

In that same chapter also S. Paul sets the Apostle S. James before S. Peter,
saying James, Cephas and John, who seemed to be pillars. So also S. John in the
first chapter of his Gospel sets Andrew before Peter, where he says, Philip
was of Bethsaida the city of Andrew and Peter, and in the 1 Cor. 9. The
Brothers of the Lord and Cephas, and in the 8. of the Acts of the Apostles, the
Apostles send Peter and John to preach in Samaria. Oh what a brave thing it
were now a days to see many Bishops assemble together, and send the Pope to
preach in England or elsewhere? They object that our Savior said to St. Peter
three times, Feed my sheep; true, but they cannot infer from thence that he
made him the head of the universal Church; for our Savior said not to S.
Peter feed thou my sheep alone, or as a Sovereign; and indeed the same
commission is given to all the Ministers of Gods Word in the 20. of the Acts,
Take heed therefore, says S. Paul unto your selves, and to all the flock,
over the which the Lord has made you overseers, to feed the Church of God
which he has purchased with his own blood, and in the 1 Pet. 5. Feed the
flock of Christ which is among you.

Jesus Christ then speaks to S. Peter alone, because that a little before he
had denied him, and he only had need to be restablished in his commission, that
had failed in it. Another reason why our Savior repeats the words thrice is,
because that he had denied him thrice; he draws from him three confessions to
remedy his treble denial, which done, he did again establish him in the
charge of a Shepherd of his flock, from the which he might plainly perceive
that he had fallen.

Nevertheless I will not deny but that S. Peter might be the chiefest among
the Apostles in age, zeal, cloquance, etc. but by no means in superiority of
jurisdiction, whereby to have power to command them.

However put the case that S. Peter had been the chief of the Apostles and
their Superior, what does that make for the Pope of Rome? They say S. Peter
died at Rome, which is indeed very doubtful: nevertheless put the case he did
dye there; for I may say then that the Bishop of Jerusalem ought to be the head
of the Church: for our Savior Christ far greater than St. Peter dyed at
Jerusalem. Where is the least mention in all Gods Word that S. Peter did leave
one to succeed him in the charge of his Apostleship, and as the head of the
Church? And when S. Peter was dead in all reason and conscience, if any should
succeed him, ought it not to be the Apostle S. John, that excellent Apostle,
which Jesus loved, rather then Linus S. Paul's Disciple.

Moreover by all the Histories of the lives of the Popes, it appears, that the
people of Rome did choose their Bishop, who sees not hereby, that the Bishop
of Rome was not the head of the universal Church, for who gave the people of
Rome power to give a head to the Church of the whole world? and to set up Linus
above the Apostles? In an elective Kingdom, when a King is to be chosen, every
quarter of the Kingdom, and every commonalty sends it is Deputies to make the
election; the voices of one city cannot conclude of any thing wherein the whole
Kingdom has interest.

Nay I say more, though S. Peter had been the head of the Church, and though he
had resided at Rome, and had left his charge to the Bishop of Rome (which are
all such presuppositions, as they shall never be able to prove) yet has the
Pope long since fallen from his charge, and consequently lost his honor; by
comporting himself quite contrary to S. Peter, and to a spiritual Pastor,
being become a temporal Monarch, having amassed unto himself such an
abundance of riches, that the Superiors and Kings of the Earth are poor in
comparison. As for his Doctrine, the Chapters following shall be employed, to
show, that it is absolutely contrary to the Doctrine of the Apostles.

Again, S. Peter never made himself a religious worship, but contrariwise in
Acts 10. v. 25. he hinders Cornelius from worshipping him, saying, Stand up, I
my self also am a man. S. Peter never endeavored to set himself above God, as
does the Pope, glorying that he can dispense with men from keeping their vows
made unto God: He that can dispense with a servant from obeying his master,
must be greater then the master: The Pope dispenceth with men from obeying Gods
commands, does he not then make himself greater then God? He dispenceth also
with Subjects from keeping their oath of allegiance which they have sworn to
their Sovereign, inciting thereby to rebellion. He permits a man to marry his
Niece, and his wives sister, things absclutely against Gods express command in
the 18. and 20. Chapters of Leviticus.

Faults committed against the Pope are many of them accounted so hideous, that
they are not to be pardoned under a great sum of money, or it may be, two or
three years pilgrimage; but as for sins which tend only to Gods dishonor, as
swearing, blasphemy, Sabbath-breaking, and so though they be f^atly forbidden
in Gods holy Word, yet if they do not any way entrench upon the Popes
prerogative, not derogate from his suprem^cy, theseare esteemed but petty
faults, half a dozen p^^er nosters, and two or three ave Mary's are a
su^ficient satisfaction for a thousand such sins.

Briefly he boasts himself to be above the Church, and says that the Church is
above the Word of God; by this reckoning then the Pope is two degrees above
Gods Word.

Moreover in the Councels where the Pope is present, the holy Scripture is set
at his feet; as it was in the last Council of Lateran: I leave any reasonable
man to judge, whether by this it appears not plainly, that he tramples under
his feet the Word of God?

To conclude, when I read in the second Epistle of the Apostle Saint Paul to
the Thessalonians, That there shall come a man, which is called the man of
sin, and the son of perdition, that shall call himself God and exalt
himself above God; boasting himself in signs and miracles: And in the 17. of
the Revelation, of the great Whore that is clothed in scarlet, that seduceth
Kings, and makes them drunk with the blood of her fornication, that has her
habitation in the City seated on seven mountains (that is to say, the City of
Rome.) I have searched every where, but can find none to whom this may be so
truly applied, as to the Pope of Rome.

CHAP. III. Of the worshipping of Images.
THe third abuse which I have taken notice of in the Church of Rome, is the
service which they do unto Saints departed this life: The Councels of the
Church of Rome, namely, the second Council of Nice, command that Images be
adored.

At Paris a little before Lent you may see the people go in procession to the
Image of our Lady, to have permission to eat butter. The women come and rub
their Chappelets on the feet of the I mages, they light them torches at
midday, they kiss them, they make coursies to them, they bring them presents,
and carry them all about in procession with great solemnity. Nay more then
that, you may see many Images of Saints that never were: As of the three Kings,
Saint Christopher, Saint Margaret, Saint Martial, Saint Vrsuline, Saint
Longis, Saint Catherine, and many other such like fantastical Saints that
never were in the world.

Many prayers likewise there are which they mumble out before such their dumb
petty-gods, as that unto the cross, Ave Lignum triumphale, etc. and diverse
others, which prayers if they intend them to Gods honor, they must also cause
those things to which they speak, to understand what they say unto them: No
man except he be frantic will speak to the Kings Image with a conceit that
thereby he does the King any honor.

All these inventions serve on purpose to lull the people asleep in ignorance,
wherefore they call Images the books of the ignorant, they themselves also hide
them in time of Lent, which is the time of their devotion, that they may not
hinder their devotion.

That which causes all this misery is, that they take away from the common
people the holy Scripture, for having forbidden them Gods Word, it was most
necessary for them to find them out somewhat or other to muse on; for this end
they take out of the table of the commandments which they deliver unto the
people, the second commandment, wherein God forbids the worshipping of Images,
and the making of the likeness of any thing in heaven or in earth, Deuteronomy. 5.8.
Thus they do in some places clip and crop the word of God, and in other some
patch it and piece it, whereby to make it answerable to their own inventions.

As I cannot therefore but pity the miserable estate of those people who are
thus kept in darkness and ignorance: so I cannot but most justly condemn the
intolerable usurpation of their Leaders, who to serve their own unsatiable
avarice, hating the glorious light of Gods word, endeavor by all means to
eclipse the same; and thereby bring themselves, and all such as are carried
away with their lives and doctrine (without Gods great mercy) to everlasting
destruction.

CHAPTER IIII. Of Prayer and serving God in an unknown tongue.
ONe of the most deadly and most dangerous abuses of the Church of Rome in my
judgment is, their praying to God in a language that often times the person that
prays understands not; for S. Paul in the 1. to the Corinthians, chap. 14.
ver. 15. wills us to pray with understanding. How can we expect that God
should grant our requests, if we our selves do not know what we would have.
True indeed, God understands all languages, but in prayer God has not so
much regard to the tongue, but to the heart, which cannot be then well
disposed, when it knows not what the tongue does say: For the tongue is given
unto men to testify the thoughts of their hearts, so that he who prays, not
knowing what he says, does not express his thoughts by his words; by this
means he does as it were act a Comedy before God: There is no Prince that will
suffer a man to prate thus to him, although he understands all languages. And
indeed we can hardly reprove a man more sharply, then by telling him, friend,
thou know not what thou say. Thus then they both mock God, and lose
their labor. The abuse is yet far greater in the reading of the Epistle and
Gospel to the people in the Church in Latin, whereof most of them understand
not so much as one word. How can they then yield obedience unto such doctrines
as they understand not? Is not this the curse which God Almighty denounces by
his Prophets, I will henceforth speak to this people in another tongue, and
with other lips, and so they will not understand me, says the Lord, 1 Cor.
14.21. Isa. 28.11. And the Apostle Saint Paul says, that in the Church he
hadrather speak five words with understanding, that thereby he might teach
others also, then a thousand words in an unknown tongue, 1 Cor. 14. And in the
same Chapter a little before he says, Except ye utter by the tongue words
easy to be understood, how shall it be known what is spoken? for ye shall
speak unto the air, therefore if I know not the meaning of the voice, I shall
be to him that speaks a Barbarian, and he that speaks shall be a Barbarian
unto me, See then an admirable Religion; for they speak to stocks and stones
which understand no language; and to the people, least they should understand
what they say, they speak altogether in Latin. The people indeed gee to see
the Mass, but they cannot understand a word of it, nay and very often the
Priests themselves have much ado to understand it. But say they we read the
Mass in Latin, that strangers also may have benefit thereby. A pretty
hypocritical excuse it is indeed; for suppose there be ten, twenty, or more
strangers in a Church, is it fit that they should have service read in a
language which they know, and all the rest of the people sit like fools, and
understand never a word: Besides, if they did mean as they pretend, surely in
such a City as Paris they would have in a Church for strangers to resort unto,
the service read in Latin, and in all the rest, in their own country
language, which they all understand.

They also absolutely forbid any man to read the holy Scripture, without a
special License from the Pope, or his Factor; and to translate it into the
vulgar tongue, which is as much to say, as that they will not suffer a child
to read his Fathers will; and that God Almighty is become suspected as if he
had given us his word to deceive us.

The Apostle Saint Paul when he sent Epistles to the Ephesians, Corinthians,
Philippians, etc. He writ unto every of them in their own tongue, to the end
that all might read and know what he writ unto them. And I pray why may not we
now read those same Epistles in our own language, as well as they read them
in theirs?

Whereupon also the Apostle Saint Paul in the 1 Thessalonians. 5. I charge you by the
Lord (says he) that the Epistle be read unto all the holy brethren. So
likewise Acts 17. ver. 10. the Bereans are commended, for that they searched
the Seriptures daily whether those things were so, which Saint Paul preached
unto them.

Saint Paul in the 2 of Timothy, Chap. 3. prayseth his Disciple Timothy,
because that from a child he had known the holy Scriptures. In a word, this
is a new startup invention, and such a knavery as is seldom heard of, to
forbid the people to read the word of God, lest they should become heretics,
whereas indeed it is only to mask them with ignorance, for fear lest by the
light of Gods Word, their Religion should plainly appear to be, as it is
indeed, full of gross errors and hypocrisy.

In those countries where the Inquisition is, bawdy-houses are licensed, and
the Pope does gather out of them great sums of money for tribute: ^oolish
pamphlets, and immodest Love-bookes are printed cum privilegio; but if they
find but one Bible, either Italian, Spanish, or the like, it is accounted a
crime which deserves no less then death, and a case worthy of the
Inquisition. And certainly had it not been for the reformed Church, that is to
say, purged from Popery, the Bible had long since been buried in oblivion, and
no mention made thereof: For as thieves hate the light, lest their evil deeds
should be discovered: so do those Doctors of the Church of Rome labor to
obscure the light of Gods Word, lest their hypocritical inventions, and new
found devilli^h plots, whereby they serve their own unsatiable lusts, should
be brought to light.

CHAPTER V. Of the Invocation of Angels and Saints departed this Life.
THe Invocation of Angels and Saints deceased, has indeed a show of devotion
and humility, but it is never the less contrary to to the word of God, which
flatly forbids us to give any divine service or worship unto Angels; as in the
second Chapter of Saint Paul's Epistle to the Colossians, Let no man beguile you
of your reward, in a voluntary humility, and worshipping of Angels, intruding
into those things which he has not seen. We believe in God alone, and the same
Apostle Saint Paul in the tenth Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans
forbids us to worship any other then him in whom we believe; how says he,
shall they call on him on whom they have not believed? And our Creed teaches
us to believe in the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, but not in any
creature whatsoever. So likewise in the two and twentieth of the Revelation,
when Saint John fell down to worship before the feet of the Angel, the Angel
forbad him, saying, see thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servants, worship
God. Saint James in the first of James, ver. 6. Wills us to pray in faith;
and the Apostle to the Romans, 14. Chapter, tells us, that whatsoever is not of
faith is sin; wherefore the Invocation of Saints cannot be done in faith,
because it is not grounded on the word of God; for the same Apostle in the
tenth of the Romans, says, that says comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God; and none of the Doctors of the Church of Rome could ever produce
any argument out of the word of God, whereby to prove that religious worship
which they give unto Angels, or Saints deceased, either lawful or necessary.
Again, if it be necessary for us to pray to Saints, it must likewise most
necessarily follow that they must know our hearts and thoughts; for how should
they else discern hypocrites from such as pray in sincerity. Which is quite
contrary to Gods word in the second book of the Chronicles, chap. 6. ver. 30.
thou only (says the wise King Solomon) know the hearts of the children of
men. Likewise, to say that the Saints see all things in the face of God as in a
glass, were to prophecye, having no warrant from the word of God for the truth
thereof: And were it so that the Saints knew all things, then were they equal
with God Almighty in wisdom and knowledge. But the Scripture says that the
Saints know not the day of judgment, Mat. 24. and Mar. 13. And the wise man in
the ninth Ecclesiastes, excludes the dead from any knowledge of earthly
things; The dead (says he) know not any thing, neither have they any more a
portion in any thing that is done under the Sun. And Job Chapter 14. speaking
of a diseased father, his children (says he) come to honor, and he knows it
not, and they are brought low, but he perceives it not of them.

Their ordinary excuse is, that they go to God by Saints, as men go to the
King by his officers: But the case is not alike: For a King cannot be every
where, neither does he know all things, and it is not possible that every one
should have access to him: Likewise be has need to be informed of the truth
of things by persons put in trust therefore. It is not thus with God, for he
knows all things, and does see and behold all the creatures in the world at
once, and knows and understands all men's prayers, not needing either Saints
or Angels to inform him thereof. And although this comparison were allowable,
yet if a King calls any one unto him, certainly he will not be well pleased if
that person should go to any of his officers before he come to him. Thus God
invites us, saying, Come unto me all ye that are weary, and heavy laden, and I
will refresh you, Mat. 11. He does not bid us go to Saint Vrselin, Saint
Margarite, or any other such like solicitors; Nay more, God calls us his
children, and therefore if we should not go unto him in all our necessities
when he calls us, we should show our selves very undutifull, and unworthy of so
high a calling.

Moreover, we have one only Advocate with the Father, namely, the Son of God,
our Lord Jesus, and there is none other. The Apostle Saint Paul in the 1 Timothy
chap. 2. says thus, There is one God, and one Mediator, between God and man,
the man Christ Jesus. As therefore there is but one God, so there is but one
Mediator. And Saint John in his 1. Epistle, chap. 2. We have an Advocate with
the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our
sins. And in the 14. Chapter of Saint John's Gospel, I (says our Savior) am
the way, the truth and the life, no man comes unto the Father but by me.

Their greatest abuse is yet behind; which is, that they do not only make the
Saints our Mediators, but also our Redeemers: For in the Mass the Priests pray
for salvation through their merits: For they say that the Saints undergo more
punishment and pains then their siunes deserve. Hence they gather their
superabundant satisfactions, which the Pope hoordeth up in the treasury of the
Church, and distributes them by Indulgences, so that any one that has money
may go to the Pope, and purchase as many merits as will satisfy Gods justice
for all the sins that he commits all his life long, let him sin as much as he
can. This also is a trick which serves very well for the Popes profit, and to
exalt his dignity; and is founded on the unwritten word, that is to say, on
their own hellish Inventions.

CHAP. VI. Of fasting and abstinence from certainements.
THe grand enemy of our salvation has labored with might and maine for the
accomplishment of the prophecye of the Apostle. S. Paul in the 1 Timothy 4. chap.
where he speaks thus; Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter
times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrines of devils, forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from
meats, which God has created to be received with thanksgiving of them which
believe and know the truth, for every creature of God is good, and nothing to
be refused, if it be received with thanks giving.

This prophecye of the Apostle is long ago accomplished in the Doctors of the
Church of Rome: For do not they both forbid marriage, and command to abstain
from meats? which abstinence is also flatly condemned by the same Apostle in
the tenth Chapter of the 1. to the Corinthians, Whatsoever (says he) is sold
in the shambles, that eat, asking no question for conscience sake; for the
earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof: If any of them that believe not
bid you to a feast, and ye be disposed to go, whatsoever is set before you
that eat, asking no question for conscience sake. And in the second Chapter of
the Epistle to the Colossians, he condemns those who say, touch not, taste
not, handle not. And to the end that we might not think that he speaks only of
those who abstain from meats which they conceive filthy in their own nature,
he declares plainly, that he speaks of such as abslaine themselves in
humility, and in voluntary devotion, punishing their own bodies, not sparing
their flesh; which doctrines (says he) have indeed a show of wisdom, in will
worship and humility, and neglecting of the body, not in any honor to the
satisfying of the flesh.

The Church of Rome is full of these observations, there being above five
months in the year wherein some abstain from some kind of meat or other.
Observations, which we cannot find that they were ever practiced by our
Savior, or his Apostles. These abstinences they give unto God in part of
payment, and their fastings they account for satisfactions; as if a man should
think to pay his debts by fasting, presuming that his Creditors will abate him
somewhat, because that such a day he did eat nothing but fish for his dinner.

Nay the abuse is now come so far, as that one man may fast for another, and
so satisfy for him; and that a man to whom the Priest has set certain fasts
for penance, may for a piece of money buy them out.

Sobriety and abstinence of themselves are indeed good and holy duties, so as
they be not abused by superstition, and by thinking to merit any thing unto our
selves thereby; for so that which is in it self an exercise of humility, is
changed into an efficient cause of pride; and that which should serve to lay
open our sins before God, is made a covert for our hypocrifie.

This is also another device, whereby the Pope increases his dignity, and
gathers vast sums of money to his treasury.

CHAP. VII. Of abstinence from Marriage.
AS for forbidding to marry, Saint Paul tells us, that it is the doctrine of
devils. In the Apostles time marriage was permitted unto the Ministers of the
Church, witness the same Apostle, 1 Timothy chap. 3. A Bishop (says he) must be
blameless, the husband of one wife, ruling well his own house, having his
children in subjection with all gravity; and a little after, Let the Deacons be
the husbands of one wife, ruling their children and their own houses well. So
likewise in the 11. verse commands that their wives be grave, not standerous,
sober, faithful in all things; and in the seventh Chapter of the 1 to the
Corinthians, to avoid fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let
every woman have her own husband. Note here the word every, to the end that
neither Priests nor any other may be excepted. Likewise to avoid fornication,
this commandment is made unto all such as are subject to fall into
fornication, so that Priests are no way exempted from it, for they also being
but flesh and blood, are subject to the like infirmities as others are.

We read also that the Prophets and chief sacrificers were married. Likewise
we read that the Apostle Saint Peter was married, for in the 1. Chapter of
Saint Mark there is mention made of Peter's wives mother.

Now in the Church of Rome Marriage is forbidden Clerks and Priests: If a
Priest does wantonly dally with a wench in the open streets, no man regards
that; for at Rome the Prelates go publicly into the bawdy houses; but to see
a Priest or Capuchin, or such like married, it were a thing very prodigious.

They object that the Priests have made a solemn vow to abstain from
Marriage; but have they not also made a vow to keep Gods commandments, that
forbid fornication, and that commands us to marry rather then to burn.

Vows indeed are good, when they promise good things, and such as are in our
power to perform; but it is not always in man's power to abstain from
fornication. A single life is without question very good and commendable, but
in those only which have the gift of continency; the which, either none at all,
or very few have attained unto.

Moreover, where is the least Commandment in all Gods Word, whereby honest
Marriage is forbidden, either to those of the Clergy or others? No, no, this
certainly was invented for the better maintenance of the Popes dignity; for the
Pope having been at great charges in erecting of bawdy-houses in Rome, and
elsewhere, it was necessary for him to find out some devise to get resort
thereunto, by the forbidding those of the Clergy to marry, who now are far
better customers then any other.

CHAP. VIII. Of Purgatory.
THe Purgatory of the Church of Rome has this maxim for its foundation, That
by the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ we are discharged, and delivered from
the guilt and punishment of our sins committed before Baptism; but as for
sins committed after Baptism, it is left to us to satisfy Gods justice, in
this life by such penances as the Church shall think fit to enjoyne us; and
afterward in afire which they call Purgatory; which torment is mitigated and
shortened by the prayers and offerings of the Living, and by the Popes
Indulgences.

Surely the proof of this doctrine they have out of their unwritten word, for
there is not so much as mention made of any such matter in Gods Word: However
hereby they have amassed infinite riches unto the Popes Treasury; because these
Masses, and Indulgences, by the which they say this torment is mitigated, and
shortened are sold at a very high rate; for they never say any Mass for any
person deceased, except he or his friends do give somewhat to the maintenance
of the Church: No, no, such special graces as these are not for such poor
people as are not able to purchase them.

Concerning this Purgatory, we read nothing, neither in the old, nor new
Testament; but on the contrary we read of diverse persons who by death have
immediately entered into Paradise, and there rested in peace. Witness the good
old Simeon, in the 2d. of Saint Luke, who had a promise after having seen the
Messiah to depart in peace. Likewise Saint Paul in the 2^. of Timothy 4.
witnesses, that after having fought a good fight, he was to receive a crown
of righteousness.

The soul of poor Lazarus in the 16. Luke is carried immediately after its
departure out of the body into Abraham's bosom, where it is comforted, whilst
wicked Dives is grievously tormented in hellfire. Our Savior said to the
penitent thief that was crucified with him, this day shall thou be with me in
Paradise. It is manifest then that he went not into Purgatory.

The Angel of God in the 14. Chapter of the Revelation, pronounces, Blessed
are the dead which dye in the Lord, from henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that
they may rest from their labors, and their works do follow them. Do they
rest from their labors? how are they then tormented in a terrible blasting
fire? Again the Apostle Saint Paul, 2 Cor. 5. says, That if our earthly house
of this Tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building of God, a house not made
with hands, eternal in the heavens. Now I do much admire how the Apostle
should be so far overseen, as to forget Purgatory, which they imagine to be
between these two.

Moreover, we read in the first Chapter of Saint John's first Epistle, that the
blood of Jesus Christ cleanses us from all sin; and in the 2d. Chapter to
the Colossians, we read, that God has forgiven us all our trespasses. How is
it then that these blasphemers dare to accuse God of so high an injustice, as
to exact the payment of those debts, which are already paid? and to scorch his
poor children in a hot burning fire, for the punishment of those sins, which
he has already freely forgiven us in Jesus Christ? Thus to deal with our very
enemies were inhumanity; how then can we imagine that the God of heaven, who is
goodness it self, should do thus with his servants?

I confess that God, after having pardoned our sins, cease not to chastise
us in this life, to amend us, and to keep us always in awe of his Majesty.
These punishments are none other then fatherly chastisements and corrections.
If God did not thus correct us, he would punish us more in not correcting us;
for the sinner that is not thus recalled from his evil ways, snorts in his
wickedness, and luls himself asleep in his sins; but I shall never believe,
that the most just, and only wise God, after having freely forgiven us all our
sins in Jesus Christ, should afterward take pleasure to torment us thousands
of years in a terrible hot burning fire. Besides, if there be a Furgatory, why
may not the death and passion of our Savior Christ Jesus be sufficient to
deliver souls from thence, as well as the Popes Indulgences? and if the Pope
can draw souls out of Purgatory at his pleasure, I must needs judge him a very
uncharitable person to let so many thousands lie there, in such grievous
torments, for want of money to buy Indulgences.

As for those passages which they allege out of the Scripture, to prove this
their imaginary Purgatory, they are all spoken allegorically, and figuratively:
As that same passage which they have out of the 12^^ Chapter of Saint Matthew,
that the finne against the Holy Ghost shall not be forgiven neither in this
world, nor in the world to come. But I answer that this world to come cannot be
Purgatory, for they say that Purgatory is now already, but by this world to
come, is truly meant the day of judgment; and our Saviors meaning is, that he
that sins against the Holy Ghost, shall be punished both in this life, and
also after this life eternally in hellsire.

Likewise to that in the 3d. Chapter of the 1. Epistle to the Corinthians,
where it is spoken of gold, wood, precious stones, hay, stubble, etc. I answer,
that it is also an Allegorical speech, and that it is not meant of the torment
of the soul after death.

So then we see plainly that this their Purgatory is but imaginary, and and
cannot be proved out of the word of God, wherein there is not so much as any
mention made thereof; only forged by them, to maintain and uphold the Popes
dignity, who by this invention finds quick sale for his pardons and
Indulgences.

CHAP. IX. Of merits and justification by Works.
THe Church of Rome teaches, that a man by his good works may merit eternal
salvation; and that a man is justified before God by the works of the Law, and
thereupon to make the Protestant Religion seem the more odious, they lay to
our charge that we teach, that good works are altogether unprofitable, and no
way conducing to salvation; and that it is faith alone that justifies without
any need at all of performing any other duties of Christianity. An abominable
doctrine it is indeed, and worthy of most severe punishment, as abolishing all
honesty and virtue, and setting loose the reins to all manner of wickedness
and impiety.

To the contrary we of the Protestant Religion purged from Popery, hold that
good works are absolutely necessary to salvation, and that there is no other
way to obtain everlasting life; that faith without works is dead, and cannot
justify; that good works serve to glorify God, to edify our brethren, and to
bring us to eternal salvation; only we deny that good works can merit
salvation, they are the way indeed whereby we come to everlasting happiness,
but not the price whereby we purchase it; which is already sufficiently
purchased, by the free redemption of our Lord Christ Jesus.

We say moreover, that although faith alone, and without good works cannot
justify, yet faith has the propriety to justify us before God; as the eyes
cannot see without the help of the ears, and yet the eyes alone have the gift
of seeing.

Now that we cannot merit any thing at Gods hands, I shall plainly prove by
these five reasons following:

First, because it is our duty to do any good work; whatsoever we do, as our
Savior himself tells us, Luke 17. When ye shall have done all those things
which are commanded, say, we are unprofitable servants, we have done all that
which was our duty to do.

Secondly, the good which we do comes from God; and consequently cannot merit
any thing for us at Gods hands; for we do but give him that which is his own
already.

Thirdly, our good works profit him nothing; he has no need of our service,
although we have great need of his grace.

Fourthly, our good works at the best are but imperfect, and have always some
infirmity in the performance of them.

Fifthly and lastly, there is no proportion at all betwixt our good works and
the kingdom of heaven: To gain such an excellent purchase, there needs a
price insinitely excellent, such as the merits of our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus.

Likewise the holy Scripture says, that eternal life is the gift of God, and
not to be purchased by man's merits; as the Apostle witnesses in the 6h Chapter
of Romans The wages of sin (says he) is death, but the gift of God is eternal
life through Jesus Christ our Lord; and Ephesians the 2d Chapter, by grace we
are saved, through faith, and that not of your selves. It is the gift of God,
not of works, lest any man should boast. Wherefore God calls us his
children, and by consequent heirs, Romans 8. to the end that we may know that we
can lay no right to the kingdom of God as a purchase, which we have merited by
good works; but as children, and in Jesus Christ lawful heirs hereunto.
Surely, then those that go about to purchase eternal salvation in a mercinary
way by their own merits, renounce the title of being Gods children, and
consequently lose their labors. Some there be, who to sweeten this their
hodge-podge, say that we merit by the grace of God, who gives us grace to
merit; a tenet altogether as false as hypocritical and absurd; for the chief
and principal cause why our good works are not meritorious, is because they
proceed from the grace of God. I pray what does that man merit of me that gives
me that which is mine own already?

I confess indeed that the holy Scripture says, that God does recompense our
good works, and that our reward is great in heaven; and that even for a cup of
cold water we shall not lose our reward; but this reward is no way merited by
us; as a father gives his child some reward, it may be for writing a line or
two out of a Copy, or such like, which he does not because the work deserves
it, but because it is his child.

So God accepts of us freely in Christ Jesus, not for our works sake, but
rewards our works, though never so imperfect and unworthy, only because we are
his children.

It is no marvel then if those of the Church of Rome profess that they doubt
of their salvation; for it is impossible to build a steadfast assurance thereof
on so weak a foundation as our own merits; whereas indeed we ought to ground
it only on the immovable foundation of Gods promise in Christ Jesus.

Let us conclude then with the Apostle Saint Paul in the 3 Chapter to the
Romans, that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the Law, and
that we are justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in
Jesus Christ.

I do not say but that before men we are justified by works, that is to say,
known to be just; for men cannot judge of our faith, because they cannot
discern it. And thus Saint James chap. 2. teaches that Abraham was justified
by works, but he was not justified by that means before God: As Saint Paul
teaches in the 4th Chapter of his Epistle to the Romans: If Abraham (says
he) were justified by works, he has whereof to glory, but not before God.

Hear likewise what the same Apostle says in the 2d Chapter to the
Galathians, verse the 16th. We have believed in Jesus Christ, that we might be
justified by the faith of Christ, and not by the works of the Law, for by the
works of the Law shall no flesh be justified. And in the 2d Tim. Chap. 1. God
has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our works,
but according to his own purpose and grace which was given us in Christ Jesus,
before the world began.

CHAPTER X. Of Works of Super-erogation.
Works of Super-erogation may fitly be termed the Popes grand Masterpiece to
support his dignity.

The Apostle Saint James Chapter the 3^ says, that in many things we offend
all. And Solomon in the 1. book of the Kings, Chapter the 8th says, that
there is no man that sins not. And in the 24th Chapter of the Proverbs he
says, that a just man falls seven times, that is to say, many times. The
Apostle Saint Paul himself in the 7th Chapter to the Romans, says, that he
does the evil that he would not do, and that sin dwells in him. Wherefore
our Savior taught his Disciples to say every day, forgive us our trespasses.

It appears then plainly, that the most just amongst men fail in many things,
and do not perfectly fulfill the Law of God.

To the contrary the Church of Rome teaches, that a man may not only perfectly
fulfill the Law of God; but also that many persons do more good works then God
has commanded, and consequently are more righteous then God would have them.

These good works, more perfect forsooth, and more excellent then those which
God has commanded, they call works of Supererogation, the which a man is not
bound to perform, neither is he to be punished if he does them not; but if he
does them, and observes them, he does thereby purchase unto himself a degree
of glory in Paradise above the ordinary rank of Saints, who having done no
more but what God has commanded, have also for their labor nothing but
eternal life.

This doctrine is altogether as senseless as devilish, and against all reason:
For God has commanded us in his Law, that we love, that we serve him and obey
him with all our heart, with all our strength: If any man does then more then
God has commanded in his Laws, he serves God, and loves him more then with
all his strength, which is as much to say, as that he does that which he is not
able to do.

Likewise the Apostle to the Philippians, Chapter the 4th, commands us to
give our selves to all things that are just and honest, and to all virtue
whatsoever. If then these works of Super-erogation be either just or honest,
they are also commanded.

And if those who give themselves to these works of Super-erogation have power
to perform them, is it not God who has given them that power? And if God does
give them that power, is it not that they should serve him? They are therefore
bound to do those works; and if so, then are they no more works of
Super-erogation.

But if we consider this seriously, we shall find that these of the Church of
Rome, who boast that they do more then God does either require or command, do
absolutely conceit themselves to be far more just and more holy then the
Angels themselves: For all the perfection of the Angels consists in doing
Gods will, and not in doing more then he commands them; as it is said Psalm
103. Angels that excel in strength do his Commandments, hearkening unto the
voice of his word.

Nay, I say more, that all the justice of our Savior Christ Jesus, as man,
consisted in nothing else then in doing the will of his Father in heaven, as
you may read in the 6th Chapter of Saint John's Gospel, I came down from
heaven (says our Savior) not to do mine own will, but the will of him that
sent me. And in the 10^^ Chapter to the Hebrews, Lo, I come to do thy will o
God. So then these of the Church of Rome, with their works of Super-erogation,
will be found by this reckoning more just and more perfect then Christ Jesus.

Likewise it must needs be, that in doing these works of Super-erogation, they
do either the will of God, or else their own: The will of God they do not;
for they are works which God has not commanded, they do therefore their
own. It seems then by this that they conceive their own will, to be more
perfect and more excellent then the will of God.

And how comes it to pass that perpetual virginity, and martyrdom, and
monasteriall vows (which with many other such like they term works of
Super-erogation) should be better then the Commandment of God, which commands
us to love him with all our heart, etc. Howbeit to love God is always a good,
holy, and necessary duty; but a single life, and martyrdom, and such like are
things in themselves most sinful and wicked, if they be not done in love to
God. The love of God is always holy and good, but these things may be done in
hypocrisy, or through despair and ambition, and are no way good if they be
not done for the love of God.

Martyrdom is a good and holy duty when God calls us thereunto; but to incur
it without necessity can be termed nothing else but preposterous timerity: But
when we are called thereunto by God, in such kind, as that to escape it we must
deny the faith of Christ, then it is absolutely a thing most necessary, and
expressly commanded in Gods Word.

To give all ones goods to the poor were a knavish part in a man that has
many children, etc. The monastical oath of never marrying is an occasion and
cause of all manner of idleness and filthy concupiscence.

Finally, God commands us to do whatsoever things are just, whatsoever things
are good, whatsoever things are pure: If then these men will do more then God
commands them, they must of necessity do that which he absolutely forbids, and
so heap unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath.

CHAPTER XI. Of the Superaboundant Satisfactions of Saints and Monks, which
the Pope distributes by Indulgences.
THe Church of Rome holds that there be diverse Saints who have not much
sinned, and yet have suffered very much; and consequently that they have
suffered more punishments then their sins deserved. The overplus is that
which they call superaboundant satisfactions; that is to say, the overplus of
that which these Saints have paid unto God more then they owed him; of this
rank of Saints are chiefly the Monks, for they say that they perform so many
good works, and undergo so many punishments for satisfactions, that they have
enough left to help other men.

This overplus lest it should be lost, the Pope gathers into the treasury of
the Church, and distributes it to the people by Indulgences, and converts it
into satisfactions for other men's offenses.

It is then a very saucy presupposition that God will accept of the lashes with
a whip, of the beatings, of the fasts and pilgrimages of Saint Francis, or
Saint Dominicke, in full satisfaction for another man's sins: As if a Judge
would deal any thing the kinder with a prisoner because a friend of his whipped
himself, or fasted more then he was commanded.

It is also to accuse God Almighty of injustice, to think that he inflicts
more punishments on any man then his sins do deserve.

It is not to know the greatness of sin, and to be ignorant of the
punishment due thereunto, to conceive that a few fasts and scourgings, or any
miseries that are to be endured in this life, can be a satisfaction more then
sufficient for the same: For our Savior in the 5th Chapter of Saint Matthew,
says, that he that calls his brother fool shall be in danger of hellfire.

And if the satisfaction of Jesus Christ be sufficient for the punishment due
to all our sins, what need we the satisfactions of Saints? Why should we
think that God will take two payments for one and the same debt, when the
first is sufficient?

Moreover, God rewards us to the full here on earth for all our good works and
endeavors, how is it then that we should merit any thing to another thereby? A
foolish conceit it is indeed, as if the same money which I employ to buy me a
house, should likewise serve over and above for the payment of another man's
debts. And in a thing so holy and important, as touching our reconciliation
with God in Christ, is it lawful to forge articles of faith without any ground
for the truth thereof out of the word of God? For where is the least proof for
this in all the holy Scripture? who sees not that it was invented on purpose
to increase the Popes treasury, and to exalt his Empire? who hereby with his
pardons and Indulgences amasseth unto himself infinite riches.

I would very willingly learn who it was that first put the Saints
satisfactions into the treasury of the Church? when began this distribution?
how shall we know certainly whether God does receive these satisfactions as
sufficient? why had not the Priests in the old Testament such a treasury
wherein to keep the superaboundant satisfactions of Noah, Abraham, and Jacob,
etc. which overplus it seems they have lost by ill husbandry. What is the cause
why our Savior Christ Jesus, nor his Apostles were not advised to speak of
this Treasury? or of one man's satisfying for another? Surely Saint Paul was
asleep when he said, that every man shall bear his own burden, Gal. 6. or
else they will make themselves wiser then Saint Paul. But whether it be
allowable by Gods Word or no, so it be any way conducing to the Popes profit it
matters not with them, so the Pope has a fee it is no matter whether God has
any honor. Thus do they both dishonor God and wrong their own souls.

CHAP. XII. Of the presence of the Lords body in the Sacrament, and of
Transubstantiation.
IF there were none other abuse in the Church of Rome save only this one error
of Transubstantiation, it were of it self sufficient to drive away from the
Church of Rome any man that is careful for the salvation of his soul. The
holy Scripture declares that no Idolaters shall enter into the kingdom of
God, 1 Cor. 6. and surely there can be no greater Idolatry then to call a
morsel of bread his god, and his Creator, and to adore a god made with a few
words; a god that may be stolen away, a god that may be moldy, and eaten up
with worms, and those terms which they use, of eating God, of lifting up God,
of carrying God about in procession, me thinks should make a true Christians
hair to stand on end, to hear such intolerable blasphemies, whereby God
Almighty is so greatly dishonored, and the Christian Religion so exposed to
the reproach of Pagans and Infidels.

The Doctors of the Church of Rome strive to prove this their
Transubstantiation from that passage of our Savior, which they allege cropped
and maimed, not mentioning either the foregoing, or the following words, where
we find that Jesus took bread, brake it, blessed, and gave it to them, saying,
take, eat, this is my body, which is broken for you, do this in remembrance of
me. It appears then that our Savior g^ve bread, and it is manifest that he
gave it not till after the consecration; it was therefore bread after the
consecration: Our Savior says, that the bread is his body, not that the bread
is changed or transubstantiated into his body; so that the bread is not the
body of Christ Capernaitically or grossly, but sacramentally and spiritually.

Moreover, our Savior in the 12th Chapter of Saint John's Gospel says, me ye
have not always, which were false if he were always enclosed in a wafer cake.
To this they answer, that we have him no more visibly. I reply, that to have
Jesus Christ invisibly, is nevertheless to have him; that man should lie that
should say he has no money, because it is in his coffer. So likewise in the
16th of Saint John's Gospel, ver. 17. I go to the Father (says our Savior)
which also were an untruth if he did still remain in a piece of bread.

All this they pretend under the shadow of these words, this is my body, for
the meaning whereof they will not receive Saint Paul's exposition, who thus
delivers it unto us, the bread which we break, is it not the communion of
the body of Christ? 1 Cor. 10.16.

And I pray how many times in the Scripture is it said that we are the body of
Christ? does it therefore follow that we be transubstantiated into his body?

We see then into how many blasphemies, how many gross absurdities and
contradictions they run into to defend this their fantastical Transubstantion;
having no proof at all for it out of Gods word; what they have out of their
unwritten word I know not, neither do I care.

CHAP. XIII. Of the sacrifice of the Mass.
A word or two now of the Idolatrous sacrifice of the Mass. Hereupon it was
that I first found the Doctors of the Church of Rome at a fault: For I often
called on them to show me some passage out of the word of God, that commands
the sacrifice of the body of Christ Jesus, but they could none of them ever
show me any: Some forsooth will take the institution thereof from those words
of our Savior, do this, which they interpret, sacrifice my body; but this
interpretation is of their own invention. Others allege that passage of our
Savior, this is my body, for the institution of it: But what if it were such a
body indeed as they interpret it (which notwithstanding is very false) can they
conclude, because our Savior said, this is my body, that he commanded the
sacrifice of his body? Briefly, they cannot allege any passage out of the
word of God, which might prove the institution of this their most idolatrous
sacrifice. And indeed, seeing the sacrifice of the death of Jesus Christ is
sufficient, what need is there to sacrifice him any more? Again, through the
whole passage of the institution of the Lords Supper, there is not the least
sign or mention of any sacrifice, neither did the Apostles any worship at all,
which is a thing most necessary in every sacrifice, and more especially in a
sacrifice newly instituted, for a president and example for the future.

Moreover, the Apostle Saint Paul in the 10th Chapter to the Hebrews, says,
that we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once
for all. We see then plainly, that the death of our Lord and Savior Christ
Jesus is the only sacrifice, which he himself offered up unto God for all our
sins; so that it is mere foppery in us to presume to sacrifice that body
again in such a tragicomaediall manner as that of the Mass, which has
already been received as a sufficient sacrifice for all our sins.

Likewise in every sacrifice, that which they sacrifice ought to be
consecrated; that which they pretend to sacrifice, is the Lords body, which
cannot be consecrated; for who can consecrate the Son of God? so likewise the
thing consecrated which they sacrifice in the Mass, cannot be the bread, for
they say that it is no more bread after the consecration; and although they
should say that it were bread after the consecration, yet so it is that neither
bread nor any other creature can be thought a reasonable sacrifice for our
redemption.

Certainly this was invented only for the maintenance of a company of lazy
lubbers, which they call Priests; for take away the sacrifice of the Mass, and
they have no employment, and truly by this means I think they get as much as
might competently maintain them, were it not for the Popes bawdy houses, which
consume most part of their revenues.

CHAP. XIV. Of the taking away the cup in the Sacrament.
THere are yet many errors in the Church of Rome, but the most abusive and
injurious error in my opinion is the taking away of the cup in the Sacrament
from the Laity, contrary to our Saviors institution, and to the practice of
the Apostles, who gave the people the holy Communion under both signs.

The first institution of the Sacrament was when our Savior took the cup and
blessed it, and gave it to his Disciples, saying, drink ye all of this. Now if
in these words, drink ye all of this, our Savior speaks to none but the
Pastors or Ministers of the Church, it must consequently follow, that the
commandment to eat, which is in the aforegoing words appertain also to the
Pastors only; and then there is no commandment at all whereby the Laity is
commanded to receive the bread.

And it is clear that the Apostles receiving the Sacrament of our Savior,
received it not then as Pastors, but as Sheep and Disciples; And though they
had received it as Pastors and Ministers of the Church, did not our Savior
thank you, when he said unto them, do this as often as ye do it in remembrance
of me, intimate unto them that they ought to administer it unto the people in
the same manner as he did administer it unto them.

The Apostle Saint Paul understands it so, as you may see by that
commandment which he gives the Corinthians in his 1. Epistle, Chap. 11. Let a
man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and drink of that cup.
It is manifest that this commandment, both to eat of that bread, and drink of
that cup is made unto those that ought to examine themselves; but every one
ought to examine himself before he come to receive that holy communion;
therefore every one ought to receive both that bread and that cup whereof Saint
Paul speaks.

And in the beginning of that same 1. Epistle to the Corinthians, it appears
that Saint Paul did write to all the people of Corinth, excepting none that did
call upon the name of the Lord Jesus. These are the words: Unto the Church of
God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to
be Saints, with all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our
Lord.

And surely it is somewhat considerable, that the Church of Rome seems by
this means to labor to deprive the people of eternal life: For the Doctors
of the Church of Rome conceive those words of our Savior in the 6th of Saint
John's Gospel, Except ye eat the flesh of the son of man, and drink his
blood, ye have no life in you, to be spoken of the Sacrament of the Eucharist:
And if it be so, it is manifest, that in taking away the cup from the Laity,
they deprive them of eternal life.

Their excuse for this is, that the bread is in the body, so that in eating the
body, they drink the blood also. To the which I answer, that to receive the
blood so in the Sacrament is not to drink it; but our Savior says expressly,
Except ye drink, etc. And if in eating the body they drink also the blood,
the Priest does by this reckoning drink twice, once when he swallows down
the body, and again when he drinks off the cup.

They produce likewise certain passages of the Scripture, wherein it is spoken
of the breaking of the bread, without mentioning the cup? I answer, that in
those passages, as it is not said that the people should receive the cup; so
neither is it said that the Priests should receive it: If then by these
passages, they will gather that the people are not obliged to take the cup, I
may also from thence gather that the Priests are not obliged; for there is no
more spoken of the one then of the other. Besides, we read in the 2d of Sam.
chap. 9. that Mephibosheth did eat bread at David's table; may we conclude from
thence that he never drank, because it is not expressed?

The manner of the celebration of the Lords Supper ought to be taken from our
Saviors first expressed institutions, and formal commandment.

The original spring of this gross abuse proceeds from pride and ambition,
for by this means those of the Clergy raise their dignity far above the
people, whom they exclude from one half of the Sacrament; and do hereby make
themselves in this respect equal unto Kings, who together with them receive
the Sacrament under both signs. And the Pope has a prerogative above all men
else, in that he does suck the wine out of the Calice with a quill.

Thus have we briefly discovered the manifold and great abuses of the Church of
Rome, and how strangely they delude the common people, with their imaginary and
idolatrous services; how absolutely contrary to Gods holy word are all their
tenets; and how through the whole profession of their Religion they seek
infinitely Gods dishonor, and are wholly bent for the advancement of the Popes
dignity. I beseech Almighty God to give us his blessed Spirit to discern
betwixt good and evil, and so to rely upon the merits of our Savior Christ
Jesus, by a lively faith, that at length we may obtain that immortal crown
of glory, prepared f^r all faithful persons in Christ Jesus our Lord, to whom
with the Father Almighty, and the glorious Spirit, be ascribed and given all
possible praise, thanksgiving and obedience, for ever and ever, Amen.

(...)
FINIS.

