A PHYLOSOPHICAL, AND Medicinal Essay OF THE WATERS OF TUNBRIDGE.

Written to a Person of Honor.

By PAT. MADAN M. D.

Temporibus Medicina juvat. data tempore prodest,
Et data non apto tempore Lympha nocet.
LONDON, Printed for the Author, MDCLXXXVII.

My Lord,
IT was your Honors pleasure, to ask my judgment concerning Tunbridge-waters,
because I often recommend my Patients to them; which in my opinion are not
Inferior in Medicinal Virtues to any Spaw of that kind: For by their Effects,
which is an Demonstratis a posteriori.
after-demonstration; they are impregnated with a Chalcanteous or Vitriolate
Juice; which, with its Sulphurous Particles irritates and moves the Belly to
Blackish Excretion, and by frequent Drinking thereof, it Blackneth the Tongue,
because this member being of a Spongy Substance imbibes some Sooty Sulphurous
Minims into its Porosity, occasioning this Tincture.

Through its more subtiler piercing Chalchantous Spirits, it provokes Urine in
a plentiful manner.

To these is admixt some Ferrugineous Juice, which contains a great deal of the
Volatile Salt, which is it that is dissolved in the Chalybeat-Wine, now so much
in Vogue amongst Physicians.

His Aquis ferrum inesse videtur in principiis solutis unde earum vis
Chalybeata intimius Sanguine permiscetur and potentius morbis expugnat quam
ferrum quocunque demum artificio nobilitatum, Dr. Sydenham. These Waters seem
to contain Iron in its unconcrete and seminal Principles, whereupon their
Chalybeat Virtue is more entirely mixed with the Blood, and more powerfully
attaques Diseases, then Iron prepared to the best advantage can; Dr. Sydenham.

Mars in its self confists chiefly, of Salt, Sulphur, and Earth: It has very
little of Spirit and Water, and Particles of the former Elements, especially
the Sulphurous and Saline in the mixed are combined together with Earth, remain
wholly fixed; but being loosed and divided from each other (as in these Waters)
have a very efficacious Energy; Dr. Willis de Chalybeatis.

In them Galls shaven, or Oake-leaves added; or by pouring to them some
infusion of Tea made in Water, they will become of an Atropurpureous Color; to
which in-Stilling some drops of Spirit of Vitriol, or pouring thereunto some
Sherry, becomes clear again and Redintegrats its Pristine Color. On the
Surface of these Waters, there is a Grey-Filme in a Morning; they have a
Roughness in the Mouth, with 'em no Arsenical Vapors are intermixed, but void
of all noxious quality, are Limpid and Salutiferous. many do daily receive
Benefit by the use of 'em: Wherefore by Syndrome Phainomenoon.
the concurrence of these appearances they have the Characteristick of a good
and wholesome Spaw.

As for their Virtues and Properties in Physic, I believe if there be any such
Remedy in Being as a Panpharmacon, or Universal Remedy, it is here: For even as
Soap put to Foul Linen with Water, Purges and Cleanses all Filth, and makes
them to become White again; so these Waters with their Saponary and Detersive
Quality clean all the whole Microcosm or Body of man from all Feculency and
Impurities. Vid. the first Region by Black Seige; the second by Urine, the
third by Transpiration, sending forth from the Center to the Circumference many
Sooty and Fetid Effluviums, which in some, color their Shirt Blackish, Harum
enim substantia liquida notannda quantitas per intimos viscerum recessus
preterfluens, peccantes and in propriis cuniculis stagnantes succos egregie
everrit morborumque causam averruncet, Materiam tartaream and viscosam
dissoluunt: Hepatis quoque and renum calidam in temperiem corrigunt.
An observable quantity of this Liquid Substance, gliding through the Inner
Passages of the Bowels, brushes off the Peccant Humors that stagnate in their
proper Channels, and root out the Cause and Origin of Diseases: The Acidulae
also dissolve Tartarous and Viscous Matter, and correct the hot Indisposition
of Liver and Kidneys: See the Author Fredericus Lossius in Conciliis Medicis.

Wherefore the use of these Waters have deservedly gained a great esteem and
reputation in Curing many Chronick and Rebellious Diseases, which are accounted
the shame of Physicians; for they Cure even to a Miracle, such as are quite
given over by Doctors, they may well be named Aquae Vitae, or Waters of Life,
because they restore men to Life, and make them live twice: Quia vita priori
posse frui est bis vivere.
Because to enjoy their former Health is to live again, for Sickness and
Neutrality of Health, as the Greeks say, is but (...), To live without Life;
wherefore Non est vivere sed been valere Vita Martial.
Life is not only to live and breath, but also to have perfect Health; and that
is got here by Drinking.

Ad has aquas medici postquam aegros magna and sumptuoso medicamentorum
apparatu longo tempoae defatigarunt cum vident res sibi ex voto non succedere,
miseros relegant; tanquam ad sacram anchoram sunt enim efficacissimum and
potentissimum remedium ad profligandos gravisstmos morbos a Deo concessum, si
dextra manu porrigantur quod Poeta exprimit his versibus.
Physicians when they have tired their miserable afflicted Patients with
tedious and Chargeable courses of Physic (finding all ways else unsuccessful)
at last send 'em to these Waters, which they lay hold of, as a Sacred Anchor,
for they are the most Efficacious and Powerful Remedy against the greatest and
most Inveterate Diseases; by the appointment of Almighty God, provided they are
made use of in a due and right manner; which the Poet expresses in these words.

Publica morborum requies, commune medentum,
Auxilium, praesens numen, inemptaque salus,
Amissium reparant lymphis impune vigorem,
Peccaturque aegro luxuriante dolor.
Diseases public ease; a common heal,
A free-cost-Health; a God does never fail,
Vigor to Men restore with ease, avail,
All pain in wanton Patient's does assail.
But if you take 'em in the left hand, or by the wrong handle, they cause
thousands of Diseases, and hasten even death it self. Fredericus Lossius in
Conciliis de morbis Hypochondriacis.

Etenim massae Sanguineae Effatae and Languescenti volatile quoddam
fermentorum, seu calcaria subdit, a quo excitantur and quasi eriguntur spiritus
antea jacentes and suo pondere pressi: Sanguinem vigorat ejusque vim (...)
redintegrant: Nam quoties Chalybeata in chlorosi seu febre alba vel amatoria
propinantur pulsus de repent major fit and celeror: Exteriora corporis
incalescunt, facies non amplius pallida and morti concolor, sed vivida cernitur
and Sanguine purpurata, Fredericus Lossius.
Chalybeats Cure not so much by opening Obstructions of the Viscera, as by
depressing the Exaltations of Sulphur and fixed Salts, and by Volatilizing the
Blood much Depauperated and made Effete as in Cachectick Bodies: For they
communicate a Volatile sort of Ferment; as a Spur to the Effete and Languid
Mass of Blood, by which the Spirits that before lay gasping as it were, and
pressed down with their own weight, are excited and made more lively; by
Invigorating the Blood, and renwing the Ferment; For as soon as Chalybeat
Medicines are made use of in the Green Sickness, the Pulse becomes suddenly
greater and quicker: The External parts of the Body grow hot, the Face no
longer Pale and Dead-colour'd, but fresh and Purpled with Blood it self.

Betwixt the Ferment of the Stomach and Chalybeats, there is a mutual conflict,
as appears by the Nidorolent Belches, and Eructations after taking 'em, as if
one had eaten hard Fried Eggs: In this re-action Chalybeats undergo a
dissolution within the Viscera of Concoction, and the active Particles, both
Sulphurous and Saline display themselves and mixing with the Nutritive Juice,
are carried into the Blood which they Inactuate.

Chalybeat-Waters by their many and diverse Seminary Principles with which they
are embryonated, are very powerful and efficacious in curing of many and diverse
Diseases, though they be of a contrary Nature and Disposition; for they serve not
only as a Bridle, but also as a Spur: Yet I would not advise them to be drunk
indifferently by all Constitutions and Sexes, without the Advice of a
Physician, who by his Prudent Conduct and management, weighing all (...)
Indications, Contra-indications, and Co-indications according to Discretion,
may obviate all Symptoms that may survene, and thereby render them more useful,
and effectual; the Potation of Waters thus Circumstantiated, may deserve to be
called the most powerful Hand of God; and keep their Reputation untainted: But
without this Caution, they may prove a Sword in a Mad-Mans hand, and not at all
Auxiliary, but pernicious and hurtful: Hence comes the saying, Pessimum mortis
sed optimam vitae instrumenturs.
That Steel is the worst Instrument of Death, and best of Life: Wherefore our
Learned and well Experienced Doctors now adays abbreviate the tedious and
various Theraupeutick method of Physic, and in lieu of it prescribe their
Patients only a Chalybeat course to satisfy all intentions, judging it to be
instar omnium, or equivalent to all other prescriptions, Vt hujus veluti
panacaee usus caetera possit excusare Medicamenta.
and as a Learned Physician was wont to say, As true as Steel.

The Sanative Virtues and Energies of those Waters are beyond any Polypharmacon
prescription imaginable, being very prevalent against frequent Giddiness and
Scotomia, Passions of the Heart, and Fainting of Spirits, with a fear and dread
as it were of present Death. In Hypochondriacal and Hysteric Fits, by
supressing the Anathymiasis of ill Vapors, and hindering Damps to exhale to
the Head and Heart, no Remedy more effectual. In Scurvy which is an Endemick
Disease, it is an Appropriate and Specific Remedy, by correcting the depraved
Ferments and Dulcifying the Blood: In Hemorrhagies taken with Advice, it is of
great strength and force: In both Obstructions and overflowing of the Terms
also, an excellent Remedy: Its good against all Obstructions of Liver, Spleen,
and Mesentery; Leucophlegmatia, Febris Alba, Seu Amatoria, or Greensickness,
Stone, Gravel: Nay, it Cures Hydrophobia, or the Disease called the Fear of
Water, commonly contracted by the Bite of a Mad-Dog methodically Drank.

Moreover these Waters are endowed with an admirable and Powerful Faculty in
rendering those who Drink of them Fruitful and Prolifick; by reason of their
Spirituous Ferment they Enliven, Invigorat and Actuate the whole Mass of
Blood, the nobler parts of the Body and Spirits thereof. Likewise reduce them
from a Saline or Sulphurous Dyscrasie, and sometimes from both, to a sweet
Balsamic, Spirituous, and Sanguineous Temperament, Actiones sequuntur
temperamentum corporis.
which naturally incites and inspires men and Women to Amorous Emotions and
Titillations, being previous Dispositions, enabling them to Procreation: This
may be the Aitiology of this product in some sense.

Venus comes from the Salt Sea through many Crannies, Interstices, Pores of the
Earth, and dangerous Precipices foaming to meet her beloved Mars in the Bowels
of the Earth: whom she no sooner embraces, but she is Impregnated and big with
a Valliant Hero, in the Bed of Honor with no insipid delight: From thence soon
after this Congression, she rises Tryumphing in our Hemisphere at Tunbridge,
generously imparting and distributing this Impregnative Faculty to her
Votaries, Omne bonum sui communitativum.
in order to preserve and perpetuate Mankind.

To Her, Mars in a Poetical Rhapsodie speaks.
Tu Dea? tu rerum naturam Sola gubernas,
Nec sine te quidquam, dias in luminis oras
Exoritur: nec sit laetum nec amabile quicquam.
Thou Goddess! turnest Natures Wheel,
To thee All-Beings do Appeal;
Without Thee, neither Joy nor Love, we feel.
So Passionate was he for a married Venus: To these Lines I may annex a
Poetical Hypothesis, de aquis Chalibeatis, or Chalibeat-waters made by a
Learned and Ingenious Man, alluding to the preceding Discourse.

Quid valet obdurum placide dissolvere Martem,
Ecce Venus madidans, mollit amore Deum.
Spuma maris transit telluris sedula rimas,
Quemque ardet juvenem; quaerit ubique furens.
Non erit ergo novum si nostris emicet undis,
Hic Martem exultans convenit illa suum.
Salsis in Terrae thalamo complexibus hument,
Surgit and explosus colliquefactus Amor.
Hinc tantis dignae ferratae laudibus undae:
Mars praebet robur: Dat Venus alma decus.
Huc queis forma perit: huc, huc properate puellae,
Vos Pulchras reddit candida limpha Deas.
Hue properate senes, curvans quos deprimit aetas,
Ecce Dei vires exhibit unda sui.
Ventriculos implete mares: implete puellae,
Quos bibitis fontes rivus Amoris erunt.
Posthac de Baccho fileant proverbia: friget
Non sine Lenaeo, sed sine Mart V-enus.
What thing can reach Mars his hard heart?
It Is Venus only has the Dart.
The foaming Sea finds Terra's chinks,
And mad with Love, into 'em sinks.
It Is nothing strange if Venus rise,
And both in Joy, here sympathise.
Moistened in Salt Embraces Bed,
She melted, rising rears her head.
Hence Waters Fame of Iron race,
Mars gives the Strength, Venus the Grace
Come hither Dames, whose Beauties fade,
A Goddess in a trice is made.
Come hither Old, whom Age has bent,
Gods Power is Omnipotent.
Drink Men and Women, drink and swell,
You cannot drink dry kind Cupids Well.
Drink Sirs and Ladies; He, She Dove,
What here you drink, increases Love.
No more of Bacchus; Venus chill
Appears, when Mars has no good will.
Nay, only then to say I Am bold,
Venus is so when Mars is cold.
Notwithstanding all these Encomiums of the Waters, yet some are of opinion
they are not proper in some kind of Maladies: As in a Rheumatism, nor in
Hectic Fevers, or Consumptions: First, by reason of the ill success they are
wont to have in using these Waters. Secondly, Because in them the parts are
much weak'ned, and Nature cannot throw off the Glut of Waters sent into the
Blood: In Rheumatick Persons the Nervous Juice degenerates from its Crasis, and
inclines to a sharpish Nature, and is wont to be perverted by the fluid Salts
of the Spaw-Waters: As Doctor Willis well observes, As for Hecticks, they are
commonly of a fine texture of Body, much Distempered with Heat, Dryness, and
Costiveness; all which Symptoms are rather increased by Chalybeats, than
abated: Wherefore the Learned Dr. Willis in his Chapter of Chalybeats, says,
That Steel is not proper in very Hot and Spiritous Blood, nor where the the
Bowels are of a hot Temperament: Neither are these Waters good, but rather
hurtful to those who are in perfect Health, according to Hippocrates sentiment;
who says, Medicamenta non convenient sanis: Medicaments are not convenient for
Sound and Healthy Persons. Moreover, they are Judged not proper for Women with
Child: Because whatever provokes Urine, as these Waters do, provokes also the
Terms, and whatever provokes 'em in Women, causes Miscarriage; therefore not
fit for them in this circumstance.

Old and Ancient Persons are not to be too bold in drinking these Waters,
because their Ferments and Natural Faculties are much debilitated by decay of
Nature, and not sufficient to exert their Function in distributing these
Waters, which if remaining in their Body, and being not carried off, Suffocates
the Vital Flames of the Heart and Arteries: Wine therefore for 'em is most
convenient. Deus enim Vinum hominibus quasi auxilium adversus senectutis
austeritatem pharma cum largitus est, ut reviviscere videantur, and maestitiae
oblivio capiat: atque ipse animi habitus mollise duro factus ut ferrum Igni
impositum, tractabilior fiat unde Vinum a non nullis lac senum nominatur.
Lossius.
For God has given Wine as a Physick-help against the Moross Austerity of Age,
that by the moderate use thereof, Old Men may in a manner renew their Lives,
and forget their Aches; even the habit of the Mind from a hardened condition, is
become soft; as Iron by the help of Fire is made more tractable; whereupon Wine
is called, Lac senum, the Old Man's Milk.

The method which is to be observed in drinking these Waters, is as follows:
First, To drink for three or four days every Morning, Epsom or North-Hall
Waters, to Purge the Body and prepare it in order to Tunbridge: For unless the
first passages are cleansed, Medicines designed for any other use, will be
depraved by the filth residing in them. These Purging-Waters may be drunk to
three or four Pints, either raw or boiled, and altered with Milk. This being
done, drink of Tunbridge, walking gently to the Fountainhead. Nam dulcius and
utilius ex Font bibuntur: delatae enim ex propriis Fontibus fieri non potest
quin amittant vivificos illos Spiritus inquoque omnis vivamenti vis consistit,
quos nullo postea labor restitui potest Bacchius de thermis.
For Waters are more pleasant and profitable taken at the Fountainhead: Whence
once removed, they lose their Vivific Spirits, in which all Virtue does reside:
which afterward no diligence can recover.

For being impregnated with a Spiritous and volatile Exhalations, they easily
lose their Virtue by the Avolation of Fugitive Parts being carried at a
distance: That they are embodied with such subtle parts, you may experience it
sensibly by putting a Bottle half full of them, about Sunrising to your eyes;
and from thence you will perceive such Emanation of Efluviums to come Analogous
to those of Orange-peel when squeezed, as will stimulate and irritate the
tender Tunicles of your Eyes: This I have by Tradition from a Physician, who
for many years frequented Tunbrige, and made great scrutiny into the Nature and
Idiosyncrasia of these Waters; yet this I know, that Chalybeat-waters in long
deportation; or being some space of time out of the Fountain, will not tinge
with Galls or Oaken leaves, at least not so intense as before: whence I deduce
that, in carriage to some distance, or being long our of the Fountain, they are
divested of their Martial, and consequently Medicinal Power. Vnum quodque quo
magis elongatur a principio eo magis languescit.


They are to be drunk gradually, and with leisure, not in great draughts, with
little or no intermission, because they are chiefly prescribed to purify and
keep in its due Crasis the Blood and Nervous Juice, to open Obstructions, and
strengthen the Tone of the Nervous Plexus: Now this they effect, by insinuating
Subtle and Active Particles of different State and Origin, into the Morbifick
Minera, conquering and subduing Saline and Irritative Particles residing in the
Blood, and carrying some forth as Prisoners, by Urine. (...)
This Mutual Contest betwixt the Combatants of Chalybeats and their Antagonist,
cannot be expected to be at an end in haste, or in short space of time, but
after many Attacks and several Collisions, and as I may say, broken Pates: But
precipitate drinking destroys all these intentions, and leaves no time for
alteration, assimulation, or Mortification of Particles of different Nature and
Figure; Wherefore it is better to (...) Festina lent Hippes, omne nimium
Naturae inimicum quod vero paulatim fit, tutum est presertim si ab uno ad aliud
progrediatur.
hasten slowly, and drink 'em leasurely, with due intervals.

Moreover, great draughts are generally held Pernicious, Destructive, and
rather oppressing than alleviating Nature: And considering these Waters are not
Virtuated so much by their quantity as quality inherent in them, the Body
participates more of the latter frequently drinking a little, than by powering
in, a vast and stupendous quantity at one time, like Tricongius Mediolanensis,
who drunk three Gallons at one draught, and from thence took his Name.

The compass of time wherein the Waters are usually drunk, is an hour, or an
hour and a half, walking betwixt whiles moderately, Ad Ruborem, sed non ad
Sudorem.
till you look red, but not sweat, least you divert 'em from the Vrinary
passage to the Periphery of the Body, (for the same matter goes by Sweat as by
Urine) and cause too great an Effervescency in the Blood.

The measure of time to continue the drinking of these Waters for good effect,
is commonly a Month, or six Weeks: But by the Authority of Claudinus, and many
other Doctors, we may continue a Steel course for the space of a Year: Why not
a Fortiori, or much more, the use of these Waters with as much safety and
benefit, they being the most perfect course of Steel; because here the Elements
of Steel are in un-concrete and seminal Principles, and display themselves, as
(I before mentioned out of Dr. Sydenham.) Supposing in this Administation,
there be respect had to the Patients strength, Disease, Euphory, or
well-bearing; Temperament of the Air, and other Circumstances.

They are to be taken, gradually increasing and lessening; the Dose at the
beginning, and before their end of the whole space of time appointed for the
taking of them. As in reference to the number of Glasses. In my Judgment, you
may make it either odd or even: Though some Philosophers who are of Opinion, that
all things are composed of number, prefer the odd before the other, and
attribute to it a great Efficacy and Perfection, especially in matters of
Physic: Wherefore it is that many Doctors prescribe always an odd Pill, an odd
Draught or Drop to be taken by their Patients. For the perfection thereof, they
allege these following Numbers. As Seven Planets, Seven Wonders of the World;
Numero Deus impore gaudet.
Nine Muses; God is Three and One, with many other Examples, which for brevity
I supersede; and let them abound in their own Sense.

If there fall Rain, then the Waters are not seasonable, because they will be too
much diluted and weak'ned; but a little wet does no harm, but rather good,
because it washes the Salt in the Crannies and Interstices of the Earth into
the Fountain and more intensly impregnates them. Virtue unita fortior se ipsa
dispersa.


To correct the Crudities and Rawness of the Waters, and to acelerate their
passing: Carroway Confects, and such like Candied Seeds masticated, are very
good, and much commended, taken betwixt whiles: Likewise a Glass of small White
Wine is a proper Vehicle; and for all those who are innur'd to Tobbacco Nulla
salutifero praestantior herba Tobacco.

Interpone tuis interdum pocala fumis.


nothing better than a Pipe of it for this effect, taken btwixt whiles. To
those to whom it is offensive taken alone, may add thereunto some Tea leaves or
Catechu, to qualify the ingratefulness thereof, and render it in-offensive
taken Pipe-wise. This warms the Stomach without mixing any Heterogeneous Body
with the Waters, that may obstruct their distribution and passing, for it
rarefies the Pores and Meatus in order thereunto.

It Is observed that in some, the Waters being drunk at the Fountain Head;
either by the inclemency of the Weather, or indisposition of the Patient, will
not easily pass, but remain too long in the Body, to their great prejudice and
detriment: To these Persons my advice is, to drink 'em in their warm Bed,
without sleeping, (which hinders all Evacuation) for as I said before, the
gentle heat of Bed dilates the passage, and consequently the distribution of
the Waters is much facilitated.

The Regimen which is observed in Eating and Drinking at those Waters, is as
follows. First, Eschew all gross and obstructive Meats, as Pork, Beef, Duck,
Pudding, Sawsages, all Fried Victuals, as Eggs, Collops of Bacon, most sorts of
Fish, and Sallets: All Souced and Pickled Meats, as Anchovy, Cucumbers, etc.
refrain from Milk, and all Milk-Meats: Eat no Roots, or any sort of Fruit, let
your Meat be of easy Digestion and Nutritive, as the Greeks say, (...). Keep no
days of Fast or Abstinance during this time, if I may advise you as a
Physician, and not as a Casuist, lest I encroach upon another Province,
tractent fabrilia fabri, every one in his own Sphere.

Fast three or four hours after the waters, and if at Dinner you have an
esurine Appetite, take care not to eat too much, because the quantity of waters
you drunk, has relaxed and distended your Stomach, therefore little eating is
best according to the Latin Proverb, qui multum edere optat parum commedat, he
that desires to eat much, must eat little: Avoid variety of Meats, but if you
indulge your self to several sorts, let the easier of digestion precede the
grosser, and not be Post-poned as the Greeks advise us, (...).

Let your Drink be clear, well fermented, not stale, nor sower, not thick, nor
muddy, not heating, nor cooling, but temperate; all Ale is prohibited, because
thick and muddy. -- Nihil spissius illa dum ingeritur; nihil clarius cum
egeritur:
Ergo in corpore relinquit multas faeces.
It goes in thick, and comes out thin,
And therefore leaves its Dregs within.


Begin your Meals with a Glass of White Wine; Incipe cum Liquido: ficco sinire
memento Schola salernitana.

Vt vites paenam de potibu^ incipe caenam.


I recommend Aniou Wine beyond others, because it is small, clear, light, very
diuretic, and of a singular virtue against the Stone or Gravel, and all
Obstructions of the Mesentery: Yet though you begin with Liquids, nevertheless be
advised to conclude with Solids: by this means you first wash and fortify your
Stomach, and at last close the Orifice thereof, that no Fumes or Vapors arise
to disturb your Head: The French, who are esteemed a Wise Nation, are always
observed boucher la Bottle, to stop the Bottle, least nothing exhale; so
likewise they close their Stomach with some Desair or Sweet-Meat after, eating
for the same intent.

All Excesses and Debauchery with late sitting up at Nights, is pernicious and
destructive during this time, for many reasons which I here omit, because every
one may experience it easily in himself, after such Nocturnal Locubration;
therefore, bibas ut vivas, sed non vivas ut bibas: drink to live, but not live
to drink.

To change your Linen often will be convenient, if not necessary while you
drink these Waters, because many Sooty fetid Sulphurous Steems come from 'em,
which render your Shirt black, and some other Particles obstruct the Pores of
your Body, and make them impervious, and hinder insensible transpiration; which
is an evacuation far greater and more considerable, than any manifest or
sensible one, either by Seige or Urine, according to Sanctorius de Sanctorio in
his Medicina Statica.

During the time you drink these Waters, it is necessary to take some gentle
Medicine every fourth or fifth Night going to Bed, or in a Morning early,
drinking these Waters thereupon after the Physic has begun to work. -- Here
Aloetick Medicine is held offensive, by reason it consists of Acrimonious and
Lixivial parts, apt to heat and corrode the Viscera: But this is easily solved,
if to the Aloetick Physic you mix some Resinous or Balsamic Substance which
may lenifie, mitigate hebetat and obtunde the fiery Alkaly's of Aloes: And with
this correction, or preparation, it is not only rendered less hurtful, but
particularly an appropriat Medicine to be taken with these Waters: My usual
Pill is Massae Pilul Ruffi i. resinae Jalap gr. iij. Balsam peru q. s. f.
Pilulae iij. sumendae hora somni, superbibenao mane aquas predictas ad lbiiij.
plus minusue: Many Doctors give Diacassia cum Manna to an Ounce overnight,
which is a good Eccoprotick, fit for all Ages and Constitutions, and leave no
ill Diathesis in the Viscera: Another rare Eccoprotick and Ecphractick Remedy
is highly commended with these Waters, which is Tinctura Cathartica, an Ounce
of which, or an Ounce and a half given in the first Glass Purges cito tuto
jucunde, soon, safe, and pleasantly: For no violent Catharticks are proper with
these Waters, for fear of agitating and irritating Nature too much, and making
an ill impression on the Blood and Viscera: I know some, who in lieu of Physic
will take in the first Glass to Purge them, a spoonful of common Salt with very
good success, but this Remedy is not proper for all Constitutions.

Those who are obnoxious to Stone or Gravel, and frequent these Waters: My
advice is, that the Night precedent drinking 'em, they take an emollient
Glister, and in the Morning an hour or two before the Waters, to swallow four
or five Pills of Venice or Chios Turpenthine.

Likewise in the first Glass to take an Ounce of Syrup of Marshmallows; or let
them take the bigness of a Bean of Lucatellus Balsom or Turpenthine Pills,
especially if there be any Excoriation in the Kidneys or Bladder, every Night
going to Bed. with an Ounce of the said Syrup in the first Glass every Morning,
and an Emollient Glister every third, or fourth Night; because by these means
the passages are lubricated, and the distribution of the Waters rendered more
easy.

Hypochondriacal Persons may take in the first Glass a spoonful or two of the
Syrup of Steel, or a Dram of Cremor Tartar in Powder; and so likewise in all
other Distempers, to mix Specificks with Chalybeats, is the Opinion of Dr.
Willis, de morbis Hypochondriacis, and many other Learned Physicians, for in so
doing, they associate their Operation against the Malady.

Now as to the Animi pathemata, or Passions of the Mind: Those who drink these
Waters, must be Facetious, Merry, Cheerful, Gay, Jovial, free from Melancholy,
Jealosy, Suspicion, Discontent, Peevishness, etc. Edaces animi curae solici
utdines, tristitiae maerores atque ejus generis and farinae alia animi
pathemata abigenda.
because such Passions as these corrode both Soul and Body: impede the benefit
they may reap by the Waters; nay in lieu of Health, they may catch their Death;
so great is the Sympathy betwixt Body and Soul in their disorder.

(...): Non Sine animo corpus nec sine corpore animus been valere potest: The
Mind without the Body, nor the Body without the Mind cannot be well. -- What a
Catastrophe have Passions of the Mind with fear and apprehension of Death?
(which of all terrible things is the most terrible) made in condemned Persons
Bodies in few days; insomuch that those who were before Condemnation, Young,
Vigorous, Intrepid, Magnanimous, etc. were afterward Metamorphoz'd into Old,
Effete, Pusilanimous, Decayed Bodies with Gray Hair and Hippocratical Faces,
which is the Vissage of a Dying Man, after being wasted away with long
Sickness. We experimentally see that Women impart their Marks of fancy, even to
the Child they carry in their Womb: It Is observed that Physicians prepossess
their Patients with hopes of Cure, to the end that the effect of Imagination
may supply the defect of their Physic: A Doctor being asked the Question, why
he could not cure his Mother in Law, as well as his Father? He wittily replied,
That his Mother in Law, had not the same confidence, or rather fancy for him,
as his Father had, otherwise the Cure would be effected: So great you see is
the Influence of the Fancy, or Imagitation on the Body of Man.

Likewise the effects of the Body are Communicated to the Mind: You see for
Example, Valiant Heroic Magnanimous Souls by change of Tempreament of Body
either there by Disease or Old Age, become Timorous, Suspicious, Pusillanimous,
Cowards. [Omnia tuta timent,] more like Statues than Men, of these Hippocrates
says, Vidi mortuos ambulantes: I have seen dead Men walk, their Body is a
Sepulcher to their Soul, and as the Greeks say, (...) which is, the Body is
become (...) a Sepulcher: Corpus quod corrumpitur aggravat animam; a decayed
and corrupting Body is a Load and Burden to the Soul, and by its Impurities and
Feculency is infected: In ficitur Terrae sordibus unda fluens.

The clearest Currents as they glide,
Take foulness from the Rivers side.
Animus.
Ad nullum consurgit opus Cum Corpore languet.
For when the Body Languishing does lie,
The Soul it self to nothing can apply.


Wherefore the way to have men's sana (...)
in corpore sano, or to be every way sound, is to leave pinching cares behind
when you come to Tunbridge: Expatiat your Mind, and harken sometimes to the
Charming Music you have here, the choicest and best can be had: It Is an
Antidote against the Spleen.

Dulcisonum reficit tristia corda melos.
Melodious Songs do often impart,
Refreshment to the saddest Heart.
For Melody gently soothing Nature, disposes and directs the Spirits into a
Dancing, and observing regular motions: You see Music by its Influence, forces
sound and sober Men even against their own wills, or thinking of other things,
to actions emulating the Tune heard: Willis de Convulsione a Tarantula.

Physicians, whom Almighty God has Created for the necessity, and use of
Mankind, and commands us to Honor, Ecclesiasticus cap. XXXVIII. verse. 1. and
2.
(...)
are here many Able, Worthy, and Eminent of that Profession, who by their
diligent Scrutiny into the Recesses of Nature, are come of late years to great
Perfection and Knowledge of Physic here in England, far excelling those of
former Ages, wherein Physic labored under a dying Hippocratical Face; and in
Cimerian Darkness: These Doctors are in this place ready to assist with their
Learned Prescription and Wholesome Advice, according to the exigency of every
one, in order to their Health, and Methodically drinking the Waters. -- Many
Learned Divines and Spiritual Guides are not here wanting, whom you may freely
consult and make choice of according to your Inclination, in order to the good
and safety of your Soul.

Here are Women whom they call Dippers, ready to fill you Glasses of Water.
Confestim advolitat, quae pocula porrigat ultro
Plena perennis Aquae, quam Fons sine munere donat.
Qualem nec Latium novit, nec Graecia iactat:
Illa beat siccos faecunda stirpe parents.
Deciduumque facit, post funera vivere nomen,
Illa domat febres, and si male calculus haerens.
Renibus aut peni languentia uiscera torquet.
Illa fugat, pellit curas, and nubila menti,
Discutiens, aptat Doctis, sacratque Camaenis.
With winged speed one to you Glasses brings,
With Water filled, free as the Living Springs;
Whose Fame far above Rome's or Greece's Rings.
This blesses Parents with a Fruitful Race,
That even Death it self cannot deface.
This Waters, Fevers and the Stone casheers,
That vexed the Shaft and Kidneys many years.
This chaseth Sorrow, clears a cloudy Mind,
Fits it for Learning; which with Muses joined,
All here a Seat, and Temple too, do find.
The Air, which to the Preservation of Man's Life, nothing's more necessary, as
Philosophers all agree, (and the derivation of the very word Air, from the
Greek word (...) Spiro denotes the same, being Composed of two Vowels, Alpha
and Omega, as Principium and finis Vitae, which is the beginning and end of
Man's Life;) is here Clear, Serene, Lucid, void of any stinking Mephitis or
Damps arising from Boggs or Fens, which may occasion Epidemical Distempers in
the Blood, but to the contrary, the whole Ambient of the Horizon is filled with
an inexhaustable Series of Odoriferous and Fragrant Effluviums, incessantly
exhaling from sweet scented Herbs and Plants that grow in these parts. The Air
thus embodied, we perpetually inspire, which arise, and Analogically speaking,
Spiritualize our Minds far beyond all Exotic either Natural or Artificial
Perfumes.

Moreover, at Tunbridge you find conference with Eminent and Famous Wits, which
is the most Fruitful and Natural Exercise of the Mind; the use of which is more
sweet than any other action of our Life: The Study of Books is a Languishing
and Feeble motion in respect of it: For what is delivered Viva Voce, with a
Lively Voice, makes a deeper Impression in the Mind, and consequently more
advantageous than Reading: Sic variis animum studiis Tunbrigia mulcet ut vix
absentes possis lugere Penates.
Much more may be said of the various and manisold Benefits and Comforts you
may receive at Tunbridge, which I now supersede, hoping these I mentioned, are
Allurements strong enough to invite, if not a Magnetism to draw Men thither.

It Is rare to Write any thing to that perfection, as to rescind the occasion of
all objections from Cavillers: Wherefore what I have said of the Virtues of
these Waters, would not be sufficient if I do not obviate also such Objections
as may raise Scruples in the minds of these who make use of them.

The First Objection is, That many soon after drinking of these Waters, died;
and that others by the use of them, receive no benefit: Whence they infer these
Waters to be Improper, Noxious, Lethiferous, and not fit to be drunk by Men.

Vina bibant homines, animantia caetera Fontes,
Absit ab humano pectore potus Aquae.
Let none but Cattle Water drink,
That, fit for Men, no Man can think.
As for the first Objection, I confess one may die soon after taking Waters,
and so may he after taking any thing else: Not that the Waters duly prescribed,
are occasion of Death, but through Irregularity, Disorder, or neglect of
something that was to be done in order to the taking of them, Death may ensue;
Nay Men may die immediately or soon after taking things indifferent in
themselves, and void of any Medicinal or Alterative quality, as for example,
after eating Bread and Butter, or drinking a Glass of Wine: It does not
therefore follow that this last thing they eat or drunk cause their Bane, and
that no Man ought to eat or drink any more of this kind of Food.

Secondly, Some of those who drink Waters, may have a Malady of Cacoethes
Nature, or of such a contumacy and so far radicated, that it illudes all
Energie of Chalybeats or any sort of Physic. Non est in Medico semper,
releuetur ut aeger nam Docta interdum plus valet orte malum ovidius.
It does not follow therefore that this Martial Remedy is ineffectual in its
self in order to cure other Maladies of a different Nature; by reason of the
impregnable habit and rooting of some incurable Distempers: Non defamanda
praesidia quae aliis profuere Celsus. Remedies which have done others good, are
not to be undervalued; Actiones activorum sunt in subjecto disposito.
they exert their Operation according to the dispositon of the subject on which
they work: The Sun for example with the same heat melts the Wax and hardens the
Clay, Limus ut hic durescit and haec ut cera liquescit uno eodemque igne. --
Virgilius, and by this reason that which is one Man's Meat, may prove another
Poison. So likewise these Waters, if used with a Physicians Advice, and due
consideration, prove Effectual and Salubrious: But taken without it, and by an
indisposed or unprepared Bodies, may be Noxious and sometimes Morti-ferous:
Wherefore, since all things do not agree with all Persons; nay, nor the same
thing always, or a long time with the same person, therefore the careful
Observation and daily Advice of a Prudent Physician is here necessary, that by
Indications taken from things that do good or hurt, the Method of Cure may be
rightly ordered, and now and then changed. Willis, Capite de colico.

These Waters kill and expel all manner of Worms, ingendered either in the
Stomach, Intestines, Matrix, or in any other part of the Body. -- Ryetius, in
his Observations of the Spaw-Waters, makes mention of a Woman, who labored a
long time with a Chronicki Distemper under the Doctors hands, without receiving
any benefit by all their Prescriptions and Physic that she had taken; was at
last advised to Chalybeat-Waters, and by drinkig of them with Method and
Continuance, avoided several Worms of diverse Shapes, Figure, and Longitude, and
was perfectly Cured.

They are a Polychrest Remedy, serving for many uses and intentions; they both
Loosen and Bind; Cool and make Hot; Dry and Moisten: Cure Distempers of diverse
State and Origin, nay, of contrary Natures and Dispositions, (as I said
before.) Certainly a perfect Knowledge of their Idiosyncrasia and Properties
would reduce Physic to a narrower compass, and to Prescribe well the Stadium
Chalybeatum, or Chalybeat course would make the Studying of so many Volums of
the parts of Physic unncessary, for by the help of these Waters, we prolong
Man's life by a more facil and easier means than has hitherto been known,
Veritas ex puteo exathlanda. Truth must be drawn out of a Well.

Provocat haec leniter Tunbrigia menstrua pridem,
Suppressa, and nimium sistit ubi illa fluunt.
Nostraque suppressos ut provocat ipsa vicissim,
Immodicos Fluxus sic quoque sistit Aqua:
Stringunt quippe sua vi lymphae five relaxant,
Frigore tum corpus sive calore juvant.
Ecquis idem Medicamen eodem in corpore credat,
Adversa inter se pellere posse mala!
These Waters Virtue have to open and close,
What may be called the Females Monthly Rose.
These Waters loosen, and as firmly bind,
As in all Fluxes any one may find.
By their own virtue strengthen and relax,
Both heat and cool, dry Clay, and harden Wax.
It Is strange that in one Body the same thing
Should cross-grained Maladies to cure bring.
Ecce quam sint Naturae Omnipotentis Dei, prudentia and potestate ductae,
admiranda opera quae Aquae istius limpidae at purae beneficio tot, tamque inter
se contrarios morbos curat, id quod ars Medica sine Corporis noxa prestare
nequit. -- Ryetius in his Observations de Aquis Spadanis.

Behold the Wonderful Works of Nature, guided by the Prudence and Power of the
Almighty God, that by the help of a limpid and clear Water, she cures manifold,
nay contrary and opposite Maladies, which the Art of Physic without great
detriment to the Body, cannot do.

To accelerate and promote the passing of these Waters by Urine, Ryetius
advises some Drops of Spirit of Vitrol to be Instilled into their Glasses of
Water, for Acids being endowed with a Diuretic and Penetrative Faculty depose
the Serum, and conveys it to the Reins, to be sent forth by the Vreters.

To promote Evacuation by Seige, he advises to mix some common Salt in Powder
with the Waters, and a Dram to every Pint, more or less, proportionating the
quantity to the bearing of the Patient. This gently expels the loose matter
contained in the Ventricle and Intestines, Purges Viscous Phlegm adhering to
their Tunicles and Bilous Humors from the Pancreatick passages: But it is not
to be taken indifferently by all Persons.

Dum juga montis aper, dum flumen Piscis habebit,
Anchora fonsaegris, hic sacra semper erit;
Ut bibat accurret (rumpantur ut ilia Codris)
Germanus, Scotus, Belga, Britannus Iber,
Hinc Populus Floret, crescet Tunbrigia, quidquid.
Bellum destruxit, mox reparabit Aqua.
Whilst Boars on Mountains shall abide,
Or Fishes in the River glide;
So long both sure and uncontrolled,
Will last this Health-firm Anchor-hold.
This Drink ( let Codrus burst with rage)
Will English, Scotch, and Irish Sage,
With German, French, and Dutch engage.
Hence Peoples Glory, Tunbridge praise,
What War thows down, Water will raise.
Thus much for Chalybeats, to comply with Your Honors Solicitations, hoping
this rude Essay upon a Baren Subject, may be cultivated by other Philosophers
and Physicians better qualified to the benefit and advantage of Mankind,
especially to Your Honors Satisfaction and Welfare; whom Almighty God the
Everlasting Fountain and Source of Living Waters, preserve with long Life and
Health in this World, and grant immarcescible Laurels in that which is to come;
which is the earnest and unfeigned desire of,

My LORD, Your Honors Most Humble, and Obedient Servant, P.M. M.D.

ERRATA.
PAge 3 in the Marginal Note against l. 7. for dissoluunt r. dissolvit. ibid.
against l. 8. for corrigunt r. corrigit. l. 10. for Fredericus r. Fridericus.
l. 8.19. dele Because. ibid. against l. 27. for magna r. magno. p. 4. l. 9. for
Peccaturque r. Pacaturque. Marg. l. 3. for fermentorum r. fermentum. l. 9. for
redintegrant r. redintegrat. l. ult for Fredericus r. Fridericus.


