A DISCOURSE CONCERNING SUPREME POWER AND COMMON RIGHT.

At first Calculated for the Year 1641. and now thought fit to be published.

By a Person of Quality.

LONDON, Printed for R. Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in S. Paul's
Churchyard. 1680.

TO THE READER.
THIS little following Treatise, concerning the Origination of Paternal Power,
and the Derivation of all others from it, with Reflections upon Regal
Government, and the Relative Duties both of King and People to each other, is,
for Substance, only a Summary Collection, from the best Authorities, of such
necessary and Practical Notions, as might have steered us in the most benighted
and tempestuous times of the late unhappy (and almost unparalled) Rebellion,
and keep us within the Bounds of Duty and Allegiance, both to God and our King.
But it lost its usefulness (being calculated for the high Distempers of that
Age only) by miscarrying in the Press, and for some years irrecoverably
concealed, and kept from its designed end by one (since dead) who communicated
to me the following Discourse, which has for some years layn in my hands as
buried, unless something of the like Contagion should break out again, and give
it a new Resurrection, as an Antidote against the spreading of so popular an
Infection. But now I am prevailed with, upon the sad Prospect of things that
threaten a relapsing into the like Dangers, by Popish Plots, and those many
Sects, Distractions and Divisions amongst us, (some of whose Principles agree
with the rigid Scotch Presbyters, and Jesuits, in their Tenants concerning the
deposing of Kings, and the forfeiture of their Regal Power into the People and
their Representatives,) to show both from Scripture, Antiquity, the Doctrine,
Articles, Canons, Homilies, and Liturgy of the Church of England, which all
agree with our ancient Laws and many late Acts of Parliament, That our Kings
are only submitted by God to the direction, not coaction of Humane Laws: (as
Mr. Faulkner in his Treatise upon that Subject has lately and most learnedly
made appear:) Yet Kings are not unconfined by the Laws of God and our Kingdom,
which set just bounds both to King and People, to regulate their Actions by (as
a middle thing between Supreme Power and Common Interest:) And our Municipal
Laws may be straightened or enlarged in regard of the Sovereign's Exercise of
Power, but cannot influence or affect the Power it self (which is of God) to
alter or enervate the nature of it: Nor can it oblige to any thing, foro
divino, but what is just in the means, as well as good in the end, and safe in
regard of Humane Prudence: by which Rules we have much reason to believe our
Superiors (as they yet have done) will take their measures, and neither
countenance nor indulge the least evil of sin, to avoid the greatest evil of
punishment: Yet if God (for our almost unpardonable provocation and abuse of
those many Miracles of Mercy he has hitherto preserved us by) should submit us
to the implacable malice of our common Enemies the Papists at home and abroad,
or to Civil Commotions within our selves, to bring us again into Chaos and
Disorder, in which we may need some assistance for our Conscientious
Comportments, both with Prudence and Innocence; the ensuing Treatise may be of
great use, there being things casuistically proposed and resolved, (with
modesty and submission to others Judgments) in Relation to the late Rebellion,
which may some way help us in other difficulties, if we fall under any; which
that God in Mercy would avert, is the Prayer of,

Your unknown Servant, etc.

A DISCOURSE CONCERNING SUPREME POWER AND COMMON RIGHT.
CHAP. I.
AS God is a Spiritual King, so Kings are Humane Gods; his Picture drawn in
Little, and the most express Image of his Power, receiving (as the Wax from the
Seal) all the parts and proportions of the Print, in the largest Character, in
which he shows himself in Civil Administrations: So as the endeavor of
effacing any part of that just Power, where God has Engraven it in his
Deputies, is a Spiritual Treason and Rebellion against God himself. Romans 13.
For not only by me, but for me, Kings Reign, says God, Prove. 8.15. Romans 13.
in that he makes them his hand both to punish and protect by, and styles them
for that end, nursing Fathers to the Church and State.

Nor is the Stamp to be despised, though it be engraven but in Lead and Iron;
the Power being the same in him (who by the undue exercise of a just Power,
makes himself a Tyrant) as it is in a good King, and challenging the same
Submission and Obedience in lawful things from us: It being not the Wax, but
the Impression, that bears the value, as it is Gods. And therefore to wrest the
Sword out of our Sovereigns hands (the best of Princes) is as much as we can to
dis-enthrone God from his way of Rule amongst us, as the Jews did in the person
of Samuel.

For which Reason our Laws give the King a kind of Immortality here, in saying
he cannot dye: because his Power which is from above, passes, in the intendment
of our Laws (by a kind of Pythagorean Transmigration) always into the next of
his Line, and upon the failure thereof only it Escheats into the People, as to
the Election of another person to Reign, but never was, nor is fundamentally in
them, in regard of the Power by which they Govern. And the wisest People do
(but as a Pipe, not the Spring) derivatively pass it into one man to actuate
it, as the most absolute and perfect Government, and that which God only owns.
For when he says, By me Kings Reign, Prove. 8.15.
he implies all other Forms of Government to derive their Pedigree only from
men, not Divine Institution. They have his Permission, but Kings only his
Commission; so as all other lesser Rivulets in the Administration of Justice in
their Kingdoms, are in them, as their Spring, derivative from and subordinate
to them: For the Supreme Power is ever annexed to the Persons of Princes, in
whom it is seated; the Inferior only to the Offices of subordinate
Administrations, which are always responsible to him that has the Supreme
Power. Else the God of Reason should make a Body without Reason (a Head) to
govern it.

The contrary Opinion to which clear Truth, has caused the sad Tragedy of
these benighted Times, and has ever proved the Seminary of Anarchy and
Confusion in all States, where it has taken root and prevailed; though it has
for the most part withered and perished in the end, as having no true
Principles of life and permanency, however for some time maintained by Tyranny
and Oppression; as may be instanced in most of those Popular States that have
been since the beginning of the World, which were but Weeds, no Plants of Gods
setting. For subordination of Persons, which arises by degrees, should rest
when it comes to the Sovereign, or all things would wheel into a Confusion.

But God is a God of Order, 1 Cor. 14.32.40.
and as his Power made all in Number, Weight and Measure, Wisd. 11.20.
so his Providence upholds all according to the same Model, by setting a kind
of Hierarchy and Regiment amongst all the several Societies of the Creatures,
even from the lowest to the highest Story of created Beings, (so that levelling
is contrary to his Design) and by a sweet subordination and symbolizing quality
and affection, even amongst Contraries, preserves the whole.

First, In the Inanimate Creatures: For the Heavens have the Sun and Moon
inthroned there to govern in their several Spheres, the one over the Day, and
the other over the Night, which, with the Stars (though differing from one
another in glory) make one uniform and glorious Structure; Is. 60.13.
and though of several proportions, states, and inequalities, maintain a happy
harmony amongst themselves.

Secondly, In the Unreasonable Creatures: As in Bees, which of all others
maintain a most perfect Polity of Monarchical Government amongst them, and are
the best Emblems of good Subjects, painful in their labor, dutiful in their
life, all uniting in Obedience to the service of their King, and supplying his
weakness with their Wings, when he is unable to fly with his own (as some
observe.) Nay all other Creatures from a Natural Principle mould themselves
into a sociable subordination. Thus the Lion is King of all the salvage
Regiments of the Forest: the Eagle of Birds. Nay even Sholes of Fishes, Herds
of Beasts, Flocks of Fowls, and the rest, have their Heads and Leaders.

Thirdly, In Man's Soul; by placing the Understanding in it as the Sun in its
Orb, the Moon and lesser Lights (as the Will and Affections) inferior to it in
their Sphere and Station, to follow its Influences, and derive all their light
and direction from it. Nor is it otherwise in the Body, which is compact of
many Members, one more noble than another, yet all united under one Head, as
supreme, from whence they receive Laws, and to which they pay Obedience; there
being not the least Sinew, String, or Part unuseful.

Fourthly, In the Church, State, and all Societies; there being in all, by his
Ordination, superior and less Noble Offices; as in great Buildings, Rooms for
State, others for more ordinary use and convenience: In Clocks greater and
lesser Wheels, every one, like Stones in an Ark, being of equal necessity,
though not beauty, with the rest; yet all making but one Uniform and Glorious
Structure. Isa. 60.13.


Fifthly, In Heaven it self: For there amongst the Angels there is a Gabriel,
and in other Orders Cherubim, Seraphim, Thrones, Principalities, and Powers;
teaching us that the more things draw to Unity, the nearer they are to
Perfection, and Assimilation with God himself, who is not only a strict Unity,
but Oneness in himself.

Now upon this fundamental Principle, and according to these Natural
Productions God does will, in his voluntas signi, or beneplaciti, a Conformity
to them in all things, but chiefly amongst Men (rational Creatures, if not
believing Christians) by centring all Power (of Families, Societies, Kingdoms)
in one Supreme and Paternal Head, both for perfection and permanence: So as all
other Forms argue not only weakness in, but tend to the perversion, nay
subversion of the Fabric, (the several Policies of Men would seem to raise)
because not agreeing to the Model, which God first erected in Adam. For even
there he established Regal and Paternal Power, that differ only in proportion,
not similitude; (it being the same, as a Child is a Man in little.) For all
Government was virtually and seminally in him, though spreading and propagating
with the growth and Generations of Men, being first founded in Families, and
with Ezekiel's Waters, rising by degrees from thence to the uniting of many,
and incorporating them into Societies under one Head; till at last many Heads
did center in one Supreme, many natural Parents chose one common Parent to them
all, one Pater Patriae, to whom they submitted the exercise of the Legislative
Power; (which was before in every Father of a Family, who, over his own
Children and Servants, had a Power even to Life and Death, and was their King)
being guided to it both by dictates of right Reason, God's overruling
Providence, the guidance of his Spirit, and immediate designation of the Person
from him (as in the Jewish Commonwealth) till he settled it in a lineal
Succession. That of Parents, Patriarchs, Kings, being but the same Power, under
several Dresses and Appellations, the same Beams of Majesty, though reflecting
several Lusters, and challenging a-like Obedience from all that are subjected
to them, from one and the same Divine Right. So as the Duty of the fifth
Commandment had been as binding upon Adam's posterity in the State of
Innocence, had he stood, as upon us, though not promulgated till a thousand
years after; but there would have been none of that reluctance and opposition
in us, nor of that oppression and irregularity in our Superiors, which we are
now subjected to by our Sins, and his first disobedience to God.

So that I conceive it can neither be rationally, nor upon grounds of Religion
denied, that all just Power, especially the Government by Kings, derives its
pedigree from Paternal, and is an Ordinance of God, springing out of a Natural
and Eternal Principle, which has ever been owned. First, In the exemptive
Precept of their persons to be free from all other Power. Prove. 21.3. Isa.
10.5. Pro. 8.15. Eccles. 8. 1 Pet. 2. Romans 3.
Secondly, In the designation of the person. Deuteronomy. 17.15. Job. 36.7.34.30. Hos.
13.11. Wisd. 6.3.
Thirdly, In the punishment of Rebellion against his sacred Ordinance. Number. 16.
2 Samuel 1.4.14.15.
Fourthly, By the command of our Prayers for, and Obedience to them he has set
over us, though Wicked and Tyrants, 1 Timothy 2.2. 1 Chronicles. 12.1. ^. Jer.
29.7.25.9. Dan. 3.21. Genesis 20.27. Bar. 1.15. Mat. 22.21. 1 Samuel 24.4.6.8.9. 1
Pet. 2.27.
for since the loss of our first Estate (wherein all should have continued in a
sweet harmony and orderly subordination, and lived in an happy subjection,
without any Schisms, or mutinous irregularities) we must submit to them, even
in their Egyptian Tasks, as the just punishment of our Rebellions against God,
and not Rebel against his Ordinances.

And upon these grounds, says Optatus, David, in fearing the Anointed, spared
his Enemy King Saul, as he was God's breathing Image, the mortal picture of the
immortal God, a piece made for lasting, wrought in Oil, at his Inauguration,
and not to be defaced by any hand. A president worthy the imitation of these
apostate times, wherein men's speculative Atheism has made them such Monsters
in Wickedness as to attempt to depose the King, to root up the tallest Cedars,
to pull down and level all the high Mountains of greatness God has set up;
that they might introduce and usher in an Anarchy, or make the Bramble to
Reign, bearing no Fruit but Thorns to tear and wound us; by it to efface all
that is of God amongst men, both outward Majesty and Piety; when Regal Power
(as it conveys it self from the Father to the Son, to a kind of immortalizing
it self here) is the legitimate Issue of God himself, (descended from him for
the good and preservation of Men, in a safe and religious course of life) and
ever bears his Stamp and Image, in regard of the Power, though the Persons that
bear it sometimes (when they think not themselves safe under the Guard of their
own Virtues and Peoples Affections) place their security in their strength, and
their happiness rather in a Power to hurt, than in a just care to preserve
their Subjects, (whose hearts they should account their best Treasury and
surest Magazines) and so degenerate into Tyrants, and make that which is life
to become death to us (as S. Paul says in another case). Yet even then they
are to be submitted to upon rational grounds, and that Government is to be
chosen before any other, though Caesar's Image and Superscription were not
stamped upon it by Divine Ordinance: All others being but Counterfeits of it,
and of a more base allay, (little Money in great Medals,) when this, like the
noblest Coins, contains much in little.

But as there are many snares beset the Throne of Majesty, (though there is
nothing on Earth so near the Deity, nor so commodious for the well-ordering of
Humane ^ocieties:) the best Princes sometimes fall into great perplexities and
difficulties; because perhaps wanting the Meander's Thread of free and honest
Admonitions and Advice to extricate themselves, or by having their Ears dulled
with Flattery (that Court-Earwig) or too tender to endure the too searching air
of an ingenuous spirit, which speaks his own Duty, not his Sovereigns
Affections.

Man having lost the felicity of being a Law to himself, that should keep him
from transgressing the limits of equal Justice to any other, has cause to
submit himself to Monarchical Government, as the most silken Rein and gentle
Bit he can take on to restrain him in his deviations and startings out of the
right way of common Equity, though under an ill King, rather than a Popular
State, or Elective Kingdom, which make a great show, and glorious ostentation
of Liberty, though it is but Paint artificially laid on (like Absalom's 2 Samuel
15.
,) a Varnish of Piety and public Utility, only to hide a Thraldom: For they
are the greatest Servitudes imaginable, when submitted to, and are accompanied
with the greatest Mischiefs (like the back-doors in great Houses) having many
in-lets to Disorder, more than the other, and possess only Hos. 8.4.
an Usufructuary and Gubernative Power to Rule, without any just Propriety in
the Legislative, which none can pretend to, but such as are Commissioned from
God, according to his revealed Will, and possess their Crowns by a lawful Civil
Right; as in this Kingdom since the Conquest.

For, first, (as a good Author observes to me) Succession in one Man (a King)
disarms the Ambition of all daring and aspiring Spirits, who would be at the
Stern (every one a Pilot) though they wrack the Ship through their Civil
Contentions. Nay it takes away that ground of Emulation, that might justly be
among men of one level (equals in Worth, Birth, and ennobled Virtues) to ascend
the Throne, and hinders the fomenting of Factions amongst those, that in other
Governments have the Suffrages to Elect to the Supreme Power, or any other
eminent Place.

Secondly, It prevents the exhausting of the Public Treasure many times, which
those temporary Rulers are ever guilty of, holding it unnatural not to feather
a Nest for their own young ones, (though by the pluming all others) and a
weakness to live like Gods, and dye like ordinary Men: And many Drains
new-made, you know, will insensibly take away more water than one Stream, where
it is always full Sea.

Thirdly, It cures the windy swelling Tympany of Pride in those temporary
Rulers, that are always in travel to bring forth a thing of their own shaping
to succeed them in their Government, though against the Rules of it; (and who
so fit a Pourtraict as some of their own Issue or Kindred?) as may appear in
some of the Roman Emperors, and most Popular States, who (rather than fail in
it) have nursed and raised up their design, not only with the Milk of Flattery
and many vicious practices and indulgences, (the making of Factions; by the
toleration of all evils) but fed and brought it to perfection with the blood of
Civil Wars, and exhausting their Countries Treasure in Bribes and Profuseness,
ever legitimating all undue ways to keep what they have no Title to, but by
their Crimes; even to the subversion of Religion, with Jeroboam, not only in
making Calves for (but of) the People, never wanting specious pretenses to prop
and uphold their rotten Pile, though not trusting to them. For you shall always
find such Usurping Tyrants maintain the Martial Sword, when once unsheathed, to
Oppression; that the Sword might maintain them, and protect them against the
just revenge of an injured People.

Fourthly, Elective and Popular States, as a breach in a Sea-bank, let in a
deluge of confusion, (the Effect of Arbitrary Power) which, in such a tottering
condition, is never maintained, but by greater wickedness (as Cataline said)
than that which first formed it: And therefore read all Stories, and you shall
find that few Commonwealths, and such Kingdoms, have ever been happy for
present felicity or continuance, not having had the poor comfort of being
ruined by their Gods, but Men, by their Servants, not Masters; or else,
Aetna-like, they have been always wasting themselves by fire in their own
Bowels; Pride, Envy, and Avarice ever blowing it up into the flames of a Civil
War, where there are many equal Competitors or Pretenders to Sovereignty: So as
not the best and fittest (who will not ascend by such winding steps) but the
most potent gain those Dictatorships; all which are just Punishments for
endeavoring to form the Weapons of our strength, draw the Model and Materials
of Government out of our selves; Our own Reasons, when clouded with Passion,
Interest, and Prejudice, not consulting with Religion; nor suffering God, that
made the House, to order it.

For when we so leave our Religion for our Reason, we lose both Reason and
Religion. Which would oblige us to think our selves safer under the protection
of God's Ordinances, in whose hands are the hearts of Kings, (the restraints of
Conscience,) than by any outward Force or Humane Providence without them. For
by God's appointment Gods they are, and (as the Head, from whence all Veins
distribute their Spirits equally, with respect to the higher and inferior
Members) in a Body Politic maintain a happy Commerce and Traffic betwixt it
and the most remote parts: Direction and Protection descending whilst Love and
Obedience ascend.

But besides this, have we not more Reason to expect happiness from a lineal
Succession in Kings, than the Election of Men to that or any other Form? When,
instead of a Mushroom, the growth of one night, (that springs perhaps out of
the basest Excrements, and of such a lazy despondency of Mind as sinks him into
the next degree to a Beast, making him to have no designs generous and noble to
carry him beyond his own felicity) we shall have one whose blood is derived to
him through the Veins of many Noble, Heroic, and Virtuous Progenitors, who
becomes all Spirits, refined from those marish and terrene parts, which weigh
down, or raise Vapors to eclipse others of a more base Extraction, when they
aspire to great and generous actions.

Nay this makes Princes live in their Posterities, when dead, and brings
reverence to the very Swadling-Cloaths and Cradles of their Successors, as if
they might Command Obedience before they could speak, (as Barclay observes.)
Nor can it be imagined but that their high and virtuous Educations should
infuse a Gallantry into them above Pride (says the same Author) having been
always used to the greatest outward Observances, and, by being so, placed above
all Contempt; so as it cannot but nourish in them higher thoughts than either
Hatred, Emulation, or Avarice produces, and free them from those
self-reflections private Families are subject to, (as I have touched before;)
because they are secured against the fears of Competitors in rule, and have
settled supplies for their wants, enjoying in the Stream what others have but in
the Cistern, and conveying it to their posterity, as their Patrimony and
Inheritance; making them many times Heirs of the Goods of their minds, as well
as Bodies, and to reap the Harvest, and crop of all their noble and growing
Designs; (which, as Seed sown by them, will not perhaps ripen into Fruit in
many years after.) For it is probable such will manure and nurse up with
Industry and Care what their Predecessors planted.

Nor can the Infancy and weakness of a Prince be of so bad a Consequence as a
Popular State; because he is then in Guardian to the most able and faithful
Great Ones, or the great Council of the Kingdom it self, which the wisest and
best of Kings do always make use of to steer their Actions by. Nay, if that
Government should for a time degenerate, it is more likely soon to recover, and
unite again in one, when broken into many Interests, equally tainted with
malignant Influences, and self-seeking designs.

But not, with the Mole, to lose my self upon the face and superficies of
things, when I may make my Habitation safe by digging deeper, (the best
Foundations being lowest laid,) I shall return to my first design, and go to
the Root of all, endeavoring to show that Regal Power was a Plant of Paradise
of God's own setting, and so of Divine Right; and that the Sword which contends
with the Scepter, and raises it self upon the ruins of just Power, cannot be
free from all the forementioned sad Effects, which must eclipse the Glory of
every Nation, and leave it no Trophies but such (as Pyrrhus once said of his
Victories) as would undo the Conqueror, and appear best when shrouded under
the Vail of true Repentance, and offered up again by a holy Restitution to the
Altar, from which they were sacrilegiously taken: Such successes being our
greatest vanquishments, and leaving us no just Title to make other use of our
unjust acquisitions. Though Abishai would have preached David into a Murder and
Rebellion at once, upon no better grounds than Gods delivering Saul into his
power, 1 Samuel 26.9.10.24.12.
had he not learnt a better Divinity, measuring his Actions by Gods revealed
Will, not outward Events; knowing he there writes in Characters, showing us his
hand only, but not letting us at all read his meaning in them. Deuteronomy. 9. 2 Chronicles. 13.8.


But to be a little more plain and perspicuous in so necessary a Truth, I shall
endeavor, as in an Epitome or Index to those many large and learned Discourses
that have been written upon this subject, to sum up the best Collections I can,
and to digest them into this Method.

First, To show that Kings are the Ordinance of, and hold their Supreme Power
from God, not Man; and that they are only accountable to him for the use of it.
Secondly, What that Power is, and how limited. Thirdly, That resistance in the
Subject against that Power is in no Case warrantable. Fourthly, What Duties
Kings owe to their Subjects. Fifthly, What the Subject's Allegiance consists in
to them.

First, That Kings are the Ordinance of God; contrary to that of the Romanists
and our new Statists. Reges coronas and sceptra ab hominibus recipient, and ad
eorum placita tenent. Bellarm. lib. 5. de Romans Pon. cap. 7.
So Buchanan De Jure Reg. apud Scotos.
Populus Rege praestantior etiam and major: Rex igitur cum ad Populi Judicium
vocatur, minor ad majorem in jus vocatur.) For they are called God's by
Institution and Appropriation from God: For, By me Kings reign, says he, Prove.
8.15. Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2. Jo. 14.30. Hos. 13.11. Wis. 6.13.
and with my holy Oil have I anointed him; Ps. 89.20.
not only to rule by, but for God too, as the most express Character of him
upon Earth: Which made him lead his people by the hand of Moses and Aaron; (one
Chief in Civil matters, the other in things concerning the Priest's Office,
though with subordination.) Not one People by many Rulers, (much less the Ruler
by the People) but by one in Chief under the conduct of God himself, and by his
Authority; as may appear in that, and all other Instances of Regal Power. So as
Kings are to be reverenced and distinguished from others, in regard of that
Natural and Paternal Power God planted in Adam, and caused immediately after to
derive from many Heads into one Chief, in one place; a cause of the division of
the Nations amongst the Sons of Noah, as Monarch of the whole Earth after the
Flood. Genesis 10.32.
So as Kings are Gods, and to be obeyed.

First, In regard of their Attribute of Power: For where the word of a King is,
there is Power; Eccles. 8.4.
that he might be feared; Pro. 24.21.
and who may say unto him, what do thou?

Secondly, In that of Mercy: For there is Mercy with him that he may be feared;
in that he bears not the Sword in vain, Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2.
but does whatsoever pleases him, Eccle. 8.3. 1 Samuel 8.
in giving gracious Indulgences.

Thirdly, In regard of Majesty and Sovereignty: For God expresses them by
those highest Titles, (says Calvin) Inst. 4. l. cap. 20.
to affect us with the awful sense of the Divinity it self, and our Duty to
them, in putting the Glory of his own name upon them. For Ps. 82.6.
I have said ye are Gods; and not only so, but decreed and ordained it, it
shall be so, even Gods before Men (though Men before God.) 1st, By Analogy.
2dly, Deputation. 3dly, By Participation. Thus Tertullian. Lib. ad Scapalum
Cyrillus, Ep. ad Through. prefix. lib. advers. Julian.
Chrysostom, Hom. ad Pop. Antioch.
Gregory, L 9. Decret. 1 Tit. 3.3.
which is the reason of those high Titles of Prerogative the sacred Word styles
them with, after the Israelites rejection of Samuel, (as that of God, in regard
of the immediate rule they were to exercise over them) after their desire of a
King; for before the Power was not vested in the Person of any, but
ministerially only in regard of Exercise, which still proceeded from immediate
and Divine Directions: But after he placed the Power in the person of the King
1 Samuel 8.
to be accounted for only to God Psalm. 51.
as a punishment of the Peoples Rebellion against him, and desire of innovating
their Form of Government. Nay, he then dignified the person of the King with
all the Attributes of Majesty, to show that he left the power of ordering all
things to the conduct of Man (though with an overruling Providence) which
before derived immediately from himself; so establishing Monarchy, but no other
Form of Government by any Divine Commission. And then he styles them,

First, Children of the most high, Psalm. 82.
to show from whom the Inheritance of their Crowns descends, and that they are
a middle thing, as it were, between Heaven and Earth, like a Cloud in the Air,
above Man, and below God.

Secondly, The Lords Anointed, 1 Chr. 4.18. 1 Samuel 24.16.
and so Sacred by Consecration.

Thirdly, The Angels of God, 2 Samuel 14.20.
in regard of Wisdom.

Fourthly, The Light of Israel, 2 Samuel 21.17.
in regard of comfort and influence.

Fifthly, The Kings of Nations, Luke 12.25.
in regard of their vast Empire.

Sixthly, Nursing Fathers, and Nursing Mothers, Isa. 49.23.
in regard of their tender Care and Affections to their People, and to sit in
the Throne of God, 2 Samuel: 3.1. 1 Chronicles. 29.23. 2 Samuel 12.7. Isa. 62.3.
in regard of protection, as the Spring and Fountain from whence all Justice
does flow. And therefore the Queen of Sheba acknowledged of Solomon, That he
was King, (as has been said) not only from, but for God, to do Justice and
Judgment 2 Chronicles. 9.8.
for ever; Job. 36.7.
Custos and moderator utriusque Tabulae. And not only so neither (though these
are great Prerogatives) but even as God, (two Constellations in one Hemisphere,
God and Man, neither eclipsing the light of the other) For so said Jacob to his
Lord Esau, Genesis 33.10.
vidi faciem ut faciem Dei, that is, says the Chaldee, (as a Reverend Divine
observes) God in him, as he was the Prince. For, Rex est animata Imago Dei,
says St. Augustine. And for this Cause it was said of Moses, (who, with the
Patriarchs and Judges, had the exercise of Regal Power successively before
Readiness Inauguration) the Scepter he held was God's, not his own, virga Dei in
manu; Exodus 17.9.
God and Caesar Mat. 22.21. Prove. 24.21.
being to be obeyed tanquam conjunctae Personae.

Nor is it St. Peter's calling all Magistracy an Humane Creature, and St.
Paul's styling it God's Ordinance, contradictory one to the other. For one
speaks of the Authority, Romans 13.
the other of the Laws or Ordinances made by such as he has empowered to it,
whether it be the King or those Commissioned by him, which St. Peter calls
Humane Ordinances most properly, because made by Men, but intends not the King
himself, as if he were made by the People, 1 Pet. 2.
nor his Power, but the exercise of it; which, in regard of Circumstance, as
Time, Place, Actings, etc. is by Custom or Municipal Laws become Humane.

And now, after so great Light has shined into the World, is it not strange
that Men should seal up their Eyes, and choose to walk in darkness of Error?
should trace the Paths of Disobedience and Rebellion, and by a daring Impiety
heaping of one sin upon another (as the Giants of old did Pelion upon Ossa)
should mount this Throne of God by force and violence 1 Chronicles. 29.23.
to overthrow and divest him of all his Regalia and Sovereign Power on Earth,
pulling the Crown from his Head, the Scepter and Sword from his Hand, in the
Person of our Sacred King, who as the sum and recapitulation of the Virtues of
all his Predecessors, or as so many Lights in one Constellation, shows the
Glory and Luster of all; when a Heathen by the Light of Nature, even Aristotle
1 Eth. c. 2.
as well as Calvin 4 Inst. 20. Sect. 33.
did see something Divine in the Officers of Governors, who are called Sap. 6
4.
The Officers of God's Kingdom.

From whence the Schools conclude, That any the least Irreverence to a King, as
to question our Obedience to him, may justly be called Sacrilege. And since
Sacrilege is a violation or taking away of something that is Holy, it is
evident that the Office and Person of a King is Sacred; so as one observes,
Those Men that are most Sacrilegious against God and his Church, are most
likely always to offer Violence to the Honor and Persons of their Princes, as
too late experience has taught us; and to deny themselves the greatest
Blessing Jer. 22.34. Number. 23.21. Isa. 49 22, 23.
to introduce the greatest Curse, Licentiousness and Confusion. Prove. 28.2.
Isa. 3.5.


All which sad Effects are but the airy Offspring of a Platonic Speculation,
a wild and untaimed seemingly wise Folly, in affirming that the People are in
their Representative above the King; contrary to St. Peter's Doctrine, 1 Pet. ^
13.
our known Laws (as may be seen in Bracton, and all our ancient Sages) the
Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, which they have sworn; and his just Title,
being ever acknowledged by all, Carolus (but) Dei Gratia, Charles, by the Grace
of God, not Election nor Suffrages of the People. Though were it admitted that
(in some places, as in Elective Kingdoms) or here in case of Escheat, (if there
were none living that by lawful descent were right Heir of the Crown) the
choice of their King were in the People, they can only hold forth the Person to
the Power, if God have so in his Providence ordained it, Deuteronomy. 17.15.
not give the Power to the Person; which is not habitually in them, (though by
them mediately not immediately) conveyed, but in God's Unction and Approbation
of the person. For Power (like the Soul in the Body, when reduced to its first
Element) returns to God that gave it. And as in the Ordination of Bishops,
though the choice sometimes was perhaps in the People, God was the Author, and
other Bishops, by laying on of hands and Prayer, the immediate Instruments only
of conveying the Power of their Ministerial Function to them, as an indelible
Character, which their first Electors could not efface; nor any (unless it
derived from the Supreme Civil Magistrate, under whom they lived) justly
suspend in the Exercise; in that the Power does ever derive from God, and by
them.

But for further illustration we will consider it in the more familiar
Instances of free Elections. And first in Corporations, as in a Model, or hand
contracted (which is but expanded, and the more stretched out in the highest
Governments) where the Commons propound the Person for the succeeding
Governor, the Representatives choose, and the Kings Power invests, without
which Act the rest are but Ciphers without a Figure; but having once Caesar's
stamp and Image upon it, it becomes legitimate, current, and of value; so as
none can clip or efface it to lessen his Authority (much less displace the
Magistrate) but orderly, by the Power that set him up without much Crime,
Rebellion, and hazard of damnation. Romans 3. 1 Pet. 2.


A second illustration is, That the People by free Votes choose their
Representatives in our Parliaments; yet the Power, by which they Elect, and
that of the Elected, is derived from the Kings Writ; so as they cannot for any
miscarriage, or breach of trust in the Person recall their choice, or make a new
Election in any case, without a new Warrant from the Crown, but do become
instrumental in conferring that which is not at all inherent in them, as may
more fully appear in the application of those similitudes to Kings where they
are Elected; in that Almighty God, how tyrannous soever they prove, uses them
but as he did Ashur, for the Rod of his Anger, Isa. 10.5.
when he gives a King in his Wrath, Hos. 3.
like Saul, to scourge the Rebellions of a people, not leaving them any just
Power to depose him, or any remedy, or other appeal, than to him in Prayer: 1 Samuel 8.18.
In that his Providence orders all Actions and Events, and suffers no evil of
punishment, without intitling himself to it; For there is no Evil in the Land,
but I have done it, says he: And therefore he accounts repining as impatience,
resistance by force Rebellion against himself. For, as the Apostles were
Christ's, Kings are Gods Ministers upon Earth, in as near a Relation. Nay
himself, as it were, shows that all such Arrows are shot at them, wound him,
when Christ says, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me, Act. 9.4.


And thus God expresses it both in Moses his case, Number. 16.
where he made the dull and patient Earth (the common Hackney to all injurious
trampling) the severe Avenger of his dishonor; and so in Samuel's, 1 Samuel 8.
though even then by the fore-designation of God, Deuteronomy. 7.15.
the Peoples free Election was confined to Saul, the man that he did choose 1 Samuel 9.15, 16, 17.
: For till then God did rule by immediate direction and revelation, those he
appointed to be their Governors, and would not totally cast them off for their
revolt, but still continued his goodness to them, even in his Indulgence of
Anger; not leaving them to a factious and tumultuous Election, but ordered it
by immediate command to the person he had fore-appointed, till he had settled
the succession in David and his Seed: 1 Samuel 16.
By it showing his dis-allowance of all popular and disorderly Elections; for
even there where he permitted their concurrence in choosing the person, in whom
all Power should habitually reside, and from whom its Actual Administrations
should derive; he suffered them only to assist Samuel, in holding forth the Wax
which he had appointed to set his Seal and Image upon, but not to give any
Impression.

Nor can it rationally be imagined by any man, that is a Christian, and
acknowledges the Sword to be Gods, and that he that sheds Man's Blood, without
his Commission, is guilty of Murder, how a power of Life and Death should be
collated by any Community of Men, to one or more, when neither divisim nor
conjunctim, they have power over their own, or one another lives: Nor could
ever any pretend to it, (unless Parents and Heads of Families, by Divine,
Natural and Paternal Right) but when derived from God the other way, and by his
Commission exercised. Yet the People may in some sense be said to be the Pipe
by which (not at all the Spring from which) the Power is derived; the Hand that
holds the Burning-Glass to the Sun, no cause of those Rays of Power that shine
upon it, and are contracted in it; or as the Men that lay out the dry Bones (as
the Prophet did) whilst God breaths the Spirit of Government, and animates
them for Action: In which we must next consider,

CHAP. II. What Power Kings have, and how limited.
AS I have endeavored to make it appear, by what has been said, that all
Power is Originally, Fundamentally and Vertually flowing from God, and abiding
in the King only as its Cistern and Receptacle, from whence it is conveyed to
us by many Pipes of several sizes. Our inquiry must be how it is limited in it
Self or Execution: For resolution wherein we must go to the Standard of the
Sanctuary, the Holy Scriptures; and there we shall see, That when God first
gave a King in his Wrath, 1 Samuel 8.
the cause of it was the Peoples being not satisfied with the Regal Power God
did exercise over them in his Vice-Royes and Deputies before; but distrusting
God Almighty, when they saw Nahash, King of the Children of Ammon, come against
them, that he would not suddenly provide for their deliverance, they would have
one in readiness always to go up and fight for them. Which distrust or despair
of theirs, who had found so many miraculous Deliverances under God's
Government, was that which so highly displeased God; and not simply the desire
of a King) yet they neither desired to cast off God's Laws, nor his choosing
the Person, as in Saul: nor is it said that the Kingdom of God is cast off at
the Election of Saul; but they desired more sensible Evidences of Majesty and
Glory, because Samuel held not forth the outward Pomp, Splendor, and Majesty
of Heathen Kings, but (as a Type of Christ, whose Kingdom was not of this
World) with Humility as well as Power. Upon which God gave them a King, after
the manner of other Nations, 1 Samuel 8. Dan. 5.18.19.
but withal commanded Samuel to let them know what kind of King they desired,
even [Jus Regis] and that he should rule by absolute and unlimited Power, in
regard of Man, (however he may want the immediate direction and overruling
Grace of God) though not for want of a Rule for direction, Deuteronomy 17.2. 2 Samuel
23.3.
in that 2 Samuel 22.3.
he that rules over men must rule as in the fear of God, Ezekiel. 46.16, 17, 18.
and not oppress the People. For no King can do that [de jure] justly in regard
of his Office and Commission; yet from thence implying a Tyrant should be
exempt from all account to Man, and free from any force or resistance, though
he be exorbitant, and that Subjects are in such cases denied all Appeals but to
God; as may be proved out of Samuel. 1 Samuel 8.18.
Nay, against such a King there is no rising up, says Solomon.

Prove. 30.31. Eccles. 8.
To which Calvin agrees in his Comment upon that place; for against Tyrannical
Acts in a lawful King he allows no resistance in these words, Nec quicquam
adversus Reges movere, licet Tyrannidem exerceant, and rapinis sint graves
subditis, nullamque nec Dei, nec aequi rectique rationem habeant: For, Non
vestrum est his malis mederi; hoc tantum est reliquum Domini opem implorare.
Instit. l. 4. c. 20.


But though we find [Jus] a Right of security for Kings against all violence
(as I have observed) we find no [Jus] right for Tyranny and Arbitrary Power,
which is to be esteemed a sin, for which Kings are to account to God; and the
rather because they are above all Humane Judicature, and only under him, as the
People are under them: For which God styles him, Lord of Lords, and King of
Kings. And upon this ground, though David had sinned against Vriah, first in
defiling his Bed, then in murdering his Person, (both to be punished with Death
by the Law of God, in any common man) but most in making him sin against his
God, in Drunkenness, (by one sin to conceal another) he yet was never
questioned for those black Deeds, but in his Confessions to God cries out,
Psalm. 51.
Against Thee, Thee only, have I sinned, and done this evil in thy sight: Quia
cum Rex sim (says the Gloss) quamvis contra Vriam deliquerim, non habeo tamen
in terra qui me judicet, sed te in Caelo agnosco Judicem meum. (So also in
Psalm, Miserere mei Deus, written by R. P. and dedicated to Thom. de Trugillo.)
And Joannes Lorinus C^mm. in Psalm. 50.
says to the same sense upon those words, [Tibi soli peccavi] quia solus
potest cognoscere aut punire peccatum ipsius, qui Rex esset nec superiorem
haberet. Thus St. Hierom Ep. 22. and 4. Cassia Col. 20.
Quia non fuit qui arguere auderet Regem, qui posset accusare and punire:
Vtpote cum quo nullus potestate par, nedum major esset, non est qui audeat
dicere Regi Apostata, vocareque Judices impios, Job 34.18.
nisi velit ipse impius haberi (ut Chrysostomus, ac Nicetas, and hoc loco
Cyrillus notant.) In which accord Cyprian Ad Novatian.
Ambrose, Sermon. 16. iu Ps. 118.
Clemens Alexandrinus 4 Storm. c. 6. Turracramata 1 Summae de Eccl. 1. Q. 92.
ad 6.
Though Baronius in his Annals, speaking of the Sanhedrim (Anno Christi 31.
Number. 10.) says, That Herod, though a King, was cited thither for his Cruelty:
But it was false by the Authority he quotes, Joseph. Antiq l. 14. c. 17.
in that Josephus denies him to be a King then, but says, That he was a
Subject to Hyrcanus: For when Herod was cited by the Sanhedrim, his Father
Antipater was living, (and Hyrcanus, then High Priest and Prince in State and
Right) who gave him notice of the Confederacy against him in the Synagogue; so
as Baronius in that Instance (as Bishop Mountague infers) only showed his good
meaning to extend Papal Authority over Kings. Yet Herod, in revenge of it, took
away their lives that convented him when he came to the Crown.

And it is a Tradition among the Rabbis, That when King Jannaeus was commanded
by the Sanhedrim to appear and answer before them, those who presumed to summon
him, were shrewdly punished by the Angel Gabriel; which although it were
perhaps fabulous, yet it is certain that the Jews in their Talmud In Cod.
Sanedrim c. 11.
have it as a confirmed Maxim; Regem suum non judicari, nec cuiquam licere in
eum testimonium dicere. The King was not to be judged or accused by any,
(according to that of Solomon,) Prove. 17.26.
in that they are not Children of the most Voices, but of the most Highest; the
Peoples approbation serving only ad pompam, but not ad necessitatem, in a
King's Coronation. A Reason why Melchisedech was said to have no Father in
regard of his Kingly Office; because Regal Power is an emanation from the Deity
it self.

Yet this exemption from all Humane Powers here, does not exempt them from the
highest Power; for then most properly, Judgment is mine, and I will repay,
says the Lord. Be wise now therefore o ye Kings, be learned ye that are Judges
of the Earth; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with reverence,
etc. lest ye perish from the right way, if his Wrath be kindled, yea but a
little. Psalm. 2.10.11.12.


Nay it is sometimes his greatest severity not to let them be punished here,
Hos. 4.14.
that they might bear the weight of his Wrath hereafter. Heb. 1.12.
In that every ones account must be according to the Talents they receive, and
Great Ones you know are hardly cleared. Nay Experience tells us, That he who
falls from a high Scaffold or Pinnacle, is in more danger of irrecoverable
hurts, than he that slips upon a level ground: So as this Opinion is no ground
for Licentious Exorbitances in Kings, but a just stating of the question
concerning Regal Power, which Originally is one and the same in it self, in all
States where it is, though in many places, and according to several Forms
limited and regulated in regard of Exercise and Execution only; which I shall
endeavor to make yet more clear, though veritas in profundo (as one says)
Truth lies not in the surface and superficies of things, but is almost buried
under the Rubbish of false Opinions, or corrupted in the steam, before we come
to the Fountain it self; and being much obscured by Clouds of Error, has some
(verisimilia) plausible mistakes received and digested by wanton Stomachs,
which do morbum alere, non hominem. But it proves a Monster when pertinaciously
held; For then the truth of God is detained in Unrighteousness: Romans 1 18.
And therefore I will go with St. Basil to the Mine (which was the Prophet's
and our Savior's advice) to search the Scriptures, Joh. 5.29. Isa. 8.20.
and endeavor to follow the Vein of Truth, as it lies there, where we shall
find that all things (even Hell it self) stand by a subordination; and that God
did first settle it here in Adam, then Moses, from them to be derived to all
posterities; wherein we will farther consider the Power, and then the
Regulation of it.

And first for the Power. As, Sapiens semper incipit a fine, says the
Philosopher, in that the end sets all a-working; let us consider how God in the
conveying it out of himself, for Administrations in the Political and Civil
World, did primarily intend the due ordering of things by it, according to the
rules of Justice, Piety and Religion, that all might concenter in Gods Glory
and Man's Good; Order, Truth, and Justice being the only Foundations and Pillars
of Government. For as in the lesser World of mixed Bodies, due temper and
moderation of parts, and in the rational World Tranquillity of Soul by the
subordination of inferior Faculties and Passions to the Sovereignty of Reason,
preserves them; so in the great World propriety and enjoyment of our just and
native Rights, with punishment of Offenses, (which the mind of the Law, rule of
Justice and Right, the measure of all things according to Equity and Reason
under the Supreme Head) is that which preserves a happy Harmony and sweet
Society amongst men.

And for this end God gave his first Commission to Moses only, even Regal Power
(which before was Natural and Paternal in Adam) both for expedition in Affairs
of State, which could not be acted by many, and the prevention of Factions and
Schisms, that Popular States are always subject unto; but this under certain
Fundamental Rules (though he had immediate Revelation) to shape himself by, yet
with an absolute Power, where Gods Law did not restrain him, to be derived to
all Kings for ever; who still are, or ought to be, the Depositories of that
Supreme Authority; as to make War and Peace, to call and dissolve Assemblies
both in State and Church Affairs; which (as the greatest Essentials of Regality
Number. 10.1, 2, 8. and 29.1.
) were only Originally in God himself, but since exercised and practiced by all
succeeding Kings, as may appear by multitudes of Scriptures Jos. 1.17. and
34.18. 1 Chro. 15. and 23.3.6. 2 Chro. 15.14. and 20.21. and 25.5. and
34.31.32.33.
and the Stories of all Ages; so as none durst in former times have refused to
come when called by them, Number. 20.13.
though for matters of Conscience, (or a Diana) unless some Demetrius, or
Crafts-man led on the Rout, as one observes upon the Text. Acts 19.4, 23, 36.


Nor is this only of Divine Institution, but founded in Nature, as has been
showed, (in that all the Conjugations of Sinews and Strength meet in the Head,
the Fountain of Motion, from whence all the Members derive their Operations)
and practiced among the Heathen, by the Light of that Law only, as in Pharaoh,
Genesis 41.44.
and the Character God gave the Jews of their Kings when they asked one after
the manner of the Nations. 1 Samuel 8.
From whence we may conclude, That Moses had all Monarchical and Absolute
Power, (in respect of the Jews radically in him, even Jus Regale) Deuteronomy. 33.3.
and was in Rectitudine Rex, as well in Name as Power; verse. 4.5.
which afterward was transferred upon Saul, as a Punishment to the People for
rejecting it in those God had appointed to conduct them by the immediate
assistance of his Holy Spirit; But that he ever left (or gave) Commission for
the exercise of this Power to a Community, can never be showed.

Yet here God leaves not Tyrants to their own unbridled range and rapine (as
the Wild Beasts of the Forests) without a rule both of Direction and
Obligation, (as has been showed) which ought to be the measure of all just
Power, Deuteronomy. 17. Genesis 17.6.49.10.
(though he did foretell what did or should follow;) for he no sooner
establishes the Throne upon David and his Seed, but does it under a Covenant of
Obedience, 2 Chro. 6.16.7.17. 2 Kin. 11.6. Ezech. 37.12,
by the fail of which his Crown was forfeited to God only, not Men, upon any
Compact or Condition betwixt him and the People. 2 Samuel 5.
Yet had there been a stipulation between them, the violation thereof could not
have evacuated his Power, no more than a Fathers severity 1 Timothy 6. 1 Pet. 2.18.
can cancel a Child's Obedience, it being only a peculiar of God's, by whom
Kings reign Prove. 8.15, 16.
to remove and set them up; Dan. 2.21.
which made Nazianzen (in his first Oration against Julian) condemn those that
would not depend upon God's Providence, and expect the execution of his
Counsels upon Wicked Princes, whose hearts are in his hands, and He turns
them whithersoever he lists; Prove. 21.1.
but would be their own Gods and Deliverers; when Tyrants are God's hand upon
us for our Sins: (So Peter Martyr, upon Romans 13. out of Dan. 4.) Nay, Calvin
says, It is our fault if so great a Blessing be turned into our Punishment; it
being but a just retaliation for our disobedience to God: For, [Secundum merita
populi disponuntur corda Rectorum] according to the Deserts of a people the
hearts of Governors are disposed, and the just Judge punishes the faults of
the Prince many times upon them that had caused him to offend, says St.
Gregory. Ep. l. 2. Ep. 6.


So as we may justly invert that of David, a King, to his People, and say, as
Wicked Subjects of a pious Prince; Let thy Judgments, O Lord, fall upon us; but
that innocent Lamb, what has he done! that he should become a Sacrifice for
us, who ought to sacrifice our selves for him? since it is our Rebellions
against Thee that have occasioned in us this Rebellion against so good a
Prince, 2 Samuel 21.1.
that by them thou might take occasion to be the more severe in thy
Judgments upon our Nation.

However, let us consider, there is something good in the highest Tyranny and
ever to be preferred to Anarchy: For when there was no King in Israel, every
one did oppress his brother, and act after the Lust of his own heart, not only
rejecting their Civil but Spiritual Obedience to God; Jud. 17.2.17.6.18.
whereas the Oppression of a Tyrant most commonly extends but to some; so as
the good or evil Estate of Israel seemed to depend upon the having, or not
having a King. And having thus showed how the Power of Kings is absolute,
without dependency upon their Subjects, though limited in regard of their
Sovereign God, I shall proceed to the exercise of it, and show how that may be
bounded and moderated by Compact, the Indulgence of good Princes and municipal
Laws.

What that Power is, and how limited.
2. I say as God is Goodness and Power, and every perfection in himself, so he
communicates of them in some degree to all, though most to Kings, (his moving
Statues upon Earth) especially of those Attributes which most concerns the
dispensation of Mercy, Justice and Judgment to the World. For Kings are maxim
and proxime, seconds to God (as Tertullian says) above all others, and as it
were, his immediate Deputies upon Earth, to Govern us according to Principles
of Common Equity, and his revealed Will, and such other Rules as the Indulgence
of good Princes (from whom all other subordinate Powers derive, Exodus 18. 1
Pet. 12.
as the Moon borrows her Light from the Sun) many times submit themselves to:
For thus, though Monarchical Power be the same in root in all Kings, it does
not spread nor grow to one and the same height in regard of Exercise, but is
with the free determination of their own Wills limited, ab externo, by some
positive Law or Custom, which only obliges so far as the Law extends, and to
that always, except it be in Cases of extremity and visible necessity; so as
this restraint is Moral and Legal in it self, and in regard of mixture of
persons with the King many times in the Exercise (not Supremacy) of his Power.

From whence proceed the Voluntary Suffrages of all those he has joined with
himself in the fabrication of this Government, as in the making of Laws in our
Parliaments. But this Indulgence of Kings ought to be always free, never
forced; Kings having sometimes the Obligation of an Oath they submit to, to
bind their Consciences, but never of a Militia to bind their Hands, if Caesar
have his due. For though in Democratical and Aristocratical Commonweals the
practice be contrary, we must consider them only as Governments of Gods
Permission, as a punishment upon a Nation; (for, For the Transgression of a
Land many are the Princes thereof, Prove. 28.2.
) and not of his Ordination, but differing as much in Constitution, as a sick
and a sound man, weakness and perfection, and are as a Dwarf in nature, if not
a perversion of it.

For the Power of Arms, with other things for protection, (which none else
ought to assume) are so essential to the being of a King by Divine Institution
(who owes protection to his people from all violence Foraign and Domestic, as
well as they him Obedience) as he cannot divest himself of them; because they
are Fundamental and Inherent in his Office, and one of those Principles out of
which it is elemented: Number. 10. Deuteronomy. 33.3.4. 1 Samuel 8. 1 Pet. 2.
Otherwise he bears the Sword in vain, or rather but the Scabbard, when others
have the Weapon, with Endeavors to sheath it in his Bowels.

Nor is it more impious than unreasonable for to affirm men can convey more
than they are invested with, or that any should delegate a Power over others
lives, that has not an immediate Commission for it from God, since no man has
Power over his own, nor can shed Blood (though under the outward Formalities of
Justice) without being Guilty of Murder, having no just Calling to it; the
usurpation of an unjust Power being much worse than the most Tyrannical use of
the Sword can be in the hands where God has placed it, even in Kings, and such
as act by Commission from them. 1 Pet. 2.13, 14. Ge. 9.5, 6.
So that, as our Savior said to Peter, All they that take the Sword shall
perish by the Sword, Mat. 26.
because drawn without the consent of the lawful Magistrate; Mat. 22.20. Job
19.11.
and if we once come but to say, with the Sons of Belial, Who is Saul or David,
that we should serve them, that of the Atheist will soon follow Job. 26.
Who is the Lord that we should serve him; in that those that reject his
Ordinances, or act not according to them, renounce God; and then no Superior
will be owned, but their own Lusts, which always possessed the Throne, when
Israel had no acknowledged King, Judge. 17.
and produced the Effects of Beasts, not Men.

For as in all Popular States there are many Eyes to discern what is best, so
there are many Heads to contrive their private Designs, many Ambitions to
satisfy, many Lusts to obey, many Injuries to revenge, many Mouths to fill,
(and many Hands to fight for Sin's Empire but Man's Slavery:) Whereas a good
King will restrain those mischiefs, and in all just things make Salutem Populi
supremam Legem; believing he cannot condescend too much to the corresponding
Affections of the People: In that the favor of the King should be like the Dew
upon the Grass, Prove. 19.12.
to nourish and refresh them, and make them produce Fruits of Obedience to him;
it being in the Body Politic, as in the Natural, an equal mixture of those
Principles, out of which they are elemented, an even poyse of humors, a due
regulation of all the Powers, (in regard of exercise) with symbolizing
qualities in each toward one another, that preserves a State. Upon which
grounds the happy constitution of our Kingdom, according to the Rules of
Equity, is founded in three Estates, each having a Negative Voice, that none
might be obliged to any Law, but by their own Suffrage; for in our Laws (as in
sounds) the Harmony of all makes the Music.

So as a middle temper, between Supreme Power and Common Interest, is that of
which our Parliaments are fundamentally composed, which have the Legislative
and Supreme Power (considering the King as a part of them) for the making of
Statutes, as a measure between both, (as Nerves of a Body Politic) and to be
as Bonds of a Civil Life; in that (like the Center in the Circumference) they
do, or ought to stand equal to all parts, and (with the Pin in the Balance)
upright, to weigh unto every one their due according to Justice and Equity;
That for the King's weighty Care and Protection of us, we might pay him an
ingenuous Subjection, not Servitude but Obedience.

Now though a Derivative Power cannot set new bounds to Sovereign Power, it may
and ought to stand to keep those (the Sovereign Power has assented to by a
Law) in all ways, but force: Prayers and Tears, in Extremities, being, as St.
Ambrose says, the only Weapons we have Commission from God to use. For in such
Cases, (if they prevail not) 1 King. 8. 1 Samuel 8.18.
we must bear the Indignation of the Lord whatever it be, because we have
sinned against him; the submission of his Will being the only way to compass
our own, Psalm. 37.
and to be protected by him in the greatest miseries that can fall upon a
State, Isa. 43.2.
in that he is the Lord, and besides him there is no Savior verse. 11.
who makes the Army and the Power to lie down together, and to rise up no more.
verse. 17.


Thus all Magistrates, as in the Septemviri of the Medes and Persians, Dan.
6.14. Esdr. 1.19.
are Bounders in the Exercise of (but are no Sharers Originally in) the Supreme
Power, which is ever to be submitted to, though not obeyed in contrary to
Divine, Act. 5.29.
and sometimes Humane National Laws: Phil. 4.
For the just execution of which, Magistrates distributive are to take care, as
the two houses congregative and conjunctive are in the making or repealing of
them. And thus, and no otherwise is Supreme Power to be regulated; though there
are a Rebellious People, Which say to the Seers, see not, and to the Prophets,
prophecy not unto us right things, speak smooth things, and Prophecy Deceits,
etc. and, Cause the Holy One of Israel to be forgotten before us. Isa. 30.9,
10, 11.
And therefore I shall proceed to the third part, and speak a word of
resistance in the Subject against the Sovereign Power.

CHAP. III. That Resistance in the Subject, by force, against his Lawful
Magistrate, is in no Case Lawful.
AS the great World (even the whole frame of Nature) stands by a wise and apt
combination of several Beings so contempered by Divine Providence, as all agree
in a subordinate Obedience to make up one entire Body without any Reluctance,
Strife, or Rebellion against the superior and first Mover, though they are
sometimes obstructed even to the Interruption of the whole course of things,
and unhinging of many goodly pieces of it, as it were involuntarily, (as at the
time of Our Savior's Sufferings, when all the whole Creation seemed to have
Compassion of him, except Man, for whom only he suffered; the glorious Sun
withdrawing its light to put on blacks, and the dull Earth trembling under the
weight of our Sins.)

So likewise Man, as a Rational and the noblest of all God's Creatures, should
much more observe the Law of his Maker, even the whole Economy or Model of
Government so deeply imprinted in his Soul, where Reason is enthroned for
Sovereign, as a Beam or Lineament of God himself, (who is the only King of
Kings upon Earth) to suppress and not suffer any exorbitant and tumultuous
rising of the lower Passions and Affections to carry it to any exorbitancy, nor
to indulge it to them, which still ought to observe a regular motion in their
own Sphere, and leave the superior one to God's ordering in all their
Irregularities. In that it is he alone that is the first Mover in, and sole
Orderer of all Humane Affairs upon Earth, (for though the Obliquity of all ill
Actions be from us, the Natural Power of doing any thing is from him) by it to
show us, as by a clear light, the absolute submission (which is our Passive
Obedience) we owe our Lawful Sovereign, though Wicked, with the active in
lawful Commands; yet not for themselves, but the Lord's sake, and as his
Ordinance; Romans 13.2 1 Pet. 2.13.14 15.
for we are not to revile them, no not in upbraiding words. Ecc. 8.4. Ex. 22
28. Act. 23.5. 2 Pet. 2. 2 Timothy 3. Jud. Epist.
And if we must not speak evil of the Rulers of the people, a majore, we may
much less bind our Kings with Chains, and our Nobles with Links of Iron, (which
only is God's Prerogative) though they be Heathenish and Tyrannous; which made
David always Loyal to Saul, in all his Persecutions. (though 1 Samuel 24.
a Tyrant by the abuse of Power, not Usurpation,) even when he himself was
anointed of God, and chosen to succeed the other: 1 Samuel 16.
And this he performed as an Obedience to God: (for, The Lord forbid that I
should do this thing, says he, 1 Samuel 24.6.
) to whom only his appeal lay against Saul; though he was guilty of Murder,
Sacrilege, Oppression, Witchcraft, and the greatest Crimes; because that by
his Holy Oil (which is ever uppermost amongst all Liquors) God did design his
Sovereignty and Superiority above all others, and made him capable of reserving
a charge only at the Divine Tribunal. 1 Samuel 24.12.


And St. Paul in his time commanded no less Obedience to Claudius, in whose
Reign he lived, (as Baronius conjectures) 1 Tom. 11. An. 45.
knowing that a Claudius, a Nero, or a Cyrus, Isa. 45.1.
because of the odor of that Ointment of Inauguration, are to be loved, never
to be rejected by their Subjects: For God's Commissions to Kings are [durante
beneplacito] during his pleasure, (who can by millions of ways take away their
Aerie Beings (the only difference between Sleep and Death) without an unnatural
Parricide, or the rising of their People, if he think fit to ease them of such
a servile condition as cruel Tyrants bring upon them) and not quamdiu se been
gesserint, by it to make their Subjects Judges of their Actions, who are only
liable to the Directive (not Coactive and Coercive) Power of Laws. For as the
Moral Law to the lively and true Members of Christ, they are only a Rule to
order and guide (not to condemn) Kings, though, as an Ashur, the Rod of God's
Wrath, the King should ly heavy upon his People in himself, or by inferior
Powers.

Much more therefore ought we to bear the Yoke of Christian Princes,
(esspecially in such a mixed Government as ours, wherein the King de facto may
invade our Liberties, but cannot without consent of both his Houses, de jure,
change the Laws,) and much better endure Transient Acts, than a Model of Man's
framing, which will be always subject to Arbitrary Changes. And thus Calvin
understands Inst. 4.20. Nu. 27.
what was imposed upon the Jews 1 Samuel 8. Jer. 27.
not to be peculiare mandatum to them, but general, cuicunque delatum est
Regnum ei serviendum, when he says, Ex quibus apparet subditos Regibus nec
posse nec debere adversus ipsos quicquam movere, licet tyrannidem exerceant. So
as by his sense the higher Power Romans 13.
is the Power above Subjects, and only below the highest Power of all, (even
God) which St. Paul there expresses in the singular number often, to declare
this Regal and Supreme Power to be in the King, and all others derivative from
him, if St. Peter's be a good Comment upon it, 1 Pet. 2.13.15.
where he styles the King as Supreme. For, Rex non debet esse sub homine sed
sub Deo and Lege, the one for direction, the other for punishment: Under the
Law, as a Rule; under God, as Judge of his Actions: Eccle. 8.
which made David be put in Balance with all the People; 2 Samuel 18.3.
for their telling him he was worth ten thousand was to be understood of all:
As in Jude, verse. 14.
where God's coming at the last Judgment is said to be with ten thousand of his
Saints, instead of all, as is expressed by the Prophet Zachary. c. 14. v. 5


And therefore that now received (but much abused) Maxim, That the King is
major singulis, universis minor, can in its just latitude be meant only of the
Original and Fundamental Right the People had in the first Election of the
Person to the Power (where God did not immediately appoint him) not of giving
the Power to the Person; for that is only from God, who claims the Sword as his
own Right, and will not have it used by any hand, to which he conveyes it not
by Humane (which is always accompanied with Divine) Right. And so it is to be
esteemed of according to God's revealed Will, who never instituted other
Government for Civil Regiment, but commands it (as other Spiritual Functions in
the Church) for Divine Administration; there being no happy State in the
perfection of Government without a Lawful King; nor Glorious Church without
Episcopacy. (Nor can any other justly entitle themselves to the having a Divine
Precept or Institution for their Practice.) So as if others have the esse, they
want the been esse of Government, though men have found out many other
inventions for both.

And therefore whosoever resist their Lawful Rulers by force, purchase to
themselves Damnation, as they oppose the Ordinance of God, though in wicked
ones, (yet Rulers if wicked, are to expect the same Reward.) For, says Bucer,
the word Subject signifies a fall and absolute Subjection to Rulers, and
forbids all force; because, as another observes, upon Tit. 3.
to be subject is to obey; and the rather because in the worst Government of
any King, the protection we receive from it does more than balance the Evils
we perhaps might suffer under another Form. Jud. 17.
And therefore, says the Apostle) let every Soul (as well Spiritual as
Temporal) be subject to Kings, (as the best Form of Ruling) in whom by Gods
Ordination the Habit of all Power resides (though the Act be in his Ministers)
in all Causes (though not over them, but their Persons) as Supreme; (and qui
tentat accipere, tentat decipere, says Bernard.) So as none, but those that
swear falsely in making a Covenant, and fear not the Lord, will say what should
a King do to us? Hos. 10.3, 4.
When, as it is in the Fable of Beasts, all should agree to choose the Lion for
their King, rather than have none: For, praestat unum timere quam multos. And
therefore it is probable God in his Providence (to prevent Inter-regnums, the
mischiefs that did follow upon having no King Judge. 17.
and the tumultuousness of Popular Elections) did settle Regal Powers in a
succession of Blood first in David, though promised to Abraham, and prophesied
of to Judah. Genesis 17.6.49.10. 1 King. 11.14. Jer. 41.1. 2 Chro. 22.10.


So as that Position of the Romanists, and our new Statists, (Simeon and Levi,
Brethren in Iniquity) that Princes are made by the People, because made by the
consent of the People; and that People Originally make the Magistrate, not the
Magistrate the People, is most false; yet thus Parsons (in his Dolman) and many
others, broached that seditious Position, with diverse of the same nature, to
stir up the People against Queen Elizabeth, persuading them they had power to
dispose of the Crown, and might depose her, and transfer the Kingdom to the
Infanta of Spain; and since that time both Junius Brutus, Buchanan, and others,
like Sampson's Foxes, have joined with the Jesuits in this, though standing as
Extremes in other things.

But this Opinion (as a most Reverend Divine of our Church has showed) has no
Foundation in Reason nor Scripture. For, says he, from the Canon, the Powers
that be are ordained of God. And how can man give the Sword (the power of Life
and Death over others) that has not power to take away his own life by any
Natural or Divine Right? (For as has been said, no man can convey to another
what he has not himself:) So that Power, wheresoever placed, is an Emanation
from God immediately, and so to be obeyed only where orderly settled and
constituted; For the Powers that be, says the Apostle, Romans 13.
(whether by Election or Inheritance, Compact or just Conquest being once
legally established) are of God, and may not be disturbed by their Subjects, in
a way of Arms, or Force, for any Impiety, Tyranny or Oppression whatsoever;
they having no Power over the person once invested in, and discriminated by the
Power all Kings have by God's Ordination; for in all changes men can only
choose the person, but never give the Power. As Silver that is mere Plate, if
it be tendered for exchange, may be taken or left at the liberty of him, to
whom it is offered; but when once stamped by the King, and Coined becomes
current and not to be refused. Or as Acts of Parliament, whilst Voted by the
two Houses, have to this time been only Consents, but after the King's
concurrence Statutes that bind the persons that Voted them, and all others; and
not to be altered by them without his assent: So in Governments, or Governors,
as soon as any are created by man, whether Kings Elective or by Succession,
even St. Peter's Humane Creatures are by St. Paul called God's Ordinance, Romans
13.
and not to be resisted nor altered at the Will of the Electors, who
irrevocably part with their own Right, as the Jewish Servant (by boring) made
himself a Slave.

For if there remained in them a Power dormant, to overruled and unmake them,
whom they have once submitted to, then where were decency and order? 1 Cor. 14.
Nay what Tumults, Disorders, and Massacres would arise from it, when Revenge
would remove the one, or Ambition, Faction, and the like, set up another, to
compass their own ends? (like Herodet a Persian King, who being a cruel Tyrant,
when he could not find out a Law to warrant his unlawful Actions, found out
another that he might do what he list.) And those that fear not God and the
King ( conjunctim, as one in regard of Divine Relation and Institution) are
given to such changes, Prove. 24.21.
though Christ himself, as man, gave the example of submission and
acknowledgment of the Divine Right of Caesar's (and his Deputy Pilate's) Power,
Mat. 17.27. Joh. 9.11.
the conviction of which Truth fetched the Confession of it from a Popish
Divine, Royard. in Dom in 1. Advent.
Rege constituto, non potest Populus jugum subjectionis repellere.

And though Bellarmine lays it as a Position, (as cited by Suarez Li. 3. c. 3.
p. 224.
) That the People never so give up the Act of Power unto the King, but that
they retain the Habit still in themselves, it is contradicted by Suarez Defend.
Fid. Cath. l. 3. c. 3. p. 225.
in these words. Non est simpliciter verum Regem pendere in sua potestate a
Populo, etiamsi ab ipso eam acceperit: for he adds, Postquam Rex legitime
constitutus est, supremam habet potestatem in his omnibus, ad quae accipit,
etiamsi a Populo illam acceperit. So Cuneris L. de Offic. Princi.
Principis (sive Electione, sive Postulatione, vel Successione, vel belli jure
Princeps fiat) Principi tamen facto divinitus potestas adest. Otherways there
would be Sword against Sword, whereas God has made but one, because for one
hand, and will still be a Repressor of the Tumults of the People, which are
more raging than the Waves of the Sea. Ps. 65.7.
For that keeps its bounds, when the other will know none. Hos. 5.10, 11.


But here it is but he that resists, not he that obeys not, that purchases
Damnation. For there may be not only a lawful but a necessary Disobedience,
when the Commands of our Superiors run counter to God's revealed Will, Acts
4.18, 19.5.29.
as in Daniel and the three Children. Dan. 3.4.5. chap.
But even then resist not though a Nero, under whom some think St. Paul writ
his Epistle to the Romans, and a little after felt some sparks of his
Persecution, Ep. 3.
as he was flagellum Domini, Hos. 13.11.
by an Ordinative Permission.

Nay further, our submission to such should be ex animo, (as Aquinas glosses)
because the command is omnis anima. For it is not an Eye, but a Heart-service
that God requires, even to our froward and perverse Masters; 1 Pet. 2.18. Ep.
6.6.
knowing that God will both recompense and protect those that suffer according
to his Will, and commit their Souls to him in well-doing; 1 Pet. 4.19.
which made David conclude, They that know thy name will put their trust in
thee, for thou Lord have not failed them that seek thee, but wilt be their
refuge in such times of trouble. Ps. 9.9, 10.


Nay the duty of not resisting may also be enforced from the contrary; when
Christ in saying that, If his Kingdom were of this World, then would his
Servants fight, Joh. 18.36.
intimates, that we owe our lives for the protection of our King's just Rights,
but ought not to do any thing against them or theirs, whether concerning the
Person or Posterity.

For after the free Suffrage or Submission of a People to a Successive
Monarchy, the Son and next in Blood have always a just right to the Crown (as
in our Kingdom) upon the death of his Father, though wanting the Ceremony of
Coronation, which does but declare not convey the Right. Nor is it in the
Peoples Power to revoke their former Concessions, no more than a Wife when she
has taken a Husband can divorce her self, or justly refuse him other duties,
though he grow froward and unjust. And if it were otherwise how should we
imitate Christ our General in his Passive Obedience, (as is commanded, 1 Pet.
2.21.
) keep our Covenant in Baptism, (the Epitome of Christian Religion,) and make
many living Christians by one dying Saint, (in that Sanguis Martyrum est semen
Ecclesiae) or be Partakers of that Spiritual Good that comes by suffering, even
the Trial of our Faith 1 Pet. 1.7.
and Improvement of our Glory.

So as the contrary Opinion must needs proceed from Infidelity or distrust,
when we will be our own (God's) Deliverers, and not rely upon Providence for
the Event in all Distresses, in only using such means as by his word are
warrantable. And the Weapons of our Warfare, we know, are not Carnal, but
Spiritual; 1 Cor. 10.4. 2 Timothy 4.7.
even our whole Panoplie being but the Girdle of Verity, the Breast Plate of
Righteousness, the Sword of the Spirit, the Helmet of Salvation, and Shield of
Faith, Ephesians. 6.
by which we overcome the World. 1 John 5.4
And therefore Tertullian in his Apology against forcible entrance, Text. 37.
begins with an Absit, and concludes, We must rather be slain than slay our
Superiors. So Ambrose, L. 5. Ep. ad Aurent.
Prayers and Tears are our only Weapons. And to that purpose speaks St.
Cyprian, Ad Demetriad.
Gregory Nazianzen, Orat. 2. in Julian.
with all the concurrence of the Primitive times.

Nor are we to submit for fear, (unless filial) or want of force, but
Conscience sake: Nor can the New-minted Jesuitical Distinctions (of differing
between the Person and the Power in their Rebellions, by placing it in the
People, and the Administration of it only in the King) absolve their
Consciences from the Guilt, who de facto have resisted in our times; it being
but a Popish Riddle (such as their Transubstantiation) in which they turn the
substance of the Regality of Kings into a mere Chymera, a fancyed nothing, and
make Accidents to subsist without a Subject, the Supreme Power without his
Person; a Paradox that neither the Gospel nor the Law can unriddle.

For they speak the contrary, in making the Supreme Power inseparable from the
Person of a King, 1 Pet 2.
especially ours, which is settled as well by Municipal, as Divine Law; as may
appear by all the Laws of this Kingdom, both Customs and Acts, as well as by
the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, Cook. fol. 36. 37.
which condemn such Monsters of Opinion to be illegitimate: See Cook fol. 8.
35. So Pref. 4. part fol. 1. Bract. l. 1. c. 8. fol. 5. 6. 16. Ri. 2. cap.
5.24. Hen. 8. C. 12. D. etc. Stu. f. 43. Dier 29. Co. 11.90.93. 1 Eliz. c. 1.
5. Eliz. 1. Cook Calvin's Case f. 11. Exilium. Henricide Spencer. 1 Edw. 3. 3
Edw. 25. Calv. B. ^0. Cook 4. Parl. Inst. fol. 46. 7 fol. 30. 2 fol. 15. 1
Jacob. c. 1.10.33. Hen. 8.21.
And if the unhappiness of evil times and men have de facto done otherwise, and
deposed, or destroyed, or rejected their Princes, they are to expect no Laurels
nor Trophies for it; the memory and monuments of them being best buried in
Oblivion: In that such Victories ought to be ashamed of themselves; for though
such ways may seem right to a man, the end thereof are the ways of death. Prove.
14.2.16.25.


And thus having taken the Timber that grows upon other Men's Soyles, and
squared it into a less Model for use, gathered the choicest Flowers out of
other men's Gardens, and made them into a Nose-gay, fit for every hand, to
refresh the Spirits of such as are fainting under the persecution of these
times for their Loyalties, (there being little of mine but the Thread that
binds them) drawn my Oar out of others Mines to melt it into a small Wedg or
Ingot, that every one might carry a stock of Knowledge about him, as a
Counter-Charm to those seducing Spirits now raised among us, to withdraw men
from their due Obedience, I desire every one to treasure up something for their
use: and having proved all Power to be of Divine Right, and only subject to
limitation in regard of Exercise, with a security against Force, though a
Nebuchadonozor, or a Jeroboam Jer. 29 7. Hos. 13.11.
be over us, I shall proceed to speak of the Duty of Kings; in which I shall
not say much, since all are Doctors and read Lectures upon that subject, being
all Eye for without (none for within) to take notice of the slips and failings
of their Prince, which they always behold in a Multiplying-Glass, though by
making too much Window they weaken the Walls, and cause Factions and Divisions
that the Roof might fall, and then I am sure the Frame will not stand long, let
them seem to underprop it with never so many specious pretenses; (painted, but
rotten Posts:) For as the firmness and uniting of the Walls support the Roof,
so the Roof covers and preserves them from many an ill Blast that would
otherwise weaken and overthrow them. But I spin this Thread too long on this
Subject, and therefore I here wind it up, and proceed to consider,

CHAP. IV. What Duties Kings owe to their Subjects, with the Excellency of that
Government.
HAving endeavored to show, as it were in Landscape and dark shadow only, the
Great and High Prerogatives of Kings, not being able perfectly to describe them
as they are in themselves without a seeming Court-flattery, (which yet might be
forgiven given in these times, and in a Garrison, where Peace of Conscience is
the only reward of Loyalty) I shall further show you the Excellency of Regal
Government by its Effects. For so (as the Sun in Water) it is best seen in its
Reflections, and the just Actions of Pious Kings, who are the Fountains of
Honor, Justice, Power, and all other regular subordinate motions in the lower
Spheres, (as the Vital Spirits in the Head are of all Natural Operations of the
Body) are always best seen in their Piety and Moralities; the industrious
endeavor of which makes their Mitres rather ponderous than glorious, as the
Emblems of Christian Kings do show; in that the Cross is always fixed (but
superior) to their Crown, to the imitation of their Master, who was Crowned
indeed, but with Thorns; to teach them how full of vexing Cares and Troubles
that Head should be subject to, that (as the Stern to the Ship) is to guide the
great Barque of the State, not only in Calms but Storms, which best prove the
Pilot. So as we may consider the Infelicities of Good Kings (with respect to
this World) to be more in the Scale than their happiness; when they are not
Lords but Stewards; not Owners but Dispensers of all their glorious Attributes
and Endowments. For Regal, is that Paternal Power in the fifth Commandment,
which Philo Judaeus observes confines upon both Tables, that their Arms of
Protection might extend to the keeping of both; and the greater the Trust the
more severe the Account. In which there stands,

First, a Charge of Power upon each King's Score (it being one of God's
communicable Attributes) how he has used the Sword God has put into his hand,
which St. Peter says ought to be a terror to the Evil, not to the Good,
(though a Protection to all against private wrongs) with the Militia and Power
of making War or Peace: which is seated in them, and inherent, by Divine Right;
Number. 10. Deuteronomy. 17.
(as well as in our King by the known and established Laws, and magna charta C.
2.6. and 7. and Ed. 7. C. 1.
and to the Son, H. 3.
succeeding him;) and though it be regulated in the Exercise, By 13. El. 1.
etc. 6 1 E. 3. c. 5. 4 H. 4. c. 13 5 H. 4. 11 H. 7. c. 1. 2 E. ^ 4. 5 of P. M.
^. 3. 4 Jac. c. 1. 22 E. 4.
the Parliament never did pretend to give the Power but to declare it.

And thus Reynolds in his Comment on the 110 Psalm, Upon Ps. 110.2.
amongst the [Jura Regalia] proper honors belonging to the Person of the King
(which none can use but in a subordination to him) does reckon [Armamentaria
Publica] the Magazines of all Military Provisions, (citing Greg. Tholos.;) De
Repub. l. 9. c. 1. Romans 13. 1 Samuel ^0.16.
by them to fence and impail God's Church and Vineyard both from the wild Boar
and little Foxes; and the persons of men from Injuries and Violence; which are
the greatest Privileges we can enjoy in this World, as may more clearly appear
by the contrary Effects; (For things are seen carendo magis quam fruendo.) As
in Judges, Cap. 17.
where the decay of Religion, advancing of Idolatry, making Priests of the
lowest of the People, and all other Civil (uncivil) Disorders proceeded from
the want of this Power in one man, and are imputed to it, as to the efficient
cause, though properly malum non habet efficientem, sed deficientem causam.

And therefore we may expect great good from them, when so many Evils are
occasioned by their want. For when there was no King in Israel, every man did
what seemed good in his own Eyes, (says the Spirit of God) disenthroning
Reason, and making Lust their Law, and Rapes their boast. Judge. 19.
So that by just consequence the having of a good King is the proper Remedy of
those Evils, who makes his just Power the measure of his Will, not his Will the
measure of his Power. And therefore it is Enacted, says St. Peter, in the
style of a Lawgiver (as some observe) that all should be subject to him (at
least in not doing his Lawful Commands, be punished by him.) Romans 3 4. Eccl^s.
^. Esdr. 7 25, 26, 27. Rev. 2.20.
And so we find it in all the Reigns of the good Kings of Israel; for there
were no Micha's Idols nor High Places left; no Rapines nor Violences suffered;
no acting of Wickedness under the Countenance of Laws and Acts; but, as Gods,
Ps. 82.6.
they meddled with the Affairs of God; as Nursing-Fathers they nourished the
Church with the two Breasts of God's Word and Sacraments, through the
Ministerial Administrations of Priests, and as public Ministers for good, Romans
13.
they restrained all other Uncivil Insolences, not suffering every man to be a
King; nay more than a King, in doing what he list: for a King ought not to be a
Jeroboam, favoring idolatry, or any false Worship; 2 Chro. 10.14.
but a David, Learned, Pious and Wise, as an Angel of God, 2 Samuel 19.27.
that Fraud, Injuries, and violence might be detected and restrained, Innocence
relieved, Industry encouraged, Virtue rewarded, and Vice punished.

Secondly, Justice Distributive is owing from a King to all his Subjects, as
that which establishes his own Throne, (says Solomon) and keeps the just
Boundaries of [meum and tuum] Common Right amongst men (out of which, as Seeds,
the large Harvest of Contentions grows:) For, Judicium or Potestas judiciaria
is a peculiar of Royalty, in that the Administration is from the Prince as the
Fountain of all Humane Equity (under God) deposited in the hands of inferior
Officers: Pr^v. 20.8.
For so he is interpretative in them, who, as his mouth, are to publish the
Laws, and to execute those Acts of Justice and Peace which principally belong
to his own sacred Breast. So Reynolds still in that place, alluding there to
that of Joh. 5.22, 27. and drawing his Parallel from Christ, where he says,
The Father has committed all Judgment to the Son, etc. And therefore herein a
good King ought ever to make God's revealed Will, and the known Laws, (of which
his sworn Judges are to be the Interpreters) the measure and rule of his
proceedings; and that under pain of Damnation, a severity from God, infinitely
above the coercion of men: nor shall their punishment be less, who usurp the
Exercise of this Justice without his Commission.

Thirdly, Mercy must all derive from the King (as a Flower that grows only in
his Garland) a Gem which can shine only from the Diadem of Princes, For Jus
vitae and necis, a Power of pardoning Condemned Persons, and delivering from
the Terror of the Law, (though in some cases limited, as in wilful Murders,
and the like) belongs only to him; being there deposited by God himself, and in
no other Representative whatsoever; so that where Regal Government is settled,
the Execution of any man (though wicked and deserving to dye by the Law) is
wicked, if not having the King's Commission for it.

Fourthly, Honor (the ennobling of the Blood) is to derive from him, when
Virtue or some Heroic Acts dignifie the Person; for without that he that
receives it is but a Label which bears the Wax, without any impression of the
Seal, or as a rotten Post that bears a glorious Escutcheon. But for the more
clear manifestations of this, his [Ornamenta Regia] Regal Ornaments, as a
Crown, a Throne, a Scepter, and the like, with the universally acknowledged
Rights to them, speak him to be the only Spring, from whence it can flow, 2
King. 12.^2. 1 Kings 10.8.
and ought still to issue in lesser and greater Streams, by it to enrich the
humble Valleys, and make them show gay, when adorned with those Flowers of the
Crown for the encouragement of Virtue; (as he bears the Sword to cut down
Offenders and prevent their growth:) And as a Testimony hereof the Romans had
wont to send to Foreign Kings in League with them, an Ivory-Sceptre, a Royal
Robe, and Chair of State, Tacit. Annal. l. 4.
to show in Hieroglyphick what they were.

Fifthly, Kings owe an Example of Virtue and Piety to their Subjects in that (
instruimur praeceptis sed dirigimur exemplis, says Seneca,) the Actions of
great men have a Compulsory Power in them, [Regis ad exemplum] are an
Eye-Catechism, and (as the Basilisk) by seeing they many times kill our Vices,
or by being seen invite us to Virtue; Examples being the shortest way of
teaching: For from that Milk we usually, as from our Mothers Breasts, suck our
good or bad Inclinations. Gal. 2.14.
Nay like the first Mover they carry all the Inferior Orbs with them, as the
first Deer the Herd: When bad Kings, with the ill Influence of the Planets,
kill more deadly than Poison in Plants, because coming from a more glorious
Body, though the other be more Infectious.

But herein we in this Nation have the advantage of all others: For if ever the
Rays of Virtue had a Power of affimilating others into their own Divine
Nature, the Beams of Goodness that shine upon us from the Example of our dear
Sovereign (who, as a Combination or Conjunction of Graces, both Divine and
Moral, has all in himself that a finite and limited Being is capable of) must
needs have a prevalency over us. Or if they make us not better, they will make
us much worse, as they will rise up in Judgment against us to our greater
Condemnation. And I am confident as he is an Active Example of Virtue, so he
would be Passive to teach us how to suffer in a good Cause, though it were to
pass through a Red Sea of his own Blood for the good of his People;
Pelican-like to nourish us with the Spirits that flow out of his own Breast;
and, by those Beams, to reflect a more glorious Luster than in his Meridian and
height of Greatness.

But, not to suffer my Zeal to carry me besides my purpose, there is, amongst
many others, one part of Duty most especially incumbent upon Kings. For,

6. Lastly, as Kings reign by God, so they should rule for him and the highest
good of their People in matters of Religion, both in maintaining the Substance
and Essential Parts of it, in their Vigor and Power, by Active Compulsions and
Humane Restraints, to force the outward man to Obedience in things good in
themselves, and to prescribe such Rules, Methods, and Boundaries in things
indifferent, as may bring all to Uniformity in Worship, and may stand as a Wall
or Fence to God's Vineyard, against the Invasions of the little Foxes of
Schisms and Factions. And this not only for Decency, Order, and Significancy,
but as that without which Religion it self cannot subsist: For though they are
no parts of it, but Circumstantials, Essentials in a Well-formed Church cannot
be maintained without them, no more than a Tree can be preserved to live
without its Bark, or Majesty in a King without Reverence: For that, like the
Skin to the Body, preserves it both in Being and Beauty; which occasioned St.
Paul's Precept of having all things be done decently and in order, that is,
according to appointment, as the Original (...).
will bear it; so Dr. Hammond renders the Words. 1 Cor. 14.40.


For take away those Regulations of our Public Devotions, (which are as the
Hemme, that strengthens the Garment, and keeps it Uniform,) all would resolve
into Rents and Schisms, Chaos and Confusion. So as if the Church of God (his
enclosed Garden) be not fenced by good Laws for Conformity, all Methods of
Devotion are lost, and the Bores of the Forest (unruly men of Factious
Spirits) will soon break in to destroy and root it up; and offer nothing but
the blind and lame to God, in loose and untruss'd postures, unbecoming the
Greatness of an Earthly Prince in our Addresses to them, much more to our God,
Mal. 1.
by it to make their Superiors bend to them, if pertinacious obstinacy could
do it, when they should bow to their Superiors, Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2. Ephesians. 4. and
6.
according to the Economy of Nature it self, where the inferior Orbs are to
be guided and move by the highest Spheres: Otherwise the whole Fabric would be
unhinged and fall in pieces, or at least grow weak by separation. For a
Dispensation to several Forms of Worship in one Church would prove an Act
rather of Division than Comprehension, increase Emulation and Factions, and
plant a Seminary for a continued Schism: In that there could be no such
Encouragement but there would be scandal and a way of seduction in it, to all
Orthodox Protestants, and a Transmigration of Souls amongst themselves from the
Father to the Son, with Encouragements and Supports from their pro^use Zeal of
the Proselites to their Opinions. So as they would strengthen with time (in
that Novelties never want Courtship and Adorers,) though the old way is (Regia
via] God's way, and only to be contended for St. Jude Ep.
and preserved by our Act of Uniformity.

And in this respect Kings and Queens are chiefly styled Nursing Fathers and
Nursing Mothers to the Church; Fathers for Provision and Protection; Mothers
for their tenderness and care; when as by little Stratagems and Circumventions
they bring their Children to an habituated Obedience, and keep Dangers from
them by some outward and extraordinary Confinements, both for Honesty and
Order. 1 Cor. 14.40.


So as Kings have no meaner a depositum committed to them, than the Crown and
Throne of God and Christ in the Church: For they are as the Lions about the
Throne, to secure and guard it; and as Lawgivers in indifferent things, Deuteronomy.
33.4, 5.
(though subject to the direction of their Laws) and are with David to
prescribe Rules for fixed Services and Devotions, 1 Chro. 23.
and with Josiah to compel to Religious Duties and Laws of his commanding, (as
is before expressed,) 2 Chro. 34.33.
as Hezekiah did; 2 Chro. 29. and 30. and 31.
which Constantine the first Christian Emperor imitated: Eusebius. de vita
Constant. l. 2. c. 37, 38, 39.
But they never (as Praxiteles the Painter made the silly People worship the
Image of his Strumpet, under the Title of Venus) imposed the Visions of their
own Fancies, nor licensed the crude and unnourishing Vapors of others empty
Wits upon the credulous People, it being below the Majesty of Truth and
Religion; but according to the sincerity of God's Law: not suffering their
Lusts to guide them, which ever bring unconstancy with them, and make the Soul,
like a distempered Body, never well in any position or condition. For then men
(like Bees from one Flower to another) will be ever flying from one Change and
Vanity to another, and not find enough to satiate the intemperate desire of
change.

So as it can be neither agreeable to Religion nor Prudence for a King to
suffer variety of Postures and Forms in the outward Exercise of Religion; (for
what is good is to be obeyed for it self; what, indifferent in Obedience to his
Command, when in middle things Supreme Power chiefly consists.) And,

1. For Religion, Kings ought to maintain it in its Essentials and Purity
(without any Indulgence or Dispensations to any) as that only which can
maintain them. Prove. 16.12, 20, 28.
And such Joseph's will be Storehouses in their Kingdoms, and as Elijah,
Chariots and Horsemen for their security; there being no guard to that of
Piety and Zeal for God's Glory, which they are entrusted to preserve, (even
both Tables of the Law;) and are not to bear the Sword in vain, which is put
into their hands for that use; Compulsion being necessary where Commands are
contemned. Luke 14.23. Rev. 2.2, 6, 14, 15, 20. Chapter 3.15, 16.


Nor does Christ's Permission of the Tares to grow give any just Power of
Toleration to Princes by God's Law in known Evils, or pertinacious contumacy to
lawful Commands, but only permits mixed Assemblies, where, by reason of outward
Conformity, none can discriminate the truly pious from the Hypocrite; by which
he yet does not forbid their Eradication absolutely, but for fear the good Seed
also should be destroyed; when a Connivance to known Errors in Doctrine, (or
to pertinacious Non-conformists in indifferent things) would make the
Magistrate contract the guilt of their Crimes, ( Judge. 5.23.) by confirming the
one in their mistaken Doctrines, and the other in their superstitious believing
indifferent things unlawful; even to an adoring the Idol of their own Fancy,
uncharitably censuring of all others, (even the Church and Government it self;)
though it bring Hell out of Heaven, (in a pretense of Devotion) and the Devil
upon God's Shoulders to rule amongst us in Samuel's Garment, by the silly
Charms of a seducing Spirit, through the warmth of Zeal, when it wants the
light of Knowledge to guide it; though like the Volatile Spirits of Poisons,
when unconfined, (by not being luted up in some Viol or Vessel) it evaporates
into an Airy being, of use only to infect others that suck it in by a nearness
of Conversation. So as some Ingredients of a seeming Cruelty in our Laws will
prove the most Sovereign Mercy to reduce and recover them, and preserve the
sound from their Contagion, if tempered in a proportion to their Crimes by
pecuniary Mulcts or other Confinements; saving some by Compassion, others by
Fears; Jude ver. 22.23.
when the violation of any just Law, if wilfully done, is unlawful. Nay the
least minute Atome or Airy Omission, if habitual, may become the greatest
Crime, if done with Scandal and Contempt to Authority; in that the
Transgression is against Gods Ordinance, that requires Obedience to the
Commander, not in the value of the thing commanded by him, it being no less
Treason to coin a Farthing, that has the King's stamp upon it, than a piece of
Gold, according to our Saviors Rule; in that, He that offends in one wilfully,
is guilty of the breach of all the Commandments, when upon equal Temptations he
would break the rest; for one little wilful Sin, like the first drop in an
Orifice, will usher in more, and dispose the whole Body to such Evacuations and
Eruptions.

2. In Prudence there ought to be no Indulgence, as to the Public Exercise of
any false Religion or variety of Forms in outward Worship: For, what Unity,
Decency, or Order can there be in setting up one Congregation against another?
when Order is the Bond of Peace that keeps us in Unity: For once break that, or
tie but with a slip-knot, and all will be dissolved and come to Confusion,
which is the Womb of all Rebellion and Schisms.

Nay, it were to depose Reason (the Supreme Monarch) and Enthrone the Inferior
Members, which should submit, and not impose. And certainly the giving Ground
in such a Duel would give Courage and Insolency in the Enemy to press for more;
and the Pale of Law, that has a breach once made in it, will let out all the
Beasts of the Forest to Rapine and Prey, to the loss of good Subjects, but not
to the making any better. So as however wise Princes may enlarge any thing that
is too strait in matters of Discipline, they will never let Clamor, or the
Unjust Discontents of any Midwife in what they call Reformation; and much less
a Toleration of all Sects and Errors.

Nor can the King expect a Harmony amongst Antipathies by permitting several
Forms in one settled Government, though the want of Power to maintain his own
Laws may force him to unreasonable Condescensions; (for then a Dam against that
Current would but enrage it to greater Violences) yet in such a Case I conceive
he ought rather to make a General Rule of Conformity for all, if possible, than
Differing-ones to Parties;) by it to lay asleep and bury all Animosities the
other would maintain; and, like Oil upon Paper, would rather harden than soften
such Rebellious Spirits, and render them rather Conquerours than Supplicants:
But I hope God will not submit his own Glory and our King to such an Eclipse,
when nothing but necessity can make it lawful: Though probably such a Scheme by
some may be set and calculated for our Horizon, when his Majesty's Compliance
to some things has made them rather impose more than acquiesce in what they
desired; for he that once gives Ground ever loses more in his Retreat; (unless
it be to rally again with some Reserves to maintain his own Right more
vigorously;) so as we ought still to contend to Blood for our King's Freedom in
his Actings against such. Especially those whose Principles are for Resistance
and Rebellion (not Submission) in things that are contrary to their seditious
Principles; that hold it lawful to murder the King, (if not the man in whom the
Regal Power is vested,) by dispoiling him of all his Regalia, and Essentials of
Royalty; which were to un shakel madmen, and set them free to Fury and Rage,
perhaps for the destruction of those that endeavored their recovery and
preservation, and not to strike Sparks into those Brands that need be quenched:
but they heighten all into a Flame.

Besides, it were unsafe to the Public Peace to permit the Factious
Separatists (who are yet as Sand without Mortar, weak, dispersed and loose) to
gather into Combinations and Confederacies, by which they will know their own
strength, and take advantage of others weakness to compass their own end, whose
end is only (like Oil among other Liquors) to be uppermost, and bring all into
a subjection to them, and to be able perhaps to give, not ask Dispensations.

Nay it would reflect dishonor and disgrace upon our Government and
Governors, and Discouragement to all Orthodox Professors, not to maintain what
has been prosperously practiced among us since the Reformation, and has had
the Influences of Heaven to give it a Prolifick Virtue, in producing a Loyal,
Zealous and Pious People to beautify their Professions. And therefore
Christian Kings should not be outdone by a Heathen inspired by God to it, but
send out a Decree that whosoever will not do th Law of God, and the King's Law,
let him have Judgment without delay, whether it be to Death, or to Banishment,
or to Confiscation of Goods, or to Imprisonment, Ezr. 7.25, 26, 27.
which was in part practiced by the Kings of Israel, 2 Chro. 15.12, 13, 14, 15.
and 29. and ^0. and 31. and 34.31, ^2, ^3. 1 Chronicles. 23.
and ought much more to be done under the Gospel, that has more of light and
direction in it to walk by; lest Liberty should turn into Licentiousness, in
holding things contrary to the Analogy of Faith, and against the Rules of
Charity, Purity, Loyalty, Sobriety and Expedience, to the disturbance of the
Peace and Unity of the Church, which Good and Pious Kings ought always to
prevent or restrain by wholesome and Penal Laws of Regulation, to encourage or
fright their People the more to their Duties and Obedience; which I shall in
the next place touch upon with a light and unskilful Pencil.

CHAP. V. Of the Debt and Allegiance Subjects owe to their Princes.
NOW, that we may pay and retribute the Native Rights (rightly) which we owe to
the Person upon whom God has fixed the Sacred Character of Supremacy, let us
endeavor to set a true value and estimate upon the great benefits we receive
by him, when we either find in the foot of the Account all the Glory of
Religion, and happiness of a free People (if he Governs well) summed up in him,
or when ill, not only the Exercise of many Christian Graces in us (God
commanding our Submission to him) but sometimes the highest Crown of Martyrdom,
when we suffer for Christ and a Good Cause, and are not only ready (with St.
Paul) to do, but dye for his Name: Acts 21.
For by it we may make Tyrants and our greatest Enemies to become our best
Friends, if we can but improve those holy advantages for our Spiritual Good,
and make our Spirits, when extracted from the more earthly parts in all outward
enjoyments, to multiply our Joys: so that were there not a higher Principle to
move us, our own Interest and self-advantage (the delight and complaisance of a
quiet Conscience) should naturally incline us to an holy gratitude to God for
them, and oblige us to all proportionable returns; unless we will have the
inanimate and irrational Creatures to rise up against us in Judgment. For thus
the Rivers run back into the Lap of their Natural Mother, and offer up their
streams there, as a just Tribute for having sucked and derived their
nourishment from her Breasts. Thus the dull and heavy Earth does put forth her
self in an early Spring to make an Offering of her Fruits to man, for his
labor and cost bestowed on her, and sends up an Incense to Heaven (confessed of
the Spirits of her richest Flowers) in thanks for her fruitful Showers and
sweet Influences by which they grow and flourish. Nay the most unnatural of all
Birds, the Raven, became Elias his Caterer out of a natural gratitude to God
(as some have observed) for feeding her young ones when she left them.

And therefore let not these become, in this, reasonable Creatures, and we Men
become Beasts, nay worse by our unthankfulness for Blessings by Afflictions;
but most when we fail in our Duties to our Superiors for their benefits to us;
the contrary being enjoined by God; who, because Princes are to rule for him,
takes care for them; and no sooner provides for his own Worship, but for their
Honor, Ex. 20.2, 3, 1^.
still coupling them with himself through all the Scripture: as Prove. 24.21.
Mat. 22.21. 1 Pet. 2.17.
Fear God, honor the King, that so both Law, Prophets, Apostles, nay the Son
of God himself, might enforce it as a Duty upon us, as a learned Father of our
Church observes. But not to loose my self in this Sea, we will follow the
several streams that run into it, and show how they all meet there. And,

First, of Obedience.
1. The first great Out-rent and Homage we are to acknowledge our subjection in
is Obedience (in lawful Commands.) For so St. Paul to Titus, Tit. 3.1.
commenting as it were upon the 13th Chapter to the Romans, expounds it. And,
as the Learned observe, the very word [Subjects] signifies Obeyers in the
Original, as an Essential Ingredient into an happy Government; which, with
Solon, is ever most glorious, Si Populus Magistratui obediat, Magistratus autem
legibus. But then this duty must be rooted in Conscience and spring from
thence, in that we must obey for the Lord's sake, terminating it in him,
because the bond to Civil Obedience is from Divine Ordinance, and that not only
to the good, but froward Masters: 1 Pet. 2.18. Ephesians. 6.
And then let it spread into every duty (even in all things Col. 3.20.
Actively or Passively, obeying the Lawful, submitting our Persons, though not
our Actions to the rest) Act. 5.29.
to our King as he is Pater Patriae, 1 Pet. 2.17.
of all others the Supreme Head; for only in rebus mediis L^x posita est
Obedientiae; because, as I noted before, in things necessary by any Divine Law
we ought to obey though no Humane Authority command them; in things unlawful we
ought not to obey though commanded; and are only to obey for the Commands sake
(not the things commanded) in things indifferent, which only become unlawful
because forbidden, and are not forbidden because unlawful. For such Obedience
is not only accepted with (but rewarded of) God; as in the Recabites, Jer. 35.
and can only keep us in a serene and calm temper in the Body politic; so as a
frown will not appear in the face of that great Ocean by the raging of Waves
and madness of the People; nor will a wrinckle show it self to abate its beauty.

2. We owe Honor to him, and that as justly as Fear to God himself, being
commanded to pay it to God in the Man, not to the Man, but as he represents
God. And this (as the Flags and main Sails of a Ship) does not only deck and
adorn the Throne, but makes it bear up in all Weathers; nay, (as the Bark the
Tree) does preserve it in all its other Rights. For, let us but once slight or
contemn the Person, (in saying, what is this Moses that takes so much upon
him?) Number. 9.
and we shall soon despise his Power; nay God himself as represented in the
King or Supreme. 1 Samuel 1.8


Upon which ground it is probable that God and the King are linked together:
Fear God, Honor the King, 1 Pet. 2.17.
to teach us that their Precepts are not two, but one and the same in Root,
though the Fruit we must pay them is different. And therefore St. Paul in
commanding all to submit to the higher Powers, concludes, to whom you owe
Honor, Romans 13.7.
(as to a Father, or to God, for Gods command) Isa. 49.23.
and this in our thoughts not to blaspheme them, Eccl. 10.20.
in our words not to deprave them, Ex. 22.28. Acts 22.5. Jude 8.
nor speak evil of them; in all our Actions to reverence them, as Gods upon
Earth, his Chair of State, wherein Divinity it self is Enthroned, Ps. 8^.6. 2 Samuel 14.10 Number. 12.10. and 16.32.
though in the Person of a Wicked man: For though he forfeit his claim to
double Honor, due to them that rule well, 1 Timothy 5.
one to his Place, another to his Virtues,) he cannot divest himself of, nor
justly be denied that Honor, Fear, Subjection, etc. which Subjects, as a debt
and duty, must everpay to his Office and Supremacy, as a most learned Divine
has observed.

3. We owe Tribute both of our Persons and Purses. First of our Persons, for
the just defense of our King and his just Rights. This is employed in those
words of our Savior, My Kingdom is not of this World, else would my Servants
fight. Joh. 18.36. 1 Timothy 22.
As also in respect of the Power of Life a King has over his Rebellious
Subjects, that would not submit to his Government; Luke 19.27.
which though a Parable may from the Application enforce it. And it may be
further proved from his just Power of making War and Peace; Number. 10.
as has been showed fully from Scripture and our Law Books.

Secondly, To this we must add the Tribute of our Purses; in that Money is one
of the Pillars of Power, and the Nerves of War; Majesty without it being but
the shadow of Regality, and without Power but a Speculative Greatness that has
the Vision of gallant things, but no means to detain them; because wanting of
that Soul which should animate that (otherwise dead and useless) thing to
Action. And therefore God has provided against the Galilites and Herodians
Act. 5.37 Mark 12.17. Mat. 22.16.21.
in one and the same Command, resolving upon that Common Rule of Justice [suum
cuique] for neither but against both; those that would give all to God and no
Tribute to Caesar, or all to Caesar and nothing to God (divorcing those he has
joined together) by saying, Give therefore to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's. Mat. 22.21.
Upon which ground (as I conceive) Dr. Reynolds still observes, Ps. 110. page
128.
[ Bona adespota incerti Domini vectigalia census, etc.] Concealments,
Tributes, Customs, and the like, are Testifications of Homage and Fidelity
belonging to the Personal Prerogative of Princes, and are (as the Apostle
says) due unto them. Romans 13.6, 7.
Thus Solomon levied, and the Princes with whom he held Correspondence, paid
Tribute. 1 Kings 4.21. and 9.21. and 10.10. Deuteronomy. 20.16.
Nay Christ himself paid it, (by his Command to Peter) though he was at the
cost of a Miracle for it, Mat. 17.27.
even to a Tiberius, a Wicked Prince, though it was the only Miracle he ever
wrought in money matters, (as peculiar to Princes) whereas all his others
concerned the general necessities of mankind.

And we may further observe the justness of it from the Latin word Reddite,
not Date, importing that it is not only lawful to pay, but unlawful to
withold it as a due; nay it should be willingly (the Offering of a
free-heart.) 2 Cor. 9.71.
So as Legal Customs, Luke 3.3.
Taxes or Homage, 1 Samuel 17.25. 2 Kings 15.19, 20.
Fines, Est. 7.26.
Confiscations, Ezr. 10.8.
are the just Rights of our Superiors. But extraordinary Impositions cannot
legally be now laid upon us, (in any case but visible and immergent necessity)
without the consent of both Houses of Parliament; it having been the Wisdom of
our Predecessors (by the Indulgence of good Kings) to keep the Purse and the
Power (by Municipal Law) divided, to prevent all Tyranny and Exorbitancy in the
use of either.

And if we owe these Assistances to our lawful Sovereign, how are they guilty
against God of a High Rebellion that reject and oppose him in their Superior,
and do not endeavor by just duty to prop, but undermine his Throne? For if a
Negative Obligation, not to aid him, be unlawful where God commands assistance;
what is their Crime, but as the Sin of Witchcraft, that enter into an
Engagement against him, who is to them God amongst men in the visible Character
of his Power? (when all others are only Men before God:) So as he never
countenanced any other Government than what was Monarchical, deposited and
summed up in one Person, exercising the Power, though not always possessing the
name of King. As appears by that of Judges, where it is said, every one did
what they list when there was no King (that is, no supreme Judge, or lawful
Magistrate) in Israel.

Nay, even in Popular States (so natural a thing is Monarchy) in what hands
soever the Power is, one Finger will still (as in natural Bodies) be found
longer than the rest, and become a Kingly Tyrant by his over-swaying Interest.
And therefore let us not cast Pelion upon Ossa, heap Sin upon Sin, by
countenancing such mushroom Alterations. Nay, he that is not against them is
with them in this case, and so becomes guilty of their unfruitful deeds of
Darkness, if not discountenancing and preventing them by all lawful ways;
according to that of the Apostle, 1 These. 5.
avoid all appearance of evil by appearing to disallow of it, never concurring
actively with it, though we suffer to Bonds and death: For that will in the end
prove our Crown of rejoicing, though the Absoloms of these times would with
fair and specious pretenses seduce us from our Allegiance. For it is better in
this Case (contrary to David's choice) to fall into the hands of Men, (embalmed
with Innocence to preserve our names from Infamy, and our Souls from Damnation)
than into the hands of God, besmeared with the Leprosy of Sin, that must needs
cause his rejection of us.

But if the Despisers of God and their King will still pertinaciously maintain
the black and horrid Sins of Oppression, Sacrilege, Murder, and the like; not
only deposing, but despoyling them (as the greatest Delinquents) of all their
just Patrimonies and Rights, by plundering the one, and vilifying the other,
(in all things sacred, whether Places, Persons or Revenues, sanctified and
discriminated by Gods own Institution) by profaning his Sanctuaries, and
despising his Priests and Ordinances, Lam. 31. Ps. 74.
they may be assured of a certain (if not swift) destruction to overtake them
from the Authority of the like Precedents in all Ages, and the Word of God it
self. For their Posterity here (like a Plague Sore in the Body growing out of
their own putrefaction (their soul and ulcerous Sins) as the meritorious cause
of Judgments will hasten them.

Nor can they account themselves free from the other's guilt, who have not
acted in their Crimes, if they have not some way opposed them Judge. 5.23.
according to their several Callings and Capacities, being bound to it by the
Laws of God, the Kingdom, and that of Natural Obligation to their Civil
Parents, and common Charity to their engaged Brethren; in that Damnation will
be chiefly pronounced against Sins of Omission, at the last day; which I
express not to upbraid any, but to convince them; by it to make them steer a
more safe course in Emergencies of the like nature, (if any shall hereafter
happen) making God's Law the Compass by which they sail (even Heavenly
Influences, not sublunary Agitations.)

However, I hope they will keep themselves from a countenancing of, or
compliance with the Persons and Actings of those that usurp the Supreme Power,
(both in regard of Scandal to others, and contracting Crime upon themselves) by
avoiding all Appearances of Evil, 1 These. 5.
when Virtue and Vice border so upon one another, are so near in their Confines
and so contiguous, as the least excess or defect makes a Natural Action many
times an unnatural disorder, and a thing indifferent in it self become the
parent of a great Sin.

Therefore he cannot be innocent that holds Communion with those that are
guilty of such high Crimes, in any thing that seems to countenance them; though
God's Service be a thing pretended, as in their Thanksgivings and Humiliations;
so St. Augustine. Sermon. 6. de verb. Dom.
For two will not walk together unless they agree, says the Prophet. Amos 3.3.
So as it is the duty of every Christian not to betray the truth by his Silence
or Countenance, but to contend for it against all Actions that seem to favor
the successes of an unjust Cause, grounded in Rebellion, or tending to the
maintaining an Usurped Power. Judge. 3.11.
And therefore we ought by separating from them 2 Cor. 4.17.
to reprove their Errors; Ephesians. 5.7, 11, 15.
in that our Actions have a Tongue in them, as well as the Corn, Earth, and
other inanimate Creatures. Psalm. 19.
So that though Humiliations and Thanksgivings are Pious and Religious Duties
in themselves, yet when called to advance any unjust Interest, or to
countenance it, our presence there intitles us to their Sin; (though we abhor
it, and the Minister at that time preach against it) in that the end for which
it was commanded terminates and specificates the Duty in all ordinary and
public Interpretation; and makes us give, by our presence, Offense to the
Innocent, confirm the Wicked, and partake of their Crimes; so as Disobedience
in that case is better than Sacrifice. 1 Samuel 15.


Nay, I may not only appropriate others Sins Psalm. 50.28.
by Countenance, Approbation, or Imitation, (while living,) but may be guilty
of Sin in others many thousand years after I am dead, (as well as I did Sin
before I was born) when they sin by Example or Infusion derived from me. For as
the long precogitation upon any sin with delight makes it an old and inveterate
one before it be produced into Act, so another's repetition of any sin by my
Example or Authority (though committed many Ages hence) makes it a new sin to
me, and to increase my Damnation; as is deduced most justly by Divines from the
Parable of Dives, Luke 16.
who reflected upon himself (not his Brethren) in his charity.

And therefore let us walk with all preciseness, Psalm. 119.53.63.
hating Evil with a perfect hatred, and doing nothing that either may be made
an Argument to confirm others in any evil way or action by our compliance; or
be matter of just scandal to the Innocent and suffering Party; especially if
our Judgments approve it not. For if I ought not to do a good Action, nor
favor a good Cause, if not of Faith, Rom 14.
I am much less excusable in countenancing an ill one, my Judgment in any thing
dissenting. So that none can conscientiously and voluntarily act with those
that usurp the exercise of Supreme Power in any Kingdom, in any thing that
gives countenance to such an Authority, or is conducing to the establishing or
maintaining of it, without contracting the guilt of all those sins and
irregularities the others smoothed their way by to that assumed Greatness. For
there are so many ways to contract others Crimes, as Junius and Piscator
observes, On Isa. 10.1.
that the very Scribe or Notary of an unjust decree, though but instrumental in
it, is threatened with a Curse; a woe being pronounced both against them that
decree unrighteous decrees, and that write grievous things, which the other
prescribed; as the Prophet expresses it. For we are commanded to walk honestly
toward them that are without, 1 Pet. 2.12.
not giving the least scandal in any thing: (What then is their guilt, who make
or put on their own Shackles, and twist the Halter for the strangling of
themselves, by departing from that Rule?) Though we may, in lawful Actions,
submit to the Power of Usurpers, (especially when seconded with some Coercive
Penalty) as in paying of Taxes, compounding for ones own Estate in case of
sequestration, etc. where the least evil of Punishment only falls under
Election; yet we ought not otherwise to countenance such a Party, for these
ensuing Reasons, which may contribute some directions for men to walk by, in
the sad and Labyrinthian turns of these times, by showing the unreasonableness
of any such Compliance or Dissimulation by our Actings. And,

1. First, All compliance in an unlawful thing, or that which I believe so, and
every Act of Dissimulation, ought to be avoided, as it is opposite to sincerity
and truth, which God commands in every Word and Act, there being nothing so
contrary unto him as a Lie, nor so destructive of Humane Society; in that our
Words are our common Coin, and ought to bear the stamp of the heart, both in
regard of our Commerce with men, and Tribute we pay in them to God, Psalm. 5.
Rev. 21.27.
nay to our own happiness; Aug. c. 3. Tom. 3. Tho. Aquinas 2. 2 qu. 10. Art. 1.
yet when Words and Actions are of a double signification, and that no other is
defrauded, misled, or justly scandalized by them, a man may use them by way of
design, though Opus exterius naturaliter significat intentionem, Aquin. 2. 2.
qu 111. Art. 1. 2. Aug in Ps. 25.
as the Woman's of Tekoah to David, 2 Samuel 14.
and Nathan, 2 Samuel 12.


2. Secondly, as it takes away the Glory and Crown of Martyrdom and Suffering
for God and a Good Cause, and prevents the exercise and manifestation of Faith,
Patience, Perseverance, and many other saving Graces (contrary to St. Peter and
St. Paul in their whole Epistle.) Yet where there is a lawful means to preserve
my self, I am bound to use it, (but not to tempt God by a temptation) in making
dissimulation or outward compliance a way to preserve my self or Estate by; for
that were to allow to every man a retreat in all Trials, and hold it forth as
the Horns of the Altar by which he may be saved, and place truth in
unrighteousness; though neither Law nor Gospel ever allowed of such a
Dispensation, (as to deny a truth, or speak, or act a Lie for
self-preservation;) but Elisha denied it to Naaman the Syrian: 2 King. 5.
The Prophet's [Go in Peace] being nothing but a Civil Farewell to him, no
toleration for his bowing in the Temple of Rimmon, though he professed an
uprightness of heart to the true God. Nay, St. Paul reproved it in St. Peter,
Gal. 2.
though but in an Act of Omission, a not doing what he might at some other
times lawfully have forborne, even a not conversing with the Gentiles; because
then proceeding from a servile fear it proved scandalous, and of ill Example:
And if Christ, the Morning Star, [vincenti dabitur] be only given to them that
overcome, what hope can they have that yield before the fight?

3. Thirdly, All seeming outward Approbation of, or consent to any thing that
is evil, makes us guilty of all the whole Chain of Sins the first Link draws
along with it. For, if a Robbery in one occasion a Rape in his Companion, and
that a Murder in a third, the first Approbation and Compliance in an unlawful
King, and Confederacy in one evil makes all three guilty of all those sins. So
if I but once give up my person to a free and voluntary Obedience to any
unlawful Power, usurping the Crown in any thing that conduces to the support of
it, (though not my heart) I do with Peter deny my own Master, (ore, si non
cord) and not only forsake David for Absalom, but become guilty of our
unnatural Rebellion, and the Innocent Blood it occasioned the expense of, with
all its train of Vices. As Jerusalem, by countenancing the Persecution of the
Prophets in her time, became guilty of the Blood of all the Righteous that had
been slain in that Cause, from the first Martyr Abel to the Death of Zacharias.
Mat. 23.34, 35.


For as I may be guilty of murdering one that overlives me, if I comply with
the Wicked in designing of it, (though it fail in the Event) or but countenance
it in the Attempt; so may I by an after- Approbation be guilty of a Murder
committed a thousand years before. And therefore we are commanded to separate
from Babylon in Practice and Communion, if we will not partake of her sins and
punishments; Rev. 18.
(as Daniel did from the Nation he lived in, though but in a Negative Precept:
Dan. 3.
For, what Communion can light have with darkness in what is ill, Christ with
Belial, if we will keep our selves void of offense toward God and toward Man?
Acts 24.
Thyatira's countenancing of Jezabel, being as hateful as Laodicea's
lukewarmness. Rev. 2. and 3.20.


So that we ought to reprove and not become guilty of others Crimes by a tacit
compliance; but (fearing God and the King, as Solomon commands) Prove. 20.19.
avoid them that are given to change Loyalty into Licentiousness; Religion into
Profaneness; Piety into Policy, Oblations into Ablations; Prove. 20.25. Mic.
3.8. Acts 5.3, 5. Romans 2 22
known Laws into Arbitrary Orders; Monarchy into Anarchical Tyranny; a Virgin
into an Harlot, whose house is the way of Hell, going to the Chambers of Death,
Prove. 7.27.
by the prostitution of Religion, Law and Right. For know (says Solomon) man's
iniquity shall take and hold him in the Cords of Death, Prove. 5.
that wilfully does what is evil in it self, evil in his Opinion, or generally
esteemed so of the best men, Phil. 4.8
whether in thought or act. Jer. 17. Jam. 1.15.


4. Fourthly, We are the rather to avoid all such Compliance and Dissimulation,
and to walk with all circumspection, in regard of Man's proneness to follow a
Multitude to do evil, and to run upon the Bias of Popularity or self-interest:
Especially since the Example of great men has not only a persuasive but
compulsory Power in it. Gal. 2.
For he that in Authority countenances one Thief makes many. Nay, he will soon
do what he should not, that does all he may lawfully, not considering
Expedience. So as rather than for to prejudice or scandalize others, we ought
to suffer all things, 2 Timothy 2.10.
and rather expose our selves to all personal hazards in a strict walking and
self-denial than comply willingly with the Apostatizing Practice of these
times, charactered by St. Paul 1 Timothy 3.
and St. Jude; and not only avoid every appearance of evil, but every lawful
Action, that may be an inlet to a Temptation to our selves or others; when
difficulty is the Test of true Christianity, which ever makes men (with the
Cypress-trees) keep their viridity and freshness (their Innocence) in the
sharpest Winter, (the greatest dangers) and (with the Rose) smell best in the
Still, when on the Fire.

So as (with St. Bernard to Eugenius, Baron. de consid. l. 3.
) all our Actions require [trinam considerationem] a threefold consideration,
as a most learned Divine observes to me; an liceat, an deceat, an expediat; so
as Discretion, Charity, and Edification, must be Inrgedients into all our
Actions. For, [Quorum usus coercetur certis Circumstantiis, ea dicuntur non
expedire, non dicuntur non licere.] Cham. 3. Panstrat. 21.27.
All Circumstances are to be considered in lawful things, as Times, Places,
Persons, Measures, Manner, to the making up of a lawful Action, otherwise a
right end, without these, frees not the Action from being sinful in the Doer;
Aug. 4. contra Julian. 3.
though lawfulness in a strict sense looks but at the nature and quality of the
thing it self, expedience at all Circumstances that conduce to any end.

5. Fifthly, We are to avoid all such Compliance and Dissimulation, and to be
jealous of our selves in the least shadow of Evil, lest by an habitual
countenancing of any evil act, we become worse than the first Authors of it,
(who perhaps by their hearty Repentance have endeavored their reparation) when
by my countenancing, owning or maintaining any past Injustice or Oppression, I
do not only contract the guilt of the first Contrivers of it, (for the
Scriptures attribute to one what he approves of in another: So St. Augustine)
Sermon. 6. de verbo Domini.
but entail a Curse upon my own posterity by it; Exodus 20.5.
though the thing was done at first without my consent; nay, perhaps against my
will. And thus Ahab was the reputed Murderer of Naboth by possessing the
Vineyard, 3 King 20.
and not reproving, but actually countenancing his Wifes action.

A President for those that now enjoy or purchase the Churches or King's Lands
and Revenues, and had no other ways to make the Inheritance theirs, Mar. 12.
but by killing the Heirs, (those Christ sent to possess them by lawful Title.)
Nay the Owner of the spoils is (in my Judgment) in a more dangerous condition,
than the first Designer of the sin; In that the one cannot consist with
Repentance, (of which Restitution is a part) when the other, as a transient
Act, may be sorrowed for, though effected in the most horrid way of dissembled
holiness (which makes virtue it self ill-spoken of) when Fasting and Prayers
are made preparatory to the worst design, putting on most of God, when they
acted for the Devil. Is. 29.13. and 19. Jer. 13.13. Ezech. 33.^1, etc.


6. Sixthly, Dissimulation or Compliance in evil is to be avoided in regard of
that Rectitude we are to maintain in all our Actions: (For what Communion has
Light with Darkness?) Therefore, says the Apostle, have no fellowship with its
unfruitful deeds, but reprove them; doing nothing that may bear the appearance
of evil. 1 These. 5.^2.
By which all State-Hypocrites and Hermophrodites, that can serve all Sexes and
Turns, and ( Cameleon-like) assume all shapes, are condemned.

Wherefore let us walk honestly, as in the day, free from all Artificial
Umbrages and Disguises, (unless to conceal a truth only which we are not
obliged to discover) maintaining a Conscience void of offense toward God and
all Men.

7. Seventhly, We are to avoid all such Compliance and Dissimulation, since all
Aberrations from the Truth and our Duties (whether Dictum, Factum, or
Concupitum) are in their own nature Damnable (says St. Augustine) in that they
all ought to be as intensively pure as our Prayers; especially our Actions,
which are to others the Images and Counterparts of our Souls, and ought to be
kept innocent in regard of our selves. 2. To carry the probability of a fair
Interpretation. 3. To be free from just offense, that we may be blameless in
the midst of a crooked Generation, Phil. 2.4, 15. 2 Cor. 4.17.
and approve our selves in much patience in affliction. 2 Cor. 6.


For our Actions have a voice in them, so as every Dissimulation, or outward
Compliance with any thing ill, speaks me guilty of it to God and men; in that
signa exteriora non solum sunt verba, sed etiam facta; and mendacium est falsa
significatio cum voluntate fallendi: So as every dissimulation is a species of
a Lie, and can in no case be lawfully done; because, omne mendacium est
peccatum, Aug. l. 4. c. 7. Tom. 5
which we are commanded to hate, Romans 12.
and to have nothing to do with the stool of Wickedness, which imagines
mischief, as a Law. Psalm. 94.20.
For then, (incipit esse licitum, quod solet esse publicum; and desinit remedio
locus, ubi quoe fuerant vitia mores sunt:) when they gather themselves together
against the Righteous, and condemn the Innocent Blood, verse. 21.
sin becomes natural to them.

And that we may the better oppose those whom we are not to conform to; nor
have any Fellowship with, Romans 12.2. Ephesians. 5.11. 2 Timothy 3. Gala. 5.
we must put on the whole Armor of God, to withstand in the evil day, Ephesians. 6.
doing all things heartily, as unto God, and not to men, Col. 3.23.
who are filled with all unrighteousness, and even Disobedient to Parents,
Covenant-breakers, implacable, unmerciful, Romans 1.29.30, 31.
(all which was foretold should appear in the last times, under the pretense of
Piety, the Mask or Form of Godliness) 2 Timothy 3.
rejecting their King and Priests, Hos. 10.
not enduring sound Doctrine, but heaping to themselves Teachers; 2 Timothy 4.3.
not called, as Aaron was lawfully, Heb. 5.
nor commissioned by any Mission from God, Romans 10.
to instruct his people, and dispense his Ordinances. And how this is now
fulfilled in our Ears he that runs may read. For (as the Key to the Lock its
made for, the Print to the Seal) the Text fits the story of these times, and is
the just Character of them Hos. 5.4* 2 Timothy 2.19. Isa. 20.12. Mat. 15.8. Jer.
12.
that turn their hearts from God, and their very Devotions into sin, when by
them they seek to give Countenance to Wickedness. Ezekiel. 33. ver. 30.31, 32, etc.


8. Eighthly, We must avoid all things evil or scandalous, lest some be
withdrawn from their duties, and others confirmed in their wicked Practices by
our ill example, which is the shortest way of teaching, and, like the ill
influence of Planets, kills most deadly. Neither is it only the most persuasive
Rhetoric and Oratory to weak understandings, but many times carries the force
of a command, nay of a compulsion in it; (as may appear by the Apostle; Gal.
2.14.
and, like Poison in the Blood, (that runs through all the Veins, taints, and
discolours them) infects the very Air of our Conversation.

And therefore on the contrary let us as we ought, rather suffer all for the
Elect's sake, with St. Paul, 2 Timothy 10.
and expose our selves to all personal hazards, in a strict walking according
to this rule, than comply in any unlawful act against Kings; for those are not
Children of the most Voices, but of the most highest, as has been said; the
Peoples Approbation serving only ad Pompam, but not ad necessitatem. (Thus the
first King Melchisedech was said to have no Father in regard of his Office, to
show that Regal Power is an emanation from the Deity it self) and therefore the
People cannot depose their Kings, nor their Progeny, because they are not of
their making, (For, cujus est instituere, ejus est abrogare,) but still owe
them Obedience and all things tending to their outward glory and support.

But our Royal Sovereign having also a Civil Right, by the Municipal Laws of
this Nation, both to the Crown and all his other Regalia, Rights and Revenues,
none can, but by a complication of many sins, (as Rebellion, Oppression, and
the like) invade him in any of them, nor acquit themselves from the guilt of
it, without opposing them that do it by all lawful means; being bound to it by
(the Law of God and of this Kingdom) and a Natural Obligation and common
Charity, which ties every man, not only to commiserate, but relieve another
that suffers under unjust pressures; so as those neutral men, that stand upon a
safe Shore, while the Ship is in danger, and afford it no help, cannot be found
guiltless; because they have not endeavored to deliver him that had no helper,
nor broken the Jaws of the Wicked, and pulled the Prey out of their Mouth. Job.
29^


And if Damnation be to be pronounced against sins of Omission at the last day,
as for not helping, not comforting those to whom we owe it, but by a single
Obligation of Charity, what Hell is hot enough for those that act against so
many clear convictions, and endeavor to enforce others to approve of, or
seemingly to Covenant and engage for, their Tyranny and Oppression; and like
those that have a Plague Sore, desire to dilate and spread their Infection
(their sin) to others, when he that maintains or approves of an unlawful act
done, repeats it, and sins it over again, espouses the sin, and makes it so
habitually his, as not to admit of any Divorce; but, as he that sets upon his
house by Oppression or Injustice, entails a Curse upon it to the Fourth
Generation: Exodus 20.5.
So he that countenances or confirms another in any unjustifiable Action, and
always approves it, does as much as in him lies to make his whole life but one
continued act of Wickedness, and entails it upon his Posterity.

Nay our Charter for Heaven has this condition in it, That we speak the truth
from our hearts, Ps. 15.
and in our hearts too, in Words, Actions, and Desires; for my inclination to a
sin makes me guilty without the Act, (in that there is an Eye-Adultery and a
Mental-Idolatry, the Devil's single money) and the connivance at (much more
compliance with) another's sin in out-ward appearance makes it mine (and so in
God's account) though my heart dis-allow and detest it.

For every Hypocrisy, Dissimulation, Guile, and the like, multiplies the sin,
and makes it two to me approving it in any; for I contract both the guilt of
the sin I countenance in another, and the Lie I am guilty of in my self by it;
for my Hand, or Eye, or Foot, or any fictitious Action may tell a lie as well
as my Tongue.

But then every untruth is not a Lie, when I believe what I say upon fair and
probable grounds, because mendacium consistit in voluntate; every thing having
only so much more of inordinateness and obliquity in it, as it departs from
what we believe or acknowledge to be truth.

9. Ninethly, we must not comply in any thing ill, nor do the best Action, if
we believe it bad, Romans 14.23.
nor countenance an ill cause, though to a good end, in that the man is by it
divided, (the heart and the hand moving several ways) and becomes guilty of
dissembling; which is no less (as has been said) than a real acted Lie; and
that every Lie is a sin, that ought not to be given way to Rev. 22.
out of the contemplation of the greatest good, even the saving of Souls: Romans
3.8.
For the Ark must fall rather than be supported by Vzzah's hands, 2 Samuel 6.6.
(any undue means) and no Sacrifice must be offered to God, rather than
Disobedience: 1 Samuel 15.
So that we must be sure that what we do be not only bonum, but been, good in
respect of the means as well as end. For, with St. Augustine, ( lib. 4 cap 7.
tom. 5.
Quod est secundum se malum ex genere nullo modo potest esse bonum and licitum.
Because (as Aquinas says) ad hoc quod aliquid sit bonum requiritur quod omnia
recte concurrant; in that Bonum est ex causa integra, malum vero ex
singularibus defectibus:) A single defect making an Action sinful, when all
Circumstances are required to concur in a good one; in that, omne verum est
omni vero consentiens, and quicquid non licet certe non oportet, (So Cicero Pro
Balbo.
) For potest aliquid licere, and non expedire; expedire autem, quod non licet,
non potest. Aug. de Adult. Conjug. cap. 15.
So that I will conclude with St. Augustine, Tom. 4. cap. 10. de mendatio.
and Thomas Aquinas excellently, Non licitum mendacium dicere ad hoc quod
aliquis alium a quocunque periculo liberaret. And therefore, with the Divine
Poet Mr. George Herbert, let us Dare to tell truth; there is nothing needs a Ly;
A Fault, that needs it most, grows two thereby.
and let us purify our hearts, Jam. 4.8.
as well as cleanse our hands, if we will draw nigh unto God; Jer. 17.
the Law of God requiring (an inward universality of the Subject) to walk in,
as well as an Universal Obedience of the Precept to walk by.

10. Tenthly, Yet all this does not by way of Obligation extend to the speaking
of the whole truth at all times, (as in Abraham's calling Sarah his Sister, to
disguise his Relation to her as a Husband) Genesis 20,
when God is not dishonored, nor my Brother damnified by it; in that it may be
but a concealing of something I am not bound to reveal; when Mendacium est,
quippe falsa significatio cum voluntate fallendi. Aug. tom 4. l. 2.
And therefore I will conclude with St. Augustine, Tom. 4. cap. 10. de mendacio,
it is lawful sometimes to hide a truth, (nay prudent and good;) but [non
licet] it is never lawful to tell a Ly, or to commit the least evil for the
greatest good.

And for these Reasons let us not comply in any thing that is malum in se, or
malum quia prohibitum, or so only in our Opinions; but let every man be fully
persuaded in his own mind what he should (or may) do, and not swerve from it in
his Practice. But in indifferent things the Commands of the lawful Magistrate
ought to cast the Scale and poyse him to Obedience; which he ought to submit to
in things evenly balanced, though he may perhaps a little scruple or doubt of
the lawfulness of them. For there he is not his own man, but acts with relation
to a further duty; Paternal Power swaying much in such cases, as we may see by
an higher example. Number. 30.
Otherwise there cannot be a greater contempt to God, than for a man to contemn
the Power of his own Conscience, (says Bonaventure,) or to appear what he is
not; every simulation being a Ly (as has been showed) when it has not some
signification in it more than is expressed; Aug. tom. 4. lib. 2. Quest. Evang
qu. 51.
and the Mouth that lies slayes its own Soul, Ezech. 16.
in that he dares God, yet fears man.

OBJECTION I.
Obj. 1. Ay but I deny the Premises and Ground of the former Conclusions: For
every Dissimulation is not unlawful: Witness David's before the King of Achish,
and Joshua's flying before Ai. Nor is every appearance in a disguise or seeming
Untruth a Ly, but in some cases lawful; as in Joseph's Carriage in Egypt
toward his Brethren, and Naaman's bowing in the house of Rimmon, allowed by
the Prophet Elisha; nor are these so many in-lets as you pretend.

To this I answer.

Answ. First, That the lawfulness or unlawfulness of no Action is to be
grounded upon matter of Fact; for no Presidents of others actings ought to be
be an Authority for us to imitate, though done by the Saints of God themselves;
in that they are to be considered as men (Christianity not destroying Humanity)
subject to many weaknesses and Infirmities, nay great failings in particular
Actions, and may become the more dangerous to others by the eminency and
reputation of the person; as that Body is most in hazard that has a confluence
of ill and noxious humors harbored under a seeming healthful Complexion;
which, interrupting the Harmony of a well-tempered constitution, at last march
under the colors of Innocence.

Secondly, As to David's Case, 1 Samuel 21.
[r] I say it was no act of dissimulation, but a prudent assuming of a lawful
disguise for the preservation of his life; (for his Heart and Act both
concurred in the means he used for his escape,) and had nothing in it of
scandal, nor any countenancing of any thing evil, or of prejudice to any, but
only a concealing of himself, and appearing as one that wanted the use of his
understanding at that time, that he might the better enjoy and use it, when
freed from his Enemies.

Thirdly, To the Instance of Joshua's fleeing before Ai, I answer, It was
lawful, being a Stratagem of War, having nothing of dissimulation in it. For as
he had to do with Enemies, so the using of all Circumventions, and taking of
all advantages was lawful to conquer them by (even by the Law of Arms and
Nations) as well as force; and no more than all professed Enemies mutually
profess and expect. For though all Capitulations, Contracts, and Promises must
be Religiously observed with Enemies when made, (as long as War is denounced
and continued,) Circumventions as well as Force are allowable; as in using
their Colors, and the like, to bring them into Ambush; or with the Romans to
throw Bread out of their besieged Capitol to the Gauls, to disguise their want
when they were ready to famish, that the Conditions of Surrender might be the
better; which St. Augustine with the Fathers and Schoolmen allow: though no
Covenant made is ever to be broken with any, (where the violation is not first
on the others part;) for then there can be no faith nor security in any thing,
nor commerce, nor contract between men; and that breach of Faith made the
Trojans, who could not be conquered by War, to be overcome by a pledge of
Peace, when the Mask was taken for the Man, as in Absalom.

Fourthly, I grant that every seeming untruth is not a Ly, (nor every untruth
it self; for, mentiri est contra mentem ire; so that if I speak a Falsehood, and
believe it true, I yet do not tell a Ly:) nor can dissimulation or Falsehood be
imputed to Joseph, either in his representing the person of an Egyptian, or
accusing his Brothers for Spies, or Benjamin for his Cup, Genesis 42. and 43. (...)
because both his Words and Actions were for his Brethrens advantage, and in
their Interpretations and consequence significant of his intentions to bring
them to him, though they were something dark and mysterious in themselves,
after the manner of the Prophets, and use of all Nations; whose Actions are
sometimes like the Hieroglyphics, which make every Feature speak a Precept,
and every Circumstance to signify something to men of sense; so as all
Ironies, Hyperbolical Expressions, Disguises, nay Reservations of a truth are
justly to be exempt from the nature of a Lie in some cases, the Scriptures
being full of them.

For though my Tongue should be always in my heart, my heart needs not to be
always in my Tongue. I may conceal a truth, not tell a Ly, being not always
bound to discover my self in Dangers or Trials, where God's Honor, or some
duty to his revealed Will exacts it not. So that St. Augustine determines in
Joseph's case, Lib. Qu. super Genesis Q. 45.
and says, Mendacium est enunciantis cum voluntate falsum enunciandi, or, cum
voluntate fallendi. Lib. de vera innocentia.
For Abraham, by calling his Wife Sister, [x] would not be known to be her
Husband, Genesis 20
for fear of Abimelech; though she was both Sister and Wife to him.

And thus our Savior concealed his going up to Jerusalem from the Samaritans
when asked the question, Mat. 9.
by saying, His hour was not yet come, (because the period of time was not then
accomplished he fixed upon for his remove) though the Text says he went
immediately, and that Luke 24.28, 29.
to his Disciples (for the Trial of their Affections, or perhaps intending it,
if their importunities had not interposed;) he made as if he would have gone
further and have left them, when he yet stayed in the next Village with them.

By all which we are taught, That Piety is no Enemy to Prudence, though it no
ways countenance Dissimulation, Equivocation, or any the least ill or unlawful
Action in any: So that St. Augustine in Abraham's case, Lib. Qu. super Genesis
4.46.
and upon that action of our Savior's, Qu. Evang. l. 2. qu. 41.
Quaelibet fictio non dicitur esse mendacium. Finxit se longius ire Dominus;
non enim quod fingimus mendacium est, sed quando id fingimus quod nihil
significat. Cum autem fictio nostra refertur ad aliquam significationem, non
est mendacium, sed aliqua figura veritatis. As Nathan's Parable to David, Aug.
l. de mendacio cap. 5.
and Christ's of the lost Sheep, and lost Groat, etc.

Fifthly, To that of Naaman's bowing the in Temple of Rimmon before the Idol
(not to it) I say,

1. It was not only a single but multiplied sin; (and no ways tolerated by the
Prophet;) for, like Ezekiel's Wheels, 2 King. 5.
one moved within the other; when first his acting against his Conscience (if
he be presumed to have done what he asks a merciful dispensation for) drew him
to an outward dissimulation (in appearing what he was not in heart) by
countenancing Idolatry. Secondly, To a scandal of the Godly. And Thirdly, To a
confirmation of the Pagan Worshippers in their Idol-service to their false
Gods; which was a sin prohibitum quia malum, and so cannot rationally be
presumed to have had any dispensation from the Prophet, (though for the gaining
of Naaman to the Profession of the true God) when their Damnation is just that
say, Let us do evil, that good may come, Romans 3.8.
or that Gods needs such humane Artifices, when men and Beasts take their Prey
by craft.

2. The Prophet's saying [go in peace] was but a civil Farewell, after the
custom of that Nation, no allowance of Naaman in that sin, nor at all taking
notice of his intention; because perhaps his reproof might then prove
unseasonable to his new Convert, who (as our Savior says of his Disciples,
when he had other things to declare unto them after their first Conversion)
could not bear it, being but an Infant in Grace; a newborn Proselyte, capable
only of milk, (the first Principles of Religion) not strong meat; in that it
would rather turn into corruption and a surfeit to endanger, then nourish the
man; so as it was in the Prophet a prudent silence only for that time, no
connivance at his intended error.

3. As Naaman's bowing was sinful in it self, and so in his Opinion (else why
did he beg pardon in that particular from God?) out of the conviction of a
natural Conscience, in that even to such what is not of Faith is Sin, Romans
14.23.
I conceive the Prophets [Go in Peace] might have the nature of a Reproof in
it, being as much as if he should have said, Well, since you find a check of
Conscience at it, as a thing that needs a pardon, why do you not rather decline
it (as you ought) than interrupt the Calm, Tranquillity and Harmony of a quiet
mind, in which peace I wish you still to go forward, (by saying Go in Peace)
without raising any such Earthquake or Commotion in your self.

4. In Naaman's Case, matter of just scandal was taken off (as some conceive)
in that he publicly professed his disallowance of the Idol-Worship, and so
could not confirm the Wicked, offend the Godly, nor misguide others by his
performing of a Civil Duty; so as the Prophet might be thought rather to
rectify a tender Conscience, by his words, than tolerate a sin, Aug. Ps. 5.
when Naaman's intention was only to bow Civilly, not Religiously, with his
King, not to the Idol.

5. Lastly, Admit the Prophet did dispense with Naamans civil bowing, as some
conceive in respect of his late Conversion, being immediately commissioned by
God for it in a thing not malum in se, (who as the Supreme Lawgiver could only
dispense with his own commands;) if any man shall by that example presume to do
what Naaman did, he does not as Naaman did, unless he have the same Warrant,
without which none ought seemingly to partake of others sins, Ephesians. 5.7.11.
but rather reprove them, walking with all Circumspection in regard of the
several ways they are to be contracted; though there are (as the Schools call
them) [peccata compensativa] profitable sins, as in the Egyptian Midwifes
saving the Hebrews Children by a Ly: But I commend only their Obedience to God,
in not killing, not their excuse which needed pardon: Their Mercy was
recompensed, their Ly not approved: Nor shall we ever be justified in the least
degree of sinning, 1 Timothy 5.22.
which may be contracted many secret ways, and more than most men usually
apprehend. And therefore we ought to be very cautious of contracting sin, there
are so many avenues to it: as,

1. Consulendo, By advising others in evil, as Achitophel did Absalom to make
good his Treason and Rebellion against David; but such shall be taken in their
own snare and perish in and by their own counsels, says Solomon.

2. Adulando, By feeding other Vices, and nursing them up with the milk of
Flattery, in calling good evil, and evil good, Isa. 5.20.
which is a beautifying of a people (as the Pagan Negroes by painting) with Ink
instead of Colors, Isa. 9.16,
to which the greatest woe belongs; though the Wicked may bless for a time whom
God abhors. Ps. 10.3,


3. Mandando, So Vriah's Murder and Drunkenness were David's sins, though
effected by others.

4. Consentiendo, For thus Saul became guilty of Stephen's Martyrdom. Act.
22.20.
And therefore, If sinners entice thee consent thou not. Pro. 1.10.
For, sentient eandem poenam qui consentiunt in eandem culpam.

5. Provocando, By inflaming or enticing others to sin, as the Harlot in the
Proverbs; Pro. 7,
for by setting any others house on Fire, we are sure to burn and consume our
own, if contiguous to it, and be answerable for the other's damage.

6. Participando, For if thou see a Thief attempting to steal, and have a
power to hinder him and do it not, thou art guilty of his Crime: The not
preventing a sin in another, where I may do it lawfully, being a promoting of
it: And then [aequum est ut qui participes fuerunt in peccato participes fiant
in supplicio] it is but just that we suffer in the punishment, if we partake in
the sin: Rev. 18.4
For so Wrath came upon Jehoshaphat 2 Chro. 19.2.
because he helped the Ungodly, and loved them that hated the Lord, when a good
wish to a bad action is a partaking of the evil. 2 John 5.11.


7. Omittendo vel connivendo, by conniving at or not reproving others; Ephesians.
5.11. Lev. 5. Ezech. 3.
such a Love and Indulgence to my Brother being the greatest hatred; Lev. 19.17.
as God hates us most when he seems not to hate us at all, by reproving and
correcting us, but suffers us to go on in a course of sin. Isa. 1.


8. Defendendo, For he that defends or maintains a bad Cause or Action
espouseth the guilt of it; in that, He that justifyeth the Wicked or condemns
the Just is abominable before or unto God, Prove. 27.15.
and becomes the greater sinner, in that it has more of deliberation, and
perhaps less of Temptation in it than the other had.

9. Praecedendo, By giving ill example. For if I pluck up the first pale in
another Enclosure, and engage others by my Example to lay it waste and common,
I am guilty of their Trespass; as he that wilfully makes or inlarges any cuts
in a Sea-bank is liable to repair the damages any receives by those Waters. For
thus Jeroboam made Israel to sin (says the Text) even exemplum dando, as well
as imperando, and Peter the Jews. Gal. 2.


And to these I might add many other ways (as a learned Divine has observed to
me) by which we derive others sins upon our selves; but is not this enough to
make us vigilant over our Souls, since there are so many Avenues for sin to
approach us, and that it is of so subtle and insinuating a nature, as (tho the
Guards be never so well kept) it will sometimes enter by a false pass, or glide
in by the advantage of that gloomy darkness that over-shadows the best men? So
as we need add (ballast to our sail) Examination to every Action, to poise and
prove it by; it being a safe and noble, no melancholy thing (as one wittily
observes) to be always in ploughing, weeding and worming a Conscience, in
removing (Straws as well as Loggs) occasions of Temptations, by trying and
testing every thought, word and work to make them current, by filing the Iron
and melting the Ore, to clear and smooth the greatest difficulties, lest our
spungy souls, apt to (receive any Liquor) suck in and embrace any sin, swell us
into such an immense body of sin, as (through custom or impenitency) should
become too big to enter into the Bethesda of Christ's Blood, (when what comes
there is ever cleansed and cured.)

And therefore, though prudence in declining evils of punishment be commanded
Mat. 10.16.
, it must always be with Innocence: So as prudens simplicitas is the greatest
Policy and best Fort to retreat to in all dangers, when the least ungirting a
man's self (or allowed liberty) in any thing evil, by outward complyances or
disguises, is but a prostitution of him to contempt, and would insecure the
Interests of all men, and make all things uneasy to them in matters of Trust
and Confidence, the period (as one says) of cares, and only Pillow of rest for
man's Spirit, when a pleasing entertainment to the Senses, may, as a Chamber of
death, and Magazine of Corruption, become by its stench Poison to the Brain;
and surely no man is the better for another artificial sweetness, that feels
the noisomness of his putrid and corrupted Lungs break in upon him through the
thin Cloud of a perfumed breath. And he that strowes a Pits mouth with Flowers
and covers it with an Icy-crust (instead of a Cristal Pavement) for others fall
and ruin, has but more of Artifice, not less of Malice than a professed
Enemy, but is more dangerous and destructive to all Humane Society; so as
dissimulation is in no case to be allowed, being ill in it self, and the parent
of so many mischiefs.

Quest. 1. But admit God should for our Sins give us up for a time to the
Arbitrary Tyranny of our State-Deformers, and permit, de facto, a change in the
face, or rather a total Metamorphosis in our Government, how far may we obey?

Answ. Why then men may in reference to their Power (while it continues and
they command lawful things) obey; but not to the Authority. For once admit of a
Conscientious Obedience as due to an Usurped Power, no State in the World shall
ever be free from the Treacherous Practices and daring Attempts of ambitious
Spirits, or be left means to recover their just Rights, if lost, when Power of
Arms ought only to support the just Power of Princes, and not by Power to set
up an Illegal and Usurped one.

Yet Conquest sometimes, if grounded upon a just War (which cannot be between
King and Subjects) may challenge a Conscientious Obedience, as well as a King
that comes to a Crown by a just descent, (as ours;) yet the persons of such
many times raise a Title from common, Humane and Municipal Laws also, to their
Subjects Obedience, and many times by a mixture of both Humane and Divine,
weave the strongest Thread; men being always more ready and prone to conform to
their own than God's Laws. And therefore it was the wisdom of our former
Monarchs, comprehensively to engage their People (in the several
Representatives) to all those Statutes they were to be governed by;
constituting their Parliaments of the three Estates of Men; Clergy, Nobles, and
Commons; by that temper and even poyse of Power (in regard of the exercise of
it) to bring in all to a cheerful Obedience, when their known Laws were the
known Boundaries and middle things between Supreme Power and Common Right: By
this, exrtacting, as it were, the purest Essence and Spirits out of all other
Forms of Government, to make one perfect one, including the rest; as man does
the Inferior Creatures, having reason proper to himself, sense common with
Bruits, and Vegetation with Plants; for thus we have Monarchy in our King,
Aristocracy in the House of Peers, and Democracy in the House of Commons. And
to prevent any exorbitancies in any one, all must concur to the making any Law,
with the King's assent, not otherwise; and let him that affects either
Arbitrary Power or Parity, but begin it in his own house, and he will never
wish it should spread into the State of which he is a Member.

Quest. 2. But may I not act under an Usurped Power, or a Power I conceive to
be so, nor seemingly comply to preserve my self?

Answ. No, not in any case to own the Authority, but Power: I am passive under
some compulsion, and that in lawful things.

OBJECTION II.
Object. 2. But if a People depose their lawful King, (for a Tyrannical and
exorbitant use of a just Power, or to preserve Religion it self) be it by War
or otherwise; and by assuming the Power, place it in many, or one, that wholly
imployes it for the maintenances of the true Religion and just exercise of the
known Laws, may I lawfully and conscientiously obey him?

Answ. That it is not lawful to acknowledge such an Authority just, and in that
notion to obey it, because the Supreme Power in any one Person is derived from
God, and is Paternal, founded in Adam upon Natural and Paternal Principles,
never collated by man, but is absolute and unlimitted in regard of Humane
Influences upon it in its first collation, 1 Samuel 8.
though limited in respect of Divine Precept, Deuteronomy. 17.
in regard of Exercise, and sometimes by National and Municipal Laws; (through
the Indulgence of good Princes) yet Kings are never subject to the Coactive but
Directive Power of them, and answerable unto God only (as David was, Psalm. 51.
not to man for their violation,) from whom they hold their Commission. Prove.
8.25. Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2. Hos. 13.11.
And therefore by Precept they are exempt in their Persons from all other
Powers, Prove. 21.3. and 8.15. Eccles. 8. 1 Pet. 2. Romans 13.
as immediately designed by God in their individual persons to be obeyed, Deuteronomy.
17.15. Job 3.6, 7. and 34.30. Hos. 13.11. Wisd. 6.3.
with a brand and desert of punishment upon all those that resist or rebel
against them, 1 Samuel 8. Number. 16. 2 Samuel 1.4. and 15.15.
as if done against God; Romans 13.
when our Prayers, Tribute, Reverence, Assistance, and Obedience are an Homage
we owe them, though Wicked and Tyrants, (where the Divine Providence concurs
with other just, mediate, instrumental ways for the making their Titles lawful)
1 Timothy 2.2. Jer. 25.9. and 29.7. Dan. 3.21. Genesis 20.27. Mat. 22.21. 1 Samuel 8.
and 24. 1 Pet. 2.27.
as they are God's breathing Images, the Mortal Pictures of the Immortal God,
says Optatus, even Gods before men, Ps. 82.6.
though men before God. First, By Analogy. Secondly, Deputation. Thirdly,
Participation. So Tertullian, Lib. de Scapul.
Cyrill, Epist. ad Theod. prefix. lib. advers. Julian.
Hierom, Ad Pap. An^i Greg. l. 9. decret. 1 Timothy 3.3.
etc.

Nay, this truth has been derived to us from all Antiquity as well as
Scripture, and was never contradicted till the Romanists and Schismatics,
(like Simeon and Levi, Brethren in Iniquity) as Samson's Foxes, concurred
(though looking contrary ways) to the setting all Cristendom on Fire by it,
and broached the contrary Doctrine. As Buchanan De Jure Regis apud Scotos.
and Bellarmine, De Romans Pont. l. 5.
though all antiquity be against them, as Calvin acknowledges, Inst. l. 4. c.
20.
and as appears by multitudes of Authors both ancient and Modern. Glos. Incog.
in Ps. 50. R.P. dedicated to Tho. de Trugil. Loranus. in Ps. 50. Hieron. Ep.
22. and 46. So St. Chrysostom. in Ps. 50. as cited by Cyril. So Cyprian ad
Novatian. Ambros. Sermon. 16. in Ps. 118. Clemens Alex. l. 4. c. 6. Turrecre. 1
Sum. de Ec. 1. Q 92
Which ought to convince our late Statists (the Corahs, Dathans and Abirams of
these times) of their Errors, and satisfy all men, that the person in whom
the Supreme Power is placed, cannot by any Tyrannical Act, or Introducing
Heresy, forfeit his Right; and that none ought nor can Conscientiously obey it
in another, that assumes or accepts it from an unjust Collation, though for the
best ends imaginable.

Yet if the Objection be still framed and pressed (as I suppose it is) by the
Actors in our present troubles (the sad effects whereof are but the Airy
Offspring of their Platonic Speculations, a wild and wise folly) they may
receive a further satisfaction from our known Laws, (as may be seen in Bracton
and all our ancient Sages) the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, and our
King's just Title, acknowledged by all Carolus Dei Gratia, not by the Peoples
Suffrage; his Coronation not making but declaring him King only. Nor ought it
to be otherwise in Popular States, where, by Universal Suffrage and consent,
the People have lawfully placed the exercise of the Supreme Power in many
(retaining the esse, perhaps, not been esse, of Government) there being no
rising up, or opposition lawful against the Supreme Power, or those we conceive
lawful Magistrates. Romans 13.


Now upon these grounds (that the Supreme Power is not Originally,
Fundamentally, and radically in the People, but in that single Person God has
by Prescription, Succession, and Inheritance, or other Humane Rights
commissioned for it) there is no just means of assuming it into the People, and
their transferring it upon any; nor can any such act be lawful, whether by the
Pomp and Artifice of a pretended Justice, or the Power of the Sword; both which
do but heighten the Crime, according to the weight of Circumstances in either;
the one clothing the Devil in the Robes of Justice and Majesty; the other
making the Sword the unjust Arbitrator over the Lives, Liberties, and Fortunes
of many innocent persons, without any lawful Power, Mat. 26. Joh. 10.10.
and against all our known Municipal Laws; when in such a case no Title of
Conquest can ly; for that must be ever grounded upon a just War, which is
always constituted of these essential parts. 1. A Just Power. 2. A Just Cause.
3. Just means to prosecute it. None of which can concur in Subjects taking up
Arms against their lawful Sovereign, or Warrant Obedience to any other, without
countenancing Injustice, Violence, Oppression, etc. Mat. 26. and 22, 24. Joh.
19.10.
which is in no case lawful; no dispensation being lawful to any Action that
partakes of the nature of sin.

For with the Hypocrite, to do a seeming good, to let in or countenance any
evil (for the most pious ends) is but to bring in Religion upon the Devil's
Shoulders, and follow a seeming Triumph to Hell.

So as all that can be done under such a Government is but a prudent submission
to the Power in things indifferent, without giving any countenance to the
Authority that imposes it, or just scandal to our weak Brethren. For then even
lawful and indifferent things in their nature, are not at all times expedient
to be done, says St. Paul; 1 Corin. 6.12.
as in the Instances of eating or not eating; 1 Corin. 8.13.
but we may or may not, according to several Circumstances. For,

1. A thing indifferent may become ineligible unto me, in regard of use or
exercise, where a lawful Power interposeing determines my choice either way, if
the thing be equally indifferent, and stand, like the Pin in the Balance, in
an even poyse; (all Obedience to the Supreme Magistrate depending in its just
latitude upon things indifferent to be done, or omitted;) upon which ground (as
a learned man observes) God made choice of a Fruit in Paradise, indifferent in
its own nature to be eaten or refused, for the trial of man's Obedience in the
State of Innocence, to teach us that the interposing of a Command from a just
Authority ought in all things indifferent to determine our choice; and by
making it a duty takes off all just cause of scandal to others; for in this way
scandal is taken, not given; in the other I am guilty of Disobedience to my
Superior, Romans 13.
as my Magistrate, of scandal to him, as my Brother, and of ill example to all
if I do the contrary.

Though my choice may, nay ought to be determined in the use of an indifferent
thing, rather than break a rule of Charity in the doing or not doing it; as in
the Instance before of eating or not eating of Flesh at any time to the scandal
of my weak Brother, 1 Cor. 8.
when free in the aequilibrium of choice. Yet if any necessity of nature, or
other great prejudice to my Person or Fortune depends upon my not eating, I
ought to eat Flesh though to the scandal of another, rather than impair my
health, or bring any great mischief upon my self by the Omission of it. For
there, though the thing be indifferent in it self, it is not so to me, such
Natural or Moral Necessity interposing.

From whence I conceive I may safely conclude against the former Objection,
That no conscientious Obedience is due to such an exercise of Power as is there
proposed; (no nor submission in indifferent things, if done with scandal to
others, because not imposed by a lawful Power to determine my choice;) yet
where my personal freedom, self-preservation, or any great prejudice to my
Estate (in which my Posterity is concerned) be put into the Scale to weigh
against an unwilling scandal, I may submit; for that alters the case in
relation to Conscience, though not the nature of the thing; for there I owe a
prudent submission, when by the rule of Charity (which is but to love my
Neighbor as my self) I am to prefer the well being of my self and mine to an
offense taken by, not willingly given to another; where a compulsory Injunction
and Power inforceth my submission to an indifferent thing; it being agreeable
to the Law of God, Nature, and Nations, to preserve my self by all lawful ways.

OBJECTION III.
Object. 3. If it be so that honest and well-meaning men may not be in any case
voluntarily instrumental under an usurped and unlawful Power to the executing
the known Laws, by which distributive Justice between Party and Party,
Religion, Peace and Propriety may be maintained, and perhaps some advantages
gained, by which they may much improve the Interest of their lawful Sovereign,
(which they prefer in their wishes to their own Being) and that if they decline
a making use of such opportunities, and that all men should walk by the same
Rule, there must necessarily follow Oppression, Atheism and Anarchy, the Womb
of all Confusion, that would reduce all things into the first Chaos so as
nothing but darkness and disorder would cover the Earth, which their Omissions
may contract the guilt of, when, in acting with the present Power for these
ends, they do but choose the least of Evils, and have no thought of doing the
least Evil, and so may act.

Answ. As I said, The least Evil is not to be committed nor allowed, to produce
the greatest good: Romans 3.8.
and that there the choice is not between Evils of Punishments where the least
may be chosen; but between an Evil of Sin (which I have proved an outward
Compliance in an Unjust Cause, or with an Usurped or unlawful Power, especially
against a just claim to be) and no Sin, being (as the Schools determine) in the
number of things eligible. ( Malum non est in numero eligibilium propter aliud
bonum, in that, actus peccati non est ordinabilis in bonum finem. So Thomas
Aquinas 2. 2. Qu. 110. Art. 3.
). And upon the Egyptian Midwives, and Rachels Pious Ly; it is concluded by St
Augustine, sup Ps. 5.
Peter Lombard, Lib. 3. did. 38.
and Thomas Aquinas, 2. 2. Qu. 110. Art. 3.
That no man ought to tell a Ly to preserve a Life, nor for any Spiritual Good.
Though St. Augustine says wittily, Tract. 5. Tom. 9. super Joan.
Nemo habet de suo, nisi mendacium and peccatum; when all truth comes from the
Fountain of it, God. Eccles. 7. Jam. 1.
And St. Ambrose Tom. 4.
(upon those words, Quis ex vobis arguit me de peccato?) Omne mendacium
fugiendum est tam in verbis quam in operibus, etc. all outward dissimulation is
to be avoided; when Opus exterius naturaliter significat intentionem. Aquin. 2.
2. Qu. 111. Art. 11. Qu. 111. Art. 2.


And we should be the more careful not to make Hell the way to Heaven, (Vice to
introduce Virtue) when even lawful Actions become sins, if done with scandal to
others, and that some higher end or duty determine not my choice in them (as I
have determined in another case of Conscience concerning Actions in themselves
indifferent:) For the least defect or excess makes a lawful Action become
sinful; and a willing countenancing of any sin draws on the toleration of all,
and like the Spirits in the Blood, will soon run through the whole Body of sin.
For, with Aquinas, 2. 2. Qu. 110. Art. 2.
veritas aequalis est, cui per se opponitur magis and minus. So as in doubtful
Cases Gerson's rule is good, Par. 2. Reg. mor.
(Ab omni actu, cui non est necessario astrictus, teneatur desistere) where
scandal may be given.

OBJECTION IV.
Object.4. Ay but Salus Populi est Suprema Lex: So as I may act voluntarily
with and under an usurped Power, though against legal settlements and known
Laws for the preservation of the Commonwealth, and that by a Law of necessity,
which gives the Law to all Laws, and warrants the doing of that which otherwise
is unlawful; for by this our Savior seems to justify his Disciples gathering
Ears of Corn on the Sabbath Day, and urges the Authority of David's Example for
it. Mat. 12.


Answ. 1. It is true that Salus Populi est Suprema Lex, in reference to Humane
and Municipal Laws; for so Kings, in whom the Supreme and Legislative Power
resides, may for the good of their People, in great Exigents, act besides, nay
against the known National Laws of their Kingdom, but not contrary to any
Divine Sanction.

Answ. 2. I acknowledge that necessity is a very powerful Argument, both before
God and man, to excuse (not justify) an ill Action: For so God himself, the
Supreme Lawgiver, has sometimes been pleased in a Gracious Condescension to
man's infirm condition, to dispense with his own Laws, as well as Kings with
theirs, in Cases of great necessity, as may be instanced. But this has been
ever in things only [mala quia prohibita] evil because forbidden; as in
Ceremonial and Judicial Laws; never in any thing that is [malum in se, and
prohibitum quia malum,] evil in it self, and forbidden because specifically so:
Such as are Schisms, Heresies, Idolatry, Rebellion, Usurpation, Oppression,
Murder, Sacriledg, and the like; for in these God never leaves his Servants
without a just way of extricating themselves from any such necessity of acting,
by enabling them to dare to dye rather than do any thing that in its nature is
evil. and, by suffering according to the Will of God, to commit the keeping of
their Souls to him in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator: 1 Pet. 4.19.
Otherwise no man shall ever have the Honor and Reward of suffering for and
with his Savior, nor have means to manifest and exercise his Faith, Patience,
Fortitude, Perseverance in well-doing, and many other Graces.

Answ. 3. For the Example brought out of the twelfth of Matthew, to prove the
human lawfulness of doing an unlawful thing in case of necessity, only to
preserve a single person, (as in David) which a fortiori, from the less to the
greater, must be the more justifiable for the preservation of a Commonwealth:
It appears that our Savior does approve of his Disciples in gathering the Corn
on the Sabbath, by David's Example as it was made lawful by an Humane
Necessity, in a Ceremonial Precept only. Nevertheless, as Lord of the Sabbath,
he did then cancel the duty of that Ceremonial Law of not gathering any thing
upon that day, as appears by the Context.

Yet our Savior in citing David's eating the Shewbread, did not free David
from the breach of a Ceremonial Precept, (For the Text says expressly, it was
not lawful for him, nor those with him to eat it, but only for the Priests,)
but urges it for the illustration of Gods Indulgence and Mercy to the frailty
of his nature in so great a Humane strait under the Law, in a thing only malum
quia prohibitum; that they might the less wonder at his compassionating his
Disciples weakness, in taking that they might conceive to be against a
Ceremonial Precept only, and that under the Gospel, for the relief of nature in
an extremity.

OBJECTION V.
Object. 5. Well, but if it be not lawful to comply voluntarily with an Usurped
Power, by which I may be said to give it countenance and reputation, may I not
yet act under it in things good or indifferent in their own nature, when they
are commanded under a Coercive Penalty; and that for the preservation of my
self and Posterity, which the Law of God, Nature, and Nations oblige to?

Answ. A Passive Submission to the present Power may in some such Cases be
lawful. For I am not bound to tempt a Temptation, nor, with the Porpus, to seek
and hunt the storm, where it may be honestly avoided; self-preservation being
so natural, as by instinct it catches at any thing, that may but stay or
support it; as a Hop for want of a Pole will clasp and embrace a Nettle to stay
it from falling. But here we must be cautious, and distinguish between the
acting of a Magistrate and other inferior Employments, which perhaps may be
preparatory only to some Administrations of Justice, or yet of less importance.
Yet in case of Magistracy we must distinguish between Causes Criminal and
merely Civil. For,

1. In Causes Criminal, where Blood is by the Law required to expiate the
Offense, I conceive it wholly unlawful to act, in that they must derive their
Commission for it from them, who have a just Power of conveying it by Divine
Commission and the known Laws; or else they do not take but wrest and force the
Sword out of God's hand: and he that so sheds man's blood with it, by man shall
his blood be shed; in that he does it without any lawful call, without which no
man can act but in a private capacity; and then it were murder in any to kill a
Murderer: and he that as a Magistrate will do a thing that requires the just
Influence of Supreme Power to make it lawful, does tacitly own that Power to
be in him or them from whom he derives his Power to act. Especially in the
Method of proceeding against Malefactors in Criminal Causes, where the frame of
the Indictment and reading the Commission must be understood an owning a just
Power to be in them from whom they derive theirs; in that no private person or
Community of men, unless combined into a lawful Government, ever had the Power
of Life and death in them. For it is by that Power only men justly suffer; (not
the Law, which is only a Regulation of the exercise of it;) so as any man may
press the desert of death against a Wicked Malefactor by the Law, as
preparatory to Sentence and Execution, but must not be active in the latter
without a just Commission, in that all men ought to act in a lawful posture and
subordination only. For if the Power Originally be invalid, it cannot derive a
just one, by virtue of which men may operate; no more than a sulphurous Spring
can send forth a sweet stream; for, with Aristotle, Quod deest in causa deest
in effectu.

2. In cases merely Civil, between Party and Party, I am something doubtful how
to determine, if compelled to accept of a place of Judicature; though perhaps
in some Cases I may be morally bound (from the Object it points at) to act,
without any outward force upon me, in the name (not virtue) of the Usurper,
where the thing is intrinsically good, or has the countenance of ancient and
known Laws, but never to the countenancing or upholding of the Power; so as I
may act under, but not for it in such cases. And in others, when I have refused
and resisted it, as far as I can with safety to my Person and Fortune, I
conceive I have taken off all matter of just scandal of giving any countenance
to the present Power, and rather show my disapproving of it; when force and
compulsion only has determined my choice, and that only to a submission, in
reverence to the Power that is upon me, (but not to any just Authority in the
Imposer, which Conscience would oblige unto.)

Nor do I in this consider my self vested in any just capacity for the doing
any distributive Justice, so as to force a Conscientious Submission from any to
my Determinations, but only as an Arbitrator to mediate a just end of
differences, which the necessity of the times (all other Channels, by which
Justice as a stream should derive to us, being wholly obstructed) enforces all
men to a voluntary and free submission unto.

And therefore with these Limitations it may perhaps be lawful, so as neither
by Oath or Acting, I own the exercise of the Supreme Power as just in them that
assume it, nor endeavor to countenance or support it; which Cautions all
Callings of men, especially Commissioned Officers, are to observe under an
unlawful and usurped Power, that possesses only an usufructuary and gubernative
one to rule, without any just propriety in the Legislative Power, to which none
can pretend, but such as are commissioned by God according to his revealed
Will, and possess their Titles by a lawful and civil Right. For in an unlawful
posture of subordination none can have a just Power derived. Though (as I said)
perhaps in some cases, where I am morally bound to a thing intrinsically good,
I may act in the name (not Power) of the Usurper. Neither do those abused Texts
Romans 13. 1 Pet. 2.13.
oblige us further; for God cannot breath hot and cold in the same words, i. e.
countenance Rebellion under a pretense of lawful Obedience.

3. Lastly, For other inferior employments; in things absolutely in their own
nature lawful, men may, as an Act of Submission under a Power, comply
passively; (though no Beam of any just Power appear in the Person commanding;)
so as it be involuntary, and with a public owning the dislike of it.

Nay there may be perhaps a voluntary and yet lawful acting in some such
Capacities in things of, an inferior nature, when men do it rather by
permission of than commission from the Usurpers of the Supreme Power, having
their Call only from the ancient and known Laws of the Kingdom, as Constables,
Bailiffs, etc.

OBJECTION VI.
Object. 6. Well, if it be not lawful to countenance or any way support an
unjust Power, it is not lawful to pay Taxes, Customs, Excise, etc. when
imposed, and to maintain a War against a Just Title.

Answ. Every Voluntary Act herein is sinful, and not to be done; in that the
matter, manner, and end ought to be good in every Action. And in this case,
though it may be in some cases lawful to submit to such Payments, I ought
rather to dye than do any thing willingly that may advance those ends for which
it is designed.

But then if the demand of it comes seconded with a Power and direction to levy
ten times as much if refused, the state of the question is altered and directs
me to an act of prudence in chooseing the less evil of punishment, (which will
be rather a weakening than strength to the Usurper, who would make an advantage
by my refusal,) without contracting the guilt of the Tyrants misapplying it.
For the compulsion in the Law it self looks only at the money, not the
employment of it, and directs my choice to what is least penal; and takes off
all just cause of scandal, when my intentions in paying are as far distant from
his in receiving as Heaven from Hell. And though this particular case be hardly
to be found amongst the Casuists, it is thus resolved in other Notions; to
which I will propose a Parallel or two for illustration (never questioned or
condemned by any I suppose as unlawful) having Universal Consent and Practice
for it. But first I shall answer another Objection.

OBJECTION VII.
Object. 7. It is true, every Act has only so much of sin as it has of the
will in it; but here what you do cannot be said to be merely Passive, or
Involuntary, but a mixed Action, partly constrained and partly free, and so in
some measure sinful, as involving your consent.

Answ. I confess man in all things works as a rational Creature, and does
nothing but of choice; his will being never forced, as Natural Agents are, from
the impulse of a Foreign Power; so that it is his choice not necessity which
fixes him, be the thing in its nature eligible or not: but this happens not in
this case; For if the question were whether I would pay Taxes, etc. to the ends
proposed, or loose all, I ought to part with all, and my Life too, rather than
do it.

But if it be reduced to this: Will you give me so much money, or let me take
all you have, or ten times as much? then the choice is merely between evils of
punishment, in which the Law of Nature obliges me in prudence to choose the
least; as also the Law of Charity; and is so universally understood to free me
both from scandal and sinister interpretations; Compulsion in Law never
implying more than submission to the Act: and then when all Power of resistance
is taken from me, and no liberty of Election left, whether I will part with so
much Money or not; but that my liberty is limited to one Object only, the evil
of suffering in a less or greater degree; I may pay the Money assessed without
any check of Conscience, in sensu diviso, abstracted from all ill, but not in
sensu composito, as parting with it to a sinful end.

Nor does the intention of the Imposers (though it binds not in Usurped Powers)
extend further than to our submission to the payment of the Money they require;
(though they declare the end for which they intend it) or else to undergo the
Penalty they require; as may appear by all the Ordinances of these times. And
for Parallels to this, --

1. Consider, That if Thieves assault me upon a way, and swear to kill me, if I
will not give them a Bond for an hundred pounds, to be employed for the
corrupting of some Virgins Chastity, or other Wicked end, and will have it
inserted in the Conditions I am to subscribe, I ought not to do it for a World.

But if the condition be only to pay so much Money, I may yield to it as a
ransom for my life. For it then becomes a choice of the least evil of
punishment only, (without countenancing or contracting any evil of sin;) which
I am obliged to by the Law of self-preservation, especially when my Actions
declare no more.

2. Consider, If a lawful King, disputing his just Rights against the actual
Invasion of his Rebellious Subjects, shall place all his Treasure and Magazines
in some strong Garrison, there to be kept as the Nerves and Sinews of his War,
as Pillars and Supports of his Royalty, and entrust them into some Loyal hand
to keep and defend them for his Service, they cannot be delivered up to his
Enemies (to prove his Masters Ruin when designed for his strength) without
great sin, till held and disputed beyond all probability of longer defense, or
hope of relief, because something of his Sovereigns Interest remains still in
his Power.

But when it can be no longer kept by force, it is a duty upon him, both for
the preservation of himself, and the Loyal Party with him, to surrender upon
Capitulation, rather than become a wilful Sacrifice; all Election being taken
from him but that of the less evil of punishment, when he only parts with what
he cannot keep, to preserve himself for some fairer opportunity of serving his
King, which proportion holds in our payment of Taxes, when the demand is
seconded by a Compulsory Power.

For there Natural Equity permits a Passive Submission; and in things not
absolutely necessary by Divine Sanction, as in observing the Rules and Canons
of the Church, in Ceremonies, Forms of Prayer, and Liturgies, etc. For there
Omissions are no acts of Contempt, nor just cause of scandals, if we are forced
to it.

OBJECTION VIII.
Object. 8. Well, admit that it be not lawful voluntarily to obey, but
passively only to submit to the Impositions of those that usurp an unjust
Power, I may yet (to ransom my person in case of restraint or Imprisonment,
and to enjoy the benefit of Laws and protection of the present Government)
engage to be true and faithful to them, rather than to continue both in Misery
and Incapacity of ever paying that Tribute of Homage and Allegiance I owe my
just Sovereign, either in aiding or assisting to the recovery of his just
Rights.

Answ. In this case, Faithfulness implying Trust, Duty, and Active Obedience,
(as in the Revelations, Be faithful unto Death, and I will give thee a Crown of
Life; and so understood in Common Notions) you ought not to do it. For though
you cannot pay the Debt of an Operative Allegiance to the right Owner, it is
not in your Power to transfer his Right to another; the Duty of Subjects to
their Kings, deriving from God's Precept, not Man's Donation; so as it falls
not under the consideration of things Arbitrary, Obedience being simply good or
evil, as it is objected.

And therefore all I conceive we can do in this case lawfully, is but the
giving of a Negative Assurance not to act any thing against them, so long as we
remain under their protection; which once made, we ought to be faithful in the
observing, till our condition be enlarged by Exchange, Ransom, or some other
way of Providence, which ever presumes the means to be lawful, as well as the
end good. For this is but a submission to my fate, with an Improvement of my
Condition, no restraint of my Power; (but the exercise of it for a time) a
prudent Election of the least evil of Punishment, without any Ingredient of the
evil of sin: For so we may keep Loyal, and strengthen in the Habit, when
suspended in the Act, and interrupted in the mafestation of the Duty; a wrong
possession de facto, never cancelling the Owners right de jure, but engages all
honest men's Compassions to the oppressed, and Prayers for their restitution;
and not, with the Pagan Indians, to worship the Devil, ne noceat; or for the
Temptations of Greatness or Power. Mat. 4.
So as our Oaths and Engagements must be always, as the Casuists determine, 1.
Super re licita. 2. In bonum finem. 3. Never contra pactum aliquod prius
initum; which the equity of the thing and some just occasion may again call me
to upon a former tie or Obligation; for if otherwise taken they engage us only
to an hearty Repentance for having taken them.

And all this we ought to do out of an humble and reverential awfulness to the
Person and Commands of our King, not servile Affection, (as not consisting with
a noble and ingenuous nature) but a filial one, issuing from love: For this is
grounded upon the Law of Nature, and should be filial, as Power it self is
Paternal. Lev. 19.3. Pro. 14.21.
And therefore my Son, (says Solomon) fear God and the King; for as the King
to God, so the Subjects are to the King, and he is a middle thing in regard of
just Power, between them and God. Nay, he is so much Gods (nay God to us) in
regard of the immediate Power and delegation he has from God, (that Josephus
to distinguish Monarchical Government from all others framed by men, calls it
Theocratie, that of God) which, in the Inventory of all Blessings of this life,
was by Ezekiel accounted the greatest: ( Ezekiel. 16.3.) And, as a Beam from the
Sun, it is so inseparable from the person, where it is once legally settled in a
King and his Progenitors, as it is with us, (owned both by the Articles of our
Church, Canons, Homilies, Laws, and Oaths, both of Supremacy and Allegiance)
that nothing but death can divide them.

For though some Kings have been deposed by Rebellions, and others forced to
resign their Crowns, as Edward the Second, (see Baker's Chronicle) they were
never divested of the Habit of Power (de jure) but only deprived of its
exercises (de facto:) And though that of Resignation, can hardly be justifiable
in any case, it ought never to be done but to his lawful Successor, (as it was
in the Instance mentioned) without throwing off God, (as in the rejection of
Samuel) where his Providence had otherwise settled the Right; in that where
the Divine Constitution has placed the Supremacy in any, God still expects
from him a just managing of that Power for the advancement of his Glory, and
good of his people, which he can never cast off, no more than a Father, Wife,
or Child can discharge themselves from the mutual duty, of those Relations, so
long as they continue.

Nor is this slightly to be passed over when the single duty of fear, due to
the King, Eccl. 12.13.
is comprehensive of all others; for as Love, it is a Catholic Grace, runs
through all our Actions, and is a Watch upon them for their Regulation; or, as
the Life and Soul that animates them; and the more it is free, the more it
dilates to show it self, (says Irenaeus) in just duties; and makes our
Filiation under the Gospel of much more liberty than the condition of Servants
under the Law, as it imports a voluntary Reverence or Worship: for so Fear and
Reverence in the Language of the Spirit speak the same thing. Eccl. 1. Ps. 5.7.
compared with Ps. 132.7. Ps. Ps. 95. Mal. 1.6.


But to test our selves in this duty, we may know it by our fear of God, which
includes it; as God will know (that is take notice of) our fear of him, by that
to our Superiors. As in Abraham's Sacrifice, where though intuitively and
eternally he knew that Abraham feared him, yet he would not own it, but from
the evidence of his outward expressions: Genesis 22.13.
And thus our Savior would only take notice of St. Peter's love to him by
feeding his Flock, Joh. 2 P. 17.
though he well knew his Affections before, which was also the reason of Job's
Trials. Job. 1.


Nor is this a slight Argument, (as a Reverend Divine observes) but grounded
upon an impregnable Reason and Syllogism framed by the Spirit of God, 1 John 4.
who concludes by a Topic rule, That if we love not the general Image of God
in our Brethren, whom we do see, we cannot love God whom we do not see, but in
such Shadows and Representations. And if by my want of Affection and Charity to
my Brother, and the fruit of it, God concludes against my love to him, he will
do it much more for the want of our duty of fear to our King, (who is not only
his general, but the particular and peculiar Image of his Divine Power and
Glory, to whom fear is originally due,) which made Jacob to say of his Lord
Esau, Genesis 32.10.
vidi faciem ut faciem dei: And Moses, Number. 16. Exo. 16.8.
Your murmurings are not contra nos sed contra Jehovam.

Nay, thus God himself says of the ten Tribes revolt, 2 Chr. 13.8.
they resisted the Kingdom of God in David's Son; and to Samuel, 1 Samuel 8.7.
non te sed me. So as our failings in this, or any other way to our Prince, is
a disobedience to God himself, as their hearts are said to be in his hands by
appropriation. Therefore, my Son, (says he, not Sons) give me thy heart, Pro.
24.21.
in exchange for those many hearts I have submitted unto you, when you shall
appear in Power and Majesty; and this to speak the near ground of Relations
between God and his Vicegerent; and instruct us that we ought to be Sons to
the King in our Duties, if we will be Heirs to God, and Inheritors of his Glory.

For as in that where he said, The Poor ye shall have always among you, Christ
did not only foretell but propose it, as a Glass to represent God's bounty to
us, and an Object for the exercise of ours to him; so in promising Kings should
be our Nursing-Fathers, he does as it were promise us some Beams of his Majesty
and Goodness should shine through that Glass, and always be amongst us, for the
comfort of his people, and commands our Reflections of Gratitude and Obedience
to himself in them.

For when we look upon the Actions of Kings, we terminate not our selves in
their persons, but the power of God working in them, (when lawfully deputed:)
which makes the Schools call Rebellion Sacrilege, in that King's Persons are
sacred, and that God is opposed and violated in them, who has given them a
right of propriety in Power, (not an usufructuary one only) such as one King
may gain in another's Kingdom by a just War; yet of right he ought only to hold
it till Reparation be made for the first Injury done, and the Expense he has
been forced upon for the Vindication of himself and his Rights.

OBJECTION IX.
Object. 9. But if a Nation be invaded, when under an Usurped Power, (by a
Foreign King or People) without either just Title or Ground of War, I ought to
assist the Usurper in the defense of it.

Answ. In this Case I ought only to join with any Force to defend my self and
the Kingdom against any such Invasion, so as I neither fight for the Usurper's
Interest and Establishment, nor against those of my lawful Sovereign.

But out of this Bough many Branches spring, that afford Fruit of excellent
taste and nourishment, could I but gather and press them; but I leave them for
an abler hand, and period my Lines and the Reader's trouble in what I have
expressed already.

In which Resolutions, if I have been too severe and rigid, I shall willingly
and readily retract my error upon the Evidence and Conviction of better
Reasons: For I only hold forth this Glow-worm-shine, and little twilight, to
afford some glimmering in these benighted times, by which men may guess at the
way they should choose to walk in, (though difficult and rugged) and to provoke
some of the great Luminaries, who had a fixation in the Orb of our late
glorious Church; or other Orthodox Divines (Stars too, though of a lesser
magnitude) to send forth some clearer Beams and more wholesome Influences, both
to guide and refresh us in this Wilderness we walk in: (inhabited rather by
Beasts than rational Creatures:) there being no subject more proper and useful
to these times, wherein, if we should but see Diogenes in his buisie search,
and ask what he strove to find, he would answer, Hominem quaero.

Nay, I confess I am wholly excentrick in my motion, being out of my own
Sphere; and have nothing but Pious Intentions, and a Holy Zeal (for a Rachel's
Mantle) to cover this weak Essay with, and to hide it from the severe censure
of a more exact Inquisition. Only the Rule I propose to my self, is, in all
doubtful and controverted Cases of Conscience, to determine in that which is
the strictest, and has most of self denial in it, in regard of the proneness
of Man's Nature to strain his Fetter and pass his Bounds; and because the least
sin (like the falling of the first drop in the Orifice, or the first Sand in
the Hourglass) disposes to and prepares the way for more; and many times, if
allowed, proves the most dangerous, in that it refers more to Infinity it self,
and grows into Habits, because repeated without notice or purpose of
limitation; when great devastating Sins Allarms the Soul to a speedy
discounting them by repentance, and as great Fish-bones, that are not easily
swallowed, stick in the mouth and are spit out again.

How Conscientious then ought we to be in every Action, since the doing of an
Act, good in it self, becomes sin to me, if I be not fully persuaded of the
lawfulness of it, and the Compliance with others in any thing that is evil in
it self (though I do believe it lawful) makes their sin become mine. For so St.
Augustine Sermon. 6. de verb. dom.
says, the Scriptures do attribute to one what he acts by (or approve of in)
another's person: Thus the Prophet attributes the Murder of Naboth to Ahab, in
saying, Thou have killed him: 3 King. 20.
because he disallowed it not when done; though it was not he, but Jezabel,
that contrived and acted it without his knowledge: And thus the Jews are
charged by St. Peter to have killed the Lord of Life; though they did it not
actually, nor was it lawful for them (as they confessed) to put any man to
death; yet their guilt was more than the Romans, in that they had Malice in
their hearts to prosecute it, when the other had hands only dipped in his Blood.

Therefore walk (says the Apostle) with all Circumspection, or Preciseness, as
the word bears it) Ephesians. 5.15. (...).
recoyling from all sorts of Evils in their first approach; as the Blood in the
Body will do from any apprehended danger, to fortify the most vital parts. For
if we must account for every vain thought, Jam. 4. Jer. 4.14.
(though thought be so near nothing as no man can think what it is) how should
we avoid the least act of scandal to our Brethren, or compliance in the most
minute sin, when the smallest sins many times prove more dangerous than
greater, (as is before expressed:) For like Worms they get insensibly into the
heart of the Fruit, and destroy it; when the great Birds, that fall upon the
Tree, are watched and driven away.

Thus small Distempers many times kill, where a strong Fever would not; in
that they infuse their Venom by gentle insinuations, not to be discovered, when
the other by Assaults gives Allarm to our watchfulness. Nay, great sins
discounted, or not repeated, are not so dangerous as the least, multiplied
without our care or notice; in that (as I said) they refer more to infinity it
self, when augmented without purpose of limitation. For thus our pale-faced,
weak (but repeated) sins, become many times more deadly, than our scarlet and
impudent ones repented of.

Therefore let us be so far from making little account of great sins, as to
make great account of little ones. For if the owning or patronizing the least
minute Atom, aerie sin, be so dangerous, and (when alone) sits in State, and
draws a whole Train of Vices after it; what hope is there of those men, who, on
the contrary, are so far from making great account of little sins, as they make
little or no account of great ones; and yet assume the disguise of Piety, as
the hating of Idolatry, when they commit Sacriledg. Romans 2.22.
by it, and their Hpocrisie, making themselves more guilty than they could be
in the thing they abhor? For (as one says wittily) the Idolater is but mistaken
in his God, the other thinks God is mistaken in him; the one dishonours, the
other undeifies his God. Yet the men of our times, who make themselves the only
Church of God, and reprobate those who are of the true Church, are not only
guilty of this, but many other crying sins; which they not only Act, but Enact,
as a Law; as Bloodshed, Oppression, Profanation of God's Rights and
Ordinances; by which you may know them not to be yet born of God, 1 John 3.
for those sin not, (not such great known sins, not with a deliberate purpose
to sin.)

And therefore let us neither adhere to their Persons, (how seemingly holy
soever they are in other things) nor countenance that Cause, that causes so
many crying Disorders and Impieties. For, (as St. Cyprian says) ea non est
Religio, sed dissimulatio, quoe per omnia non constat; when as Religion
teaches us to walk in an orderly, sincere, universal, and uniform observance
of all God's revealed Will, and so walking to persevere. For they (and they
only) who are constant unto death shall enjoy a Crown of Life; which I heartily
wish to the greatest Enemies of God, our just Cause, and our Persons;
beseeching God, that (though they send us through a red Sea of our own Blood to
our Heavenly Canaan, and, with Mahomet's Tomb, hang us between Heaven and
Earth, as unworthy of either) they may yet become Instruments of restoring
Peace and Truth in this Kingdom, and account those fair and spotless Lillies
greater Ornaments to th^i^ Garlands, than all their Roses of Bloody Trophies.
And that they may make God and the Kingdoms good the only Center and
Circumference of all their Thoughts, Words, and Actions; truly repenting of
their Sins, that by Gods Mercy they may obtain Pardon for them, and not be left
in hardness of Heart, Blindness and Impenitence, (a Judgment beyond all
Judgments, as it is a Judgment that has no sense of Judgment, and yet has
both Sin and Punishment in it.) And though they have resolved all Law into the
Sentence of the Sword, and almost all Gospel into the private whispers of a
seducing Spirit, God in Mercy keep them from the destruction of the one, and
afford them Mercy in the other for their Conviction and Amendment; and let not
the Spiritual Lethargy of Sin any longer stupifie their Consciences, but awaken
them to an active endeavor of repairing their Errors, and restoring of God's
Truth, that their Souls may be saved.

5. Lastly, Prayer is the great Outrent and Homage the Subject, as a duty, ows
his Sovereign.

Now as Prayer is the top-Branch of all our Duties to God, and the most
prevailing Oratory for his Blessings upon a Nation, we must pray for them as
men, but first as Kings, that we may lead a peaceable and quiet life under
them, in all Godliness and Honesty. 1 Timothy 2.
And therefore in the practice of that Duty I shall wind up my Discourse,

Humbly beseeching God, that as he has given us a Caesar for Piety exemplary,
for Prudence as an Angel of God, knowing both good and evil, who by day as a
Cloud, and as a Pillar of Fire by night, does go before us to direct, comfort
and refresh us in all our wearisom marches and hard sufferings; not refusing to
wade through another red Sea, though tinctured with his own Blood, for the
regaining and maintaining of Truth and Peace amongst us; that God would give us
Grace truly to value so great a Blessing in our King; and for his Fatherly
Kindness to us, to pay all filial Obedience to him. And let us never cease
humbly to pray thee, O Lord, still to establish the Crown upon the Head of him
and His Posterity, till Shiloh come.

Plead thou this Cause of our King, O Lord, (or rather thine own Cause) and
fight against those that fight against Him; hate them not so much, as not to
seem to hate them at all, (by letting them still prosper in their Wickedness;)
but correct them, to amend them here, that they may not be condemned hereafter;
and make Him the more Pious by His Pressures, the more just by their
Oppressions, and every way the better for, and more glorious by His Sufferings.

Make His Enemies as the Dust before the Wind, and the Angel of the Lord
scattering them; but upon His Head let His Crown ever flourish.

And thou, who art the Supreme Goodness, so temper thy Justice, we beseech
thee, as to make thy Strokes become Mercies to Him, that He may read thy favor
in thy frowns, and not turn thy Rod into a Serpent, thy Antidote into Poison,)
but make thou it, like Aaron's, in the end to bud, and bring forth the blessing
of a happy Peace to Him and us.

Yet let Him not so value Peace as to prefer it to Truth; (for a just War is
better tban an unjust Quiet,) but as His and our Sins have let in one, so make
our Sufferings by, and Sorrows for them, to fit us for the Blessing of the
other; and us by following Righteousness to find a happy rest.

In the mean time, sanctify and preserve Him from all the Artificial
Underminings and open Violence of Bloody and Wicked Men; prepare him for all
Events, and give him an holy use of all thy varied Judgments, and make Him to
make a pious advantage of His Enemies, and they to become His best Friends;
when by sucking the Venom and Poison out of their Injuries, He can (by a
charitable forgiveness) turn them, through God's Mercies, into the richest
Cordial Spirits, to refresh His Soul with in His greatest Conflicts and
Faintings.

And ever give Sentence with Him (O God) and defend His Cause against the
Ungodly: Let not the Justice of it sink under the weight of the Sins of His
Party, nor the not only acted (but enacted) Rebellion, Sacrilege, and
Oppression of His Enemies, separate any longer between them and thee, nor us
from one another, but unite us all in inward Affections, and the Bond of an
outward Peace; and that we may maintain truly zealous hearts to our God, Loyal
to our Sovereign, and loving one toward another.

Protect Him by thy Power against all His Adversaries, guide Him by thy Grace
in all His Actions, bring him to His Throne again with Happiness, Safety and
Honor; re-establish Him in all His just Rights, and grant that all those
committed to His charge may lead a peaceable and quiet life under Him, in all
Godliness and Honesty: and that as He has always defended thy Faith, so thy
Faith may still defend Him; and He make it His Endeavors to restore thy
Worship to its ancient Purity, thy Church and Ministers to their ancient Glory,
and Himself and Kingdom to a happy and established Peace.

And for this end, calm (O Lord) the raging of the Sea, and the madness of His
Pepole; bound their Passions; turn their outward Form into the substance of
Religion; let all their Schisms end in a Charitable Accord, their Errors in
Truth, their Rebellion in Loyalty; that as they have requited Him Evil for
Good, and Hatred for His Good Will, they may now have hearts to repent of their
Evils done, and he one to forgive those he has suffered by them.

Still preserve Him a Faithful Servant to thee (though His Subjects be false to
Him) and ready to undergo the greatest Injuries, rather than to consent to the
least Sin: Give Him a heart to part with all for thee, but nothing of thine;
and though they would Vn-King Him by their Demands, let Him not Vn-man Himself
in His Condescentions; (depose the just Sovereignty of Reason in Himself,) nor
prefer any preservation to that of His own Conscience; but in all things to
preserve His Subjects just Rights, without enslaving Himself or His.

Make thy Will (O Lord) the Rule of His, and thy Glory and thy Self the Center
and Circumference of all His Thoughts, Words, and Actions: Give Him a free
submission to thee in all Events; extricate Him from all His troubles; carry
Him through all Difficulties; increase in him all saving Graces; subdue in Him
all Corruptions; pardon all His Sins; sanctify unto Him all Afflictions; guide
him in all His ways; supply Him in all His wants; lay no more upon Him than He
may be able to bear, but with the Temptation give Him a means to escape, even
the Snares of Sin and Malice of His Enemies: and make Him not only be ready to
suffer, but to dye for the name of JESUS; in Affections and Habit ever, yet
never in Act, a Martyr, unless for the advancement of thy Glory and His, by one
dying Man to make many living Saints, to increase the joys of the Saints in
Heaven, though it would take from us the greatest upon Earth.

Give Him (O Lord) a dry Victory over all His Enemies, and not the Temptation
of a Bloody Conquest: But if by those Issues thou will recover our weak and
dying State, come again with healing in thy Wings, and once more restore what
we have lost, and give what is wanting to the manifestation of thine own Glory.
So be it, Lord JESUS,

Amen. Amen.
FINIS.

