THE LIFE AND DEATH OF Sr. THOMAS MOORE, WHO WAS LORD CHANCELLOR OF ENGLAND TO
KING HENRY THE EIGHT.

Printed for N.Y. 1642

The Preface to the Reader.
1. AS I cannot but daily think of the rare and admirable virtues both of
nature and grace, The end and scope of this work:
which did shine most perspicuously in the blessed life and glorious death of
that worthy Champion of Christ's Church Sr. THOMAS MORE; so also have I often
had an earnest desire, especially for the spiritual behoof of my self and my
Children (who are as small brooks derived by natural propagation from that
spacious sea of rare perfections; or like tender twigs drawing sap from the
fruitful root of his noble excelle^cies) to give them a taste, according to
my poor ability, of some few of his most heroical virtues; professing my self
utterly unable to set down his life in writing, as he deserves.

Though beyond my ability and capacity*
2. For if that Apelles the principal paynter that ever lived, was thought only
fit to draw with his pencell the pourtraicture of Alexander the Great; or if
Lysippus the most curious engrauer was the only man, which was suffered to
carue in brass the beauteous feature of the same so worthy a personage; for
fear least that some unskillful workman might rather blemish his favor,
then any ways grace it: what courage can I have to undertake a work of so
great difficulty as this, who know myself a very puney in comparison of so
many famous men, that have undergone this business already, finding in the
very beginning of this mine enterprise my small capacity overwhelmed with the
plenty and copiousnesse of this subject? and if I should boaste my wit and
skill to be equal with learned Stapleton's, who at large and with great
diligence and dexterity has set forth the life of this great servant of God
in his book entitled The three Thomases, I should, vanish away in mine own
pride, knowing my self right well most unworthy to be compared unto him; or if
I should challenge unto my self more certainty of the matter related, then my
great uncle Mr. William Rooper could have, every one might judge me both vain
and arrogant, of whose sincerity none that ever knew him or heard of him, can
doubt, I being the third in descent from S. THOMAS, and he his owe sonne-in
law, with whom he had familiarly conuersed y space of sixteen years
together, as he himself confesses; Yet undertaken out of zeal and love to
the memory of S. Th. M.
yet for all this I have now at last ventured to discourse a little of the life
and death of this glorious Martyr (for so without envy I hope I may call him)
non vt electus ex multis, sed quasi relictus ex omnibus, not as one that may be
thought fit to set his life forth with good grace, but as he, who only upon a
natural affection to his Ancestour, trusting chiefly of Gods aid, and this
Saint's holy prayers, is emboldened to say somewhat thereof; this being one
property of affection, to suppose, that whosoever has spoken, or whatsoever
has been said of him, whom we love, all that we think nothing, if we
ourselves have not said somewhat in his praise; although (alas) we are often
the unfittest men for that purpose, we being not able to utter what we
conceive, because our passion takes away much of our conceit; and therefore
we utter for the most part either broken words, or imperfect sentences, more
intelligible to him, that searches the secretts of men's hearts, then to others
that hear them spoken, or read them in our writings.

And for special cause known to my self alone.
3. But one may ask me, why I should challenge more affection to this man, then
any other of my kin, of whom few or none have endeavored to write any
thing hitherto; I answer, that though I have had more cause perhaps then any
man else to love him, and honor him, which is best known to my self, and not
fit to be related unto all men, secretum meum mihi; yet will I not ascribe to
my self so great a privilege of loving him best, I being the youngest and
meanest of all my family; let this suffice him, that is a curious searcher of
this my deed, that as Doctor Stapleton was moved to take pains in setting
forth the actions of S. THOMAS MORE, because he was borne in the very same
month and year, wherein he suffered his glorious martyrdom; As also for
being borne on the day of his martyrdom*
so was I borne anew and regenerated by the holy Sacrament of Baptism on the
very same day (though many years after) on which Sr. THOMAS MORE entered
heaven triumphant, to wit, on the sixth day of July And therefore have I had
some special confidence of his particular furtherance and blessing. For how, I
pray you, could I ever have hoped to have lived as heir of Sr. THOMAS his
family, And by his prayers having the honor to be the heir of his family.
and to enjoy at this time some part of his inheritance, all which by his
attaynder he had lost utterly from himself and his children, if his prayers had
not, as it were begged it at Gods hands? besides I was the youngest of thirteen
children of my father, the last and meanest of five sons, four of which
lived to men's estate; and yet it has been Gods holy pleasure, to bestow this
in heritance upon me; which though perhaps I have no cause to boaste of,
because it may be a punishment unto me for my faults, if I use it not well,
and a burden which may weighe me down full deep; yet will the world
conjecture it to be a great blessing of God, and so I ought to acknowledge it:
And although I know myself the unfittest and unworthiest of all the four to
manage this estate, yet they either loathed the world, before the world fawned
on the^, living in voluntary contempt thereof, and dyed happy souls, in that
they chose to be accounted abject in the sight of me^; or else they utterly
cast of all care of earthly trash, by professing a strayte and religious life,
for fear least the dangerous perils of worldly wealth might gaul their
souls, and the number of snares, which hang in every corner of this world,
might entrappe the^ to the endangering of their eternal salvation; and left me
poor soul to sink or swime, or, as I can, wade out of these dangerous whirle
pooles, amongsts which we wordlings are ingulphed; the multitude of which
eminent perils do force me to cry first and chiefly to CHRIST JESUS: saying
with his Apostles: Lord, save me, for I am in danger of drowning; and then also
to crave the especial assistance of Sr. THOMAS MORE his prayers, by whose
intercession I hope to wafte this my poor bark unto her assured haven of
heaven, though shaken and crushed with wind and weather.

4. But none of us must think, Not presuming only upon his merits:
that his assistance is all, we must putt our own helping hands thereto:
Na^genus and proauos, and quae non fecimus ipsi
Vix ea nostra voco. --
his meritts are not our warrant, yea rather his examples have laid a greater
load on the backs of his posterity, in that we are bound to imitate his
actions more then any other, or else more harm will fall upon us, because we
have not followed the foot stepps of our worthy Forefather, Which lay a
greater burden of imitation upon us;
according as Moses commanded the Israelites saying in his Canticle:
Interroga patrem tuum, and annunciabit tibi; maiores tuos, and di^ent tibi;
which the Apostle also counsels Christians in these words: Quorum videntes
Conuersationem, imitaminifidem. But should I therefore wish I had not been his
Grandchilde, because I have incurred a greater bond, and shall run into
greater infamy, by forsaking my duty? noe; God forbid; yea rather this will
I boldly affirm, not upon vain glory, but upon the confidence I have of
this singular man's blessing; if God would have given me choice, before he
created me of nothing, wether I would be the son of some famous Emperor,
magnificent King, noble Duke, courageous Lord, or his, whose I was, I would
most willingly have chosen to be the same I am (to Gods eternal glory be it
spoken.)

But trusting upon his prayers: and setting his life and death as a sampler
before our eyes.
5. Wherefore relying upon the assistance of this most excellent Saint, I will
endeavor briefly to set down for mine own instruction, and my Childrens,
the life and death of Sr. THOMAS MORE; who was as a bright star of our
Country in the tempestuous storms of persecution, in which we sail to our
heavenly City; on whom God heaped a number of most singular endewments; as,
abundance of wit, profound wisdom, happy discretion, perfect Justice,
exceeding Temperance, sweet affability, and all excellencies of nature and
morality, besides supernatural and Theological gifts; as, Charity in a
high degree, both toward God and his neighbor, a Faith most constant, which
would not be daunted with any threats or disgraces, that his Prince or
Counselors could thunder out against him, nay not with death it self; a
magnanimity not to be overcome either by fear of any losses, or hope of any
dignities; religion and such devotion as scarcely could be looked for in any
of a lay profession; which perfections began to shine in his infancy, and
continued in the progress of his actions, and did not end, but increased by
his most glorious death which was an entrance into a most happy kingdom,
wherein he both can and will have compassion and help us in these our
miseries; because he was raised by God to be one of the first famous warriors
in this our long persecution. Wherefore he may worthily be set before our
eyes, as a perfect pattern and lively example to be imitated by us: for he
had more to loose, then most men in the land, being second to none but to the
Chiefest, either in worldly dignity, or his Prince's favor; and yet did he
willingly forgo all, yea life it self, rather then to wrong his Conscience,
in consenting to any thing against the law of God, and Justice, as by this
ensuing discourse will particularly appear.

THE FIRST CHAPTER. SIR THOMAS MORES parentage, birth, education; studies and
first employments of youth.
1. Sir Tho. Mores parents, and their noble descent.

2. The place, day, and year of Sir Th. Mor. birth.

3. Sir T. M. his first studies.

4. Sir T. M. his first works or writings.

5. His mortifications and penances.

6. His devotions, and prayers.

7. His diet and apparel.

8. His pleasant and discreet dissimulation of his virtues.

1. S. Thom. Moors pare^tage and nobility.
SIR THOMAS MORE was the only son of Sir John More knight, one of the
Justices of the kings Bench a singular man for many rare perfections, S. John
Moor Knight, father of Sir Thomas, and his virtues.
which his son sets down in his own Epitaph extant amongst his Latin
Works, tearming his father a man Civil, that is to say, Courteous and affable
to all men; sweet and pleasant in Conversation, that is, full of merry
conceits and witty ieastes; innocent and harmless, to wit, neither
desirous of revenge, nor maligning any for his own private gain; meek and
gentle, that is to say, of an humble carriage in his office and dignity;
merciefull and pitiful, that is, bountiefull to the poor, and full of
compassion toward all distressed persons; just and uncorrupted, which are the
aptest titles and epithites that can be given to a Judge, as if he would say,
that he was never moved with frie^dshipp, stirred up with hope of gain, nor
wrested by any threats, but still performed his duty, and that he shutt up
always his left eye to all affection of friendshipp, and from all briberie.
Cambden also reports of him for proof of his pleasantness of wit, that he
would compare the multitude of women, which are to be chosen for wives, unto a
bag full of snakes, having amongst them but one eele; now if a man should
putt his hand into this bagg, he may chance to light on the eele, but it is a
hundred to one he shall be stung with a snake. Many such like witty
similitudes would he use in his private discourses, and in public auditorie.

By these his perfections of wit and grace one might guess that this Child
was likely to prove singular, having so good a father; Descended of au^cie^t
gentry.
but he far surpassed him in all these and many more excellencies; so that
our Family has been much more dignified by this son, then he any way drew
worth and dignity from his Ancestors; the consideration whereof has caused
many to think and say that SIR THOMAS was of mean parentage, and the first
of his house; yea some have not stuck to write, by birth no gentleman;
grounding their error upon these words, which he sets down in his
Epitaphe: Thomas More, borne of no noble family, but of an honest stock; which
is true as we here in England take Nobility and Noble; For none under a Baron
(except he be of the Privy Council) does challenge it; and in this sense he
means it: but as the Latin word Nobilis is taken in other Countries for
Gentry, it was otherwise. For Judge More bare Arms from his birth, having his
Coat quartered, which does argue that he came to his inheritannce by descent,
and therefore although by reason of king Henry's seasure of all our Evidences
we cannot certainly tell, who were Sir John's Ancestors, yet must they
needs be Gentlemen; and, as I have heard, they either came out of the Mores of
Ireland, or they of Ireland came out of us. And as for SIR THOMAS, he was, as I
have said, a Knight's eldest son, and sole heir to a Judge of this realm.
But whatsoever the Family was or is, if Virtue can ennoble any, surely it
has by these two excellent men been made much more to be respected* yet if we,
as God forbid we should, degenerate from their footestepps, we may cause it
soon to be base and of small reckoning, vice being the chief stayne, that
tainteth even the noblest Families.

The name of SIR THOMAS his mother was Hand^ombe of Holievvell in the County
of Bedford; Sir Tho. Moors mother, a very virtuous gentle woman.
yet Doctor Stapleton had not heard so much, who says: that her name was
unknown; by reason of which words some have taken great exceptions, as
though she had been a base woman, though he does in the same place tell this
reason thereof, because she dyed soon after she had brought forth this child;
but to have been a woman of more then ordinary virtue, that, Her vision
concerning her children, and especially Sir Thomas.
which Doctor Clement reports from SIR THOMAS his own mouth of a vision
which she had the next night after her marriage, seems, in my judgment,
forcible to argue; in which she saw in her sleep, as it were engraven in her
wedding ring the number and favor of all her children she was to have, whereof
the face of one was so dark and obscure that she could not well discern it,
and indeed afterward she suffered of one of her children an untimely
delivery; but the face of one of her other, she beheld shining most
gloriously, whereby no doubt Sir THOMAS his fame and sanctity was foreshened
and presignifyed. She brought forth before him to Sir John two daughters, one
called Jane, afterward married to a noble gentleman Mr. Richard Staffreto^,
and Elizabeth, wife to the worthy ge^tleman Mr. John Rastall, Judge Rastall's
father.

Sir John Moore his second wife, out lived Sir Thomas.
Sir John after his first wife's death, married successively two others,
whereof the last, as I have heard, was called Alice one of the Mores of Surrey,
and great aunte to Sir William More, whose son, now living, is Sir George,
lieftennant of the Tower, a man little inferior to his noble Anncestours, if
his religion were answerable to theirs. This Lady outliued her son in law
Sir THOMAS, dwelling upon her Iointure in Hartfordshire at a Capital message
then called More-place, now Gubbons, in the parish of Northmimes; but being a
little before her death thrust out of all by king Henry's fury, she dyed at
Northall a mile from thence, and lies buried in the church there.

2. 2. The place and time of S. Th. Mor. birthe.
Sir THOMAS MORE was borne at London in Milke-streete, (where the Judge his
father for the most part dwelt) in the year of our Lord 1480. in the
twentieth year of Edward the Fourth. Shortly after his birth God would show
by another sign, An evident danger strangely escaped in his childhood.
how dear this babe was unto him. For his nurce chancing to ride with him over
a water, and her horse stepping aside into a deep place, putt both her and her
Child in great danger and ieopardie; whose harms she seeking suddenly to
prevent, threw the infant over a hedge into a field near adjoining; and after
by God's help escaping safe also, when she came to take him up again, she
found him to have no hurt at all, but sweetly smiled upon her; that it might
well be said of him: Angelis suis Deus mandauit de te, ne forte offendas ad
lapidem pedem tuum; and not his foot only, but his whole body.

3. 3. His first studies and employments.
This was no doubt a happy presage of his future holiness; and putt his
parents in mind that he was that shining Child, of whom his mother had that
former vision; wherefore his father had the greater care to bring him up in
learning, as soon as his tender age would permit it; and so he putt him to the
Free-schoole of London called S. In S. Anthonies school in London.
Anthonies, where he had a famous and learned man called Nicolas Holt for his
master, under whom when he had rather greedily devoured then leasurely chewed
his Grammar rules, he outstripped far both in towardness of wit, and
diligence of endeauours, all his school fellows, with whom he was matched.

In Cardinal Moorto^s house.
And being borne to far greater matters, his father procured him to be placed
shortly after in the house of the most worthy prelate that then lived in
England both for wisdom, learning and virtue, whose like, the world scarcely
had, The praise of the L. Cardinal.
Cardinal Morton Archbishopp of Canterbury, and Lord high Chancellor of
England, whose grave countenance and carriage was such that he easily allured
all men to honor and love him; a man (as Sir THOMAS MORE describes him in his
Vtopia) of incomparable judgment, a memory more then is credible, eloquent in
speech, and, which is most to be wished in Clergiemen, of singular wisdom and
virtue; so that the King and the Common wealth relied chiefly upon this man's
counsel, as he, by whose policy King Henry the Seventh both got the Crown
of England from Richard the third the usurper, and also most happily procured
the two houses of Lancaster and York to be united by marriage.

In this famous man's house this youth learned most diligently abundance of
wisdom and virtue; S. Thom. Moore his tovvardlynes in the Cardinals retinevv.
and now he began to show to the world, what man he was likely to prove. For
the Cardinal often would make trial of his pregnant wit, especially at
Christmas merriments, when having plays for recreacion this youth would
suddenly step up amongst the players, and never studying before upon the
matter, make often a part of his own invention, which was so witty and so
full of ieasts, that he alone made more sport and laughter, then all the
players besides; for which his towardlienesse the Cardinal delighted much in
him, and would often say of him unto diverse of the Nobility, who at sundry
times dined with him, that that boy there waiting on him, whosoever should live
to see it, would prove a marvelous rare man.

The Cardinal sends him to Oxenford.
But when this most reverend Prelate saw, that he could not profitt so much in
his house, as he desired, where there were many distractions of public
affairs, having great care of his bringing up, he sent him to the University,
and placed him in Canterbury-Colledge at Oxford, now called Christs-church;
where, in two years space that he remained there, he profited exceedingly in
Rhetoric, Logic and Philosophy; and showed evidently, what wonders, wit and
diligence can perform, when they are joined, as seldom they are, in one
painful student. Brought up there nearly and austerly by his father.
There his whole mind was set on his book; for in his allowance his father
kept him very short, suffering him scarcely to have so much money in his own
custody, as would pay for the mending of his apparel; even no more then
necessity required; and of his expenses he would exact of him a particular
accounte, which course of his fathers he would often both speak of, and praise
it, when he came to riper years; affirming that by this means he was curbed
from all vice, and withdrawn from many idle expenses either of gayming or
keeping naughty company, so that he knew neither play nor other riott,
wherein most young men in these our lamentable days plunge themselves too
timely, to the utter overthrow as well of learning and future virtue, as their
temporal estates. This strictness of his father increased in him also a great
reverence and obedience after unto him again; The great reverence which he
always bare to his father.
in so much that in all his life after he was so dutiefull unto him, that he
never offended nor contradicted him in any the least word or action, still
showing toward him admirable deeds of humility, even at that time, when in
the eye of the world, he far surpassed his father in dignity, which may be
seen, by asking him blessing euerieday duly, even after he was Lord
Chancellor of England; and when he and his father met publicly at
Lincolnes-Inne, or other where, he would still offer him the place of
precedence, though the Judge by reason of his sonne's office did still refuse
it; such was the piety and submissiue mind of this humble man; such again
was the provident care of the father toward his son, that one can hardly
guess, which of the two were more worthy, the father of such a son, or the
son of such a father; yet I judge the father more happy, that enjoyed such
an admirable son, and wish that my Children may imitate in this kind their
virtuous Anncestours.

4. His first works and vvritings.
4. When this towardlie youth was come to the age of eighteen years, he
began to show to the world his ripeness of wit; for he wrote many witty
and goodly Epigrammes, which are to be seen in the beginning of his English
Works; he composed also many pretty and elegant verses of the Vanity of
this life, and the inconstancy thereof, which his father caused to be set up
with pictures and pageants, which are also in the beginning of his great
English Volume; he translated for his exercise one of Lucian's Orations out of
Greek into Latin, which he calls his first fruits of the Greek tongue, and
thereto he added another Oration of his own, to answer that of Lucian's; for
as he defended him who had slain a tyrant, he opposes against it another with
such forcible arguments, that this seems not to give place to Lucian either
in invention or eloquence. As concerning his diverse Latin Epigrammes, How
much esteemed of by learned men.
which he either translated out of Greek into Latin, or else composed of his
own: many famous authors, that then lived, do make mention of them with
great praise. For Beatus Rhenanus in his epistle to Bilibaldus Pitcheimerus
writes thus: THOMAS MORE is marvelous in every respect; for he compoundeth
most eloquently, and translateth most happily: how sweetly do his verses flow
from him? how nothing in them seems constrained? how easy are all things
there that he speaks of? nothing is hard, nothing rugged, nothing obscure; he
is pure, he is witty, he is elegant; besides he does temper all things with
mirth, as that I never read a merrier man. I could think that the Muses have
heaped upon him lone all they pleasant conceits and witty merriments;
moreover his quippes are not biting, but full of pleasantness and very
proper, yea rather any thing then stinging; for he ieasteth, but without
mordacitie; he scoffeth, yet without contumely. The like judgment of his
Epigrammes does that famous Poet Leodgarius a Quercu, public Reader of
Humanity in Paris, give, and that not so much by his words as by his deeds.
For he having gathered of the Epigrammes of diverse famous men a Collection, he
has set out more Epigrammes of Sir THOMAS MORE'S, then of any other writer:
yet because rareness of any excellent quality is still enuyed by some man or
other, one Brixius a German, wrote a book against these Epigrammes of Sir
THOMAS MORE's, Aquarrel stirred up betvveen him and Germanus Brixius;
which he called Antimorus; with such commendation, that Erasmus earnestly
besought Sir THOMAS, that he would not ouerwhelme his friend Brixius with such
an answer, as his rashness deserved; adding this of this his foolish book
Antimorus: I hear what learned men speak of Brixius now after he has
written his Antimore, which as I hear it not willingly of him, so would I
less willingly hear the^ so speak of you; wherefore seeing I perceive how
hard a matter it is to temper an answer to so spiteful a book, but that you
must give some scope unto your passions, I deem it best for you not to regard,
but wholy to contemn the matter; yet this I would not counsel you, my best
friend, to do, if there were any thing in that malicious Antimore, which
did truly blemish your fame, so that it were necessary for you to wipe it
away, etc. Easily given over by S. Th. Moor.
Which friendly counsel Sir THOMAS MORE in some sort followed; for although
he had answered Brixius fully in a little treatise, which already he had
published, before Erasmus his letter came to his hands; yet upon the receipt
thereof, he endeavored by all the means he could to get all the Coppies
again into his hands, and so to suppress the book; so that it is now very
hardly to be found; though some have seen it of late. And Sir THOMAS sent
Erasmus a letter to this effect, that although Brixius by his malicious book
had endeavored so much to disgrace him, that he wanted no will but skill and
power to overthrow his fame utterly, yet this should prevail more with him,
that Brixius was friend to Erasmus, then that he was his own enemy. Which
kind of answer shows expressly, how easy he was to forgive injuries,
especially this being such a one as touched him so near in his reputation;
following herein the counsel of Christ himself in the gospel of S. Matthew,
who says: Love your enemies, and do good to them that hate you, that you may
be the true imitatours of God, who causes the son to shine as well upon
the wicked, as upon the just. But can we think so heroical an act in so young
years (for he was not now of the full age of twenty) could proceed from one,
who had not been practiced before in the school of Christ, and in the earnest
search of perfection? surely no, for this young man had even from his infancy
labored with allmight and main to enriche himself with virtues; knowing that
learning without virtue is to set precious stones in rotten wood, and, as the
wise man says, a gold ring in a haggs snowte.

5. 5. His Mortificatio^s
When he was about eighteen or twenty years old, finding his body by
reason of his years most rebellious, he sought diligently to tame his
unbridled concupiscence by wonderful works of mortification. Hearshirt.
He used oftentimes to wear a sharp shirt of hair next his skin, which he
never left of wholly; no, not when he was Lo: Chancellor of England: Which my
grandmother on a time in the heat of summer espying, laughed at, not being much
sensible of such kind of spiritual exercises, being carried away in her youth
with the bravery of the world, and not knowing quae sunt spiritus, wherein the
true wisdom of a Christian man consists. He added also to this austeritie a
discipline every friday and high fasting days, thinking that such cheer was
the best he could bestow upon his rebellious body, rather then that the
handmayde sensuality should grow too insolent over her mistrisse Reason,
having learned the true interpretation of these words of Christ: He that
hates his life in this world, Watching and fasting.
keeps it for life everlasting. He used also much fasting and watching, lying
often either upon the bare ground or upon some bench, or laying some logg under
his head, allotting himself but four or five hours in a night at the most
for his sleep, imagining with the holy Saints of Christ's Church, that his
body was to be used like an ass, with strokes and hard fare, least prouender
might prick it, and so bring his soul like a headstrong jade into the
bottomless pit of hell. For chastity, especially in youth, is a lingering
martyrdom, and these are the best means to preserve her from the dangerous
gulphe of evil custom; but he is the best soldier in this fight, that can
run fastest away from himself, this victory being hardly gotten with
striving. Exercises among the Charthusians.
He had invred himself to straytenesse that he might the better enter in at
the narrow gate of heaven, which is not got with ease sed violenti rapiunt
illud, that is to say, they that are boisterous against themselves, bear it
away by force. For this cause he lived four years amongst the Carthusians,
dwelling near the Charterhouse, frequenting daily their spiritual exercises,
but without any vow. He had an earnest mind also to be a Franciscan Friar,
that he might serve God in a state of perfection; but finding that at that time
Religious men in England had somewhat degenerated from their ancient
strictness, Not permitted by God to take an ecclesiastical course.
and fervor of spirit, he altered his mind. He had also after that together
with his faithful Companion Lilly a purpose to be a priest; yet God had
allotted him for an other estate, To be a pattern of married men.
not to live solitary, but that he might be a pattern to married men, how
they should carefully bring up their children, how dearly they should love
their wives, how they should employe their endeavor wholly for the good of
their country, yet excellently perform the virtues of religious men, as,
piety, Charity, humility, obedience, and Conjugal chastity.

6. His deuotio^s and prayers. At daily mass.
6. He heard an entire Mass every day, before he undertook any worldly
buesinesse; which custom he kept so religiously that being on a time sent for
to the king, whilst he was hearing Mass, he would not once stir, though he
were twice or thrice sent for, until it was wholly finished, answering them
that urged him to come quickly, that he thought first to perform his duty to
a better man, then the king was; imitating therein the famous act of S. Ludgar
first bishopp of Munster, who being sent for to Charles the Great, whilst he
was singing in the quier the Canonical hours, he would not once stir till
all were ended; and being asked by the Emperor, why he neglected to come, when
he sent for him, he answered: I have always thought that your command is by
me so to be obeyed, as I doubted not but God is to be preferred; therefore I
have been careful to finish that I was about first, not for any contempt of
your Imperial Majesty, but for your more safety and the duty I owe to God.
With which answer the Emperor no whitt displeased but delighted, answered him
with thanks, saying, that he had now found him such a one, as he had ever
formerly thought him to be. Neither was King Henry any whitt angry at that
time with Sir THOMAS MORE, but rather highly pleased with this his small
neglect.

He used every day to say our Lady's Mattins, the Seven psalms and
letanies, His daily orisons.
and many times the Graduall psalms, with the psalm Beati immaculati in via;
and diverse other pious prayers, with he himself composed; he selected also
many sentences of the Psalms, imitating therein S Hierome's psalter, which
are extant in the latter end of his English Works.

But finding his body for all his austeritie ready still to endanger his
soul, Much pleased with the life of Picus Mirandula.
although at all times he shunned idleness more then any other man, he
determined to marry; and therefore he propounded to himself, as a pattern of
life, a singular layman John Picus Earl of Mirandula, who was a man famous
for virtue, and most eminent for learning; his life he translated, and set
out, as also many of his most worthy letters, and his twelve precepts of good
life; which are extant in the beginning of his English Works. For this end he
also wrote a treatise both learned, spiritual and devout, of the Four last
things of man, though he left it imperfect, being called by his father to other
studies.

His diligence in frequenting good preachers.
He frequented sermons diligently; especially when those men preached, who were
most excellent for good life and spiritual direction, such as Doctor Collett
was, the most famous Deane of Paul's, who, as Erasmus writes, was wont every
day to preach at Paul's, besides many other sermons, which he made at the
Court and else where, Doctor Colets excellent employments.
expounding in them either the Pater noster, the Apostles Creed, the Ten
Commandments, the Seven Sacraments, or some other matter of necessary
instruction, which he never left of, until he had perfected the whole, that
thereby every one might learn, what they should believe, what to follow, and
what to shun, and showed the means how every Christian might come to
perfection in their sundry states of life; and his life did not disagree from
his doctrine; for he exercised himself much in all works of Charity and
mortification of his flesh. This was he that founded the goodly Free-schoole
of Paul's, dedicating it to the little boy JESUS, as he was found disputing
with the Doctors at twelve years old, of which famous act Sir THOMAS MORE
writing unto him, compares it by a fit Antithesis to the Horse of Troy, out
of which the Grecians issued to surprise that City; in like manner, says he,
out of this your school, many have come that have subverted and overthrown
all ignorance and rudeness.

But fearing least all these his devout exercises might not be so meritorious,
Doctor Colet chose^ by S. Th. M. for his ghostly father.
if he followed his own will; for a young man is in great danger of himself to
want discretion, the mother of all virtues; therefore he chose this worthy
Deane for his ghostly Father; for he was accounted one of the skillfullest
physicians for the soul, that could be found amongst ten thousand; him he
committed himself unto, as to a safe guide of perfection in the dangerous
passages of youth; that by his experience he might the more easily overcome the
devil, the world, and his own flesh, by following his whole some lessons, to
work the salvation of his soul, without any prejudice of his body; to him
he was as obedient in all spiritual affairs, as he was to his father in all
dutiefull obligation; whereby he arrived to perfect obedience, one of the
chiefest helps that a spiritual man can have to get heaven. And because
every one may see what affection he bore to this man his ghostly physician, I
will set down here an excellent letter of Sir THOMAS MORE's to Doctor
Collett, and it is this: S. Th. his letter to D. Colet having left London.
. As I was lately walking before Westminster Hall, busying myself about other
men's causes, I met by chance your servant, at whose first encounter I was
maruelously reioysed, both because he has been alvvaies dear unto me, as also
especially for that I thought he was not come to London without yourselfe;
but when I had learned of him, that you were not come, He professes what
spiritual comfort he received from D. Colet.
nor yet minded to come of a long while, it cannot be expressed, how suddenly
my great joy was turned into as great sorrovv and saddenesse. For what can be
more grievous unto me, then to be deprived of your most sweet co^uersatio^?
whose wholesome counsel I was wont to enjoy, with whose delight some
familiarity I was recreated, by whose weighty sermons I have been often
stirred up to devotion, by whose life and example I have been much amended in
mine own, finally in whose very face and countenance I was wont to rest
contented. Wherefore as I have found myself greatly strengthened, whilst I
enjoyed these helps, so now do I see myself much weakened and brought
almost to nothing, being deprived of them so long. For having heretofore by
follovving your footestepps almost escaped out of hells mouth, so now like
another Euridice (though in a contrary manner, for she was left there because
Orpheus looked back upon her, but I am in the like danger, because you do not
look upon me) fall back again by a certain violence and necessity into that
obscure darkness I was in before. Populous cities fuller of dangers of
sin, then the country life.
For what I pray you is there here in this City, which does move any man
to live well, and does not rather by a thousand devises dravv him back, and
with as maine allurements swallow him up in all manner of wickedness, who
of himself were otherwise well disposed and does endeavor accordingly to
clime up the painful hill of Virtue? VVhithersoeuer that any man comes vvat
can he find but feigned love, and the honey poison of venomous flattery; in
one place he shall find cruel hatred, in another hear nothing but quarrels
and suits. VVhithersoeuer we cast our eyes, what can we see but victualing
houses, fishmongers, butchers, cooks, puddingmakers, fishers, o fovvlers, who
minister matter to our bellies, and set forvvard the service of the world,
and the prince thereof and devil? yea the houses themselves I know not how
do bereave us of a great part of our sight of heaven; so as the height of our
buildings, and not the circle of our horizon, does limite our prospect. For
which cause I may pardon you the more easily, that you do delight rather to
remain in the country, where you are. For there you find a company of
plain souls, The pleasure and innoce^ce of a country life.
void of all craft, vvherevvith citizens most abound; vvhithersoeuer you
look, the earth yields you a pleasant prospect, the temperature of the air
refreshes you, and the clear beholding of the heavens does delight you; you
find nothing there but bounteous gifts of nature, and saintelie tokens of
innocence. Yet I would not have you so carried away with those
contentments, that you should be stayed from hastening hither. For if the
discommodities of the City do, as they may very well, displease you, yet
may the country about your parish of Stepney (whereof you ought also not to
have the least care) afforde you the like delights to those, which that
affordes you, wherein now you keep; from whence you may upon occasions come
to London as into your Inn, where you may find great matter of meritt. The
country people is most commonly harmless, or at the least not laden with
great offenses, Cities stand more in need of skillful pastors, the^ country
mansions.
and therefore any phisician may minister physic unto them; but as for
citizens, both because they are many in number, as also in regard of their
inueterate custom in sinning, none can help them but he that is very
skillfull. There come into the pullpett at Paul's diverse men, that promise to
cure the diseases of others; but when they have all done, Preachers that live
not well, edyfy no thing.
and made a fair and goodly discourse, their life on the other side does so
jar with their saying, that they rather increase then assuage the griefs
of their hearers. For they cannot persuade men that they are fit to cure
others, when as themselves (god vvote) are most sick, and crazie; and
therefore when they feel their sores touched and handled by those, whom
they see are full of loathsome sores themselves, they cannot but have a great
auersion from them. But if such a one be accounted by learned men most fit to
cure, in whom the sick man has greatest hope, who doubts then, but you
alone are the fittest in all London to cure their maladies, whom every one
is vvilling to suffer to touch their wounds, and in whom what confidence
every one has, and how ready every one is to do what you prescribe, He
inuiteth D. Colet to return to the city, to help souls.
both you have heretofore sufficiently tried, and now the desire that every
body has of your speedy return, may manifest the same. Return therefore my
dear Colett, either for Stepney's sake, which mourns for your absence no
less then children do for the absence of their loving mother, or else for
London's sake, in respect it is your native country, whereof you can have no
less regard, then of your own parents; and finally (although this be the
least motive) return for my sake, who have wholy dedicated myself to your
directions, and do most earnestly long to see you. In the mean while I pass
my time with Grocine, Linacre and Lilly; the first being as you know the
directour of my life in your absence; the second, the master of my studies,
the third, my most dear Companion. Farevvell, and see you love me as you have
done hitherto.

London, 21. October.



By this letter it may clearly beseene, The inestimable profit of a good
ghostly father.
how he gave himself from his youth to the true rules of devotion, and thereby
sought to profitt as well in holiness as in learning; For if Christ has
pronounced them happy, that hunger and thirst after justice, surely he showed
in this letter a great earnestness of desire to attain to perfection. And his
example may move all his to follow therein his footestepps, that their chief
and principal endeavor in their youth be to seek out a skillfull physician
of the soul, who both can and will guide us in the path of Catholic doctrine
and duty, and when we have found such a one, to follow his counsel precisely,
and make the secretts of our hearts known to him. This dutiefulnesse of the
ghostly child to so rare a father, made Colett also admire this young man's
towardlienesse, so that this Doctor would profess to many, and at sundry
times say, that there was but one wit in England, and that was young THOMAS
MORE; althoug many flourishing youths at that time lived in England, which
were of hopeful expectation. And no doubt but God did further him with
particular grace and towardliness, because he was so extraordinarily devout,
Sir Tho. Mo. learned more by prayer then by study.
so that I do imagine it may be said of Sir THOMAS MORE, which S. Thomas of
Aquine wittnesseth of himself, that he learned more by prayer and spiritual
exercises, then ever he could do by any study For to what study soever Sir
THOMAS applied himself, he grew in short time most famous therein. And first
how great a Poet he was accounted even in his youth, we have already partly
spoken of; then what Declamations he made full of all Rhetorical eloquence to
the amazement of all his auditorie, many have wittnessed, who heard them, and
have read them; how pure a Latin style he attained unto, his singular epistles
yet extant to diverse personages do evidently show, so that one would imagine
he had spent all his life time in Humanity only. And although his aptness for
eloquence seemed far to disagree from the serious studies of the Common Law
of this land, so that few could suppose such a wit would have had the patience
to have taken a lawbooke in hand, yet such was his obedience to his father that
at his command he studied the Law diligently.

7. His sober diet.
7. He used to eat at his meals but of one dish, which was most commonly
powdered biefe, or some such like salt meat; although his table was always
furnished with much variety; and what meat he first tasted on, the same would
he for that time make his whole refection of. In his youth he abstained wholly
from wine; and in his latter years he would taste thereof, but first it must
be well alayed with water; as Erasmus to Huttenus wittnesseth.

And plain apparel.
He had noe care what apparel he wore; in so much that being once told by his
secretary Mr. Harris, that his shoes were all torn, he bad him tell his man,
that looked unto him thereof, to buy him new, whom for this cause he called
his Tutour; for he bought and made all his apparel at his own discretion,
Sir THOMAS never busying his head about such matters; choosing rather to be in
all things at the discretion of other men, then at his own guiding, that he
might in all his actions exercise the chief virtues of a Christian man,
obedience and humility. Yea although he were most wise, and dexterous in
discerning truth from falsehood, and virtue from cloaked vice; yet would he for
the most part in his greatest affairs and studies ask his man Harris his
advise and counsel; and if he thought the contrary better, he would willingly
submitt himself to his opinion. And indeed Harris was a man of good
understanding and judgment, and a very trusty servant.

8. These were the foundations, 8. He dissembled his virtuous mortification by
pleasunt and vvitty conversation.
on which he laid his future building; which by how much the more it was to be
raised to splendor and beauty, by so much he laid his groundworke of
humility the lower; and whatsoever hardness he used secretly, still kept he
in outward semblance a singular alacrity, being merry in company and full of
ieastes; especially eschewing the vice of singularity; yea he was very
cunning in dissembling his virtues, so that few came to know, what holy
exercises he practiced; even as in his writings he often feigned matters
cunningly to have heard them of others, which he himself had invented, as in
his preface to his Vtopia he artificially discourses as though Raphael
Hithlodius had told that whole story unto him; commento periucundo, as Paulus
Iouius does testifye. So he feigned as though an Englishman called Rosse had
pleasantly confuted Luther's book, as he discoursed with his host in Italy,
who afterward published all their communication in printe, by which means
Luther could never learn, who he was that answered him after his own furious
fashion, which angered him sore; lastly his three books of Comfort in
tribulation, a work most excellent and divine, he invented to have been spoken
by two Hungarian kinsmen about the Turks persecution; but thereby he most
lively represented the terrible storms of cruelty, which king Henry the
eight, and heresy would raise in our poor distressed Country.

THE SECOND CHAPTER. SIR THOMAS MORES his marriage, first preferment, and
serious vvritings: with his danger in time of K. Henry 7. and entry into
favor with King Henry 8.
1. S. Thomas Mores first marriage and wife.

2. His second marriage with a vvidowe.

3. His integrity in profession of the law.

4. He offends K. Henry 7. by crossing in parliament an iniust imposition.

5. The beginning of his favor with King Henry the eight.

6. His studious employments amidst his serious offaires.

7. The first honors bestovved by K. Henry 8. upon S. Thomas.

8. He is by the K. made speaker of the lovver house of parliament.

9. Cardinal vvolseys proposition in parliament frustrated by S Thom. More.

10. Sir Tho. made chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster.

1. S. Thom. Moor his marriage* and first wife.
1. SIR THOMAS MORE having determined by the advice and direction of his
ghostly father to be a married man, there was at that time a pleasant
conceipted gentleman of an ancient family in Essex one Mr. John Colie of
Nevvhall, from whom Sr. Henry Colt that now lives, is lineally descended,
that invited him to his house, being much delighted in his company, and
proffered unto him the choice of any of his daughters, who were young
gentlewomen of very good carriadge and complexions, and very religiously
inclined, whose honest and sweet conversation, whose virtuous education
enflamed Sir THOMAS not a little; Chosen out of a charitable compassion against
his own affection.
and although his affection most served him to the second, for that he thought
her the fairest and best favored; yet when he thought with himself, that this
would be a grief and some blemish in the eldest, to see her younger sister
preferred before her, he, of a kind of compassion settled his fancy upon the
eldest, and soon after married her, with all her friends good liking.

Now when he began to be clogged with wife and family, His children by her.
children also began to grow fast upon him; for his wife, whose name was Jane
Colt, as long as she lived with him, which was but some six years, brought
unto him almost every year a child, for whose maintenance he applied himself
busily to the practice of the law; and because he would have his wife near
unto his father, he placed her in Bucklers-bury. John More.
By her he had one son called John More my own grandfather, who was his
youngest child, and three daughters; his eldest daughter Margarett, Margaret
Roper.
a woman of singular wit and wisdom, rare piety, and extraordinary
learning, was wife unto William Rooper of Eltham in the County of Kent
Esquier, whose grandchilde now living is Sir William Rooper; Elizabeth Da^cy.
his second daughter called Elizabeth was afterward matched with Sir John
Dancy's son and heir; the third called Cicilie was married to Mr. Cecily
Heron.
Giles Heron of shakclvvell in the County of Middlesex esquier: Anne Cresacre
wife to M. John More.
his son my grandfather married Anne Cresacre sole daughter and heir of
E'dvvard Cresacre deceased of Baronborough in the County of York esquier,
whom Sir THOMAS bought of the King being his ward, upon error for another
body's land lying in the same town, as was afterware proved.

2. His second marriage with a widow.
2. My great grandmother having brought forth these four children, dyed soon
after, and within two or three years he married a widow called Mris. Alice
Middleton, by whom he had no children; this he did not of any concupiscence;
for he would often affirm, that Chastity is more hardly kept in wedlock, then
in a single life, but because she might have care of his children, that were
very young from whom of necessity he must be very often absent; she was of
good years, of no good favor nor complexion, nor very rich, by disposition
very near and worldly. I have heard it reported, he woed her for a friend of
his, not once thinking to have her himself; but she wisely answering him, that
he might speed, if he would speak in his own behalf, telling his friend,
what she had said unto him, with his good liking he married her, and did that
which otherwise he would perhaps never have thought to have done. And indeed
her favor, as I think, Not very fair, but kind stepmother.
could not have bewitched or scarce ever moved any man to love her; but yet
she proved a kind and careful mother-in-law to his children, as he was
always a most loving father unto them, and not only to his own, but to her
daughter also, who was married to Mr. M. Alington, his stepdaughter
Alington, and mother to Sir Giles Alington. He brought up together with this
own children as one of them Margarett Gigs, Margaret Clement.
after wife to Doctor Clement, a famous physician; and she proved also very
famous for her many excellent parts, Careful government his famyly.
as learning, virtue and wisdom All these he bred most carefully to learning
and godly exercises, often exhorting them, to take virtue for their meat, and
play for their sauce; getting them good means to maintain them by his
practice in the law, which he had first studied in an Inn of Chancerie called
New-Inne, where he profited exceedingly, and from thence went to
Lincolnes-Inne, of which house his father then was, where he allotted him small
allowance for the reasons before alleged, and, as it seemed, then his great
patron the good Cardinal was dead.

3. His knowledge, and rare integrity in profession of the law.
3. But he plied that study whereto he gave himself, being apt to any, that in
short time he was made and accounted a worthy Outer-barister; yea still
proceeding with most notable fame, he became a double reader, to which few but
rare and singular lawyers do ever attain. Every one began to admire him
both for a man of judgment, uprightness and other excellent parts, a ready
delivery, boldness in a just cause, and diligence in his Clients case, and
no great taker of money, unless he had througly deserved. For which causes
every man striued to have him of their Counsel in all suits. He is made Judge
of the sherif of Londons court.
The City of London chose him within a while, Judge of the Shrief's Court,
some say, Recorder of London, which I think not; yea there was not at that
time any matter of importance in any of the King's Courts of this realm but
he was of counsel to one of the parties, still choosing the iustest side, and
therefore for the most part he went away victorious. His ple^tyfull, but
honest gains.
By all which means he got yearly, as he told his son Rooper, without
any grudge of conscience, to the value of four hundred pounds, which was a
large gaynes in those days, when lawyers spedde not so well as now they do,
neither were they then so plentiefull; but his fame exceeded all other.
Wherefore he was chosen twice Agent for the Stillyard-marchents, which business
he dispatched with singular dexterity. 4. K. Henry the 7. offended with S. Tho.


4. King Henry the Seventh then reigning, was a prince of singular virtues,
as wisdom and religion, if that covetousness, the root of all mischief,
had not seized upon him toward his latter days, which caused him to lay upon
his subjects many Impositions, and to raise sore exactions by two Caterpillars
of the Commonwealth Emson and Dudley, who in the beginning of Henry the
Eighth's reign were rewarded according to their deserts for their wicked
counsel, to teach other men by their deaths how Injustice and rapine is
punished by God. This King, I say, had called to geather a Parliament, For
crossing him in parliament in an unjust imposition.
wherein he demanded one Subsidy and three Fifteenes for the marriage of his
eldest daughter the Lady Margaret's Grace, who then should be, as she was in
deed shortly after, bestowed upon the King of Scotts. It chanced that Sir
THOMAS was then one of the Burgesses; For many had now taken notice of his
great sufficiency. When the consent of the Lower house was demanded to these
impositions, most of the rest either holding their peace, or not daring to
gainesay them (though they were unwilling to grant them) Sir THOMAS making a
grave speech, brought forth such urgent arguments, why these exactions were
not to be granted, that hereupon the King's demand was crossed, and his
request denied; so that one Mr. Tiler one of the King's privy Chamber went
presently from the house, and told his Majesty, that a beardelesse boy had
disappointed him of all his expectation; whereupon the king conceived great
indignation against him, and could no way be satisfied, until he had in some
sort revenged it.

But for as much as he having yet but a little, Sir John More the father
imprisond, to be revenged upon the son.
could not loose much, the king devised a Causeless quarrel against Sir John
More his most innocent father, and clapped him up in the Tower of London, keeping
him there prisoner, until he had forced him against all Justice to pay one
hundred pounds as a fine for a Causeless offense. Bad counsel given by a
politik bishop.
Many also then counseled Sir THOMAS MORE to ask the king mercy, that his
father might be released, amongst whom was Doctor Fox then Bishopp Winchester
one of the king's privy Council, who pretended great love toward Mr. More,
purposing indeed to get the king thereby a better means to revenge his
displeasure against him. Avoided by council of the religious bishops chaplain.
But when Sir THOMAS had asked the Bishop's Chaplain Doctor Whittford a very
holy and grave man, afterward a Father of Sion, he that translated the
Follovving of Christ into English, what he were best to do, he requested him
for the passion of Christ not to follow his Lord's advise, saying moreover that
the Bishop would not stick to agree to the dearh of his own father, if it
were to serve the king's turn. For which cause he returned no more to my Lo:
of Winchester, but determined to have gone over sea, thinking he could not live
in England without great danger, standing now in the king's displeasure; He
retires to his quieter studies.
and therefore he studied the French tongue at home, sometimes recreating his
tired spiritts on the violl; where he also perfected himself in most of the
Liberal Sciences, as Music, Arithmetike, Geometry and Astronomy, and grew to
be a perfect historian; his chief help in all these labors being his happy
memory, of which he modestly speaks thus; I would I had as good a wit, and
as much learning vt memoria non vsquequaque destituor, as my memory does not
altogether fail me.

But king Henry dying shortly after, Empson and Dudley put to death for
wicked counsel.
and his son king Henry the Eighth striving at the beginning of his reign
to win the applause of his people, cast Emson and Dudley into prison, and
attaynted them of high treason for giving pernicious counsel to his father
their prince; and when they were going to execution Sir THOMAS asked Dudley
whether he had not done better then they; The happiness of a good conscience.
to whom with a sorrowful heart he answered: O Mr. MORE, God was your good
friend, that you did not ask the king forgiveness, as many would have had
you done; for if you had done so, perhaps you should have been in the like
case with us now. So that to shun present dangers by offending God or our
Country, is not always the safest way even for our bodily good, the
contrary turning oftentimes to our great fame, glory and profitt.

5. The beginning of S. Th. Mores favor with K. Henry 8.
5. These great parts of nature and diligence, which every one noted in Sir
THOMAS MORE coming to the young king's ear, who was at that time greedy to
entertain all rare men into his service, he caused Cardinal Wolsey then Lo:
Chancellor to move him to come to the Court; and albeit the Cardinal labored
earnestly with him to effect it, alleging how dear his service would be to
his Majesty, Warily at the first declined by S. Th.
who could not with his honor allow him less then he should loose by
changing his former estate, but rather would enlarge his means, and recompense
him fully; yet loath to change his estate, (which was certain) made such
means to the king by the Cardinal, as that his Majesty was at that time
satisfied to forbear him.

He is employed by the K. on an embassage into France.
Yet did the king use him in diverse Embassages, first sending him in to France
to challenge certain debts, which the king of England demanded to be due unto
him, that had been there unjustly kept back, in which charge he satisfied both
the kings fully; such was his wise demeanor and sufficiency. After this he
was also sent Ambassador into Flanders to confirm a league betwixt England
and Burgundy, To Flanders and Burgu^dy.
which he happily finishing, the king offered him at his return a yearly
pension, which Sir THOMAS refused, as he writes to Erasmus in these words:
When I returned from my embassage of Flanders, the king's Majesty would have
given me a yearlie pension, which surely, if one would respect honor and
profitt, was not to be little esteemed; yet have I as yet refused it, and I
think I shall refuse it still; because either I should be feign to forsake my
present means, which I have already in the City (and I esteem it more
then a better) or else I must keep it with some dislike of the Citizens,
betvveene whom and his Highness if there should happen any controversy (as
sometimes it does chance) about their priu iledges, they might suspect me as
not sincere and trusty unto them, in respect I am obliged to the king with an
annual stipende.




6. His more serious vvritings
6. About this time he compounded his famous book of Vtopia in latin so much
praised and extolled by all the learned men of that age, His Vtopia, greatly
esteemed by all learned men.
about the year of our Lord 1516. being six and thirty years of age. This
book was of all Nations so much applauded, that very shortly after it was
translated both into French, Italian, Dutch and English. The judgment of
diverse learned men concerning which work, I think good to set down here in
English as Doctor Stapleton recites them in his Three Thomases in Latin. By
Budaeus.
And first Budaeus a singular writer in those days says thus of it in an
epistle to Lupsetus: We are beholding to Thomas More for the discovery of
Vtopia, vverein he has diuulged to the world in this our age a pattern of a
happy life, and a perfect rule of good behavior. This age and our posterity
shall have this history as a Seminary of most wholesome doctrine and
profitable instructions, from whence they may transporte and accommodate
every one to their own Cities and Countries these excellent ordinances and
decrees* By I. Paludanus.
John Paludan to Peter Giles speaks thus thereof: you may see in Vtopia as in
a looking-glass, whatsoever belongs to a perfect Communion Wealth. England
truly has many excellent learned men. For what may we conjecture of the rest,
if More alone has performed so much? being first but a young man, and then
full of businesses both public, and domestical, and lastly professing any
thing rather then learning. By P. Aegidius.
Peter Giles also to Hierome Buslidian speaks thus, and gives it this
praise: So many wonders do here meet together, that I am in a doubt which
first to admire, whether his most happy memory, which could almost word
for word relate so many different things again, having but heard them once
told, or his wisdom for marking and setting forth all the fountains, from
whence either the happiness or mischiefs of any Common wealth do arise; or
the elegancie and force of his style, who has with such pure Latin, and
such vigor of speech comprised so many and sundry matters; especially one
that is so much distracted both with public and private affairs. By
Buslidius.
Buslidian a great Counselor of Charles the Fifth Emperor in a letter to Sir
THOMAS says: In the happy description of your Vtopian Commonwealth, there
is nothing missing, which might show most excellent learning together with
an absolute knowledge of all humane things. For you excel in sundry
sciences, and have such great and certain knowledge of things besides, that
you affirm every matter in writing, as though you had tried every thing by
experience before, and you write most eloquently whatsoever you affirm; a
maruclous and rare happienesse; and the more rare, by how much the fewer can
attain thereunto. And further in the said letter he affirms that this
Vtopian Common wealth far exceeds the Lacedemonian, the Athenian, yea even
that of the Romans itself, in that it seeks not so much to make many laws,
as it labors to provide good and upright Magistrates; by whose prototypon,
that is, the pattern of their honesty, the example of their manners and
behavior, and the pourtraicture of their Justice, the whole state and true
government of every perfect Common wealth may be framed. By Paulus Iouius.
Paulus Iouius in his book of the praises of learned men speaks thus: Mores
fame will alvvaies last in his Vtopia; for he therein has described a
kingdom well governed with wholesome laws, and much flourishing, with
rich peace, shevving how he loathed the corrupt manners of this wicked age,
and endeavoring by a pleasant fiction to lead the right pathe to a blessed
and most happy life, etc. Finally Hutten, Viues, Grapheus and Lacius affirm
that Sir THOMAS had an incomparable wit; greater then a man's wit, pene
diuinum, yea almost divine.

About this time he also wrote for his exercise the history of king Richard
the third, His story of K. Richard the 3.
both in Latin and English, which is so well penned that if our Chronicles of
England were half so well set out, they would entice all English men to read
them over often. These his works set out at that time, when he was most
employed in other men's affairs, show how diligent and industrious he was. For
thus he writes in his Vtopia: He was wonderfully studious amidst his serious
affairs.
Whilst I daily either plead other men's causes, or hear them sometimes as an
arbiter, othervvhiles as a Judge, whilst this man I visit for friendshipp,
another for businesses, and whilst I busy my self abroad about other men's
matters all the vhole day; I leave no time for my self, that is for study.
For when I come home; I must discourse with my wife, chatte with my
children, The office of a discreet householder.
speak with my servants; and seeing this must needs be done, I number it
amongst my affairs; and needful they are, unless one will be a stranger in
his own house; for we must endeavor to be affable and pleasing unto those,
whom either nature, chance, or choice has made our companions; but with
such measure it must be done, that we do not mar them with affability,
or make them of servants our masters, by too much gentle entreatie and favor;
whilst these things are doing, a day, a month, a year passes. When then
can I find any time to write? for I have not yet spoken of the time that is
spent in eating and sleeping; which things alone bereave most men of half
their life. As for me I get only that spare time, which I steal from my meat
and sleep, which because it is but small, I proceed slovvly; yet it being
somevvhat, I have now at the length prevailed so much as I have finished, and
sent unto you, Peter, my Vtopia.

Besides all this to show the more his excellent parts of ready utterance,
His lectures publik upon S. Austin, de ciuit, Dei.
pleasant conceits and sharpness of wit, even to the admiration of all men,
he read a lecture in S. Laurence church at Lothburie, where Sir John More his
father lies buried, out of S. Augusten's books De Ciuitate Dei, not so much
discussing the points of Divinity, as the precepts of moral philosophy and
history, where with these books are replenished. And he did this with such an
excellent grace that whereas before all the flower of English youths went to
hear the famous Grocinus, who was lately come out of Italy to teach Greek
in the public university, under whom as also that famous Grammarian Linacre
Sir THOMAS himself had profited greatly, of whom he had Aristotle's works
interpreted in Greek, now all England almost left his lecture, and flocked to
hear Sir THOMAS MORE.

7. By pleading for the Pope against the K. he makes him of his privy Council.
7. It fortuned shortly after that a ship of the Popes arrived at Southampton,
which the King claimed as a forfeyture; yet the pope's legate so wrought with
the king that though it was seysed on, yet he obtained to have the matter
pleaded by learned Council. For the Pope's side as their principal man was
chosen Sir THOMAS MORE; and a day of hearing being appointed before the Lo:
Chancellor and other the chief Judges in the Star Chamber Sir THOMAS argued
so learnedly and forcibly in defense of the pope's part, that the before said
forfeyture was restored, and he amongst all the audience so highly commended
for his admirable and witty arguing, that for no entreaty would the king any
longer forbear to use him. Wherefore he brought him perforce to the Court and
made him of his Privy Counsel, as Sir THOMAS testifyeth himself in a letter
to that worthy prelate John Fisher Bishop of Rothester, saying: I am come to
the Court extremely against my will, as every body knovveth, and as the
king himself often tvviteth me in sport for it. And hereto do I hang so
unseemly as a man not using to ride does sit vnhansomely in his saddle. But
our Prince, whose special and extraordinary favor toward me I know not
how I ever shall be able to deserve, is so affable and courteous to all men,
that every one, K. He^rie 8. learning, and courtesy
who has never so little hope of himself, may find somevvhat, whereby he
may imagine, that he loves him; even as the Citizens vviues of London do,
who imagine that our ladies' picture near the tovver does smile upon them, as
they pray before it. But I am not so happy, that I can perceive such fortunate
signs of deserving his love, and of a more abject spirit, then that I can
persuade myself that I have it already; yet such is the virtue and learning
of the king, and his daily increasing industry in both, that by how much the
more I see his Highness increase in these kingly ornaments, by so much the
less troublesome this Courtier's life seems unto me.

A gracious King for his first tvve^ty years.
And indeed king Henrie's Court for the first twenty years was a seat of
many excellent wits, a palace of rare virtues, according as Erasmus
wittnesseth thereof in an epistle to Henry Gilford a gentleman of an ancient
family. For thus he writes; The fragant odor of the most honorable fame of
the Court of England, which spreades it self over all the world, it having a
king singularly endevved with all princely excellencies, a Queen most like
unto him, and a number of sincere, learned, grave and wise personages
belonging unto it, has stirred up the prince of Berghes to putt his son
Antony to no other school but that.

S. Thom. More knighted and made Threasurer of the exchequer.
Within a while after the king had created him one of his high Councillors of
state, perceauing every day more and more his fidelity, uprightness,
dexterity, and wisdom, dubbted him knight, and after Mr. Weston's death he
made him Threasurer of the exchequer, a place of great trust; of which increase
of honor Erasmus writes to Cochleus, saying: When you write next to MORE,
you shall vvish him joy of his increase of dignity and good fortune; For being
before only of the king's privy Council, now of late by the beneuolencc and
free gift of his most gracious prince, he neither desiring nor seeking for it,
is not only made knight, but Threasurer of the king's Exchequer; an office in
England both honorable, and also commodious for the purse. The familiarity of
K. Henry with S. Thom. More.
Yea king Henry finding still more and more sufficiency in Sir THOMAS used
him with particular affection for the space of twenty years together; during
a good part whereof the king's custom was upon holy days, when he had done
his devotions to send for Sir THOMAS into his Trauerse, and there some times
in matters of Astronomy, Geomitrie, and Divinity, and such other sciences, to
sit and confer with him: otherwhiles also in the clear nights he would have
him walk with him on the leads, there to discourse of the diversity of the
courses, motions and operations of the stars, as well fixed as the planetts;
And because he was of a very pleasant disposition, it pleased his Majesty and
the Queen at supper time commonly to call for him to hear his pleasant
ieastes. Discreetly lessened by S. Th. himself.
But when Sir THOMAS perceived his witty conceits so much to delight him,
that he could scarce once in a month get leave to go home to his wife and
children, whom he had now placed at Chelsey, three miles from London by the
water side; and that he could not be two days absent from the Court, but he
must be sent for again, he much misliking this restrainte of his liberty,
began thereupon to dissemble his mirth, and so by little and little to disvse
himself, that he from the^ceforth at such seasons was no more so ordinarily
sent for.

He is sent by the K. to appease the prentises of London.
The great respect, which the City of London bare unto him caused the king as
a special man to send Sir THOMAS to appease the apprentises, which were risen
up in a mutine against the strangers that dwelt then amongst them, upon a May
day: and surely Sir THOMAS had quicted them wholly and soon, had not an
extraordinary chance hindered it in S. Martins, as Stovve wittnesseth.

The king used also of a particular love to come on a sudden to Chelsey, where
Sir THOMAS now lived; and leaning upon his shoulder to talk with him of
secrett counsel in his gardin, yea and to dine with him upon no inuiting.

8. 8. He is by the King chosen speaker of the lovver house of Parliament.
In the fourteenth year of the reign of king Henry the eight, there was a
parliament held, and thereof (which was a strange thing) Sir THOMAS MORE was
chosen Speaker for the Lower house, being now one of the Prince Counsel; who
being very loath to take this charge upon him, made a worthy Oration to the
King's Matie. (not now extant) whereby he earnestly labored to be discharged
of the said place of Speakershipp; where unto his Highness would by no means
give consent.

At the beginning of Parliament he made another Oration, A su^mary of his first
speetch in Parlame^t
the points whereof are very wisely set down by my uncle Rooper in his Life
of Sir THOMAS MORE; and they are these: Since I perceive, most redoubted
Sovereign, that it accords not to your high pleasure to reform this
election, and cause it to be changed, but have by the mouth of the right
Reverend Father in God the Legate (who was then Cardinal Wolsey) your high
Chancellor there unto given your assent, and have of your benignity far
above that I may bear, to enable me and for this office to repute me fit
rather then that you would seem to imputte to your Commons, that they had
vnmeetely chosen me, I am therefore, and alvvaies shall be ready obediently to
conform myself to the accomplishment of your high command. And then he
makes two humble petitions; the one concerning himself, the other, the whole
assembly. The first; that if he should chance to mistake his message, or for
lack of good utterance by misrehearsall pervert their prudent instructions,
that his Matie would then pardon his simplicity, and suffer him to repair
unto them again for their more substantial advise. His other request unto the
King's Majesty was, that it would please his inestimable goodness to pardon
freely, without doubt of his dreadful displeasure, whatsoever it shall happen
any man to say there, interpreting every man's words, how uncomely soever
they were couched, to proceed of a good zeal toward the profitt of the
realm, and the honor of his royal person.

9. 9. Cardinal Wolseys entry into parliament.
Cardinal Wolsey found himself much grieved at the Burgesses, that nothing
could be either done or spoken in both the houses, but it was immediately
blown abroad in every ale house. It fortuned after that a great Subsidy was
to be demanded, and the Cardinal fearing it would not pass the lower house,
unless he were there present himself before whose coming it was long debated,
whether they should admit him with a few of the Lords, as the most opinion of
the house was, or that they should receive him with his whole train. Masters,
quoth Sir THOMAS, for as much as my Lo: Cardinal lately, ye woote well, laid
to our charge the lightness of our toungs, for things uttered out of this
house, it should not in my mind be amiss to receive him with all his pomp,
with his Maces, his Pillars, his Polaxes, his Cross, his hatt, and the Great
Seal too, to the intent, that if he find the like fault with us then, we may
lay the blame upon those, whom his Grace brings with him. Upon which words
the House wholly agreed, and so he was received accordingly. And a motion to the
lovver house.
There the Cardinal with a sollemne speech by many reasons proved, how
necessary it was that the demand there moved should be granted, but he seeing
the company silent, contrary to his expectation, showing no inclination
thereto, demanded of them some reasonable answer; but when every one still
held their peace, he spoke in particular to Mr. Murrey; who making no answer
neither, he asked others also; but they all had determined to answer him by
their Speaker: Frustrated by S. Tho. Mores. vvisdome.
Who spoke therefore reverently on his knees, excusing the silence of the house
abashed, as he said, at the sight of so noble a personage, who was able to
amaze the wisest and best learned in the realm. Yet with many probable
arguments he proved this his manner of coming to be neither expedient, nor
agreeable to the ancient liberties of that house; and for himself in conclusion
he showed, that except all they could putt their sundry wits into his head,
that he alone in so weighty a matter was unmeet to make his Grace a
sufficient answer. Whereupon the Cardinal displeased with Sir THOMAS that he
had not in that parliament satisfied his expectation, Who pleasantly and
vvittily diuerteth the Cardinals displeasure.
suddenly rose in a rage and departed. And afterward in his gallerie at
VVitehall he uttered unto him his grief, saying; I would to God you had been
at Rome, Mr. MORE, when I made you Speaker. Your Grace not offended, so would I
too, my Lord, replied Sir THOMAS, for then should I have seen the place I long
have desired to visit. And when the Cardinal walked without any more speech,
he began to talk to him of that fair Gallerie of his, saying: This Gallerie
of yours, my Lord, pleases me much better then your other at Hampton court;
with which digression he broke of the Cardinal's displeasant talk, that his
Grace at that present wist not more what to say unto him*

But for a revenge of his displeasure he counseled the king to send him his
Ambassador Legerinto Spain, And obtains against him not to be sent Ledger
ambassador into Spain.
commending to his Highness, his learning, wisdom and fittnesse for that
voyage, the difficulty of many matters considered between the Emperor
Charles the Fifth and our realm, so as none was so well able to serve his
Majesty therein; which the king broke to Sir THOMAS. But when Sir THOMAS had
declared to the king, how unmeet that journey was for him, the nature of
Spain so much disagreing with his constitution, that he was unlike to do his
Sovereign acceptable service there, being that it was probable, that he should
send him to his grave; yet for all that he showed himself ready, according as
duty bound him, were it with the loss of his life to fullful his Maiestie's
pleasure in that behalf. The king most graciously replied thereto thus: It is
not our meaning Mr. MORE, to do you any hurt, but to do you good, we could be
glad: We will therefore employe your service otherwise; and so would not
permit him to go that long journey.

10. He is made Chau^cellour of the Duchy of Lancaster.
10. For the king's wisdom perceived that the Cardinal began to grow
jealous of Sir THOMAS MORE's greatness, fearing that (which after happened) he
would outstrippe him in the king's gracious favor, who still heaped more honor
upon Sir THOMAS; and although he was never the man that asked the king any
request for himself; yet upon the death of Sir Richard VVinckfield, who had
been Chancelour of the Duchy of Lancaster, that dignity was bestowed upon
Sir THOMAS MORE. Of which his honor Erasmus writing to Cochlie biddes him to
send Congratulatorie letters unto him, saying, that he came unto it nec
ambiens nec expetens, vltroneo fauore Principis humanissimi, that is, neither
ambitiously seeking it, nor once asking it, but by the mere favor of his most
gracious Prince.

King Henry took such extraordinary love in Sir THOMAS his company, S. Thom.
Mores judgment of K. He^r^es extraordinary favor.
that he would sometimes on a sudden, as before I touched come over to his
house at Chelsey and be merry with him; whither on a time unlooked for, he
came and dined at his house. And after dinner walked with him the space of an
hour, holding his arm about his neck most lovingly in the gardin. When his
Majesty was gone, my uncle Rooper rejoiced thereat, and told his father, how
happy he was, for that the king had showed him such extraordinary signs of
love, as he had never seen him do to any other, except the Cardinal, whom
he saw with the king once walk arm in arm. VVhereto Sir THOMAS answering
said: I thank our Lord God, I find his Grace my very good Lord indeed; and
I believe he does as singularly favor me as any other subject, within this
realm; how beit, son Rooper, I may tell you, I have no cause to be proud
thereof; for if my head would win him a Castle in France (for then there was
wars between France and us) it should not fail to go of. By which words he
evidently showed, how little he ioyed either in the king's favor, or in his
worldly honor, piercing with his singular eye of judgment into king Henry's
nature; that what show of friendship soever he made to any, yet he loved none
but to serve his own turn; and no longer was any in his favor, but as long
as they applied themselves to his humors; yet could he not choose but love Sir
THOMAS for his singular parts, his profound judgment, his pleasant wit, and
entire sincerity; for which causes the rare and admirable Queen Catherine
king Henrie's first wife would often say, Queen Catherins judgment of S. Th.
Mores loyalty.
that the king her husband had but one sound Counselor in his kingdom,
meaning Sir THOMAS MORE; for the rest she said that either they spoke as the
king would have them, or had not such matter of judgment in them; and as for
Cardinal Wolsey, Cardinal VVolseys vaniglory.
who was then the greatest subject in the realm, for his own benefitt and
end, he cared not what counsel he gave the king. He was of base parentage,
and, as they say, a butchers son of Ipsvvich; yet had he crept up into favor
partly by his learning, partly by his nimble wit, and lovely carriadge,
whereby he could in sinuate himself into great men's favors; he had also a
ready tongue and a bold countenance, and had gotten many spiritual livings
together, bestowing them upon vanities, as great and sumptuous buildings
costly bancketts, and great magnificence; for he was vain glorious above all
measure, Flattered by most men.
as may be seen by Sir THOMAS MORE's book of Comfort in Tribulation; where he
means of him what is spoken under the name of a great Prelate of Germany,
who when he had made an oration before a great audience, would bluntely ask
them that sat at his table with him, how they all liked it; but he that should
bring forth a mean commendatio^ of it, was sure to have no thanks for his
labor. And he there tells further, how a great spiritual man, who should
have commended it last of all, was putt to such a non plus, that he had never a
word to say, but crying oh, and fetching a deep sigh he cast his eyes into the
welking and wept. But nothing at all by S. Th. More
On a time the Cardinal had drawn a draught of certain Conditions of peace,
between England and France, and he asked Sir Thomas More's counsel therein,
beseeching him earnestly that he would tell him if there were any thing
therein to be misliked. And he spoke this so heartily (says Sir THOMAS, that he
believed verily that he was willing to hear his advise indeed. But when Sir
THOMAS had dealt really therein, and showed wherein that draught might have
been amended, he suddenly rose in a rage and said: By the Mass, thou art the
veriest fool of all the Counsel. At which Sir THOMAS smiling said: God be
thanked that the king our Master has but one fool in all his Council. But we
shall have occasion to speak more hereafter of this Cardinal.

THE THIRD CHAPTER. THE COURTEOUS and meek behaueour of Sir THOMAS MORES; his
frinds at home and abroad.
1. The gentle disposition of S. T. More in all occasions.

2. His prompt and ready wit.

3. His frindship with learned men at home.

4. With learned men of other nations.

5. His pleasant and merry conversation.

1. His courteous behaueour in midst of honor.
1. SIR THOMAS MORE for all his honor, and favor with his Prince, was nothing
puffed up with pride, disdain or arrogancy, but was of such a mild
behavior, and excellent temper, that he could never be moved to any passion
or anger, as mine uncle Rooper wittnesseth, who affirms that in sixteen
years space and more, that he dwelt in his house, and was conversant with him
always, he could never perceive him so much as once in a fume. Yea Margaret
Gigs, (who was brought up from a child amongst Sir THOMAS his children and
used by him no otherwise, then one of them, and afterward married Doctor
Clement) a singular learned woman would say, that sometimes she would committ a
fault for the nonce, His meeknes in reprehe^ding.
to hear Sir THOMAS MORE chide her, he did it with such gravity, such
moderation, such love and compassion. His meekness and humility was also
perceived in this, that if it had fortuned any scholar to come to him (as
there did many daily) either from Oxford, Cambridge or else where, some for
desire of his acquaintance (as he had intercourse of letters with all the men
of fame in all Christendom) some again for the report of his learning and
singular wisdom, some for suites of the Universities; if any of them, I say,
had entered into argument, whrein few were able to dispute long with him, he
would urge very forcibly; and if it fortuned, that they entered together so
far to dispute, that he perceived they could not without some inconuenie^ce
hold out much further against his arguments, then, least he should discourage
them, as he that sought not his own glory, he would seem to be confuted,
that the student should not be discomforted, ever showing himself more
desirous to learn then to teach, and so by some witty devise he would
courteously break out into some other matter.

2. His readiness of wit in all occasions.
2. Such was also his readiness of wit, that going ever in progress with the
king either to Oxford or Cambridge, when they were received with very eloquent
orations, he was always the man appointed by his Majesty ex tempore to make
answer unto them, as he that was promptest and most ready therein. Yea when
the king went into France to meet the French king, Sir THOMAS MORE made a
speech of their congratulation; which he also did, when Charles the Fifth landed
in England to see Queen Catherine his aunte. And whenever he had occasion
either in England or beyond the sea, to visit any university, he would not
only be present at their readings and disputations, but would also learnedly
dispute there amongst them himself, to the great admiration of all the
Auditorie, for his skill in all sciences. But when at Brugges in Flanders an
arrogant fellow had set up a Thesis, that he would answer whatsoever question
could be propounded unto him in any art whatsoever, Sir THOMAS made this
question to be putt up, for him to answer thereto, whether Aueria capta in
Withernamia sunt irreplegebilia; adding that there was one of the English
Ambassadors retinue, that would dispute with him thereof. This Thraso or
Braggadocio not so much as understanding those terms of our Common Law, knew
not what to answer to it; and so he was made a laughing stock to the whole
City for his presumptuous bragging.

3. Now, 3. His frindship and estimation with the learned of all Christendom.
as he was ungrateful to vain proud men, so was he an entire and special
good friend to all the learned men in Christendom; and first he affected
especially that famous man Cuthbert Tunstall lately Bishopp of London, and then
of Durham; of whom Sir THOMAS speaks in his epitaphe made by himself whilst
he was in good health and state, thus: Then whom the whole world has not a
man more learned, Cuthbert Tunstall Bishop of Durrham.
wise or better. He speaks also of him in his Vtopia thus: The King sent me
Ambassador into Flanders as a Colleague to that excellent person Cuthbert
Tunstall, whom lately he has chosen (to the congratulation of all men) his
Master of the Rovvles, of whose singular praises I will not speak, for that
I fear I should be suspected, because he is so dear a friend unto me; but for
that his virtues and learning are greater then I can express, and also more
known, then that I should need to go about to declare them; except I would
seem to set a torche to lighten the sun. In this embassage many things
delighted me much: first the long and never interrupted familiarity, which I
had with Tunstall, then whom as there is none more learned, so also no man
more grave in his life and manners, no man more pleasant in his manner of
carriage and conversation. He wrote unto him diverse letters, which may
testifye what intire-friendshipp there was between these two excellent men; as
this: Although every letter which I receive from you (most vvorthie friend)
is very grateful unto me, yet that which you vvrote last, was most
vvellcome, for that besides the other commendations, which the rest of your
letters deserve in respect of their eloquence, and the friendshipp they
profess toward me, these last of yours yield a peculiar grace, for that
they contain your peculiar testimony (I would it were as true as it is
favorable) of my Common Wealth. I requested my friend Erasmus, that he would
explane to you the matter thereof in familiar talk; yet I charged him not to
press you to read it, not because I would not have you to read it (for that
is my chief desire) but remembering your discrete purpose, not to take in hand
the reading of any new work, until you had fully satisfied yourselfe with
the books of ancient Authors, which if you measure by the profitt you have
taken by them, surely you have already accomplished your task; but if by
affection, then you will never bring your said purpose to a perfect end.
Wherefore I was afraid that seeing the excellent works of other men could
not allure you to their reading, you would never be brought to condescende
willingly to the reading of my trifles, and surely you would never have done
it, but that your love toward me drove you more thereto, then the vvorth of
the thing itself. Therefore I yield you exceeding thanks for reading so
diligently over my Vtopia; I mean, because you have for my sake bestovved so
much labor; And no less thanks truly do I give you, for that my work has
pleased you; for no less do I attribute this to your love, because I see you
rather have testified, what your love toward me did suggest, then the
authority of a Censor: Howsoever the matter is, I cannot express how much I
joy, that you have east your whole account in liking my doings. For I almost
persuade myself all those things to be true, which you speak thereof,
knovving you to be most far from all dissembling, and my self more mean,
then that you should need to flatter me, and more dear to you, then that I
should expecte a mock from you. Wherefore, whether that you have seen the
truth unfeignedly, I rejoice heartily in your Judgment, or whether your
affection to me has blinded your judgment, I am for all that no less
delighted in your love; and truly vehement and extraordinary great must that
love be, which could bereave Tunstall of his judgment. And in another letter
he says: You deal very courteously with me, in that you give me in your
letter such hearty thanks, because I have been careful to defend the causes
of your friends, amplifying the small good turn I have done you therein, by
your great bounty; but you deal somevvhat, too fearfully in regard of the
love, which is betvveene us; if you imagine that you are indebted unto me for
any thing I have done, and do not rather challenge it of right to be due unto
you, etc. The Amber, which you sent me, being a precious sepulcher of flies,
was for many respects most vvellcome unto me; for the matter thereof may be
compared in color and brightness to any precious stone, and the form is
more excellent, because it represents the figure of a a heart, as it were the
hieroglificke of our love: which I interpret your meaning is, that betvveene
us it will never fly away, and yet be alvvaies without corruption; because I
see the fly (which hathvvings like Cupide the son of Venus, and is as fickle
as he) so shutt up here and enclosed in this glevvie matter of Amber, as it
cannot fly away, and so embalmed and preserved therevvith, as it cannot
perish. I am not so much as once troubled that I cannot send you the like
gift again, for I know, you do not expect any enterchange of tokens; and
besides I am vvilling still to be in your debt, yet this troubles me
somevvhat, that my estate and condition is so mean, that I am never able to
show myself vvorthie of all and singular your friendshipp. Wherefore though I
cannot give testimony myself herein before other men; yet must be satisfied
with mine own inward testimony of mind, and your gentle acceptance. He
dedicated one of his books unto him saying in this wise: When I considered, to
which of all my friends I should dedicate these my Collections out of many
Authors, I thought you most fit for the same, in respect of the familiar
conversation, which of long time has been betvveene us, as also in respect of
the sincerity of your mind, because you would be alvvaies ready to take
thankefully, whatsoever in this work should seem grateful unto you; and
whatsoever should be barren therein, you would make a courteous construction
thereof; whatsoever might be unpleasing, you would be vvilling to pardon. I
would to God, I had as much wit and learning, Tunstall a glorious confessor
in Q. Elizabeth's days.
as I am not altogether destitute of memory. As for Bishopp Tunstall he was a
learned man, and wrote a singular book of the real presence. And although,
during king Henrie's reign, he went with the sway of the time (for who almost
did otherwise?) to the great grief of Sir THOMAS MORE; yet living to the time
of Q. Elizabeth, whose Godfather he was, when she berayed the font, in his
old age seeing her take strange courses against the Church, he came from
Durham, and stoutely admonished her not to change religion; which if she
presumed to do, he threatened her to leese Gods blessing and his. She nothing
pleased with his threats, made him be cast into prison, as most of the Bishops
were, where he made a glorious end of a Confessor, and satisfied for his
former crime of Schism contracted in the time of king Henrie's reign.

Frindship of S. Th. More with B. Fisher.
Sir THOMAS MORE's friendshipp with the glorious Bishop of Rochester was neither
short nor small, but had long continued, and ended not with their famous
martyrdomes. See how good Bishop Fisher writes unto him: Let, I pray you, our
Cambridge men have some hope in you to be favored by the king's Majesty that
our scholars may be stirred up to learning by the countenance of so vvorthie a
prince, We have fevv friends in the Court, which can or will commend our
causes to his royal Majesty and amongst all we accounte you the chief, who
have alvvaies favored us greatly, even when you were in a meaner place; and
now also show what you can do, being mised to the honor of knighthood, and
in such great favor with our prince, of which we greatly rejoice, and also
do congratulate your happiness. Give furtherance to this youth, who is both
a good scholar in Divinity, and also a sufficient preacher to the people. For
he has hope in your favor, that you can procure him great furtherance, and
that my commendations will help him to your favor. To this Sir THOMAS MORE
answers thus: This Priest, Reverend Father, whom you write to be in
possibility of a Bishopric, if he might have some vvorthie suitor to speak
for him to the king, I imagine that I have so prevailed, that his Majesty
will be no hindrance thereto, etc. If I have any favor with the king,
which truly is but little, but whatsoever I have, I will employ all I can to
the service of your Fatherhood and your scholars, to whom I yield
perpetual thanks for their dear affections toward me, often testified by
their loving letters, and my house shall be open to them as though it were
their own. Farevvell vvorthie and most courteous prelate, and see you love me
as you have done.

With Cardinal Poole, in his younger days
His love and friendshipp with young Poole (afterward a famous Cardinal) may be
seen by their letters. he makes mention of him with great praise in a letter
he wrote to his well-beloved daughter Margaret Rooper in this wise: I cannot
express in vvriting, nor scarcely can conceive it by thought, how grateful
to me your most eloquent letters, dear daughter Margarett, are. Whilst I was
reading them, there happened to be with me Reinald Poole, that most noble
youth not so noble by birth as he is singularly learned, and excellently
endevved with all kind of virtue; to him your letter seemed as a miracle; yea
before he understood how near you were besett with the shortenesse of time,
and the molestation of your vveake infirmity, having notvvithstanding sent me
so long a letter. I could scarce make him believe, but that you had some help
from your Master, until I told him seriously that you had not only never a
master in your house, but also never another man, that needed not your help
rather in vvriting any thing, then you needed his. And in another to Doctor
Clement a most famous physician, and one that was brought up in Sir THOMAS his
own house, he says thus: I thank you, my dear Clement, for that I find you
so careful of my health and my childrens, so that you prescribe in your
absence, what meats are to be avoided by us. And you, my friend Poole, I
render double thanks, both because you have vouchsafed to send us in vvriting
the counsel of so great a physician, and besides have procured the same for us
from your mother, a most excellent and noble matrone, and vvorthie of so great
a son; so as you do not seem to be more liberal of your counsel, then in
bestovving upon us the thing itself, which you counsel us unto. Wherefore I
love and praise you, both for your bounty and fidelity. And of Sir THOMAS
MORE's friendship Cardinal Poole boasts much after his martyrdom in his
excellent book De vnitate Ecclesia saying: if you think that I have given
scope to my sorrow, because they were my best beloved friends that were putt
to death (meaning Sir THOMAS MORE and Bishop Fisher) I do both acknowledge and
profess it to be true most willingly, that they both were dear unto me above
all others. For how can I dissemble this, seeing that I do rejoice more of
their love toward me, then if I should boaste, that I had gotten the dearest
familiarity withal the princes of Christendom.

With D. Lea Archbishop of york.
His frienshipp also with Doctor Lea (afterward the worthy Archbishopp of
York) was not small nor feigned, although he had written an excellent book
against Erasmus his Annotations upon the new Testament, Erasmus being then Sir
THOMAS his entire friend, and as it were the one half of his own heart. For
Sir THOMAS writes thus unto him: Good Lea, that you request of me, not to
suffer my love to be diminished toward you, trust me, good Lea, it shall not,
though of myself I incline rather to that part that is oppugned. And as I
could vvish that this City were freed from your siege, so will I alvvaies
love you, With Lapsetus
and be glad that you do so much esteem of my love. He speaks also of
Lupset, a singular learned man of that time, in an epistle to Erasmus: Our
friend Lupsett reads with great applause in both toungs at Oxford, having a
great auditorie; for he succeeds my John Clement in that charge. What
familiarity there was betwixt him and Doctor Collett, Grocine, Linacre, and
Lilly, all, singular men, Grocinus. Linacre. Montjoy. G. Latimer.
we have spoken of heretofore. William Montioy, a man of great learning, and
William Lattimer, not Hugh the heretic, that was burnt, but another most
famous for virtue and good letters, were his very great acquaintance, as also
John Croke, I. Crocus
that read Greek first at Lipsia in Germany, and was after King Henrie's
Greek master, to whom he writes thus: What soever he was, my Crocus, that
has signified unto you that my love is lessened, because you have omitted to
write unto me this great while, either he is deceived, or else he seeks
cunningly to deceive you; and although I take great comfort in reading your
letters, yet am I not so proud, that I should challenge so much interest in
you, as though you ought of duty to salute me every day in that manner, nor
so vvayvvard nor full of complaints to be offended with you, for neglecting a
little this your custom of vvriting. For I were unjust, if I should exact
from other men letters, whereas I know myself to be a great sluggard in
that kind. Wherefore be secure as concerning this: for never has my love
waxed so cold toward you, that it need still to be kindled and heated
with the continual blowing of missiue epistles; yet shall you do me a great
pleasure if you write unto me as often as you have leisure, but I will never
persuade you to spend that time in saluting your friends, which you have
allotted for your own study, or the profiting of your scholars. As touching
the other part of your excuse, I utterly refuse it; for there is no cause why
you should fear my nose as the trunk of an elephant, seeing that your letters
may without fear approach in the sight of any man; neither am I so long
snovvted that I would have any man fear my censuring. As for the place
which you requirre that I should procure you, both Mr. Pace and I, who love
you dearly, have putt the king in mind thereof.

4. 4. With learned me^ of other nations: as, I. Coclaeus.
But now as concerning the familiarity he had with the most famous men of
other nations, it may be likewise seen by his letters to them; as to that
famous John Cochlee, who was Luther's scourge, he writes thus: It cannot be
expressed, most vvorthie Sir, how much I hold myself indebted unto you, for
certifying me so often of those occurrences, which happen in your Country.
For Germany now daily brings forth more monsters, yea prodigious things,
then Africa was wont to do. For what can be more monstrous then the
Anabaptists; yet how have those kind of plagues, risen forth and spread for
many years together? I for my part seeing these sects daily to grovve worse
and worse, do expect shortly to hear, that there will arise some, who will
not stick to preach, that Christ himself is to be denied; neither can there
arise so absurd a knave, but he shall have favorers; the madness of the
people is so great. In which letter he foretells of David George the
Hollander, who called himself Christ, and had diverse followers at Basile. So
was there in England the like desperate fellow called Hackett, whose disciples
were Arden and Coppinger. At another time he writes thus unto the same man: I
would have you persuade yourself, dear Cochlie that I have not received any
letter from any of my friends these many years, more grateful then your
last were to me; and that for two causes especially; the first, for that I
perceive in them your singular love unto me, which though I have sufficiently
found heretofore, yet do these show it most plentifully, and I account it as a
great happiness; for to let pass your benefitts done me, who would not
highly esteem the friendshipp and favor of such a friend? Secondly because in
these letters you certifye me of the nevves of many actions of Princes, etc.

Afterward he had also entire familiarity with Budaeus, G. Badaeus.
which was often renewed by letters, and once by personal meeting in France,
when the kings of England and France had a parlie together. For Budaeus was in
great favor with his king Francis, yea one of his privy Council, as Sir
THOMAS was to king Henry; all which may be perceived by his letter to Budeus
in this manner: I know not, my good Budie, whether it were good for us to
possess any thing that were dear unto us, except we might still keep it.
For I have imagined that I should be a happy man, if I might but once see
Budeus, whose beautiefull picture the reading of his works had represented
unto me. And when God had granted me my vvishe, it seemed to me that I was
more happy then happiness itself; yet after that our business were so
urgent, that I could not fulfill my earnest desire to enjoy your svveete
conversation often, and that our familiarity scarce begun was broken of
within a while, the necessary affairs of our Princes calling us from it, so
as it is now hard to say, whether we shall ever again see one another, each
of us being enforced to wait upon our own Prince; by how much the more
joyful our meeting was, by so much the more was my sorrovv in the parting;
which you may lessen somevvhat, if that you would please to make me often
present by your letters: yet dare I not crave them of you: but my desire to
have them is great.

M. Dorpius.
Another friend he had called Martin Dorpe, a famous reader in Louaine, and a
singular good man, whom by letters fraught with sound arguments he brought to
the love of the Greek tongue, being altogether before auerted therefore: thus
he speaks of him in a letter to Erasmus: I cannot let Martin Dorpius pass
unsaluted, whom I respect highly for his excellent learning, and for many
other respects; but for this not a little because he gave you occasion to
write your Apology to Brixius his Moria.

Lascarus* Philip Beroaldus.
He mentions also John Lascarus as a dear friend of his, as also Philipp
Beroalde in a letter of his to Budeus in this manner: Commend me heartily to
Lascarus that excellent and most learned man; for I imagine that you would of
yourselfe remember me to Beroaldus, though I should not putt you in mind
thereof; for you know him to be so dear unto me as such a one ought to be,
then whom I have scarcely found a more learned man, or a more pleasant
friend.

Hierome Buslidian, Hierom Buslidius
who built the College called Trilingue in Louaine, we have mentioned before,
when we spoke of his learned Vtopia, of whom thus he speaks in a certain
letter of his to Erasmus: Amongst other things which delighted me much in my
Embassage, this is none of the least, that I got acquaintance with Buslidian,
who entertained me most courteously according to his great wealth and
exceeding good nature, where he shevved me his house built most artificially,
and enriched with costly household stuff, replenished with a number of
monuments of antiquity, wherein you know I take great delight, finally such
an exquisite library, yea his heart and breast, more stored then any library;
so that it astonished me greatly.

And presently after in the same letter he speaks of Peter Giles as
follows: Peter Aegidius.
But in all my travails, nothing happened more to my wish then the
acquaintance and conversation with Peter Giles of Anwerp, a man so learned, so
merry, so modest and so friendly that, let me be baked if I would not
purchase this one man's familiarity with the loss of a good part of my
estate. And in his Vtopia he speaks thus of him: Whilst I live here in
Anwerp, I am visited often, amongst the rest, by Peter Giles, then whom none
is more grateful unto me: he is native of Anwerp, and a man of good reputation
amongst his countriemen, and vvorthie of the best* For he is such a young man
that I know not whether he is more learned, or better qualifyed with good
conditions* for he is a most virtuous man, and a great scholar, besides of
courteous behavior toward all men, of such a sincere carriage, love and
affection toward his friend, that you can scarce find such another youth to
set by him, that may be compared unto him; he is of rare modesty, all
flattery is far from him; plainness with wisdom are seated in him
together; moreover so pleasant in talk and so merry without any offense,
that he greatly lesseneth by his pleasant discourse the desire I have to see
my Country, my house, my wise, my children, of whose company I am of myself
too anxious, and whom to enjoy I am too desirous. Of Beatus Renanus a very
learned man, B. Rhenanus.
he writes in an epistle to Erasmu, thus: I love Renanus maruelously and am
much in his debt for his good Preface; whom I would have thanked a good
while ago, but that I have been troubled with such a govvte of the hand,
that is to say, idleness, that by no means I could overcome it.

Cranuilde also an excellent learned man and one of the Emperor Charles his
privy Council was brought to Sir THOMAS MORE's friendshipp by Erasmus;
Cranuild
for which both of them thanked Erasmus exceedingly as appears first by
Cranuild's letter to him, which is thus: I cannot but thank you greatly with
these my (though rude) letters (most learned in all sciences) for your singular
benefitt lately bestovved upon me which I shall alvvaies bear in remembrance,
and which I esteem so much as that I would not le^se it far Craesus's
wealth. You will ask me, what benefitt that was; truly this, that you have
brought me to the acquaintance and svveete conversation of your friend MORE but
now I will call him mine, whom after your departure I often frequented,
because he often sent for me unto him; whose bountiefull entertainment at his
table I esteem not so much as his learning, his courtesy, and his
liberality. Wherefore I accounte myself deeply indebted unto you, and desire
God that I may be able to demonstrate unto you a grateful signification of
this good turn done me. In his absence he sent my wife a ring of gold, the
posie whereof in English was: All things are measured by good will. He gave
me also certain old pieces of silver and gold coin; in one whereof was
graven Tiberius's picture, in another Augustus; which I am vvilling to tell
you, because I am somevvhat to thank you for all. Whom Erasmus answered thus:
This is that sure, which is vulgarly spoken: I have by the means of one
daughter gotten two sons in law: you thank me because by my means you
have gotten so special a friend, as MORE is; and he on the other side thanketh
me also, for that I have procured his knowledge of Cranuilde. I knevv well
enough that because your vvitts and manners were alike, there would easily
arise a dear friendshipp betwixt you; if so were that you did but know
each other; but as the having of such friends is precious, so is the true
keeping of them as rare. Hear how, Sir THOMAS writes to Cranuilde: I both
perceive and acknovvledge how much I am in your debt, my dear Cranuilde,
because you never cease to do that which is most grateful unto me, in that
you certifye me still of your affairs and friends. For what can be either
more acceptable to THOMAS MORE in his adversity, or more pleasing unto him in
his prosperity, then to receive letters from Cranuilde, except one could bring
me to the speech of him, a most learned man of all others. But as often as I
read your vvritings, I am enamoured therevvith, as if I were conuersing with
you in presence. Wherefore nothing troubles me more, then that your letters
are no longer; yet have I found a means to remedy that, because I read them
over again and again, and I do it leasurely that my sudden reading them may
not bereave me of my pleasure. But so much for this. That which you write
concerning our friend Viues, Viues.
who has made a discourse of wicked women, I agree so well with your
opinion, that I think one cannot live without inconueniencies with the very
best woman. For if any man be married, he shall not be without care; and in
my conceit Metellus Numidicus spoke truly of vviues; which I would speak
the rather, if many of them through our own faults were not made the
worse. But Viues has gotten so good a wife, that he may not shun only, as
much as possible any man, all the troubles of marriage, but also thereby he may
receive great contentment; yet now men's minds are so busied with public
garboiles, whilst the fury of vvarres does so rage every where, that no man
is at leisure to think of his private cares: where fore if any household
troubles have heretofore oppressed any, they are now all obscured by reason
of common mischiefs. But this suffiseth for this matter, for that I return to
your self, whose courtesies and friendshipp toward me as often as I think
of (which is very often) it shakes from me all sorrovv. I thank you for the
book you sent me, and I vvish much joy with your new child, not for your
own sake only, but for the Common wealths, vvose great benefitt it is, that
such a parent should increase it with plenty of children. For from you none
but excellent children can be borne. Farevvell, and commend me carefully and
heartily to your wife, to whom I pray God send happy health and strength:
My wife and children also vvish you health, to whom by my report you are as
well known and as dear as to myself. Again farevvell. London 10. Aug.
1524. Another letter he wrote unto him in this sort: I am ashamed, so God help
me, my dear Cranuilde, of this your great courtesy toward me, that you do
salute me with your letters so often, so lovingly and so carefully, when as I
so seldom do salute you again, especially seeing you may pretend yea allege
as many troubles of businesses as I can: but such is the sincerity of your
affection and such the constancy thereof, as although you are ready to excuse
all things in your friends, yet you yourselfe are alvvaies ready to perfurme
every thing, and to go forvvard without omitting that which might be
pardoned in you. But persuade yourself, good Cranuild, that if there happen
any thing at any time, wherein I may really show unto you my love, there, God
vvilling, I will never be vvanting. Commend me to my Mistrisse your wife,
for I dare not now inuerte the order begun, and to your whole family,
whom mine does with all their hearts salute. From my house in the Country
this 10th. C. Goclenius.
of June 1528. Conradus Goclenius a Westphalian was commended by Erasmus unto
Sir THOMAS MORE thus: I praise your disposition, my dearest MORE, exceedingly,
for that your content is to be rich in faithful and sincere friends, and that
you esteem the greatest felicity of this life to be placed therein. Some take
great care that they may not be cosened with counterfaite ievvells; but you
co^temning all such trifles, seem to yourself to be rich enough, if you can
but get an unfeigned friend. For there is no man takes delight either in
Cards, dice, Chesse, hunting or music so much as you do in discoursing with
a learned and pleasant conceyted Companion. And although you are stored with
this kind of riches; yet because that I know, that a covetous man has never
enough, and that this manner of my dealing has luckily happened both to you
and me diverse times heretofore, I deliver to your custody one friend more
whom I would have you accept with your whole heart. His name is Conradus
Goclenius a Westphalian, who has with great applause and no less fruit
lately taught Rhetoric in the College newly erected at Louaine called
Trilingue. Now I hope that as soon as you shall have true experience of him,
I shall have thanks of you both; for so I had of Cranuilde, who so wholy
possesses your love, that I almost envy him for it.

But of all strangers Erasmus challenged unto himself his love most especially,
Sir Tho. Mores frindship to D. Erasmus Roderodamus.
which had long continued by mutual letters expressing great affection, and
increased* so much that he took a journey of purpose into England to see and
enjoy his personal acquaintance and more entire familiarity; at which time it
is reported how that he, who conducted him in his passage, procured that Sir
THOMAS MORE and he should first meet together in London at the Lo: Mayor's
table, neither of them knowing each other. And in the dinner time, they chanced
to fall into argument, Erasmus still endeavoring to defend the worser part;
but he was so sharply set upon, and opposed by Sir THOMAS MORE, that
perceauing that he was now to argue with a readier wit, then ever he had
before met withal, he broke forth into these words not without some choler:
Aut tu es Morus aut nullus; whereto Sir THOMAS readily replied: Aut tu es
Erasmus, aut diabolus: because at that time he was strangely disguised, and had
sought to defend impious propositions; for although he was a singular
Humanist, and one that could utter his mind in a most eloquent phrase, yet had
he always a delight to scoff at religious matters, and find fault with all
sorts of Clergy men. He took a felicity to set out sundry Commentaries
upon the Fathers works, censuring them at his pleasure, for which cause he is
termed Errans mus; because he wandreth here and there in other men's haruests;
yea in his writings he is said to have hatched many of those eggs of heresy,
which the apostata Friar Luther had before laid; not that he is to be
accounted an heretic, for he would never be obstinate in any of his opinions,
yet would he irreligiously glaunce at all antiquity and find many faults
with the present state of the Church. Whilst he was in England Sir THOMAS MORE
used him most courteously, doing many offices of a dear friend for him, as
well by his word as his purse; whereby he bound Erasmus so straytely unto him,
that he ever after spoke and wrote upon all occasions most highly in his
praise; Forsaken, when he perceived Erasmus hate in Religion
but Sir THOMAS in success of time grew less affectionate unto him, by reason
he saw him still fraught with much vanity and inconstancy in respect of
religion; as when Tindall obiecteth unto Sir THOMAS, that his Darling Erasmus
had translated the word Church into Congregation, and Priest into Elder, even
as himself had done, Sir THOMAS answered thereto, if my darling Erasmus has
translated those places with the like wicked intent, that Tindall has done,
he shall be no more my darling, but the Devils darling. Finally long after
having found in Erasmus's works many things necessarily to be amended, he
counseled him as his friend in some latter book to imitate the example of S.
Augustine who did set out a book of Retractations, to correct in his writing,
what he had unadvisedly written in the heat of youth; but he that was far
different from S. Augustine in humility, would never follow his counsel; and
therefore he is censured by the Church for a Busy fellow: many of his books
are condemned, and his opinions accounted erroneous, though he always lived a
Catholic Priest; Erasmus lived alvvayes a Catholic Priest.
and has written most sharply against all those new Gospellers, who then
began to appear in the world; and in a letter to John Fabius Bishopp of
Vienna he says that he hates these seditious opinions, with the which at this
day the world is miserably shaken; neither does he dissemble, says he, being
so addicted to piety, that if he incline to any part of the balance, he
will bend rather to superstition then to impiety; by which speech he seems
in doubtful words to tax the Church with superstition, and the new
Apostolical brethren with impiety.

Now to conclude this matter of Sir THOMAS MORE's friends, let us hear what
Erasmus speaks of him in an epistle to Vlderick Hutten: S.T. Mores constancy
in frindship
MORE seems to be made and borne for friendshipp, whereof he is a most
sincere follovver, and a fast keeper; neither does he fear to be taxed for
that he has many friends; which thing Hesiodus prayseth nothing: every man
may attain to his friendshipp; he is nothing slovve in choosing, most apt in
nourishing, and most constant in keeping them; if by chance he falls into ones
amity, whose vices he cannot amend, he slackeneth the raines of friendshipp,
disioynting it by little and little rather then dissoluing it suddenly: whom
he finds sincere and constant agreing with his own good disposition, he is
so delighted with their company and familiarity, that he seems to place
his chief worldly pleasure in such men's conversation; and although he be
very negligent in his own temporal affairs, yet none is more diligent then
he in furthering his friends causes. What need I speak many words? if any
were desirous to have a perfect pattern of friendshipp, none can make it
better then MORE. In his company there is such rare affability, and such
svveete behavior, that no man is of so harsh a nature, but that his talk is
able to make him merry, no matter so unpleasing, but he with his wit can
shake from it all tediousness; His pleasant conversation proceeding from a
quiet conscie^se.
declaring plainly in these words the most pleasant disposition of Sir THOMAS
MORE; whose only merry ieastes and witty sayings were able to fill a whole
volume, if they were all gathered together; some of which Doctor Stapleton
has set down in two several Chapters, whereof I shall also mention some
hereafter; but the greatest number have never been set down in writing, as
daily faling from him in his familiar discourse. All which show plainly that
he had a quiett conscience full of alacrity and a witty conceit, able to
please all men that resorted unto him, and who would not be glad of his
company, who was by nature most affable, in his Princes favor very high, and
stored with worldly blessings, as ample possessions, wealth enough and pomp
of the world, even at will.

He used when he was in the City of London a Justice of peace, A vvitty and
merry reprehe^sion.
to go to the Cessions at Newgate, as other Justices did; amongst whom it
happened that one of the ancient Justices of peace was wont to chide the poor
men, that had their purses cut, for not keeping them more warily, saying that
their negligence was cause, that there were so many Cut purses brought
thither. Which when Sir THOMAS had heard him often speak at one time
especially, the night after he sent for one of the chief Cut purses that was
in the prison* and promised him that he would stand his good friend, if he
would cut that Iustice's purse, whilst he sat the next day on the Benche, and
presently make a sign thereof unto him; the fellow gladly promises him to do
it. The next day therefore when they sat again, that thief was called
amongst the first; who being accused of his fact, said that he would excuse
himself sufficiently, if he were but permitted in private to speak to some
one of the Benche; he was bid therefore to choose one whom he would; and he
presently chose that grave old man, who then had his pouche at his gyrdle; and
whilst he roundeth him in the ear, he cunningly cutts his purse; and taking
his leave sollemnely, goes down to his place; Sir THOMAS knowing by a sign
that it was dispatched, takes presently an occasion to move all the Bench to
distribute some alms upon a poor needy fellow, that was there, beginning
himself to do it. When the old man came to open his purse, he sees it cut
away, and wondering, said, that he had it, when he came to sit there that
morning, Sir THOMAS replied in a pleasant manner; what? will you charge any of
us with fellonie? He beginning to be angry and ashamed of the matter, Sir
THOMAS calls the cut purse and wills him to give him his purse again,
counselling the good man hereafter not to be so bitter a censurer of innocent
men's negligence, when as himself could not keep his purse safe in that open
assembly. For these his witty ieastes he may well be said to have been
neither hateful to the Nobility, nor unpleasing to the people. If we read
his letters, His candor and innocence.
they show great eloquence a pure latin phrase and a religious mind, for
always they express either humility in himself, zeal of Gods honor, love
to his neighbor, compassion of the afflicted, or a dear affection to his wife
and children; so that it may be said that he had pectus vere candidum a very
sincere heart; and surely they breathe out matter either of wonderful devotion,
or admirable wisdom.

THE FOVRTHE CHAPTER. THE PIOUS HOME-employmente of Sir THOMAS MORES; and his
godly councels given to his wife and children.
1. Sir Th. Mores home-entertainements and devotions.

2. His beehauiour toward his wife and children and councels given them.

3. Sir Th. More studiously vvrote against beresyes in midst of his affairs.

4. A view of many vvitts and pithy speeches of S.T. Mores.

5. Sir Th. Mores profound skill in diuinytye.

1. 1. S.T. Mores home-entertainments and deuotio^s.
ALthough he lived a Courtier and a lay married man yet when he came home, he
would both in the morning and in the evening, before he went to bed, say in
his Chapel certain prayers deuoutely upon his knees, with his wife, children
and family, and because he was desirous sometimes to be solitary, and would
sequester himself from the world, to recollect himself and shake of the dust
of earthly businesses, which otherwise would easily defile his soul, he built
for himself a Chapel, a library and a gallerie, called the New buildings, a
good distance from his main house, wherein as his custom was, upon other
days to busy himself in prayer and meditation, whenever he was at leisure,
so usually he would continue there on the Frydaies, in memory of Christ's
bitter passion, from morning until night, spending the whole day in devotion;
so that he became an excellent man in the Contemplative life; of all which let
us hear what Erasmus writes: MORE has built near London upon the Thames
side (to wit, at Chelsey that which my lo: of Lincoln bought of Sir Robert
Cecile) a commodious house, neither mean nor subject to envy, yet magnificent
enough: there he conuerseth affably with his family, his wife, his son and
daughter in law, his three daughters and their husbands, The excellent order
of his family.
with eleauen grandchildren; there is not any man living, so loving to his
children as he, and he loves his old wife as well as if she were a young
maid; and such is the excellency of his temper, that whatsoever happens
that could not be helped, he loves it as though nothing could happen more
happily. You would say there were in that place Plato's Academie; but I do
the house injury in comparing it to Plato's academie, wherein there was only
disputations of numbers and Geometrical figures, and sometimes of moral
virtues. I should rather call his house a school or university of Christian
religion; for there is none therein but reads or studieth the liberal
Sciences; their special care is piety and virtue; there is no quarrelling or
intemperate words heard, none seen idle; which household discipline that
vvorthie Gentleman does not govern by proud and lofty words, but with all
kind and courteous benevolence; every body perfourmeth his duty, yet is
there always alacrity, neither is sober mirth any thing vvanting. And again
he writes thus: His vviues employme^t.
His first wife, which was but young, he caused to be instructed in learning,
and to be taught all kind of music; she dying after she had brought forth
four children, he married, as is aforesaid, a widow, not for lust, but to
be a gouernesse, to his young family, who although she were inclining to old
age, and of a nature somevvhat harsh and besides very worldly, yet he
persuaded her to play upon the lute, violl, and some other instruments, every
day perfourming thereon her task; and so with the like gentleness he ordered
his whole family. His servants discipline.
He suffered none of his servants either to be idle or to give themselves to
any games; but some of them he allotted to look to the gardin, assigning to
every one his sundry plott; some again he set to sing, some to play on the
organs; he suffered none to give themselves to cards or dice. The men abode on
the one side of the house, the women on the other, seldom conuersing
together; he used before bedtime to call them together, and say certain
prayers with them, as the Miserere psalm; Evening prayers.
Ad te, Domine, leuaui; Deus misereatur nostri; Salve Regina; and De profundis
for the dead, and some others; he suffered none to be absent from Mass on the
Sondaies, or upon holy days; and upon great feasts he got them to watch the
eeues all the Mattins time. Vigils. His devotion on good friday.
Upon Good Friday he would call them together into the New-buildings; and
reading the holy Passion unto them, he would now and then interpose some
speeches of his own to move them either to compassion, compunction, or such
pious affections. Erasmus says, that there was a fatal felicity fallen on
the servants of that house, that none lived but in better estate after Sir
THOMAS MORE's death; none ever was touched with the least aspersion of any
evil fame.

He used to have one read daily at his table, His tabletalke*
which being ended, he would ask of some of them, how they understood such and
such a place, and so there grew a friendly communication, recreating all men
that were present, with some ieaste or other. My aunte Rooper writing hereof to
her father in the Tower says: What do you think, my most dear father, does
comfort us at Chelsey in this your absence? surely the remembrance of your
manner of life passed amongst us, your holy conversation, your wholesome
counsels, your examples of virtue, of which there is hope that they do not
only persevere with you, but that they are by Gods grace much more increased.

2. 2. His behaueour tovvard his wife and children, and counsels given the^.
His children used often to translate out of English into Latin, and out of
Latin into English: and Doctor Stapleton testifyeth that he has seen an
Apology of Sir THOMAS MORE's to the university of Oxford in defense of
learning, turned into Latin by one of his daughters, and translated again
into English by another. To desire heavenly matters.
And to stir up his wife and children to the desire of heavenly things, he
would sometimes use these and the like words unto them: It is now noe
maisterie for you, my joys, to get heaven; for every body gives you good
example, every one storeth your heads with good counsels; you see also virtue
rewarded, and vice punished; so that you are carried up thither by the chinnes;
but if you chance to live that time, wherein none will give you good example,
nor none any good counsel; when you shall see before your eyes virtue
punished and vice rewarded, if then you will stand fast, and stick to God
closely, upon pain of my life, though you be but half good, To bear
afflictions patie^tly.
God will allow you for whole good. If his wife or any of his children
chanced to be sick or troubled, he would say unto them: we must not look to
go to heaven at our pleasure and on fotherbeds; that is not the way, for our
Lord himself went thither with great pain; and the servant must not look to
be in better case then his master. As he would in this sort animate them to
bear their troubles patie^tly, So vvithstand temptations of the devil.
so would he in like manner teach them to withstand the devil and his
temptations valiantly, comparing our ghostly enemy to an ape, whith if he be
not looked unto, he will be busy and bold to do shrewede turns; but if he
be espied and checked for them, he will suddenly leap back and adventure no
further; so the devil finding a man idle, sluggish, and using no resistance to
his suggestions, waxes hardy, and will not fail still to continue them,
until he has thoroughly brought us to his purpose; but if he find a man with
diligence still seeking to withstand and prevent his temptations he waxes
weary, and at last he utterly forsakes him, being a spirit of so high a
pride, that he cannot endure to be mocked; and again so envious that he
fears still least he not only thereby should catch a foul fall, but also
minister unto us more matter of meritt. Against too much curiosity in dressing.
When he saw any of his take great pains in dressing themselves to be fine
either in wearing that which was uneasy, or in stroaking up their hair to
make themselves high foreheads, he would tell them that if God gave them not
hell, he should do them great injury; for they took more pains to please
the world and the devil, then many even virtuous men did to cleanse their
souls and please God.

A happy household.
Many such speeches tending to devotion and care of their souls had he every
day at dinner and supper, after the reading was done, as is before said, with
such heavenly discourses flowing with eloquence, that it might well be said of
him, which the Queen of Saba said of Solomon: Blessed art thou; and blessed by
thy Lord God; and blessed are all they that attend and wait on thee; For no
doubt there was the spirit of God in that family, where every one was busied
about somewhat or other; no cards, no dice, no company keeping of the men
with the women; but as it were in some religious house, Their ordinary
recreations.
all chaste, all courteous, all devout; their recreations was either music of
voices or viols; for which cause he procured his wife, as I have said, to play
thereon, to draw her mind from the world, to which by nature she was too much
addicted; but so, as Sir THOMAS would say of her, that she was often pennywise,
and pound-foolish, saving a candle's end, and spoiling a veluett gown. Of her
also he meant it, when in his books of Comfort in Tribulation he tells of
one, who would rate her husband, because he had no mind to set himself
forward in the world, saying unto him: Tillie vallie, tillie vallie: will you
sit and make goslings in the ashes; my mother has often said, unto me: it is
better to rule then to be ruled. Now in truth, answered Sir THOMAS, that is
truly said, good wife; for I never found you yet willing to be ruled. And in
another place of the same book he calls this wife of his, a iollie
Maister-woman.

3. 3. S.T. More studiously vvrate against heresies in midst of of his affairs.
For all his public affairs and household exercises, he never left of to
write learned books either of devotion or against heresies, which now began
to spread themselves from Germany into Flanders, and from thence into England
by many pestiferous pampheletts and books, against which Sir THOMAS MORE
labored with his pen more then any other English man whatsoever, in regard
of his zeal to God, and the honor of his immaculate spouse the Catholic
Church, as appears by his four books of Dialogues, The praise of his
Dialogue
a work full of learning and wit, where he argues most profoundly of the
Invocation of Saints, pilgrimages, relikes, and Images; he teaches also
substantially, how we may know, which is the true Church, and that that Church
cannot err.

After he had ended this book, there was a lewd fellow set out a pamphlett
entitled the Supplication of Beggars; His answer to the Supplication of
beggars.
by which under pretense of helping the poor, he goes about to cast out the
Clergy and to overthrow all Abbeys and religious houses, bearing men in hand,
that after that the Gospel should be preached, beggars and bawdes should
decrease, thiefes and idle people be the fewer, etc. Against whom Sir THOMAS
wrote a singular book, which he named A Supplication of the souls in
Purgatory, making them there, The Supplication of souls of Purgatory.
complain of the most uncharitable dealing of certain vpstarts, who would
persuade all men to take from the^ the spiritual alms, that have been in all
ages bestowed upon these poor souls, who feel greater misery then any
beggar in this world; and he proves most truly that an ocean of many
mischievous events would indeed ouerwhelme the realm: Then, says he, shall
Luther's gospel come in; then shall Tindall's Testament be taken up; then
shall false heresies be preached, The woeful effects of heresy.
then shall the Sacraments be set at naught, then shall fasting and prayer be
neglected, then shall holy Saints be blasphemed, then shall Almighty god be
displeased, then shall he withdraw his grace and let all run to ruin,
then shall all virtue be had in derision, then shall all vice reign and run
forth unbridled, then shall youth leave labor and all occupation, then shall
folks wax idle and fall to unthriftiness, then shall whores and thieues,
beggars and bavvdes increase, then shall unthrifts flock together, and each
bear him bold of other, then shall all laws be laughed to scorn, then
shall servants set naught by their masters, and unruly people rebelle
against their governors, then will rise up rifeling and robbery, mischief
and plain insurrection; whereof what the end will be, or when you shall
see it, only God knovveth. And that Luther's new Gospel has taken such
effect in many parts of Christendom, the woeful experience does feelingly
to the great grief of all good folks testifye to the world; Of all which, and
that the land would be peopled to the devouring of one another, he writes
particularly more like one that had seen what had ensued already, then like
one that spoke of things to come.

Against Tindal, Frith, and Barnes.
He wrote also a laboursome book against Tindall, refuting particularly every
periode of his books; a short treatise also against young Father Fryth in
defense of the real presence, which that heretic did gainesay and for that
was after burnt. Against Friar Barnes his church he wrote also an Apology,
Apology.
and a defense thereof, Debellation of Salem and Bizance.
under the name of Salem and Byzanze; which are all set forth together with
that most excellent piece of work comprised in three books of Comfort in
Tribulation; Comfort in tribulation.
which subject he handles so wittily as none has come near him either in
weight of grave sentences, devout considerations or fit similitudes; seasoning
always the troublesomnesse of the matter with some merry ieastes or pleasant
tales, as it were sugar, whereby we drink up the more willingly these
wholesome druggs, of themselves unsavory to flesh and blood; which kind of
writing he has used in all his works, so that none can ever be weary to
read them, though they be never so long.

4. 4. A view of many vvitty and pithy speeches of S. Th. Mores.
Wherefore I have thought it not amiss to set down in this place amongst a
thousand others, some of his Apophthegmes, which Doctor Stapleton has
collected in two whole Chapters:

Do not think, says Sir THOMAS MORE, that, to be always pleasant, which
mad men do laughing. For one may often see a man in Bedlem laugh, The vulgar
no true judge of things.
when he knockes his head against the wall; uttering this to condemn them that
esteem all things good or badde, which the common people judge to be.

Sinners distasted.
Again: A sinner, says he, cannot taste spiritual delights; because all
carnal are first to be abandoned.

Why fevv do fear death.
By an excellent similitude he teaches us, why few do fear death thus: Even
as they which look upon things afar of, see them confusedly, not knowing
whether they be men or trees; even so he that promises unto himself long
life, looks upon death as a thing far of, not judging what it is, how
terrible, what griefs and dangers it brings with it. And that none ought to
promise himself long life, No man sure of long life.
he proves thus: Even as two men that are brought out of prison to the
gallows, one by a long way about, the other by a direct short path, yet
neither knowing, which is which, until they come to the gallows, neither of
these two can promise himself longer life, the one then the other, by reason of
the uncertainty of the way; even so a young man cannot promise himself longer
life, then an old man.

Against the vanity of worldly honor he speaks thus: Even as that
criminal person, Worlds vanity.
who is to be lead to execution shortly should be accounted vain, if he should
engraue his Coat of Arms upon the prison gate; even so are they vain, who
endeavor to leave, with great industry, monuments of their dignity in the
prison of this world.

By a subtle dilemma, he teaches us, VVorldly losses hurt not.
why we are not to think that we can be hurt, by the loss of our superfluous
goods in this manner: he that suffers any loss of his goods, he would
either have bestowed them with praise and liberality, and so God will accept
his will in steed of the deed itself, or else he would have waisted them
wickedly, and then he has cause to rejoice, that the matter of sinning is
taken away.

To express lively the folly of an old covetous man he writes thus: The
folly of old misers.
a thief that is to dye to morrow, steals to day; and being asked, why he
did so, he answered, that it was a great pleasure unto him to be master of
that money but one night; so an old miser never cease to increase his heap
of coin, though he be never so aged.

To express the folly and madness of them that delight wholly in hording up
wealth, he writes in the person of the souls in purgatory thus; Madness of
covetous me^.
in his book of the Supplication of the Souls: We that are here in purgatory
when we think of our bags of gold, which we horded up in our life time, we
condemn and laugh at our own folly no otherwise, then if a man of good
years should find by chance the bagg of Cherrie stones, which he had
carefully hid, when he was a child.

Fruicts of tribulation.
In his book of Comfort in tribulation, that men should not be troubled in
adversity, he writes thus: The minds of mortal men are so blind and
uncertain, so mutable and unconstant in their desires, that God could not
punish men worse, then if he should suffer every thing to happen that every
man does wish for. The fruit of tribulation he describes thus all punishment
inflicted in hell, is only as a just revenge because it is no place of purging:
In purgatory all punishments purge only, because it is no place of meritt; but
in this life, every punishment can both purge sin and procure meritt for a
just man, because in this life there is place for both.

He says also that they which give themselves to pleasure and idleness in
this time of pilgrimage, are like to him, How fond it is to love this world.
who traveling to his own house, where there is abundance of all things,
would yet be an hosteler in an Inn by the way, for to get an Innekeepers
favor, and so end his life there in a stable.

Speaking of ghostly Fathers, Against Confessors that flatter their ghostly
Children.
that seek to please their penitents, he says: Even as a mother sends forth
her child to school with fair words and promises, that has slept too long
in the morning, and therefore fears the rod, when he weepeth and blubbereth
she promises him, all will be well, because it is not so late as he imagines,
or that his master will pardon him for that fault this time, not caring what
he endures when he comes thither indeed, so she send him merry from home
with his bread and butter in his hand; even so, many Pastors of souls speak
pleasing things to their sheep that are rich and delicate, they promise them,
when they are dying, and fear hell, that all things shall be well with them,
telling them, that either they have not offended God so grievously as they
fear, or that God being mercieful will easily forgive the^; nothing careful
whether after this life they feel hell or no, so that they make them not sad
in this world, and show themselves grateful unto the^ here.

Affliction more profitable then pleasure.
Pleasure, says he, does not only withdraw wicked men from prayer, but also
affliction sometimes; yet this is the difference; that affliction does
sometimes wrest some short prayer from the wickedest man alive; but pleasure
calls away even one that is indifferent good from all prayer.

Against differring of ame^dment.
Against impenitent persons and such as differ the amending of their life till
the latter end of their days, he says thus: A lewd fellow that had spent
all his life in wickedness, was wont to brag, that he could be saved, if he
spoke but three words at the hour of his death; riding over a bridge that was
broken, his horse stumbling, and not being able to keep himself from tumbling
into the water, as he saw himself fall headlong into it casting away the
bridle, he said: the Devil Take All; and so with his three words he perished
in the river.

He that is lightened with a true vision, Visions, and illusions.
differs from him that has an illusion; even as a man awake differs from
him that dreameth.

Even as he that passes over a narrow bridge, by reason of his fear often
falls, Pusillanimity a dangerous temptation.
especially if others say unto him: you fall; which otherwise he would safely
pass over; even so he that is fearful by nature and full of pusillanimitie,
often falls into desperation, the devil crying unto him; thou art damned,
thou art damned; which he would never harken to, nor be in any danger, if he
should take unto him a good heart, and by wholesome counsel fear nothing the
diuell's outcrye.

Danger of prosperity.
The prosperity of this world is like the shortest winter's day; and we are
lifted up in it as an arrowe shot up on high, where a hot breath does delight
us, but from thence we fall suddenly to the earth, and there we stick fast,
either be mired with the dirt of infamy, or staruing with cold, being plucked
out of our feathers.

Of riches and honors.
Again he says? As it is a hard thing, to touch pitch, and not to be defiled
there with, a dry stick to be putt into the fire, and not to burn, to
nourish a snake in our bosom, and not to be stung with it; so a most hard
thing it is to be rich and honored in this world, and not to be struck with
the darte of pride and vain glory.

All riches of this world none of our own.
Let there be two beggars, says he, who have long time begged together; one
of whom some rich man has entertained in his house, putt him in silk, given
him money in his purse, but with this condition, as he tells him, that with in
a short space, he will thrust him out of his doors, and take all that away
from him again; if he in the mean while being thus gallant, should chance to
meet with his fellow beggar, would he be so foolish as for all this not to
acknowledge him for his companion? or would he for these few days happiness
hold himself better then he? Applying this to every man's case, who comes
naked into this world, and is to return naked again.

He compares Covetousness to a fire, Covetousness
which by how much the more wood there is laid on it to burn, so much apter
it is to burn more still.

That there are many in this life, Bad merchants.
that buy hell with more toil, then heaven might be won with, by half.

He foresawe heresy in England, A prediction of heresy.
as appears by this witty comparison; Like as before a great storm the sea
swells, and has unwonted motions without any wind stirring; so may we see
here many of our Englishmen, which a few years ago could not endure to hear
the name of an Heretic, Schismatike, Lutheran or Sacramentarie, now to be very
well contented both to suffer them and to praise them somewhat, yea to learn
by little and little as much as they can be suffered, to find fault, and to
tax willingly the Church, the Clergy, the Ceremonies, yea and Sacraments too.

Rich are not goods.
Also he has this argument; if he be called stout that has fortitude, he
hot, who has heat, wise that has wisdom; yet he who has riches, cannot
be said presently to be good; therefore riches cannot be numbered amongst good
things. Twenty, yea a hundred bare heads standing by a noble man do not
defend his head from cold so much as his own hat does alone, which yet he is
enforced to putt of in the presence of his prince.

The vvorst affection.
That is the worst affection of the mind, which does delight us in that thing,
which cannot be gotten but by offending God. He that does get or keep
worldly wealth by offending God, let himfully persuade himself, that those
things will never do him good; for either God will quickly take away evil
gotten goods, or will suffer them to be kept for a greater mischief.

Even as he that knows certainly that he is to be banished into a strange
country, Alms deeds.
never to return into his own again, and will not endure that his goods be
transported thither, being loath to want them for that little while rather then
ever to enjoy them after, may well be thought a mad man; so are they out of
their wits, who enticed with vain affections to keep their goods always
about them, and neglectiue to give alms for fear of wanting, cannot endure to
have these goods sent before them to heaven, when as they know most assuredly
that they shall enjoy them always there with all plenty, and with a double
reward.

To ease his thoughts when he was in prison, An the world a prison.
he imagined that all the world was but a prison, out of which every day some
one or other was called to execution, that is to death. To suffer for God.


In his daily talk he used also many witty sayings, as: that it is an easy
matter in some cases for a man to loose his head, and yet to have no harm at
all.

The world no reco^penser.
Good deeds the world being ungrateful is wont never to recompense, neither
can it, though it were grateful.

Heresy impude^.
Speaking of heretics he would say; they have taken away hypocrisy, but they
have placed impudency in the room thereof; so that they which before feigned
themselves to be religious, now do boaste of their wickedness.

Prayer.
He prayed thus: O Lord God, grant, that I endeavor to get those things, for
which I am to pray unto thee.

Detraction.
When he had any at his table speaking detraction, he would interrupt them
thus; Let any man think as he pleases, I like this room very well; for it
is well contrived and fayrely built.

Ingratitude.
Of an ungrateful person he would say, that they wrote good turns done unto
them in the dust; but even the least injuries, in marble.

Faith the mistress of reason
He compares reason to a handmayde, which if she be well taught, will obey; and
Faith to the mistrisse, which is to keep her in awe: captiuans intellectum in
obsequium fidei.

To seek for the truth amongst heretics, No truth among heretics.
is like to a man wandering in a desert, and meeting with a company of lewd
fellows, of whom he asks his way they all turning back to back, each
poynteth right before him, and assures him that that is his true way; though
never so contrary one to the other.

He says that he were a mad man, Better prevent, then redress.
that would drink poison to take a preservative after that; but he is a wise
man, that spilling the poison, leaves the antidote for him, that has need
thereof.

As it is an easier thing to weaue a new nett rather then to sow up all the
holes of an old; Heretical tra^slations.
even so it is a less labor to translate the Bible a new, then to mende
heretical versions.

He is not wise that eats the bread, Avoid heresy.
which is poisoned by his enemies, although he should see a friend of his
scrape it away never so much, especially having other bread to eat not
poisoned.

Fasting.
The heretics saying that none ought to fast, but when they are troubled with
the motions of the flesh, he answers; if it be so, no married man needs to
fast; for they have another remedy athand; and virgins durst not fast, least
wanton fellows should mark them, when carnal temptations most assail them,
and this were for one to show to others their fleshly fraylties.

Desire of heaven.
He was wont to say that he may well be adadmitted to heaven, who was very
desirous to see God; but on the contrary side, he that does not desire
earnestly shall never be admitted thither.

Monastical life.
Against an heretic he speaks thus: that if monastical life be against the
Gospel, as you seem to say it must needs be, that the gospel be contrary
unto it; and that were to say that Christ taught us to pamper ourselves
carefully, to eat well, to drink well, to sleep well and flow in all lust
and pleasure.

Faith and good works.
If Faith cannot be without good works, why then babble you so much against good
works, which are the fruicts of faith.

That people should fall into bad life and lust, is as great a miracle, he
says, Bad life no miracle.
as stones to fall downwards.

Whereas (he says) you inueighe against Schoole-Diuinitie, School-diuinity.
because truth is there called in doubt, not without danger; we inueighe
against you, because false matters are held by you undoubtedly for truth it
self.

These good fellows (speaking of heretics) will rather hang out of Gods
vinyarde, Heretics.
then suffer themselves to be hired into it.

Heretics writings, seeing they conclude no good thing, are altogether
tedious, be they never so short.

And again: As none can run a shorter race, then he that wantes both his
feet; so none can write shorter then he that has not any good matter, nor
fit words to express it.

When an heretic told him, Impugning of heresy.
that he should not write against heretics, unless he could convert them; he
said, that it was like, as if one should not find fault with burners of
housen, unless he were able to build them up again at his own charge.

Heretics falsplay.
He tells, that heretics use to frame Catholics arguments very weak and
frivolous, that they may the more easily confute them; even as little children
make houses of tyleshardes, which they cast down with great sport again
presently.

Their contumelies.
Of their contumelious speeches against himself he says, I am not so void of
reason, that I can expect reasonable matter from such unreasonable men.

His hatred against heresy in good earnest.
When they said his writings were nothing but ieasting toys, he says; I scarce
believe that these good brethren can find any pleasant thing in my books;
for I write nothing in them that may be pleasing unto them. When the heretic
Constantine had broken prison in his house, he bad his man go lock the door
fast and see the place mended sure, least he should come back again; and when
the heretics reported, that he was sorry for this, that he could not for anger
eat in three days, he answered that he was not so harsh of disposition to
find fault with any man for rising and walking, when he sat not at his ease.

All his English works were set out together in a great volume, whilst Q.
Marie reigned, 5. His profound skill in diuinyty.
by Judge Rastall Sir THOMAS his sister's son, by which works one may see
that he was very skillfull in Schoole-Diuinitie and matters of Controversy,
for he argues sharply, he confirms the truth profoundly, and cites both
Scriptures and Fathers most aptely; besides he urges for the adverse part
more a great deal, then any heretic ever did, that wrote before him.

But to see how he handles Luther under the name of one Rosse, None handled
Luther more kindly.
would do any man good, faining that Rosse wrote his book from Rome, against
the most ridiculous and scurrilous pa^phlett, which Luther had made against
King Henry the eighth, who of good zeal had set out with great praise a
book in defense of the Seven Sacraments, and the Pope's authority; for which
Pope Leo the tenth gave him the tile of Defender of the Faith. Wherefore in
defense of his Sovereign, whom Luther had most basely rayled at, calling him
often Thomistical ass, and that he would beray the king's Crown, who was not
worthy to wipe his shoes, with many other scurrilous speeches; Sir THOMAS
painteth out the foul mouthed fellow in his lively colors, and made him so
enraged, that it stung him more then any other book, that ever was set out
against him.

Sir Thomas More well studied in S. Thomas doctrine.
Finally in every one of his books, whenever he touches any controversy,
he does it so exactly that one may see, that he had diligently read many great
Divines; and that he was very well seen in S. Thomas the father of all
Divinity, this may be an evident sign, which his Secretary John Harris a man
of sound judgment and great piety, reported of him, that on a time an
heretical book newly printed and spread abroad was brought to Sir THOMAS;
which when he read, being in his boat, going from Chelsey to London, he showed
certain of the author's arguments with his fingar to Mr. Harris saying: Lo
here how the knaue's argument is taken out of the objections of S. Thomas in
2.2. in such and such an article; but the lewd fellow might have seen the
solutions, which are presently added there. And other school-diuines.
He maintained also in a learned Disputation with Fa: Alphonsus the Franciscan
Q. Catherin's ghostly Father Scotus his opinion of Attrition and Contricion,
as more safely to be followed, then that Occhamus; by all which it may be
gathered, that he had great insight in the diversity of Scholasticall opinions.

He wrote also a book in Latin against Pomeran the heretic, His epistle
against Pomeranus.
and indeed labored very much rather to reduce such men unto the Catholic
Faith then to punish them for their reuolte: and yet in his epitaphe he says
of himself, that he was to thieves, murderers and heretics grievous: and
Simon Grineus a Lutheran boasts in his translation of Proclus dedicated to my
grandfather, how courteously Sir THOMAS his father used him, when he was in
England.

THE FIFTH CHAPTER. K. HENRY'S FIRST scruples in his Marriage; Sir THOMAS MORES
care in the education of his children.
1. The ambition of Cardinal Wolsey occasion of K. Henry his fall.

2. K. Henry communicates his scruple about his marriage with S. T. More.

3. S. T. Mores praediction of the fall of England from religion.

4. He reduces his son Roper miraculously from heresy.

5. He obtains his daughter Margarets health of God by prayer.

6. S. T. Mores domestique school.

7. His delight, and contentment in the studies of his children.

8. How his daughter Margaret proved excellent, for her sex, in learning.

1. 1. Cardinal Wolsey his ambition.
WHile Sir THOMAS MORE was Cha^cellour of the Duchy, the Sea of Rome chanced
to be vacant; and Cardinal Wolsey a man of insatiable ambition, who had crept
up in the favor of Charles the Fifth, (so that the Emperor still writing unto
him called him Father, and the other called him son,) hoped now by his means
to attain to the popedom; but perceauing himself of that expectation
frustrate and disappoynted, because the Emperor in the time of their election
had highly commended another to the whole College of the Cardinals, called
Adrian, who was a Flemming, and had been sometime his school master, a man of
rare learning and singular virtue; who therevpo^ allthough absent and little
dreaming of it, was chosen Pope; and then forth with going from Spain, where
he was then resident, came on foot to Rome. Pope Adria^s humility.
Before he entered into the City, putting of his hose and shoes, barefoote and
bare leggd he passed through the streets toward his palace, with such
humility and devotion that all the people not without cause had him in great
reverence and admiracion; but, as I said, Cardinal Wolsey, a man of contrary
qualities, waxed therewith so wroth, and stomacked so the Emperor for it ever
after, that he studied still how he might revenge himself any ways against
him; which as it was the beginning of a lamentable tragedy, so the end
thereof we cannot yet see, although there have been almost one hundred years
sithence. Wolsey the author of K. H. 8. fall.
This Wolsey therefore not ignorant of King Henrie's unconstant and mutable
disposition, inclined to withdraw his affections upon every light occasion
from his own most noble, virtuous and lawful wife Q. Catherine the Emperor's
own aunte, and to fix this amourous passions upon other women, nothing
comparable unto her either in birth, wisdom, virtue, favor, or external
beauty; this irreligious prelate meaning to make the king's lightness an
instrument to bring about his unconscionable intent, endeavored by all the
means he could to allure the king to cast his fancy upon one of the French
king's sisters; the king being fallen in love already, he not suspecting any
such thing, with the lady Anne Bullen a woman of no nobility, no nor so much
as of any worthy fame.

This French match he thought to plott to spite the Emperor, Longla^d B. of
London, Wolseys instrument.
because at that time there was great wars and mortal enmity between the
French king and Charles the Fifth. For the better compassing whereof, the
Cardinal requested Longland Bishopp of London, who was the king's ghostly
father, to putt a scruple into king Henrie's head, that he should, as it were
another S. John Baptist, (though the case were nothing like,) tell his
Majesty, that it was not lawful for him like another Herod to marry his
brothers wife.

2. K. Henry communicates with S. T. More, his scruple concerning his first
marriage
And although K. Henrie's conscience had been quiett now above twenty years
together, yet was he not unwilling to hearken hereunto: but entertayning it,
opened his scruple to Sir THOMAS MORE, whose counsel he required herein,
showing him certain places of Scripture, that somewhat seemed to serve the
turn and his appetite. Which when Sir THOMAS had seriously perused, and had
excused himself saying, he was unfit to meddle with such matters, being one
that never had professed the study of Divinity: The king not satisfied with
this answer, knowing well his judgment to be found in whatsoever he would
apply himself unto; pressed him so sore, that in conclusion he condescended to
his Majesty's request being as it were a command; and for that the cause was
of such weight and importance, having need of great deliberation, he besought
his Majesty to give him sufficient respite advisedly to consider of it; with
which the king very well satisfied, said that Tunstall and Clarke, two worthy
Bishops, one of Durham, the other of Bathe, with others the learnedest of his
privy Council should also be his Coadiutours.

Sir THOMAS taking his leave of the king, Sir Tho. Mores discreet answer to
the kings scruple.
went and conferred with them about those places of Scripture, adding thereto,
for their better means to search out the truth, the expositions of the ancient
Fathers, and Doctors of the Church; and at his next coming to the Court,
talking with the king about this matter, he spoke thus: To deal sincerely with
your Majesty neither my Lo: of Durham, nor my Lo: of Bathe, though I know
them both wise, virtuous, learned, and honorable prelates, nor my self with
the rest of your Council, being all your Grace's own servants and subjects,
for your manifold benefitts daily bestowed upon us so much bound unto your
Highness; none of us, I say, nor we all together are in my judgment meet
counselors for your Majesty herein: but if your princely disposition purpose
to understand the very truth hereof, you may have such counselors, as
neither for respect of their own worldly commodity, nor fear of your
princely authority will be inclined to deceive you; and then he named S.
Hierome, S. Austine, and diverse others both Greek and Latin Fathers; showing
him moreover, what authorities he had gathered out of them, that he need not
have any further scruple thereof, and that marrying of a new wife, whilst his
own was alive, was wholly repugnant to their doctrine and the meaning of the
Scriptures. All which though king Henry did not very well like of, because it
was disgustfull to his passionate lust; yet the manner of Sir THOMAS his
discourse and collection was so wisely tempered, by his discreet
communication, that he took them at that present in good part, and often had
conference of them again.

His most upright conscience, and constant zeal of the truth.
By which manner of Sir THOMAS his counsel and sincere carriage, one may easily
gather, what unspotted conscience this upright man had, who for no hope of
gain, or any fear of disgrace, would once swerve from the true dictamen of
his Conscience: and if the rest of king Henrie's counsel had been as backward,
(to hinder this beginning of dissolution) as Sir THOMAS was, no alteration of
religion had by all likelihood happened in England; for from this only spring
of K. Henrie's intemperance, proceeded all the succeeding calamities, which
have daily increased, and yet have not any hope of amendment.

All which change Sir THOMAS MORE either like a very wise man foresawe long
before, 3. He foresavv in spirit the fall of religion in England.
or rather like a prophet prophesied thereof to my uncle Rooper, who on a time
of a certain joy began to commend to his father-in-lawe the happy estate
of this realm, that had so Catholic and zealous a prince, that no heretic
durst show his face; so learned and virtuous a Clergy, so grave and sound a
Nobility, such loving and obedient subjects, all agreing together in one
faith and dutiefulnesse, as though they had cor vnum and animam vnam, but one
heart and one soul; Sir THOMAS thus replied again; Truth it is indeed, son
Rooper, as you say, and going through all estates with his comme^dations of
them, he went far beyond my uncle; and yet son, quoth he, I pray God, that
some of us, as high as we seem to sit now upon the mountains, treading
heretics under our feet like antes, do not live the day that we gladly would
wish to be in league with them, to suffer them to have their churches quietly
to themselves, so that they would he content to let us have ours peaceably to
our selves. When mine uncle Rooper had told him many reasons, why he had no
cause to say so; well, said he, I pray God some of us live not till that day;
and yet showed he noe reason for all these his speeches* whereat my uncle said
in a choler: By my troath Sir it is very desperately spoken; I cry God mercy
(says my uncle) I used unto him that very word. By which speech Sir THOMAS
perceauing him to be somewhat angry, said merrily* well son Rooper, it shall
not be so, it shall not be so. But yet himself found the predictio^ too true:
for he lived until the fiueteenth year of Q. Elizabeth's reign, when he saw
religion turned topsie turuie, and no hope of any amendment.

This spirit of prophecy no doubt was a sign of Gods love unto Sir THOMAS,
4. The miraculous reductio^ of his son Roper from heresy, by his prayers.
being so dear in his sight, that he would make him partaker of some part of
his secretts: but that which he wrought in the conversion of this his son in
law, was not a sign only, but an evident demonstration of God's great favor
unto him. For when Mr. William Rooper was a young man, he used austeritie to
himself more then discretion afforded; and by this means he grew weary of
the Catholic fasts and religious discipline; and hearing of a new and easy
way to heaven, which the preachers of novelties did promise to their followers,
he began to read diligently the books of heresies, which came over, and
were spread in every place of England; in so much that being weary of
Auricular Confession, fasting the lent, and vigiles, he grew vehement in his
new opinions, and zealous in breaking of them to others; so as that he would be
always talking, what a ready way to heaven was now found out, no body
needing to sue to Saints or men's prayers; but Gods ear was open still to
hear, and his mercy ready to forgive any sinner whatsoever, when he shall
call to him by faith, which was only necessary to salvation; and having that
only, which he assured himself of, he needed not doubt, but that he was an
elect and saved soul, so that it was impossible for him to sin or fall out
of God's favor. The hot spirit of heresy.
Of this dangerous poison of security he having druncke a full draught, he
came on a time to Sir THOMAS to request him, because he was highly in the
king's favor, that he would get him a license to preach, what the spirit
had taught him; for he was assured that God had sent him to instruct the world;
not knowing (god wot) any reason of this his mission, but only his private
spirit; to whom Sir THOMAS in a smiling manner replied; Is it not sufficient,
son Rooper, that we that are your friends should know that you are a fool,
but that you would have your folly proclaimed to the world? After this he often
disputed with him about matters of religion, yet never could he bring him to
hearken to any reason, every day seeming more obstinate then other, until at
length he said: in sober sadness: I see, son, noe disputation will do thee
good; henceforth therefore I will dispute with thee no more; only will I pray
for thee, that God will be so favorable as to touch thy heart; and so
committing him to God, they parted. And he earnestly powered out his devotions
before the Divine mercy for that intent. And behold my uncle not long after
being inspired with the light of grace, began to detest his heresies; and, as
another S. Austin was wholly converted; so that ever after he was not only a
perfect Catholic, The great piety and charity of his said son M. Roper
but lived and dyed a stout and valiant Champion thereof, whose alms in
charitable uses, was so great, that it is said, that he bestowed every year
to the value of five hundred pounds, especially in his latter days in which he
enjoyed an office of great gain and commodity; and after his death I have
heard it reported by the^, that were servants in his house, that whilst his
body lay unburied for three or four days there was heard once a day for the
space of a quarter of an hour the sweetest music that could be imagined, not
of any voices of men, but angelical harmony, as a token how gracious that
soul was to Almighty God, and to the quires of Angels.

5. Another miraculous cure wrought by prayer upon his daughter Margaret.
Now this was a more special favor, which God granted to Sir THOMAS his devout
prayers, then the raising of a dead man to life, by how much more the death of
the soul is of more danger then the death of the body, yet it is certain
also, that this glorious man begged also corporal life for some of his dear
friends. On a time his daughter Margaret wife to this William Rooper, fell
sick of the sweating sickness, of which many dyed at that time; who lying
in so great extremity of the disease, that by no inventions nor devises that
any cunning phisicia^ could use at that time having continually about her most
learned, wise, and expert that could begotten, she could by no means be kept
from sleep; so that every one about her had just cause to despair of her
recovery, giving her utterly over, her father as he that most loved her, being
in noe small heaviness at last sought for remedy of this her desperate case
from God. wherefore going as his custom was, into his new building, there in
his Chapel upon his knees most devoutly even with many tears besought
Almighty God, unto whom nothing was impossible, of his goodness, if it were
his blessed will, that at his meditation he would vouchsafe graciously to
grant this his humble petition; where presently came into his mind, that a
glister was the only way to help her: which when he told the phisicians,
they confessed that it was the best remedy indeed, much marueling of
themselves, they had not remembered if; which was immediately ministered unto her
sleeping; for else she would never have been brought to that kind of medicine.
And although when she awaked thoroughly, Gods marks (an evident and undoubted
token of death) plainly appeared upon her, yet she contrary to all
expectations was, as it were miraculously and by her fathers fervent prayer
restored to perfect health again; whom if it had pleased God at that time to
have taken to his mercy, her father solemnly protested that he would never
have meddled with any worldly matters after, such was his fatherly love and
vehement affection unto this his Jewel, who most nearly of all the rest of
his Children expressed her fathers virtues, although the meanest of all the
rest might have been matched with any other of their age in England, either
for learning, excellent qualities or piety, they having been brought up even
from their infancy with such care and industry, and enjoying always most
virtuous and learned masters.

6. Sir Tho. Mores domestiqs school.
So that the school of Sir THOMAS MORE's children was famous over the whole
world; for that their wits were rare, their diligence extraordinary, and
their masters most excellent men, as above the rest Doctor Clement an
excellent Grecian and phisician, who was after reader of the phisicke-lecture
in Oxford, and set out many books of learning. After him one William Gu^nell
who read after with great praise in Cambridge, and besides these one Drue, one
Nicolas, and after all one Richard Heart, of whose rare learning and industry
in this behalf, let us see, what may be gathered out of Sir THOMAS his
letters unto them, and first to Mr. Gunnell thus: I have received, my dear
Gunnell, your letters, such as they are wont to be, most elegant and full of
affection. Your love toward my children I gather by your letter; their
diligence, by their own; for every one of their letters pleases me very
much, Modesty the ornament of women.
yet most especially I take joy to hear that my daughter Elizabeth has
shevved as great modesty in her mother's absence, as any one could do, if
she had been in presence; let her know that that thing liked me better, then
all the epistles besides; for as I esteem learning, which is joined with
virtue more then all the threasures of kings; so what does the fame of being a
great scholar bring us, if it be severed from virtue other then a notorious
and famous infamy, especially in a woman, whom men will be ready the more
willingly to assail for their learning, because it is a rare matter, and
argues a reproach to the sluggishnesse of a man, who will not stick to lay
the fault of their natural malice upon the quality of learning supposing all
their own vnskillfullnesse by comparing it with the vices of those that are
learned, shall be accounted for virtue: but if any woman on the contrary part
(as I hope and vvishe by your instruction and teaching all mine will do)
shall join many virtues of the mind with a little skill of learning,
Learning to be desired for use, not for praise.
I shall accounte this more happiness, then if they were able to attain to
Craesus's wealth joined with the beauty of fair Helene; not because they
were to get great fame thereby, although that inseparably follovveth all
virtue, as a shadovve does the body, but for that they should obtain by this
the true reward of wisdom, which can never be taken away as wealth may,
nor will fade, as beauty does, because it depends of truth and justice, and
not of the blasts of men's mouths, then which nothing is more foolish, nothing
more pernicious; for as it is the duty of a good man to eschew infamy, so it
is not only the property of a proud man, but also of a vvretched and
ridiculous man to frame their actions only for praise; for that man's mind must
needs be full of unquietness, that alvvaies vvauers for fear of other men's
judgments betvveene joy and saddenesse. But amongst other the notable
benefitts, which learning bestows upon men, I accounte this one of the most
profitable, that in getting of learning we look not for praise, to be
accounted learned men, but only to use it in all occasions, which the best of
all other learned men, I mean the philosophers those true moderatours of men's
actions have delivered unto us from hand to hand, although some of them have
abused their sciences, aiming only to be accounted excellent men by the people.
Thus have I spoken, my Gunnell, somevvhat the more of the not coveting of vain
glory, in regard of those words in your letter, whereby you judge that the
high spirit of my daughter Margarett's wit is not to be dejected* wherein I
am of the same opinion that you are, In what consists deiectio^ of spirit.
hut I think (as I doubt not but you are of the same mind) that he does
deiect his generous wit, whosoever accustometh himself to admire vain and
base objects, and he rayseth well his spiritts, that embraces virtue and true
good, they are base minded indeed, that esteem the shadovve of good things
(which most men greedily snatch at, for want of discretion to judge true good
from apparent) rather then the truth it self. And therefore seeing I hold this
the best way for them to walk in, I have not only requested you, my dear
Gunnell, whom of yourself I know would have done it out of the entire
affection you bear unto them; neither have I desired my wife alone, whom
her mother lie piety by me often and many ways tried does stir them up
thereto, What orname^t Sir Tho. More required in his children.
but also all other my friends I have entreated many times to persuade all my
children to this, that avoiding all the gulphes and dovvnefalls of pride, they
walk through the pleasant meadovves of modesty, that they never be enamoured
of the glistering hue of gold and silver, nor lament for the want thereof,
which by error they admire in others, that they think no better of
themselves for all their costly trimmings, nor any meaner for the want of
them; not to lessen their beauty by neglecting it, which they have by nature,
nor to make it any more by unseemly art, to think virtue their chief
happiness, learning and good qualities the next, of which those are
especially to be learned, which will avail them most, that is to say, piety
toward Gods, Charity toward all men, modesty, and Christian humility in
themselves, by which they shall reap from God the reward of an innocent
life, by certain confidence thereof they shall not need to fear death, and
in the mean while enjoying true alacrity, they shall neither be puffed up
with the vain praises of men, nor dejected by any slander of disgrace; these
I esteem the true and solid fruits of learning; which as they happen not, I
confess, A vvoma^ may attain to learning as well as a man.
to all that are learned, so those may easily attain them, who begin to
study with this intent; neither is there any difference in harvest time,
whether it was man or woman, that sowed first the corn; for both of them
bear name of a reasonable creature equally, whose nature reason only does
distinguish from brute beasts, and therefore I do not see why learning in
like manner may not equally agree with both sexes; for by it, reason is
cultiuated, and (as a field) sowed with wholesome precepts, it brings
forth excellent fruit. But if the soil of vvomans brain be of its own
nature bad, and apter to bear fearne then corn (by which saying many do
terrifye women from learning) I am of opinion therefore that a woman's wit
is the more diligently by good instructions and learning to be manured, to the
end, the defect of nature may be redressed by industry. Of which mind were
also many wise and holy ancient Fathers, as, to omit others, S. Hierome and
S. Augustine, who not only exhorted many noble matrones and honorable
virgins to the getting of learning, but also to further them therein, they
diligently expounded unto them many hard places of Scriptures; yea vvrote
many letters unto tender maids, full of so great learning, that scarcely our
old and greatest Professors of Divinity can well read them, much less be
able to understand them perfectly; which holy Saints works you will
endeavor, my learned Gunnell, of your courtesy, The end to which all
learning must be directed.
that my daughters may learn, whereby they may chiefly know, what end
they ought to have in their learning, to place the fruits of their labors in
God, and a true Conscience; by which it will be easily brought to pass, that
being at peace within themselves, they shall neither be moved with praise of
flatterers, nor the nipping follies of unlearned scoffers; but me thinks I
hear you replye, that though these my precepts be true; yet are they too
strong and hard for the tender age of my young wenches to hearken too: For
what man, be he never so aged or expert in any science, is so constant or
stayed, that he is not a little stirred up with the tickeling of glory? And
for my part, I esteem that the harder it is to shake from us this plague of
pride, so much the more ought every one to endeavor to do it from his very
infancy. And I think there is no other cause, why this almost inevitable
mischief does stick so fast in our breasts, but for that it is ingrafted in
our tender minds even by our nurses, as soon as we are crept out of our
shelles; it is fostered by our masters, it is nourished and perfected by our
parents, whilst that no body propounds any good thing to children, but
they presently bid them expect praise as the whole reward of virtue;
whence it is, that they are so much accustomed to esteem much of honor and
praise, that by seeking to please the most, who are alvvaies the vvorst, they
are still ashamed to be good with the fevvest. He desires it may by all
means be beaten from his children.
That this plague may the farther be banished from my children, I earnestly
desire, that you, my dear Gunnell, their mother and all their friends, would
still sing this song, unto the^, hammer it alvvaies in their heads, and
inculcate it unto them upon all occasions, that vain glory is abject, and to
be despised, neither any thing to be more vvorthie or excellent, then that
humble modesty, which is so much praised by Christ; the which prudent
Charity will so guide and direct, that it will teach us to desire virtue
rather then to vpbrayde others for their vices, and will procure rather to
love them, who admonish us of our fault, then hate them, for their wholesome
counsel. To the obtaining whereof nothing is more auayleable, then to read
unto them the wholesome precepts of the Fathers, whom they know not to be
angry with them, and they must needs be vehemently moved with their
authorities, because they are venerable for their sanctity. If therefore you
read any such thing unto Margarett and Elizabeth, besides their lessens in
Salust, for they are of riper judgment by reason of their age, then John and
Cecilie, you shall make both me and them every day more bound unto you;
moreover you shall hereby procure my children being dear by nature, after this
more dear for learning, but by their increase of good manners most dear unto
me. Farevvell. From the Court this Whitfuneeue.




Another epistle of Sir THOMAS MORE to his Children. 7. The delight Sir T.M.
bad in his childre^s learning.
Thomas More to his whole school se^deth greetinge: Behold how I have found
out acompendious way to salute you all, and make spare of time and paper,
which I must needs have waste in saluting every one of you particularly by
your names; which would be very superfluous, because you are all so dear
unto me, some in one respect, some in another, that I can omit none of you
unsaluted. Yet I know not, whether there can be any better motive, why I
should love you, then because you are scholars, learning seeming to bind me
more straytely unto you, then the nearenesse of blood. I rejoice therefore that
Mr. Drue is returned safe, of whose safety you know I was careful. If I
loved you not exceedingly, I should envy this your so great happiness, to
have had so many great scholars for your masters. They studied Astronomy.
For I think Mr. Nicolas is with you also, and that you have learned of him
much astronomy; so that I hear you have proceeded so far in this science,
that you now know not only the pole-starre, or dog, and such like of the
common Constellations, but also, which argues an absolute and cunning
astronomer, in the chief planetts themselves: you are able to discern the
sun from the moon; go forvvard therefore with this your new and admirable
skill, by which you do thus climb up to the stars, which whilst you daily
admire, in the mean while I admonish you also to think of this holy fast of
Lent, and let that excellent and pious song of Boethius sound in your ears,
whereby you are taught also with your minds to penetrate beauen, least when
the body is lifted upon high, the soul be driven down to the earth with
the brute beasts. Farevvell. From the Court this 23 th of March.

Another. Thomas More to his best beloved Children, and to Margarett Gigs,
whom he numbreth amongst his own, sends greeting: The merchant of Bristow
brought unto me your letters, the next day after he had received them of you,
with the which I was exceedingly delighted. For there can come nothing, He
discourieth pleesau^tly.
yea though it were never so rude, never so meanly polished, from this your
shop, but it procures me more delight then any other men's works, be they
never so eloquent; your vvriting does so stir up my affection toward you;
but excluding these your letters may also very well please me for their own
vvorth, being full of fine wit, and of a pure Latin phrase. therefore none
of them all, but ioyed me exceedingly, yet to tell you ingeniously what I
think, my son John's letter pleased me best, both because it was longer
then the other, as also for that he seems to have taken more pains then the
rest. For he not only paynteth out the matter decently, and speaks elegantly,
but he plays also pleasantly with me, and returns my ieastes upon me
again very vvittily; and this he does not only pleasantly, but temperately
vvithall, shevving that he is mindful with whom he ieasteth, to wit, his
father, whom he endeavors so to delight, that he is also afeared to
offend. Hereafter I expect every day letters from every one of you; neither
will I accept of such excuses, as you complain of, that you had no leisure,
or that the Carrier went away suddenly, or that you have no matter to write;
John is not wont to allege any such things; nothing can hinder you from
vvriting, but many things may exhort you thereto why should you lay any
fault upon the Carrier, seeing you may prevent his coming, and have them ready
made up, and sealed two days before any offer themselves to carry them. And
how can you want matter of vvriting unto me, who am delighted to hear
either of your studies, or of your play: whom you may even then please
exceedingly, when having nothing to write of, you write as largely as you
can of that nothing, then which nothing is more easy for you to do,
especially being women, and therefore pratlers by nature, and amongst whom
daily a great story rises of nothing. But this I admonish you to do, He
wills the^ to write with care and premeditation.
that whether you write of serious matters, or of trifles, you write with
diligence and consideration, premeditating of it before; neither will it be
amiss, if you first indite it in English, for then it may more easily be
translated into Latin, whilst the mind free from inuenting is atte^tiue to
find apt and eloquent words. And although I putt this to your choice,
whether you will do so or no: yet I enjoin you by all means, taht you
diligently examine what you have written, before you write it over fair
again; first considering attentively the whole sentence, and after examine
every part thereof, by which means you may easily find out, if any
solecismes have escaped you: which being putt out, and your letter written
fair, yet then let it not also trouble you to examine it over again; for
sometimes the same faults creep in at the second vvriting, which you before
had blotted out. By this your diligence you will procure, that those your
trifles will seem serious matters. For as nothing is so pleasing but may be
made vnfauorie by prating garrulitie; so nothing is by nature so unpleasant,
that by industry may not be made full of grace and pleasantness. Farevvell my
svvetest Children. From the Court this 3. of September.

Another letter to his daugter Margarett only: Thy letters (dearest Margarett)
were grateful unto me, which certifyed me of the state of Shaw; yet would
they have been more grateful unto me, His earnest care of his childre^s good
employme^t.
if they had told me, what your and your brother's studies were, what is
read amongst you every day, how pleasantly you confer together, what
themes you make, and how you pass the day away amongst you in the svveete
fruits of learning. And although nothing is written from you, but it is most
pleasing unto me, yet those things are most sugared svveete, which I cannot
learn of but by you or your brother. And in the end: I pray thee, Megg, see
that I understand by you, what your studies are. For rather then I would
suffer you, my children, to live idely, I would my self look unto you, with
the loss of my temporal estate, bidding all other cares and businesses
Farevvell, amongst which there is nothing more svveete unto me, then thy self,
my dearest daughter. Farevvell.

It seems also by another letter of his, how careful he was that his
children might be learned and diligent, and he prayseth them for it thus:
Thomas More sends greeting to his most dear daughters Margarett, Elizabeth
and Cecilie; and to Margarett Gigs as dear to him as if she were his own. I
cannot sufficiently express, my best beloved wenches, how your eloquent
letters have exceedingly pleased me; and this is not the least cause, that I
understand by them, you have not in your iourneys, though you change places
often, omitted any thing of your custom of exercising yourselues, either in
making of Declamations, The care his children had to please him in their
studies.
composing of verses, or in your Logike exercises; by this I persuade my
self, that you dearly love me, because I see you have so great a care to
please me by your diligence in my absence, as to perform these things, which
you know how grateful they are unto me in my presence. And as I find this
your mind and affection so much to delight me, so will I procure that my
return shall be profitable unto you. And persuade yourselues that there is
nothing amongst these my troublesome and careful affairs that recreateth me
so much, as when I read somevvhat of your labors, by which I understand
those things to be true, which your most loving master vvriteth so lovingly
of you, that unless your own epistles did show evidently unto me, how
earnest your desire is toward learning, I should have judged that he had
rather written of affection then according to the truth: but now by these
that you write, you make him to be believed, and me to imagine those things to
be true of your witty and acute disputacions, which he boasts of you
almost above all belief; I am therefore marvelous desirous to come home, that
we may hear them, and set our scholar to dispute with you, who is slovve
to believe, yea out of all hope or conceit to find you able, to be
answerable to your master's praises. But I hope, knovving how steadfast you
are in your affections, that you will shortly overcome your master, if not in
disputing, at least in not leaving of your strife. Farevvell, dear wenches.

And thus you may conjecture how learned his daughters were; Books dedicated
by learned men to his children.
to whom for this respect Erasmus dedicated his Commentary upon Ouide de
nuce. Lewis Viues also writes great commendations of this school of Sir
THOMAS MORE's in his book to Q. Catherine of England. And both Erasmus
dedicated Aristotle in Greek, and Simon Grineus, who although an heretic, yet
in respect of his learning had been kindly used by Sir THOMAS MORE, as he
writes himself, did dedicate Plato and other books in Greek unto my
grandfather John More as to one that was also very skillfull in that tongue. See
what Grineus speaks unto him: There was a great necessity, why I should
dedicate these books of Proclus full of marvelous learning, by my pains set
out, but not without the singular benefitt of your father effected, unto you,
to whom by reason of your fatherlike virtues all the fruit of this benefitt
is to redounde, both because you may be an orname^t unto them, and they also
may do great good unto you, whom I know to be learned, and for these grave
disputacions sufficiently provided and made fit, by the continual
conversation of so vvorthie a father, and by the company of your sisters, who
are most expert in all kind of sciences. For what Author can be more
grateful to those desirous minds of most goodly things, such as you and the
Muses your sisters are, whom a divine heat of spirit to the admiration and
a new example of this our age, has driven into the sea of learning so far,
and so happily, that they see no learning to be above their reach, no
disputations of philosophy above their capacity: And none can better
explicate entangled questions, none sifte them more profoundly, nor none
conceive them more easily, then this author.

Let us see another letter to his daughter Margarett only: You ask monye,
dear Megg, too shamefully and fearfully of your father, who is both desirous
to give it you, He pays his daughters letters with gold.
and your letter has deserved it, which I could find in my heart to
recompense, not as Alexander did by Cherilus, giving him for every verse a
Philippine of gold; but if my ability were answerable to my will, I would
bestow two Crowns of pure gold for every syllable thereof. Here I send
you as much as you requested, being vvilling to have sent you more; but that as
I am glad to give, so I am desirous to be asked and favvned on by my daughters,
thee especially, whom virtue and learning has made most dear unto me.
Wherefore the sooner you have spent this money well as you are wont to do,
and the sooner you ask me for more, the sooner know you will do your
father a singular pleasure. Farevvell my most beloved daughter.

8. The learning and piety of his daughter Margaret.
This daughter was likest her father as well in favor as wit, and proved a
most rare woman for learning, sanctity, and secrecy, and therefore he trusted
her with all his secretts. She wrote two Declamations in English, which her
father and she turned into Latin so elegantly, as one could hardly judge,
which was the best. She made also a treatise of the Four Last things; which
her father sincerely protested, that it was better then his, and therefore, it
may be, never finished his. She corrected by her wit a place in S. Cyprian,
corrupted, as Pamelian and John Coster testifye, in steed of nisi vos
sinceritatis, rectoring neruos sinceritatis. To her Erasmus wrote an epistle,
as to a woman not only famous for manners, and virtue, but most of all for
learning. We have heretofore made mention of her letter that Cardinal Poole so
liked, that when he had read it, he would not believe it could be any woman's;
in answer whereof Sir THOMAS did send her the letter, some part whereof we
have seen before; the rest is this, which though there were no other
testimony of her extraordinary learning, might suffice: In the meanetime,
says her father, I thought with myself how true I found that now, which
once I remember I spoke unto you in ieaste, when I pitied your hard hap,
that men that read your vvritings, would suspect you to have had help of some
other man therein, which would derogate somevvhat from the praises due to
your works; seeing that you of all others deserve least to have such a
suspicion had of you, for that you never could abide to be decked with the
plumes of other birds. But you, svveete Megg, are rather to be praised for
this, that seeing you cannot hope for condign praise of your labors, yet for
all this you go forvvard with this your invincible courrage, to join with
your virtue the knowledge of most excellent sciences: and contenting yourself
with your own pleasure in learning, you never hunte after vulgar praises,
nor receive them willingly, though they be offered you; And for your singular
piety and love toward me, you esteem me and your husband a sufficient and
ample theater for you to content you with; who in requital of this your
affection beseech God and our Lady, with as hearty prayers as possible we
can power out, to give you an easy and happy childbirth, to increase your
family with a child most like yourself, except only in sex; yet if it be a
vvench, that it may be such a one, as would in time recompense by imitation of
her mothers learning and virtues, what by the condition of her sex may be
vvanting; such a vvenche I should prefer before three boys. Farevvell,
dearest daughter.

The estee^ that the B. of excester had of her learning.
But see, I pray you, how a most learned bishopp in England was ravished with
her learning and wit, as it appears by a letter, which her father wrote unto
her to certifye her thereof, Thomas More sends hearty greeting to his dearest
daughter Margarett: I will lettt pass to tell you, my sweetest daughter,
how much your letter delighted me; you may imagine how exceedingly it pleased
your father, when you understand what affection the reading of it raised in
a stranger. It happened me this evening to sit with John Lo: Bishopp of
E'xeter, a learned man, and by all men's judgment, a most sincere man: As we
were talking together, and I taking out of my pockett a paper, which was to
the purpose we were talking of, I pulled out, by chance, therevvith your
letter. The handvvriting pleasing him, he took it from me and looked on it;
when he perceived it by the salutacio^ to be a vvomans, he began more
greedily to read it, novelty inuiting him thereunto: but when he had read it,
and understood that it was your vvriting, which he never could have believed,
if I had not seriously affirmed it; such a letter, I will say no more; yet
why should not I report that which he said unto me? so pure astile, so good
Latin, so eloquent, so full of svveete affections; he was maruelously
ravished with it; when I perceived that, I brought forth also an Oration of
yours, which he reading, and also many of your verses, he was so moved with
the matter so unlooked for, that the very countenance and gesture of the man
free from all flattery and deceit, bevvrayed that his mind was more then
his words could utter, although he uttered many to your great praise; and
forthwith he drevv out of his pockett a portegue, the which you shall receive
enclosed herein. I could not possibly shu^ne the taking of it, but he would
needs send it unto you, as a sign of his dear affection toward you,
although by all means I endeavored to give him again; which was the cause
I shevved him none of your other sisters works; for I was afeared least I
should have been thought to have shevved them of purpose, because he should
bestow the like courtesy upon them; for it troubled me sore, that I must
needs take this of him: but he is so vvorthie a man, as I have said, that it
is a happiness to please him thus; write carefully unto him and as eloquently
as you are able, to give him thanks therefore. Farevvell; from the Court this
11 th. of September. even almost at midnight.

Some of her writings.
She made an oration to answer Quintilian, defending that rich man, which he
accuses for having poisoned a poor man's bees, with certain venomous flowers
in his garden, so eloquent and witty that it may strive with his. Her
translation of Eusebius.
She translated Eusebius out of Greek, but it was never printed, because
Christopherson at that time had done it exactly before. Yet one other letter
will I set down of Sir THOMAS to this his daughter, which is thus: Thomas
More sends greeting to his dearest daughter Margarett: There was noe reason,
my dearest daughter, why thou should have differred thy vvriting unto me one
day longer, for fear that thy letters being so barren, should not be read of
me without loathing. For though they had not been most curious, yet in respect
of thy sex, thou might have been pardo^ed by any man; yea eue^ a bleamish
in the childe's face, seems often to a father beautiefull. But these your
letters, Megg, were so eloquently polished, that they had nothing in them, not
only why they should fear the most indulgent affection of your father More,
but also they needed not to have regarded even Momus his ce^sure, though never
so teastie. I greatly thank. Mr. Nicolas our dear friend (a most expert man
in astronomy) and do congratulate your happiness, Her skill in Astronomy.
whom it may fortune within the space of one month with a small labor of
your own to learn so many and such high wonders of that mighty and
eternal vvorkeman, which were not found but in many ages, by watching in
so many cold nights under the open skies, with much labor and pains, by
such excellent and above all other men's understanding vvitts. This which you
write, pleases me exceedingly, that you had determined with yourself to
study philosophy so diligently, that you will hereafter recompense by your
diligence, what your negligence has heretofore lost you. I love you for this,
dear Megg, that where as I never have found you to be a loyterer (your
learning, which is not ordinary, but in all kind of sciences most excellent,
evidently shevving, how painefully you have proceeded therein) yet such is
your modesty, that you had rather still accuse yourself of negligence, then
vainly boaste of diligence; except you mean by this your speech that you
will be hereafter so diligent, that your former endeauours, though indeed
they were great and praise vvorthie, yet in respect of your future diligence,
may be called negligence. If it be so that you mean, (as I do verily think
you do), I imagine nothing can happen to me more fortunate, nothing to you, my
dearest daughter, more happy; For as I have earnestly wished that you might
spend the rest of your life in studying physic and holy Scriptures, by the
which there shall never be helps vvanting unto you, for the end of ma^s
life; which is, to endeavor that a sound mind be in a healthful body, Why
humanity is best studied in our younger years.
of which studies you have already laid some foundations, and you shall
never want matter to build thereupon; so now I think that some of the first
years of your youth yet flourishing may be very well bestovved in humane
learning and the liberal Arts, both because your age may best struggle with
those difficulties, and for that it is uncertain, whether at any time else
we shall have the commodity of so careful, so loving, and so learned a
master: to let pass, that by this kind of learning our Judgments are
either gotten, or certainly much helped there by. I could vvishe, dear Megg,
that I might talk with you along time about these matters, but behold they
which bring in supper, interrupt me and call me away. My supper cannot be so
svveete unto me, as this my speech with you is, if I were not to respect
others more then myself. Farevvell, dearest daughter, and comme^de me kindly
to your housband, my loving son, who makes me rejoice for that he studieth
the same things you do; and where as I am wont alvvaies to counsel you to
give place to your husband, now on the other side I give you license to strive
to master him in the knowledge of the sphere. Farevvell again and again.
Commend me to all your schoole-fellovves, but to your master especially. And
having upon this occasion of speaking of Sir THOMAS his children, how te^derly
he loved the^, how earnestly he sought to make the^ scholars, and with their
schollarshipp to have the^ join virtue, made so^ewhat a longer digressio^,
the^ I thought; we will return, as we had begu^ne, to speak of the alteration
of religion in our Country, and how therevpo^ Sir THOMAS MORE fell into
trouble.

THE SIXTH CHAPTER. SIR THOMAS MORE made Lord high Chauncellor of England.
1. The excellent charity of Sir Tho. More tovvard his neighbors.

2. The beginning of King Henry's separation from the Church of God.

3. Cardinal Wolseys disgrace, dovvnfall, and death.

4. Sir Thomas More installed in the office of Lord Chancellor.

5. His incomparable behaueour in that high place of honor.

6. He refuses to allow of K. Henry's diuorcement.

1. Charity of Sir Tho. More to his neighbors.
1. WHilst this unlucky divorce was so hotely pursued by the king, it happened
that my uncle Rooper walking with his father along by the Thames side, near
Chelsey, amongst other talk Sir THOMAS said; now would to our Lord, son
Rooper, that upon condition three things were established in Christendom, I
were putt into a sack and here presently cast into the Thames. His three
wishes for the good of Christedom.
What great things are those, good Sir, said he, that should move you so to
wish? Would thou know them, son Rooper; yea Marry, Sir, with a good will,
said he, if it would please you. In Faith, Unity in peace.
son, they be these; First, that where the most part of Christian princes be
at mortal war, they were at an universal peace; secondly, Unity in religion.
whereas the Church of Christ is at this time sore afflicted with many errors
and heresies, it were settled in a perfect uniformity of religion: Thirdly,
that whereas the matter of the king's marriage is now in question, End of the
kings controversy.
it were to the glory of God and quietness of all parties brought to a good
conclusion. Whereby one might well gather, that otherwise this would be a
disturbance to a great part of Christendom. The first he saw in some sort
granted him by his means; the other two are this day to be seen, what
tragedies they have raised in England and else where.

Thus did he by his words and deeds show throughout the whole course of his
life, that all his thoughts, He never asked anything of the King.
travails and pains were only for the honor of God without respect either of
his own glory or regard of any earthly commodity; For it may be seen by
many things as well deeds as letters how much he contemned the honors which
were heaped upon him daily by his Prince's special bounty and favor toward
him, and my uncle Rooper testifyeth from his own mouth in his latter days,
that he professed unto him, that he never asked of the king for himself the
value of one penny. The like may be said of his contempt of riches and worldly
wealth; but a fitter place to speak thereof may be had hereafter. All which
excellent endowments of his mind proceeded no doubt from the special favor
of Almighty God, and the fervent zeal of this his seruat to attain to
perfection of all virtues.

Liberality to his parish Church
He built a Chapel in his parish Church at Chelsey, where the parish had all
ornaments belonging thereunto abundantly supplied at his charge, and he
bestowed there on much plate, often speaking those words: Good men give it,
and badde men take it away.

His merciful works to his poor neighbors.
He seldom used to feast noble men, but his poor neighbors often, whom he
would visit in their houses, and bestow upon them his large liberality, not
groates, but Crowns of gold, yea more then that according to their wants. He
hired a house also for many aged people in Chelsey, whom he daily relieved;
and it was my aunte Rooper's charge to see them want nothing. And when he was a
private lawyer, he would take no fees of poor folks, widows nor pupills.

2. The beginning of K. He^ries separation from the Church.
2. A little before he was preferred to the dignity of Chancellourshipp, there
were questions propounded to many, whether the king in the case of his first
marriage needed have any scruple at all; and if he had, what way were best to
deliver him from it. The most part of his Counsel were of opinion, that there
was good cause of scruple, because Q. Scruple of his marriage with Q. Catherin
Catherine was married before to Prince Arthur, king Henrie's elder brother;
wherefore she was not to be wife to two brothers; and therefore to ease the
king's mind, suite was to be made to the pope and the Sea of Rome, where the
king hoped by liberal gifts to obtain what he desired; but in this, as after
it appeared, he was far deceived.

After this there was a Commission procured from Rome for trial and
examination of this marriage; Co^missioneirs from Rome about it.
in which the Cardinals Wolsey and Campegius, were joined together; who for
the determination hereof sat at the Black Friars at London, where a bill was
putt in for the annulling of the former matrimony, alleging that that
marriage was utterly unlawful; but on the orher side for proof that it was
lawful and good a Dispensation was brought forth, The dispensatio^ questio^d.
which was of very good force, as touching the power which the Pope had to
dispe^ce in a law that was neither contrary to Gods positive law in the old
Testament, but rather agreeable thereto, nor to the law of Nature, and it was
commanded in Leuiticus, that if the brother dyed without issue, the next in
kindred to him in a manner should be forced to marry his wife. And supplied by
a new co^firmatio^.
But there was found an imperfection in the Dispensation; yet that same was
lawfully supplied by a public Instrument or brief found in the Threasure of
Spain, which was sent immediately to the Commissioners in England, and so
should judgment have been given by the Pope accordingly, that the first
marriage stood in force, K. Henry appeals to a general council: and falls
from the Pope.
had not king Henry upon intelligence thereof, before the judgment was
pronounced, appealed to the next General Council. Hincillae lachrimae; hence
came the deadly enmity between the king and the Pope; hence proceeded that
bitterness of king Henry, that he commanded none should appeal to Rome, nor
none should so much as go thither; no Bishops nor Spiritual men should have
any Bulls of authority from thence; all spiritual Jurisdiction began now,
never before thought of, to be invested from God immediately upon the Imperial
Crown of England; but this not all at once: yea he grew afterward unto such
height of malice, that he caused the name of Pope to be raized out of every
book that could be found either printed or written. He caused S. His injury
to S. Thomas of Canterburies body.
Thomas of Canterbury to be attaynted of high treason after he had been three
hundred years accounted a blessed Martyr of the whole Church; yea so
acknowledged by king Henry the second who was cause of his death; but this king
most strangely cast his sacred bones out of his renowned shreene, after numbers
of miracles, and caused them to be burnt. Q. Anne Bole^s incontine^cy.
This was the strange pass king Henry was brought unto doting on Anne Bullen,
though, God knows, she had no qualities wherefore he should so doat on her,
as appeared evidently when for foul matters he after a short time cut of her
head, and proclaimed himself in open Parliament to be a Cuckolde; which no doubt
he never had been, if he had kept himself to his first virtuous wife Q.
Catherine; but all these things happened a good while after, and many other
extreme violences and ensuing miseries, as we do see and feel as yet.

3. Cardinal Wolseys disgrace and downfall.
3. Whilst those things were a doing, as is beforesayd, about the king's
divorce, and nothing yet brought to any conclusion, the king sent Tunstall
bishopp of Durham and Sir THOMAS MORE Ambassadors to Cambray to treat of a
peace between him and the French king, Sir Tho. Mores embassage for peace; and
happy success therein.
and Charles the Emperor: in which journey Sir THOMAS so worthily behaved
himself that he procured in our league with the said Princes far more
benefitts to our realm then at that time was thought possible by the king and
all his Council; insomuch that his Majesty caused it afterward openly to be
declared to the people, when he was made Chancellor, how much all England was
bound to Sir THOMAS MORE. And now at his return the king again was very
earnest with him to have him agree to his second marriage; for which cause also
it is thought, and Cardinal Poole testifyeth it in a letter, he made him the
rather Lo: Chancellor; telling him, Bishop Stokelies quirk in Q. Catharins
marriage
that though the dispensation was good in respect of the laws of the Church,
yet now it was found out to have been against the law of nature, in which no
dispensatio^ could be had, as Doctor Stokeley, (whom for that quirke found
out he had lately preferred to the Bishopric of London,) was able to instruct
him, His conference with Sir Thomas about it.
with whom he willed Sir THOMAS to confer in that point. But for all the
conferences he could have with him, Sir THOMAS could no way induce himself to
change his former opinion therein. Yet the Bishopp relating to the king their
Conference, so favorably reported of Sir THOMAS MORE's carriage therein, that
he said, he found him very toward and desirous to find out good matter,
wherein he might truly serve his grace to his contentment, but yet he could not.

Strokesly undermines the Cardinal,
This Bishopp having been lately by the Cardinal in the Star Chamber openly
disgraced and awarded to the Fleet, not brooking this contumely, sought by
all means to wreake his anger against the Cardinal: and picked a quarrel at
him to the king, because he began to wax cold in the divorce. For
backwardnes in the kings divorce: and forwardnes for a french match.
For so it was, that Wolsey was sent over into France to treat a marriage
between king Henry and the king of France's sister: and finding their willing
acceptance, it was likely to come to that issue, which he hoped for. Yet God
so wrought to cross him, that this very invention, which he had first plotted
to revenge himself on Charles the Emperor, this same was the pit, wherein he
fell, and whereby all his dignity, creditt, and wealth was taken away; so that
of him it may well be said: incidit in foueam quam fecit* For whilst he was
contriuing for the king a marriage in France, the king himself little to his
knowledge had knitt the knott in England with a mean woman in respect of a
prince, a private knight's daughter, and of meaner conditions then any
gentlewoman of worth.

Wherefore Wolsey returning, The Cardinal discontented:
and finding his embassage crossed, began to repine at the king for
disgracing him so much, and now wished that he had never began to putt such
scruples into Longlands head; which Stokeley soon finding, and himself having
devised a new knott in a rush, to bring the king in better liking of himself
for his forwardness, and into more dislike of the Cardinal so wrought with
his Majesty, that he sent for the Cardinal back, being now on his way gone to
be enstalled in the archbishopric of York: Arrested and deprived of all
honors and riches.
so that by Sir William Kinston he was arreasted of high treason, having
confiscated all his goods before, so that he that had been one of the greatest
prelates of Christendom, had not now one dish to be served in at the table;
who if he had loved God half so well as he adored his prince, could never have
come to such misery; for that he dyed either with sorrow or poiso^ shortly
after.

But the king caused in his place of Chancellourshipp Sir THOMAS MORE to be
placed, Sir Tho. More elected L Chauncelor.
that with that bayte, says Card: Poole, corrupted, he might the more easily
be brought to the bente of the king's bow; who behaved himself so excellently
in the place, as one may say that none ever before him did better, although he
was the first lay man that ever possessed that room, as Card: Only worthy of
the place, in Cardinal Wolseys judgment.
Poole notes; yea Wolsey himself hearing that Sir THOMAS MORE should have it,
though he was very loath to leese it himself, and withal bore Sir THOMAS no
more good will, then needs he must; yet professed he to many, that he thought
none in England more worthy of it then Sir THOMAS; such was his fame, that
none could envy it, though it were never so unaccustomed a case.

4. The honorable ceremony with which he was enstalled.
4. The manner how Sir THOMAS MORE was installed in this high Office, how the
king did extraordinarily grace him therein, and how modestly notwithstanding he
accepted therereof, is very remarkable. For being lead between the Dukes of
Norfolk and Suffolk through VVestminister hall up to the Star chamber, and
there honorably placed in the high Iudgement-seate of Chancellor, the Duke of
Norfolk, who was the chief peer and Lo: Threasurer of England, by the king's
order spoke thus unto the people, there with great applause and joy gathered
together: The king's Matie. The Duke of Norfolks oration in behalf of Sir Tho.
More.
(which I pray God may prove happy and fortunate to the whole realm of
England) has raised to the most high dignity of Chancellourshipp Sir THOMAS
MORE, a man for his extraordinary vvorth and sufficiency well known to
himself and the whole realm, for no other cause or earthly respect, but for
that he has plainly perceived all the gifts of nature and grace to be heaped
upon him, which either the people could desire, or himself vvish for the
discharge of so great an office. For the admirable wisdom, integrity and
innoce^cie, joined with most pleasant facility of wit, Of his worthiness
for so great a place.
that this man is endevved vvithall, have been sufficiently known to all
Englishmen from his youth, and for these many years also to the king's
Majesty himself. This has the king abundantly found in many and weighty
affairs, which he has happily dispatched both at home and abroad; in diverse
offices, which he has born, in most honorable embassages, which he has
undergone, and in his daily counsel and aduises upon all other occasions. He
has perceived no man in his realm to be more wise in deliberating, more
sincere in opening to him what he thought, nor more eloquent to adorn the
matter, which he uttered. Wherefore because he savv in him such excellent
endovvments, and that of his especial care he has a particular desire that
his kingdom and people might he governed with all equity and justice,
integrity and wisdom: he of his own most gracious disposition has
created this singular man Lo: Chancellor; that by his laudable performance of
this office, his people may enjoy peace and justice, and honor also and fame
may redounde to the whole kingdom. The first lay man, that ever was mad Lord
Chancellor.
It may perhaps seem to many a strange and unusual matter, that this
dignity should be bestovved upon a lay man, none of the Nobility, and one
that has wife and children; because heretofore none but singular learned
prelates, or men of greatest Nobility, have possessed this place; but what is
vvanting in these respects, the admirable virtues, the matchless gifts of
wit and wisdom of this man, Good reasons why that old custom was altered.
does most plentifully recompense the same. For the king's Majesty has not
regarded how great, but what a man he was; he has not cast his eyes upon
the nobility of his blood, but on the vvorth of his person; he has respected
his sufficiency, not his profession; finally he would show by this his
choice, that he has some rare subjects amongst the row of gentlemen and lay
men, who deserve to manage the highest offices of the realm, which Bishops
and Noble men think they only can deserve. The rarer therefore it was, so
much both himself held it to be the more excellent, and to his people he
thought it would be the more grateful. Wherefore receive this your
Chancellor with joyful acclamations, at whose hands you may expect all
happiness and content.

Sir THOMAS MORE according to his wonted modesty was somewhat abashed at this
the Dukes speech, Sir Tho. Mores modest and discreet reply.
in that it sounded so much to his praise; but recollecting himself as that
place and time would give him leave, he answered in this sort: He
acknowledges his own unworthiness,
Although, most noble Duke, and you right Honble. Lords, and worshipful
gentlemen, I know all these things, which the kings Majesty, it seems,
has been pleased should be spoken of me at this time and place, and your Grace
has with most eloquent words thus amplifyed, are as far from me, as I
could vvish with all my heart they were in me for the better performance of so
great a charge. And although this your speech has caused in me greater fear
then I can well express in words: yet this incomparable favor of my dread
Sovereign, by which he shows how well, yea how highly he conceaueth of
my weakness, having commanded that my meanness should be so greatly
conmended, The Dukes love,
cannot be but most acceptable unto me: and I cannot choose but give your most
noble Grace exceeding thanks, that what his Majesty has willed you briefly
to utter, you of the abundance of your love unto me, have in a large and
eloquent Oration dilated. And the kings favor, and bounty.
As for myself I can take it no otherwise, but that his Majesty's incomparable
favor toward me, the good will and incredible propension of his Royal
mind (where with he has these many years favored me continually) has
alone without any desert of mine at all caused both this my new honor, and
these your undeserved commendations of me. For who am I, or what is the house
of my father, that the kings Highness should heap upon me by such a
perpetual stream of affection these so high honors? I am far less then
any the meanest of his benefitts bestovved on me; how can I then think my
self vvorthie or fit for this so peerless dignity? I have be drawn by
force, Which he esteems beyond his deserts.
as the king's Majesty often professes, to his Highnesse's service, to be a
Courtier; but to take this dignity upon me, is most of all against my will;
yet such is his Highnesses benignity, such is his bounty, that he highly
esteems the small dutiefulnesse of his meanest subjects; and seeks still
magnificently to recompense his servants; not only such as deserve well, but
even such as have but a desire to deserve well at his hands. In which number
I have alvvaies wished myself to be reckoned, because I cannot challenge
myself to be one of the former; which being so, you may all perceive with me
how great a burden is laid upon my back, in that I must strive in some sort
with my diligence and duty to corresponde with his royal benevolence, Al
which increase in him a full purpose to discharge well so great a charge.
and to be answerable to that great expectation, which he and you seem to
have of me; wherefore those so high praises are by so much more grievous unto
me, by how much I know the greater charge I have to render myself vvorthie
of, and the fewer means I have to make them good. This weight is hardly
suitable to my vveake shoulders; this honor is not correspondent to my poor
deserts; it is a burden, not a glory, a care, not a dignity; the one
therefore I must bear as manfully as I can, and discharge the other with as
much dexterity as I shall be able. The earnest desire which I have alvvaies had
and do now acknovvledge myself to have, to satisfye by all means I can
possible the most ample benefitts of his Highness, will greatly excite and
aid me to the diligent performance of all; And desires favorable
interpretation of his endeavors.
which I trust also I shall be more able to do, if I find all your goods
wills and vvishes both favorable unto me, and conformable to his royal
munificence: because my serious endeauours to do well iojned vvth your
favorable acceptance will easily procure that whatsoever is performed by me,
though it be in it self but small, yet will it seem great and praise
vvorthie; For those things are alvvaies achieved happily, which are accepted
willingly, and those succeed fortunately, vhich are received by others
courteously. As you therefore do hope for great matters and the best at my
hands, so though I dare not promise any such yet do I promise truly and
affectionately to perform the best I shall be able.

When Sir THOMAS had spoken these words, A wise ponderation of his
predecessor Cardinals example.
turning his face to the high Judgment seat of the Chancerie, he proceeded in
this manner: But when I look upon this seat, when I think how great and
what kind of personages have possessed this place before me, when I call to
mind, who he was, that sat in it last of all, a man of what singular
wisdom, of what notable experience, what a prosperous and favorable
fortune he had for a great space, and how at the last he had a most grievous
fall, and dyed in glorious: I have cause enough by my predecessors example to
think honor but slipperie, and this dignity not so grateful to me, as it
may seem to others; for both is it a hard matter to follovv with like paces
or praises a man of such admirable wit, prudence, authority and splendor,
to whom I may seem but as the lighting of a candle, when the sun is
down; and also the sudden and unexpected fall of so great a man as he was
does terribly putt me in mind that this honor ought not to please me too
much, The danger of high honors.
nor the luster of this glistering seat dazel mine eyes. Wherefore I ascend
this seat as a place full of labor and danger, void of all solid and true
honor; the which by how much the higher it is, by so much greater fall I am
to fear, as well in respect of the very nature of the thing it self, as
because I am warned by this late fearful example. And truly I might even now
at this very first entrance stumble, yea faynte, but that his maiestie's most
singular favor toward me, and all your good wills, which your joyful
countenance does testifye in this most honorable assembly, does somevvhat
recreate and refresh me; otherwise this seat would be no more pleasing to
me, then that svvord was to Damocles, which hung over his head, tied only by
a hair of a horse's tale, when he had store of delicate fare before him,
seated in the chair of state of Denis the Tirant of Sicilie; this therefore
shall be alvvaies fresh in my mind, this will I have still before mine eyes,
that this seat will be honorable, famous and full of glory unto me, if I
shall with care and diligence, A warning to use them well.
fidelity and wisdom endeavor to do my duty, and shall persuade myself,
that the enjoying thereof may chance to be but short and uncertain; the one
whereof my labor ought to perform; the other, my predecessour's example may
easily teach me. All which being so, you may easily perceive, what great
pleasure I take in this high dignity, or in this most noble Dukes praising of
me.

Common joy of S. Thomas his promotion.
All the world took notice now of Sir THOMAS's dignity, whereof Erasmus
writes to John Fabius Bishopp of Vienna thus: Concerning the new increase of
honor lately happened to THOMAS MORE, I should easily make you believe it, if
I should show you the letters of many famous men rejoicing with much
alacrity, and congratulating the king, the realm, himself, and also me for
MORE's honor, in being made Lo: Chancellor of England.

5. The behaueour of S. Thomas in the dignity of L. Chancellor.
5. Now it was a comfortable thing for any man to behold, how two great rooms
of Westminster hall were taken up, one with the son, the other with the
father, which has as yet never been heard of before or since, the son to be
Lo: Chancellor, and the father Sir John More to be one of the ancientest
Judges of the king's Bench, Toward his father the auncientest judge of the
realm.
if not the eldest of all; for now he was near 90. year old. Yea what a
grateful spectacle was it, to see the son ask the father blessing every
day upon his knees, before he sat in his own seat? a thing expressing rare
humility, exe^plar obedience, and submissiue piety.

Shortly began every one to find a great alteration between the intolerable
pride of the precedent Chancellor Wolsey, Toward all sutours, especially the
poorer sort.
who would scarce look or speak to any, and into whose only presence none
could be admitted, unless his fingars were tipped with gold; and on the other
side this Chancelour, the poorer and the meaner the suppliant was, the more
affably he would speak unto him, the more attentively he would hearken to his
cause and with speedy trial dispatche him; for which purpose he used commonly
every afternoon to sit in his open hall, so that if any person whatsoever
had any suit unto him, he might the more boldly come unto him, and there open
to him his complaints.

Which his open manner of extraordinary favor to all, my uncle Dauncy, No
access to bribery.
his son in law seemed merrily on a time to find fault with, saying, that
when Card: Wolsey was Chancellor, not only diverse of his inner chamber, but
such as were but his doorekeepers, got great gains by him; and since I have
married one of your daughters, I might of reason look for some commodity; but
you are so ready to do for every poor man, and keep no doors shutt, that
I can find no gains at all, which is to me a great discouragement, whereas
else some for friendshipp, some for profitt, some for kindred would gladly use
my furtherance to bring the^ to your presence; and now yff I should take any
thing of them, I should do them great wrong, because they may freely prefer
their causes to you themselves; which thing though it is in you, Sir, very
commendable, yet to me I find it nothing profitable. Means how great men may
do favors in justice
which word Sir THOMAS answered thus; I do not mislike, son, that your
conscience is so scrupulous; but there be many other ways, wherein I may both
do yourself good and pleasure your friends; for sometimes by my word I may
stand your friend in steed, some time I may help him greatly by my letter,
if he has a Cause depending before me, I may hear him before another man at
your entreaty; if his Cause be not all the best, I may move the parties to
fall to some reasonable end by arbitrament: Notable integrity
but this one thing I assure thee on my faith, that if the parties will at my
hands call for justice and equity, the^, although it were my father, whom I
reverence dearly, that stood on the one side, and the devil, whom I hate
extremely, were on the other side, his cause being just, the devil of me
should have his right.

What saying was this to express the love to Justice, which he always bore,
Even against his own kindred.
and his deeds showed it so, that no malicious tongue ever could pick the
least quarrel against him for the least touch of injustice, as shall be more at
large spoken of, when every light matter came to be sifted narrowly, after he
fell from the king's favor; and that he would for no respect of alliance
digress one iotte from equity, well appeared by another son in law of his
my uncle Heron; for when he having a Cause in the Chancerie before Sir THOMAS,
and presuming to much on his favor, because he ever showed himself the most
affectionate father to his children that was in the world; by reason whereof he
would by no means be persuaded to agree to any indifferent order, at last Sir
THOMAS made a flatt decree against him; wherein he lively expressed the
practice of his former saying.

Long delays in law, the misery of poor clients: remedied by Sir Thomas.
Now at his coming to this Office, he found the Court of Chancerie pestered and
clogged with many and tedious Causes, some having hung there almost twenty
years. Wherefore to prevent the like, which was a great misery for poor
suitors, first he caused Mr. Crook chief of the Six Clerks, to make a
Dockett containing the whole number of all Injunctions, as either in his time
had already past or at that time depe^ded in any of the king's Courts at
Westminster. Then bidding all the Judges to dinner, he in the presence of them
all, showed sufficient reason why he had made so many Injunctions, that they
all confessed that they rhemselues in the like case would have done no less.
Then he promised them besides, that if they themselves, to whom the
reformation of the rigor of the law appartained would upon reasonable
consideracions in their own discretion (as he thought in conscience they were
bound) mitigate and reform the rigor of the law, there should then from him
no Injunctions be granted; to which when they refused to condescende, then,
said he, for as much as yourselues, my Lords, drive me to this necessity, you
cannot hereafter blame me, if I seek to relieve the poor people's injuries.
After this, he said to his son Rooper secretly, I perceive, son, why they
like not this; for they think that they may by a verdict of a Jury cast of
all scruple from themselves upon the poor Jury, which they account they
chief defense. Wherefore I am constrained to abide the adventure of their
blame.

He took great pains to hear causes at home, as is said, A pleasant tale of
a table.
arbitrating matters for both the parties good; and lastly he took order with
all the atturneys of his Court, that there should no sub poenas go out,
whereof in general he should not have notice of the matter, with one of their
hands unto the Bill; and if it did bear a sufficient cause of complaint, then
would he set his hand to it, to have it go forward; if not, he would utterly
quash it, and deny a sub poena. And when on a time one of the atturneyes,
whose name was Mr. Tubbe had brought unto Sir THOMAS the sum of the cause of
his Client, requested his hand unto it, Sir THOMAS reading it, and finding it a
matter frivolous, he added in steed of his own hand thereto; these words: A
tale of a Tubbe for which the attorney going away as he thought with Sir THOMAS
his name unto it, found when his Client read it, to be only a ieaste.

6. King Henry desire Sir Thomas to allow his divorce.
6. Shortly after his entry into the Chancellourshipp, the king again
importuned him to weighe and consider his great matter, thinking that now he
had so bound him unto him, that he could not have gainesayde him; but he
valuing more the quiett of his conscience, and the justice of the cause, then
any prince's favor in the world, fell down upon his knees before his
Majesty and humbly besought him to stand his gracious Sovereign, Sir Thomas
noble and discreet refusal*
as he had ever found him since his first entrance into his princely service;
adding that there was nothing in the world had been so grievous to his heart, as
to think that he was not able (as he gladly would with the loss of one of his
chiefest limbs) to find any thing in that matter, whereby with integrity of
his conscience he might serve his Grace to his contentment. And he always bore
in mind those most godly words, that his Highness spoke unto him, when he
first admitted him into his royal service, the most virtuous lesson that ever
prince gave unto his servant, whereby he willed him. First to look to God, and
after God, to him; as, in good faith, he said, he did, and would; or else might
his Majesty accounte him for his most unworthy vassal; whereto the king
courteously answered, that if he could not therein with his conscience serve
him, he was contented to accept his service otherways; Accepted for the time,
by the king.
and using the advice of other his learned Council, whose consciences could
well agree thereto, he would notwithstanding continue his accustomed favor
toward him, and never with that matter molest his conscience after: but how
well he performed his promise, may be seen by the discourse following. And
indeed there is no prince, be he bent to never so much wickedness, but shall
find counselors enough that will always seek to please his humors; but to
find any one that will not agree to what that king is bent, to have
wrongfully brought to pass, these are very rare, and therefore most to be
admired.

THE SEVENTH CHAPTER. A VIEW OF SOME especial and most remarkable virtues of
SIR. T. MORE in midst of his Honors.
1. Incredible poverty in so eminent a personage: sign of vnmacheable
integrity.

2. Admirable zeal in cause of catholic religion against all heresy.

3. Cheerful myrthe in all occasions joined with gravity.

4. Solid devotion, and reverence in divine service.

5. Patience and resignation in temporal losses.

6. Contempt of vvorldly honor declared in deposing of the dignity of
Chancellor.

7. A resolution to live poorly, never like seen in a great states man.

8. With what deep ponderation he resigned up that high honor.

1. The death of Sir John More.
1. ABout this time it happened Sir John More to fall sick of a surfeit of
grapes, as I have heard; who though he was very old, yet had he till then
been more lusty, then his years afforded him. In his sickness, his son,
whom now he had scene Lo: Chancellor, often came and visited him, using many
comfortable words unto him; and at his departure out of this miserable world,
with tears taking him about the neck, most lovingly kissed and embraced him,
commending his soul devoutly to the merciefull hands of his Creator and
redeemer: Sir Thomas never enjoyed his fathers inheritance.
so with a heavy heart departed from him, who left him now bettered with a
very small increase of estate, because his chief house and lands at Gubbins
in Hartfortdshire his last wife enjoyed, who outliued Sir THOMAS some ten
years, and therefore Sir THOMAS never enjoyed almost any inheritance from his
father; in so much that he affirmed in his apology, which he wrote about this
time, that all his revenues and pensions, except that which had been granted by
letters patents from the king of his mere liberality, to wit, the mannours of
Duckington, Frinckford, and Barlyparke in Oxfordshire, all the rest, he says,
amount not to above Fifty pound by the year, as those which he had from his
father or by his wife, or by his own purchase. Rare poverty in a L. high
Chancellor.
Surely a rare saying, that one of the king's Counsel, who had gone through
many offices for almost twenty years should not be able to purchase one
hundred pound land; when as now a private Attorney by his own practice will
leave his child five hundred pound land of inheritance. Therefore in so great
an officer this shows an admirable contempt of worldly commodities, a
bountiefull hand to spend liberally and abundantly upon the poor, his own
kinsfolk and family, the Church and upon hospitallitie. And as for ready
money, he had not in all the world, when he gave up his office, above one
hundred pound either in gold or silver; which is as strange as the former. Yet
could it not stop. Q. Annes malice against him.
All which does demonstrate his uprightness, his munificence, his singular
perfections and his divine wisdom. For what could millions of gold have
stood him in steed, but to cumber his conscience, when he lost all from
himself and his posterity by reason of the malice of a spiteful queen, who
pursued him and his to death, to their utter temporal overthrow, showing
perfectly that saying non est malitia super malitia mulieris. For the king
could not by his fall promise himself any great increase of goods, as he had
gotten by the Cardinall's overthrow.

2. His admirable zeal in cause of catholic religion.
2. Now the Bishops of England at this time considering with themselves, that
for all his prince's favor he was neither a rich man, nor in yearly revenues
advanced as his worthiness deserved, and weighing with themselves what pains
and travails he had taken in writing many learned books for the defense of
the true Catholic faith against many heresies secretly sown abroad in the
realm, to whose pastoral charge the reformation of them principally
appertained, there being not one Clergy man, that had matched his writings
either in the greatness of the volumes, the soundness of the arguments, to
convince the adversary, or the pains taken to reduce them. A liberal reward
proffered him nobly by the Bishops of Enggland.
They called therefore a Convocation together, whether most of the Clergy
came, where they concluded to offer unto him the sum of four thousand pound
at the least, thereby to recompense in part his travails there in sustained.
To the payment whereof every Bishop, Abbott, and the rest of the Clergy,
after the rate of their abilities were liberal contributours, hoping that this
sum would content him. Wherefore his dear friends Tunstall Bishopp of
Durham and Clarke B. of Bath, and as is supposed Veysey of Exeter came to Sir
THOMAS and spoke thus unto him; how that they held themselves bound to consider
him for his pains taken and bestowed to discharge them in Gods quarrel; and
albeit they could not according to his deserts requite him so worthily as they
willingly would, but must refer that only to the goodness of God: yet for a
small part of recompense, in respect of his estate so unequal to his worth
they presented unto him that sum in the name of the whole Convocation,
desiring him to take it in good part. And though this were a bountiefull deed
in respect of those prelates; yet little knew they Sir THOMAS his magnificent
disposition, who answered them in this manner: As nobly and magnanimously
refused by him, only for Gods sake.
That like as it was no small comfort unto him, that so wise and learned men
accepted so well of his simple doings, for which he never purposed to receive
any reward, but at the hands of God alone, to whom the thanks thereof was
chiefly to be ascribed; so gave he most humble thanks unto their Lordshipps
all, for their so bountiefull and friendly consideration; but he purposed not
to receive any thing from them. And when they with great importunity pressed
still upon him, that few would have supposed he could have refused it, they
could not for all that fasten any whitt upon him. Then they besought him that
he would be content they might bestow it upon his wife and children. Not so my
Lords, quoth he; I had rather see it cast all into the Thames then I or any of
mine should have there of one penny. For though your offer, my Lords, be
indeed very honorable, yet set I so much by my pleasure and so little by my
profitt, that I would not in good faith for much more money have lost the rest
of so many nights sleep as was spent upon the same: and yet for all this I
could wish that upon condition all heresies were suppressed, all my works were
burnt, and my labor utterly lost. Thus they were feign to depart, and restore
to every one his own again. By which wise and virtuous answer, every one
may see that all his pains that he took, were only in respect of Gods honor,
and not for either vain glory or any earthly commodity;

The heretics calumny against him.
Yea he cared not what any said of him, conte^ning the peoples dispraise as a
blast of wind. For the heretics having gotten it by the end, that the
Clergy had offered him a great sum of money, and measuring other men by
their own covetous humors, reported and wrote in pamphletts that he was
bribed by the Clergy to write, whom he answered mildely by a flatt denial,
that he was not made richer by one penny from the Clergy. Yet some of those
heretics had spent him somewhat; and besides he being Bigamus, twice married,
could never hope for any spiritual promotion.

The water baylife of London, who had been sometime his servant, hearing (where
he had been at dinner) certain merchants somewhat drunk with this new poison,
liberally to rail against Sir THOMAS, True glory to be hated by heretics.
in that he was so bitter against Lutherans, waxed sore discontented therewith,
knowing well, that he little deserved any evil report; wherefore he hastily
came to Sir THOMAS and told him what he had heard: and were I, Sir, said he,
in such favor and authority with my prince, as you are, such men should not
be suffered so villanously and falsely to misreporte and slander me. Wherefore
you may do well, Sir, to call them before you, and to their shame to punish
them for their undeserved malice. But Sir THOMAS smiling on him said: why, Mr.
Water bailife, would you have me punish those, by whom I reap more benefitt
then by all you that are my friends: let them in Gods name speak as lewdely
of me as they list, and shoot never so many boltes at me, as long as they
hitt me not, what am I the worse: but if they should once hitt me, then would
it not a little grieve me; howbeit I trust by Gods grace and help, there shall
none of them all be able to touch me I have more cause, I assure thee, to
pity them, then to be angry with them. Lo, Perfect patience always joined
with true perfection
to what height of perfection had he now attained, that he was neither allured
by hopeful gains, nor deterred one iotte from his duty by evil toungs or
slanders, always carrying one and the same alacrity in all his crosses and
adversities!

3. Cheerful mirth.
3. When that one of the house of the Manners by the king's favor was come
lately to a noble dignity, who had been before a great friend of Sir THOMAS;
An vnma^nerly reprehe^sio^ mannerly returned on the reprehender.
but perceauing that the world began somewhat to frown upon him for that he
was not so forward as other men to egg the king to the divorce, and being
desirous to pick a quarrel against him said unto him: my Lord, Honores mutant
Mores. Sir THOMAS readily after his merry fashion replied: It is so indeed,
my Lord, but Mores signifies in English, manners and not more; he was
therewith so putt out of Countenance, that he wist not what to say.

A bold debtour, pretily told his own.
In like manner he wittily twitted another man, whom he had lent money unto; of
whom he asking his due, bad him remember that he should die, God knows how
soon, and then he should have little use of money, adding the sentence in
latin to please Sir THOMAS the more Memento morieris; whereto readily Sir
THOMAS said: what say you Sir, me thinks you putt yourself in mind of your
duty herein saying Meme^to Mori aeris, remember More's money* Thus was he
continually in his discourses full of witty Ieasts, that though his
countenance was always grave, yet none could converse with him, but he would
make them laugh exceedingly; tempering all serious matters with some witty
devise or other.

It happened on a time that a beggars little dog, A merry arbitrament between
his Lady, and a beggar.
which she had lost was presented for a Jewel to my Lady More, and she had
kept it some sennight very carefully; but at last the beggar had notice, where
her dog was, and presently she came to complain to Sir THOMAS, as he was
sitting in his hall, that his Lady with held her dog from her; presently my
Lady was sent for, and the dog brought with her; which Sir THOMAS taking in
his hands, caused his wife, because she was the worthier person, to stand at
the upper end of his hall, and the beggar at the nether end, and said, that
he sat there to do every one Justice: he bad each of them call the dog;
which when they did, the dog went presently to the beggar, forsaking my Lady.
When he saw this, he bad my Lady be contented, for it was none of hers; yet
she repyning at the sentence of my Lo: Chancellor, agreed with the beggar, and
gave her a piece of gold, which would well have bought three dogs, and so all
parties were agreed; every one smiling to see his manner of enquiring out the
truth.

A pleasant ce^sore of a witless writing.
A certain friend of his had taken great pains about a book, which he would
have set out, thinking well of his own wit, which no other would praise and
because he would have Sir THOMAS to over see it, before it were printed, he
brought it to him to view; who pervsing it, and finding no matter therein
worth the printe, said with a grave countenance: if it were in verse, it were
more worth: upon which words he went and turned it into verse, and after
brought it again to Sir THOMAS; who looking thereon, said soberly: yea marry,
now it is somewhat; for now it is rhyme; before it was neither rhyme nor reason.

And indeed whatsoever jest he brought forth, he never laughed at any
himself, but spoke always so sadly that few could see by his look, whether
he spoke in earnest or in ieaste. As talking with the messenger in his Dispute
of his Dialogues, by an occasion they happened to speak of a dogs turde; A
merry mistaking.
and at that very instant one of his men came to tell him, that dinner was
ready, to whom he said, look that there be better meat provided for us then
that; who presently went forth and told my lady, that his Lo: would have
better meat provided for his dinner; which sore troubled all the house, till
at lenght the cause of mistaking being known they all fell a laughing.

4. 4. His earnest devotion in the service of God.
And although he never left his mirth in outward appearance, yet still did he
use the like mortifications which he was wont; yea he exercised acts of
humility that he made most worldly men to wonder at him. On the sunnedaies
even when he was Lord Chancellor, he wore a surplice, and soung with the
singers at the high Mass and matins in his parish church of Chelsey; which the
Duke of Norfolk on a time finding, He used to sing in his surplice, in his
parish church.
said. God body, God body, my Lo: Chancelour a parish Clarke: you disgrace
the king, and your office. Nay, said Sir THOMAS smilingly: your Grace may not
think I dishonor my prince in my dutiefulnesse to his Lord and ours; having
in his mind that saying of David in the like case dancing before the Ark of God, when his wife Michol laughed at him Vilior fiam in oculis meis: I will
still think meanly of myself, whatsoever others shall think of me. To carry
the cross in procession, on foot.
He often would also in public processions carry the cross before the rest,
thinking himself happy, if he could any way show love and readiness in
almighty Gods service; and when many counseled him in the long processions
in Rogation week to use a horse for hie dignity and age, he would answer: it
beseemed not the servant to follow his master prauncing on cockhorse, his
master going on foot. He never undertook any business of importance,
Confessed and communicated before any importa^t business.
but he prepared himself first by Confession and receiving the blessed
Sacrament deuoutely, trusting more of the grace of God derived to us by these
holy Sacraments, then he did to his own wit, judgment and practice; yet
every of them was in him extraordinary, so that he lived a most worthy life
in all the course of his actions: never changed with any prosperity, nor
dismayde with any adversity.

5. 5. Patience in temporal lesser.
As when his barnes of Corn and hay were burnt, he never altered his
countenance, or showed the least sign of sorrow, only saying: Fiat voluntas
Dei; he has bestowed much more upon us, and therefore may he take away what he
pleases: besides he wrote a most patient letter to my Lady, which is thus:
Mris. An excellent resignatio^ to the providence of God.
Alice, I commend me unto you: having heard by my son Heron, that ours and
some of our neighbor's barnes with all the corn in them are burnt; although
we may be sorrovvfull for the loss of so much good corn, abstracting from
Gods holy disposition: yet seeing that it has been his divine pleasure to
suffer it, we ought not only patiently but also willingly to receive his
gentle rodd. God gave us all that we have; and seeing he has taken part of it
away by this chance, his blessed will be done: let us never murmr or
grudge for this accident, but take it in good part, and give God thanks as
well for adversity as for prosperity. Perhapps this loss may be a greater
benefitt of God then the gain of so much would have been; for he knovveth
what is most expedient for us. Be therefore of good courage I pray thee, and
taking all our family with you, go to the Church and give God thanks as
well for these things which he has given us, as for that he has taken
away, and for all that which he has left us, which he can easily increase,
when he sees it fittest for us; More care to supply his neighbors losses,
then his own
and if he pleases to take more from us, his blessed will be fullfilled; let
it be diligently enquired out, what our neighbors have lost, and desire them
not to be sad for any thing, for I will not see any of them endamaged by
any mischance of my house, although I should thereby not leave myself so much
as one spoone. I pray thee be cheerful with all my children and family.
Also take counsel of our friends, how Corn is to be provided for that which
is needful for you, and for seed corn this next year, if perhaps it be
fit that we sovve any field our selves: but whether we do so or no; I do
not think it expedient, presently to give over all care of husbandry and let
out our farm to others, until we have better and at more leisure considered
of it: yet if we have more workmen in our house, then we have need of,
such may be dismissed, Godly care of his poor servants.
if they can be co^modiously placed with other masters; but I will not
suffer any to be sent away to run at randon without a place to dvvell in.
At my return to the king, I see things go so, as it is likely I shall stay
with him a good while; yet because of this misfortune, perhaps I shall get
leave to come and see you some time this next week, when as we will
co^ferre more at leisure about these our household affairs. Farevvell, from
the Court. At Woodstock 13. Sept. 1539. God rewards true resignation even in
this world.
But mark how God rewarded this his patience: for it was in October next that
he was made Lo: Chancellor; by which office he might easily have purchased
many fair houses, if his mind had aimed at worldly riches, and not rather
thirsted after heavenly rewards. Vanity of judgment of worldlings.
Some have not stuck to say that if Sir THOMAS had been so happy as to have
dyed of his natural death about this time he had been a very fortunate man,
living and dying in all men's favor in the highest judgments of the world, and
prosperous also to his posterity; for he had left them a fair and great
inheritance, especially by the king's gracious gift. But in my mind they are
all carnally wise that affirm this, and no way have tasted of heavenly
wisdom For the last Scene of this Tragedy is the best and not to be wished
to have been omitted for all the land king Henry enjoyed, though you add the
abbeylands and all, after which now his fingars ends began to itche: For
that Card. Wolsey had showed already a president thereof, by getting leave of
the Pope, to dissolve certain small Abbyes for the building and maintenance of
that great College of Christ-Church in Oxford, which for that cause, as I
think, is S. Peter's work, and lies still unfinished.

6. 6. S. Thomas resigned up his office of L. Chancellor.
Though in all his life time Sir THOMAS had showed lively examples of many
excellent virtues, as piety, zeal of God's honor, wisdom, Justice,
liberality, contempt of the world, riches, yea what not? yet his most
heroical virtues toward his end he has expressed more lively and exactly,
as his magnanimity, The nearer his end, the more replenished with the love of
God.
contempt of honors, of wife, children, possessions, life it self, and
whatsoever can be of us desired, and in steed thereof has chosen disgraces,
extreme adversities, imprisonment, loss of dignities, goods and inheritance,
and has taken up his Cross and followed Christ in sheding of his blood to his
honor: no champion is crowned till he has gotten the victory. And behold
he most gloriously triumphs over the flesh by forsaking his life and leaving
it; the world, by despising it, and the devil by resisting manfully all his
temptations. A notable record: that no cause was left vndecyded in the Cha^cery.


When Sir THOMAS had behaved himself in his office of the Cha^celour-shipp for
the space of two year and a half so wisely that none could mende his doings,
so uprightly that none could take exception against him or his just
proceedings, and so dexterously that never any man did before or since that
which he did. For he had taken such order for the dispatching of all men's
Causes, that on a time sitting as Judge there, and having finished one cause,
he called for the next to be heard; whereto was answered that there was not one
Cause more depending. This he caused to be set down upon record; whereas at
this day there are little fewer then a thousand, if not more; whereof some lie
in the suddes by the space of diverse years.

When (as I say) Sir THOMAS had deserved high commendations of every one, and
now perceived that the king was fully determined to proceed to the unfortunate
marriage of Anne Bullen, A parliament called for Q Annes marriage
and for that cause a Parliament was called, wherein Sir THOMAS being the chief
Officer of the higher house, was with diverse Bishops and Noble men commanded
by the king, to go down to the lower house to show unto them, both what many
universities beyond the seas, and Oxford and Cambridge at home had done in
that behalf, with their public zeales testifying the same. All which matters
at the king's command he opened to the Lower house, Sir Tho. More sues to
depose his office.
not showing his mind therein; yet doubting (as good cause he had) least
further attemps should after follow, which contrary to his conscience by
reason of his office, he was likely to be putt unto; he made great suite to
the Duke of Norfolk his singular good friend, that he would be a means to the
king that he might be discharged, with his Majesty's favor of the
Chancellourshipp; wherein for certain infirmities of his body he pretended
himself unable any longer to serve. The Duke being often thereto by Sir THOMAS
solicited, at length obtained of the king, when at a time convenient by his
Majesty appointed Sir THOMAS repaired to the king to yield up unto him the
great Seal of England; The king graciously accepts his desire.
which his Majesty courteously received at his hands with great praise and
thanks for his worthy service in that office, at which time it pleased his
highness to say thus unto him: That for the service he had hitherto done unto
him, in any suite that he should hereafter have unto him, that either should
concern Sir THOMAS his honor (that very word it liked his Highness to use
unto him) or that should appertain to his profitt, he should not fail to
find him a good and gracious Lord. But how true these words proved, let
others be Judges, when the king not only not bestowed upon him the value of one
penny, but took from him and his posterity all that ever he had, either
given by himself, or left him by his father, or purchased by himself. The
next morning being holieday, How merely he insinuated the matter to his wife.
few yet knowing what had been done, he went to Chelsey church with my Lady
and his children and family: and after mass was done, because it was a
custom that one of my Lord's gentlemen, should then go to my Lady's pewe,
and tell her, my Lord was gone before, then did he himself come, and making
unto her a courtesy, with his cappe in his hand, and said: may it please your
Ladieshipp to come forth now my Lo: is gone. whereto she imagining it to be but
one of his ieastes, as he used many unto her, he sadly affirmed unto her, that
it was true; for he had resigned up his office, and the king had graciously
accepted it. This was the way that he thought fittest to break this matter
unto his wife; who yet was full sorry to hear it; A pleasant jest, to diuere
her from sorrow.
and it may be she spoke then those words, which I have rehearsed before:
Tilli valley; what will you do Mr. MORE: will you sit and make goslings in the
ashes: it is better to rule then to be ruled. But to requite her brave mind,
he began to find fault with her dressing, for he saw a great fault about
her; for which she chiding her daughters that none of them could espy it, they
still saying they could find none; Sir THOMAS merrily said: Do you not
perceive that your mothers nose stands somewhat awry? at which words she
stepped away from him in a rage. All which he did to make her think the less of
her decay of honor, which else would have troubled her sore.

7. Provident disposition of his household after his resignement.
7. Shortly after this he called all his servants together, many of whom were
Gentlemen of good sort and fashion, and told them, that he could not
maintain them as he gladly would, and therefore demanded them, what course of
life they would betake themselves to; and if they purposed to serve any Noble
man, Of his servants* all well rec2ommended.
he would undertake to place them to their contentment, who with eyes full of
tears affirmed, that they had rather serve him for nothing, the^ most men for
a great stipende: but when to this he would not agree, he settled them all in
places most fit for their turns, either with Bishops or Noblemen. His bardge
he gave to my Lo: Audley, who succeeded him in his office, and with it his
eight watermen; His fool Patison he gave to the Lo: Mayor of London, upon this
condition, that he should every year wait upon him that should have that
office. After this he called before him all his Children, Of his children
living with him.
and asking their advise, how he might now (in the decay of his ability so
empaired by the surrender of his office, that he could not hereafter as he had
done and gladly would) bear out the whole charges of them all himself (for
all his Children with their children had hither to dwelt with him) for that
they could not be able to continue together as he could wish they should. When
he saw them all silent and none to show him their opinion therein; then will I,
An incomparable resolution after so great an honor, to bear cheerfully so low
an estate.
said he, show unto you my mind: I have been brought up at Oxford, at an Inn
of Cha^cerie, at Lincolnes-Inne, and in the king's Court, from the lowest
degree to the highest; and yet have I in yearly revenues at this present
little left me above a hundred pound by the year: so that now if we look to
live together, we must be content to be Contributours together. But my
consell is, that we fall not to the lowest fare first; we will not therefore
descend to Oxford-fare, nor to the fare of New-Inne; but we will begin with
Lincolnes Inn dyett, where many right worshippfull men of great accounte and
good years do live fullwell; which if we find ourselves after the first
year not able to maintain, then will we the next year come down to Oxford
fare, where many great learned and ancient Fathers and Doctors are
continually conversant; which if our purses stretch not to maintain neither,
then may we after with bag and wallett go a begging together, hoping that for
pity some good folks will give us their charity, and at every man's door
to sing a Salve regina; whereby we shall still keep company and be merry
together. O worthy resolution! see how he expresses his love toward his
Children, but more toward God, taking patiently whatsoever might befall him.
And he that provides for the worst, will the better be prepared to endure
lesser Crosses. But what an admirable thing is this, that whereas he was by the
king taken into his Maiestie's service from a very worshipful living, as I
have said, four hundred pounds by the year, to deal in the greatest and
weightiest Causes that concerned his Highness and the realm, Honorable
poverty of so great a personage.
he had spent with painful cares, trauells and troubles as well beyond the
seas, as with in this kingdom, in effect the whole substance of his life; yet
with all the gain he got thereby (being never himself a wastefull spender) he
was not now able after the resignement of his offices, to find for himself and
those that necessarily belonged unto him, sufficient meat, drink, fuel,
apparel and such needful charges; all the lands, which he ever purchased
being, as my uncle Rooper well knew, not above the value of twenty marks by
the year, and after his debts paid, he had not of my uncle's own knowledge
(his Chain excepted) in gold and silver left him the worth of one hundred
pounds. Wherefore his Children went to their own livings, all but my uncle
Rooper and my aunte, who lived in the house next unto him.

8. 8. How earnestly, and co^sideratly he deposed his office.
And how really he had desired himself to resign up his place of
Chancellourshipp, partly for the above mentioned consideration, and partly
also for his own content and quiett enjoying of himself, may well appear in
that he so much liked and highly commended the like deed in William Warrham
that worthy Archbishopp of Canterbury immediately before Card. Wolsey; as by
this letter unto him is to be seen: An excellent letter to Archbishop Warrha^
to such a purpose.
I have alvvaies esteemed your most reverend Fatherhood happy in your courses,
not only when you executed with great renown the office of
Chancellourshipp; but also more happy now, when being rid of that great
care you have betaken yourself to a most wished quiettnesse, the better to
live to yourself, and to serve God more easily; such aquietnesse I say that is
not only more pleasing then all these troublesome businesses, but also more
honorable far in my judgment, then all those honors which you then
enjoyed. For many men, and amongst those some wicked men also may oftentimes
be raised to great offices: Great offices da^gerously undertaken, and as
dangerous to be given over.
but when you had that high Office of Chancellourshipp, which, as all others
of the like kind are, is of that nature, that the more authority and power
one has whilst he does bear it, the more slanders he is subject unto having
left it, to resign such an office voluntarily (which yet your Fatherhood
could scarce get leave to do with all the means you could use) none but a
modest minded man would, nor any but a guiltless man dare, do. Wherefore
many, and amongst them myself do applaude and admire this your act, which
proceeded from a mind I know not whether more modest in that you would
willingly forsake so magnificent a place, A true valuatio^ of virtuous actions.
or more heroical in that you could contemn it, or more innocent in that yon
feared not to depose yourself from it, but surely most excellent and prudent it
was to do so; for which your rare deed I cannot utter unto you how I
rejoice for your sake, and how much I congratulate you for it, seeing your
Fatherhood to enjoy so honorable a fame, and to have obtained so rare a
glory, by sequestring yourselfe far from all worldly businesses, from all
tumult of Causes, and to bestow the rest of your days, with a peaceable
conscience for all your life past, in a quiett calmness, S. Thom. Mores
humble estimation of himself.
giving yourselfe wholy to your book and to true Christian philosophy;
which pleasing and contented state of yours, my own misery causes me daily
more and more to think of; who although I have no businesses vvorth the
talking of (and yet he was then one of the King's privy Counsel, Threasurer
of the exchecker and employed in many embassages) yet because vveake forces
are easily oppressed with small matters, I am so troubled daily with
businesses, that I have not as much as once leisure to visit your Fatherhood,
or to excuse myself therefore by letter, and scarcely was I able to write this
unto you, He sends his Vtopia to the Archbishop.
by which I was to commend this my little book of Vtopia unto your most
reverend Fatherhood, which an Antwerpian friend of mine (love svvaying his
judgment) has thought fit to be published, and has putt it in printe
without my priuitie, being rather hudled up then polished, which I was
emboldened to send to you, though it be unworthy of your learning,
experience and dignity, relying on your courteous nature, which is wont to
conster to the best every man's endeauoures, also trusting in your tried love
toward me, by which I hope, though the work itself should not like you,
that yet for the authors sake you will favor it. Farevvell most honorable
prelate.

A little after this time he wrote thus to Erasmus: I have a good while
expected, His innocence in his office.
if any man could accuse me of any thing, since the deposing myself of the
Chancellourshipp: and as yet no man has come forth to complain of any my
injustice: either I have been so innocent, or so crafty, that my adversaries
must needs suffer me to glory in the one, if they cannot abide I should do so
in the other. Yea this the king's majesty also as well in private discourse
often, as also twice in public has vvittnessed, for that (which
shamefastness will not suffer me to speak of myself) he commanded the most
noble Duke of Norfolk high Threasurer of England, Testified in private and
publik by the King
when my successor an excellent man was settled in my place to testifye this
to all the assembly, that he had hardly at my earnest entreaty suffered me to
let the office go; and not content with that singular favor in my behalf
he caused the same again to be spoken of in his own presence when in the
audience of a public meeting of the Nobility and people my successor recited
his first speech, as the custom is, in the assembly of all the Estates,
which we call the Parliament.

The chief cause of his resigneme^t, to serve God more freely.
He writes also to Erasmus in another letter thus. That which I have from a
child unto this day almost continually wished (my most dear Desiderius) that
being freed from the troublesome businesses of public affairs, I might live
some while only to God and myself, I have now by the especial grace of
almighty God, and the favor of my most indulgent prince, obtained. And then
having spoken somewhat of the weakness of his health, he goes on, saying:
Having these things often in my head, either that I was to depose myself of
the office, or that I should fail in the performance of my duty therein,
seeing that I could not dispatche those affairs, but that I must endanger my
life, and so dispatche myself of the office howsoever, As tha^kfull to the K.
for permitting his resignement, as for the office it self.
I purposed at the last to forgoo the one rather then both. Wherefore because I
would as well be careful of the public vvellfare as of mine own health, I
was an earnest suitor to my Prince, and at last have obtained by his singular
courtesy, that because I began to grow vvearie and even ready to lie under
my burden I might be rid of that though a most honorable office, vvhereto
his favor had raised me above all my deserving, as it was wholy without my
seeking. I beseech therefore all the Saints in heaven, that by their
intercession almighty God would recompense this most favorable affection of
the King's toward me, and that he would give me grace to spend the rest of
my age in his service, profitably and not idely or vainly, affording me health
of body, that I may be the better able to take pains.

And to Cochleus he writes thus* Another cause for his weak health.
I have been lately sore sick for some months together, not so much to the
sight of others, as to mine own feeling, which infirmity I can scarce shake
of now, when I have left of my office; for then I could not exercise my
function of Chancellor, unless I should endanger my health daily. The care of
my recovery, but especially the due respect I had not to hinder public
justice, moved me thereto, vvhih I thought I should greatly hinder, if being
sickly I should be constrained to undertake businesses as I did when I was
stronger. That leisure, which the favorable benignity of my most gracious
prince has vouchsafed to grant me, I have purposed to dedicate wholy to my
study and the honor of God.

Contempt of all vainglory.
And as for his contempt of worldly honor he writes thus to Erasmus: You
will not believe how vnvvillingly I undertake embassages; neither can there
be any thing more displeasing unto me then the function of an Ambassador. Of
his Vtopia he writes, that he judged the book no better worthy, then to lie
always hidden in his own Hand, or else to be consecrated to Vulcan. Of his
poetry he says: my epigrammes never, pleased my mind, as you well know, my
Erasmus, and if other men had not better liked them, then myself, they should
never have been putt out in printe.

THE EIGHT CHAPTER. THE FIRST OCCASION and beginning of Sir THOMAS his troubles.
1. How he prepared himself to suffer for Christ, as if he foresavv he should
so do.

2. A vvorthie lesson for statesmen given by Sir Thomas More, to Cromwell.

3. The unfortunate marriage of Queen Anne Bolain.

4. Sir Tho. More refuses to be present at Queen Annes coronation; the
beginning of hers, and the Kings indignation.

5. The holy Nun of Canterbury first occasion of calling Sir Thom. More into
Question about Q. Anne*

6. Diverse accusations procured against Sir T. More, all easily avoided by his
innocente life.

7. His first examination before the Kings deputies.

8. His merry heart and brave resolution after this examination.

1. His remote preparation to Martyrdom.
1. THe year immediately before his troubles, he spent most in spiritual
exercises, and in writing of books against heretics: of whom in another
letter he speaks thus: That which I profess in my epitaphe, that I have been
troublesome to heretics, I have done it with a little ambition; 1 Hatred to
heresy.
for I so hate these kind of men, that I would be their sorest enemy that
possible they could have, if they will not repent; for I find them such men,
and so to increase every day, that I even greatly fear the world will be
undone by them. Yet for all his hatred to them, no heretic suffered death
whilst he was Lo: Chancellor, Yet in his time no heretik pur to death.
as Erasmus confesses in the above mentioned letter. And indeed it seems he
would not have them suffer death, because he writes to that effect in the
laws of his Vtopia. Writing another time to Cochlie he says: I would to God,
my Cochlie, I had such skill in holy Scriptures and Divinity, that I were
able to write against these plagues of the world fruitfully and with good
effect. Erasmus also confesses that he hated those seditious opinions, with
the which the world was then cruelly shaken.

He would often talk with his wife and Children of the exceeding joys in
heaven, 2. Continual talk of spiritual matters.
and terrible pains of hell, of the lives of holy Martyrs, what torments they
endured for the love of God, of their marvelous patience and deaths, which
they suffered most willingly rather then they would offend Gods divine
Majesty; and what an honorable thing it was for the love of our Lord
JESUS CHRIST to abide imprisonment, loss of goods, lands, and life; adding
also what a comfort it would be to him, if he might find that his wife and
children would encourage him to dye in a good cause; 3. Desire to suffer for
Christ
for it would cause him for joy thereof merrily to run to death; besides, as
prophesying of his future troubles, he would tell them what miseries might
chance to happen unto him. With which virtuous discourses he had so encouraged
them, that when these things after fell upon him indeed, their misery seemed
the more tolerable unto them, because Shafts foreseen hurt not so much.

2. A notable lesson for all statesmen, given to M. Cromwell.
2. Within a while after the resigning of his Office, Mr. Cromevvell (now highly
in the King's favor) came of a message from the king to Sir THOMAS; wherein
when they had thoroughly talked together, before his going away Sir THOMAS said
unto him: Mr. Cromevvell; you are entered into the service of a most noble,
wise, and liberal Prince; if you will follow my poor advise, you shall in
your counsel giving to his Majesty ever tell him what he ought to do, but
never what he is able to do; so shall you show yourself a true and faithful
servant, and a right worthy counselor; for if a lion knew his own strength,
hard were it for any man to rule him. But not kept by the said M. Cro^well.
But Cromevvell never learned this lesson; for he ever gave that counsel to
his prince, which he thought would best please him, and not what was lawful.
For it was he that was the mischievous instrument of king Henry to pull down
all abbeys and religious houses, yea to ruinate religion utterly; whereby you
may see the difference between king Henry a just prince, Bad Counselors make
bad Princes.
whilst he followed Sir THOMAS MORE's counsel, and after a cruel tyrant and
bloudsucker, when he practiced Thomas Cromevvells plotts and devises; and also
we may see the issue of both these counselors, the one having gotten great
fame for his just deserts, the other having purchased eternal infamy, yea the
overthrow of himself and his family. The reward of bad counsel exa^plified in
Cro^well.
For though he attained to be Lord Cromevvell, yea afterward Earl of Essex,
yet his honor and life was soon taken away from him most justly; and now
there is scarce any of his posterity left, his lands are all sold, yea such
was his grandchild's misery, that he complained very lamentably to some
gentlemen that he had not bread to putt into his mouth: Of good Counselors
in.S. Tho. More.
whereas Sir THOMAS MORE's great grandchildren, though they live not in great
abundance, yet have they, God be blessed, sufficient to maintain the estate of
honest Gentlemen; which God of his mercy continue.

3. The marriage of Q. Anne.
3. Now had King Henry also chosen an Archbishop of Canterbury for his own
tooth, promoted by the King, as I have heard say, at a beare-bayting, soon
after VVarham's death; his name was Thomas Cranmer, Archbis. Cra^mers good
qualities
Anne Bullen's Chaplain, a man wholly bent to fulfill the king's pleasure in
all things: By his counsel Q. Marie was after disinherited, and all men were
sworn to the succession of Q. Anne's issue, and to renounce the Pope's
authority, by acknowledging king Henry and his Successors supreme head of the
church of England.

Unto this man there was Commission granted under the great Seal to determine
the marriage, who had a conscience large enough to putt in execution, what the
king did fancy; He concludes the marriage to be lawful
and sitting at S. Albans about this new match, all things were easily
accorded. The king pretended that he could get no justice at the Pope's hands;
wherefore from thenceforth he sequestered himself and his kingdom from the Sea
of Rome, marrying Q. Anne in private; for she was not sollemnely carried
through London, before she was great with child of Q. Elizabeth.

Thus every man may see the cause of our breach from Rome, The cause of
Engla^ds separation from Rome.
the union whereof had continued more then nine hundred years, ever since
holy Pope Gregory first converted us, and would have remained God knows how
long, if that either king Henry would not have cast his liking upon a wanton
damsel, or else the Pope's conscience could have stretched to dispense with a
king to have two wives together; for the king still would praise his former
wife, and term her a virtuous woman; only forsooth scruple of conscience was
pretended; but he could not see any cause of scruple in breaking his promise
upon his appeal; whereby he professed he would stay until the determination
of a general Counsel, to which from the Pope he had already appealed.

Sir Tho. Mores prophetical guess of the oath of supremacy.
As soon as Sir THOMAS had heard that king Henry was married, he said to my
uncle Roper: God give grace, son, that these matters within a while be not
confirmed with oaths. My uncle then, although he saw likeliehood thereof, yet
fearing always that that would fall out, which Sir THOMAS foretold, waxed for
these words very sore grieved. For he had many times had experience, that he
spoke prophetically of diverse things.

4. Sir Tho. M. refused to be at Q. Annes coronatio^.
4. Before that Q. Anne should be carried in triumph from the Tower to
Westminster through the streets of London, with many pagents and sumptuous
shows, which proved after but a may game, Sir THOMAS received a letter from
three great Bishops, Durham, Winchester, and Bath, requesting him both to
keep them company to her Coronation, and also to take twenty pounds, which
by the bearer thereof they had sent him, to buy him a gown; the money he
thankefully received; yet stayde he still at home, and at their next meeting,
His counsel and predictio^ to the Bishops his good frinds.
he said merrily thus unto them. In the letter, my Lords, which you lately sent
me, you requested two things of me; the one whereof I was well content to
grant you, that the other I might the bolder deny; and like as the one,
because I took you for no beggars, and my self I knew to be no rich man, I
thought the rather to fulfill: so the other putt me in mind of an Emperor,
that ordained a law, that whosoever had committed a certain offense, A notable
story wonderfully, and prophetically applied.
which now I remember not, except she were a virgin, should suffer death for
it; such reverence had he to virginity; now it happened that the first that
offended in that crime, was a virgin; which the Emperor hearing of was in a
perplexity, as he that by some example would feign have that law putt in
execution. Whereupon when his counsel had sit long debating this case very
sollemnely, suddenly rose there up one plain, man of the Counsel, and said:
why make you so much ado, my lords, about so small a matter? let her be
deflowred, and after devoured. So though your Lordshipps have in the matter of
this marriage hitherto kept your selves virgins, yet take heed, you keep your
virginity still; for some there be, that by procuring your Lordshipps first to
be present at the Coronatio^, next to preach for the setting forth thereof,
His purpose rather to be devoured then defloured.
and finally to write books in defense of it, are desirous to deflowre you;
and when they have deflowred you, they will not fail soon after to devour
you. As for myself, it lies not in my power, but that they may devour me, but
God being my good Lord, I will provide so that they shall never deflower me. In
which speech he most lively prophecieth both of all the Bishopp's fall to
Schism, which after befell, and his own death, which followed not long after.

These words of his it is probable that they came to Q. Q. Annes hatred to Sir
Thomas.
Anne's ears, who as impatient as an Herodias, not abiding that any in the
realm should find fault with her great catch, she incensed King Henry more
against Sir THOMAS MORE then any other man; And a month after this
sollemnitie was not past, but she got him to be sent prisonner to the Tower,
little knowing that her Fortune's wheel would soon turn after.

When the king perceived he could not win Sir THOMAS to the bent of his lust
by no manner of benefitts, And the kings displeasure
then lo the fair sunshine day of his favors became ouercast, and there
ensued a terrible storm, he now going about by terrors and threats to drive
him to consent unto it: full little imagining that he was a steadie rock,
against which noe waves of his rage could prevail.

But mark how Sir THOMAS prepared himself for this valiant combat; Sir Thomas
disposes him self more immediately to suffer death.
having given over his office of Chancellourshipp: he never busied himself in
State-matters any more, but gave himself wholly, during that year, which was
between that and his troubles, not only to confute heretics, as I have said,
but also addicted himself to great acts of mortification, prayer and piety;
he lessened his family, placing his men in other services; he soulde his
household stuff to the value of one hundred pounds; he disposed his Children
into their own houses. As he lay by his wife's side, many nights he slept
not, forethinking the worst that could happen unto him; and by his prayers and
tears he overcame the frayltie of his flesh, which, as he confesses of
himself, could not endure a fillipp. A Christian stratagem.
He hired a pursiuant to come suddenly to his house, when he was one time at
dinner, and knocking hastily at his door, to warn him, the next day to
appear before the Commissioners, to arm his family the better to future
calamity; imitating herein the act of S. John the Almes-giuer, who hired a
man to come to him at meals, to tell him, that his grave was not yet finished
and that he should take order for it; for the hour of death was uncertain.

5. The first occasion of calling into question for Q. Anne.
5. But see how the beginning of this trouble grew first by occasion of a
certain Nun, called Elizabeth Berton, dwelling in Canterbury; who for her
virtue and holiness was not a little set by amongst the common people; unto
whom for that cause many religious persons, Doctors of Divinity, The holy
Nun of Kent*
and diverse lay men of good worshipp used to resort; she affirming to them
constantly, that she had revelations oftentimes from God, Warned by revelation
to rebuke K. Henry.
charging her to give the king warning of his wicked life, and of his abusing
of the sword, and authority committed from almighty God unto him. She
moreover knowing that my Lo: of Rochester Bishopp Fisher was of a singular and
rare virtuous life, and of admirable learning repaired to Rochester, Conferreth
her reuelatio^s with B. Fisher
and there disclosed unto him all her revelations, desiring his advise and
counsel therein; which the holy Bishopp perceauing might well stand with the
laws of God, and his holy Church, advised her (as she before had warning to
do, and intended it) to go to the king herself and let him understand all
the circumstances thereof; which she performed stoutely, telling him all the
revelations, and so returned to her cloister again.

Her talk with Sir Thomas More:
In a short space after he making a journey to the Nuns of Sion, by means of
one Fa: Reynold a priest of that house, there she happened to enter into talk
with Sir THOMAS MORE concerning such secretts as had been revealed unto her,
some part thereof touching deeply the matter of the king's supremacy, which
shortly after this followed, and about the vnlawfullnesse of the king's
marriage. Waryly handled by him.
Sir THOMAS though he might well at that time without danger of any law, (of
which there was then none) freely talk with her therein, yet notwithstanding
he demeaned himself so discreetely in all his talk with her, that he deserved
no blame, but rather great co^mendations, as it was proved after most
evidently, when it was sore laid to his charge.

6. Accusations procured against Sir Thomas.
6. After the divorce was pronounced, there was set out a book by authority
from the Council, which laid down the reasons why this divorce was done;
wherein amongst other matters it was said that therefore the king would not
stay for the Pope's sentence, because he had already appealed from him to the
next General Council. That he impugned the K. marriage.
Strayte after it was rumoured abroad, that Sir THOMAS MORE had answered and
refuted this book; of which slander Sir THOMAS purged himself by a letter to
Mr. Cromevvell now Secretary, and in the king's great favor, showing by
many arguments that he neither would nor could confute that book; which
letter is at large in the latter end of Sir THOMAS his workes^

But for all his purging himself, Quarrels picked against his Chau^cellourship.
accusations still came thick and threefolde upon him. For the king by
threats and sifting of his former deeds, would either win him to his mind,
or else find some occasion to except against his doings; and had he not been a
man of singular integrity, free from all bribes and corruption in all his
offices, every light matter would have been laid now heavy upon him; as of
some things he was indeed accused, which adds more to his honor and
reputation. There was one Parnell that grievously complained against Sir
THOMAS; because when he was Lo: A supposed bribe pleasantly confuted.
Chancellor at the suite of one Mr. Vaughan his adversary, he had made a
decree against him; for which at his wife's hands Sir THOMAS had taken a
great guilt Cup as a bribe: for the clearing of which accusation Sir THOMAS
being called before the body of the Council, the whole matter was in grievous
manner laid to his charge; and when Sir THOMAS confessed the taking thereof
saying, that for as much as that Cup was given him long after the decree for
a new years gift, he at her importunity, of courtesy, refused not to take
it. Then the Lo: of Wiltshire Q. Anne's father, who was the preferrer of the
suite, and hated Sir THOMAS both for his religion, and for that he had not
consented to his daughter's marriage, with much joy said unto the other Lords;
Lo, did I not tell you, that you should find the matter true? whereupon Sir
THOMAS desired their Honors, as they had courteously heard him tell the one
part of his tale, so they would voutsafe to hear the other with indifferent
ears; which being granted he further declared unto them, that albeit at her
urging he had indeed received the Cup, yet immediately thereupon he caused
his buttler to fill it up with wine, and therein drunk to her; which when he
had done, and she pledged him, then he as freely as her husband bestowed it
upon him, did even as willingly bestow the same upon her again for her new
yeares-guift; and so forced her to receive it, though much against her will;
all which herself and many others there then present deposed before that
honorable assembly. Thus his accusers were putt to shame enough, and he with
great honor acquitted.

At another time, on a new-yeares day also, A courteous refusal of an honest
reward.
there came unto him Mris. Croaker, a very rich woman, for whom with no small
pains he had made a decree in Chauncerie against the Lo: of Arundel, (never
fearing in act of Justice, any nobility of blood, or greatenesse of
personage) who presented him with a pair of gloves, and fourscore Angels in
them; he thankefully received the gloves of her, but refused the money saying:
Mris. seeing it were against good manners to refuse a gentlewomans
new-yeares-guift, I am content to take your gloves; but as for the lining, I
utterly refuse it, and so caused her to take her money again.

Another of like nature.
One Mr. Gresham likewise, having at the same time a Cause depending before him
in the Chancerie, sent him for a new-yeares-guift a fair guilt Cup, the
fashion whereof he very well liked; wherefore he caused the messenger to take
one of his own Cups, which was in value better, though the fashion pleased
him not so well, and deliver it to his master in recompense of the other; and
under no other condition would he receive it; wherefore he was feign so to do.

Many like unto those acts did he, which declared how clean his hands were
from taking of any bribes; which for tediousness sake we will omit; these
are enough to show any living man, how little he gained, yea how little he
cared for all transitory wealth, esteeming virtues of the mind his richest
threasure, and Christ naked on the Cross his chief desire; Sir Tho. More a
wise marcha^t traffiking for heaven.
which holy pleasure of his almighty God before his death fulfilled, when for
his love he lost all that might be most dear unto worldly men; separation
from wife and children, loss of all liberty, and the utter overthrow of all
his goods and estate; yet by leesing these things he gained better; for in
steed of temporal, he achieved eternal, in lieu of transitory, he has
purchased permanent, in room of deceiptfull trash, he has bought to himself
a Crown of glory: centuplum accepit, and vitam aeternam possidet; he was a
true merchant, that by selling all he had, bought the precious margarite spoken
of by Christ in S. Matthew; then which there can be imagined nothing more
precious, which without doubt he enjoys for all eternity.

7. 7. Sir. T. M. his first examination.
Now there was another parliament called, where in there was a bill putt into
the Lower house to attaynte the nun and many other religious men of high
treason, A parliament to attaint true men of treason
and Bishopp Fisher with Sir THOMAS MORE of misprision of treason; which bill
the King supposed would be so terrible to Sir THOMAS, that it would force him
to relente, and condescende unto him; But therein he was much deceived, for
first Sir THOMAS sued, that he might be admitted into the Parliament to make his
own defense personally; which the king not liking of, granted the hearing of
this Cause to my Lo: of Canterbury, The Kings deputies, to examine Sir Tho. M.
the Lo: Chancellor, the Duke of Norfolk and Mr. Cromwell; who appointing
Sir THOMAS to appear before them; my uncle Roper requested his father
earnestly to labor unto them, that he might be putt out of the parliament bill;
who answered then that he would; but at his coming thither, he never once
entreated them for it; when he came into their presence, they entertained him
very courteously, requesting him to sit down with them; which in no case he
would; The Deputies faires words; to win Sir Tho.
then the Lo: Chancellor began to tell him, how many ways the king's
majesty had showed his love and favor toward him, how gladly he would have
had him continue in his office, how desirous he was to have heaped still more
and more benefittes upon him, and finally that he could ask no worldly honor
and profitt at his Highnesse's hands, but that it was probable that he should
obtain it; hoping by these words, declaring the king's affection toward him,
to stir Sir THOMAS up to recompense the king with the like, by adding his
consent unto the king's, which the Parliament, the Bishopps, and many
Universities had already consented unto;

Whereunto Sir THOMAS mildely made this answer, Fairly answered with a mild and
constant refusal.
that there was no man living that would with better will do any thing,
which should be acceptable to his Highness then he, who must needs confess
his manifold bounty and liberal gifts plentifully bestovved upon him; how
be it he verily hoped that he should never have heard of this matter any more;
considering that from the beginning he had so plainly and truly declared his
mind unto his majesty; which his highness of his benign clemency had ever
seemed like a gracious prince very well to accept of, never minding, as he
said unto him, to molest him any more therevvith; since which time, said he,
I never found any further matter to move me to any change; and if I could,
said he, there is not one in the whole world, which would have been more
joyful for it.

The Deputies threats.
Many speeches having passed to and fro, on both sides, in the end, when they
saw evidently, that they could not remove him from his former determination by
no manner of persuasion, then began they more terribly to threaten him
saying: the king's majesty had given them in command expressly, if they
could by no gentle means win him, that they should in his name with great
indignation charge him, that never there was servant so villainous to his
Sovereign, nor any subject so traiterous to his prince, as he; For by his
subtle and sinister sleights he had most unnaturally procured and provoked the
king to set forth a book of the assertion of the Seven Sacraments, Sir. T.
M. accused for autour of the kings book for the Pope
and for the maintenance of the Pope's authority, so that he had caused his
Majesty to putt a sword in to the Pope's hands to fight against himself to
his great dishonor, in all the parts of Christendom.

Now when they had displayed all their malice and threats against him; my
Lord, His constant reply, and evident refutatio^
said Sir THOMAS, these terrors be frights for children, and not for me; but
to answer that, where with you chiefly burden me, I believe the king's
Highness of his honor will never lay that book to my charge; for there is
none that can in that point say more for my discharge then himself; who right
well knovveth that I never was procurer, promotour, nor counseler of his
Majesty thereunto; only, after it was finished, by his Grace's appointment,
and the consent of the makers of the same, I only sorted out, and placed in
order the principal matters therein; wherein when I had found the Popes
authority highly advanced, and with strong arguments mightily defended, I
said thus to his Grace: I must putt your Highness in remembrance of one thing,
and that is this: the Pope, as your Majesty well knovveth, Wise and wary
counsel of Sir Tho. to the King.
is a Prince, as you are, in league with all other Christian princes; it may
hereafter fall out, that your Grace and he may vary upon some points of the
league, where upon may grovve breach of am^t^e and war betvveene you both:
therefore I think it best that that place be amended, and his authority more
slenderly touched* Nay, quoth his Grace, that shall it not; we are so much
bound to the Sea of Rome, that we cannot do to much honor unto it. Then did
I further putt him in mind of our statute of Praemunire, The king
acknowledges obligation of his crown to Rome.
whereby a good part of the Pope's authority and pastoral cure was payred
away; to which his Majesty ansvvered, whatsoever impediment be to the
contrary, we will set forth that authority to the uttermost; For we have
received from that Sea our Crown Imperial; which till his Grace with his
own mouth so told me, I never heard before. Which things well considered, I
trust when his Majesty shall be truly informed thereof, and call to his
gracious remembrance my sayings and doings in that behalf, his Highness will
never speak more of it, but will clear me himself; with which words they
with great displeasure dismissed him, and parted.

8. 8. His merry heart after his examination.
Then took Sir THOMAS his boat to Chelsey; wherein by the way he was very
merry, and my uncle Rooper was not sorry to see it; hoping that he had gotten
himself discharged out of the bill. When he was landed and come home, they
walked in his gardin, where my uncle said unto him: I trust, Sir, all is well,
because you are so merry. It is so indeed, son, I thank God. Are you then,
Sir, putt out of the parliament Bill? said my uncle; by my troth, son, I never
remembered it. Never remembered that? said he, that touches you and us all so
near? I am very sorry to hear it. For I trusted all had been well, when I
saw you so merry.

Would thou know, son, why I am so joyful? A fall given to the devil.
In good Faith I rejoice that I have given the devil a foul fall; because I
have with those Lords gone so far, that without great shame I can never go
back. This was the cause of his joy, not the ridding himself of troubles, but
the confidence he had in God, that he would give him strength willingly to
suffer any thing for Christ's sake, that he might say with Christ JESUS:
Desiderio desideraui, etc. I thirst greatly to drink of the Cup of Christ's
passion; and with S. Paul. Cupio dissolui, and ess cum Christo. But these
speeches though they liked Sir THOMAS well, yet pleased they my uncle Rooper
but a little.

The Kings indignation against Sir Tho.
Now after the report made of this their examinacion of Sir THOMAS to the King,
by the Lo: Chancellor and the rest, king Henry was so highly displeased with
Sir THOMAS MORE, that he plainly told them, that he was resolutely
determined, that the foresaid parlement-bill should undoubtedly proceed
against them. Yet to this the Lo: Chancellor and the rest said: that they had
perceived that all the upper house was so powerfully bent to hear Sir THOMAS
speak in his own defense, that if he were not putt out of the Bill, it would
utterly be overthrown, and have no force against the rest. Which words
although the king heard them speak, yet needs would he have his own will
therein, adding that he would be personally present himself at the passing of
it. But the Lo; Prudent and politik advise in so bad a cause.
And ley and the rest seeing him so vehemently bent upon it, fell down upon
their knees, and besought his Majesty not to do so; considering that if he in
his own presence should be confronted and receive an overthrow, it would not
only encourage his subjects ever after to contemn him, but also redounde to
his his honor for ever throughout all Christendom; and they doubted not in
time but to find some other fitter matter against him; For in this Case of the
Nun, they said, all men accounted him so clear and innocent, that for his
behavior therein every one reckoned him rather worthy of praise, the^ of
reproof. At which words of theirs, the king was contented at their earnest
persuasion to condescende to their petition; yet was not his displeasure
against Sir THOMAS any whitt assuaged but much more incensed.

On the next morning Mr. Proceeding against Sir Tho. M. differed.
Cromevvell meeting my uncle Rooper in the parliament house, told him, that his
father was putt out of the bill; which message he sent presently to Chelsey;
and when my aunte Roper toulde her father thereof; he answered: In faith Megg,
quod differtur, non aufertur, knowing as it were the very bottom of the
King's heart, and all his Counsels, imagining that this was not any favor
done unto him, but that they might find afitter matter to work on, as it
shortly after proved.

A brave answer to a frinds fear.
Within a while after the Duke of Norfolk fell into familiar talk with Sir
THOMAS, and amongst other speeches he said unto him: By the mass, Mr. More, it
is perilous striving with princes; therefore I could wish you as a friend to
incline to the king's pleasure; for by God body, Mr. More, Indignatio
principis mors est. Is that all my Lord, said Sir THOMAS; in good faith, then
there is no more difference between your Grace and me, but that I shall dye to
day, and you to morrow. If therefore the anger of a prince causes but a
temporal death, we have greater cause to fear the eternal death, which the
king of heaven can condemn us unto, if we stick not to displease him by
pleasing an earthly king.

THE NINTH CHAPTER. THE REFVSALL OF the oath of supremacy, cause of Sir THOMAS
MORES imprisonment in the Tovver.
1. The oath of supremacy and succession refused by Sir Thomas.

2. His imprisonment, first in westminster, after in the Tovver.

3. A notable discourse betvveen him and his daughter Margarit Roper.

4. Some other passages of his in the time of his durance.

5. A pretty dialogue betvveen him and his wife the Lady More.

6. Master Rich his sophistical case put to Sir Thomas More.

7. His books, and means of vvriting taken from him.

8. His great care to give no occasion of offense to the King.

1. The oath of supremacy.
1. NOw in this parliament in the year 1534. when as Queen Elizabeth had been
borne the September before, and Q. Anne had been proclaimed Queen the 12th. of
April before that, and Q. Catherine declared the widow only of prince Arthur;
there was, I say, at this parliament an oath framed, whereby all English
subjects should both renounce the Pope's authority and swear also to the
succession of Q. Anne's children, accounting the Lady Marie illegitimate;
within a month or thereabouts after the enacting of this statute, all the
Clergy as well Bishops as priests, Sir Tho. M. cited to take it.
yet no lay man but Sir THOMAS MORE, were summoned to appear at Lambeth,
before the Lo: Archbishop Cranmer, the Lo: Chancelour Audley, Mr. Secretary
Cromevvell, the Abbott of Westminster, with others appointed Commissioners by
the King, to tender this oath unto them.

On the same morning that Sir THOMAS was to go thither, His preparation before
his going
as he was accustomed before he took any matter of importance in hand, he
went to Chelsey church, and there was Confessed and received at mass devoutly
the blessed Sacrament; and whereas ever at other times before he parted from
his wife and children, they used to bring him to his boat, and there kissing
them bad them Farewell, at this time he suffered none of them to follow him
forth of his gate, but pulled the wickett after him, and with a heavy heart, as
by his countenance appeared, he took boat with his son Rooper, and their
men; in which sitting sadly a while, as it were with Christ in his agony in
the gardin, at the last suddenly he rounded my uncle in the ear, and said: I
thank our Lord, son, the field is won* whereto my uncle answered at
randon, as not knowing then his meaning; I am very glad thereof. But one may
easily know, what he meant, and so my uncle afterward perceived, that the
burning love of God wrought in him so effectually, that it now had conquered
all carnal affections; trusting to that saying of our Savior: Behold and
have confidence; I have conquered the world.

His discreet behaueour in that cause.
How wisely he behaved himself at Lambeth, may be seen in a letter of his sent
after to my aunte Rooper, which is set out in printe in the latter end of his
English Works, with others his most singular letters, wherein he lively
describes to his children all his troubles, and shows what a heavenly
spirit he had to endure all for Gods sake, trusting still chiefly to Gods
goodness not to his own strength, the effect whereof is this: He refuses the
oath: for conscience sake.
After he was called before them, he requested of them to see the oath, which
when he had read unto himself he ansvvered, that he neither would find
fault with the oath, nor with the authors of it, nor would blame the
conscience of any man that had taken it, but for himself, he could not take
it without endangering his soul of eternal damnation; which if they doubted
of, he would swear unto them, that that was the chief cause of his
refusal; in which second oath, if they doubted to trust him, how then could
they trust him in the former? Which he having said my Lo: Chancelour replied,
that all there were heartily sorry, he should make such an answer; for they
constantly affirmed that he was the first man that denied to take it; which
would greatly aggrauate the king's displeasure against him; and forthwith they
showed him a Catalogue of the Nobility and many others, who had taken it, and
had subscribed their names thereunto.

Yet because he would not blame any man's conscience therein, All the clergy,
but Bishop fisher and D. Wilson, did take the oath.
he was commanded to walk into the gardin a while and presently all the
Clergy men, some Bishops, many Doctors, and priests were called in, who all
took it, except Bishop Fisher, and one Doctor Wilson, without any scruple,
stop or stay; and the vicar of Croyden, says Sir THOMAS, called for a cup
of beer at the butterie bar, quia erat notus Pontifici, and he drunk valde
familiariter.

Under what co^ditio^s Sir T. M offered to set down his reason of refusal.
After all these had soon dispatched the matter, for which they were sent for,
Sir THOMAS was called in again, and the names of all that had taken the oath,
were showed him; whereto for himself he answered as before; then they often
objected unto him obstinacy; because he would neither take it, nor give any
reason, why he refused it; to which he replied, that his denial only would
provoke the King's indignation sufficiently against him, and therefore he was
loath any further to aggrauate his displeasure, showing what urgent necessity
drew him unto it; howbeit, if his Majesty would testifye that his expressing
the causes, wherefore he refused it, would not provoke against him his further
anger, he would not stick to set them down in writing; and if any man could
satisfye those reasons to the content of his conscience, he would take the oath
most willingly. Sir T. M offer proceeds not of vncerta^ty: but because he was
certain his reasons were unanswerable.
Then Cranmer, my Lo: archbishop urged him, that seeing he was not certain of
his conscience, but that it was a thing certain, that he must obey his Prince,
therefore was he to reject that doubtful conscience of his, and stick to the
latter, which was undoubted. Yet if this argument were of any force, then in
all controversies of religion we may soon be resolved to to follow whatsoever
any king commands us.

And when the Abbott of Westminster had said, that he might very well suspect
his own conscience to be erroneous, All Christendom of more authority then all
england.
because he alone would seem to control all the wisdom of the whole realm,
who had made and taken it. Thereto Sir THOMAS answered; that if he alone should
stand against so worthy a kingdom, he had great cause to fear his own
conscience; but if that of his side he could produce a far greater number of
as learned men as they, he thought himself not then bound to reform his
conscience by follovving the consent of one kingdom against the general
received opinion of the whole Christian world. When Mr. Secretary seemed
greatly to pity him, Sir THOMAS added: if any hard thing happened unto
himself, he could not prevent it, without he should endanger his own soul.

The oath of succession.
Then asked they him, whether he would swear to the succession; to which he
answered, that he was willing enough to do that, if the oath were set down
in such words, as he might safely take it; Thereto my Lord Chancellor said:
see, Mr. Secretary, he will not swear to that neither, but under a certain
form of words. No truly, replied Sir THOMAS, except I find that I may swear
it without danger of perjury, and with a safe conscience.

2. Sir Tho. Mores imprisonment. First in Westminster.
2. When he had thus behaved himself, he was committed to the custody of the
abbott of Westminster for the space of four days; during which time the king
consulted with his council, what order were meet to be taken with him. And at
the first albeit they were resolved, that, he swearing an oath not to be
known, whether he had sworn to the Supremacy or no, or what he thought
thereof, he should be discharged; yet did Q. Then by Q. Annes importunity, in
the Tower.
Anne by her importunate clamours so sore exasperate the king against him, that
contrary to the king's former resolution (but indeed for the greater honor
of God, and his martyr) the king caused again the oath of Supremacy to be
ministered unto him; who although again he made thereto a discreet qualifyed
answer, nevertheless he was forthwith committed to the Tower. when as he went
thither, wearing a chain of gold about his neck, Sir Richard Winkefield, His
willingness to leese all for Christ.
who had the charge of his conueyance thither, advised him to send home his
chain to his wife or some of his children; nay Sir, said he, that I will not;
for if I were taken in the field by mine enemies, I would they should fare
somewhat the better for me; rather choosing to have it lost in the Tower, then
that king's officers should get it at home, when he should leese all; or else
esteeming nothing lost, but gained, which was lost for Christ. At his la^ding,
Mr. Lieftenant was ready to receive him at the Tower-gate; The upper garment
the porters fee.
where the porter demanded of him his upper garment; marry porter, said he,
here it is, and gave him of his cappe, saying, I am sorry it is not better for
thee. Nay Sir, quoth he, I must have your gown; which forthwith he gave him;
and then was conveyed to his lodging, His man's oath.
where he called unto him John Wood his man there appointed to attend him, who
could neither write nor read, and swear him before Mr. Liefetenant, that if he
should hear or see him at any time speak or write any thing against the
king, the Council or the State, of the realm, he should open it to Mr.
Lieutenant that he might straightwaies reveal it again to the Council. His
wonderful courage.
This was his peaceable and constant carriage in adversity, bearing all his
troubles with great alacrity, that both God was much pleased with his
willingness, and every man admired much his patience: For if adversity will
try men's wisdom and true fortitude, surely Sir THOMAS was a most wise man,
that nothing happened unto him, which he did not in a manner foresee, and truly
stout, that nothing could dau^te his courage or abate his magnanimity.

3. 3. His discourse with his daughter Margaret.
When he had remained with great chearefullnesse about a months space in the
Tower, his daughter Margaret longing sore to see her father, made earnest suit,
and at last got leave to go to him; at whose coming after they had said
together the Seven Psalms, Prevented with prayers.
and Letanies (which he used always after to say with her, when she came
thither, before he would fall in talk of any worldly matters, to the intent
he might commend all his words to almighty God's honor and glory) amongst
other speeches he said thus unto her: I believe, Megg, that they who have putt
me here, think they have done me a high displeasure; but I assure thee on my
faith, The comfort he found in his emprisonment.
mine own good daughter, that if it had not been for my wife and you my
children, whom I accounte the chief part of my charge, I would not have
failed long ere this to have closed myself in as strayte a room as this, and
strayter too; now since I am come hither without mine own deserte, I trust
that God of his goodness will discharge me of my care, and with his gracious
help supply the want of my presence amongst you; and I find no cause, I
thank God, to reckon myself here in worse case, then in mine own house; For
me thinks God by this imprisonment makes me one of his wantons, and sets
me upon his lap and dandeleth me, even as he has done all his best friends,
S. John Baptist, S. Peter, S. Paul and all his holy Apostles, martyrs, and
his most especial favorites, whose examples God make me worthy to imitate.

Five reasons used by his daughter to make him rele^t
By which discourse of his it appears most evidently, that all the troubles,
which ever happened unto him, were no painful punishments, but by his
admirable patience and alacrity most profitable exercises. My aunte Rooper
contrariewise, either because she would have more familiar access unto her
father, or else because in deed she would really persuade him to follow the
king's fancy, began to diuerte him from such zealours discourses, and
forcibly to urge him with many reasons and motives to the taking of this oath,
that they might enjoy his presence at his house at Chelsey; first, 1. Obedience
to the King.
because he was more bound to the king then any man in England, and therefore
ought the rather to obey his will in a case that was not evidently repugnant to
Gods law; 2. Authority of wise me^.
secondly, it seemed not credible, that so many wise and learned men, as were
in England, should all impugn the will of God; thirdly, 3. Only B. Fisher of
his mind.
that he should beware how he pinned his soul upon Bishopp Fisher, being one
of the meanest bishops in England; fourthly, 4. Him self a lay man.
that there were so many Bishops, Doctors and learned men that had taken it;
so that he being a lay man seemed bound, in her judgment, to accommodate his
conscience to theirs; and lastly, 5. against a parliament.
every one thought him bound in conscience to approve that, which a whole
parliament of the realm had so uniformly enacted; for which reasons many have
condemned you, Father, said she, either of inconsideration, rashness, Sir T.
M. answers.
or obstinacy. To the first Sir THOMAS answered as may appear by a letter of
my aunte Rooper's yet extant, which contains all this their discourse, All
the saints of God acknowleged the Popes supremacy
and by that letter of Sir THOMAS his written to Mr. Cromevvell, that he had
not slightly considered of this matter, but for these seven years space,
since the time that king Henry had written against Luther, he had diligently
read over all the fathers both Greek and Latin, who all from Ignatius (S.
John Euangelist's disciple) even to these late Divines, with one consent, do
agree of the Popes Supremacy, which has been also accepted of throughout all
Christendom, these thousand years and more; and he savv not how one member
of the Church, as England was, could withdraw itself from the whole body;
Why he never touched that point in his writings.
yet when he saw this controversy began to be disputed of, he always had
tempered his speeches against Tindall, that ex professo he never argued upon
that theme; but now being putt to his choice, whether he should offend his
Conscience or the king, whether he should fall into temporal danger or
eternal hazard of his soul, I cannot, says he, resolve otherwise, then any
wise man would.

To the second, he said; Motives with which many deceive their own
consciences.
he would not condemn any body for taking it; for some, says he, may do it
upon temporal hopes, or fear of great losses, for which I will never
think any has taken it; for I imagine no body is so frail and fearful as
myself; some may hope, that God will not impute it unto them for a sin,
because they do it by constrainte; some may hope to do penance presently
after; and others are of opinion that God is not offended with our mouth so
our heart be pure; but as for my part, I dare not ieoparde my self upon these
vain hopes.

To the third, he says, He knew not of B. Fishers mind.
it was altogether improbable, because he refused this oath before it was
tendered to Bishopp Fisher, or before he knew whether he would refuse it or no.

To the fourth, The Doctors of the Church greater then Doctors of England.
though there were never so many learned prelates within this realm, that
should take it, yet being many more in other parts of Christendom, which
think as I do, I am not bound to conform myself to these alone, having the
Doctors of the Church on my side, who could not be drawn neither for hopes
nor fears.

And general Councils, then a Parlame^t
Finally to the last, he wisely answered, that although to deny the decree of a
general Council were a damnable act, yet to vvithstande a statute of one
realme's making, which contradicts the constant opinion of the whole
Church, is neither a rash deed, nor an obstinate, but most laudable and
Christianlike. All which disputation my aunte Rooper set down in a letter to
her sister Alington, printed together with Sir THOMAS his letters.

His trust in Gods mercy against the fear of death.
After all this, my aunte Rooper sought to fright him, with the danger of death,
which might perhaps move him to relente, when he cannot hinder his mishappes,
but now he might prevent all, being yet not too late; whereunto how humbly he
speaks of his own frailty, and how confidently he relyeth upon Gods mercy,
may be seen at large; whose words are so humble so zealous, so godly, that
they are able to pierce any man's heart, that will read them in the latter end
of his works; they breathe out an Angelical spirit, far different from the
presumptuous speeches of either heretic or desperate man: Lord help me; A
heavenly resignation.
if God for my many and grievous sins will suffer me to be damned, his
Justice shall be pmised in me; but I hope he will procure for me that his mercy
shall have the upper hand; nothing can happen, but that which God pleases;
and what that is though it should seem evil unto us, yet it is truly the
best.

4. At another time, 4. Sir T. M. prophecieth Q. Annes death.
when he had questioned with my aunte Rooper of his wife, children, and state
of his house in his absence, he asked her at last, how Q. Anne did: In faith,
Father, said she, never better; there is nothing else in the Court but dancing
and sporting. Never better, said he; alas, Megg, alas; it pittieth me to
remember unto what misery, poor soul, she will shortly come; these dances of
hers will prove such dances, that she will spurn our heads of like foot bals;
but it will not be long ere her head will dance the like dance. And how
prophetically he spoke these words, the end of her Tragedy proved it most
true.

His pleasant answer to his keepers honest excuse.
Mr. Lieutenant coming into his chamber to visit him, rehearsed the many
benefitts and friendshipps, that he had often received from him, and therefore
that he was bound to entertain him friendly, and make him good cheer; but the
case standing as it did, he could not do it without the king's displeasure;
wherefore he hoped that he would accept of his good will, and of the poor fare
he had, whereto he answered: I verily believe you, good Mr. Lieutenant, and I
thank you most heartily for it, and assure yourselfe I do not mislike my fare;
but whenever I do, then spare not to thrust me out of your doors.

The inconsta^cy and ignorance of the oath makers.
Now whereas the oath of Supremacy and marriage was comprised in few words in
the first Statute; the Lo: Chancellor and Mr. Secretary did of their own
heads add more words unto it, to make it seem more plausible to the king's
ears; and this Oath so amplifyed they had exhibited to Sir THOMAS and others;
of which their deed Sir THOMAS said to his daughter: I may tell thee, Megg,
that they who have committed me hither, for refusing an oath not agreeable with
their own statute, are not able by their own law to instifye mine
imprisonment; wherefore it is great pity, that any Christian prince should
be drawn to follow his affections by flexible counsel, and by a weak
Clergy lacking grace; for want of which they stand weakly to their learning,
and abuse themselves with flattery so shamefully. Which words coming to the
Councell's ears, they caused another Statute, espying their oversight, to be
enacted with all these conditions.

Another time looking out of his window to behold one Mr. Reynolds a
religious, His meditation upon the martyrdom of 24. religious me^
learned and virtuous Father of Sion and three monks of the Charterhouse going
forth of the Tower to their execution (for now king Henry began to be fleshed
in blood, having putt to death the Nun and diverse others, and many after
for the Supremacy and his marriage) Sir THOMAS, as one that longed to
accompany them in that journey, said to his daughter the^ standing besides
him: Lo, do not thou see, Megg, that these blessed Fathers be now as
chearefully going to death, as if they were bridegroomes going to be married?
whereby, good daughter thou may see, what a great difference there is
between such as have in effect spent all their days in a straight, hard, and
penitential life religiously, and such as have in the world like worldly
wretches (as thy poor father has done) consumed all their time in pleasure
and ease licentiously? For God considering their long continued life in most
sore and grievous penance, will not suffer them any longer to remain in this
vale of misery, but takes them speedily hence, to the fruitio^ of his
everlasting deity, whereas thy silly father, who has most like a wicked
Caytife passed forth most sinfully the whole course of his miserable life; God
thinks him not worthy to come so soon to that eternal felicity, but
leaves him still in the world further to be plunged and turmoiled with
misery. By which most humble and heavenly meditation, we may easily guess
what a spirit of Charity he had gotten by often meditations, that every
sight brought him new matter to practice most heroical resolutions.

Within a while after this Mr. Master Secretary Cromwells visit.
Secretary coming to him from the king (who still gaped more for Sir THOMAS
his relenting, then all his other subjects) pretended much friendshipp toward
Sir THOMAS, and for his comfort told him, that the king was his good and
gracious Lord, and minded not to urge him to any matter, wherein he should
have any cause of scruple from thenceforth to trouble his conscience. As soon
as M. Secretary was gone, to express what comfort he received of his words,
he wrote with a coal, (as he did usually many other letters, because all his
Ink had been taken from him by the king's express commandment,) certain
witty verses, which are printed in his book.

All the while Sir THOMAS was in the Tower, Sir T. M. writ in the tower his
book of comfort.
he was not idle, but busied himself in writing (with a coal for the most
part) spiritual treatises, as the Three books of Comfort in Tribulation,
where, in a dialogue manner under the names of two Hungarians fearing the
Turks running over their Country, who had made great preparations therefore,
he paynteth out in lively colors both the danger that England stood then in
to be overwhelmed with heresy, and how good Catholics should prepare
themselves, to loose liberty, life and lands and whatsoever can be most dear
unto them, rather then to forsake their faith. It is a most excellent book
full of spiritual and forcible motives, expressing lively Sir THOMAS his
singular resolution to apply all those wholesome medicines to himself, now being
ready to practice in deed, whatsoever he sets down in words.

5. A pretty dialogue between Sir T. M. and his wife.
4. When he had remained a good while in the Tower, my Lady his wife obtained
leave to see him, that he might have more motives to break his conscience; who
at the first coming to him like a plain rude woman, and somewhat worldly
too, in this manner began bluntely to salute him. What the good year, Mr.
More, I marvel that you, who have been hitherto always taken for a wise man,
Her worldly objection.
will now so play the fool, as to lie here in this close filthy prison, and
be content to be shutt up thus with mice and ratts, when you might be abroad at
your liberty with the favor and good will both of the king and the Council,
if you would but do as all the bishopps and best learned of his realm have
done: and seeing you have at Chelsey a right fair house, your library, your
books, your gallerie, your gardine, your orchard and all other necessaries so
handsome about you, where you might in company of me your wife, your Children
and household be merry; I muse what a Gods name you mean here still thus
fondly to tarry. His heavenly answer.
After he had a good while heard her, he said unto her with a cheerful
countenance: I pray thee, good Mris. Alice, tell me one thing. What is that,
says she. Is not this house as near heaven as mine own? she a^swering after
her custom: Prison as near heaven as our own house.
Tillie vallie, tillie vallie: he replied: how say thou Mris. Alice, is it
not so indeed? Bone Deus man, will this gear never be left? Well then, Mris.
Alice, if it be so, I see no great cause, why I should much joy either of my
fair house, or any thing belonging thereunto, when if I should be but seven
years buried under the ground, and rise and come thither again (he might have
said but seven months) I should not fail to find some therein, that would
bid me get me out of doors, and tell me plainly, that it were none of mine;
what cause have I then to like such a house, as would so soon forgett his
Master? Again, tell me Mris. Alice, how long do you think may we live and
enjoy it. Some twenty years, said she. Truly, replied he, if you had said
some thousand years, it had been somewhat; Eternity to be preferred before
temporality.
and yet he were a very bad merchant that would putt himself in danger to
leese eternity for a thousand years; how much the rather if we are not sure
to enjoy it one day to an end. And thus her persuasions moved him but a
little, thinking of those words of Job to his wife tempting him: quasi vna ex
stultis mulieribus locuta est.

An other visit.
Not long after this came there to him at two several times the Lord
Chancellor, the Duke of Norfolk and Suffolk with Mr. Secretary, and
certain others of the Privy Council to procure him by all means and
policies they could either to confess precisely the king's Supremacy, or
plainly to deny it Here may we see that those very men, which seemed to cry
before unto him: Osanna, benedictus, qui venit in nomine Domini, say here:
toll, toll, crucifige eum: this is the fickleness of the worldly men. But
to this, as appears by the examinations set out at the end of his English
Works, they could never bring him, because he was loath to aggrauate the
king's displeasure against himself, saying only, that the Statute was like a
two-edged sword; if he should speak against it, he should procure the death
of his body; and if he should consent unto it, he should purchase the death of
his soul.

6. 6. M. Rich his sophistical case.
After all these examinations came Mr. Rich, afterward made the Lo: Rich for
his good service done in this point, then newly created the king's
Sollicitour, Sr. Richard Southvvell and one Mr. Palmer Mr. Secretarie's man,
were sent by the king to take away all his books Mr. Rich pretending to talk
friendly with Sit THOMAS said thus unto him, (as it proved after) of set
purpose. For as much as it is well known Mr. More, that you are a man both
wise, and well learned in the laws of this realm and in all other studies, I
pray you, Sir, let me be so bold as of good will to putt unto you this Case:
Admit there were an act of Parliament made, that all the realm should take me
for king, would not you, Mr. More, take me for king? Yes Sir, said Sir THOMAS
that I would; I putt the Case further, said Mr. Rich, that there were an act of
Parliament, that all the realm should take me for Pope, would not you then take
me for Pope? For answer, said Sir THOMAS to your first Case, the Parliament may
well, Mr. Rich, meddle with the state of Temporal princes; but to make answer
to your other Case; suppose the Parliament should make a law, that God should
not be God, would you then, Mr. Rich, say that God should not be God? No Sir,
said he, that would I not: For no Parliament can make such a law. No more, A
poor ground for an indictment of treason.
reported he, that Sir THOMAS should say: (but indeed he made no such
inference, as he avouched after to Mr. Rich his face) could the Parliament make
the king supreme head of the Church; and upon this only report of Mr. Rich,
Sir THOMAS was shortly after indicted of high treason upon the new Statute of
Supremacy. At this time Mr. Lieutenant reported that Mr. Rich had so vile a
smell about him, that he could scarce endure him, which Sir THOMAS also felt.

7. 7. A remarkable accident, at the taking away his books.
He had a little before this begun a divine treatise of the passion of
Christ; but when he came to expound those words of the Gospel: And they
laid hands upon him, and held him; these gentlemen took from him all his
books, Ink and paper, so that he could write no more. Which being done, His
merry jest upon it.
he applied himself wholly to meditation, keeping his chamber windows fast
shutt, and very darks: the occasion whereof Mr. Lieutenant asking him, he
answered: when all the wares are gone, the shop windows are to be shutt up.
Yet still, by stealth he would get little pieces of paper, in which he would
write diverse letters with a coal: of which my father left me one, which was
to his wife: which I accounte as a precious Jewel, afterward drawn over by
my grandfathers son with ink.

8. How great care he took not to offend the king.
8. What respect Sir THOMAS had not to displease the king in any of his deeds
or answers, may be seen by his discreet behavior in all his proceedings. For
first in his books he never handled exactly the Popes Supremacy, though
urgent occasion were given him by the books which he took in hand to confute;
secondly, whatsoever writing he had touching that Controversy, he either made
them away or burnt them, before his troubles; as also a book, which the
Bishopp of Bath had written of that matter; thirdly, he would never take upon
him to advise any man in that point, though much urged thereto by letters,
especially of Doctor Willson his fellow prisoner in the Tower, knowing
himself, being a lay man, not to be bound to persuade a Clergy man, much less
a Doctor of Divinity: Fourthly, when he was brought from the Tower to
Westminster to answer his Indictment, and thereupon arraigned at the
King's-Bench-barre, where he had often asked his father's blessing; he openly
told the Judges, that he would have a bidden in law, and demurred upon the
Indictment, but that he should have been driven thereby to confess of
himself, that he had denied the kings Supremacy, which he protested he never
had done. The substance of his indictment.
And indeed the principal fault there Laid to his charge, was that he
maliciously, traitorously, and Diabolically would not utter his mind of that
Oath. Whereto Sir THOMAS pleaded; not guilty: and reserved to himself
advantage to be taken of the body of the matter after verdict, to avoid that
Inditeme^t, adding moreover, that if only those odious terms, were taken out,
he saw nothing that could charge him of any Treason.

THE TENTH CHAPTER. THE ARRAIGNEMENT and condemnation of Sir THOMAS MORE.
1. Sir Thomas Mores arraignement at the kings-benche.

2. His worthy resolute, and discreet answer to his indictment.

3. Master Rich his false oath against Sir Thomas, clearly rejected.

4. The Jurors verdict excepted against, by Sir Thomas, with a noble
confession of ecclesiastical supremacy.

5. Sentence of condemnation pronounced against Sir Thomas.

6. He delivers fully and plainly his judgment, touching the act and oath
supremacy.

1. 1. The arraignme^t of Sir Th. More.
AFter that the king had endeavored by all means possible to get Sir THOMAS
his consent unto his laws knowing that his example would move many being so
eminent for wisdom and rare virtues, and could by no means obtain his
desire, he commanded him to be called to his Arraigneme^t at the king's bench
bar, having been a prisoner in the Tower somewhat more then a twelue-moneth,
for he was Committed about midde-Aprill, and this happened the seventh of May
1535. the year following: He went thither leaning on his staff, because he
had been much weakened by his imprisonment, his countenance cheerful and
constant; His judges.
his Judges were: Andley the Lo: Chancellor, Fitz James, the Lo: Chief
Justice, Sir John Baldvvin, Sir Richard Leister, Sir John Port, Sir John
Spilman, Sir Walter Luke, Sir Antonie Fitzherbert: where the king's Attornye
reading a long odious Indictment, containing all the crimes, His indictment.
that could be laid against any notorious malefactor, so long, as Sir THOMAS
professed, he could scarce remember the third part, that was objected against
him; but the special fault was that: of the refusal of the oath, as is
before spoken, for proof whereof his double examination in the tower was
alleged; the first, before Cromevvell, Thomas Beade, John Tregunnell, etc. To
whom he professed that he had given over to think of titles either of Popes
or Princes, although all the whole world should be given him, being fully
determined only to serve God; the second before the Lo: Chancellor, Duke of
Suffolk, Earl of Wiltshire and others, before whom he compared that Oath to
a two-edged sword; for if he should take it, his soul should be wounded; if he
refused it, his body: That he had written letters to Bishopp Fisher to
persuade him therein, because their answers were alike; upon all which it was
concluded, that Sir THOMAS was a traitor to his Prince and realm, for denying
the king's supreme Jurisdiction in ecclesiastical government, presently after
this Indictment was read, the Lo: Chancellor and the Duke of Norfolk spoke to
this effect unto him: The judges charges.
you see now how grievously you have offended his Majesty. Yet he is so
merciefull, that if you will lay away your obstinacy, and change your opinion,
we hope you may obtain pardon of his highness. Whereto the stout Champion of
Christ replied: Most noble Lords, His Christian resolution.
I have great cause to thank your Honors for this your courtesy; but I
beseech Almighty god that I may continue in the mind I am in through his
grace unto death; by which three words he exercised the acts of three virtues,
humanity, piety, and fortitude, showing himself a Civil man, a godly
Christian, and a noble Confessor of Christ's truth.

2. 2. Sir Th. his answer to the indictment.
After this he was suffered to say what he could in his own defense, and then
he began in this forte: When I think how long my accusation is, and what
heinous matters are-layed to my charge, I am stricken with fear, least my
memory and wit both, which are decayed together with the health of my
body through a long impediment contracted by my imprisonment, be not now able
to answer these things on the sudden, as I ought, and otherwise could.
After this there was brought him a chair, in which when he was sat, he
began again thus:

1. How sincerly he had always told the K. his mind touching the marriage.
There are four principal heads, if I be not deceived, of this my Indictment,
every of which I purpose, God vvilling, to answer in order; To the first
that is objected against me, to wit, that I have been an enemy of a
stubbernesse of mind to the king's second marriage; I confess that I alvvaies
told the king my opinion therein, as my conscience dictated unto me, which I
neither ever would, nor ought to have concealed; for which I am so far from
thinking myself guilty of high treason, as that of the contrary, I being
demanded my opinion by so great a prince in a matter of such importance,
whereupon the quietness of a kingdom depends, I should have basely
flattered him against mine own conscience, and not uttered the truth as I
thought, then I should vvorthily have been accounted a most wicked subject,
and a perfidious trayter to God; if herein I had offended the king, if it can
be an offense to tell one's mind plainly, when our prince asks us, The
durance of his emprisonment and afflictions.
I suppose I have been already punished enough for this falte, with most
grievous afflictions, with the loss of all my goods, and committed to
perpetual imprisonment, having been shutt up already almost these 15.
months.

My second accusation is that I have transgressed the Statute in the last
parliament, 2. Why he refused to tell his judgment of the law of supremacy.
that is to say, being a prisonner, and twice examined by the Lords of the
Council, I would not disclose unto them my opinion of a malignant,
perfidious, obstinate and traiterous mind, whether the king were supreme
head of the Church or no; Lay men not touched with that law.
but ansvvered them, that this law belonged not not to me, whether it were
just or unjust, because I did not enjoy any benefice from the church; yet I
then protested, that I never had said or done any thing against it, neither
can any one word or action of mine be produced, to make me culpable; yea this
I confess was then my speech unto their Honors, that I hereafter would
think of nothing else, but of the bitter passion of our blessed Savior and of
my passage out of this miserable world; I vvishe no harm to any; No law can
punish silence that is without malice.
and if this will not keep me alive, I desire not to live; by all which I
know, that I could not transgress any law or incur any crime of
treason; for neither this Statute nor any law in the world can punish any
man for holding his peace; for they only can punish either words or deeds, God
only being Judge of our secrett thoughts.

Of which words, because they were urgent indeed, the king's Atturnie
interrupted him and said: Whether his silence were malicious.
Although we have not one word or deed of yours to object against you, yet
have we your silence, which is an evident sign of a malicious mind, because
no dutiefull subject being lawfully asked this question, will refuse to answer.
To which Sir THOMAS replied saying: my silence is no sign of any malicious
mind, which the king himself may know by many of my dealings, neither does
it convince any man of breach of your law. For it is a maxim amongst the
Ciuilians and Canonists: Qui tacet, Obedience first to God, and then to man.
consentire videtur; he that holds his peace, seems to consent. And as for
that you say: no good subject will refuse to answer directly, I think it
verily the duty of a good subject, except he be such a subject, as will be an
evil Christian; rather to obey God then man, to have more care of offending
his Conscience, then of any other matter in the world, especially if his
Conscience procure neither heavy scandal nor sedition to his Prince or
Country, as mine has not done; for I here proteste unfeignedly, that I never
revealed it to any man living.

I now come to the third Capital matter of my Indictment, whereby I am
accused, 3. That he never counseled or induced B. Fisher.
that I maliciously attempted, traitorously endeavored and perfidiously
practiced against this Statute, as the words thereof affirm, because I
vvrote eight sundry packetts of letters, whilst I was in the Tovver, unto
Bishopp Fisher, by which I exhorted him to break the same law; and induced
him to the like obstinacy; I would have these letters produced and read
against me, which may either free me or convince me of a lie. The contents of
his letters to the said Bishop.
But because you say the Bishopp burnt them all, I will here tell the truth of
the whole matter; some were only of private matters, as about our old
friendshipp and acquaintance; one of them was in answer to his, whereby he
desired of me to know how I had ansvvered in my examinations to this Oath of
Supremacy; touching which, this only I vvrote unto him again, that I had
already settled my conscience; let him settle his to his own good liking;
and no other answer I gave him, God is my vvittnesse, as God, I hope, shall
save this my soul; and this I trust is no breach of your laws*

4. The law of supremacy like a two-edged sword.
The last objected crime is, that being examined in the tovver I did say that
this law was like a tvvo-edged svvord; for in co^senting thereto, I should
endanger my soul; in refusing it, I should leese my life: which answer,
because B. Fisher made the like, it is evidently gathered, as you say, that we
both co^spired together. Whereto I replye, that my answer there was but
Conditional, if there be danger in both either to allow or disallovve this
Statute; and therefore, like a tvvo-edged svvord, it seems a hard thing, that
it should be offered to me, that never have hitherto contradicted it either in
word or deed. These were my words. What the Bishopp ansvvered, I know
not. If his answer were like mine, it proceeded not from any Conspiracy of
ours but from the likeness of our vvitts and learning. To conclude I
unfeignedly auouche, that I never spoke word against this law to any living
man; although perhaps the king's Majesty has been told the contrary.

3. 3. M. Riches oath against Sir T. More.
To this full answer the Atturnye did not replye any more, but the word:
Malice: was in the mouth of all the Court; but noe man could produce either
word or deed to prove it; yet for all this clearing of himself, for a last
proof to the Jury that Sir THOMAS was guilty, Mr. Rich was called forth to
give evidence unto them upon his oath, which he did forthwith, affirming that
which we have spoken of before in their Communication in the Tower, against
whom, now sworn and forsworn, Sir THOMAS began in this wise to speak If I
were a man, Evidently disproued by Sir Tho. Mores oath to contrary.
my Lords, that did not regard an oath, I needed not at this time in this
place, as is well known unto every one, to stand as an accused person. And
if this oath, Mr. Rich, which you have taken be true, then I pray, that I never
see God in the face: which I would not say, were it otherwise, to gain the
whole world.

Then did he recite before all the Court the whole discourse of all their
Communication in the Tower, according as it was, truly and sincerely, adding
this; In good faith Mr. Rich, I am more sorry for your perjury, then for mine
own peril; By just exception against the witness unworthy of credit.
and know you, that neither I nor any man else to my knowledge ever took you
to be a man of such creditt, as either I or any other would vouchsafe to
communicate with you in any matter of importance. You know that I have been
acquaynted with your manner of life and conversation a long space, even from
your youth to this time; for we dwelt long together in one parish, where as
yourself can well tell (I am sorry you compelle me to speak it) you were
always esteemed very light of your tongue, a great dycer and gamester, and not
of any commendable fame either there or at your house in the Temple, where
has been your bringing up. Can it therefore seem likely to your Hon:ble
Lordshipps that in so weighty a Cause I should so unadvisedly ouershoote
myself as to trust Mr. Rich a man always reputed of me for one of so little
truth and honesty, so far above my Sovereign Lord, the king, to whom I am
so deeply indebted for his manifold favors, or any of his noble and grave
Counselors, that I would declare only to Mr. Rich the secretts of my
Conscience touching the king's Supremacy, the special point and only mark
so long sought for at my hands; which I never did nor never would reveal after
the Statute once made either to the king's highness himself or to any of his
noble Councillors, as it is well known to your Honors, who have been sent,
for no other purpose, at sundry several times from his Majesty's person to me
in the tower, I refer it to your judgments, my Lords, whether this can seem
a thing credible to any of you.

If it had been true, there had been no malice.
And if I had done, as Mr. Rich has sworn, seeing it was spoken but in
familiar secret talk, affirming nothing, but only in putting of Cases without
any unpleasing circumstances, it cannot justly be taken to be spoken
maliciously, and where there is no malice, there can be no offense. Besides
this, my Lords, I cannot think, that so many worthy Bishops, so many
honorable personages, and so many worshippfull virtuous and well learned men
as were in the Parliament assembled at the making of that law ever meant to have
any man punished by death, Malice in law.
in whom there could be found no malice, taking malitia for maleuolentia; for
if malitia be taken in a general significacion for any sin, no man there is
that can excuse himself thereof. Wherefore this very word maliciously is only
material in this Statute, as the word forcible is in the Statute of forcible
entry; for in that Case if any enter peaceably and putt his adversary out
forcibly, it is no offense; but if he enter forcibly, he shall be punished by
that Statute.

Besides all the unspeakable goodness of the king's highness toward me, The
improbability of M. Rich his deposition.
who has been so many ways my singular good Lord and gracious Sovereign,
he, I say, who has so dearly loved and trusted me, even from my first coming
into his royal service, vouchsafing to grace me with the dignity of being one
of his Privy Council, and has most liberally advanced me to offices of great
Creditt and worshipp, finally with the chief dignity of his Maiestie's high
Chancellor, the like whereof he never did to any Temporal man before, which
is the highest office in this noble realm, and next to his royal person, so
far above my meritts and qualities, honoring and exalting me of his
incomparable benignity by the space of these twenty years and above, showing
his continual favors toward me, and now at last it has pleased his
Highness at mine own humble suite to give me license with his Maiestie's
favor to bestow the residue of my life in the service of God for the better
provision of my soul, to discharge and disburthen me of that weighty
dignity, before which he had still heaped honors more and more upon me; all
this his highnesse's bounty so long and so plentiefully powered upon me, were
in my mind matter sufficient to convince this slanderous accusation so
wrongfully by this man surmized and urged against me, which I committ to your
Lordshipps honorable consideracions, whether this oath be likely or not to be
true.

M. Rich his witnesses do fail him
Mr. Rich seeing himself so evidently to be disproued, and his Creditt so
fowlely defaced, caused Sr. Richard Southvvell and Mr. Palmer, who in the time
of their communication were in the same chamber with them two, to be there
sworn, what words had passed between them. whereupon Mr. Palmer upon his
deposition said, that he was so busy in the thrusting up of Sir THOMAS's
books in to a sack, that he took no heed to their talk. Sr. Richard
Southvvell also said likewise, that because he was appointed only to look to
the conueying of the books, he gave no ear unto them. And after all this Sir
THOMAS alleged many other reasons in his own defense to the utter discreditt
of Mr. Riche's foresaid evidence, and for proof of the clearenesse of his
own Conscience.

4. 4. The Jury verdict, guilty.
But for all that ever he could do or say, the Jury of Twelve men, whose
names were Sr. Thomas Palmer, Sr. Thomas Peirt, George Louell esquier, Thomas
Burbage esquier, Geoffrey Chamber gentleman, Edward Stockmore gentleman,
William Brown gentleman, Iaspar Leake gentleman, Thomas Billington gentleman,
John Parnel gentleman, Richard Bellame gentleman, George Stoakes gentleman.
These, I say, going together and staying scarce one quarter of an hour (for
they knew what the king would have done in that Case) returned with their
verdict, Guilty.

Wherefore the Lo: Chancellor, Excepted against by Sir Thomas.
as Chief Judge in that matter, began presently to proceed to Judgment;
which Sir THOMAS hearing said unto him: My Lord; when I was toward the law,
the manner in such cases was, to ask the prisonner before sentence, whether he
could give any reason, why Judgment should not proceed against him. Upon
which words the Lo: Chancellor staying his sentence, wherein he had already
partly proceeded, asked Sir THOMAS what he was able to say to the contrary,
who forthwith made answer in this sort: The act of parliament against Gods law.
For as much as, my Lords, this Indictment is grounded upon An act of
Parliament directly repugnant to the laws of God and his holy Church the
supreme government of which or of any part thereof no Temporal person may
by any law presume to take upon him, that which rightfully belongs to the
Sea of Rome, which by special prerogative was granted by the mouth of our
Savior Christ himself to S. No lay man can be head of the church.
Peter and the Bishops of Rome his successors only; whilst he lived, and was
personally present here upon earth; it is therefore amongst Catholic
Christians insufficient in law, to charge any Christian man to obey it; And
for proof of this sound assertion, he declared amongst many reasons and sound
authorities, that like as this realm alone being but one member and a small
part of the the Church, might not make a particular law disagreing with the
general law of Christ's universal Catholic Church, no more then the City
of London being but one member in respect of the whole realm may enact a law
against an Act of Parliament, to bind thereby the whole kingdom, Against the
lawer of the realm.
So shevved he further that this law was even contrary to the laws and
statutes of this our realm not yet repealed, as they might evidently see in
Magna Charta, where it is said, that Ecclesia Anglicana libera sit, and habeat
omnia iura integra and libertates suas illaesas: And it is contrary also to
that sacred oath, Against the kings own oath.
which the king's highness himself and every other Christian prince alvvaies
receive with great sollemnitie at their Coronatio^s. Moreover he alleged that
this realm of England might worse refuse their obedience to the Sea of Rome,
Against the peculiar obligation of England to Rome.
then any child might to their natural father. For as S. Paul said to the
Corinthians: I have regenerated you, my children, in Christ, so might that
vvorthie Pope of Rome S. Gregory the Great say to us Englishmen: ye are my
Children, because I have given you everlasting salvation; For by S. Augustine
and his followers, his immediate messengers, England, first received the
Christian Faith, which is a far higher and better inheritance, then any
carnal father can leave to his children; for a son is only by generation;
we are by regeneration made the spiritual Children of Christ and the Pope.

To these words the Lo: Chancellor replied, that seeing all the Bishopps
Universities and best learned men of this realm had agreed to this Act, it was
much marueled that he alone should so stiffely stick thereat, and so
vehemently argue there against it. Against all Christendom that ever was.
To which words Sir THOMAS answered, that if the number of Bishopps and
universities were so material, as his Lordshipp seems to make it, then do
I, my Lord, see little cause why that thing in my conscience should make any
change; for I do not doubt but of the learned and virtuous men that are yet
alive, I speak not only of this realm, but of all Christendom about, there
are ten to one that are of my mind in this matter; but if I should speak of
those learned Doctors and virtuous Fathers, that are already dead, of whom
many are Saints in heaven, I am sure that there are far more, who all the
while they lived, thought in this Case, as I think now: And therefore, my
Lord, I think myself not bound to conform my conscience to the Council of
one realm against the general consent of all Christendom.

5. 5. The condemnation of S. Tho. More.
Now when Sir THOMAS had taken as many exceptions as he thought meet, for the
avoiding of this Indictment, and alleging many more substantial reasons,
then can be here set down, the Lo: Chancellor having bethought himself, and
being loath now to have the whole burden of this Condemnation to lie upon
himself, asked openly there the advice of my Lo: Chief Justice of England,
Sr. John Fitz, James, whether this Indictment were sufficient or no; By yfs,
and ands; but no proofs.
who wisely answered thus: my Lords all, by S. Gillian (for that was ever his
oath) I must needs confess that if the Act of Parliament be not unlawful,
then the Indictment is not in my conscience insufficient: An answer like that
of the Scribes and Pharisees to Pilate: If this man were not a malefactor, we
would never have delivered him unto you; And so with yfs and ands he added to
the matter a slender evasion. Upon whose words my Lo: Chancellor spoke even as
Caiphas spoke in the Jewish Council: Quid adhuc desideramus testimonium, reus
est mortis, and so presently he pronounced this sentence.

The sentence.
That he should be brought back to the Tower of London by the help of William
Bingston Sheriff, and from thence drawn on a hurdle through the City of
London to Tyburne, there to be hanged till he be half dead, after that cut
down yet alive, his prive parts cut of, his belly ripped, his bowels
burnt, and his four quarters set up over four gates of the City, his head
upon London Bridge. This was the Judgment of that worthy man, who had so well
deserved both of the king and Country; for which Paulus Iouius calls king
Henry another Phalaris.

The sentence yet was by the king's pardon changed afterward only into
Beheading, Mitigated by the king.
because he had borne the greatest office of the realm: of which mercy of the
king's, word being brought to Sir THOMAS he answered merrily: God forbid, the
king should use any more such mercy unto any of my friends; and God bless
all my posterity from such pardons.

6. 6. Sir Thomas fully delivers his judgment of the act of suoremacy to be
unlawful.
When Sir THOMAS had now fully perceived that he was called to Martyrdom,
having received sentence of death, with abolde and constante countenance he
spoke in this manner: Well seeing I am condemned, God knovves how justly, I
will freely speak for the disburthening of my Conscience, what I think of
this law; When I perceived that the king's pleasure was to sifte out, from
whence the Popes authority was derived, I confess I studied seaue^ years
together to find out the truth thereof; and I could not read in any one
Doctour's vvritings, which the Church allows, any one saying that
avouches that alay man was or could ever be the head of the Church.

To this my Lo: Chancellor again: Would you be accounted more wise and of
more sincere conscience then all the Bishopps, learned Doctors, Nobility and
Commons of this realm? Against all the church of God.
To which Sir THOMAS replied: I am able to produce against one Bishopp, which
you can bring forth of your side one hundred holy and Catholic Bishopps for
my opinion, and against one realm, the consent of all Christendom for more
then a thousand years. The Duke of Norfolk hearing this said Now, Sir THOMAS,
you show your obstinate and malicious mind. To whom Sir THOMAS said:
Consta^cy no obstinacy.
Noble Sir, not any malice or obstinacy causes me to say this, but the just
necessity of the Cause constrayneth me for the discharge of my Conscience, and
I call God to vvittnesse, no other then this has moved me hereunto.

Sir Tho. Mores blessed charity to his judges.
After this the Judges courteously offered him their favorable audience, if he
had any thing else to allege in his owns defense; who answered most mildely
and charitably: More have I not to say, my Lords, but that like as the blessed
Apostle S. Paul, as we read in the Acts of the Apostles, was present and
consenting to the death of the protomartyr S. Stephen, keeping their clothes
that sloned him to death, and yet they be now both tvvaine holy Saints in
heaven and there shall continue friends together for ever; so I verily trust,
and shall therefore heartily pray, that though your Lordshipps have been on
earth my Judges to condemnation, yet we may hereafter meet in heaven merrily
together to our everlasting salvation; and God preserve you all especially my
Sovereign Lord the king, and grant him faithful Councillors; in which
prayer he most lively imitated the example of holy S. Stephen: ne statuas
illis hoc peccatum; yea of our Savior himself speaking on the cross: Pater
dimitte illis, quia nesciunt quid faciunt. The truth of this relation from
present witnesses of credit.


All these of Sir THOMAS his speeches were faithfully delivered from Sr.
Antonie Sentleger, Richard Hayvvood, and John Web gentlemen, with others more
of good creditt who were present and heard all, which they reported to my uncle
Rooper, agreing all in one discourse.

THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER. THE HOLY DEATH and glorious martyrdom of Sir THOMAS MORE.
1. The manner how Sir Thomas was led back to the tovver from his
arraignement; where his son publicly demanded his blessing.

2. Mistress Margaret Roper, his daughters noble and laudable love to her
father Sir Thomas, now condemned.

3. How devoutly and magnanimously Sir T. M. expected his exequution.

4. Aduertisment of the day of his death sent him from the king.

5. The manner and form of his glorious death and martyrdom.

6. The kings sadness upon report of his death: withsome notable circumstances
of his burial.

7. A consideration of the last blessing which he gave to his heirs, and
their progeny after them.

8. Physiognomy of Sir Thomas More.

1. The manner of Sir Thomas his return to the tower.
1. AFter his Condemnation he was conducted from the bar to the Tower again,
an axe being carried before him, with the edge toward him, and was lead by Sr.
William Kinston a tall strong and comely gentleman, Constable of the Tower,
and his very good friend; but presently a doleful spectacle was presented to
Sir THOMAS and all the standers by; His son asks him blessing.
for his only son, my grandfather, like a dutiefull child, casts himself
at his father's feet, craving humbly his blessing, not without tears, whom
he blessed and kissed most lovingly, whose love and obedience Sir THOMAS in a
letter praised saying, that this his behavior pleased him greatly. When Sr.
Great co^stancy, courtesy, and charity.
William had conducted Sir THOMAS to the Old Swanne toward the Tower, there
he bad him Farewell with a heavy heart, the tears trickeling down his
cheeks: but Sir THOMAS with a stayed gravity seeing him sorrowful, began to
comfort him with cheerful speeches, saying: good Mr. Kinston, trouble not
your self, but be of good cheer; for I will pray for you, and my good Lady
your wife, that we may meet in heaven together, where we shall be merry for
ever and ever. Soon after this Sr. William talking hereof, to my uncle Rooper,
said: In good faith Mr. Rooper, I was ashamed of myself, that at our parting I
found my heart so weak, and his so stout, that he was feign to comfort me, who
should rather at that time have comforted him: but God and the clearenesse of
his Conscience is a comfort, which no earthly prince can give or take away.

2. 2. His childrens behavior to him.
When Sir THOMAS was come now to the Tower-wharfe his best beloved child my
aunte Rooper desirous to see her father, whom she feared she should never see
in this world after, to have his last blessing, gave there attendance to meet
him; whom as soon as she had espied, after she had received upon her knees,
his fatherly blessing, she ran hastily unto him, and without consideration
or care of herself, passing through the midst of the throng and guarde of men,
who with bills and halberds compassed him round, there openly in the sight of
them all embraced him, took him about the neck and kissed him, not able to
say any word, His daughter Matgarets laudable passion.
but: Oh my father, oh my father. He liking well her most natural and dear
affection toward him, gave her his fatherly blessing; telling her, that
whatsoever he should suffer though he were innocent, yet it was not without the
will of God, and that she knew well enough all the secretts of his heart,
counselling her to accommodate her will to Gods blessed pleasure, and bad her
be patient for her loss. She was no sooner parted from him, and gone ten
steps, when she not satisfied with the former Farewell, like one who had
forgotten herself ravished with the entire love of so worthy a father, having
neither respect to herself, nor to the press of the people about him,
suddenly turned back, and ran hastily to him, took him about the neck, and
diverse times together kissed him; whereat he spoke not a word, but carrying
still his gravity, tears fell also from his eyes; yea there were very few in
all the troop, who could refrain hereat from weeping, no not the guarde them
selves, yet at last with a full heavy heart she was severed from him: at which
time Margarett Gigs embraced him and kissed him also; yea mine Aunt's maid one
Dorothie Collie did the like; of whom he said after, it was homely, but very
lovingly done; all these and also his son my grandfather wittnessed that
they smelt a most odoriferous smell to come from him, according to that of
Isaac: Odor filij mei, sicut odor agri pleni, cui benedixit Dominus. A
ponderation upon this mutual passion of Father and daughter


Oh what a spectacle was this, to see a woman of nature shamefast, by education
modest, to express such excessive grief, as that love should make her shake
of all fear and shame; which doleful sight piercing the hearts of all
beholders, how do you think it moved her fathers? surely his affection and
forcible love would have daunted his courage, if that a divine spirit of
constancy had not inspired him to behold this most generous woman, his most
worthy daughter, endewed with all good gifts of nature, all sparks of
piety, which are wont to be most acceptable to a loving father, to press unto
him, at such a time and place, where no man could have access, hanging about
his neck, before he perceived, holding so fast by him, as she could scarce be
plucked of, not uttering any other words hut oh my father, what a sword was
this to his heart, and at last being drawn away by force, to run upon him
again without any regard either of the weapons, wherewith he was compassed,
or of the modestye becoming her own sex: what comfort did he want? what
courage did he then stand in need of? and yet he resisted all this most
courageously, remitting nothing of his steadie gravity, speaking only that
which we have recited before, and at last desiring her to pray for her fathers
soul.

This and other his heroical acts made Cardinal Poole write thus of him:
Cardinal Pooles estimatio of Sir Thomas his death


Strangers and men of other nations, that never had seen him in their lives,
received so much grief, at the hearing of his death, that reading the story
thereof, they could not refrain from weeping, bewayling an unknown person
only famous unto them for his worthy acts: Yea, says he, I cannot hold
myself from weeping as I write, though I be far of my country; I loved him
dearly, who had not so many urgent causes of his love, as many others had,
only in respect of his virtues and heroical acts, for which he was a most
necessary member of his Country; and now God is my witness, I shed for
him even whether I would or not, so many tears, that they hinder me from
writing, and often blott out the letters quite, which I am fra^ing, that I ca^
proceed no further.

3. How devoutly and cheerfully he atte^ded his exequution.
3. So remained this unconquerable Conqueror of the fllesh, the world, and the
devil, some seuenight after his Judgment, in the Tower, arming himself with
prayer, meditation, and many holy mortifications, for the day of his
Martyrdom, and walking about this chamber with a sheet about him, like a
corpse ready to be buried, and using to whippe himself very sore and long.

In this mean time and space, came to him a light headed Courtier, talking of
no serious matter, but only urging him this, that he would change his mind;
and being wearied with his importunity, he answered him, that he had changed
it, A pleasant co^ceipt upon a leight courtyer.
who presently went and told the king thereof; and being by him commanded to
know, wherein his mind was changed, Sir THOMAS rebuked him for his
lightness, in that he would tell the king every word that he spoke in ieaste,
meaning, that whereas he had purposed to be shaven, that he might seem to
others as he before was wo^t, now he was fully minded, that his beard should
take such part as his head did; which made the fellow blanke, and the king
very angry.

In this while also he wrote a most kind letter unto Mr. His last letters: To
Antony Bo^uise.
Antonie Bonuise an Italian merchant, in Latin, calling him the half of his
heart; which is to be seen amongst his other letters. Last of all; the day
before he was to suffer, being the Fifth of July, he wrote a most loving letter
with a coal, to his daughter Margarett, To his daughter Margaret
sending therein his blessing to all his children; in which he writes very
affectionately, yet he knew nothing of his death as then, in these words: I
cumber thee, daughter Margarett, very much; but I would be sorry, that it
should be any longer then to morrow: for to morrow is S. His desito die upon
the octaue of S. Peter, which was also S. Thom. of Canterburys commemoratio^.
Thomas of Canterbury's eeue, and the vtas of S. Peter; and therefore to
morrow I long to go to God; it were a day very meet and convenient. I never
liked your manner toward me better, then when you kissed me last. For I like
when daughter lie love and dear charity have noe leisure to look unto
worldly courtesy. Farevvell, dear daughter, pray for me, and I will pray
for you and all your friends, that we may meet together in heaven. Commend
me, when you can, An blessing to his heir.
to my son John; his tovvordlie carriage toward me pleased me very much.
God bless him, and his good wife and their children, Thomas, (who was my
father) and Augustine (who dyed unmarried) and all that they shall have. In
which words I hope by Gods help to have some part of his blessing. God
granted him his desires, to die the day he wished.
But oh good God! voluntate labiorum eius non fraudastieum. For upon the eaue
of his special patron, and the vtas of S. Peter for whose supremacy he
suffered martyrdom, God heard his petition, and he suffered death that very
day most courageously. Together with this letter he sent also unto her his
shirt of hair, and his whippe, as one that was loath to have the world know
that he used such austeritie. His heir-shirt, and discipline.
For he cunningly all his life time had with his mirth hidden from the eyes of
others, his severe mortifications, and now having finished; his combatt, he
sent away his weapons, not being certain of any notice of the king's mind,
but either taught by revelation, or having a firm confidence of God's great
goodness, and desiderium cordis tribuit ei Dominus.

4. 4. Aduertisment given him of the day of his death, from the K.
For upon the next morning being Tewsday the sixth of July there came unto him
Sir Thomas Pope very early in the morning, his singular good friend with a
message from the king and the Council that he was to suffer death on that day
before nine of the clock, and therefore he should forthwith prepare himself
thereto. Mr. Pope, says he, Most welcome unto him
I most heartily thank you for your good tidings: I have been much bound to the
king's highness for the benefitts and honors that he has most bountiefully
bestowed upon me, yet am I more bound to his Grace, I assure you, for putting
me here, where I have had convenient time and space to have remembrance of my
end. And, so help me God, most of all I am bound unto him, that it pleases
his majesty to rid me so shortly out of the miseries of this wretched world.
The K. willed him to use but few words at his exequution.
The king's pleasure further is, said Sir Thomas Pope, that you use not many
words at your execution. Mr. Pope, answered he, you do well to give me warning
of the king's pleasure; for otherwise I had purposed at that time somewhat to
have spoken; but no matter, wherewith his Grace or any other should have cause
to be offended; howbeit, whatsoever I intended, I am ready obediently to
conform myself to his Highnesse's command: And I beseech you, good Mr.
Pope, be a means to his Majesty, that my daughter Margarett may be at my
burial. His wife and children permitted to be at his burial.
The king is contented already, said he, that your wife, Children and other
your friends should have liberty to be present at it. Oh how much am I
beholding to his Grace, that vouchsafes to have so much consideration of my
poor burial. Then Sir Thomas Pope taking his leave of him, could not refrain
from weeping. His comfortable courage.
Which Sir THOMAS perceauing comforted him in these words: Quiett yourselfe,
Mr. Pope, and be not discomforted; for I trust we shall once see each other
full merrily, where we shall be sure to live and love together in eternal
bliss. And further to putt him out of his melancholy Sir THOMAS MORE took
his vrinall in his hand, and casting his water said merrily: I see no danger
but this man may live longer, if it had pleased the king.

After which words they parted; He put on his best apparel that day.
and when he was gone, Sir THOMAS as one that had been invited to a sollemne
bankett, changed himself into his best apparel, and putt on his silk
Chamlett gown, which his entire friend Mr. Antonie Bonuise (a noble Citizen
of the State of Luca in Italy, to whom he wrote the letter as is late spoken
of before) gave him, whilst he was in Tower. Mr. Lieutenant seeing him prepare
himself so to his death, counseled him, for his own benefitt to putt them of
again, saying, that he who should have them, was but a Iauill. What Mr.
Lieutenant, said Sir THOMAS, shall I accounte him a Iauell, who will do me
this day so singular a benefitt. Liberally to his execution.
Nay I assure you, were it cloth of gold I would think it well bestowed on
him. For S. Cyprian that famous Bishop of Carthage gave his executioner thirty
pieces of gold, because he knew he should procure unto him an unspeakable
good turn. Yet for all this Mr. Lieutenant so pressed him, that at last being
loath for friendshipps sake to deny him so small a matter, he altered his
gown, and putt on a gown of Friese; but yet he sent of that little money which
was left him, one Angel of gold to the hangman, in token that he maliced him
nothing, but rather loved him exceedingly for it.

5. The form of his death and martyrdom.
5. He was therefore brought about nine of the clock by Mr. Lieutenant out of
the Tower, his beard being long, which fashion he never had before used, his
face pale and lean, carrying in his hands a read Cross, casting his eyes
often toward heaven. As he thus passed by a good woman's house, she came forth
and offered him a cup of wine, which he refused saying: Christ at his passion
drunk no wine, but gall and vinager. There came another woman after him crying
unto him for certain books, which she had given to his custody, when he was
Lo: Persons hired to disgrace him.
Chancellor. To whom he said; Good woman, have patience but for one hower's
space, and by that time the king's Majesty will rid me or the care I have
for thy papers and all other matters whatsoever. Another woman suborned
thereto, as some think, by his adversaries to disgrace him, followed him also
crying out against him, that he had done her great injury, when he had been
Lo: A good conscience.
Chancellor: to whom he gave the answer, that he remembered her cause very
well; and that if he were now to give sentence thereof he would not alter, what
he had already done.

Last of all there came a Citizen of Winchester, He freeth one from the
te^tation of despair by his prayers.
who in times past having been greatly troubled with grievous temptations of
despair, was brought by a friend of his to Sir THOMAS MORE when he was Lo:
Chancellor; who though he could not before by any wholesome counsel alter
this his mind; yet Sir THOMAS MORE promising him to pray for him, he was for
the space of three years free from all such temptations. When Sir THOMAS was
committed, and he could get no leave to have access unto him, his temptations
grew so great that he often sought to have been the cruel murderer of
himself; but now hearing Sir THOMAS was to be executed, he came to London, and
ran to Sir THOMAS, as he was carried to execution, desiring him with great
earnestness that he would help him by his prayers: for his temptation was
come again unto him, and he could not possibly rid himself thereof; to whom
Sir THOMAS spoke thus: go and pray for me, and I will carefully pray for you.
He went away with confidence, and he never after was troubled with the like
again.

Being now brought to the scaffolde, whereo^ he was to be beheaded, it seemed
to him so weak that it was ready to fall. wherefore he said merrily to Mr.
His words at his death.
Lieutenant: I pray you, Sir, see me safe up, and for my coming down let me
shift for my self. When he began to speak a little to the people, which
were in great troops there to hear and see him, he was interrupted by the
Sheriff. Wherefore briefly he desired all the people to pray for him, and to
bear witness with him, that he there dyed in and for the faith of the holy
Catholic Church a faithful servant both of God and the king. His prayers.
Having spoken but this he kneeled down, and pronounced with great devotion
the Miserere psalm; which being ended, he chearefully rose up; and the
executioner asking him forgiveness, he kissed him saying: Words to the
executioner.
Thou will do me this day a greater benefitt then ever any mortal man can be
able to give me; pluck up thy spirit man, and be not afraid to do thy office;
my neck is very short; take heed therefore that thou strike not awry, for
saving thy honesty. He covers his eyes himself.
When the executioner would have covered his eyes, he said; I will cover them
myself; and presently he did so, with a cloth that he had brought with him
for the purpose; then laying his head upon the block, he bad the executioner
stay until he had removed aside his beard saying: that that had never
committed any treason. So with great alacrity and spiritual joy, he received
the fatal blow of the axe, which no sooner had severed the head from the
body, His happy death.
but his soul was carried by Angels into everlasting glory, where a Crown of
martyrdom was putt upon him, which can never fade nor decay. And then he found
those words true, with he had often spoken; that a man may leese his head and
have no harm, yea I say, unspeakable good and endelesse happiness.

6. The kings sadness upon the news of his exequution.
6. When news of his death was brought to the king, who was at that time
playing at tables, Anne Bullen looking on, he cast his eye upon her and said:
thou art the cause of this man's death; and presenrly leaving his play he be
took himself to his chamber, and thereupon fell into a fit of melancholy;
but whether this were from his heart, or to seem less cruel then he was
indeed, I can hardly conjecture; for on the one side the remembrance of his
faithful service so many years employed for the whole realme's benefitt,
could not but make the king sorrowful; and on the other side, the vnmerciefull
dealing with his son and heir, his small allowance to his wife, his
pittielesse cruelty against all his children, shows that he had an
implacable hatred against him, because that he would not consent unto his
lustful courses; of which we will speak more largely, The place of his
burial.
when we have discoursed of his burial. His head was putt upon Lo^don-bridge,
where as trayters heads are set up upon poles; his body was buried in the
Chapel of S. Peter, which is in the Tower in the bellfrie, or as some say, as
one enters into the vestry, near unto the body of the holy Martyr Bishopp
Fisher, who being putt to death just a fortnight before, had small respect
done unto him all this while.

But that which happened about Sir THOMAS winding sheet, A notable accide^t
about his windnig-sheet.
was reported as a miracle by my aunte Rooper, Mrs. Clement, Dorothie Colly,
Mr. Harrys his wife. Thus it was: his daughter Margarett having distributed all
her money to the poor for here father's soul, when she came to bury his
body at the tower, she had forgotten to bring a sheet; and there was not a
penny of money left amongst them all. wherefore Mris. Harrys her maid went to
the next Drapers shop, and agreing upon the price, made as though she would
look for some money in her purse, and then try whether they would trust her or
no; and she found in her purse the same sum, for which they agreed upon, not
one penny over or under; though she knew before certainly, that she had not one
Cross about her. This the same Dorothie affirmed constantly to Doctor
Stapleton, when they both lived at Doway in Flanders in Q. Elizabeth's reign.
His bloody shirt.
His shirt, wherein he suffered all embrued with his blood, was kept very
carefully by Doctor Clements wife, living also beyond the seas, as also his
shirt of hair. His head having remained some month upon London Bridge, His
head.
being to be cast into the Thames, because room should be made for diverse
others, who in plentiefull sort suffered martyrdom for the same Supremacy,
shortly after, it was bought by his daughter Margarett, least (as she stoutly
affirmed before the Council, being called before them after for the same
matter) it should be food for fishes; which she buried, where she thought
fittest; it was very well to be known, as well by the lively favor of him,
which was not all this while in any thing almost diminished; as also by reason
of one tooth, which he wanted whilst he lived; herein it was to be admired,
that the hayres of his head being almost gray before his Martyrdom, they
seemed now as it were readish or yellow.

His glorious Martyrdom, His martyrdom encouraged many other to the like.
and his death strengthened many to suffer courageously for the same cause,
because he was an eminent man both for dignity, learning, and virtues; so that
Doctor Stapleton boldly affirms, that he was wonderfully both admired and
sought to be imitated by many, as he himself had heard, when he came first to
the years of understanding and discretion. Mr. Gardener;
And truly German Gardener an excellent learned and holy lay man coming to
suffer death for the same Supremacy some eight years after avouched at his
end before all the people, that the holy simplicity of the blessed
Carthusians, the wonderful learning of the Bishopp of Rochester, and the
singular wisdom of Sir THOMAS MORE had stirred him up to that courage; but
the rest seemed not so much to be imitated of lay men, being all belonging to
the Clergy, as this famous man, Even his own Parishpriest.
being clogd with wife and children. Yea his death so wrought in the mind of
Doctor Learcke his own Parish Priest, that he following the example of his
own sheep, afterward suffered a most famous Martyrdom for the same cause of
Supremacy.

7. A consideration upon the blessing. which he gave to his heirs children.
7. Thus have we according to our poor Talent labored to set down briefly
the life and death of Sir THOMAS MORE my most famous great Grandfather; whose
prayers and intercessions I daily crave both for myself and all my little
ones, who are also part of his charge, because he gave them his blessing, in
his most affectionate letter, viz: God bless Thomas and Augustine and all that
they shall have; immediate or mediate; those which they shall have vsque ad
mill generationes. This has been our comfort, that the trial thereof has
been evidently showed in that Edward, Thomas, and Bartholomew, my father's
brethren, being borne after Sir THOMAS my great Grandfather's death, and
having not this blessing so directly, as my father and my uncle Augustine had,
they have both degenerated from that religion and those manners, which Sir
THOMAS MORE had left as it were a happy depositum unto this Children and
family. For although mine uncle Bartholomew dyed young of the plague in
London, and therefore might have by the grace of God excuse and remorse at his
end; yet Thomas the yonger's courses were far different from all the rest;
for he lived and dyed a professed minister, and for all that, very poor,
bringing up his children, whereof his eldest son is yet living, in no
commendable profession; as for mine uncle Edward, who is yet alive, although
he were endowed with excellent gifts of nature, as a ready wit, tongue at
will, and his pen glibbe; yet, God knows, he has drowned all his Talents in
self conceit, in no worthy qualities, and besides is buried alive in
obscurity, for his forsaking God, and for his base behavior. My father only
right heir of his father and Grandfather, A praise of M. John More, son and
heir to Sir Thomas.
though he not long enjoyed any of their Lands, was a lively pattern unto us
of his constant faith, his worthy and upright dealings, his true Catholic
simplicity, of whom I have a purpose to discourse unto my children more at
large, that they may know, in what hard times he lived, and how manfully he
sustained the combatt, which his father and Grandfather had left unto him as
their best inheritance; The unmerciful dealing of K. Henry with Sir Tho. Mores
heirs.
For all their land was taken away by two Acts of Parliament immediately after
Sir THOMAS's death; the one Act was to to take away the land, which the king
had given him, and this was somewhat tolerable; the other most violent and
tyrannical, to frustrate utterly a most prouide^t Conueyance, which Sir THOMAS
had made of all his lands and inheritance, which he had settled upon my father,
being a child of two years old or more, without any fraud or couin, even
when as yet no Statute had been made about the Oath of Supremacy; and
therefore before Sir THOMAS could committ such a fault against such a Statute,
much less Treason, having reserved to himself only an estate for term of his
life; yet all this was taken away contrary to all order of law, and joined to
the Crown: but that land, which he had conveyed to my uncle Rooper, and mine
aunte for term of their lives in recompense of their marriage money, that
they kept still, because that was done two days before the first Conueyance.
The lady More also, With the Lady his widow.
his wife was turned out of her house at Chelsey immediately, and all her goods
taken from her, the king allotting her of his mercy a pension of twenty
pounds by the year; a poor allowa^ce to maintain a Lo: Chancellour's Lady.
M. John More committed to the tower for denial of the oath.
My gra^dfather was committed also to the Tower, and for denying the same Oath
was condemned; yet because they had sufficiently fleeced him before, and could
now get no more by his death, he got at last his pardon and liberty, but
lived not many years after, leaving my father to the education of his mother,
called before her marriage Anne Cresacre, the last of her family, by whose
match he enjoyed after a competent living to keep him out of needy life. The
imprisonment of his daughter Margaret
Mine aunte Rooper, because she was a woman, was not so hardly dealt withal,
but only threatened very sore, both because she kept her father's head for a
relike, and that she meant to set her father's works in printe, yet for all
that after a short imprisonment she was at last sent home to her husband. Thus
all his friends felt in part the king's heavy anger for his undaunted courage.

8. The favor and Physiognomie of Sir Tho. More.
8. Sir THOMAS was of a mean stature, well proportioned, his complexion tending
to phlegmatike, his color white and pale, his hair neither black nor yellow,
but between both; his eyes gray, his countenance amiable and cheerful, his
voice neither bigg nor shrill, but speaking plainly and distinctly; it was not
very tunable, though he delighted much in music, his body reasonable
healthful; only that toward his latter end by using much writing, he
complained much of the ache of his breast. In his youth he drunk much water;
wine he only tasted of, when he pledged others; he loved salt meats,
especially powdered beef, milk, cheese, eggs and fruit; and usually he eat
of corse brown bread, which it may be he rather used to punish his taste, then
for any love he had thereto; for he was singular wise to deceive the world
with mortifications, only conte^ting himself with the knowledge which God had
of his actions: and pater eius, qui erat in abscondito, reddidit ei.

THE TWELFTH CHAPTER. THE IVDGEMENT which all nations made of the death of Sir
THOMAS MORE.
1. Cardinal Pooles lamentation upon his death.

2. Erasmus of Roterdam in Holland.

3. Doctor John Cochlaeus of Germany.

4. Paulus Iouius, Bishop, in Italy.

5. William Paradin a learned historian of France.

6. John Riuius a learned Protestant.

7. Charles the fifth, Emperor; and K. of Spanie.

8. Circunstances worth ponderacion, in his death.

9* An apology for his merry apophthegmes and pleasant conceits.

10. The first lay man martyred for defense of ecclesiastical jurisdiction.

1. 1. Cardinal Pooles lamentatio^ upon Sir Tho. Mores death.
NOw let us see, what most of the learned men of Christendom, not only
Catholics but even Protestants thought and wrote of king He^rie for Sir THOMAS
MORE's death, who were not likely, being free from all partiality, but to
speak their minds sincerely, not fearing him as his subjects, nor hating him
for any private respects. First Cardinal Pole then living in the Court of
Rome, and writing to the king in the defense of Ecclesiastical unity, says
thus by the figure of Apostraphe, of the complaints of other men: Thy father,
Oh England, thy ornament, thy defense, was brought to his death, being innocent
in thy sight; by birth* thy child; by condition, thy Citizen, but thy father
for the many benefits done unto thee; for he showed more evident signs of
his fatherly love toward thee, then ever any loving father has expressed to
his only and truly beloved child; yet in nothing has he more declared his
fatherly affection, then by his end, for that he left his life for thy sake;
especially least he should overthrow and betray thy salvation. Wherefore that
which we read in the ancient stories of Greece, as touching Socrates, whom
the Athenians condemned most unjustly to take poison, so thou have now seen
thy Socrates beheaded before thine eyes; a while after his death when in a
play there was recited out of a Tragedy these words: You have slain, you
have slain the best man of all Greece. Upon these their words every man so
lamented the death of Socrates, calling to mind that injustice, although the
Poet himself dreamed least of him, that the whole theater was filled with
nothing else, but tears and howling, for which cause the people presently
revenged his death, by punishing grievously the chief authors thereof; those
that were of them to be found, were putt to death presently, and they that
could not be found out, were banished. There was also a statua erected in his
honor, in the very markett place. If they therefore at the only hearing of
these words upon the stadge took an occasion to be revenged of that most
innocent man's slaughter; what more just cause may thou, London, have of
compassion and revenge, hearing the like words to these, not pronounced only by
any stage player at home, but by most grave and reverend men in all places of
Christendom, when as they speak most seriously, exprobrating often unto thee
thine ingratitude, and saying: You have slain, you have slain the best
English-ma^ alive. This spoke this learned and wise Cardinal, who could
testifye this of his knowledge, by reason he conuersed often with the greatest
States of Christendom, being a man famous amongst them for his nobility of
blood, for his dignity, his learning and excellent virtues, for which none
have cause to suspecte him to be partial.

2. Erasmus of Roterdam.
2. Erasmus (as may be easily guessed by the style) although he wrote it not in
his own name, because he had then many friends in England, says thus: This
is Evident, that neither MORE nor the Bishopp of Rochester erred (if they have
erred at all) of any malice they had against the king, but for sincere
conscience sake; This they persuaded themselves wholly, this was infixed in
their marrowes, that the matter which they defended, was good and lawful and
honorable for the king, and wholesome for all the whole kingdom: If it had
been lawful for them to have dissembled it, they would have done it
willingly; but they took their death most patiently and peaceably, praying to
God for the king and the whole realme's safety. In heinous offenses a simple
and pure conscience, and a mind not desirous of hurting any, but of well
deserving, excuses much the fault; besides due respect and honor has been
always had even, amongst barbarous nations, to eminent learning and excellent
virtue. The very name of a philosopher rescued Plato from being beheaded by
the Aeginetes, having transgressed the laws of their City. Diogenes without
any fear came into Philipp king of Macedonia's army, and being brought
before him for a spy of their enemies, freely reproched the king to his face
of madness, that being not content with his own kingdom, he would cast
himself into danger to leese all; yet was he sent away without any harm at
all done to him: and not only so, but had a great reward given him for no
other cause, but that he was a philosopher. And as the courtesies of Monarchs
showed unto learned men, do get them great fame, so to have used such men
hardly, has been occasion, that they have been much hated and envied. For who
does not hate Antonie, for having Cicero's head cut of? who does not detest
Nero for putting Seneca to death; yea Octauius incurred some infamy for Ouid's
bannishment amongst the Getes. When Lewis the Twelueth of France now being
peaceably settled in his kingdom, would have been divorced from his wife the
daughter of Lewis the eleauenth; this matter displeased many good men; and
amongst them John Standock and his scholar Thomas spoke of it in a sermon,
desiring the people to pray to God, that he would inspire the king to do for
the best; they were therefore accused of sedition, as men that had committed a
fault against the king's Edict; yet for all this they had no other punishment
but banishment, they kept and enjoyed all their goods; and when the
controversies were ended, they were called home again with honor; by this his
mildness the king both satisfied his Edict, and got no great hatred for
molesting two men both Divines, both accounted holy men. But every man
bewayleth the death of Sir THOMAS MORE, even they who are adversaries unto him
for religion; so great was his courtesy to all men, so great his affability,
so excellent was his nature, Whom did he ever send away from him, if he were
any thing learned, without gifts? or who was so gregt a stranger unto him,
whom he did not seek to do one good turn or other? Many are favorable
only to their own countriemen; Frenchmen to Frenchmen, Scottishmen to Scotts.
This his bounty has so engraven MORE in every man's heart, that they all
lamente his death, as the loss of their own father or brother; I myself have
seen many tears come from those men, who never saw MORE in their lives, nor
never received any benefitt from him; yea whilst I write these things tears
gushe from me, whether I will or no. How many souls has that axe wounded,
which cut of More's head, etc. And a little after pulling of his vizard, he
shows himself Erasmus in these words: Therefore when men have congratulated
me, that I had such a friend placed in such high dignities, I am wont to
answer, that I would not co^gratulate his increase of honor, before he should
command me to do so.

3. 3. Doctor Cochlaeus of Germany.
John Cochleus a most learned German and a great Divine writing against Richard
Sampson an Englishman, who defended king Henry the eight for this fact, says
much of Sir THOMAS his praises; at last speaking of his death, he says thus to
king Henrie's Councillors: What praise or honor could you get by that
cruelty, which you exercised against Sir THOMAS MORE? he was a man of most
known and laudable humanity, mild behavior, affability, bounty,
eloquence, wisdom, innocence of life, wit, learning, exceedingly beloved
and admired of all men, in dignity besides highest Judge of your Country, and
next to the king himself, famous from his youth; beneficial to his Country
for many Embassages, and now most venerable for his gray head, drawing toward
old age, who having obtained of the king an honorable dismission from his
office, lived privately at home with his wife, children and nephews, having
never committed the least offense against any, burdensome to no man, ready to
help every body, mild, and pleasant of disposition. You have given counsel
to have this so good a man drawn out of his own house, out of that sweet
Academie of learned and devout Christian Philosophers, for no other cause but
this that he would not iustifye your impieties; his guiltless Conscience
resisting it, The fear of God and his soul's health, withdrawing him from it,
Do you believe that this your wicked fact has ever pleased any one of what
nation, sex or age soever? or ever will please any? it will not surely: you
have hurt yourselues murderers and guilty of shedding most innocent blood; him
have you made most grateful to God, to the citizens of heaven and to all just
men on earth, and a most renowned Martyr of Christ, he lives and reigns
without all doubt with Almighty God; you will never be able to blott out this
fault and infamy. It is written of God: Job 12.
He knovveth the deceauer, and him that is deceived; he will bring
counselors to a foolish end, Judges into amazement, he vnlooseth the belte
of kings, and guirdeth their loins with a rope. Thus writes Cocleus.

4. Bishop Iouius of Italy.
4. Paulus Iouius Bishop of Nuceria amongst the praises of diverse learned men
writes thus of Sir THOMAS MORE'S unjust death: Fortune fickle and unconstant
after her accustomed manner and always hating virtue, if ever she played the
part of a proud and cruel dame, she has lately behaved herself most cruelly
in England under Henry the Eight, casting down before her Thomas More, whom
the king, whilst he was an excellent admirer of virtue had raised to the
highest places of honor in his realm, that fom thence, being by fatal
maddenesse changed into a beast, he might suddenly throw him down again with
great cruelty, because he would not favor the insatiable lust of that furious
tyrant, and for that he would not flatter him in his wickedness, being a man
most eminent for the accomplishment of all parts of Justice, and most Saintlie
in all kind of virtues. For when the king would be divorced from his lawful
wife, marry a Queen, and hasten to disinherite with shame his lawful daughter
( Marie) MORE LO: Chancellor was forced to appear at the Bar guilty only
for his piety and innocence, and there was condemned most wrongfully to a
most cruel and shameful death like a Traitor and murderer, so that it was
not lawful for his friends to bury the dismembered quarters of his body. But
Henry for this fact an imitatour of Phalaris shall never be able to bereave
him of perpetual fame, by this his unlawful wickedness, but that the name of
MORE shall remain constant and in honor, by his famous Vtopia. He speaks of
his death, as his sentence did purporte.

5. Now let us join to these, viz: 5. W Paradin a dearned historia^ of France.
an Englishman, a Low Country man, a German, and an Italian, a French man also
that we may see how all Nations did lamente Sir THOMAS MORE'S death, and what
creditt the king and his Council there unto, got by it. William Paradine
writes thus. The troubles and civil dissensions in England, now has lasted a
year or two, when in the month of July, John Fisher Bishopp of Rochester was
committed prisonner in London, because he seemed to disallowe the king's
divorce, and the law newly made against the Pope's Supremacy. Of that
resolution was also Sir THOMAS MORE partaker, being Sheriff of London, a man
famous for eloquence, and in all manner of learning, above the reach of all
Courtiers, most expert and skillfull; most faultlesse in all deeds. These two
purposing rather to obey God then man, and confirming their minds with
constancy, were condemned to death: from which constancy they could be drawn
neither by entreaties, hope of rewards, fair promises, nor by any threats
whatsoever, which corporal death both of the^ received most patiently and
stoutely. Finally every writer of that age lamentably deplored the unjust
death of Sir THOMAS MORE. Rouerus Pontanus a German, in his Index of memorable
matters; Laurence Surius a Low-Countrieman upon the year of 1538. John
Fontayne a Frenchman in his French history; Onuphrius Patauinus in Paulo III.
an Italian; Nicolas Cardinal of Capua in his French letters; John Secundus of
Hague, yea Carrion and Sleidan himself speak honorably of Sir THOMAS MORE's
death.

6. 6. Riuius a Protestant
But of all Protestants John Riuius speaks most passiionately of K. Henrie's
cruel fact, and Sir THOMAS's piety, in these words lib. 2. de Conscientia:
He that is in a Prince's Court, ought freely, if he be asked his Judgment,
rather to tell his mind plainly, what is most behoofefull for his Prince's
good, then to speak placentia, tickeling his ears with flattery, neither
ought he to praise things, which are not praise worthy, nor to dispraise
matters, that are worthy of high commendations; yea although he be in danger
of getting no favor by persuading it, but rather punishment and disgrace for
gainesaying men's appetites; then bringing Papinianus that great lawyer for a
lively example thereof, who chose rather to dye, then to iustifye the Emperor
Caraculla's killing of his own brother, against his own conscience, he
adds; Such a man was lately in our memory that singular and excellent for
learning and piety, yea the only ornament and glory of his Country THOMAS
MORE, who because he would not agree nor approve by his consent against his
own conscience, the new marriage of the king of England, who would needs be
divorced from his first wife; and marry another, he was first cast into
prison, one that had singularly well deserved of the king himself, and of
England; and when he constantly continued in his opinion, which he truly
thought to be most just, most lawful and godly, emboldened to defend it by a
sincere conscience, he was putt to death, by that wicked parricide, that most
hateful and cruel tyrant; a cruelty not heard of before in this our age. Oh
ingratitude and singular impiety of the king's, who could endure first to
consume and macerate with a tedious and loathsome imprisonment such a sincere
and holy good man; one that had been so careful of his glory, so studious of
his Countrie's profitt; he that had persuaded him always to all Justice and
honesty, dissuaded him from all contraries, and not convinced of any crime,
nor found in any fault, he slew him (oh miserable wickedness) not only being
innocent, but him that had deserved high rewards, and his most faithful and
trusty Counselor. Are these thy rewards, o king? is this the tankes thou
returnest him for all his trusty service and good will unto thee? does this
man reap this commodity for his most faithful acts and employments? But, oh
MORE, thou art now happy, and enioyest eternal felicity, who would leese
thy head rather then approve any thing against thine own conscience, who more
esteemest righteousness, justice and piety, then life itself; and whilst
thou art deprived of this mortal life, thou passest to the true and immortal
happiness of heaven, whilst thou art taken away from men, thou art raised up
amongst the numbers of holy Saints and Angels of bliss.

7. Last of all I will recounte, 7. Charles the Emperor.
what the good Emperor Charles the Fifth said unto Sir Thomas Eliott then the
king's Ambassador in his Court, after he had heard of Bishopp Fisher and Sir
THOMAS MORE's martyrdomes; on a time he spoke of it to Sir Thomas Eliott, who
seemed to excuse the matter by making some doubt of the report, to whom the
Emperor replied: It is too true; but if we had had two such lights in all our
kingdoms, as these men were, we could rather have chosen to have lost two of
the best and strongest towns in all our Empire, then suffer ourselves to be
deprived of them, much less to endure to have the^ wrongfully taken from us.

8. Circumstances notable in the death of Sir Tho. More.
8. And though none of these should have written any thing hereof, yet the
matter it self speaks abundantly that the cause was most unjust, the manner
thereof most infamous, and Sir THOMAS MORE's patience most admirable, his
piety, his learning, his virtues incomparable; famous was he for his noble
martyrdom; infamous king Henry for his most unjust condemnation. From the
kings part.
These things do aggravate king Henry's fault: First, that he killed him by a
law, wherein he never offended, either by word or deed, and by that which
concerned not Temporal policy, but religion only; not rebellious against the
king, but fearful to offend his own Conscience; which though he refused to
approve, yet did he never reprove it, or any other man for taking it.
Secondly, that he putt to death so rare a man, so beloved of all, so virtuous,
so wise, so courteous, and witty; which might be motives sufficient ever to
pardon a guilty offender. Thirdly, for beheading a man that had done him so
much service, yea the whole kingdom such good offices, his faithful
Counselor for twenty years together, his expert Ambassador, From Sir
Thomas Mores part.
his just Lo: Chancellor, the very flower of his realm. Many things also
do amplifye and increase Sir THOMAS MORE's immortal glory; first, in that to
all the king's demands he had behaved himself so sincerely and impartial,
opening his mind ingenuously; so that the king seemed still to like him,
though his opinion were contrary to his liking. Secondly, that he had suffered
already the loss of all his goods, being condemned to perpetual imprisonment,
and only for silence. Thirdly, in that he took all crosses for the love of God
most patiently. Fourthly, that he dyed for a controversy in religion, Nota.
never before called in question, by any precedent example: Finally, that he
only of all the Council would not flatter the king, nor keep either goods,
dignity or life, with the danger of the loss of his soul. All which prove
what a rare man, how admirable and virtuous a Christian, and how glorious a
martyr he is.

9. An apology for his merry iestes.
9. But because one bauld English Chronicler Hall terms him a scoffing man
because his writings and doings were full of witty ieastes, calling him a wise
foolish man, or a foolish wiseman, let us see by his own writings the reason,
why he has used so many pleasant tales in his books; and it is this: Even as
some sick men, says he will take no medicines, unless some pleasant thing be
putt amongst their potions, although perhaps it be somewhat hurtefull, yet the
phisician suffers them to have it. So because many will not willingly
hearken to serious and grave documents, except they be mingled with some fable
or ieaste; therefore reason wills us to do the like. And in his great
Volume page 1048. he says that ieastes are as it were sauce, whereby we are
recreated, that we may eat with more stomach; but as that were an absurd
bankett, in which there were few dishes of meat, and much variety of sawces,
and that an unpleasant one, where there were no sauce at all; even so that
life, were spent idely, wherein nothing were but mirth and iolitie; and again
that tedious and uncomfortable, wherein no pleasure or mirth were to be
expected. Which mirth as it may become all men, so most especially did it
become such a one as Sir THOMAS MORE was, being a married man, yea a Courtier,
end a companion to a Prince, A fit comparison between Catoes severity and Sir
T. M. his pleasant disposition.
of whom that may worthily be spoken, which Titus Liuius recounteth of Cato
thus: In this man there was such excellency of wit and wisdom, that he
seems to have been able to have made his fortune, in what place soever he had
been borne; he wanted no skill either for the managing of private or public
businesses; he was skillfull, both in Country and City affairs; some are
raised to honor, either because they are excellent lawyers, singularly
eloquent, or of admirable virtues; but the towardlienesse of this man's
understanding, framed him so to all matters, that you would deem him to be
borne for one alone. In the practice of virtues, you would judge him rather a
monk then a Courtier; in learning a most famous writer; if you would ask his
counsel in the law, he was most ready to advise you the best; if he were to
make an Oration, he would show marvelous eloquence; he was admirable in all
kind of learning, Latin, Greek, Profane, Divine; if there were an Embassage
to be undertook, none more dexterous to finish it; in giving sound counsel in
doubtful Cases, none more prudent: to tell the truth without fear, none more
free, as far from all flattery, as open and pleasant, full of grace in
delivering his judgment, and that, which Cato had not, therein was he most
happy. For Liuie says, that he had a sower carriadge, and a tongue immoderate
free and full of taunting: But Sir THOMAS being Christ's scholar, and not any
Stoick's, was mild and of an humble heart, neither sad, nor turbulent, and
besides of a pleasant conversation, never stern, but for righteousness; a
great contemner either of unlawful pleasures, or of inordinate riches and
glory. As Cato had much enmity with diverse Senators, so many of them on
the other side did exercise his patience, that one can hardly discern, whether
the Nobility did press him more, or he the Nobility; but on the contrary
side Sir THOMAS MORE never had any, private or public quarrel with any man;
yea no man can reckon any to have been his enemy, being borne wholly to
friendshipp and affability; wherefore being nothing inferior to Cato for
gravity, integrity, and innocence, as exact a hater of all vice, and stern
to all wicked men, as he, yet did he far excelle him in mildness,
sweetness of behavior and pleasantness of wit; yea I do him injury to
compare him to any moral philosopher whatsoever; for he was absolutely well
seen in the school of Christ, and endewed with all supernatural perfections,
a great Saint of Christ's Church and a holy Martyr of his faith, and high in
Gods favor; which was well testified in his daughter my aunte Dauney, who
being sore sick of that disease, of which she after dyed, fell into a long
trance, and afterward returning to herself, she professed with abundance of
tears, that she had felt in that while most grievous torments, and should have
suffered them for ever, had not her fathers prayers and intercession begged of
God a little longer space to repent her of her former life. It was also
credibly reported that two of John Haywood's sons Jasper and Ellis, having one
of the teeth of Sir THOMAS MORE between them, and either of them being
desirous to have it to himself, it suddenly to the admiration of both parted
in two.

10. Now to conclude, let us consider, 10. Sir Tho. More a lay man martyr for
Ecclesiastical authority, never before questioned.
why God culled out this man above all other to preserve the unity of the
Church, and to be an illustrious witness of the glorious cause, for the which
he dyed: for least men should think that if only the Clergy had dyed, they
might seem partial in their own Cause; behold God picked out this worthy
lay man, such as I suppose, all Christendom had not the like, who should be as
his especial Ambassador for the laytie, as was the famous Bishop of Rochester
for the Clergy; such were these two for learning, as they could reach into
all matters; such for excellency of wit, that no subtle dealing could
entrappe them unawares easily foreseing any danger, such for virtue and
integrity of life, that God of his great mercy would not suffer such men in
so great a point, as this, to be deceived. And let no man think this was no
Martyrdom, yea rather it was greater then that of those, who would not deny
the faith of Christ, according as that worthy Bishopp and Confessor Denis of
Alexandria says, that that Martyrdom which one suffers to preserve the
unity of the Church, is more then that which one suffers, because he will
not do sacrifice to Idols; for in this a man dies to save his own soul, in
the other he dies for the whole Church.

WHo with as curious care should vievve
Each virtue of thy breast
As was thy face perused by him
Whose pencell it expressed
With ease might see much to admire
But hard to putt in shapes
As Xeuxes could express to life
The fruitful bunche of grapes
He sooner should his own life end
Then he could finish thine
Such store of matter would arise
And gemmes of virtue shine.
There must he dravve a brovve
Of Shamefastness and Grace
Then two bright eyes, of Learning and
Religion, therevvith place
And then a nose of honor must
Be reared, breathing svveete fame.
Two rosy cheeks of Martyrdom
With lillies of good name.
A golden mouth for all men pleades
But only for himself
A chinne of Temperance closely shaued
From care of worldly pelf.
The more that he shall look into
The more he leaves vnvievved
And still more shows of noble vvorth
Wherevvith he was endevved.
But lo the fatal Axe vpreared
And at his very Chinne
By envy has a seuerance made
That More might not be seen.
MORE like a Saint lived, he most worthy Martyr ended.
MORE fit for heaven, which now he has, vvhereto his whole life tended.
OF SIR THOMAS MORE'S Books.
AMong his Latin Works are his Epigrammes, Epigrammes.
partly translated out of Greek, and partly of his own making, so wittily
devised and penned, as they may seem nothing inferior, or to yield to any
of the like kind written in our days, and perchance not unworthy to be
compared with those of like writers of old. These Epigrammes, as they are
learned and pleasant, so are they nothing biting or contumelious.

History of K. Richard the 3. in English, and Latin.
He also wrote elegantly and eloquently the life of king Richard the Third, not
only in English, which book is abroad in printe (though corrupted and
vitiated) but in Latin also not yet printed. He did not perfect nor finish that
book, neither any sithence durst take upon him to set pen to paper to
finish it, neither in the one or other tongue, all men being-deterred and driven
from that enterprise, by reason of the incomparable excellency of that work;
as all other paynters were afraid to perfect and finish the image of Venus,
painted but imperfectly, by Apelles for his excellent workemanshipp therein.
But the book that carries the price of all his other Latin books, of witty
invention, His Vtopia.
is his Vtopia; he does in it most lively and pleasantly painte forth such an
exquisite plattforme, patience and example of a singular good Commonwealth, as
to the same, neither the Lacedaemonians nor the Athenians, nor yet the best of
all other, that of the Romans, is comparable, full prettily and probably
devising the said Country to be one of the Countries of the Newfound Lands,
declared to him in Antvverpe by Hythlodius a Portingall, and one of the
sea-companions of Americus Vesputius, that first sought out and found those
lands; such an excellent and absolute an estate of a Common Wealth, that saving
the people were vn-Christened, might seem to pass any estate and Common
wealth, I will not say of the old Nations by me before mentioned, but even of
any other in our time. Many great learned men, as Budeus, Many deemed Vtopia
to be a true nation and country.
and Ioannes Paludanus, upon a fervent zeal wished, that some excellent
Divines might be sent thither to preach Christ's Gospel; yea there were here
amongst us at home sundry good men and learned Divines very desirous to take
the voyage to bring the people to the faith of Christ, whose manners they did
so well like. And this said iollie invention of Sir THOMAS MORE's seemed to
bear a good countenance of truth, not only for the creditt Sir THOMAS was of
in the world, but also for that about the same time many strange and unknown
nations and Countries were discovered, such as our forefathers never knew:
especially by the wonderful navigations of the ship called Victoria, that
sailed the world round about, whereby it was found that ships sail bottom to
bottom, and that there be Antipodes, which thing Lactantius and others do
flattely deny, laughing the^ to scorn that so did write. Again it is found,
that under the Zodiake, where Aristotle and others say that for the immoderate
and excessive heat there is no habitation, is the most temperate and pleasant
dwelling, and the most fruitful country in the world. These and other
considerations caused many wise and learned men nothing less to mistrust,
then that this had been nothing but an Inuentiue drift of Sir THOMAS MORE's
own imagination; for they took it for a very sure true story, wherein they
were deceived by Sir THOMAS as too witty, and as well learned as they were. In
this book amongst other things he has a very goodly process, how there
might be fewer thieves in England, and a marvelous opinable problem of sheep,
Sheep devour men in England.
that whereas men were wont to eat the sheep, as they do in other countries,
now contrariewise sheep in England pittiefully do deuowre men, women and
children, houses yea and towns withal. Like a most thankful man he makes
honorable mention of Cardinal Morton Archbishop of Canterbury, and Lo:
Chancellor of England, in whose house, as we have said, himself was in his
tender youth brought up, albeit it be by the dissembled name of the said
Hythlodius, whom he imagines to have been in England, and to have been
acquainted with the said Cardinal.

And as this book in his kind is singular and excellent, Sir Tho. More his
book against Luther.
containing and describing a Common wealth far passing the Commonwealths
devised and used by Lycurgus, Solon, Numa, Plato and diverse others: So wrote
he in-another kind and sort a book against Luther no less singular and
excellent. King Henry the Eight had written a notable and learned book against
Luther's book De Captiuitate Babylonica, most evidently and mightily refuting
his vile and shameful heresies against the Catholic Faith and Christ's holy
Sacraments, which did so grieve Luther to the heart, that having no good
substantial matter to help himself withal, he fell to scoffing and saucy
ieasting at the king's book in his answer for the same, using nothing
throughout the said Answer but the figure of Rhetorike called savvce-malepert,
and played the very varlett with the king. To whom Sir THOMAS MORE made reply,
and does so discipher and lay open his wily wrested handling of the Sacred
Scripture, his monstrous opinions and maniefolde contradictions, that neither
he nor any of his generation durst ever after putt pen to paper to encounter
and reioyne to his reply: in which besides the deep and profound debating of
the matter itself he so dresseth Luther with his own scoffing and ieasting
rhetoric, as he worthily deserved. But because this kind of writing (albeit
a meet Cover for such a Cup, and very necessary to repress and beat him
with his own folly, according to the Scripture: Responde stulto secundum
stultitiam eius) seemed not agreeable and correspondent to his gravity and
dignity, the book was set forth under the name of one Gulielmus Rosseus,
only, suppressing his own name.

He wrote also and printed another proper and witty treatise against a
certain Epistle of John Pomeran one of Luther's sta^dard-bearers in Germany;
His epistle against Pomeranus.
And after he was shutt up in the Tower he wrote a certain exposition in
Latin upon the Passion of Christ, not yet printed, which was not perfited, and
is so plainly and exquisitely translated into English, by his niece Mrs.
Bassett, that it may seem originally to have been penned in English by Sir
THOMAS MORE himself. Some other things he wrote also in Latin which we
pretermitt; and now we will somewhat talk of his English Works, which all
(besides the life of John Picus Earl of Mirandula, and the foresaid life of
king Richard the Third, and some other profane things) concern matters of
religion for the most part.

His English writings. The dialog. with the messinger.
The first book of this sort, was his Dialogues, made by him, when he was
Chancellor of the Duchy of Lancaster, which books occasioned him afterward
(as according to the old proverb, One business begets another) to write
diverse other things For whereas he had amongst many other matters touched and
reproved William Tindall's adulterate and vicious translation of the New
Testament, Tindall being not able to bear to see his new religion, and his
own doings withal to have so foul an overthrow, as Sir THOMAS MORE gave
him, after great deliberation with his Evangelical brethren, took in hand to
answer some part of his dialogues, especially touching his aforesaid corrupt
Translation; but what small glory he wanne thereby, is easy to be seen of
every man, that with indifferent affection will vouchsafe to read Sir THOMAS
MORE's reply, whereof we shall give you a small taste; but first we will note
unto you the integrity, sincerity and uprightness of the good and gracious
nature and disposition of the said Sir THOMAS MORE in his writing, Great
sincerity in his writing: and love of the truth.
not only against Tindall, but generally against all other Protestants. First
then it is to be considered in him, that he does not, (as many other writers
do against their adversaries, and all Protestants do against him and other
Catholics,) wreathe and wreste their words to the worst, and make their
reasons more feeble and weak, then they are; but rather enforces them to the
uttermost, and oftentimes further then the party himself does or perhaps could
do. And he was of this mind, that he said, he would not let, while he
lived, wheresoever he perceived his adversary to say well, or himself to have
said otherwise, indifferently for both to say and declare the truth. And
therefore himself after the printing, finding the books diuulged and commonly
read of the Debellation of Salem and Bizanze, albeit many had read the place
and found no fault therein; yet he finding afterward that he mistook
certain words of the Pacifyer, without any man's controulement, merely of
himself reformed them; The like he counseled his learned friends, especially
Erasmus to do, and to retract many things that he had written; whose counsel
(wherein he had a notable president in the worthy Doctor S. Augustine) if
Erasmus had followed, I trow his books would have been better liked of, by
posterity, which perchance shall be feign either utterly to abolish some of
his works, or at least to redress and reform them. Here is now further to be
considered in his writings, He writ neither for gain, nor report.
that he never hunted after praise or vain glory, nor any vile and filthy
gain, or commodity; yea, so that enuenomed and poisoned books might be once
suppressed and abolished, he wished his own on a light and fair fire. Yet did
the Evangelical brethren, after he had abandoned the office of Lo:
Chancellor, as they otherwise spread and writ many vain and false rumors
to the advancement of their new Gospel, and oppressing of the Catholic, lay to
his charge in their books, that he was partial to the Clergy, and for his
books received a great mass of money of the said Clergy. And Tindall and
diverse others of the good brethren affirmed, His poverty almost incredible in
so great a man.
that they wist well that Sir THOMAS MORE was not less worth in money, plate
and other moueables then twenty thousand marks; but it was found far
otherwise, when his house was searched, after he was committed to the Tower,
where a while he had some competent liberty, but after on a sudden he was
shutt up very close, at which time he feared there would be a new and more
narrower search in all his houses, because his mind gave him, that folks
thought he was not so poor, as it appeared in the search; but he told his
daughter Mris. Rooper that it would be but a sport to them that knew the truth
of his poverty, unless they should find out his wiue's gay gyrdle, and her
goulde beads. The like poverty of any man, that had continued so long a
Chancellor with the king, and had borne so many great offices, has, I trow,
seldom been found in any lay man before, and much less since his time. As
for his partiality to the Clergy, saving the reverence due to the sacred
Order of priests by whom we are made Christian men in Baptism, Sir Tho. M. no
partial frind to the clergy.
and by whom we receive the other holy Sacraments, there was none in him; and
that they felt, that were naught of the Clergy, that had so little favor at
his hands, that there was no man, that any meddling had with them, into whose
hands they were more loath to come, then into his; but for fees, annuities or
other rewards or any commodity that should incline him to be ever prope^se
and partial to the Clergy none ca^ be showed. First, touching any fees he
had to his living, after that he had left the Chau^cellourship, he had not one
groate granted him since he first wrote, or began to write the Dialogues, and
that was the first book, that ever he wrote in matters of religion. And as for
all the lands and fees he had besides those of the king's gift, was not, nor
should be, during his mother in lawe's life, (who lived after he relinquished
the office of Chau^cellourship) worth yearly the su^me of 100. pound and
thereof had he some by his wife, some left by his father, some he purchased,
and some fees had he of Temporal men; and so may every man soundly guess,
that he had no great part of his living of the Clergy to make him partial
to them. Now touching rewards or lucre, which rose to him by his writing, (for
which good Father Tindall said he wrote his books, and not for any affection
he bare to the Clergy, no more then Judas betrayed Christ for any favor he
bare to the Bishopps, Scribes and Pharisees) it is a most shameful lie and
slander; as may appear by his refusal of the 4. or 5. thousand pound offered
him by the Clergy.

Concerning Tindall's false translation of the New Testament; first it is to be
considered, Tindals false translation of the scripture.
as these good brethren partly deny the very Text it self, and whole books
of the sacred Scripture, as the book of the Machabies, and certain others;
and Luther S. James's Epistle also; and as they adulterate and commaculate and
corrupt the whole Corpse of the same with their wrong and false expositions
far disagreeing from the Comment of the ancient Fathers and Doctors, and
from the faith of the whole Catholic Church: So have they for the advancing
and furthering of the said heresies of a set purpose perverted and
mistranslated the said holy Scripture. And after such shameful sort, that
amongst other their mischievous practices, whereas in the Latin Epistle of S.
Paul is read in the old translation fornicarij, in the new they have
Sacerdotes, that is, priests, for the good devotion they bear to the sacred
Order of Priesthood. And their patriarche Luther with his translation of the
said holy Scripture into the Dutch tongue, has wonderfully depraved, corrupted
and defiled it, as we could by diverse proofs easily show. whom his good
scholar Tindall in his English translation does match or rather pass;
wherein he turns the word Church into Congregation, Priest into Senior or
elder; which word Congregation absolutely of itself, as Tindall does use it,
does no more signifye the Congregation of Christian men, then a fair flock of
unchristian geese, neither this word Presbyter for Elder signifies any whitt
more a Priest, then an eldersticke; many other parts of his Translation are
suitable to this; as where in spite of Christ's and his holy Saints images, he
turns Idols into Images; and for the like purpose of setting forth his
heresy, Charity into Love, Grace into Favor, Confession into repentance, and
such like; for which as also for diverse of his false, faythlesse heretical
assertions, as well that the Apostles left nothing unwritten, that is of
necessity to be believed, That the Church may err in matter of Faith, That
the Church is only of chosen elects, Touching the manner and order of our
election, Confuted learnedly by Sir Th. M.
Touching his wicked and detestable opinion against the free will of man,
Touching his fond and foolish paradoxes of the elect, though they do
abominable heinous acts, yet they do not sin, and that the elect that does
once heartily repent can sin no more; he does so substantially and pleasantly
confute and overthrow Tindall, that if these men that be enuenomed and
poisoned with these pestilent heresies, would with indifferent minds read the
said Sir THOMAS MORE's answer, there were good hope, (as it has, God be
thanked, chanced to many already) of their good and speedy recovery. The
wilfulnes of heretics
But alack the while and woe upon the subtle craft of the cursed devil, that
so blinds them, and the wretched, negligent and little regard, that these
men have to their soul's health, that can be content to suck in the deadly
poison of their souls by reading and crediting these mischievous books, and
yet will not once vouchsafe to take the wholesome depulsiue Triacle, not to be
fetched from Geneua, but even ready at home at their hands in Sir THOMAS
MORE's books against this dreadful deadly infection. But to return now
again to the said Tindall, Lord! what open, foul and shameful shifts does he
make for the defense of his wrong and pestiferous assertions, Tindal falsifieth
Sir T.M. words.
and with what spiteful shameful lies does he belie Sir THOMAS MORE, and
wretchedly depraueth his writings: not being ashamed, though his plain
manifest words lie open to the sight of all men to the contrary, to deprave
his answers. And amongst other that he should affirm, that the Church of
Christ should be before the Gospel was taught or preached; which things he
neither writes nor once thought as a most absurd untruth, but that it was, as
it is very true, before the written Gospel. And the said Sir THOMAS MORE seeing
that by Tindall's own confession the Church of God was in the world many
hundred years, before the written laws of Moses, does well thereof gather
and conclude against Tindall, that there is no cause to be yielded, but that
much more it may be so, and is so indeed; in the gracious time of our
redemption, the holy Ghost, that leads the Church from time to time into all
truth, being so plentiefully effused upon the same, The Church of Christ is and
ever has been in many things instructed necessary to be believed, that be
not in any Scripture comprised. These and many other strong reasons to prove
the common known Catholic Church, and none other to be the true Church of
Christ, And seeing we do not know the very books of Scripture, which thing
Luther himself confesses, but by the known Catholic Church, we must of
necessity take the true and found understanding of the said Scriptures, and
all our faith from the said Church, which understanding is confirmed in the
said Church from the Apostles time by infinite miracles, and with the consent
of the old Fathers and holy martyrs, with many other substantial reasons,
Tindals maze.
that Sir THOMAS MORE here lays down, have so appaled and amazed Tindall,
that he is like a man that were in an inexplicable labyrinth, whereof he can by
no means get out; And Tindall being thus brought oftentimes to a bay and
utter distress, he scuddeth in and out like a hare, that had twenty brace of
grayhounds after her, and were afeared at every foot to be snatched up. And
as Sir THOMAS MORE merrily, yet truly writes, he did wind himself so wilily
this way and that way, and so shifteth him in and out, and with his subtle
shifting so bleareth our eyes, that he makes us as blind as a catt; and so
snareth us up in his matters that we can no more see, where about he walks,
then if he went visible before us all naked in a nett, and in effect, plays
the very blind hobbe about the house; Tindals manner of ame^ding.
sometimes when there is no other shift, then Tindall is driven to excuse
himself and his doings; as he does for the word Presbyter, which he translated
first Senior, then Elder; wherein for excuse of his fault at great length he
declares 4. fair virtues in himself: malice, ignorance, error and folly.
And where that he said, he had amended his fault in translating Elder for
Senior, this is a like amending, as if he would, where a man were blind on the
one eye, amend his sight by putting out the other.

As Sir THOMAS MORE answered Tindall, Against Friar Barnes his invisible Church
touching his unknown Church, so did he also Friar Barnes; for in that point
both agreed, and would have the Church secrett and hidd in hugger mugger; but
in the mean season they handle the matter so hansomely and so artificially,
that their own reasons pluck down their unknown Church. And albeit they
would have us believe, the Church were unknown, yet do they give us tokens
and marks, whereby it should be known. And in pervsing the unknown Church,
they fall into many foolish and absurd paradoxes, that Sir THOMAS MORE
discovers. And this unknown Church would they feign rear up in the air to
pluck down the known Catholic Churh on the earth, and so leave us no Church
at all; which Church to overthrow is their final and only hope; for, that
standing, they well know, their malignant Church cannot stand, being by the
Catholic Church both now and many hundred years condemned. These and many
other things does Sir THOMAS more at large full well declare, and sets the
limping and halting goodwife of the Bottle at Bottles wharfe at disputation
with F. Barnes; in which the indifferent reader shall see, that she did not so
much limpe and halte, as did the lame and weak reasons that F. Barnes brought
against her of his unknown Church which she utterly overthrows, but yet as
they do both Tindal and Barnes agree as we have said in their secrett unknown
Church, so in other points touching their said Church, as in many other
articles besides, they do jar and disagree, and not so much the one from the
other, as from themselves, as Sir THOMAS MORE shows more at large. For, says
he, as they that would have built up the Tower of Babylon, The notable
disagreeme^t of heretics among themselves
had such a stop thrown upon them, that suddenly none knew, what another
said; surely so God upon these heretics of our time, that go busily about to
raise up to the sky, their foul filthy dunghill of all old and new false
skin king heresies gathered together against the true Catholic faith of
Christ, that himself has hitherto taught his true Catholic Church, God, I
say, when the Apostles went about to preach the Catholic faith, sent down
the holy spirit of unity, Concord, and truth unto them, with the gift of
speech and understanding, so that they understood every man, and every man
understood them, sent amongst these heretics the spirit of error and lying,
of dissension and division, the damnable devil of hell, which so entangleth
their toungs, and distempereth their brains, that they neither understand one
another, Heretical scoffing.
nor any of them well himself. The books of the said Tindall and Barnes are
more farced and stuffed with ieasting and railing, then with any good
substantial reasoning; and notwithstanding that a man would think that
Tindall were in fond scoffing peerless; yet, as Sir THOMAS MORE declares
Barnes does far ouerrunne him and oftentimes fares as if he were from a
Friar waxen a fiddler, and would at a tavern go get him a penny for a fit
of mirth; and yet sometimes will the fool demurely and holily preach, and
take so upon him, as if he were Christ's own dear Apostle, as do also the
residue of the brethren, that write, Heretics Hypocrisy.
and especially Tindall, who begins the preface of this book, with the
grace of our Lord and the light of his spirit, etc. with such glorious and
glistering salutations, as if it were S. Paul himself; but Sir THOMAS MORE
does accordingly dress him, and does discover to the world Fr. Luther's and
Tindalls, and such other false, feigned and hypocritical holiness in their so
high and sollemne salutations and preachings: and concludes not more
pleasingly, that when a man well considers these their salutations and
preachings, he may well and truly judge those their counterfitt salutations and
sermons to be a great deal worse then Friar Frapp (who first gapeth, then
blesses and looks holily, and preaches ribaudrie) was wont at Christmas to
make;

And thus will we leave Tindall and Barnes, Against the supplication of beggars.
and speak of some other of their fraternity; amongst whom there was one
that made The Supplication of Beggars, the which Sir THOMAS MORE answered very
notably before he wrote against Tindall and Barnes; this Supplication was made
by one Simon Fish, for which he became penitent, returned to the Church again,
and abiured all the whole hill of those heresies, out of the which the
fountain of his great zeal, that moved him to write, sprang.

Against John Frith.
After this Sir THOMAS MORE wrote a letter impugning the erroneous writing of
John Frith, and whereas, after he had given over the office of Lo: Chancellor,
the heretics full fast did write against him, and found many faults with him
and his writings, he made a goodly and learned Apology of some of his
answers; Sir Tho. Mores Apology
which said Apology we have already touched, especially that they laid to his
charge, the slender recital and misrehearsall of Tindall and Barne's
arguments, and shows that they were calumnious slanders; and that himself
used Tindall and Barnes after a better manner, then they used him. For Tindall
rehearses Sir THOMAS MORE's arguments in every place fayntely and falsely,
and leaves out the pith and strength, and the proof that most makes for the
purpose. How heretics recite the catholic arguments
And he fares therein, as if there were one having a day of challenge pointed,
in which he should wrestle with his adversary, would find the mean by craft
before the day to get his adversary into his own hands, and there keep him,
and dyett him with such a thin diet, that at the day he brings him forth
feeble, faint, and famished, and almost starued, and so lean that he can
scarce stand on his legs, and then is it easy, you wot well, to give the
silly fool the fall. And yet when Tindall had done all this, he took the
fall himself; but every one may see, that Sir THOMAS MORE uses not that play
with Tindall, nor with any of those folk, but rehearses their reasons to the
best, that they can make it themselves, and rather enforces, and strengthens
it, as we have before declared, rather then takes any thing therefrom;

Whereas now they found farther fault with the length of his book, Touching
the length of Sir Tho. Mores books.
he writes amongst other things that it is less marvel, that it seems to
them long and tedious to read within, whom it irketh to do so much as to
look it over without, and every way seems long to him that is weary before
he begin. But I find some men, to whom the reading of the book is so far
from being tedious, that they have read the whole book over thrice, and some
that make tables thereof for their own remembrance, and are men that have as
much wit and learning both, as the best of all this blessed Bretherhood, that
ever I heard of. And for the shortness of Barnes's book, that the adversaries
did commend, he writes that he woteth not well, whether he may call them long
or short; sometimes they be short in deed, because they would be dark, and
have their false follies pass and repasse all vnperceaued; sometimes they use
some compendiors eloquence, that they convey and couche up together with a
wonderful brevity four follies and five lies, in less then as many lines;
but yet for all this I see not in effect any men more long then they: for they
preach sometimes a very long process to a little purpose, and since that of
their whole purpose they prove never a whit at all, were their writings never
so short, yet were their work too long at last all together.

Heretics blaspheming the fathers would themselves be reverently handled.
Besides many other things, his adversaries laid to his charge, that he
handled Tindall, Frith and Barnes ungodly and with uncomely words, to which
he this answers; now when that against all the Catholic Church, both that
now is and ever has been before from the Apostles days hitherto, both
temporal and spiritual, lay men and religious, and against all that good is,
Saints, Ceremonies, Service of God, the very Sacrament of the Altar, these
blasphemous heretics in their ungracious books so villanously wrest and
rail: were not a man, ween you, far ouerseene and worthy to be accounted
discourteous, that would in writing against their heresies presume without great
reverence to rehearse their worshipful names? When heretics railings are to
be neglected.
if any of them use their words at their pleasure as evil and as villainous
as they list; against myself; I am content to forbear any requiting thereof,
and give them no worse words again, then if they spoke me fair, nor using
themselves toward all other folk, as they do, fayrer words will I not give
them, the^ if they spoke me foul; for all is one to me, or rather worse then
better; for the pleasant oil of heretics cast upon my head, can do my mind
no pleasure, but contrariewise, the worse that folk write of me for hatred
they bear to the Catholic Church and faith, the greater pleasure, Heretics
excellent railours.
as for mine own part, they do me; but surely their railing against all
other I purpose not to bear so patiently, as to forbear to let them hear
some part of like language, as they speak, how beit how to match them
therein, I neither can, though I would; but I am content, as needs I must, to
give them therein the maisterie, wherein to match them, were more rebuke then
honesty; for in their railing is all their roste meat sawced, all their pott
seasoned, and all their pie meat spiced, and all their wafers, and all their
pottage made. He adds further; if they, says he, will not be heretics alone
themselves and hold their toungs and be still, but must needs be talking, and
corrupt whom they can, let them yet at the leastwise be reasonable heretics
and honest, and write reason, and leave railing, and then let all the
brethren find fault with me; if I use them not after that in words as fair
and as mild as the matter may suffer.

About this time there was one that had made a book of the Spirituality and
the Temporaltie, The pacificatio^.
of which book the brethren made great store, and blamed Sir THOMAS MORE,
that he had not in writing used such a soft and mild manner, and such
indifferent fashion, as the same person did. Confuted by Sir T.M.
By which occasion Sir THOMAS MORE discourses upon the same book, the author
whereof pretends to make a pacification of the aforesaid division and
discord, and opens many faults and follies and false slanders against the
Clergy under a holy conclusion and pretense of pacificatio^ in the said
books. To which discourse of Sir THOMAS MORE's there came an answer afterward
in printe under the title of Salem and Bizanze; to the which Sir THOMAS MORE
replied, and so dressed this pretty proper politic pacifyer, that he had no
list, The debellation of Salem and Bizance.
nor any man for him afterward to encounter with the said Sir THOMAS MORE.
The pleasant and witty declaration of the title of the said book of Sir
THOMAS MORE's, because the book is seldom and rare to be got, I will now,
gentle reader, set before thine eyes. The said title is framed in this sort:
The debellation of Salem and Bizanze sometime two great towns, which being
under the Turk were between Easter and Michelmas last 1533. by a marvelous
metamorphose and enchantment turned into Englishmen, by the wonderful
inuentiue wit and witchcraft of Sir John Somesay the Pacifyer, and so conveyed
by him hither in a dialogue to defend his division, against Sir THOMAS MORE
knight; but now being thus between Michelmas and Allhallovvntide next ensuing
the debellation vanquished, they are fled hence, and are become two towns
again with these old names changed Salem into Jerusalem and Bizanze into
Constantinople, the one in Greece, the other in Syria, where they may see them
that will, and win them that can: and if this Pacifyer convey the^ hither
again, and ten such towns embatteled with them in Dialogues, Sir THOMAS MORE
has undertaken to putt himself in adventure against them all; but if he let
them tarry still there, he will not utterly forswear it, but he is not in the
mind, age now coming on, and he waxing unwieldy, to go thither to give the
assault to such wellwalled towns, without some such lusty company, as
shall be likely to leap vt a little more lightly. This is the title of the
aforesaid book; and that indeed Sir THOMAS MORE has most valiantly
discomfited the Pacifyer and overthrown his two great towns, may easily
appear to such as will vouchsafe to read Sir THOMAS MORE's answer; the
circumstances and particularities whereof to set down, would make our present
treatise to grow too bigg; I will only show you one declaration or two,
whereby you may make some aim to judge of the whole doing of the said
Pacifyer; if it were so, How the Pacifier reconcileth points in controversy.
says the said Sir THOMAS MORE, that one found two men standing together, and
would steppein between the^, and bear them in hand, that they were about to
fight, and would with the word, putt one party back, with his hand, and all
to buffett the other about the face, and then go forth and say, he had parted
a fray, and pacifyed the parties, some men would say as I suppose, he had as
lief his enemy were let alone with him, and thereof abide the adventure, as
have such a friend step in to part them. Another, of a man, that were angry
with his wife, and happily not without cause; now says Sir THOMAS MORE, if the
author of this book would take upon him to reconcile them, and help to make
the^ at one, and therein would use this way, that when he had them both
together before him, would tell all the faults of the wife, and set among
them, some of his own imagination, and then would go about to avoid his
words under the fair figure of Some-say; which he commonly uses in his book
of Pacifyng either by forgettfullnesse, or by the figure of plain folly; and
then would tell her husband's parte-verse too, and say unto him, that he
himself had not dealt discreetely with her, but has used to make her too
homely with him, and has suffered her to be idle, and has given way to her
being too much co^uersant amongst her gossips, and has given her ouergay
gear, and sometimes given her evil words, and called, her as I suppose,
cursed queen and shrewe, and some say that behind your back, she calls you
knave and Cuckolde, were not there a proper kind of pacification; And yet is
this the lively pattern and image of Mr. Pacifyer's doings, with the which,
and with the spinning of fine lies with flax, fetching them out of his own
body, as the spyder does the Cobbewebbe, fayning and finding fault with Sir
THOMAS MORE for these matters and words, whereof he says the plain
contrary, he had great cause to be ashamed, howbeit little shame could cleave
to his cheeks, but that he would soon shake it away, while his name was not
at his book.

We have now one book more written in matter of religion, and that is of the
B. Sir T. M. his book of the blessed Sacrament.
Sacrament of the altar, by the said Sir THOMAS MORE. We told you before of a
letter of his, wherein he impugneth the heresy of John Frith; albeit he was
prisonner in the Tower of London, he found the means to make answer to that
letter, and to convey it beyond the seas, where it was printed, and it was
afterward brought into this realm, as Sir THOMAS MORE, did certainly
understand, who minded, when the book came to his hands, to answer it; but
now in the mean season came there from beyond the seas, an Answer made to the
same letter by another, and printed without the Author's name entitled: The
Supper of the Lord. But I beshrewe, The heretics supper of the Lord, wants the
best dishe.
quoth Sir THOMAS MORE, such a Sewer, that serves in such a supper, as he
conueyeth away the best dish, and brings it not to the board, as this man
would, if he could co^ueye from the B Sacrament Christ's own flesh and blood,
and leave us no thing there in but for a memorial only bare bread and wine.
But his hands are too lumpish, and this mess too great for him, especially to
convey clean, since the man has his heart bent thereto, and therefore his eye
set thereon, to see where it becomes. This naughty namelesse author, Sir
THOMAS MORE does not only by the authority of the Sacred Scripture, and holy
ancient Fathers, but by his own reasons and textes that himself brings
forth, plainly and evidently convince.

Now have we besides, Sir Tho. Mores books written in the tower. Comfort in
tribulation. Of Communion. Of the Passion.
other excellent and fruitful books, which he made being prisoner in the
Tower: as his Three books of Comfort in Tribulation; a Treatise to receive the
B. Sacrament Sacramentally and virtually both; a treatise upon the Passion with
notable Introductions to the same, He wrote also many other godly and devout
Instructions and prayers; and surely of all the books that ever he made I
doubt whether I may prefer any of them before the said Three books of
Comfort in Tribulation, The excellencn of the booze of Comfort
yea or any other man's either heathen or Christian that have written, (as
many have) either in Greek or Latin of the said matter. And as for heathen,
I do this worthy man plain injury, and do much abase him, in matching and
comparing him with them, especially in this point: seeing that, were they
otherwise never so incomparable, they lacked yet and knew not the very
especial and principal ground of Comfort and Consolation, that is, the true
says of Christ, in whom and for whom, and whose glory we must seek and
fetch all our true comfort and consolation; well let them pass, and let us
further say, that as the said Sir THOMAS MORE notably passes many learned
Christians, that have of the same matter written before, so let us add, that
it may well be doubted, all matters considered and weighed, if any of the rest
may seem much to pass him: There is in these books so witty, pithie and
substantial matter, for the easying, and remedying, and patie^tly suffering of
all manner or griefs and sorrows, that may possibly en comber any man by
any manner or kind of tribulation, whether their tribulation proceed from
any inward temptation, or ghostly enemy, the devil, or any outward
temptation of the world, threatening to bereave or spoil us of our goods,
land, honor, liberty and freedom, by grievous and sharp imprisonment, and
finally of our life withal, by any painful, exquisite and cruel death;
against all which he does so wonderfully and effectually prepare, defend, and
arm the reader that a man cannot desire or wish any thing of any more
efficacy or importance thereunto to be added; The said book a preparation
against the persequutio^ which he did forsee.
In the which book his principal drift and scope was to stir and prepare
the minds of Englishmen manfully and courageously to withstand and not to
shrink at the imminent and open persecution, which he foresawe, and
immediately followed against the unity of the Church and the Catholic Faith
of the same; albeit full wittily and wisely, that the books might the safer
go abroad, he does not expressly meddle with those matters; and covers the
matter under the name of an Hungarian, and of the persecution of the Turks in
Hungary; and of the book translated out of the Hungarian tongue into Latin,
Written when he had no book about him.
and then into the English tongue. Of these books then there is great account
to be made, not only for the excellent matter comprised in the^, but also for
that they were made, when he was most straytely shutt up and enclosed from all
company in the Tower: in which sort I doubt whether a man shall find any
other book of like worthiness made by any Christian; and yet if any such be
found, much Surely should I yield to the same. Written with cole
But there is one thing, wherein these books of Sir THOMAS MORE by special
prerogative surmounte (or else I am deceived) all other of this sort: and that
is, that they were for the most part written with noe other pe^ne, then a
coal, as was his treatise upon the Passion; which Coppies, if some men had
them, they might and would esteem more then other books written with golden
letters, and would no less accounte of it, then S. Hierome did of certain
books of the martyr Lucian, written with his own hand, that by chance he
happened on, and esteemed them as a precious lewell. And yet is there one
thing, that in the valuing and praising of these books, he is not, as many
great Clerks are like, to a whettstone, that being blunt and dull itself,
Like Esaias his cole, that purified his lips.
whetteth other things and sharpeth them; it was not so with this man; for
though he wrote these books with a dead black coal, yet was there a most
hot burning coal, such an one, as purifyed the lips of the holy prophett
Esaias, that directed his hand with the black coal, and so enflamed and
incensed his heart withal to heaue^ward, that the good and wholesome
instructions and counsel that he gave to other men in his books, he himself
afterward in most patient suffering the loss of his goods and lands,
imprisonment and death for the defense of justice and of the Catholic Faith
experimented and worthily practiced in himself.

And these be in effect the books he made either in Latin or English; which
his English books if they had been written by him in the Latin tongue also, or
might be with the like grace, that they now have, be translated into the Latin
speech, they would surely much augmente and increase the estimation, which the
world already has in foreign Countries, of his incomparable wit, learning,
and virtue.

FINIS.

