AN ADDRESS FOR Submissive, peaceable and loving living together, Under the
Present Government, To the People of the COMMONWEALTH OF ENGLAND, However by
some called, ROYALISTS, PRESBYTERIANS, INDEPENDENTS, or FIFTH-MONARCHY MEN.

By Tho. Moore, Senior.

Hearken unto me, that God may hearken unto you.
Let every soul be subject to the Higher Powers.
As much as is possible have peace with all men.
LONDON, Printed by James Cottrel, 1656.

To all Christian Readers.
Beloved Christians,
WHereas many of the People of this Commonwealth, have testified both their
thankefulness for, and submission to the present Government, by making their
Addresses or Recognitions to his Highness the PROTECTOR, in one of which
Recognitions, my Name also is: Be not you offended, That I in testmony of
thankfulness to God for his Mercies in, and of desire of Love among our selves,
and peaceable living under the present Gov^ (...) do make my Address to you;
first giving my Ground, and then making my Request to you, with endeavor of
answering what I conceive in any of us might hinder the Acceptance. For any
weaknesses of mine in this attempt, let Charity prevail so far to pass hy, as
not to be prejudiced therewith; but that which the Scripture calls for, and I
according to the Scripture request, accept my boldness in desiring of you: I
being for peace, I pray let none of you be for war, among our selves; but each
endeavoring peace, that we may share in that Promise, Blessed are the
Peacemakers: and so fear God, and love one another, and live in peace among
our selves; and the God of peace be with us: which is the prayer of the least
and unworthiest of all God's Mercies and Servants,

Tho. Moore.
Wittlesey, April 7. 1656.
Romans 13.1,2. Let every soul be subject unto the higher Powers, for there is no
Power, but of God; the Powers that be, are ordained of God: whosoever theresore
resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that resist,
shall receive to themselves damnation.


Mankind being fallen under sin and death, and so liable to have the curse,
and death by sin deserved, executed on them all: Romans 6.23. and 5.12,18. Heb.
10.6,9. Gal. 3.13. Rom 14.9. 1 Cor. 6.19,20. 2 Cor. 5.14,15.
Jesus Christ the Son of God interposing, has for Mankind, suffered that
deserved death and curse, and so redeemed Mankind from the curse of the Law:
and by his Death, Resurrection, and Sacrifice offered to God. has bought all
Men of God, and is become their rightful Lord, inlightning and extending means
to them, that, as they are not their own, but his; so they might live to him
that is their Savior and Lord.

And God has given all Power and Authority to him, and all over into his
dispose, and made him Lord of all, and does by him uphold and order all things;
Mat. 11.27 and 28.18. Act. 2.36. and 10.36. Col. 1.17. Heb. 1.3. Psa. 75.3.
so that it is indeed by him, (whose Sacrifice was virtuous from his first
undertaking, though more manifested since acted) that the Earth is upheld, and
the Inhabitants thereof, and the Governments among them therein: Prove. 8.15,16.
By him Kings reign, and Princes decree justice; by him Princes rule, and
Nobles; all the Judges of the earth. And all that God does in ordering the Sons
of Men, he does it in and through his Son Christ, and according to the Covenant
and Agreement between the Father and the Son, in the Sons first undertaking for
Mankind; Joh. 5.19,20,22,23.
and so and in that manner, God rules for ever by his Power and his Kingdom
rules over all; Psalm. 66.7. and 103.19. Dan. 4.25,35,37. Psa. 57.6,7.
yea* even in the Kingdom of Men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and none
can stay his hand, and say unto him, What do thou? So that pr^m^tion comes
neither from the East, West, or South: but God is Judge himself, he puts
down one, and sets up another. So that it is evident, That there is no power
but of God. The words also here give us to understand it of the Dominion, Rule,
Authority, and Power of Magistrates, called here, The higher Powers, as
appointed and ordered by God that is the highest Power, his Son, the Great
King, that is higher than the highest of them; Eccles. 5.8. Rev. 11.15,17.
but does not yet take his great Power into his own hands personally to reign
with his Saints; but as he has given the earth to the children of men, so he
gives the Power of governing into the hands of some men, whom he calls
Mighty Ones, or Gods* to judge among the Sons of men for God, and to give
account to him, when Christ comes personally to judge: Psa. 115.16 Psa. ^^.
so that the Powers that in any Age or Nation are in being for Magistracy in a
Commonwealth, they are of God; and whether for mercy or chastisement, they are
ordered by God in the same love, and to the gracious end, in which he gave
Christ, and made him Lord. And here to understand Powers for Magistracy in a
Commonwealth, is evident in the Text and Verses following, and also in the
Apostles charge to Titus to teach the same Doctrine to Believers, Tit. 3.1.
To put them in mind to be subject to Principalities, to obey Magistrates. And
Peter also teaches the same, putting it as one chief part of an honest
Conversation, 1 Pet. 2.13*14,15,17.
To submit our selves to every Ordinance of man, (that is, humane Ordinance or
Creature, viz. Princes, Magistrates, Governors, which God has made
instrumentally by Men, whether by Birth, Election or Conquest) for the Lords
sake; whether it be to the King, as supreme; or unto Governors, as unto them
that are sent (or set in Office) by him, etc. and showing this to be the will
of God, etc. he joins these two together, Fear God, and honor the King; which
term by the whole context appears to be the chief Governor, and those set in
Office of Government by him: for, as History says, The chief Governors in
those days were called Emperors: but whether Emperor, King, Prince,
Protector, Judge; all are included in saying King or chief Governor,
Principalities Powers, Magistrates: and that these Powers are the Governors of
Commonwealths, is clear, in saying, The Powers that are, or are in being; and
so the like at any time in being: for as for such kind of Powers, wielded with
such a Sword in spiritual and Church-Astairs, though before Christ offered up
the acceptable Sacrifice, there was something like in the Aaronical Priesthood
(though even then the Kings were in the Throne above them) yet now Christ is
come, the High Priest after the Order of Melchizedec, remaining himself the
High Priest for ever, having in that no Successor, the Priesthood being
changed, there is of necessity a change of that Law. Heb. 7.11. Mat. 20.25 28.
Luke 22 24*27 Mat. 8*12. 2 Cor. 1.24. 1 Pet. 5.2,3. Rev. 13.1,2*8. and 11.1,2.
And Christ has forbidden it to all Church Officers, in forbidding his
Disciples and Apostles the having and using any such Dominion, Lordship and
Titles among them, or allowing and giving it unto others. And the Apostles
according to the command of Christ have disclaimed all such Lordly power, and
charged all Church Officers to do the same; nor could any Church. Officers have
and exercise such a Power, till the Dragon gave his Seat, Power, and Authority
to the Beast: of which Power is not here meant, and so I have no occasion in
this business to treat of it; but of the Powers, or Governors of the
Commonwealth, of which the Apostle directly speaks, and so every of them,
that in any Age or Nation are in being; that which is in being, possessed of the
Power, it is ordered of God, he in his Wisdom and Goodness sees, and so
orders it, as that which for accomplishing his ends, is fitted for us: and
his will and Ordinance is, That we acknowledge his Wisdom, Sovereignty and
Goodness in submitting to live peaceably and obedently under the same. And he
that resists the Power, resists the Ordinance of God: whence every Soul,
even of Believers, ought to be subject to the Power in being; and so the
Apostles, Prophets, Evangelists and Elders, were; and the Church with all her
Officers, are to be subject to the Principalities and Powers that are in being,
and so to obey Magistrates.

As for fleshly Objections, under pretense of Spirit, by some Believers, that
which is said of the lowest in Power, being much rather to be heeded in respect
of them that are higher in Power; we have answer given to them in Scripture.

If any say, 1 Pet. 2.18. Col. 3.22. 1 Timothy 6.1.
I am a Believer and made free by Christ, a Son of God; and he that sits in the
Chair of Government, is an unbeliever, and so in bondage to Satan; it is not
meet for him to govern me, or for me to be subject to him:

It is answered, Gal. 5.13. Job 4.17.
The Liberty given us, is not for an occasion to the flesh, and shall mortal
man be more pure than his Maker? it is God that in his Wisdom and for his Ends
has set him in place of Government, and thee in place of Subjection: it is
therefore right, for all his works are right; and thou that hate right, art
of all others, most unfit to govern. Job 34.12.13-17.19-23.42*32.
Therefore if thou countest God, that set him in place of Government, wise,
righteous, holy and good; count him God has set as Governor above thee,
worthy all that esteem, honor, reverence and submission that by Gods command
is due to the Governor.

But if thou have not this to object, and the folly in thy deceitful heart move
thee to a contrary reply; saying, I am a Believer, and he in place of
Government is a Believer also; we are both free in Christ, and there is no
difference of bond or free in Christ; we partake of the same Grace, and
privileges, and hope; we have one Father, one elder Brother, and we are
Brethren; why should one Brother rule over another? He takes too much upon him:

Thou art answered, 1 Timothy 6.2*3,4. Ephesians. 6.5. Col. 3.22 Philem. 12.13,14,15,16.
He rules not over thy Faith and Conscience, but over thy Body and outward
affairs; and to help thy understanding, a distinction is afforded thee, between
In the Lord, and In the Flesh; and after the Spirit, and according to the
Flesh: that we may not confound Adam and Christ, the natural Man and the
spiritual Man, the Commonwealth and Christ, Nature and Grace, in one: and so if
those Sons of Adam, that be our Governors, be also Believers; if the
Governors of the Commonwealth be Members of the Church; if he that sits as Man
in place of Government, be also in the Faith, and so a Brother; then Believers
are to esteem, love, submit and obey so much the more cheerfully, and the more
readily, because they are faithful and beloved: so that if Governors, possessed
of the Power of Magistracy, be Heathen or Infidels, yet the Power of Magistracy
they are possessed of is of God, and ordered by God. If the Magistrates be
Believers, and so Christians and Brethren, their Christanity annibilates their
Magistracy, no more then Grace destroys Nature, or the Church the
Commonwealth; but helps for the good and profitable exercise thereof; and so
without any question asking for Conscience sake, about our submission to
Principalities and Powers, and obeying Magistrates What Religion do they most
affect? how are they qualified or disposed? how came they to be possessed of the
Power? by Birth and Inheritance, or by Election of the people, or by Conquest?
If God in his providence has ordered that Power, and possessed such of that
Power, we are to look at the ordering hand of God; and knowing him to be good,
to believe him to do good: and so, whether he has ordered them for mercy or
chastisement, yet to submit to, and not to resist the Powers; but in all their
commands, that we may do, though to our own damage, obey them. In things before
commanded by God, obey them more readily and cheerfully: if any of their
commands be to deny or dis-obey God, yet resist not the Power, but refuse doing
the Command, and submit to suffer the punishment they will inflict; and this
with patience before the Lord, that comes so to try us: and so if we will not
lesist, but please God, it behooves us all, every man, and specially Believers,
so to be subject to the Higher Powers, as is fully and plainly declared and
commanded, in places alleged, Romans 13.1-7. Tit. 3.1,2. 1 Pet. 2.13,14-17. And
many Evidences. Demonstrations, Reasons and Motives might be given, to move and
press as hereunto; but that Explication would be tedious: as to say,

1. Jer. 27.5,6,7,8.
The undoubted Sovereignty, Right and Authority of the Lord, the earth being
his, and they that dwell in it; he having made all, and being the upholder of
all, having also bought all men to be in his dispose, so as he may put them
under what Governors he please: and those that will not serve those under
whose Government he puts them woe will be unto them.

2. Deuteronomy. 2.5,9 19-23. Josh 12. Ezekiel. 29.19.
As he has Right, Authority, and Wisdom, Power and Godness, to use it; so he
does rule for ever by his Power, and has according to his will given the
several parts of the earth, first to one, then to another to possess, and
govern; Dan. 2.37. 2 Chronicles. 36.33.
and given Kingdoms and Commonwealths, according to his will, as in Scripture
we may read at large.

3. Isa. 3.4,5,6. and 19.11,13. Deuteronomy. 28 48. Judge. 17 6. and 18.1. and 21.25.
Heb 1.14. Jer. 3.15 Pro. 29.2 and 11.10,11.
When he is so provoked by a people, that in displeasure he will chastise them
though for gracious ends; then he will give children or fools to be their
Princes or Rulers, or their enemies to rule over them; or, which is the
heaviest of all, deprive them of having any King or Ruler, when every one will
do his own will, and one man devour another: and when his face shines upon a
people, to make the Righteous rejoice, he gives them Shepherds according to his
heart, and sets the Righteous in Authority.

4. Psa. 135.6. Eccles. 3.14 Job 23.13,14 and 34.29.
What he will do, he does in this business, and none can withstand him, so as
to add to, or take from this business he does; but whether for mercy or
chastisement, such as he puts in power shall be in power for the time appointed
by him.

5. Psa. 82.1-7 and 33.10,11 Romans 13.3,4. Prove. 19.21. and 26.10 and 29.26. and
16.10.
As he does all things rightly, so when he puts men in power, he gives them
a charge, and they shall give account to him; and however they intend or
proceed, yet they must give account to him; and he orders all their
Judgments in the issue not to fulfill any of their vain counsels, but his
counsel and ends; and though many seek the Rulers favor, yet every man's
Judgment shall be as the Lord orders it, who often puts a Divine Sentence in
the Rulers Lips, that the Judgment of the Lord is pronounced; and that surely
to be submitted to, as from the Lord.

6. Act. 4.26-28. Psa. 2.1-6. Genesis 45.4,5. and 50.20. 2 Samuel 29.5,8. and
30.1-19. Dan. 3.13-30. Rev. 7.14,15.
In those things wherein men deal and judge most unrighteously, and the
innocent undergo the greatest injury, yet God has his ordering hand therein,
to bring light out of darkness, and makes it in the issue, to come forth to the
greatest good of the sufferers, and of others also that love the Lord, which
will support all that take all out of the hands of God in the believing
acknowledgement of his Government, as we may see, not only in the examples of
Christ, but of Joseph, and David, and others. And to move us to this submission.

7. Luke 22.27 Mat. 17.25-27.
We have besides the command of God, the example of our Lord and Savior;
though Lord of all, yet as he was Man, and Minister of the Gospel here on
Earth, he behaved himself as a Servant, even among his Disciples; and both
paid Tribute him self to Caesar, and counseled others so to do; Mat. 22.21
Joh. 18.11. and 19.11.
and taking all his sufferings out of his Father's hands, he resisted not the
sentence of Pilate; but acknowledged, That he could have had no power against
him, if it had not been given him from above. Therefore whoever will
acknowledge the Sovereignty, Wisdom, Goodness, and Power of God, in his ruling
by his Power, and disposing Power and Government to the Sons of Men, must in
that acknowledgement, even for the Lord's sake, and the glory of his Name, be
subject to such Government, as he orders to be over us. And this is to do it
in singleness of heart, as to the Lord: and he that does not on this Ground
submit to the Powers that are in being, will find occcasions of discontent, to
keep him from a single-hearted Submission, if the Powers he desires were
granted to him: so that even then he will be a Murmurer and malcontent.
Therefore let us on this ground submit.

And if any enquire, What is that obedience and submission we are on this
ground to render to Magistrates:

I answer, Even the same which the Scripture on this ground requires us; which
appears to be,

1. 1 Pet. 2.17. 1 Timothy 6.1. Psa. 119.68. Ecc. 10.20. Exo. 22.28
That we do honor them, in reverence and estimate of the Power ordered to
them, as that which is right, and best for us in that frame we are found in;
and so beware we curse them not in our hearts, nor revile them with our tongue,
or so endeavor to render the Magistracy infamous.

2. Romans 13.1,2*5.
That we resist not the Power by rising up or rebelling against it; but if its
injunctions be for such things, as in conscience to God we cannot do, then
submit to endure their punishment, if they will inflict it.

3. Prove. 24.21,22.
That we join not with such, as are not content with the Powers God orders;
and if afflicted, will not with patience wait till God orders it to be more
merciful; but of themselves will be seeking and endeavoring to change: meddle
not with such, have no confederacy with them.

4. Romans 13.6,7.
That we yield unto them that Tribute, that Custom, and that Fear that is due
unto them.

5. Tit. 3.1.
That we be ready to every good Work required by them, for the Preservation,
Safety, and Commodity of the Commonwealth.

6. Tit. 2.2,3.
That we show all meekness and patience toward a (...) though many of the
Assessors and Collectors, for those works should behave themselves churlishly
and foolishly.

7. Romans 12.17,18,19. and 13.3,4,8,9,10. 1 Pet. 2.12,13.
That we defraud or injure no man, nor revenge our own cause; but in love
endeavor as much as is possible to live peaceably with all men, and so
innocently in the Nation and Commonwealth in that Government we are under.

8. Eccl. 10.4.
That if the Spirit of the Ruler rise against any one, That he do not rashly
fly, but humbly submit: if the Spirit of Satan raise Persecution against the
Truth, if the way be opened, one may fly to escape, and spread the Truth
farther; or in weakness, to avoid the snare of denial: but if it be only the
Spirit of the Ruler against a Man, yielding will pacify great offenses.

9. 1 Timothy 2.1,2,3,4. Jer. 29.7. Psalm. 37.1-7.
That we pray to God for his teaching, governing and preserving those in
Authority, and making them instruments of good to us and the Commonwealth, and
so pray for the peace and welfare of the Commonwealth and Nation we live in:
and thus not fretting our selves, or being envious against evil doers, but
doing good, we may dwell in the Land, and be fed.

And thus it becomes us to submit to, and obey Magistrates, even as they are,
and because they are Magistrates, whatever they be, so long as God continues
them in their Power over us.

But if these Magistrates have other Ornaments put on them by God, (besides
their simple Magistracy) in which they have some resemblances of our Lord and
Savior Christ upon them, then there is more abundant goodness extended by God
to us in them, and more obligations still to thankfulness for them, and
cheerful submission, and ready obedience to them; as to say,

1. Deuteronomy. 18.15 18. Jer. 30.21.
If the chief Governor be one of our selves a Countryman, a Kinsman, of our
own Country and Nation.

2. Deuteronomy. 1.2, 37. and 2.
If he have undergone hardship in sufferings and services with us and for us.

3. 1 Samuel 12.11.
If God has honored him to be an instrument to us of freedom from any hard
slavery and bondage, and of enjoyment of safety in peace and liberty.

4. Nehem. 2.10.
If being set in Power, his bent and Business be, to protect and seek the
welfare and peace of the people in the Commonwealth, and especially of such as
fear God, that they may live quiet and peaceable lives, in all godliness and
honesty.

5. Psa. 101.6,7
If to this end he endeavor to purge out wicked Officers, and set up Men
fearing God, for Under-Judges and Magistrates.

6. Psalm. 122.
If he love the Church of God, and be himself even one of them, rejoicing with
them in fellowship in the Ordinances of God, seeking the peace and prosperity
of the Church: if so, then in these things he resembles, not only Moses,
Joshua, David, Nehemiah, but in some measure the Lord himself: and if for the
Lord's sake we should submit to, and obey Magistrates, though evil men; how
much more, if God give us such a Governor, are we to be thankful for, and
submit to, obey and live cheerfully and quietly under such a Government?

Therefore having so good ground for my request, I pray you. men, fathers, and
brethren of this Nation and Commonwealth of England, take it well that I make
this address to you; beseeching you, that now God has been so gracious to us,
and dealt so mercifully with us, that none of us be like those wicked
Adversaries that grieved that one was come to seek the welfare of God's people;
Nehem. 2.10. Genesis 45.24.
nor let us fall out one with another, but be at peace, and so with
thankfulness to God submit to, and live quietly under the Government God has
so extraordinarily given us, and sealed his mind in his manner of putting us
under it; in which we have such Testimonies of his mercies, and streams of his
goodness, that knowing his mind for our submission, I need use no other
motives to persuade: only I shall assay to remove some thoughts, that hinder
the ready submission of some; and for that, is the rest of my request in my
address to you all.

1. You dear Friends, that plead your Obligation and Affection to the Governor
and Government that fore-was in the King and his Successors, I commend your
then-Affection and Faithfulness in its season, in and according to that
Obligation; in which, so long as with God's allowance I might. I stood one with
you: but God has by a power even issuing from that power, signally with his
own hand changed that, and set another Power up that is in being, and the very
Successor of what went before. I need say no more: a Child is to honor his
Father; but if his Father be dead, and his Mother married to another man, the
same Law binds him to honor him that is now his Father. I might give many
such instances, and fortify them with Scripture also: Dan. 1, and 2 and 4, and
5.11-13. and 6. etc. Ezekiel. 17.12-21. Jer. 38.16-20. and 29.
but I shall only pray you confider the example of that holy Prophet Daniel
commended in holy writ; he was faithful to Nehuchad-nezzar; yea, and to his Son
Belshazzar also, (and what became of the unfaithful Prince and Princes, that
submitted not to be faithful in that Obligation, when God had put them under
it, nor would be persuaded thereto, is known: but Daniel was faithful) yet when
God by providence put that Government and Governor out of being, and set up
another, even the Medes and Persians, who won that Power by conquest; Daniel
submitted to and followed the Lord; and was as faithful to Darius, as ever
before to Nebuchad-nezzar; he knowing that the most High rules in the Kingdom
of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will; when God had set up another Power,
he was subject unto that: Romans 15.4. Pro. 2.20.
And this is written for our instruction, That we may walk in the way of good
men. What troubles befell such as would not submit to, and live under the
Government God has set over them, we may read at large in Scripture. Jer. 29.
and 41, and 42, and 43, and 44.
And how God has resisted and testified against such as have enterprized
Rebellion to the Government he by providence puts us under, even the
dim-sighted may see. Let therefore the Apostolical charge take place with us,
and let every Soul be subject to the higher Powers that are in being, knowing
they are ordered of God. If you cannot fully digest this counsel, yet till you
can, you may digest Gamaliel's counsel, to cease opposing; Act. 5.38,39.
For if this counsel, or this work be of men, it will come to naught; but if it
be of God, ye cannot overthrow it, lest happily ye be found even to fight
against God. And I hope, in considering what God has done, and what the
Scripture says, you will see that the setting up this Power is of God, and so
digest the Apostles counsel also.

2. You my dear Countrymen, that from the Authority of the King and
Parliament, and so from the Authority of Parliament, issuing from and confirmed
by the King, did from and in obedience to that Power, lift up your hands and
protest before God, to be faithful to that Power: and also, when that Power had
in its agitation, something purged and new molded it self; so, as the House of
Lords was down, and the King departed, even then again protested to be faithful
to that still remaining Power of the Government of the Commonwealth of England,
as it then stood, without King or House of Lords; and on dissolution of that
Power, many made their Addresses to the Chief in Military Power, for calling a
free Parliament; and by virtue of his Authority, voted for Members; and so by
Act and Hand, avouched his Authority. Did not you, as I do, all this to God, in
obedience and submission to him, acknowledging him the Orderer of all Powers;
and so submitting to the Power he has possessed of being? if you did it not on
this ground, you were weakly carried and biased with some base ends, which far
be it from me to judge: and if you did it on this ground, then have you not
only seemed, but really involved your selves in the Obligation of Faithfulness
to the Protector and Government that is in being; and so your own heart will
say as much to you as I can, That every Soul of us be subject to the higher
Powers that are in being. Nor are a few grievances any toleration to us for
unfaithfulness: but surely we have none, but what the necessity in Providence
disposing hand puts on us; nor are we laden with any burden, or hindered of
any advantage, nor drawn to any service, which in our own former Engagements we
did not oblige our selves unto. Therefore I hope you are well pleased with, and
will be obedient to the Government God has put us under: and I pray you let us
lovingly and peaceably so walk together in our obedience.

3. Now you dear Fathers and Brethren, who for the love of Jesus Christ, and in
desire to please God, and approve your hearts to him in your Faith, Worship and
Conversation, and did in times past lovingly agree together in Union of
Affection and Profession for this design, and could bear some differences then
in other Opinions, where this design was found to be agreed in; and then the
burden and trouble complained of, was, the imposition of superstitious Rites,
and Doctrines, and Traditions of men, the lordly Rule of BBs, the evil
proceedings of their Courts, and want of Liberty to worship God according to
our Conscience: for attempting and pressing after which, some were imprisoned,
and some lost blood and life, some were silenced, many cited, and many drawn to
their Courts, and some excommunicated, and some occasioned to fly into other
Countries: by reason of all which, they that feared the Lord went under the
terms of Puritans, Precisians, Factionists, Schismatics, and disobedient to
Authority; and so made the odium and scorn of the common people; derided,
abased, etc. and then glad in secret to meet, for Fasting, Prayers, and
Instructions. In those days we loved one another; and professed, might we
enjoy Liberty of Conscience, for enjoyment of, and fellowship in the Gospel,
bread and cheese, mean fare and mean accommodations for the outward man should
content us. This was a time of sadness; but now God has tried us, and we are
found not upright in what we professed, as our many discontents and complaints
do testify; even now when God has freed us from those burdens and complaints
we then groaned under, and given us a Protector and Government, under which we
enjoy more Liberty of Conscience and fellowship in the Gospel, than we could
then have thought of, if we did not fall cut among our selves; and because our
particular lusts are not satisfied, ready to fault and murmur against Governor
and Government also, as the Children of Israel did in the Wilderness against
Moses, after their great deliverance; but their murmurings were against the
Lord, as it is to be feared ours also will be found to be: an ill requital of so
great mercy, once so highly prized, and earnestly prayed for; and now received,
so lightly esteemed: it brings to my mind the saying of a godly Minister in
those times, who loved me, and I him; and having some communion together,
though our Habitations were far distant on occasion of some saying in which we
fully agreed not; I thank God, says he, that such differences as this breeds
no disunion nor dis-affection between us; I desire it might be so with all
that fear the Lord: but we have a common enemy, (meaning the BBs.) that
persecutes us all; and we may thank God for it, for by that means we are kept
at peace with, and love to one another: and if that common enemy be once
removed, then shall we fall out among our selves. He that said this, is now
with God; I that heard it, am yet living on this earth, to see his words
verified. I am sorry we make no better use of God's mercy, and return so evil
to him for so great good done us: I pray God give us to be humbled for it; and
now in love and thankfulness to him, and love to one another, to lay aside
vainglory, envy, bitterness, wrath, anger, evil speaking, and help us to be
kind one to another, and tender hearted; not every one seeking his own things,
but each the good of other; and then may we enjoy the benefit of the mercy
given us, and so be thankful for and live comfortably under the Government God
has so graciously set over us; for which my Address is to you, which one might
think needless for such as we; and if it be needful for some, as it appears
it is, yet it is difficult for me to make it rightly, because of the diversity
of minds among us; I pray therefore bear with me, and accept it, while I
endeavor it as well as I can: and so I make my Address to,

1. You reverend Fathers and Brethren, whose mind and bent is set for a
National, Provincial, and Classical Presbytery, for Order and Government of
Church Affairs; and to have the Power of the Magistrate to confirm and stablish
the same; and so to give such Power to you, that by the Power of the
Magistrate, imparted to you, you may set up and carry an end the same; and
discontent if the Magistrate afford you not this Power. Surely, Order among
Brethren, and in Church Assemblies and Affairs, is needful, desirable,
profitable and beautiful; and even that in having Officers also: yet that it is
so needful, desirable, profitable and beautiful for outward Order, to be
always, in all Ages, or in all Nations, or in all Congregations, or in every
or all the parts of any one Country or Province the same, I nowhere find in
Scripture; 1 Cor. 14.26-40. and 11.2,3 4.
but this I find, a true Church, and for spiritual gifts, highly enriched and
commended, and Order required; and yet no outward Officers mentioned; yea,
probable, because of their divisions, not betrusted to choose their Officers,
till the Apostle came and set such things in order; Act. 14.21-23.
yet were they true Churches in Corinth, as there were diverse in other places,
that were true Churches for some time before they had any such outward
Officers. And I also read, how in the same time and Age, in another place, that
in the Church there was Bishops, (or Elders) and Deacons, (or Ministers) to
help in Ministration; Phil. 1.1. Act. 6.3-6.
and especially, for the relief of the poor; and this a Church as much
approved, as any I know: and yet I find in Crete and Ephesus, diverse Churches
that had Bishops, (or Elders) and Deacons; Tit. 1.5-xi.
and also a Bishop or Elder appointed to oversee all the Churches in that
Province, with their 1 Timothy 1.3-5. and 3, and 5.
Bishops and Deacons, to admonish them both for right Doctrine and Manners, and
to be chief in helping them both for ordaining and confirming both of Elders
and Deacons, etc. as Titus in Crete, and Timothy in Ephesus. 1 Cor.
12.28,29,30. Ephesians. 4.7-13 1 Timothy 3. 2 Timothy 2. and 3, and 4.1-5. 1 Timothy 6.11,14.
To say Timothy and Titus did this as they were Evangelists, is but a saying
without proof: for as the names of Apostles. Prophets, Evangelists, Pastors,
Teachers, were not appropriated to Ecclesiastically called Church Officers; but
to all those so gifted by Christ, and other Officers called Bishops and
Deacons, or Elders and Deacons: so the work of an Evangelist is set out plainly
and fully to be in teaching, etc. and this the command to be kept till the
appearing of our Lord Jesus: and though men so gifted be fittest for such
oversight also, yet no necessity, yea, or possibility, to have always the like
outward order in Church Officers and Government, though Churches differing in
some outward form may be alike true and good both in Doctrine and manners; and
that among them all was done in Faith and Love by the Word, and such spiritual
power and weapons as the Word afforded them, without craving power of the
Magistrates of the Commonwealths, or desire of any part of their Sword, to
carry an end, and manage their business with. So it was in the beginning of the
first Christian Churches, in the best times: so that, reverend Fathers and
Brethren, you may perceive, I do not fault, but justify rather the Order
desired by you, though the terms of expression of it be obscure; yea, I could
as willingly be under the same, so I might enjoy the soundness of Faith, and
Liberty of spiritual fellowship with Brethren of another outward Order, as
before to have been under the BBs with Freedom from their superstitious
Injunctions, and to enjoy the foresaid Liberty; for the order and power of this
and that is one and the same, if rightly used, only called by different
Titles: but this is that which is faulty, and occasions faultiness, The desire
of the Magistrates Power, to empower you to establish and carry an end this
Order; for which you have neither Word nor Example of Christ, or any his
Apostles, Prophets or Evangelists, nor any thing like, but the bygone Law of
the Aaronical Priesthood. Oh, my Fathers and Brethren, did you so mourn for the
Tyranny of this Power in the BBs hands, and would you have it in yours? was
their lording Power over their Brethrens Faith and Conscience so evil in your
eyes, and will the same be good in your hands, when only the Title of Lord,
and some gross outward Superstitions are taken away? was Liberty of Conscience
for all Fearers of the Lord so good, and much to be desired when that power was
in their hands? and is the same now a cursed Liberty and toleration for any but
those that submit to have that Power in your hands, and come under your Order,
when many tender Consciences of your godly Brethren can no more digest your
Order, than they could the former? I hope the most of you by this time are
better persuaded, than to be soliciting the Governor to give Power into your
hands, to rule over your Brethren. It Is enough, we are protected, and you have
Liberty for going on, and winning in, all that by Word and good Conversation,
you prevail with to join in that Order. I hope this contents you, so that you
will not murmur at, but be thankful for the Government; and press for no
farther Power, than the protection it so lovingly affords you: as for those
whose Spirits are still carried to enjoy that Power in their hands, do they not
hereby either justify the Power they pretended against, and so testify it was
not conscience of sinfulness in a lordly Power in Ministry of the Church, nor
the lordly Power they sought to pull down; but the taking away those Persons
and Titles, and exalting themselves into the same Power? or else their minds
are altered, desiring to have that builded and established, of which once they
complained and sought to pull it down. Surely, such may thank God that the
Governor affords them not their desires; for did he, they would hurt both him,
and themselves, and others also, as much as their Forefathers did: but I hope
there remains not many thus minded. Therefore my request is, That we may
consider well the mercies God has given us in the Government he has set over
us, and what an Instrument of Mercy the Governor is made to us. Surely, we are
eased of that, which (if our hearts were right) was our greatest grief and
complaint. And there is Liberty for that desired Order, as far as by Scripture,
Truth, Teaching, and holy Conversation, and warrantize from God, may be reached
unto; yea, more then when we fasted and prayed, we did expect in answer of our
Prayer. Let us not grutch our Brethren to enjoy the same mercy with our selves,
that prayed, and have their Prayers answered with us; but in thankfulness to
him that answers our Prayers, praise God, and thank him for our Government,
and pray for our Governor, and live together in peace and love under his
Government, not biting one another, lest we be consumed of one another; and if
we be per^ect, and of one mind to glorify God, and live in peace, the God of
peace will be with us, and bless our Protector and us also.

2. And you, beloved Fathers and Brethren, whom some groundlesly call
Independents, I hope you have as much as your Souls desire of the Protector, as
Protector, and in the Government in respect of your personal and social
Concernments in that Liberty and protection that is afforded you: seeing,
whatever by the Word and your holy Conversation, according to the light and
knowledge given you, and blessing of success afforded you, you have even
outward Liberty to congregate, and receive into your Congregations, and to
order for Offices and Exercise, according to your Conscience and understanding
of the Word; and protection herein also. I know you desire not worldly
promotion, nor any power of the Magistrate, to Lord it over your Brethren, that
in some things dissent from you, and accord not in all things in your Order in
congregating: and so you do readily, that which my Address is for. And so my
Request to you is, That we may in singleness of heart to God, and love to one
another, persevere in Thankfulness and Prayers for the Instruments of our
Mercy, and not by discontented Thoughts suggested by any, be waved; but live
peaceably with acknowledgement of the Mercy given us, under the Government over
us: and that we may so do, let us neither judge nor despise our Brethren,
fearing the Lord, though in some things they dissent from us; Romans 14.1,18.
walking according to the light they have received, and not according to all
that light we conceive our selves to have received; nor murmur at, or press the
removal of some things that agree not with our Judgments about a public
Ministry in the Nation, and the maintenance thereof. You know, that new Wine
put in old Vessels, will break the Vessel, and both Wine and Vessel will be
marred: and every thing is beautiful in its time; and some things of that
Nature can yet hardly be done with Righteousness: and besides, as Christ is a
Savior, so his followers principal aim in their agitations, is saving; and the
sudden doing of some things of that Nature, would produce raging, hardening,
destroying rather than saving them, till by degree they be brought to a fitter
capacity, And if we remember God's gracious order in dealing with us, to bring
us to that we now enjoy, and wait with patience for others, to win them with
lovingkindness, and mind God's hand, who knows what is fittest for us, and
when; and pray to our heavenly Father for blessing, guidance and protecting of
our Protector, and his Council* he that has heard and answered us thus far,
will certainly, so far as is good for us, hear and answer us farther; only let
us not undervalue, but improve the opportunities already given us: and so in
thankfulness for, walk submissively to, and peaceably under the Government God
has given us. I need say no more to you.

3. But for you beloved Fathers and Brethren, that believingly look for the
Lord Jesus Christ, that once abased himself, and died for us, and has procured
us so much good by his Cross; and by virtue thereof, extends so much mercy
daily to us, to come again personally in glory, and to take to him his great
Power, and sit upon the Throne of David his Father, and reign; and all his
Saints to come with him, and reign with him; and so all the Kingdom under the
whole Heavens, to be given to the Saints of the most Hight It is marvel to me,
that any of you should be discontent at the Government, under which you enjoy
so many mercies; that you cannot with thankfulness live quietly under it, and
wait with patience for that day. If in my Address to you for this, I come (...)
in touching some goodly appearing thoughts; yet he that loves, there is no
occasion of stumbling in him: and I hope, Love will so lead me, that I shall
offer no just occasion for love to be provoked or stumble at.

1. If you say, Your desire is, that Christ may reign in his Saints; and your
grief and offense taken, is, because it is not so: then I pray let us begin at
home, and we shall find the greatest cause of grief for this, to be within our
selves; and in this desire, I am persuaded not only our Protector, but all
Saints in this Commonwealth are one with us; for Christ reigning in his Saints,
in this Day of his Grace and Patience, is not his reigning with and by his
Saints, in making all of them the outward (...) and Governors of the men of
this World; but reigning and living in his Saints by his Word and Spirit,
subduing every Thought to the Obedience of Christ; Call. 2.20. 2 Cor. 10.3,4.
and 4.13. 2 Timothy 1.7. 1 Cor. 9.19-27. 1 John 5.4,5. Rev. 12 11. and 3.10. Act.
9.4,5. Col. 1.24. 2 Timothy 2.12.
and them to accept the Cross of Christ, and Conformity to him in it; and so by
the Spirit of Faith, Love, Power, and a sound Mind, he dwells in them, and
they live to him; and yet are in this World for his sake, as he was, subject to
humane Powers, and Servants to all for their good* and though they overcome the
World, yet the Victory is by Faith, proceeding to more spiritual goodness; and
(...) by carnal Weapons, reaching to worldly Power and Honor over men: but by
the Blood of the Lamb, and the Word of their Testimony, not loving their lives
unto the death; so, as while he raigns in them, they keep the Word of his
Patience, and are Sufferers for him, and with him, and he with them; who shall
after reign with him, when he raigns: and this I hope you all believe; and this
also, That Christ his reigning in his Saints, has been from the beginning,
ever since he had a Church on Earth; Psa. 68.18,19. 1 Cor. 2 14. 1 John 3.1. 1
Cor. 1.4,5,6. Col. 1.12,13. Romans 14.1-17. and 15.1,2,3. Rev. 11.15-18. Col.
3.4. 2 These. 1.7-10. 1 These. 1.10.
and more abundantly and manifestly, since he completed his Sacrifice, and
advanced our Nature in himself to Heaven, and sent forth such plentiful gifts
of the Holy Ghost; and so does in this Day, though the men of the World cannot
perceive it; and our eyesight so weak, that a little dust of some difference
so blinds us, that we can hardly discern it in our Brethren dissenting from
us, (though in circumstance) so as to give thanks as the Apostle did for the
Corinthians and Colossians; but need rather that admonition given to the
Romans; but the Saints reigning with Christ, and his own personal reigning with
and by them, as it is yet to come, so it comes at once, and they begin
together: when he comes, and takes to him his great Power, and raigns over the
Kingdoms of the World; then, and not till then, shall his Saints so reign with
him: he that believes on him, makes not haste, nor desires to reign before his
Master; but waits for that, till the Lord comes from Heaven: and when by
providence he puts any Saint into a place of worldly Power and Government;
yet in that also, they will be found Sufferers with their Master, and Strangers
in this World, as Saints; and though Protectors of their Brethren the Saints in
their outward Peace, yet Rulers of them as men also in their outward affairs,
and not able to carry all as they would in and by their several Officers and
Under-Governours in this World: woe is us, if they should suffer any thing by
us, for whom questionless they suffer much; Psa. 75.2 and 72.4. and 39.12. 2 Samuel 23.5. Heb. 4.7-11. and 11.8-16. 1 These. 1.9,10.
so, that we cannot look to have all without fault here, we must wait for that
till our Lord and Master himself does come: even thus it was with David. And so
the time of the Saints rest, and reigning with Christ over the men of the
World, is not yet. It is better for us to have Christ reigning in us now, and
to look for our reigning with him, as Abraham and our Fathers did for the
Inheritance and Kingdom.

2. If any of you say, We agree in this, only we would have Christ to be set
on his Throne: I answer, To desire and haste to that Day, All Saints that
believe such a Day, as in which Christ shall sit on his Throne, do assuredly
join with you: but before that Day, to desire or attempt to set Christ on his
Throne, none that rightly understand and well ponder the business, dare join
with you in desire or essay. I beseech you consider with me but these things,
which I hope you believe, as I do.

First, Rev. 3.21. and 4.2. Psa. 103.19. and 66.7. Heb. 8.1. 1 Pet. 3.22. Joh.
5.17,19,20. Prove. 8.15,16. 1 Pet. 2.2,3-9. Psa. 110.1. Act. 2.33,37. and
3.19,20.
That the Throne of Christ he is now upon, is the Throne of the Father; and he,
and he only as man, and no man but he, is already set down with his Father on
his Throne, nowhere called The Throne of David; but, The Father's Throne, The
Throne of God, that is set in Heaven; where he, even the Man Christ, now is set
on the right Hand of God, all Power and Authority given unto him; so, as God
does all by Jesus Christ: and he does all both from God, and as God: and so he
rules by his Power for ever, and his Kingdom rules over all; and by such
Magistrates as he pleases, he rules the Sons of men; and by his gracious Word
and Spirit he gathers a people to himself, and rules in their hearts and
societies.

And thus is Christ by his Father set with his Father upon his Throne; and
there to continue, till he make his Enemies his Footstool, which is the time of
the restoration of all things; and then none shall fetch him down, but the
Lord shall send him etc. and surely this Government of his, while he sits with
his Father on his Throne, it becomes us all to submit to, both in his
providential ordering of Governments among the Sons of men, and his spiritual
Regiment by the Gospel in the Church; and all this without murmuring, or
appointing him his way; yea, it is best even for the Kings and Judges of the
Earth, to kifs and submit to him, and not to oppose him whom God has made Lord
of all; not at the request of any, to assay to pull him from his Father's
Throne, to set him on another; if we should defire such a thing of our
PROTECTOR, it is a great mercy to be denied. But yet.

Secondly, Consider farther concerning setting Christ on his Throne;

1. Micah 4.8. Luke 1.32.
What manner of Throne it is, and whose it has been; and the Scripture will
tell us, it is Davidical, and so in the promise of it, called, The first
Dominion; and expressly, The Throne of hi^ Father David: and that was neither
above in the Heavens, not in the Hearts and Consciences of Men, in which Christ
was before, and is above David; but the Throne on which David sat, much
exalted, shall he sit on and reign.

2. Jer. 3.17. Isa. 24.23. and 33.20,21 and 62.7. Psa. 132.13-17 and 122.3-5.
Where the first, chief and continuing place of this Throne on which he shall
fit; shall be; and the Scripture tells us, It is Jerusalem, Sion, the City
where David dwelt, in the Land of Canaan, where Abraham sojourned. This
Jerusalem and Canaan made new and beautified, shall be the place of his Throne,
and the praise of the whole Earth.

3. Ephesians. 4.7,16 and 1.13,14.
What is to be done by him before he sit upon the Throne of David, and reign,
and all his reign with him, and this the Scripture declares to be, To continue
his spiritual gifts in and unto the Sai^s, to perfect them for the work of the
Ministry, till the last man be brought in that shall be called by this
Ministration of the Gospel-Call; Mat. 24.30 Acts 1.11. and 3.20,21. Rev. 22.20
Phil. 3.20,21. 1 These. 1.10. and 4.14,15,16,17. 1 Cor. 25.52,53,54.
that we All (not some only, but all) meet together in the Unity of the Faith,
and of the Acknowledgement of the Son of God, unto a perfect Man, unto the
measure of the Age of the fullness of Christ, meet to be possessed of the
purchased Inheritance: and then, that the Lord Jesus do personally and visibly
descend from Heaven, in the same body in which he died, and rose, and appeared
to his Disciples, and ascended up to Heaven, where he yet sits on the right
Hand of God, and makes intercession for us; for whose so coming the Saints
long and waits and then in this his descending from Heaven, that he do in a
moment raise the Saints that sleep, and change the surviving, that together at
once they may see the Lord, and meet him in the Air; so to be ever with him;
Zach. 14.4,5-9. Isa. 13 9,10-1^. Psa. 149.5,9. 1 Cor. 15 24,25,2^.
and so being met, then that he come, together with all his Saints, and
overturn all the Powers and Governments of this World; and so put down all
Rule, Authority, and Power, that the Davidical Government may rule all, till
all be given up to the Father; and so God be All in all. True it is, when he
comes to do this, whoever of the Governors of this World in any of the Nations
be found a Saint, shall in the same moment be changed, and meet him, and come
with him to this work; and for the rest, such as at the first, on the appearing
and coming of Christ with all his Saints, submit to serve him and his people,
shall have their lives prolonged, though their Dominion be taken away. Dan.
7.12. Isa. 60.12. Mal. 4.2,3. 2 Pet. 3.7. Jude 14,15. 2 These. 1.8,9. Isa.
9.4,5,6. and 11.4 Psalm. 72.4. Act. 3.19,20. Romans ^.19,20,21,22. Isa.
65.12,13,14-17. Rev. 21.
But all that then refuse and rebel, shall be destroyed and burnt up both root
and branch: This being the Day of Perdition and Destruction to ungodly men; and
this not like other battles, in which some die on both sides; but with burning
and fuel of fire, by the Breath of his Lips: and this done, then will he
restore all things, free the Creation from its bondage, and make the Heaven and
Earth new, for a righteous people to dwell in: and this done, and not before,
he will sit upon the Throne of David, and then set his Saints on Thrones to
reign with him. And so the Seripture directs us to look for this day.

4. Joh. 18.36. Psa. 2.6-9. Ezekiel. 33.23. Act. 3.19,20. Psa. 132.11. Dan. 4.44.
and 7.13,14,27. 2 Timothy 4.8. Rev. 2.26. and 3.22.
Who is to send him forth, and set him upon his Throne. Surely, he is not to
receive his Kingdom, or be set on his Throne after a worldly manner, or by any
of this worldly Powers, or Weapons, that his Soldiers should so need to sight
for him; nor shall the Saints set him upon his Throne; yea, the most High God,
he, and he only it is, that at the season sends forth this Son of Man, and
gives him the Throne of his Father David, and sets him thereon; and of him
only he receives it, and so sits thereon; and being set on his Throne, he
it is that gives the Kingdom to his Saints, and sets them on Thrones. This
Honor is his.

True it is, before his personal appearing to do all this, many Earthquakes
and shakings of worldly Powers will be; and the Ten Horns hating the Whore, and
making her desolate and naked, eating her flesh, and burning her with fire;
Mat. 24. Rev. 17.16.
the Horns enriching themselves with their spoils; in which battle, the Saints
as Men, and as called by Authority, for defense of a people, and Execution of
justice on evil doers, may have their hand and work; Psa. 83.15,16,17,18. Pro.
24.17.
yet they as Saints, are preserved so, that they use valor and not violence,
commit no rapes, seek not the ruin and destruction of men, but even in their
overthrow and confusion, desire the fall and shame of them, may be blessed to
them, as a means of their conversion: whence also they rejoice not in their
ruin and harm, but as they are subdued, are very merciful to them; though when
in their perverseness overthrown, they rejoice in the righteous Judgment of
God, and for their own deliverance; Prove. 16.4 1 Samuel 24.13.
their main design being the same with their Masters, according to Gospel-way,
The Salvation of men: they know, that for revengeful, unnatural, and filthy
actings in executing wrath, the Lord has another Generation of men. Therefore
the Saints being as men by humane Authority called, are Soldiers; and also as
Saints, faithful; and so, though valiant and victorious in war, yet blood is
not imputed to them, nor the Victory ascribed to them, otherwise, then as
mediate called Instruments used together with others by Christ in his
providential Government, and not as Saints and Partners with Christ: Isa.
63.1,2,3,4.
This being his own, and in respect of Saints, as Saints, his alone work, by
his Power in his Providence, to overthrow the Enemies. In which, his Garments
are sprinkled with the Blood of his Enemies; some of the Saints also dying in
these Battles, his coming also approaching nigh. But being come, that Battle in
which the Saints, and all the Saints, and none but Saints shall be with him,
and himself personally and visibly with them, and before them; Isa. 9.5,6,7.
and 11.4. Mal. 4.1,2,3. Rev. 19.11-21, and 20.1-4.
shall not be with carnal Weapons, nor Garments rolled in Blood, nor any
confused noise, or any Saint dying; but the Breath of the Lord, and burning and
fuel of fire, and all, and only the wicked overthrown, as is said. And this
done, before he sit on his Throne, and so reign, and the Saints reign with him;
and then it will be: wait for it.

Thirdly, Consider, That, as is said, the Saints must not reign before their
Master and Lord; and, that he receives his Kingdom from his Father, and then
they receive it from him: Heb. 11.40. 1 These. 4.14,15-18. 2 These. 2.^.
so likewise must they not reign before one another; yea, not the surviving on
Earth, before them that sleep in the Lord: when we are all gathered together
unto him then, and not till then, shall this reigning be. If Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, etc. must not have it before us; much more must not we look to
receive it before them.

And all these things considered, I suppose it will appear, That it is not from
the Spirit of God, that any should desire and expect Christ to reign on Earth,
as David, for the destruction of his Enemies, before he reign as Solomon,
seeing all the Enemies of Christ, and his People at his coming, must be
destroyed, before he so reign: nor as David was a type of Christ, is the Truth
in Christ to be found by times and parcels; and if spiritually you would have
David a type of Christ's Shepherds Office, as he was King and Prophet, then for
the first Fruits in this spiritualness, this reigning is not to destroy men's
lives, but to save them; Luke 9.56. Act. 15.16,17. 1 King, 3.6.
and so by Gospel-preaching, to build up the Tabernacle of David, the Courts of
the Lord, in and for the Conversion of Souls. And as for Solomon, he was given
to David, as a Son to sit on his Throne; and in that he was but a Type of
Christ, the very promised Son that is to sit on the Throne of David, which will
be when, and as is before shown. And there is no strength for this, in that
conceit, That the Kingdom of Christ should be for a time before his own
personal appearance, in the Nature of a little Stone, to break in pieces, etc.
Nor is it so said either in the Vision or Exposition, that in the Nature of a
little Stone, it shall break, etc. but that a Stone cut out of the Mountains
without hand, smote, etc. Dan. 2.34,35.
Now we know, That Christ is a precious Stone; and to some, a Stone of offense:
Isa. 28.16. 1 Pet. 2.6,7,8. Luke 20.17,18. 1 Pet. 2.5. Heb. 8.2. 2 Cor. 6.4*10.
Phil. 2.4,5,6. Zach. 12.3. and 14.5,9,12-15.
He is given of God, that framed his Body in the Womb of a Virgin, and raised
him from the dead; and he in his first appearance was, and as discovered in the
Gospel, so still is, disallowed and despised of men, and bears all with
patience: and so little, yet the time is coming, when this Stone, how little
soever now appearing, will break in pieces all wilful opposers; so likewise
those that believe in Christ are compared to Stones, and so even the Church on
Earth (as Jerusalem) a Stone, and this not natural, nor of man's, but God's
making; and because despised and persecuted by men, and they in patience
bearing it, they also are in appearance to men, and in their own eyes little;
yet in the issue at last, they will prove a burdensome Stone to all that
trouble themselves with them in persecuting them. But surely, this will be at
his personal coming, when the days of his patience come to an end: which if we
believe, we may with patience wait for it. Mal. 3.17,18. and 4.1. Romans 8.19,23.
Col. 3.4. Phil. 3.20,21.
As for that Desire and Expectation of some, by some Advancement here in the
World that now is, to have a glorious manifestation of the Sons of God, before
his personal coming, and restoring all things, it has no Ground in Scripture,
which expressly affirms, That to be the very time. I forbear what of some
Desi^es and Expectations might be said: my Desire is that we may desire and
expect nothing but what we have the Word and Promise of God for: and my Reason
is, because if ungrounded and unwarrantable Desires and Expectations get
rooting within us, they will lead to evil, and bring forth evil fruits, as a
root of bitterness springing up, and defiling many; Heb. 12.15.
of which we are to beware: for,

First, Jer. 17.6.
It will blind us from seeing when good comes; so that, if God make of our
Brethren Instruments of Deliverance, and set one of them in place of chief
Governor; though he should do his utmost by degrees, to get of the Saints for
Under-Governors; though he afford us to worship God in Christ according to the
Light we have received; yea, if he seeing us to differ, do not only protect us
from harm by others, but also from one harming another; if he should see a
fleshly desire sprung up in some Saints to be Rulers over all others in this
World, he knowing all Saints are not yet agreed who are the Saints that should
rule, and such Desires unfit men for ruling; this being that would cause a
worse War than any yet has been, and he in his Wisdom and Love do stop it; If
he suffer persecution of Tongue and Pen, for these things, and do patiently
bear it, and still seek the Protection and Good of all, and Liberty for all
Saints; yea, such as ill requite him: yet such groundless and unwarrantable
Desires and Expectations, so blindes, that missing them, we see not the good in
all this: but all we have, becomes to us like that Haman had, of no esteem:
Esth. 5.13. Col. 3.15. 1 These. 5.18 1 Timothy 2.1.
so that neither God is acknowledged in his goodness, nor thanked by us; much
less can his Instruments be, we so swerving from the plain Rule given us, I
beseech you, dear Brethren, let us fly this great evil; which getting root,
will bring forth more evil Fruits, showing their contrariety to Grace in the
very Face of them: for,

Secondly, where these unwarrantable Desires and Expectations prevail, they
lead,

1. 1 Timothy 2.1,2
To withdrawing our Prayers, and Endeavors to withdraw other from praying for
those in Authority, contrary to God's express command.

2. 1 Pet. 4.8. Pro. 25.9.
To discover what we conceive to be weakness in those in Authority, contrary to
Charity, and the express Command; no Saint being without some weakness, though
they have not the Temptations Governors have.

3. Exodus 22.28. Eccles. 10.20.
To speak evil of Rulers, to make them appear vile to others, contrary to the
express charge of God to us, concerning them.

4. Ezekiel. 13.22.
By such dealing, to sad the hearts of the righteous, and comfort the hearts,
and strengthen the hands of the wicked, that are set for ruin and destruction
of all that are bent for, or profess godliness.

5. Yea, under pretense of complaining of Persecution, if crossed of our wills,
to persecute with Tongue and Pen, such as with all their endeavor strive to
keep us from Persecution; yea, when such the care of the chief Governor, that
I suppose no man can truly say. That by his authority and allowance, he is
persecuted for glorifying God, and advancing the Lord Jesus Christ as the Son
of God, and the Son of Man; yea, for his sufferings as Man, or Exaltation; or,
as being the most High God or for bearing forth the Testimony of Christ in the
Gospel, or using any Ordinance of his commanded in the Gospel; and so for his
Conscience in worshipping God in and through Christ, however one Saint differ
from another in the manner hereof, if they rebel not against the Government, to
hinder the outward Peace of the Nation and Commonwealth.

Oh my Brethren, I pray God keep us from these evils; and if any of us have run
into them, and suffered some reproof for that, from saying, In such things we
suffer for conscience sake, or for good works, as Christ did: yea, rather let
us mind and be thankful for the mercies we enjoy, and live peaceably under the
Government God has so graciously given us: and in all, I pray ponder what the
Scripture says in all I have said to you, my Brethren, whose reproach, for
expecting the personal coming of Christ to reign with his Saints on Earth, I am
very willing to bear my part in that with you, though I am persuaded the term
of Fifth-Monarchy-men, was not by those of understanding put on you for this
Desire and Expectation, but for desiring and expecting a Kingdom for the Saints
to rule over the men of the World, before his personal and visible coming;
which would be liker to Anarchy, than Monarchy. I suppose Charity will thus
judge: and that it is according to Truth, in which Charity rejoices. I beseech
you therefore, as my Address is more earnest to you, so let me not be denied of
you, to whom I have spoken in the last place. For, my Brethren, I would be
loath any of those hideous Brands, prophesied to be found in such as walk in
the way of Cain, Balaam, and Corah in these last days, should be found on any
of us, as despising Dominion or Government, Presumption, and self-willedness,
and speaking evil of Dignities: 2 Pet. 2.10. Jude 8.
and I hope yea, am sure, if we mind it, the grace of God will prevail with us
to that which is better.

And now to you all, Men, Biethren and Fathers Countrymen and Neighbors, I
pray let us search the Scriptures; and according to their direction, let us be
thankful for, and subject and obedient to, and live lovingly and peaceably
under the Government God has graciously put us under. I have not used any
motives to you, from the faithfulness of him God has made our Protector, as
his ends from the first, if we could have attained that was professedly aimed
at, even for advancing him that was before; his heart to all godly minded, and
care for the Commonwealth, the signal Testimonies of God's approbation, and
answer of Prayers in his manifold Transactions, his mercies to many in
distress; yea, to some undeserving, of which I might have said something
knowingly: nor have I used any subtle or politic insinuations: but my Ad to
dress you, is only in the Name of the Lord, with his Words, and in Bowels
moved by the Testimony of Christ; the extent whereof, as in Gospel set forth,
all that in heart believe, have a Priaciple within their heart, leading to as
much as I desire; whose hearts, I fear it not, are with me in this Address.

Wherefore I entreat all Men, and especially Brethren, as we acknowledge the
Wisdom, Love, and Goodness of God in his ordainment, in giving us this
Government, and putting us under it: so let us accept it, submit to it, pray
earnestly for blessing on our Protector, and all in Authority under him, and
live under the Government with submission to the Higher Powers, obeying
Magistrates; and as far as is possible, live peaceably with all men,
endeavoring to keep the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace with all our
Brethren: so shall we not hinder our selves of our desired and expected good;
but may still expect the continuance and increase thereof to Governors and
governed; and the God of peace will be with us. So be it.

FINIS.

