THE GRAND INQUIRY WHO IS THE Righteous Man: OR, The Character of a true
Believer in his approaches toward Heaven.

Whereunto is added The Resolution of a Case of Separation betwixt Man and
Wife, Propounded to the Author by a party much concerned.

By William Moore Rector at Whalley in Lancashire.

London, Printed by E. Cotes, for Henry Eversden, at the Gray-hound in Paul's
Churchyard, 1658.

To the Honorable Sir RALPH ASHTON Baronet.
SIR,
YOur request is a command. I have transcribed these notes, and as near as I
could to a very syllable as they were delivered in the Pulpit. Not that I judge
them worthy your further view, but because I judge you worthy to command any
thing which is called mine. And it is an honor to me that you do accept of
this poor mite. If in the least a furtherance to the joy of Faith, it will more
then recompense. That you take heed to the better part, searching the
Scriptures whether these things be so, bespeaks you a Berean, and of more noble
spirit. But second thoughts I presume will correct your motion for the Press.
We live in a bold age indeed, Scribimus indocti doctique: And Jeremie's Figs
have their applause, both those that are extremely good, and those that are
extremely bad: but this you will find in neither basket. The Subject I confess
is worthy to be seen abroad; and now perhaps more necessary, then at other
times. We see how the Jesuit has exchanged his poison: and the generation of
vipers multiply. Oh how they rend the bowels of their Mother! And the Church of
England, once the most glorious Church in the Christian world, now fled into
the Wilderness. Yet Eliah has some Thousands, and a John in Patmos,
companions in tribulation, and in the Kingdom, and patience of Jesus Christ.
The Lord put it into the hands and hearts of our Nehemiahs to reedifie
Jerusalem. The chief stone in the foundation is here laid. But I could wish a
Bezaleel in the work, a more skilful builder, Mihi curta supellex. It holds
good with me in more senses then in one. Besides, you know my constant task;
and it falls out with me, as with the man that has many children, the younger
still robs the elder: nor have I done the double service of one day, but
another is still calling on me. Both shoulders have their burden. Yet such as it
is, both my self and it lie prostrate at your Honors feet. I am

Sir, Your devoted Servant in the Lord, William Moore.

THE GRAND INQUIRY WHO IS THE Righteous Man.
PSALM. 32.11. -- Rejoice ye Righteous --
BEloved, we live in dismal and sad times: as that day of Joel, A day of
darkness and of gloominesse, a day of clouds and of thick darkness. And now
if ever, Isa. 22.12. the Lord oals to weeping. This Text then may seem
unseasonable at this time. As the rain in harvest, so is music in the day of
mourning. Be not mistaken, There Is a sorrow in rejoicing, I said of laughter,
it is mad; and there is a joy in sorrowing, As sorrowing, says S. Paul, yet
always rejoicing. How miserable is man's condition upon earth, whilst his joy
and sorrow meet so close together, that tears express both! Habet and gaudium
suas lachrymas, habent and lachrymae suum gaudium. Joy has its tears, and
tears has their joy. I speak not now of that frothy, flashy, foolish mirth of
the world; Oh miseri quorum gaudia crimen habet, Miserable we that cannot be
merry without sin: But of that solid, serious, severe mirth; Mihi creed, res
severa est verum gaudium, says Seneca, Believe me, true joy it is a severe
thing, true, spiritual, and real joy. And let me tell you further, that sorrow
is sometimes unseasonable, but this joy never. This may seem a paradox: but so
the Apostle calls upon you, and with a duplication also, Phil. 4.4. Rejoice in
the Lord always: and again I say, rejoice. And when ever was the word more
seasonable, then whilst the Saints are weeping to behold those sad rents and
schisms of their mother the Church, the wounds she receives in the house of her
friends? It is Solomon's counsel, Prove. 31.6. Give strong drink unto him that is
ready to perish, and wine unto those that be of heavy hearts: Let him drink and
forget his poverty, and remember his misery no more. Therefore is it that I
call upon you, Rejoice ye righteous.

Rejoice ye righteous.
In handling of these words, I shall first show you who this Righteous man is:
and then what reason he has of rejoicing.

The resolving of this is a work of difficulty. Certain I am that all men are
sinners. Prove. 20.9. Who can say, I have made my heart clean, I am pure from my
sin? The affirmative interrogation implies a more vehement negation, that
indeed none can say it, and say truly. And if none can say that he has made
his heart clean, if none can say that he is pure from his sin, then who can say
that he is righteous? How righteous, and yet a sinner? and this before God too,
who sees all things as they are? This is indeed the darkest riddle in Divinity,
one of the greatest mysteries in the Gospel. Nor is it to be resolved with the
help of Reason, but of Faith. The more we seek for it in the strength of our
own brain, the further we are carried from it, and it seems impossible. But God
has revealed it to his Saints. To you it is given to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom.

And as it is a work of difficulty, so of great necessity; for till this be
done, we do but build without foundation. What is it to tell you of a seed-time
of light here, and a harvest of joy hereafter? we see the strain of the
Scriptures, full indeed of precious and sweet promises, but these only to the
Righteous. Whilst every man therefore is conscious to himself of his own
guilt, that he is a sinner, who shall presume to put in his sickle, or to lay
hold upon those joys? When they brought before him the woman that was taken in
adultery, says our Savior to her accusers, He that is without sin cast the
first stone at her. And they all went out one by one, every man left her. That
indeed was our Saviors purpose, for they came to entangle him. So here,
whilst the Psalmist calls upon the righteous only, seeing there is no man
without sin, what is it, but as if he should say, Let no man rejoice? This word
is as the Cherubims at the gates of Paradise, to exclude all hope, that none
might enter in at those everlasting doors. Till therefore we understand this
Riddle, How a man may have sin, and yet be without sin, how a man may be a
sinner, and yet righteous, we do but preach as V. Beda to a heap of stones,
there is none to hear us. This then is the foundation of all our Evangelical
comfort. The understanding of this is that upon which depends all our joy and
happiness, both in this world and that which is to come. It requires therefore
as my greatest pains, so your best attention. And the rather because Satan is
so busy. The god of this world has blinded the eyes of them that believe not,
lest the light of the glorious Gospel of Christ should shine unto them. The
understanding of this mystery is the shining of this glorious Gospel.
Therefore he casts clouds upon it, because he knows, that the right
understanding of these things, is that which sets open the gates of heaven to
poor penitent sinners: for this is life eternal, to know Christ the Lord, our
righteousness. Therefore he imployes his instruments, and they raise up the
mists of error to darken our understandings. Our Adversaries of Rome tell us of
a righteousness of works, nor only in the way of precept, but of counsel, works
of supererogation too; a doing of more then the Law requires. Hence their
Pardons, Indulgences, and the like, out of those overflowing merits of the
Saints. Nay the Jesuit has exchanged his poison, a generation of vipers there
is amongst our selves, not worthy the mention in this place: O how they rend
the bowels of their dear Mother the Church, even denying the Lord that bought
them! The rather therefore let us give all diligence to search it, and to find
it out. And in this discovery I beseech you not to consult with your own sense
and reason, that is but to consult with flesh and blood; much less would I
have you to take things upon trust, because this or that man has spoken it;
but because this is the foundation whereupon is built all our interest in the
joy of Saints, therefore consult we with the sacred Oracles, the writings of
the Prophets and Apostles, those holy men who spoke as they were moved by the
holy Ghost. Sure I am, that here is the infallible truth which cannot deceive
us. The mouth of the Lord of Hosts has spoken this. To return therefore to our
purpose, By the light of Scripture to discover to you, Who is this Righteous
Man.

For the right understanding of this, we must know, that there is a twofold
Righteousness, a Righteousness of works, and a Righteousness of Faith.

1. The Righteousness of Works.
This is when a man continues in all things that are written in this book to do
them, when we perform a perfect, exact, unsinning obedience to the whole Law of
God. This righteousness of the Law is the righteousness of Works. Romans 10.5.
Moses describes the righteousness of the Law, that the man which does those
things shall live by them. So it is a righteousness in the way of doing, in the
way of Works. Now thus we say with Paul, Romans 3.10. There is none righteous, no
not one. I know there are some say otherwise, and we hear their brags, they
fulfill the Law, nay more then the Law requires, else why do they tell us of
the works of supererogation? or from whence should arise that treasure of
Saints merits, which the Pope dispenses to redeem souls out of Purgatory? So
the Pharisees trusted in themselves, that they were righteous; but the Apostle
argues it, Gal. 3.21, 23. If there had been a Law given which could have given
life, verily righteousness should have been by the Law. But the Scripture has
concluded all under sin, that the promise by Faith of Jesus Christ, might be
given to them that believe. The Scripture has concluded all under sin, that
therefore we might not seek for righteousness in the way of the Law, but in the
way of Faith. It is the Apostles peremptory conclusion, Gal. 2.6. By the works
of the Law, shall no flesh be justified. And it is a clear truth: For,

1. Is there any that does all things that are written in this book, and
continues in so doing? It is a passage in the prayer of Solomon, 1 King. 8.46.
If they sin against thee (for there is no man that sins not) and thou be
angry, etc. If they sin against thee: but lest some should question this,
because he speaks it with an if, therefore he brings in this sad parenthesis,
There is no man that sins not. Not any man whatsoever, not the most holy, the
most righteous man. The words are express, Eccles. 7.20. There is not a just
man upon earth, that does good and sins not. Though there be just men upon
earth, yet no man so just, but sometimes he sins. Nor is it the language of the
old Testament, but of the New. J^m. 3 2. In many things we offend all. Not in
some things, but in many things; not they, but we, and all we; he brings in
himself amongst them, though he was a servant of Jesus Christ, and a Minister
of the Gospel, 1 John 1.8. If we say, we have no sin, we deceive our selves.
And Christ himself has taught us, When ye pray, say, Our Father which art in
heaven -- Forgive us our trespasses. Why does he teach us to pray daily for the
forgiveness of our sins, but because we are daily committing of new sins? even
those that call God father.

2. But suppose we now do all things that are written in this book, and
continue in so doing, yet it has been otherwise. Says Paul, Before, I was a
persecutor, a blasphemer, and injurious. And 1 Cor. 6.11. Such were some of
you: Nay not some, but all, Ephesians. 2.1, 2, 3. And you has he quickened, who
were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein in time past ye walked according to
the course of this world, according to the Prince of the power of the air, the
spirit that now works in the children of disobedience, among whom also we all
had our conversation in times past. Not ye, but we also, and all we. Suppose
then we walk at present as Zachary and Elizabeth, in all the Commandments and
Ordinances of God blameless, yet formerly we have gone astray: and if we look
upon time past, we must needs acknowledge, we are transgressors of the Law. Now
who shall expiate those sins for us, or quit us from that former guilt in the
time of our ignorance, that so we may appear as righteous in the sight of God?

3. But suppose we could clear our selves of actual transgression, and say with
the young man in the Gospel, we have kept all the Commandments of God from our
youth up, yet we know that we are born in sin. Ephesians. 2.3. We are by nature the
children of wrath even as others. All by nature in the same condition. And why
children of wrath, but because born in sin? Job 14.4. Who can bring a clean
thing out of an unclean? Not one. Adam begot a son in his own likeness, as for
nature, so corruption of nature. Such as the fountain is, such are the streams:
therefore sinful sons, because descended from the loins of sinful parents.
Romans 5.12. As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin: so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. For that, or in whom: the word
is (...), in whom all have sinned.

4. But suppose we could quit our selves of that too, that we could free our
selves from all sin both actual and original, yet then consider what must
necessarily follow. Surely to such a man there would be no need of Christ. Mat.
9.12. They that be whole need not the physician, but they that be sick. Christ
is the great. Physician of the soul, they that are righteous they need not a
Christ, only those that are sick, those that are sinners. If any man can be
justified by the works of the law, then in vain is it that Christ tasted death
for every man; in vain is it that he died for all men. It is not mine, but the
Apostles inference, Gal 2.21. If righteousness come by the Law, then Christ is
dead in vain. Those that pretend to the righteousness of works, they do what
lies in them to make the death and passion of our blessed Savior in vain and
to no purpose. They have no need of him.

5. But suppose that they stood in need, as our adversaries will acknowledge it
in another way, to merit for them, that they may be able to merit for
themselves: yet whilst they think to be justified by their works, Christ will
have nothing to do with them. Says our Savior to the Pharisees, who trusted
in themselves that they were righteous, Mat. 9.13. I came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. And Mat. 18.11. The Son of man is come to
save that which is lost. And in another place he tells us, That he was not sent,
save to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. Till therefore we find our
selves in a lost condition, Christ has no errand to us. The Apostle shall
conclude this point, Gal. 5.4. Christ is become of none effect unto you,
whosoever of you are justified by the Law; ye are fallen from Grace. The Churches
of Galatia were exceedingly troubled with these Pharisaical Justiciaries, and
indeed his whole Epistle is nothing in a manner but a confutation of such proud
and vain boasting: and here he shows them in few words what the issue of that
was, whilst they put confidence in works, though they professed Christ, yet
thus indeed they made him of no effect, they inslaved themselves to the bondage
of the Law, and so cast themselves out of the estate of Grace.

Beloved, mistake me not, I speak not this to remit your care and zeal of
weldoing; God forbid. The Law must still be the rule of your holy walking. Romans
3.31. Do we make void the Law through faith? God forbid; yea we establish the
Law. And this we pray, Col. 1.10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto
all welpleasing, being fruitful unto every good work. To this we exhort and
charge you, 1 Timothy 6.17. You that are rich in this world, that ye do good, that
ye be rich in good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying
up in store for your selves a good foundation for the time to come, that ye may
lay hold upon eternal life. Thus we press you further, Romans 2.6. God will
render to every man according to his works. According to his works, though not
for his works, as the meritorious cause. According to our works, so shall be
the degree of glory. Thus in the way of thankfulness, in the way of obedience,
and that you may receive the crown of righteousness, a greater measure and
degree of glory, no Papist in the world can more earnestly preach works then we
do. And it is observed, that in less then one hundred years since the
Reformation, more works of charity have been done in England then in three
hundred years before. (Woe is me, that latter times are grown more barren in
good works, more fruitful in the works of darkness. But so it was prophesied,
because iniquity shall abound, the love of many shall wax cold.) Yet when all
this is spoken, it is not to merit heaven by so doing. Ephesians. 2.8. By grace ye
are saved through Faith, and that not of your selves, it is the gift of God:
not of works, lest any man should boast. For we are his workmanship, created in
Christ Jesus unto good works, which God has before ordained that we should
walk in them. We are created to good works, yet not saved by them, lest any man
should boast. Romans 4.2. If Abraham were justified by works, he has whereof to
glory. It is not of works therefore, but merely of free Grace. Romans 4.4. To him
that works is the reward reckoned, not of grace, but of debt. And Romans 11.6.
If by Grace, then is it no more of Works: otherwise grace is no more grace. So
not to discourage Works, but to take you off from that self-justification in a
legal way, and to build your Faith upon the sure foundation. I proceed to

2. The Righteousness of Faith.
This is that true Evangelical Righteousness by which we stand justified before
God: not the righteousness of Works, but the righteousness of Faith. Romans 3.20.
By the deeds of the Law there shall no flesh be justified in his sight: for by
the Law is the knowledge of sin. But now the righteousness of God without the
Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, even the
Righteousness of God, which is by Faith of Jesus Christ unto all, and upon all
that believe. The righteousness of God without Works, the righteousness of God
which is by the Faith of Jesus. There is a remarkable expression, and it is
worthy our observation, Romans 9.30. The Gentiles which followed not after
righteousness, have attained unto righteousness, even the righteousness
which is of Faith: But Israel which followed after the Law of righteousness,
has not attained to the Law of righteousness. Wherefore? because they sought
it not by Faith, but as it were by the Works of the Law. The Gentiles which
sought not after Righteousness, they found it; the Israelites which sought
after Righteousness, they found it not: this is a strange mystery, but the
Apostle shows you the meaning of it. The Gentiles sought not righteousness in
the way of Works, but in the way of Faith; the Israelites sought it not in the
way of Faith, but in the way of Works. The more we seek for it in this legal
way, the further we are carried from it. Romans 10.3. They being ignorant of Gods
righteousness, and going about to establish their own righteousness, have not
submitted themselves unto the righteousness of God. It is not then the
righteousness of Works, but the righteousness of Faith which gives us
interest in the Promises, and intitles us to this rejoicing. To discover
therefore what this Righteousness is, I shall show unto you,

1. That it is the Righteousness of Christ; it is not our own righteousness,
but Christ's righteousness. Isa. 45.24, 25. Surely shall one say, In the Lord
have I righteousness -- In the Lord shall all the seed of Israel be justified,
and shall glory. Not a righteousness wrought in us, but a righteousness
wrought for us, not in our selves, but in the Lord. In the Lord have I
righteousness, and in the Lord shall all Israel be justified. Hence Jer. 23.6.
This is his Name whereby he shall be called, THE LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS. And as
it is the language of the Prophets, so of the Apostles. Hence is it that they
call it the Righteousness of God. Romans 3.21. The righteousness of God without
the Law is manifested. V. 22. The righteousness of God which is by the Faith
of Jesus. And Phil. 3.9. The righteousness which is of God by Faith.

2. That this Righteousness of God is received by Faith. So the Apostle there
explains it, in Phil. 3.8, 9. I count all things but dung, that I may win
Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness, which is of
the Law, but that which is through the Faith of Christ, the righteousness
which is of God by Faith. By Faith it is that we receive Christ. Joh. 1.12. As
many as received him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God, even to
as many as believed on his Name. To receive him, and to believe on him is one,
and the same. By faith we receive Christ, so by faith we receive the
righteousness of Christ. And take notice of the manner how, it is worthy your
observation, that you may know the nature of that Faith which justifies.

1. We receive this righteousness into our heads, hence knowing sometimes is
set for believing. Joh. 17.3. This is life eternal to know thee -- and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent.

Then 2. We receive this righteousness into our hearts. As we know it, so we
love it. Hence that phrase, Act. 15.9. Purifying their hearts by Faith.

And then 3 We receive this righteousness into our lives and conversations. As
we love it, so in some measure we are transformed into it. So the Apostle
follows it, Phil. 3.10. That I may know him, and the power of his
resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable to
his death. Where there is a receiving of the righteousness of Christ by says,
there is a conforming to the same likeness. For you must know, that true faith
is not an idle speculative notion of the brain, but a powerful working grace
upon the heart. Faith is sometimes reckoned amongst the gifts of the Spirit, 1
Cor. 12.9. And sometimes it is reckoned amongst the fruits of the Spirit, Gal.
5 22. Faith is sometimes a Gift, and sometimes a Grace. As it is a Gift, so it
is speculative and notional; as it is a Grace, so it is powerful and practical.
And this at once, if righly understood, easily reconciles St. Paul's conclusion,
That a man is justified by Faith without the deeds of the Law, with that of St.
James, Ye see then, how that by works a man is justified, and not by faith
only. Not by faith which is alone, but by a working Faith. Though works be not
the meritorious cause in point of justification, but the righteousness of
Christ received by faith, yet this faith is working, and it works this
righteousness, as into our heads, so into our hearts, and into our lives.
Though it be not this work of righteousness wrought in us that properly
justifies, but the righteousness of Christ wrought for us, yet true justifying
faith thus receives this righteousness.

3. That this Faith thus receiving Christ is accounted unto us for
righteousness. God imputes that righteousness of Christ to us, if we thus
believe. Jam. 2.23. Abraham believed God, and it was imputed unto him for
righteousness, and he was called the friend of God. That righteousness
whereby Abraham was justified in the sight of God, it was a righteousness
imputed. Not a Putative righteousness, as our Adversaries scornfully reproach
it, but a real righteousness, the righteousness of Christ, yet an imputed
righteousness. So is that righteousness by which we are justified. Romans 4.23.
It was not written for his sake alone, that it was imputed to him: but for us
also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him who raised up Jesus
from the dead. We are justified in the same way, and by the same faith, that
Abraham was. Gal. 3.6. Even as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to
him for righteousness. So it is with us. Verse. 7. They that are of the faith
of Abraham, are the children of Abraham. Verse. 9. They which be of the faith,
are blessed with faithful Abraham. What Abraham's faith was, we read, Heb.
11.7. Abraham when he was tried, by faith offered up Isaac, and he that had
received the promises, offered up his only begotten son, of whom it was said,
that in Isaac shall thy seed be called: accounting that God was able to raise
him up, even from the dead: from whence also he received him in a figure. Did
Abraham see no further then this figure? Yes doubtless, In this he beheld God
sacrificing his own son, on that very mount, where he should have offered
Isaac. Isaac was but the Figure, Christ is the Substance. Says our Savior,
Joh. 8.56. Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it, and was glad. And so
all the Patriarchs, 1 Cor. 10.4. They all did drink of the same spiritual
drink, for they drank of that rock that followed them, and that rock was
Christ. They of that rock that followed them, as we of that rock that is gone
before us. Abraham saw Christ with the eye of Faith, and believed on him, and
testified his faith by his works, faith working by love, says God, Genesis 22.12.
Now I know thou love me, seeing thou have not withheld thy son, thine only
son from me. And this faith was counted unto him for righteousness.

Thus may you see what that righteousness is by which we stand justified in
the sight of God. It is not the righteousness of Works, that exact unsinning
obedience to the whole Law of God; but it is the righteousness of Faith, the
righteousness of Christ received by faith, which is accounted unto us for
righteousness. And thus you may easily resolve the Riddle, How a man may be
righteous, and yet a sinner. Though a sinner in himself, in relation to the
righteousness of Works, yet without sin in Christ, in relation to the
righteousness of Faith, the righteousness of Christ through faith imputed
unto us for righteousness. And this is that righteousness which intitles us
to all the promises, and gives us an interest in this joy of Saints. 1 Pet.
1.8. Believing ye rejoice with joy unspeakable, and full of glory.

But because this is a point of such high concernment, for the further clearing
of it, a question must be here propounded,

How a man may be justified by the righteousness of another?

This is indeed the dark side of the cloud, not to be discerned with the eye of
sense or reason. Consult we with the sacred Oracles, which cannot deceive us.
Romans 4.5, 6. To him that works not, but believes on him that justifies the
ungodly; his faith is counted for righteousness. Even as David also describes
the blessedness of the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without
works. There is an imputed righteousness, a righteousness without works. And
if we believe on him, there is one, who justifies the ungodly, and our faith is
counted unto us for righteousness. For the better understanding of this take
notice,

1. That Christ is become our Surety. Heb. 7.22. He was made surety of a better
Testament. Now as the surety makes the debt his own, so our sins are Christ's.
Such was his singular love toward us, that he was content to take all our sins
upon himself. 1 Pet. 2.24. He bare our sins in his own body on the tree. It was
love indeed. A man void of understanding becomes surety for his friend, says
Solomon, And he that becomes a surety is ensnared in the words of his own
mouth. Christ was content thus to become a fool, thus to be taken, thus to be
ensnared, to become our surety. As once Rebecca to her son, On me be the curse
my son, so Christ here, On me be the guilt of sin. Or as Paul to Philemon, in
behalf of Onesimus, If he have wronged thee, or if he owe thee any thing, set
it on my score, I will repay it; I Paul have written it with mine own hand: So
Christ delivers his Epistle to the Father, not under hand and seal, but
confirmed in his own blood, and he takes all our sins upon himself, and writes
them to his own account, as no longer ours, but his own.

2. That God was content to accept him as our surety. Here is no wrong to
parties, as Christ was content to undertake all for us, so is God pleased to
lay all our sins upon his shoulders. Isa. 53.6. The Lord has laid upon him the
iniquity of us all. The Lord against whom the sin was committed, he was
contented to quit us, and to put all upon Christ's score, so to receive the
satisfaction at his hands. Says Christ, when the soldiers came to apprehend
him, If ye seek me, then let these men go. Christ was content to be
apprehended, that we might be set at liberty: and God was well pleased with
this dismission. So he has put our sins upon Christ's account.

3. That Christ as our surety has discharged the debt. And a debt must not be
twice paid, that stands not with Gods justice. Christ has suffered for us,
Dan. 9.26. After threescore and two weeks shall Messiah be cut off, but not for
himself. Not for himself, but us. By the way take we notice, It was not
properly Christ's active obedience (as some think) by which we are made
righteous, for if that had been accounted unto us for righteousness, it being
a spotless and a perfect righteousness, there had been no need of his death
and passion. I speak not this to create a controversy, but to show you, If not
the active obedience of our blessed Savior, then much less our own. I
confess it was necessary, to give way to his passion, that it might be a
satisfaction: for had he been a sinner, he could not have been a sacrifice for
sin, but first he must have satisfied for himself. Yet it is his blood which
redeems us from our sins, 1 Pet. 1.18. Ye were not redeemed with corruptible
things, as silver and gold -- but with the precious blood of Christ. It is his
blood, the blood of him (too scornfully reproached by some) who dyed at
Jerusalem, (though they make it but a figure, and so show themselves in the
number of those damnable Heretics, 2 Pet. 2.1. Even denying the Lord that
bought them. Yet) Col. 1.19, 20. It pleased the father that in him should all
fullness dwell, and (having made peace through the blood of his Cross) by him
to reconcile all things to himself. By his Blood upon the cross we are
reconciled, and our peace is made; by that blood which was once shed, and but
once (we need not a second sacrifice, that unbloudy sacrifice in the Mass for
that purpose) Heb. 10.12. This man after he had offered one sacrifice for sins
for ever, sat down on the right hand of God. And verse. 14. By one offering he
has perfected for ever them that are sanctified. The blood of this sacrifice,
thus once offered on the Cross at Jerusalem, is that which wipes off the
score, 1 John 1.7. The blood of Christ cleanses from all sin.

4. And ex abundanti, That God will no more lay our sins unto our charge: Isai.
38.17. Thou have cast all my sins behind thy back. So has he blotted them out
of his remembrance, Isai. 43.25. I, even I am he, that blotteth out thy
transgression, for my own names sake, and will not remember thy sins. He
crosses the book, and not only so, for that still is a Memorandum, though the
debt be paid, but he quite blots it out, that it may never be remembered any
more. And this is that, which, if understood, clearly resolves the Riddle, and
dissolves the cloud. It is indeed the marrow of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 5.19. God
was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses
unto them. And herein consists the happiness of the Saints on earth, not that
they have no sin, but that God will not lay it to their charge. Psalm. 32.1.
Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, and whose sin is covered:
blessed is the man to whom the Lord imputes not iniquity.

Thus I have showed you, that it is not the righteousness of Works, for by the
works of the Law shall no flesh be justified: but it is the righteousness of
Faith, the righteousness of Christ imputed, Romans 4.11. Abraham received the
sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of Faith, which he had being
yet uncircumcised; that he might be the father of all them that believe, though
they be not circumcised, that righteousness might be imputed to them also. And
for the clearing of this, you hear, how Christ is become our surety, He bare
our sins; that God is willing to receive the satisfaction at his hands, He has
laid upon him the iniquity of us all; That Christ has discharged our debt, He
died for us; and that God will not lay our sins unto our charge; Thus then we
appear as righteous in the sight of God.

Beloved, I have stood the longer on this point, as on the one hand, to fill
your hearts with peace and joy in believing, that I might send you away, as
Philip did the Ethiopian Eunuch, rejoicing on your way; or as the shepherds,
glorifying and praising God for the things that ye have heard: so on the other
hand, to convince gainsayers, whilst they upbraid us, that we leave the people
in their sins, and deny the perfection of the Saints, and divest them of all
righteousness. Though we deny the righteousness of works, the leaven of the
Scribes and Pharisees; yet do we not show you a righteousness of Faith? Nay, a
more absolute and perfect righteousness then any they dream on? Suppose they
should keep the Law, as they vainly boast, yet here is a righteousness beyond
it, a righteousness beyond that of Adam in the state of Innocence, nay beyond
that of Angels, it is the righteousness of God. 2 Cor. 5.21. He has made him
to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him. Not in our selves, but in Christ; not righteous, but righteousness
it self, even the righteousness of God in him.

The Righteousness of God.
1. Therefore the most absolute, exact, and perfect righteousness that can be
imagined. The righteousness which they speak on, suppose it were as big as
they boast, yet it is but the righteousness of the creature, and it has its
blemishes: but this is the righteousness of God, therefore without spot, and
without blemish. Hence we read those high expressions, Cant. 4.7. Thou art all
fair my love, there is no spot in thee. And as the Spouse in the Old Testament,
so the Church in the New, Ephesians. 5.27. That he might present it to himself a
glorious Church, not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, but that it
should be holy and without blemish.

2. Therefore an unchangeable righteousness. The righteousness of the
creature is as the early dew, which soon vanishes. Adam, first in an estate of
innocence, but he fell away; and the Angels kept not their first estate, but
left their own habitation, and therefore, says St. Jude, they are reserved in
everlasting chains under darkness to the judgment of the great day. But, Mal.
3.6. I am the Lord, I change not. And as is himself, so is his righteousness,
unchangeable. Dan. 9.24. Seventy weeks are determined upon the people, and upon
the holy city, to finish transgression, and to make an end of sin, and to make
reconciliation for iniquity, and to bring in everlasting righteousness. It
must needs be unchangeable, because everlasting. This then is a sure rock, that
will never fail us. Hence the Apostles triumph, Romans 8.33. Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods elect? It is God that justifies. Who shall
condemn? It is Christ that died.

3. Therefore a most acceptable and wel-pleasing righteousness. God must needs
own himself, the righteousness which is of God. Mat. 3.17. This is my beloved
son, in whom I am well pleased. Not with whom, but in whom: the meaning is,
that God in Christ is well pleased with us also. Ephesians. 5.2. He has given
himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God, for a sweet smelling
savor. When Jacob appeared before his father in the garments of his brother
Esau, See, says Isaac, the smell of my son is as the smell of a field which
the Lord has blessed: so when we appear in the righteousness of Christ, those
white robes of our elder brother, then we are unto God indeed a sweet savor in
Christ Jesus. Righteousness belongs unto thee, says Daniel, but to us
confusion: and Daniel found favor in Gods sight. The more that we take shame
and confusion to our selves, the more we give God the glory of his
righteousness: and the more that we give him the glory of his righteousness,
the more shall we find favor in the sight of God. So not to denude the
people, but to cloathe them with that absolute and perfect righteousness, that
everlasting and unchangeable righteousness, that acceptable and wel-pleasing
righteousness, the righteousness of God which is my faith.

But to give it yet a further vindicaon from the standers of our foul-mouthed
Adversaries, take notice,

The righteousness of Faith is no Doctrine of Licentiousness.

This Doctrine does not open a door to profaneness: but on the contrary, 1 John 2.1. These things write I unto you, that ye sin not. This is the
engagement on our souls. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous, and he is the propitiation for our sins. These
words are recorded for us, not to harden, but to melt our hearts, These things,
says St. John, write I unto you that ye sin not. When Saul saw the goodness
of David in sparing his life, he lift up his voice and wept. It is impossible
for a man to believe that God has done all this for him, impossible I say,
truly and indeed to believe this, that God has wrought such a righteousness
for us, but it must needs melt us into godly sorrow, that ever we should sin
against so good a God. It is the strongest tie that can be laid upon any
rational and ingenuous spirit. This is the true Evangelical way, Romans 4.2.
Know ye not, that the goodness of God leads you to repentance? This is Gods
way, Hos. 11.4. I drew them with cords of a man, with bands of love: and I was
to them as they that take off the yoke on their jaws, and I laid meat unto
them. These are as cords and bands, as the strongest cords, beyond those of
Philistims; Samson himself cannot break these bands, if once they be laid on
indeed. 1 John 3.3. Every man that has this hope in him, purifieth himself,
even as he is pure. And it must need be thus, if we consider,

1. The end of that great work by which our righteousness is wrought. What was
his purpose in it? Luke 1.74. He has delivered us out of the hands of our
enemies, that we might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness
before him all our days. This was his end, therefore was it he delivered us,
that we might serve him, as in righteousness, so in the truth of holiness.
Thus Tit. 2.14. He gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all
iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. He
gave himself for us, as to redeem us from our sins, to justify us; so to
purify us to himself, to sanctify us; that so we might be a special, a
peculiar people, separated from the world, a people zealous of good works.
Shall I give you a third Scripture? And therefore is it that I multiply,
because I would have you to take notice of it. Col. 1.21.23. You that were
sometimes alienated, and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he
reconciled, in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy, and
unblamable, and unreprovable in his sight. Therefore was it that he took flesh
upon him, therefore was it that he suffered death, this was his end, as to
reconcile us unto God, so that we might be holy, and unblamable, and
unreprovable in the sight of God. And now do but seriously consider this. Has
Christ thus suffered for us, and will he be disappointed of that for which he
suffered? or do we think that we shall have our end of Christ, and that Christ
will lose his end of us? That we shall be made the righteousness of God in
him, yet still continue in our wickedness? Be not deceived, you cannot thus
disappoint him of his purpose: conclude rather that you have no portion in his
death.

2. The nature of that faith by which we receive this righteousness. True
faith, as I told you, is not an idle speculative notion of the brain; but a
powerful working grace upon the heart. Act. 15.9. Purifying their hearts by
faith. Those that pretend to faith, and have not their hearts in some measure
purified, they do but flatter themselves with a mere fancy, and a vain
presumption. It is but a counterfeit, a false faith; Faith without Works is
dead, says St. James: and St. Paul tells us, that faith works by love: As
faith without works is but a dead faith, so works without love they are but
dead works. Though I give all my goods unto the poor, and have not charity, I
am nothing. Now faith it begets love; and the more we believe that God has
done all this for us, the more it inflames our heart with the love of God. And
love is of a constraining nature, it sets a man upon work indeed. David's three
Worthies will adventure through the whole host of the Philistims to fetch water
from the well at Bethlehem, out of their love to David. And St. Paul commends
the Macedonians, that to their power, yea and beyond their power, they were
willing of themselves. As St. James, therefore Show me, O man, thy faith by thy
works. So true faith is no invisible grace, but a grace which may be seen, seen
by its works. Such is the faith by which we obtain the blessing. When Isaac
blessed his son Jacob, he calls to him, Come near I pray thee, that I may feel
thee, my son, whether thou be my very son Esau, or not. He would not bless him
by the voice, but he will feel and handle him, whether his hands be the hands
of Esau: so God will not bless us by the voice, because we say that we
believe, but he will feel and handle us, whether our hands be the hands of
faith, hands that work the works of faith. And take further notice, that true
faith it has two hands, as with the one it holds upward, and lays hold upon
the righteousness of Christ for justification; so with the other it works
downward, and conveys this righteousness into the head, and into the heart,
and into the life for sanctification. Those that flatter themselves with a good
faith to Godward, and yet without works, they do but prophecy to themselves a
lie, a false vision, and a divination, and a thing of naught, the deceit of
their own heart. It is but a counterfeit, a false faith, and receives but a
counterfeit, a false righteousness, not the righteousness of God which is by
the faith of Jesus.

3. The nature of God, whose righteousness this is. Where the righteousness
of God is, there must needs be a change; for will God cast pearls before swine,
or give holy things to dogs? Will he put this new wine into old bottles, or
these holy things into unclean vessels? No, but first he gives us a new heart,
and creates in us a right spirit. For what fellowship has righteousness with
unrighteousness? Where the righteousness of God is, it transformes us in some
measure into its own likeness. 2 Cor. 3.18. We all, with open face, beholding,
as in a glass, the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from
glory to glory, even as by the spirit of the Lord. You have seen the glory of
the Lord, the glory of his righteousness. We all, and with open face, if the
God of this world has not blinded our eyes, behold, though but as in a glass,
on- with an eye of faith, yet thus beholding it has wrought a change, and into
the same likeness, so will it transform us from glory to glory, from the glory
of grace here, to that glory of glories in the highest heavens. But thus there
is a work of the Spirit here, here it begins the change, and we are changed
into the same image. When the Sun comes in at the window, it inlightens the
room: so when the Sun of righteousness shines into a soul, the beams of that
righteousness must needs reflect upon that soul. When Moses had been talking
with God, we read, that his face shined: So is it impossible that we should
have to do with this righteousness of God, but the splendour of it will, in some
measure, put upon our hearts the beauties of holiness. It must needs be thus.
The Apostle follows it with a (...), much more. Heb. 9.13. If the blood of
bulls and of Goats, and the ashes of an heifer, sprinkling the unclean,
sanctifies to the purifying of the flesh: how much more shall the Blood of
Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God,
purge your consciences from dead works, to serve the living God? If there was
any thing in those outward shadows, how much more in the blood of Jesus? If
they purified the flesh, how much more shall this purge your consciences? If
there be not this purging work upon your souls, never speak of this
righteousness of God received by the faith of Jesus.

Thus you see, though we be not justified by works, but by the righteousness
of God which is by faith, yet does it not loosen the rains to profane liberty,
but rather lays weight upon us; and works as naturally flow from it, as the
stream from the fountain. It is the end of our redemption, that we might be a
people zealous of good works: it is the nature of true faith, it cannot lie
idle, but it works by love: and the righteousness of God transforms us in some
measure into the same likeness. And thus we know that we have title to the
promises, and an interest in the seed-time of light here, and that harvest of
joy hereafter.

An Exhortation, to walk in this Righteousness.
For conclusion therefore, you that profess the faith, not the righteousness of
works, but the righteousness of God which is by Faith, remember there is one
thing necessary, one thing in comparison of which all other things are but as
loss, as nothing, nay as dung, worse then nothing: It is that of the Apostle,
that I may win Christ, and be found in him, not having mine own righteousness
which is of the Law, but that which is through the faith of Christ. Labor, O
labor for this righteousness, that ye may get it, first into your heads, that
ye may know it; then into your hearts, that ye may love it; then into your
lives, that ye may show forth the power of it, as the Apostle follows it,
Phil. 3.10. That I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the
fellowship of his sufferings, being made conformable to his death: So that the
life of Jesus might be manifested in our mortal bodies. O let your conversation
be as becomes the Gospel. Do not, O do not cause the Adversary to reproach. It
is the lewdness of your lives, that casts the reproach upon this Doctrine. O
let not the name of God and his doctrine be evil spoken on through your vain
conversation. As ye have received this righteousness of Christ, so walk as
those that are arrayed in these long white robes. Get into the number of the
righteous. Beloved, I know that ye desire it, at least when you come to die; I
know there is none in this congregation but could wish with Balaam, Number. 23.10.
O let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his. And
if we desire it at our deaths, why should not we endeavor it in our lives? What
a folly is it, nay do but consider seriously, what a desperate madness, that we
should desire this so seriously at our end, and yet never look after it till we
come to die; that this should be the first, the chief in our desires, and yet
the least, the last in our endeavors? Nay whilst thus we cast off the care of
Christ, and of his righteousness in our health, is it not just with him, so to
cast off the care of us when we lie upon our beds of languishing? Go cry unto
the gods whom ye have chosen, let them deliver you now in the time of your
tribulation. Whilst we disown him in our lives, have we not just cause to
fear, that so he will disown us at our deaths? Depart from me, ye workers of
iniquity, verily I know you not. If there be yet a profane heart in this
congregation, Oh do not deceive your selves with the righteousness of your
faith, nor flatter your selves with the hopes of joy. As Peter to Simon Magus,
I perceive thou art yet in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of
iniquity, and have neither part nor lot in this matter, for thy heart is not
right in the sight of God. Repent therefore of thy wickedness, and pray God,
if perhaps the thoughts of thine heart may be forgiven thee. This is a mess
provided only for a Benjamin. Rejoice ye righteous.

Beloved, we have now found out the righteous man. I have been long in this
discovery. So it concerns us. A wise builder will be careful to lay his
foundation firm. And a steward must be faithful to give every man his own
portion. So here, lest on the one hand, we should take the childrens bread, and
give it unto dogs: or on the other hand, lest we should withhold bread from the
children. Having therefore thus cleared the way, now we may more cheerfully
proceed to

The joy of the Righteous.
Be glad in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that
are upright in heart. In these words we find a Trinity in Unity, a trinity of
expressions in an unity of sense. Be glad, and rejoice, and shout for joy, all
to set forth the greatness of the joy of these happy men. Yet here, not only
to word it to the ear, but to lay it open to the eye, let us look about us.
Where can we fix our eye, but we find matter of the greatest joy? I shall now
give the reasons of it.

1. While we look above us.

God is our father: and have ye not here Homers Iliads in a nut-shel? Heaven in
a word? 2 Cor. 6.18. I will be a father unto you, and ye shall be me sons and
daughters, says the Lord God Almighty. Is not here matter of great joy? How
did it raise the spirit of David, when Saul had given him his daughter! Seems
it a small thing unto you to be the son-in-law of a King? But then 1 John 3.1.
Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed on us, that we should be
called the sons of God. But farther, as God is our Father, so Christ is our
Savior. The birth of Christ is glad tidings of great joy: so it was sung by a
whole quire of Angels. O ye that are highly favored, climb up into the
Sycomore-tree. Do ye not hear his voice? and it is sweet. This day is salvation
come unto thy house. Lord now let thou thy servant depart in peace, says
old Simeon, for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. And the blessed Virgin, My
soul does magnify the Lord, and my spirit has rejoiced in God my Savior. So
the Ethiopian Eunuch, when he had got but a glimpse of Christ, he went on his
way rejoicing. Nay, 1 Pet. 1.8. Whom having not seen, ye love; in whom though
ye see him not, yet believing ye rejoice, even with joy unspeakable and
glorious. But yet further, as Christ is our Savior, so the Holy Ghost our
Comforter, Joh. 14.16. I will pray unto the Father, and he shall give you
another Comforter, that he may abide with you for ever: even the spirit of
truth, whom the world cannot receive -- but ye know him. Do we not find the
comforts of this Spirit confirming the Adoption of the Father? He has given us
the earnest of the Spirit, even the Spirit of Adoption, whereby we cry Abba,
Father. So sealing the redemption of the Son. Oh grieve not the Spirit, by
which ye are sealed unto the day of redemption. And now do not your hearts leap
for joy, whilst thus you behold God your Father, Christ your Savior, and the
Holy Ghost your Comforter, the whole Trinity of Persons in the unity of your
consolation. Perhaps the world frowns upon you. And what a poor thing was that
of Haman, so to vex and fret himself for want of the knee of Mordecai, when he
had the favor of the King himself? But then what a pitiful thing is this in
us, to vex and torment our selves at the frowns of men, whilst we have the
love and favor of the Lord himself? Why art thou cast down, Oh my soul? As
once Elcanah to his wife, Am I not better to thee then ten sons? So is not the
love of God better to us then ten thousand worlds? Psalm. 4.6. Lord, lift thou
up the light of thy countenance upon us. This puts gladness in the heart, more
then in the time that corn, and wine, and oil increases. Oh ye Favorites of
heaven, be not awanting to your selves. If Haman had cause to pride himself in
the favor of Ahasuerus that great King of Assyria: how much more may it cheer
up your spirits that ye have the favor of God, the great God of heaven?
Rejoice ye Righteous.

2. Whilst we look below us.

Behold the Pit, that bottomless pit. Are you not affrighted with the horror of
it, such a fearful pit? So think upon that place of darkness, that blackness
of darkness. Oh how comfortless, how frightful; to be reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness! with the prince of darkness! And think upon those
chains, those everlasting chains. Ah woeful eternity! Were it on a bed of down,
if chained upon that bed, how wearisome? but there bound for ever, Oh what
heart is able to conceive the horror of this word for ever! Nay yet worse, Go
ye cursed into everlasting fire. Do not your sinews shrink to think upon this
fire, this everlasting fire? Oh how afflictive and tormenting, if but a minute
in it? How merciless and cruel is the fire above all other clements? but then
to be thrown into those unquenchable flames, the fire that shall never go out
-- who can dwell with everlasting burnings? But yet further, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels. Lord have mercy upon
me, says the woman in the Gospel, for my daughter is grievously tormented
with a Devil. But one Devil, yet grievously tormented; and it was her
daughter, yet Lord have mercy upon me. Do not your ears tingle, and your hearts
tremble, to think of that heavy doom, when sentenced amongst all those hellish
Fiends, those infernal Furies, amongst all the Devils in that pit of darkness,
in those everlasting burnings, and for ever and ever? Oh what ghastly looks,
what fearful howlings, and what hideous yellings? Then shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth indeed. Take yet another sight, Isa. 5.14. Hell has enlarged
her mouth wide, and their glory, and their multitude, and their pomp, and he
that rejoices, shall descend into it. He that now rejoices in his pomp and
glory, and with all his multitude, for hells mouth is wide. Mat. 7.13. Wide is
the gate, and broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be
which go in thereat. But strait is the gate, and narrow is the way which
leads unto life, and few there be that find it. Beloved, here is our
rejoicing, that we are not in the number of those many, but in the number of
these few, that we are prepared for life, and delivered from that sad
destruction. Romans 8.1. There is no condemnation to them that are in Christ. So
no pit, nor darkness, nor fire, nor Devil to torment them. Luke 1.74. He has
delivered us out of the hand of our enemies, that we might serve him without
fear. We are delivered from them: and the more we consider the horror of that
bottomless pit, that blackness of darkness, that unquenchable fire; the more
we consider those fearful howlings, and those hideous yellings with the Devil
and his Angels, the greater is our joy: especially whilst we take notice of
the multitudes that go down to hell. That so many millions are devoured in that
pit, and that we are delivered where so few escape; the more they are, the more
cause we have to rejoice in that great deliverance. As the Israelites whilst
they stood safe upon the shore, and beheld the drowning of the Egyptians in the
sea: or as they when delivered from the bloody plot of that cruel Haman,
wheresoever the word came, the Jews they had light and gladness, a feast and
a good day. If they for a deliverance from that which kills the body, how much
more we for a deliverance from that which casts both soul and body into hell?
The greater the deliverance is, the more is our joy. Rejoice ye Righteous.

3 Whilst we look without us.

Whilst we behold the glory of the heavens above us, the riches of the earth
below us, that variety of all creatures round about us. Psalm. 8.3. When I
consider the heavens, the work of thy fingers, the Moon, and the Stars which
thou have ordained. What is man that thou art mindful of him? or the son of
man, that thou visitest him. -- Thou have given him dominion over the works of
thy hands: thou have put all things under his feet, all sheep and oxen, yea and
the beasts of the field, the fowls of the air, and the fish of the the sea, and
whatsoever passes through the paths of the sea. All things to serve Man, that
goodly canopy of heaven that covers us, so bespangled with variety of stars:
that rich green mantle of the earth that supports us, so bestudded with variety
of plants; those vast dominions both of air and water, so peopled with an
infinite variety of creatures, not only for man's necessity but his recreation
and delight; All under man's command. So in their first creation. Genesis 1.26. Let
us make man in our own image, after our own likeness: and let him have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the foul of the air, and over the
cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that creeps
upon the earth. It is true indeed, man by his fall, as he has defaced Gods
image, so has he forfeited his rule. But here is the joy of Saints, Christ
has renewed their title. 1 Cor. 3.21. All things are yours, whether Paul, or
Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or
things to come; all are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is Gods. All are
yours, ye are the heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, who is heir of all
things. And is not here matter of great joy? We see the men of the world how
they rejoice when they have gotten but a little, but a very little in
comparison of the whole world: when Alcibiades viewed his Kingdoms in a Map,
they seemed but as the prick of a pin in comparison of the Globe. But the whole
world is yours. As Paul in another case, If any man have cause to glory, I much
more. O ye that are highly favored, be not awanting to your selves. Are ye in
distress, in necessities, in wants? Do ye murmur, and complain? It is because
your eyes are held, as Elisha's servant, Behold the mountain is full of horses
of fire, and chariots of fire round about Elisha. You have the wealth of the
whole world about you. All Is yours. Do ye want something, as ye think? but ye
want nothing, as God thinks. Though ye have it not in your own hands, yet is it
in his hands who knows what is better for you, then you do your selves. Every
man is not an Abraham, fit to be exceeding rich. And what good does a long
garment, on the back of a little child? you have his word, Psalm. 34.10. The
Lions lack and suffer hunger, but they that fear the Lord shall want no good
thing. The Lion is a beast of prey, he can feed upon dead carcasses, whilst
others perish in the famine: yet sooner shall the Lion lack, then they that
fear the Lord any thing which may be for Gods glory or their good. Do we not
see a Daniel as fair and as well liking with his pulse and water, as those that
feed at the Kings table? So God suites a portion to their minds, and they are
content with what they have. They desire no more. And here is a wealth beyond
that of Alexander. Who so rich as he that has as much as he desires?
Godliness with contentment is great gain. Without ifs or ands, it is so, it is
gain, gain with a witness, great gain. Nay more, what can you desire more?
here is gain with contentment. O ye covetous muckworms, ye that still feed upon
the earth, that toil, and sweat, and vex, and fret, rising up betimes, going
late to bed, eating the bread of carfulness, scarce giving rest unto your
bodies, nor yet peace to your own souls, that cosen and defraud your brethren,
that grind and oppress your poor neighbors, that make shipwreck of faith and
a good conscience, because you will be rich, what needs all this ado? Why will
ye go to the Devil for it? He may show you indeed, as he did our Savior, All
the Kingdoms of the word, and the glory of them; so doubtless he will flatter
you with hopes, All these will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship
me. Alas, he does but feed you with the wind. He can bestow nothing without
Gods permission. They are none of his to give. However, this is but about. Here
is the way, a ready, a compendious way, Mat. 6.33. First seek the Kingdom of
heaven, and the righteousness thereof, and all other things shall be added
unto you. O ye that are greatly beloved, ye are in this way, so ye enjoy
contentment, knowing that if more were better for you, God would bestow it on
you, so far as may be for your good, all things are yours. And if others
rejoice, when their corn, and wine, and oil increases, how much more may ye
that enjoy this fullness? Rejoice ye righteous.

4. Whilst we look within us.

Though we have less abroad, yet we have enough at home. We have God within
us. 1 Cor. 14.25. God is in you of a truth. We have Christ within us, 2 Cor. 13
5. Know ye not that Jesus Christ is in you, except ye be reprobates? We have
the Spirit within us, 2 Timothy 1.14. That good thing which was committed unto
thee, keep, by the holy Ghost which dwells in us. And is not here matter of
rejoicing? How can that soul but be very merry, (if not a stranger to its own
happiness) that entertains such Guests? But further take we notice of the
manner of Gods dwelling in us. It is not according to his Essence only, for so
he is in all places. Do not I fill heaven and earth, says the Lord? Nor yet
according to his Power, for so he is in all his creatures. In him we live, and
move, and have our being. But God is in us according to the working of his
grace and favor, informing, reforming, transforming us into his own likeness.
Consider that treasure of gifts which he has bestowed upon us, those
unsearchable riches of his grace, those fruits of the Spirit, love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: says our
Savior to his Disciples, In patience possess your souls. Though you have
little else, yet ye have patience in you, and when things are at the worst, yet
in that ye may still possess and enjoy your selves. Besides you have faith
within you, and that is a good portion, a sufficient living of it self. Hab.
2.4. The just man shall live by his faith. But above all remember, you have the
love of God within you, Romans 5.5. The love of God shed abroad in your hearts.
And is not that joy enough? Cant. 1.2. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his
mouth, for thy love is better then wine. O ye that are the Favorites of the
King of Saints, cheer up your spirits, you have that within you sufficient to
make you happy, were you as poor as Job upon the dunghill. Oh do not live
besides your wealth. Others may flatter themselves with their abundance, as the
Angel of the Church of Laodicea, Thou say I am rich, and increased with
goods, and stand in need of nothing: and know not that thou art poor, and
miserable, and blind, and naked, and have nothing. Alas, poor, miserable,
blind, deceived creatures, lean empty, and poor starved souls. But these have
it. Ye have that within you which crowns you the happy men, Felices nimium bona
si sua norint, did ye but know your own happiness. And are not your spirits as
yet up? Why what is it that still troubles you? Alas my sins! But love covers
all. Jer. 50.20. In those dates shall the iniquity of Israel be sought for, and
there shall be none: and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found: for I
will pardon them whom I reserve. There shall be none, God himself finds none:
not that God is blind, that he sees not what we see: but he gives you the
meaning in the latter clause, he sees none unpardoned, none that shall be
imputed, none that shall be laid unto our charge. Romans 5.11. We joy in God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have received the atonement. The
cloud's now removed, can you yet see your wealth? I shall give you heaven in a
word. Luke 17.20. The Kingdom of heaven is in you. And what is that? Romans
14.17. The Kingdom of heaven is righteousness, peace, and joy in the holy
Ghost. O do not rob your selves of any part of your own happiness, but as you
have a righteousness within you, so add to your righteousness peace, and to
your peace joy. Rejoice ye Righteous.

5. Whilst we look upon the right hand.

Whilst we sit under the sunshine of Gods favors, and that all things go well
with us. Whilst we look upon the mercies God bestowed upon us, be they less,
or more. We see the men of the world how glad they are, when their corn, and
wine, and oil increases. The righteous live as merrily as they do, and have
better reason for rejoicing then they have; more solid and true joy in the
least mercy they receive, then others in a great abundance: Psalm. 37.16. A
little that a righteous man has, is better then the riches of many wicked.
Their little is better then another much, better then their riches, then the
riches not of one, but many, nay put all together. Though their fare be not so
delicate, nor their clothes so gay, nor their bed so soft, yet they eat their
bread with more delight, and take their sleeps with more sweet refreshment, and
enjoy the mercies God bestows upon them, with more comfort and content then
others can. And the reason's evident.

1. Because they draw their wealth from the head of the well, the spring,
Dulcius ex ipso font, and there the water drinks more sweetly. Whilst others
drink only in the channel, receive their blessings from the hand of fortune,
or perhaps they sacrifice to their own net, as if by them their portion were
made fat; these they receive them from the hand of God, the fountain of
mercies. As once Jacob to his brother Esau, These are the children which God
has graciously given to thy servant.

2. Because they receive these mercies as pledges of Gods love and kindness
toward them. Whilst others feed upon the husk, satisfy themselves in those
poor enjoyments, and look no further then the creature; these feed upon the
kernel, they feast themselves upon God in the holy enjoyments, they see his
mercy and goodness in thus providing for them. And this affords a sweet
refreshment to their souls, infinitely beyond all their creature comforts,
whilst thus they enjoy God in the creatures, and receive them as love tokens.
This beyond all, says David, In the multitude of my thoughts, thy comforts
they delight my soul.

3. Because they have right in these enjoyments. Others indeed enjoy them by a
common providence: I will not say, as some, that they are usurpers. God gives
them their portion in this life. The eyes of all wait upon him, and he gives
them their meat in due season. But these have a more special interest, Christ
has purchased a more special title and right for them. And surely that man
lives more comfortably, that lives purely on his own. Says Paul, Let no man
glory in man, for all things are yours.

4. Because they have the right use of these enjoyments, whilst others are
worse for them, Eccles. 5.13. There is a sore evil which I have seen under the
sun, namely, riches kept for the owners thereof, to their hurt. As a sword in a
mad man's hand, so they endanger themselves with them: or at the best, they do
but gather for themselves; they live to themselves, till they lose both
themselves, and that which they have gathered. Thou fool, this night shall thy
soul be taken from thee, and then whose shall these things be? But the
righteous, they make themselves friends of that unrighteous Mammon; they lay up
for themselves treasures in heaven; If rich in this world, they are rich in
good works, ready to distribute, willing to communicate, laying up for
themselves a good foundation for the time to come, that they may lay hold upon
eternal life. What a world of difference there is between that man who has
the right use of his estate, and him that wants it? How comfortable is the life
of the one beyond the other?

5. Because their happiness does not depend upon these outward blessings. They
may take pleasure in them for a time, as the scholar takes pleasure in his
meat, but finds a better relish at his book, so they have fixed their
affections upon higher matters. If they be crossed in these enjoyments, yet there
is no interruption of their joy, because it does not depend upon them. Rev.
12.1. They have the Moon under their feet. By the Moon understand things
sublunary, all things under the Moon, they are above these things. As using the
world, says Paul, but not abusing it: and I would have you without
carfulness. Therefore they enjoy it with more comfort, because they enjoy it
with less care. Look upon a man whose happiness depends upon it, whose heart
is set upon the world, how he frets and grieves, and when crossed in his
pursuits, as Micah, Ye have taken away my Gods, how is it then that ye say unto
me, What aileth thee? Whilst those whose hearts are centred upon God, they
sing sweetly, with that holy Job, The Lord gives, and the Lord takes away,
blessed be the name of the Lord.

Lastly, Because they look upon these things, but as the Israelites on those
clusters of grapes brought by the spies out of the land of Canaan, so to put
them in mind of the wealth and fertility of the Country, to raise up their
hearts to the meditation of those heavenly joys. Every mercy we receive, it is
as another step to mount up our thoughts upon Jacobs Ladder to celestial
glories. These are but the Viaticum, a refreshment by the way, we look for
another Country, a City which has foundations, a building of God, and hourly
expect the call, Come ye blessed children of my Father, inherit ye the Kingdom
prepared for you, from the foundation of the world. And if we find this
comfort in our Inn, how much more then when we come at our own home? Thus
whilst others receive but the single comforts of these earthly blessings, the
godly have a double comfort, whilst thus from these things below they are
carried up unto the things above. If others therefore can rejoice in these
things, how much more cause have you to rejoice with joy above other men?
Rejoice ye Righteous.

6. Whilst we look upon the left hand.

Many are the troubles of the righteous. What crosses and afflictions? what
poverty and disgraces? what reproaches and persecutions? what bonds and
imprisonments? besides inward troubles, that law in our member, warring against
the law of our mind, that when we would do good evil is present with us. Oh
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? And then
God himself drawing the black curtain between him and us, withdrawing the light
of his countenance from us. Thou did hide thy face, and I was troubled. Be
not discouraged. Psalm. 112.4. Unto the righteous there arises light in
darkness. So a joy in sorrowing. Nay let me tell you further, you have more
matter of rejoicing in the very depth of your adversity, then others in the
greatest height of their prosperity. Therefore was it Moses his choice, Heb.
11.24. He chose rather to suffer affliction with the people of God, then to
enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season. He chose rather to suffer afflictions
with the people of God, then to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter:
esteeming the reproach of Christ greater riches then the treasures in Egypt.
Why art thou cast down O my soul? and why art thou disquieted within me? Look
upon thy Savior, 1 Pet. 2.22. Christ has suffered for us, leaving us an
example that we should follow his steps. And shall we not rejoice to be made
like unto Christ? This is that in comparison of which the Apostle accounts all
things as nothing, and worse then nothing, as loss and dung. Phil. 3.10. That
I may know him, and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his
sufferings, being made conformable to his death. Thus we have a fellowship with
Christ. Nay further we bear a part of his sufferings. And then, says St. Paul,
Col. 1.22. I rejoice in my sufferings for you, to fill up that which is behind
of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the
Church. As Christ suffered in his natural, so he must suffer in his mystical
body. Our afflictions therefore they are Christ's afflictions, a filling up of
that which is behind of his afflictions. Et quis non hic superbit? says
Luther in his Consolatory to the Duke of Saxony, who would not rejoice to bear
part with Christ? So is it the Apostles triumph, Romans 8 35. Who shall separate
us from the love of God which is in Christ? shall tribulation, or distress, or
persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or the sword? As it is
written, For thy sake are we killed all the day long, and are counted as sheep
for the slaughter: nay in all these things we are more then conquerors.
Conquerors, and more then conquerors How Is that? Not only bearing them with
patience, but with joy. Act. 5.41. They went away rejoicing that they were
count a worthy to suffer reproach for the Name of Christ. Or if all this be not
sufficient, yet take notice of the benefit, and see if we have not great reason
of rejoicing, even in our greatest trials. It is true indeed, no affliction for
the present is joyous, but grievous: O but afterward it works the quiet fruit
of righteousness to them that are exercised therewith. And take notice of it.
Beleved, these are times of trial, and one way or other we are sure to come to
it. So h^d we need to have our strength about us, for the flesh is weak. We
have the word in general, Rom 8.28. We know that all things work together for
good to them that love God. This is a sweet word. And is not here matter of
great joy, whatsoever our condition is, be it prosperity or adversity? Nay
observe further, if not in adversity rather then prosperity. David will
acknowledge it, Thou, Lord, of very faithfulness have caused me to be
troubled. Do we not see how it files off the rust. Isai. 27.9. By this the
iniquity of Jacob shall be purged, and this is the fruit, to take away his sin.
So the dross consumes, and we come out of the fire of affliction as gold
refined out of the furnace. So it excites our graces. And the more our Camomile
is trodden on, it sends forth a sweeter savor, Jam. 1.2. My brethren, count it
all joy when ye fall into diverse temptations. When ye fall into temptations,
into diverse temptations, enough to make others stagger, to reel to and fro like
a drunken man, and put them to their wits end, yet count this your joy, count
it all joy. And why so? knowing that the trial of your faith works patience,
and let patience have her perfect work, that ye may be perfect and entire,
wanting nothing. So Romans 5.3. Now we rejoice in hope of the glory of God, and
not only so, but we glory in tribulation also. In ipsa tribulatione spes
gloriae, in ipsa tribulatione gloria spei: In tribulation it self is the hope
of glory, nay in tribulation it self is the glory of our hope: and wherefore?
The Apostle follows it, Knowing that tribulation works patience, patience
experience, experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed, because the love of
God is shed abroad in our hearts. What heap upon heap, and grace upon grace,
and all flowing on us through the benefit of afflictions? Are ye not now
satisfied? 1 Pet. 4.14 If ye be reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are
ye; for the Spirit of glory, and of God rests upon you. The Spirit of glory,
and the Spirit of God. The Spirit of God never rests so gloriously upon the
Saints, as in the time of suffering. Then appears the glory of their faith, the
glory of their patience, hope, long-suffering, gentleness, meekness,
goodness, all the fruits of the Spirit. Nor only an increase of grace here,
but of glory hereafter. 2 Cor. 4 18. Our light affliction which is but for a
moment, works for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. Our
light affliction, light because but momentany, that short affliction, compare
it with eternity, it works glory for us, and a weight of glory, a great weight,
an exceeding weight, a more exceeding weight, a far more exceeding weight, a
far more exceeding and eternal weight. So do but compare your sufferings, your
layings out with your comings in; happy men, could you but see your own
happiness, how it purifies you from the dross of sin, how it refines your
graces, how it works you for that weight of glory. Mat. 5.11. Happy are ye,
when men revile you, and persecute you, and say all manner of evil against you
falsely, for my sake, rejoice and be exceeding glad, for great is your reward in
heaven. The more you suffer here, the greater measure and degree of glory shall
you have hereafter. Rejoice therefore, nay double and treble your rejoycings,
rejoice and be glad, and exceeding glad, Rejoice in the Lord, and be glad ye
righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart.

7. Whilst we look behind us.

Consider the time past. As David, Psalm. 77.10. I will remember the years of
the right hand of the most High: I will remember the works of the Lord, and
call to mind his wondrous works of old time. So do but recount your former
experiences of Gods mercies. And is not here matter of great joy? but think
with your selves how it lift up the heart of Haman when he cast his eyes back
upon those favors which Ahashuerus had bestowed upon him. Esth. 5.11. And
Haman told them of all the glory of his riches, and the multitude of his
children, and all the things wherein the King had promoted him. And when he had
been with the King at Esthers Banquet, Verse. 9. Then went Haman forth that day
joyful, and with a glad heart. If Haman could rejoice so much in the favor of
a wavering and unconstant man, how much more reason have we of rejoicing in the
favors of Almighty God, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of
changing? So do but cast your eyes back upon what he has already done, and
shall we not much rejoice in his mercies? Psalm. 126.3. The Lord has done great
things for us, whereof we are glad. And as good as great, yea and many of them.
Psalm. 139.17. How precious are thy thoughts toward me, O God? How great is the
sum of them? If I should count them they are more in number then the sand. Not
a minute of time passes over our heads but we taste his mercies, every day
that we uprise. Lam. 3.22. It is of the Lords mercy that we are not consumed,
because his compassions fail not: they are new every morning. Besides those
ordinary and common favors, none of us all if we look behind us, at some time
or other we have had experience of special and particular deliverances. What
dangers do continually surround us, we may easily guess, if we do but consider
our adversary the devil, how like a roaring Lion he still walks about, seeking
daily whom he may devour; and then the enmity that is in the creatures, but
especially that desperate wickedness that lies in our own hearts. How are we
hunted as a partridge upon the mountains? But blessed be God, we are escaped,
as a bird out of the snare of the fowler, the snare is broken, and we are
delivered. The greater our danger, the greater our deliverance: the more that
our sorrow was, the greater is our joy. As a man that has been long tossed upon
the troublesome seas, Haec olim meminisse juvabit, he then rejoices when he
gets into the harbor. As the Israelites when they stood safe upon the banks of
the red sea, and beheld the drowning of the Egyptians: So shall we not look
behind us, that we may rejoice, whilst thus we behold the salvation of our
God. But above all observe that great deliverance from the hands of Satan, from
the chains of sin, wherein we were led captive by him at his pleasure. Cast
your eyes behind you, and consider. Ephesians. 2.1. You has he quickened, who were
dead in sins and trespasses: wherein in time past ye walked, according to the
course of this world, according to the Prince of the air, the spirit that now
works in the children of d^sobedience* amongst whom also we all had our
conversation in times past. If we look upon times past, Oh what a woeful
condition was the poor creature in, at his very birth, all polluted in his
blood; and as he grows up so carried away with the course of the world,
running headlong to his own destruction. This was our condition. But blessed be
God that there is a change. It was the joy of Jehotakim, Evilmerodach the King
of Babylon sent for him out of prison, and changed his prison garments, and
gave him a continual portion before him all the days of his life: So Christ
has made a change, and an exchange with us, he has taken from us the rags of
sin, and put upon us the robes of righteousness, his own robes, He was made sin
for us who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him;
he has delivered us from that pit of darkness, and made us sit together in
heavenly places in Christ Jesus. What a change is here? do but compare your
condition then, and your condition now. Is it not the joy of Angels? There is
joy in heaven over one sinner that repents. The woman rejoices that has
found her lost g^oat; the man rejoices that has found his lost sheep; the
father rejoices that has found his lost son; bring hither the fatted calf,
let us eat, and be merry: shall others thus rejoice over us, and is it not much
more the joy of our own hearts? Look upon other men, how they still wallow in
their wickedness, having their understandings darkened, through the ignorance
that is in them, because of the hardness of their hearts: and then reflect we
on our selves, thus it has been with us, if we look upon time past. 1 Cor.
6.9. Be not deceived, neither fornicator, nor idolater, nor adulterer, nor
effeminate, nor abusers of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous,
nor drunkards, nor revilers, nor extortioners, shall enter into the Kingdom of
God: And such were some of you, but ye are washed. Such were some of you, O
what a joyful word, that we were but such, that we are not so now! So Paul,
before I was a persecutor, a blasphemer, and injurious, but I obtained mercy.
Lord what am I, that thou have brought me hitherto? that thou have loved Jacob,
and yet hated Esau? that he should pass by so many, and yet show this grace
and favor to my soul. So do but look behind you and consider how it has been
with you. Do but remember the time past, and Rejoice ye righteous.

8. Whilst we look before us.

Consider but the time to come. Heb. 12.2. Looking up to Jesus, the author and
finisher of your faith, who for the joy that was set before him endured the
cross and despised the shame. Do but look upon the joy which is set before
you, and this will carry you above the cross Beloved, I have spoken something
for your present comfort to cheer up your spirits; and as the Queen of Sheba,
It is a true report which you have heard, yet behold, the one half is not told
you. As yet we have but the seed-time, and some showers they are seasonable,
our life is but a bitter-sweet. Psalm. 97.11. Light is sown for the righteous,
and gladness for the upright in heart. But look before you, and behold a
harvest, even the joy of harvest, unintermixed joy. The time is coming when all
tears shall be wiped from our eyes. There shall be no more death, nor sorrow,
nor crying, neither any more pain. Do but look before you, and behold a
Kingdom, Come ye blessed children of my Father, inherit ye the Kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world. Do but look before you, and behold a
Throne, To him that overcomes, says our Savior, will I give to sit with me
on my throne. Do but look before you, and behold a Crown, From henceforth there
is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which God the righteous Judge
shall give me at that day, and not unto me only, but unto all that love his
appearing. The time is coming when we shall be gathered with Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob, into the Kingdom of heaven, to the Patriarchs our fathers, to the
Saints our brethren, to the Angels our friends, to Angels and Archangels, and
to all the company of that heavenly host. The time is coming when the Lord
Jesus shall send for us, as once Jacob for his father. He that sent us into the
world, owes us a better turn then to leave us for ever in the world. Father I
will that those that thou have given me be with me where I am, that they may
behold my glory. How did it rejoice the spirit of old Jacob? It is enough,
Joseph is yet alive, I will go and see him before I die: So here, and much more
then so, It is enough, Jesus is yet alive; though I cannot go and see him
before I die, yet Lord, let me die, that I may go and see him: I desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ, which is the best of all. The time is coming,
when the Lord Jesus shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice of
an Archangel, and the Trump of God, and the dead in Christ shall rise first to
meet the Lord in the air, that there they may be ever with the Lord. That they
may be with God! Oh what a happy vision to stand continually in his presence?
Says the Queen of Sheba concerning the servants of King Solomon, Happy are thy
servants, and happy are these thy men which stand continually before thee: but
think, if you can think, how happy they are that stand continually in Gods
presence; there is fullness of joy and pleasures for ever more. A fullness of
joy, because there for ever, for ever with the Lord; O sweet word, for ever!
And this is that indeed which crowns all our joys. Would it not be a hell in
the midst of heaven, to think of once losing heaven? But Oh joyful eternity!
An Eternal joy. Whilst we are here, and see nothing but what is present, we
read nothing but vicissitude, and the wheel still turning: but when we consult
with heaven, and look upon that before us, then pure and unmixed, unchangeable
and everlasting joys. Oh how great is thy goodness, which thou have laid up
for them that fear thee! Goodness, and great goodness, but what tongue is
able to express how great? 1 Cor. 2.9. Eye has not seen, nor ear heard,
neither has it entrea into man's heart. The eye has seen much, the ear has
heard more, the heart of man is able to conceive much more. Yet neither has
eye seen, nor ear heard, nor is the heart of man able to conceive the things
which God has prepared for them that love him. Mine eyes dazzle, my hand
trembles, my heart fails. Me thinks I hear as the Lord once to Job, Who is
this that darkens counsel by words without knowledge? Alas my apprehension is
dull, my affections cold, my expressions low: such joy is too wonderful for me,
it is high, I cannot attain unto it. Or as that holy Job, I have uttered things
which I understood not, things too wonderful for me, which I knew not. Now we
see, says Paul, but through a glass darkly, but here is our rejoicing, the
time is coming on that we shall see face to face; now we know but in part, but
then we shall know as we are also known. And if we know already so much reason
of rejoicing, Oh then what double and what treble joy? Be glad in the Lord, and
rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are upright in heart.
Rejoice ye righteous.

Now reflect we in the application. And the meditation of this affords us,

1. An Information.
That there are true joys in the way of righteousness.

It is the common error of the world, and many are discouraged with it, If a
man turn religious, then farewell all good days, we must never look for merry
hour any more. Spiritus Calvinianus est spiritus melancholicus, The Christian
spirit is a melancholic spirit. Foolish man, how apt to deceive himself, and
to be discouraged? And it is the Devils policy thus to blind men's eyes, and
pervert their judgments, that he may keep them from the ways of
righteousness. What a wild mistake? Of all other men they only have the
solid, and true joy. It is not an Isaac that is slain in the mount, but the Ram
in the bush of thorns: It is not true joy which is lost in Religion, but only
those sinful pleasures, which are as thorns in our eyes, and pricks in our
sides, to put us to an after sorrow. Eccles. 2.2. I said of laughter, It is
mad, and of mirth, What does it? Religion therefore does not quash our mirth,
but only qualify it: it does not deprive us of our pleasures, but correct
them. It shows us where true joy is to be found, true, solid, and
foul-satisfying joy. Psalm. 36.8. They shall be abundantly satisfied with the
fatness of thy house, and thou shall make them drink of the rivers of thy
pleasures.

But do we not see the lives of some how exceeding comfortless? And generally
all the Saints are men of a strict and austere conversation, not to be tempted
with the cup of pleasure, but spending their days in the valley of salt tears,
and wearing out their tedious lives in a sad retiredness.

For answer to this, observe the worlds mistake, and that is twofold.

1. They think, there are no pleasures to be had but only in the things of the
world. The covetous man thinks there is no joy to that of a full barn, or a full
bag: the Epicure thinks, there is no joy to that of a full cup, or a full
furnished table: the lascivious man thinks, there is no joy to that of a foul
mouth, and a bed defiled. Generally the world thinks there can be no mirth but
in their own ways, and every man pleases himself in his own humor. But do ye
not see the folly of those ways? Oh misert, quorum gaudia crimen habet!
miserable men, that cannot be merry without sin. Yet because we are taken from
these things, from these filthy, beastly, and unreasonable pastimes, from these
sinful, brutish, and inordinate lusts wherein they take pleasure, therefore
they think we have no joy at all. As the worshippers of the golden Calf, they
ear, and drink, and rise up to play: and they think it strange that we run not
with them into the same excess of riot, speaking evil of us. Fond world! Is
it any trouble to a man to lay aside his childish toys? What is all your
merriment but vanity, but childishness? Nay worse then children in their
harmless sports: not only vanity, but vexation. As a man that has the Itch,
how he pleases himself with scratching, which yet works him to an after pain?
Do ye not blush at your own folly, so to debase your selves in sensualities, as
if you had no better principles then a beast? So I dare say sometimes, in the
height of your jollities, full loath you would be to be seen by the eye of man.
And what fruit had you then in those things, whereof ye are now ashamed? But
will it not be bitterness in the latter end? Nocet empta dolor voluptas. And
what is that joy worth, which is bought with sorrow? Prove. 14.13. Even in
laughter the heart is sorrowful: and the end of that mirth is heaviness. So
Job, They spend their days in mirth, and their years in jollity, and in a
moment they go down into the pit. And then, Son, remember, thou in thy life
time receivedst thy good things, therefore thou art now tormented. The more
they have had their pleasures in this world, the greater shall be their torment
and sorrow in the world to come. But as God gave Saul another spirit, when he
was set upon the throne, he then followed no more his fathers asses: so has
God set us above these things, that now we take no delight in pursuit of such
brutish pleasures. But are we therefore deprived of all joys, because we take
no pleasure in these things? The Saints in glory neither purchase house, nor
buy land, nor have gold nor silver, neither do they eat nor drink, nor marry,
nor are given in marriage, but are as the Angels. They have none of the
pleasures of this world, yet in perfect happiness: so the Saints in grace,
though they relish not the pleasures either of the covetous, or of the
voluptuous, or of the lascivious, yet they have their joys. Nay let me tell
you further, It is their joy that they are weaned from those sinful pleasures,
that God has imbittered that cup to them, and set them above worldly joy. So
are you mistaken, whilst you think the joy of the world is the only joy.

2. And as far mistaken, whilst you think, that inward spiritual joy of the
Saints to be no joy, but sorrow, and a burden. The joy of Saints is no outside
joy. Says Paul, There be that glory in outward appearance, not in heart: so
there be that rejoice in outward appearance, not in heart. Spem vultu simulat,
premit a^tum cord dolorem. So they put a good face upon it, when their soul
perhaps is full of bitterness: So on the contrary, the Saints many times have
joy in their hearts, when it appears little in their faces; whilst their looks
are serious, their souls full of comfort. The Kings daughter, says the
Psalmist, is all glorious within. The glory of the world is an outside glory,
and the joy of the world is an outside joy: but the glory of the Church is an
inside glory, and the joy of Gods children is an inside joy. Says our Savior
to his Disciples, I have meat to eat that ye know not on: So the Saints have
joys that the world sees not, nay that they cannot see. The natural man
perceives no^ the things of God: so nor are they able to perceive the joy of
the Saints of God. They are so far from prceiving them that count them but a
burden. It is the joy of Saints to see the light of Gods countenance, this puts
gladness in their hearts, more then in the time that corn, and wine, and oil
increases. But they think not upon God, God is not in all their thoughts. When
the thoughts of God are brought into their minds, it marrs all their mirth.
The thoughts of God are melancholic thoughts, therefore they think as seldom
of him as they can. It is the joy of Saints to think of those sweet experiences
of Gods love and kindness, Thy loving kindness is better then life, and it is
their delight to recount his favors, I will remember the years of the right
hand of the most high. But these live by chance, they never regard the works of
the Lord, nor the operations of his hand; therefore they mock the Saints, He
trusted in God that he would deliver him: let him deliver him, seeing he
delighted in him. It is the joy of Saints, the knowledge of the Word of God.
His delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in that Law does he meditate day and
night. Nay, thy Commandments are my delights, says David, not delight, but
delights, a plurality of delights. One man pleases himself in this thing, and
another in that, but here he meets the pleasure of all recreations, a multitude
of delights. But these they grow weary of it. Whilst their ears are tied to
the Scriptures, they are as a Bear tied to the stake. Therefore they say unto
God, Depart from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways. It is the joy of
Saints to meet God in his Ordinances, My soul thirsts for God, yea even for
the living God: Oh when shall I come and appear before God! So they count the
Sabbath a delight. But these, how quickly they are tired of it? When will the
new Moons be gone, that we may sell corn, and the Sabbaths, that we may set
forth wheat? As the Heathens thought, so think they, that the Jews lost a
seventh part of their time, because they kept the seventh day a holy rest unto
the Lord. It is the joy of Saints to attend Gods service. As their Lord and
Master, It is my meat and drink, to do the will of him that sent me, and to
finish his work. So David, I delight to do thy will, O my God, yea thy Law is
within my heart. But these, say they, let us break his bands asunder, and cast
away his cords from us. It is in vain to serve the Lord, and what profit is it
that we have kept his Ordinances? In a word, It is the joy of Saints to think
of heaven. Where the treasure is, there will the heart be also. So their
conversation is in heaven, all their thoughts, longings, desires, and endeavors
after it. But these, their affections are set upon the things below. And as
that French Cardinal, they prefer their part in Paris before that in Paradise.
And Gallio cares for none of these things. Thus we see their mistakes,
accounting that a joy which is indeed their sorrow, and that a burden which is
the only joy.

Oh but secondly, say they, Do not we hear your complaints, and see your tears?
and your lives are bitter. Do we not read the lamentations of a Jeremy? and
David's soul melts with weeping, All the night long wash I my bed, and water my
couch with my tears.

For answer to this. It is true indeed, and as well may you desire mirth from a
dead man, as from the Saints in some conditions. But,

1. Take notice, this is their weakness. So David does acknowledge it. Psalm.
77.10. This is my infirmity. It is their ignorance of Gods fatherly love toward
them. Whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and scourges every son whom he
receives. Sorrow is sometimes as necessary for us as is joy. The truth is,
whilst we carry flesh about us, such is the frailty of our sinful nature,
either of both endangers, if they be not tempered. God therefore in the wisdom
of his providence, such is his care over us, he mixes the cup for us. He
sweetens our sorrow with some joy, lest we should despair: and imbitters our
joy with some sorrow, lest we should presume. Either of both might ruin us:
but of the two, sorrow may seem less dangerous, or rather that which brings us
the more good. A pleasant potion is more delightful, but a bitter pill is
sometimes more healthful. Eccles. 7.2. It is better to go into the house of
mourning, then to go into the house of feasting. And lest you should think this
a word rashly spoken, for who would not prefer the one far before the other,
therefore he seconds it, verse. 3. Sorrow is better then laughter. Nay not only
says it, but proves it, For by the sadness of the countenance the heart is
made better. In mirth many times we are apt to forget our selves, but sorrow
puts us in a godly frame* It is our ignorance therefore of Gods fatherly care
over us that deprives us of our happiness. Besides, it is sometimes with us,
as with Elisha's servant, Alas, Master, what shall we do? for his eyes were
held. Or as it was with old Jacob when they brought him the news, that Joseph
was alive and Governor over the whole land of Egypt, His soul fainted in him,
and he believed them not. Or as with the Disciples, when they brought the first
news of Christ's resurrection, Their words seemed but as idle tales, and they
believed not the women. So it is our ignorance, our infidelity, it is not our
righteousness but our weakness, which brings all this sorrow. But,

2. Are you not again mistaken? You hear their moans, and you see their tears:
and is there not a joy in weeping? The weeping of the Saints does not intermit
their joys. This may seem a paradox, but they understand it; As sorrowing,
says St. Paul, yet always rejoicing. We find something even in natural
experience. It is sometime an ease unto a troubled soul. Est quaedam flere
voluptas. When the vessel's full, and begins to work, if it want a vent, it
soon bursts asunder. When the heart is sore oppressed with grief, and ready to
sink under the burden, happy man that can give vent unto his soul with tears,
that can empty himself with weeping. But further, sometimes we find it, even
that which is the matter of our tears is also the matter of our joy. We shall
see a man, in reading of some sad story, how the tears trickle from his eyes:
he weeps and reads, and reads and weeps, and the more he reads still the more
he weeps, yet is he delighted in his reading. Ipse dolor voluptas. That which
causes him to weep, even that is it which so much delights him. Thus is it
here, The faints tears are the saints joy, and it is the rejoicing of their
souls that they weep and sorrow. The tears of Saints is the joy of Angels, as I
told you before, There is joy in heaven over one sinner that repents. Nay let
me tell you further, they have greater cause to rejoice in their sorrows, then
others in their greatest jollities. The Apostle understands it. Therefore says
he, 2 Cor. 7.8. Though I made you sorry with a letter I do not repent, though I
did repent -- Now I rejoice, not that ye were made sorry, but that ye sorrowed
to repentance, that ye were made sorry after a godly manner -- for godly sorrow
works repentance to salvation, not to be repented of, but the sorrow of the
world works death. There Is a vast difference between worldly sorrow, and
godly sorrow: the one tends to death, but the other to life, to repentance and
salvation. The sorrow of the godly is like the sorrow of a woman traveling
with child. It is not a barren but a fruitful sorrow. The sorrow of world is
barren, it brings forth nothing but sorrow; but the sorrow of the godly is
fruitful, it is a joy-bearing sorrow. Joh. 16.21. A woman has sorrow when she
travelleth, because her hour is come: but as soon as she is delivered of a
child, she remembers no more the anguish for joy that a man is born into the
world. And ye now have sorrow, but I will see you again, and your hearts shall
rejoice, and your joy no man takes from you. Thus you see the mistake: The
sorrow of the righteous is a joyful sorrow.

Oh but thirdly, It may be objected, that sometimes God requires it as a duty.
Es. 22.12. In that day did the Lord God of hosts call to weeping and to
mourning: and doubtless the sorrow of the Saints is hearty, when the Lord calls
for it.

For answer to this, we must confess, it is so indeed. Neither do any sorrow
as they sorrow. Therefore as if they only sorrowed, says God, Ezekiel. 9.4. Set a
mark upon the foreheads of the men that sigh, and that cry for all the
abominations that are done in the midst of Jerusalem. Their sighs are sighs
indeed, and their cries are cries indeed, God sets a mark upon them as if they
only were the mourners. Yet withal take notice, that it is not for
righteousness, but for wickedness, all the abominations that are done in
Jerusalem; righteousness is not the cause, but it is sin, either in themselves
or others.

1. In themselves. For so the Saints have their failings, Seek thy servant, O
Lord, for I have gone astray like a sheep that is lost. And as they have theirs
sins, so they have their sorrows. It cost David many a salt tear. How he weeps
and prays, Psalm. 51. Lord make me to hear the voice of joy and gladness, that
the bones which thou have broken may rejoice. The cry of his sin had made such
a noise of sorrow, that it deaft his ears from the voice of joy. And he is
afraid, O cast me not away in thy displeasure: but restore to me the joy of thy
salvation. Do not charge your sorrows on the ways of righteousness, but your
swarving from those ways. He that goes out of Gods way he goes into harms
way, and returns again by the weeping cross. Or if it be not the sense of
their present sins which causes all this sorrow, perhaps they consider the time
past, and it is their trouble that they have spent so much of their time in
vanity: so they mourn not because they are righteous, but because they were no
sooner such. Or if they be troubled at their present condition, it is not
because they are good, but because they are not so good as they desire to be.
They count not themselves, as if they had already attained, or were already
perfect, they see others that are far before them: so they are heavy, not
because they are holy, but because not so holy as they should. As some covetous
worldling, who frets and toils in the world, as if he were not worth a penny,
and out of a greedy desire of more, still complains of poverty. So the Saints
sometimes, so earnestly desirous to be yet more righteous, they lose the joy
and comfort of those graces they already have. Let us not then impute that to
their godliness, which proceeds rather from the want. But certainly conclude
there is much sweetness in it, whilst they thus hunger and thirst after it.
Thus in themselves.

2. In others. The Lord calls to weeping, and they mourn in Sion. It is for the
abominations that are done in the land. So David, Psalm. 119.136. Mine eyes run
down with tears, because men keep not thy commandments. And Lot amongst the
filthy Sodomites, 2 Pet. 2.8. In seeing and hearing, vexed his righteous soul
from day to day with their unlawful deeds. It is the sorrow of the Saints to
see God dishonored, and poor souls endangered. To hear on the one hand, men
speaking perverse things, to draw away disciples after them; and to see on the
other hand, men so unreclamable from their foolish and vain courses, and
running headlong to their own damnation. If there be any consolation in Christ
Jesus, if any comfort of love, if any bowels and mercies, must it not needs
grieve them to see men so fool away their hopes of glory to dwell with
everlasting burnings? Their charity is great, and they could wish all men like
themselves in that which is good. As Paul to Agrippa, I would to God that not
only thou, but all that hear me this day, were both almost, and altogether such
as I am, excepting these bonds. And if they will not be persuaded, Jer. 13.17.
If ye will not hear, my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride. Thus
weeping for them that weep not for themselves. And Elijah betakes himself unto
the cave. And why so? They have broken the covenant, they have thrown down the
altars, they have slain the Prophets with the sword. Are the lives of the
Saints sorrowful? But examine your own hearts, if the fault lie not in your
selves. Were your selves less wicked, their lives would be more comfortable.
Thus still you see it is not the righteousness of the Saints which makes their
hearts sad, but rather the want of it, either in themselves, or others. Nay yet
further, even this sorrow is their joy. Whilst they thus mourn, though others
provoke God, and perish in their own devices, yet God will set a mark upon them
that mourn in Sion, that the destroying Angel may pass over. Es. 4.5. God will
create upon every dwelling place of Mount Sion, and upon her Assemblies, a
cloud, and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by night: for upon
all the glory shall be a defense. So that nothing might hinder their peace and
joy in believing, but so still, Rejoice ye righteous.

2. A Direction.
The way to solid and true joy is the way of the righteous.

Beloved, we all desire solid and true joy. This that which we all long after,
to lead a cheerful and a comfortable life, and to make a joyful and a happy
end. My Text directs you to the means, Get into the number of the righteous.
This is that which will give you joy in the end, joy without end: and this
only. You think to find it some in one way, some in another, some in a third:
one pursues it in a way of riches, a second in a way of honors, a third in a
way of pleasures. They do but please themselves in their own fancies, and
embrace mere shadows. Either you must find it in a way of righteousness, or
you shall never attain to solid and soul-satisfying joy. I shall first show you
where you cannot find it, and then where true joy is to be had.

1. Do not seek it in the way of riches. Many men think, if they had but wealth
enough, they should have joy enough. It is true perhaps if they had enough: but
we see it by experience, Eccles. 1.8. The eye is not satisfied with seeing, nor
the ear filled with hearing. So Eccles. 5.10. He that loves silver shall not
be satisfied with silver, nor he that loves abundance with increase. As the
dropsy to the body, so is covetousness to the mind. Mill meis errent in
montibus Agni. Oh that I had a thousand lambs upon the mountains. And when we
have got a thousand, then pauperis est numerare pecus, he is but a poor man
that can number his cattle. The more we have, the more we crave. And how shall
we quench his thirst, which is increased by drinking? Besides, though we could
have enough, yet we are not sure to hold it. Prove. 23.51. Will thou set thine
eyes upon that which is not? For riches certainly make themselves wings, they
fly away as an Eagle toward heaven. And then the more our joy in the fruition,
the greater our sorrow in the loss. However when death comes, such as our
entrance, such is the exit: Naked came we into the word, and naked must we go
out of the world. We do but embrace the cloud in stead of Juno. Whilst we
think to hug a happiness in abundance, Soul, thou have much goods laid up for
many years, eat, drink, and be merry; Death comes, and our joy goes: Thou fool,
this night thy soul shall be taken from thee, and then whose shall these things
be?

2. Do not seek it in the way of honors. Many please themselves in the way of
eminency. Oh quam pulchrum est digito monstrari, and dicier, Hic est, what a
brave thing it is to be pointed at, There goes such a man! So, if they can but
climb up into such an office, or get the praise and applause of men, especially
the favor of such great ones, Haman invited to the Queens banquet, then went
he to his home joyful, and with a glad heart. It is true indeed, a good name
is as a precious ointment, and more to be desired then gold and silver, yet as
good as it is, remember it is bonum sine sera aut clave, a good without lock
and key. It is a thing scarce in our own keeping. We stand much at the
courtesy of others for it. And can we chain up the winds? The multitude who
but yesterday would have crowned our Savior, to day, Away with him, crucify
him. And Haman in that height of favor with King Ahashuerus, how suddenly is
the wind in another corner? and whilst yet at the banquet, the Kings
countenance is changed, and he sees that evil is determined against him by the
King. So Herod, whilst loud in the acclamations of the people, The voice of
God and not of man, presently the Angel of the Lord smites him, and Herod is
eaten up of worms. He became a prey to those base flatterers (so Josephus
seems to give the sense, though I conceive he comes short in the story) and
those who so applauded him, were his devourers.

3. Do not seek it in the way of pleasures. Many go this way, and think
themselves the only men. Whilst others are toyling in the earth of riches, or
swearing in a throng of offices and honors, these enjoy the world at will, and
feast themselves upon the sweat of other men's labors. Thus one sports away his
time in gaming. And when he has conquered his neighbor, and made himself
master of another purse, is not the box the only gainer? So they shall find
it when they come to the last game, when the soul lies at stake; they have lost
their time, and now hell it sweeps all away.

A second swils away his time in drinking. Let us fill our selves with strong
drink, and to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. But does not
the aching pate, and empty purse chide them to an after reckoning? We to them
that rise up early for strong drink, that continue until night, till wine
inflame them.

A third beastiates himself in goatish lechery. Come let us take our fill of
loves. And when Amnon has got his will of his sister Tamar, the hatred
wherewith he hates her, is more then the love wherewith he loved her. And what
fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed?

A fourth perhaps of more heroic spirit, he is for high achievement, and more
noble action. So Nebuchadnezzar pleases himself in the contemplation of his
works. Is not this great Babylon which I have built? And whilst the word was
yet in the Kings mouth, there fell a voice from heaven, O King Nebuchadnezzar,
to thee be it spoken, the Kingdom is departed from thee. And when Alexander
has conquered the whole world, his fathers fall from his horse into the dust,
if he view the print of his body, it will show him, that as little earth
contains him as another man.

A fifth perhaps more contemplative, of a clearer intellect, he sees the folly
of the world whilst so very throng and busy, as Ants upon the molehill, and
he delights himself in his study, to discourse with foreign languages, to view
Natures secrets, to consult with former ages. This man seems to come the
nearest: for so the Scholar finds a pleasure in it; more pleasure in his
books, then either the covetous in his bags, or the voluptuous at his board, or
the lecherous in his bed, or the pragmatical in the noise and tumult of his
most heroic actions. Yet remember, though we could speak all languages, yet if
we speak not the language of Canaan, we are amongst Gods people but as a
Barbarian. Or as the Apostle, Though I speak with the tongue of men, and
Angels, yea though I understood all mysteries, and all knowledge, yet if I have
not charity, I am but as a sounding brass, and as a tinkling Cymbal. If there
be not the sap of grace in this tree of knowledge, it bears nothing but leaves.
Nay worse, Eccles. 1.8. In much wisdom is much grief, and he that increases
knowledge increases sorrow. The more we know, the more we discover the vanity
of what we know. However, Eccles. 12.12. Of making many books there is no end,
and much study is a weariness of the flesh. And now what shall we say? as a
man that has sought all corners, if here we find not the true joy, where
shall we hope for it? Shall we join all together? Nay, add to these all that
your hearts can think. So Solomon he run through all, Eccles. 2.10. Whatsoever
mine eyes desired I kept not from them: I withheld not my heart from any joy.
But does he find it? Verse. 11. Then I looked upon all the works that my hands
had wrought, and on the labor that I had labored to do: and behold, all was
vanity and vexation of spirit. Solomon that had experimented all the pleasures
that the wit, or wealth, or strength of man could possibly reach, how shall we
find it where he could not? Verse. 12. For what can the man do that comes
after the King? Alas all is emptiness. But as the complexion on a painted
face, which the next wind blows off, and then appears the deformity. Eccles.
2.1. I said in my heart, Go to now, I will prove thee with mirth, therefore
enjoy pleasure: and behold, this also is vanity. Nay, worse. Verse. 2. I said of
laughter, It is mad, and of mirth, What does it? What does indeed such mirth,
but wound the conscience to an after torment? We behold the jollity, but
withal take notice of those inward gripes. When Emylius heard the people
commending his wife as a gallant Lady, he showed them his foot, Calceus iste
annon valde concinnus? Is not this shoe a very neat one? but you feel not
where it pincheth me. I have read of a kind of smallage, which, they say,
gripes the guts, whilst it sets a man upon an outward grinning, and a seeming
laughter: such is that foolish laughter, and the guilt of conscience as a
secret sting poisons his joy, and marrs all his mirth. As a silent scourge, it
gives them many a privy lash: and as an unseen sore, it puts them to many a
bitter pang, when none discerns it but themselves. However such a time will
come. Es. 29.8. It shall even be as when a hungry man dreameth, and behold he
eats: but he awaketh, and his soul is empty. They are now asleep, and they
dream of pleasures: but when their consciences are awakened, then they shall
find an Ezekiel's scrole written within and without, Woe, and mourning, and
lamentation. Luke 6 25. Woe unto you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn and
weep. Their laughter shall be turned into mourning, and their joy into weeping.
But, rejoice ye righteous.

I shall now show you where true joys are to be found. Do not think to gather
grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles; they will but rend your clothes, and prick
your hands. Do not weary your selves in pursuit of shadows; those vain
pleasures, though sweet in the mouth, as the book in the Revelations, yet
they will prove bitter in the belly. But betake your selves to the ways of God,
first seek the Kingdom of heaven, and the righteousness thereof, the
righteousness which is of God. This is that alone which gives constant
alacrity, cheerful tranquillity, and sound joy. What is that wherein God
himself is eternally delighted? what is that wherein the Angels of God are
eternally blessed? What is it that rejoices heaven, that makes heaven indeed to
be a heaven? 2 Pet. 3.13. We look for a new beaven -- wherein dwells
righteousness. Beloved, I know you desire it, and I could heartily wish that
every man here had this solid and true joy. But then you must get into the
number of the righteous. Upon this depends all your hope of happiness; as ever
you expect true joy, so it concerns you to look after this. And the rather to
awaken, let me tell you, There is no joy in any condition without this, be it
never so glorious, but a fullness of joy in any condition with it, be it never
so mean.

1. There is no joy in any condition without this, be it never so glorious.
Till we get into the number of the righteous there is no true peace of
conscience: and what joy can that man have who is at odds with himself? There Is
no peace with God, no peace to the wicked, says my God. And whilst Ahashuerus
frowns upon Haman, what pleasure can he find in his wealth, or in his glory?
Whilst God frowns upon us, it imbitters our choicest morsels. Suppose we had
the wealth of the whole world upon our backs, they are but as clothes cast on
a dead man. Our clothes must first receive a heat from the body ere they
return a heat to the body: There must be the matter of joy in us, at least a
subject capable, a calm and a clear mind, ere we receive the comfort of any
thing without us. Suppose we sit at the top of honors, high in the opinion of
the world, it is but as a malefactor applauded by the Bystanders, alas we are
condemned by the Judge. Suppose we live in all the variety of pleasures that
this world can yield us: So the Tyrant of Syracuse set the flatterer at his
table richly furnished, but with a drawn sword hanging over his head by a
slender thread: so every moment threatens our destruction. And what comfort
found Belshazzer in his cups and company, at that royal feast, attended with a
thousand Lords; when he saw that handwriting on the wall against him?
Presently his thoughts are troubled. Alas, what is the whole world, but as
music to an aching ear, or as glorious pictures to sore eyes, or delicious
meats to a diseased stomach, or a draught of wine to a man in a burning fever;
no refreshment, but more sorrow. Son, remember, thou in thy life time
receivedst thy good things, therefore thou art now tormented.

There is joy enough, a fullness of joy in any condition with it, be it never
so mean, seem it never so miserable in the eyes of men. If we be in the number
of the righteous, of an honest, and an upright heart, there is the peace of
conscience, a continual feast, there is a peace with God, nay the peace of God
which passes all understanding, so a joy unspeakable and glorious. If the
heart be upright, throw a man into poverty, this perfumes his rags, and
relishes his pulse and water. Threaten him with dangers, Hic murus aheneus
esto, this is his wall of brass, the breast plate of righteousness, he knows
nothing by himself: cast him as Job upon the dunghill, strip him of all that
the world can promise, yet God is his God, who is the fountain of mercies, and
the God of all comforts. When the people spoke of stoning him, yet David
encouraged himself in the Lord his God. So is it a wealth in the deepest
poverty, an honor in the blackest ignominy, a comfort in the saddest misery.
Nay, then, when all other delights fail us, when the evil days come upon us,
and the years draw nigh, wherein we say, I have no pleasure in them. When the
keepers of the house begin to tremble, and the grinders cease because they are
few, and those that look out at the window are darkened, and the daughters of
music are brought low. Can thy servant taste either what I eat, or what I
drink, says old Barzillai, Can I hear any more the voice of singing men or
singing women? But then especially when we lie upon our deathbeds, what are
all the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory of them? Ah miserable comforters
are ye all. In stead of rejoicing, perhaps they affright us. Ah woe worth the
day that ever mine heart hankered after riches, that ever mine eyes dazzled upon
honors, that ever my teeth watered after pleasures, these, these are they for
which I first wounded conscience, and now they stare in my face worse then
either hell or devil. But our righteousness stands by us, and an upright heart
it speaks comfort to us, and when we are to go out of the world, 2 Cor. 1.12.
This is our rejoicing, even the testimony of a good conscience, that in
sincerity and godly simplicity, we have had our conversation in the world. In
this way there is joy both in life and death and at the day of judgment, and
your joy shall no man take away from you. Rejoice ye righteous.

3. An Exhortation.
Be righteous, and Rejoice.

1. Be righteous. As you are made righteous through the righteousness of
Christ imputed, so exercise your selves in the ways of righteousness, as ever
you expect true joys. I have showed you before what this righteous man is, As
one that is clothed in the righteousness of God through faith in Christ
Jesus; so one that receives this righteousness into his head, he knows it;
into his heart, he loves it; and into his life, he works it. 1 John 3.7. He
that does righteousness, is righteous. In a word, he is a man of an honest and
an upright heart. So you have him in this verse, the latter part explains the
former, Rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are upright in
heart. This is the man that has solid and true joy. And the more we exercise
our selves in this way, the greater is our rejoicing. Oh what a sweet
encouragement! So let it stir us up to exercise our selves in the ways of
righteousness, righteousness toward God, righteousness toward men. It is
that of the Apostle, Act. 24.16. Herein do I exercise my self to have always a
conscience void of offense toward God and toward men.

1. In the way of righteousness toward God, that is, in the way of his
Commandments. The way of Gods Commandments that is a right way, and it is a
heart-rejoycing way. Psalm. 19.8. The statutes of the Lord are right, rejoicing
the heart. Do ye not find it by experience? I appeal to your own consciences.
When ye have spent the day in Gods service, and sit down at night, and review
the works that ye have done, does it not afford a more solid and sweet
contentment to your souls, then if you had surfeited your selves in the vain
empty pleasures of the world? Romans 6.19. As therefore ye have yielded your
members servants to uncleanness and to iniquity, so now yield your members
servants to righteousness unto holiness. The Apostle presses it with
arguments pro and con, verse. 21. What fruit had ye then in those things whereof
ye are now ashamed? for the end of those things is death. But now being made
free from sin, ye have your fruit unto holiness, and the end thereof
everlasting life. It will be your eternal joy.

2. In the way of righteousness toward men. Nor can you indeed be righteous
before God, except ye make conscience of your ways with men. Because God
requires both. Ps. 15.1. Lord, who shall dwell in thy tabernacle? who shall rest
in thy holy hill? even he that leads an incorrupt life, and does the thing
which is right, and speaks the truth from his heart: he that has used no
deceit with his tongue, nor done evil to his neighbor. That just and faithful
servant, it is he that shall enter into the joy of his Lord. Oh then do no
wrong to any man, neither by word nor deed. Though you have it in your power,
and might be gainers by it, yet what you get by fraud, will it not be your
sorrow in the end? So will it breed a worm in your consciences, that ever
gnawing, never dying worm: yea a moth in your estates, and a curse upon your
posterity. Psalm. 37.35. I have seen the wicked in great prosperity, and
spreading himself like a green bay tree: yet he passed away, and lo he was not,
yea I sought him, but he could not be found. But mark the righteous man, and
behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace. Oh what a joyful end! Nay
in the way, when troubles come upon us, what a breast plate is righteousness to
ward off the blow? But think with your selves what a rejoicing it was to
Samuel, when the people had cast off his government, that yet he could
challenge them; 1 Samuel 12.3. Behold, I am here, witness against me before the
Lord, and before his Anointed, whose ox have I taken, or whose ass have I
taken, or whom have I defrauded? This is our encouragement, and so we shall
find it in the day of trouble, at least when we lie upon our deathbeds, the
rejoicing of our souls. Learn we therefore, not only not to wrong, but to give
every man his due, even honor to whom honor is due: nay to the very meanest:
nor only in a way of equity, but in a way of charity: for this also is a part
of the righteousness of Saints. So Daniel gives the counsel to Nebuchadnezzar,
Dan. 4.27. Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine inquities by showing
mercy to the poor. The more we lay out our selves in the righteousness of
charity, the more shall be our joy at that great day. Psalm. 112.9. He has
dispersed abroad, he has given to the poor: his righteousness endures for
ever, his horn shall be exalted with honor. For we must know that our works
they follow us: not what we have gotten, but what we have given. I was hungry,
and ye gave me meat, Come ye blessed. And so will God judge us according to our
works. According to the measure of this righteousness, so shall be our measure
and degree of joy. Thus to awaken us to the ways of righteousness, both
before God and man. But,

3. Whatsoever we do, to do it with an honest and an upright heart. This is
that which gives us pure and unmixed joy, when we do it in the integrity and
uprightness of our souls. Many are discouraged in the ways of righteousness,
because they find not those joys in them they expected. It is because they
act not with that uprightness as the righteous does. Perhaps there is too much
of self-pleasing and vainglory in it. So the hypocrites give alms to be seen
of men: verily I say unto you they have their reward. But do it as you ought to
do it, and ye shall find the encouragement, and joy in it. And,

1. Do it as in the sight of God, setting him still before your eyes as
spectator, witness, and the judge of all your actions. Genesis 17.1. I am God
all-sufficient, walk before me, and be upright. So to walk before God, as
always in his sight, this is to be upright in the eyes of God. Thus Abraham
walked before God, that is, he walked uprightly. And thus Jotham prepared his
way before the Lord, that is, in the sincerity and uprightness of his soul he
set himself to seek the Lord. Thus Paul, 2 Cor. 2.17. We are not as many which
corrupt the word of God, but as of sincerity, but as of God, in the sight of
God speak we in Christ Jesus. Whilst we corrupt our ways in darkness, we
darken and corrupt our joys: but when we act openly as always in Gods eyes,
then we have our rejoycings before God.

2 Do it with the whole heart. Ps. 119.7. I will praise thee with uprightness
of heart, when I shall have learned thy righteous judgments. And then verse.
10. With my whole heart have I sought thee. So to seek God with an upright
heart, is to seek God with the whole heart. Thus Samuel exhorts the people, to
fear the Lord, and to serve him in truth, and with all their heart. He that
serves God in the truth of his heart, will serve him with all his heart. So
Josiah, and the people made a covenant before the Lord, to walk after the Lord,
with all their heart, and with all their soul. And David's Worthies are
commended, that they were not of a double heart, a heart and a heart, where
there is a divided heart, there can be no settled joy. A double minded man is
unstable in all his ways: as a wave of the sea, driven to and fro, and tossed.
Whilst as those Samaritans that feared the Lord, and served their own Gods, so
our hearts are divided, and our joy to seek. Psalm. 12.2. They spoke vanity,
every one with his neighbor, with flattering lips, and with a double heart do
they speak. A double heart speaks vanity, and so his rejoycings are but vanity.
It is an entire heart that gives us an entire joy.

3. Do it with a pure heart, a heart cleansed from the filth of sin. I do not
expect that ye should be without sin, whilst you carry flesh about you. For
who can say, I have cleansed my heart, I am pure from my sin? But keep your
hearts from the love of sin. 1 Timothy 1.5. The end of the commandment is charity
out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience. Where there is a good
conscience, an honest and an upright heart, there is a pure heart. O do not
deceive your selves with the love of any filthy lust; but pluck out that right
eye, your darling and beloved sin. Though it be but one, and as Lot concerning
Zoar, Is it not a little one? That little sin, as a thief in the chest, will
rob you of your comforts. If the fountain be defiled, must not the streams be
muddy? and your rejoycings like the troubled waters, so they lose their
clearness. But Mat. 5.8. Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see
God. It is the pure heart that intitles to th^se pure joys.

4. Do it in truth and in sincerity. Heb. 10.22. Let us draw more with a pure
heart. An upright heart that is a true heart, and a true heart is a sincere
heart, without fraud and without guile. Sincera, quasi sine cora. As honey
without wax: or as bread without leaven: so without that leaven of the
Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. Thus Hezekiah wrought that which was good, and
right, and true before the Lord his God. To walk uprightly, is to walk truly.
So David walked before God in truth, in righteousness, and uprightness of
heart. And it is the prayer of Hezekiah, I beseech thee, O Lord, remember how I
have walked before thee in truth, and with an upright heart. There Is a truth in
our words, opposed to lying: and a truth in our works, opposed to hypocrisy. A
saying in truth, and a doing in truth. But O damnable hypocrisy! The hypocrite
you know, is a painted sepulcher, fair without, but full of rottenness within:
such is their joy, but a rotten joy: as the summer Pear, mellow to the eye, but
rotten at the core. Job 8.13. The hope of the hypocrite shall perish. Nay, Cut
him asunder, and appoint him his portion with hypocrites: as if for them God
had provided (...), a greater damnation. But as before, so I tell you again, 2
Cor. 1.12. Our rejoicing is this, the testimony of our conscience, that in
simplicity and godly sincerity, we have had our conversation in the world. Thus
you have had the motion to persuade you to the love of the ways of
righteousness, both toward God and toward men, and to exercise your selves in
them with an upright heart. It will be your joy. Now I come to the

2. Rejoice. Let such as are righteous, such as are upright in heart, remember,
that it is their duty, and God calls upon them, Rejoice ye righteous. Oh be not
awanting to your selves, but consider that happy condition wherein God has set
you, maugre the malice of men or devils, and let not any take away your glory.
Rejoice in the Lord always, and again I say rejoice. Beloved, though it may
seem easy, yet this is a duty of much difficulty. It is easier for me to
preach, then either for you or me to practice: especially in such times as
these. A voice of wailing is heard in our streets, How are we spoiled? Had we
no more to look upon but only the ruins of a glorious Church, to see our
cattle engendring with diverse kinds, and begetting such monsters in Religion,
to see our ground sown with several seeds, and the tares so choking the good
wheat, to see our garments mingled of linen and woollen, and this grown so
much into fashion, that many follow their pernicious ways, by reason of whom
the way of truth is evil spoken on. Are we privileged beyond the Angel of the
Church of Thy^tira? Rev. 2.20. I have somewhat against thee, Because thou
suffer the woman Jesabel, who calleh her self a Prophetess, to teach, and
to seduce my people. And how sad is the doom? Jer. 12.9. Mine heritage is unto
me as a speckled bird; the birds round about are against her. Come ye, assemble
all the beasts of the field, come to devour. And now how shall we sing the
Lords song thus in a strange land? But why not? were the times worse, then,
blessed be God, they as yet are, yet there is joy for the righteous, there is at
the least a rejoicing of hope. Heb. 3.6. If ye hold fast the confidence, and
rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end. Nay, Luke 21.28. Lift up your hands,
for your redemption draws nigh. Our Savior in that place is speaking of the
worst of times, Men's hearts failing them for fear, and for looking after the
things which are coming upon the earth: and then lift up your heads, says he,
then is the time of the Saints greatnest hopes. So is the night the darkest at
the approach of day: and Saints joy the greatest in that darkest night. But
perhaps there is yet something else that troubles you. Beloved, as Joab removed
the dead body of Amasa, so would I take all lets out of your way, that nothing
might hinder your rejoicing. David's complaint is sad. Psalm. 38.3. There is no
soundness in my flesh, because of thine anger: neither is there any rest in my
bones by reason of my sin. This indeed is the sad ingredient that imbitters
all. But so let me advise you to weep still, and then rejoice that ye can thus
weep. If it hinder your rejoicing, I must tell you that it is a sin. Though it
may seem strange, yet it is a truth. A man may sin in sorrowing for sin. I
suppose but few are guilty in this kind. Yet it is a fault, when we think of
sin so much, and mourn so unmeasurably, that it unfits us for those other
duties God requires at our hands, when it cools our devotion, that we cannot
pray, or infeebles our faith that we cannot believe; when it carries us from
God, and deprives us of that hope which is laid up for us in Christ Jesus: In a
word, when it takes us from this duty, Rejoice evermore. Why art thou then cast
down, O my soul, and why art thou thus disquieted within me? I will yet trust
in God, who is the health of my countenance, and my God. So now I shall call
upon you, as upon my self, Rejoice ye righteous. And the rather I call upon you,

1. In respect unto your selves, that ye may have the comfort of those
blessings God has bestowed upon you beyond other men. As ye heard before
whilst ye look above, God is your Father; whilst below, God shall tread down
Satan under your feet shortly: whilst without, all is yours; whilst within,
the Kingdom of heaven's there: whilst upon the left hand, all things work
together for your good: whilst upon the right, you have God in your
enjoyments: whilst behind you, the winter is past; whilst before you, an
eternity. Oh joyful eternity! But till you rejoice in these things, you do but
live besides your wealth, as that covetous worldling, Eccles. 6.2. A man to
whom God has given riches, wealth, and honors, so that he wants nothing
that his soul desires: yet God gives him not power to eat thereof, but a
stranger eats it. Besides you disable your selves for the performance of
those duties God requires of you under such enjoyments, at least you perform
them not with that cheerfulness and alacrity, as ye ought: whilst your
affections flag, ye lose the grace of your performances. They come from you but
as water forced against the hill, because ye have no pleasure in them. Whereas
those that rejoice in God, they run the ways of his commandments, and therein
is their delight. That therefore you may have the comfort of his mercy roward
you, and the honor of a cheerful service, it concerns you to attend this
duty. Rejoice ye righteous.

2. In regard of others, to encourage them in the ways of righteousness.
Numb. 13. we read, The spies which were sent into the land of Canaan, they
brought an evil report upon the land, insomuch that the people began to think
of making themselves captains, to return again into the land of Egypt: so
whilst we are of that heavy, heartlesse and uncomfortable disposition, we
bring an evil report upon Religion, as if it were but some sullen fit, or
melancholic humor, and no joy to be taken in it. Thus we discourage those
that were entering in. Besides we encourage enemies. Psalm. 13.2. How long shall
I be so vexed in heart? How long shall the enemy triumph over me? then they
triumph over us, when they see us vexed at the heart. Aha, so would we have it:
and this hardens them in their wickedness. But when they see our undanted
spirits, and that we go on with cheersulnesse and courage, this is a trouble to
them. So lest you discourage friends and encourage enemies, Rejoice ye
righteous.

Lastly, In regard of God, that he may have the praises due unto his name.
Psalm. 33.1. Rejoice in the Lord, ye righteous, for praise is comely for the
upright. This is added as the reason why we must rejoice, because praise is
comely; implying indeed that we cannot be thankful to him, except we rejoice in
him. Whilst we are sad and melancholic, it appears that either we take no
notice of his mercies, or that we do but lightly esteem of them: but when we
rejoice in them, this argues, that we highly prize them, and the more we
rejoice, the more thankful for them. Oh take heed of that base sin, the sin of
ingratitude, an odious and provoking sin. It not only robs God of his glory,
but our selves. The more thankful we are to God, the more bountiful is God to
us. Ascensus gratiarum est descensus gratiae. As vapors drawn out of the
earth, return in showers to the earth: so our thanks ascending up to heaven,
God showers down upon us more abundant mercies. Because thou have been faithful
in a little, be thou ruler over much. But then on the contrary, Deuteronomy. 28.47.
Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God with joyfulnesse, and with gladness
of heart, for the abundance of all things: therefore shall thou serve thine
enemies, which the Lord shall send against thee, in hunger, and in thirst, and
in nakedness, and in the want of all things. Thus whilst we look upon God,
whether we eye his favor or his frown, it concerns us to be joyful that we
may be thankful. Nay whilst we look upon that sacred Trinity, that we may
give him his due praises, so might we double and treble our rejoycings. Be glad
in the Lord, and rejoice ye righteous, and shout for joy all ye that are
upright in heart. Thus to God the Father, in whom we rejoice; to God the Son,
by whom we are made righteous; and to God the Holy Ghost, through whom we are
upright in heart; To the three Persons and one God be the glory of our joy for
ever and ever, Amen.

The Resolution of a Case of Separation.
MADAM,
YOur Ladyships Case (if I rightly understand you) is this; Whether a woman
separating from her Husband for want of maintenance, and the Court adjudging
her an allowance, he be not bound in conscience to confirm it, in case she be
willing to live with him; and if he will not, whether she may not lawfully
continue in a separation from him.

Though the least amongst the thousands in Israel, yet providence having made
me Overseer in the flock where this Case is concerned, I humbly crave leave to
cast in my mite.

1. It cannot be denied, but that the Husband is bound in conscience to allow
his Wife an honorable maintenance beseeming his Estate and quality: for (they
twain being one flesh) otherwise he should be one of Solomon's fools, who lives
beside his wealth. Eccles. 6.2.

2. Where the Court has determined what that maintenance shall be, he ought to
submit unto their judgments; for the Judgment is not theirs, but Gods.

3. If he disobey, he sins against God: for the Powers that be are ordained of
God.

4. Yet he is not bound further then the Decree enjoins: if that expire upon
her return unto her Husband, it is supposed that then she should acquiesce
again in her Husbands love.

5. Nor is it convenient that she should have assurance in case of dislike the
second time, because that would be as a snare upon her,
upon the least discontent to be gone again, considering natures frailty, and
the deceitfulness of the heart; And did she seriously consider this, she would
not desire it.

6. However, I conceive at present,
matter of maintenance is no sufficient ground for a separation, except in case
of extreme necessity; here indeed there is no Law; for if she has not
whereupon to live at all, she cannot live with her Husband: Examine therefore
whether the maintenance disputed be of absolute necessity to a being, or only
of convenience to welbeing: If the latter only, though I will not take upon me
peremptorily to determine, yet I conceive far greater inconveniences in a
separation, then in co-habitation. I shall humbly propound my reasons, and
submit them to better judgment.

1. From that of God in Paradise. Genesis 2.24 Therefore shall a man leave father
and mother and cleave to his wife. Examine 1. Whether the Woman must not cleave
to her Husband, as well as the Man unto his Wife. 2. If they must forsake
father rather then not hold together, whether not the fathers house those
honors and punctilio's: if the greater, why not then the less? In a word,
what God has joined together, let no man put asunder, and if no man, how that
which is less then man?

2. From that of our Savior in his excellent Sermon on the Mount, Mat. 5.32.
But I say unto you, Whosoever shall put away his wife saving in the cause of
fornication, causes her to commit adultery. Examine here, 1. Whether a Woman
may separate her self, seeing the Man cannot. 2. Whether any may do it except
for fornication, and then where is maintenance?
3. If a Woman should forsake her Husband, and he commit folly with another,
whether she be not guilty of that sin? 4. Whether she do not contract a guilt,
though he do it not, whilst she thus lays him open to temptation. And here is
more then the greatest of inconveniences, be it that of Solomon his continual
dropping.

3. From that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 7.3, 4, 5. Let the husband render unto the
wife due benevolence, and likewise the wife unto her husband: for the wife has
not power of her own body, but the husband; and likewise the husband has not
power of his body, but the wife. Defraud you not one the other, except it be
with consent for a time, that ye may give your selves to fasting and prayer,
and come together again, that Satan tempt you not for your incontinency.
Examine from the words in order, 1. Whether it be lawful for the Wife to
withhold due benevolence whilst she complains of churlishness. 2. Whether the
Wife has power of her own body, whilst she disputes for maintenance.
3. Whether it be not a defrauding of her husband, whilst she continues in a
separation without his consent? 4. Whether with consent it be lawful to
separate, save only for a time? 5. Whether for a time, save only for this end,
that they may give themselves to fasting and prayers? 6. Though they do it to
this end, yet whilst they continue in a separation, whether do they not expose
themselves to Satan to tempt them to incontinency?

Madam, The fame of your perfections makes me very bold, you are able to
apprehend much in a little, and to correct that which is amiss; you know this
is written with a running pen. I have but even now received the Case from you.
Beware of those who strengthen you in the way which is in it self (to say the
least of it that can be) but of bad report: and assure your self, that as much
is spoken to Sir N. as becomes a faithful steward. I am sure that passage in
our ancient Liturgy is not disagreeing with Canonical Scripture, Cursed is he
that parts between Man and Wife; and let all the people say Amen. Confident of
your acceptance, because though weak, yet from an upright heart, I rest

Madam, Your Ladyships most Humble Servant, William Moore.
September. 3. 1654.
FINIS.
These Books following, and several others, are to be sold by Henry Eversden,
at the Grayhound in Paul's Churchyard.
AN Exposition, with Practical Observations on the Nine first Chapters of the
Proverbs, by Francis Tailor Minister of Canterbury, in quarto. Imputatio Fidei;
Or a Treatise of Justification; wherein the imputation of Faith for
Righteousness (mentioned in Romans 4, 5, 6.) is explained, by Mr. John
Goodwin, Minister of the Gospel, in quarto. Lucas Redivivus, or the
Gospel-Physitian, prescribing (by way of meditation) divine Physic to prevent
diseases, not yet entered upon the soul, by John Anthony Doctor in Physic, in
quarto. A Comment on Ruth; together with two Sermons, one teaching how to live
well; the other minding all how to die well, by Thomas Fuller Author of the
Holy State. There is now ready to publish these following. 1. Laz. Riverius his
Universal body of Physic, in folio. 2. The seventh day Sabbath, sought out and
celebrated, by Tho. Tillam, in Octavo.
FINIS.

