Instruction to the Living, FROM THE Consideration of the future State OF THE
DEAD. OR, The Doctrine of the Resurrection of the DEAD, and of Eternal Judgment
by CHRIST, as the sum of it was delivered at the Funeral of Mrs. Elizabeth
Harrison, in Boston; Jan. 1657 / 8

By Tho. Moore Junior.

If any man will come after me, (says Christ) let him deny himself, and take
up his Cross and follow me. For whosoever will save his life shall loose it.
And whosever will loose his life for my sake shall find it, (and keep it unto
life eternal. Joh. 12. 25.) for what is a man profited, if he shall gain the
whole World and loose his own soul; or what shall a man give in exchange for
his soul. For the Son of Man shall come in the Glory of his Father, with his
holy Angels, And then shall he reward every man according to his works. Math.
16. 24-27. Wherefore (says the Apostle) we labor that whether present (namely
in the body) or absent, (from it) we may be accepted with him; knowing that we
must all appear before the Judgment-seate of Christ; that every one may
receive the things done in his Body according to that he has done, whether it
be good or bad. 2 Cor. 5. 9, 10. For to this end Christ both Dyed, Rose and
Revived, that he might be Lord, Both of the Dead, and Living -- Romans 14. 9-11.
To him therefore shall men come, And all that are incensed against him shall be
ashamed. Isa. 45. 24. Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade men
-- LONDON: Printed by E. Brudenell, for John Allen at the Sunrising in St.
Paul's Churchyard, 1659.

To The READER.
AT the importunity of the late Husband of the Deceased, I promised some notes
of what was delivered at his said Wives Funeral. Intending only a Breviary of
the heads of that. But when I set on the performance of my promise, not knowing
how public it might be made. I thought it expedient to speak more fully, and
explicatively, to many of the things herein discoursed, then I could have done
in such a Breviary, or had opportunity to do at the first Delivery of it,
which work requiring more time, then I could redeem to it for a good while, by
reason of many unexpected occasions. It has lain the longer by me. I hope also
God might order it so, that it might come forth to thy greater advantage. I
shall here add but this word. That the things chiefly treated of, are of the
great things of the Law, or Doctrine of God, very needful to be well known,
and earnestly heeded by us. The good Lord graciously pardoning my weakness and
brokennesse in putting them to remembrance, give us all a more clear
understanding of them, then is made over in my rude expressions, and so direct
us to a hearty reception, and profitable usefullnesse of the things themselves,
as contained in the Scriptures, is the desire of the most unworthy of all that
have received mercy.

From my house at LYNN, November. 4. 1658. Tho. Moore. Junior.

THE Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Dead, And of Eternal Judgment by
CHRIST, as Evidenced in the Testimony of Christ, spoken too in some explication
of those words of our Savior, Job. 5. 28, 29. as considered with the foregoing
Verses, and compared with other Scriptures.
Joh. 5. 28, 29. Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming, in the which all
that are in the Graves shall hear his voice. And shall come forth: they that
have done good, unto the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil,
unto the resurrection of damnation.
OUR Savior having healed an impotent man (that had an Infirmity 38 years) by
his word, in which also he bad him rise, take up his bed, and walk, and done
these things on the Sabbath day, as we read in the beginning of the chapter;
The Jews as soon as they heard it, did the efore persecute, and seek to slay
him, because he had done these things on the Sabbath day, verse. 15, 16. Our
Savior, that he might also heal their minds, and so allay the heat of their
ignorant zeal, and sury, graciously instructs them; My Father (says he)
works hitherto, and I work, his Father did work in this work, by his word to
the making the man whole, showing that to be a good Sabbath days work; as also
the like, Mark 3. 1, 5. And therefore he ought not to be blamed, seeing he
therein did not, nor does he any thing at any time, but the works of the
Father, and in the Counsel, Name, Power, and Authority of the Father, that did
work by him all that he did; (having also made him Lord of the Sabbath, as Mark
2. 27, 28.) At this the Jews conceived yet further displeasure, and sought the
more to kill him, not only because he had broken the Sabbath, (as they still
imagined, not minding his gracious instruction.) But also because he said that
God was his Father; Immediately, and in such wise, as therein to their
apprehension, he made himself equal with God (which indeed to him was no.
robbery, Phil. 2. 6.)

Our Savior takes occasion still from their ignorant fury and malicious
opposition farther to instruct them into the excellency of his person and works
and the glory the Father had given him to possess in that body, in man's
nature, and for man's good, as also that glory that should after be more
gloriously actually conferred on him, and he clothed with it in that body, and
it manifested in and through him; That in, and by him, men might know, honor,
and believe in God: This instruction he carries on in all the following
discourse, to the verses we have pitched on, showing in all, that to him it was
no robbery to be equal with God, Instructing and admonishing them by all to
reverence him, and seek to know and worship God, in, and by him; So infinite
are his Compassions, and gentleness toward even such rebellious sinners, he
was not yet provoked by all their malicious forwardness to rise up in fury
against them, or hide himself, and with hold his gracious instructions from
them; But as one that has received gifts, even for the rebellious also, that
the Lord God might dwell among them, is still ladeing them with heavenly
instructions, teaching sinners in the way, blessing them that curse him, doing
good to them that despitefully use him, and persecute him, giving us herein an
example that we should follow his steps, according to that instruction; The
Servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle to all men, apt to teach, in
meekness instructing them that are ignorant, and oppose themselves, etc. 2 Timothy 2. 24, 25, 26. not frowardly, or unfaithfully withholding from them, for
fear, or shame, or revenge, any of those things that may tend to commend
Christ, as the Son of God, and Savior of the World, and render him precious,
nor being selfe-willed, or soon angry, but speaking the truth in love while we
have opportunity.

This discovery of the excellency of his Person, and works he makes, 1 In
showing his one-nesse with the Father in all his Counsels, and works, verse. 19,
20, 21. In all which its evident that he is one with the Father, in mind, and
will, and in glorious wisdom, and power for doing whatever he will in Heaven
and Earth, and so equal with the Father, in nature, and glorious attributes,
and works, he and the Father are one, Ioh. 10. 30. And yet also clearly
distinct in respect of the manner of their Being in the Godhead, and so in
respect of the manner of their working in every work, And as so considered in
their distinct Relations, the Father is greater then He, Joh. 14. 28. For
though the Son as the Eternal Son of God, is of the same Essence or Being
with the Father, yet he is the Son of the Father, yea though he has life in
himself, as the Father has life-in himself, and that now in Man's nature for
fallen men, yet so as of the Father, Joh. 5. 26. Though he does whatsoever the
Father does, yet so as by, and in the Counsel, Name, and Authority of the
Father, who is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.

The Son (says he) can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father
do, yet he can do what ever he will, but he cannot will any thing that the
Father wills not, he is of one mind with the Father, and in his bosom
Counsel, and does nothing, but what he knows and sees the Father wills and
does. And so he could not have healed that impotent man, if he had not seen,
and known the Father willing, and working in the same work; And so if he had
not received commandment from the Father. As also he faith, he laid down his
life that he might take it again, and did it of himself, yet so as he received
commandment of his Father, Joh. 10. 17, 18. And so he has not otherwise spoken
of himself, but so as the Father that sent him gave him commandment, Joh. 12.
49, 50. He could not have tasted death for every man, if it had not been in the
mind, will, Counsel, and grace of his Father; whence it is said to be by the
grace of God, nor could he give forth any discovery of his Fathers goodness,
or revelation of his name, and therein tenders of his grace to sinners, If
(being in the bofome of the Father) he did not perfectly know it to be in his
mind, counsel, purpose, and grace; And that he is working in the self same
thing, and to the same end; And has given him commandment so to speak, and so
to do; And this our Savior gives as the reason why his word shall judge the
rebellious Refusers in the last day, because he has not spoken of himself
otherwise, then as the Father gave him commandment, Joh. 12. 48, 49, 50.
Verily, verily, the Son can do nothing of himself, but what he sees the
Father do; for what things soever he (namely the Father) does, these also does
the Son likewise, they work together in every work, and though distinctly in
respect of the manner of working, yet the same thing, by the same (his own)
power, and to the same end. As he wrought with, and in the name of the Father,
in all the works of Creation, so now as the Son of man, he works with, and in
the name of the Father, in all his works of preservation, and so by him all
things consist, and in all his providentiall Government, and spiritual
opperations. For the Father loves the Son, namely with such manner of love,
and in such wise with that manner of love, as he loves no other; even now in
man's nature, he loves him therefore, because he laid down his life that he
might take it again, (joh 10. 17, 18.) even as he received commandment of his
Father; The Father therefore has taken up his whole delight, and
welpleasednesse in him, as the son of man, chosen him to be his fellow, his
equal, the man of his right hand, and in that love shows him all things,
that himself does, makes him of his counsel in every matter, and in his own
wisdom and name strengthens him to all that himself does, so that he, even
Christ crucified, is wisdom and strength; The wisdom of God, and the power of
God. And he will show him greater works then these, (namely of healing bodily
Infirmities and diseases) that ye may marvail; That beholding the Father in
him, ye may admire and reverence him, and fear before him; that is the end of
all, that the Father has given him commandment to do for, and amongst men: And
as a discovery of those greater works then these, which the Father to this end
would show him, he tells them. As the Father raises the dead, and quickens
them, even so the Son quickens whom he will; In such wise, as the Father, does
any work of that nature, now in this day, so does the Son; And so he did raise
up some that were dead, to life again in the days of his flesh, and by his
Apostles after, as the Father also did the like works vertually through and by
him before, Hebr. 11. 35. even so he now did them in the name of his Father.
And those were greater works then the healing the bodily Infirmities of the
Living; Yea he quickens by his Word whom he will: And that is all that receive
it from their death in sins and trespasses spiritually now, which also are
greater works then those forementioned; And so he promises that his servants
should do those greater works then these, they in his name, and so he by them,
because he went to the Father.

2 He farther makes discovery of the excellency of his Person, and works, in
declaring himself to be the only mean, and way by whom the Father judges and
disposes of men, and does whatsoever he does in his Government of the World.
Giving this also, as a farther Reason and Demonstration of his one-nesse with
the Father in all his Counsels, and works. verse. 22, 27. For the Father judges
no man, (that is immediately, or otherwise then so as by the Son, he does not
otherwise dispose of them or their ways, or order any thing to them or about
them in his Government of them, or pass sentence of Justification or
Condemnation on them,) but has committed all judgment to the Son, because he
was judged for them, or had already undertaken to bear their judgment, the
curse of the Law, as they fell under it through the first departure of the
nature from God. Joh. 12. 31, 32. Because he humbled himself even to the death
of the Cross, in which he was made a curse for us; And has thereby redeemed us
from the curse of the Law, in which we must all have been for ever banished,
and separated from God, Therefore all men are released to him, and the whole
judgment and dispose of them committed to him, And in order thereto, all power
in Heaven and in Earth given unto him, even to the man Christ Jesus. He is the
Mediator between God and men, who gave himself a ransom for all, to be
testified in due time. And this, that all men should honor the Son, even as
they honor the Father; that they should acknowledge his right of Lordship by
purchase and redemption, and by the Fathers gift to be as large, and full as is
the Fathers right of Lordship by Creation, and absolute propriety in; And
liberty to dispose of them as his Creatures, for the Father has committed all
judgment to him, as the Son of Man, whence also his ability and fitness to
judge, is the same with the Fathers, for the Father has now actually glorified
him in man's nature, with his own self, the glory he had with him before the
World was, having finished the works the Father gave him to do on Earth,
which were also so accepted; as finished with the Father from the beginning of
the World. He has put his spirit on him to bring forth judgment to the
Gentiles, so that he stands in the strength of the Lord, and in the Majesty of
the name of the Lord his God, Joh. 11. 4, 5. Math. 28. 18. Isa. 42. 1, 6. with
chapter 11. 1, 2. Mich. 5. 4. That Men in honoring him, might honor the Father in
him, and that in hearing his word, and through and according to it believing on
the Father that sent him, and whosoever so does, the Father through that word,
and according to it justifies them, and makes them partakers of eternal life;
and the rest he holds under condemnation by, and according to the same word,
doctrine, law, and rule of the Son of Man, so bearing witness of him; yea that
men might honor him; The glory the Father has given him, is such, as in which
he is infinitely strengthened, fitted and appointed to call all the ends of the
Earth, as Isa. 55. 4, 5. and 45. 22. Psalm. 50. 1. Math. 28. 18, 19, 20. Mark
16. 15 Luke 24. 47. Act. 3. 22, 26. And that in the name and power of God his
Father, in such wise as to make the dead to hear, to open the blind eyes, and
awaken those dead in sins, or make his word so powerful to the awakening them,
that they might in hearing hear, even in the light, and power of his voice in
the Gospel, as that is by any means of his appointment, witnessed, preached
to them, and that they that in hearing do hear, may be quickened, and made
alive by it. For as the Father has life in himself, so he has given to the
Son to have life in himself, and has given him authority to execute judgment
also; (both here and hereafter) because he is the Son of Man.

3 In the verses under consideration, he compleates the discovery of the
excellency of his person and works; and his singular one-nesse with the Father,
in declar^ng those greater and more glorious works, which the Father will after
show, and bring forth by him; in the general Resurrection and judgment; And
with this also corrects their sinful marvelling, at what he had before
declared. Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming in the which all that are
in the Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, etc. The end and
scope of our Savior then in the text appears to be, to discover the
excellency of his person, and works, as he is God-man, the word made flesh, the
son of God, the son of man, and therein to teach, and lead into the
understanding, and usefulness of things to come, even of the resurrection of
the dead, and of eternal judgment by Jesus Christ, he is Lord of all. And
ended, this is the prime end, and scope of all Scriptures, to bear witness of
Christ, ( Joh. 5. 39) as the Son of God, the Savior of the world, the Lord by
purchase, and so the Judge also of quick and dead, 1 John 4. 14. Act. 10. 36,
42. yea, this is the way of the holy Ghost in them, to teach all things, and
lead into all truth, and so to show even things to come in the demonstration of
him, or by glorifying him, and that in taking of his things, and showing them.
Therein he commends, and displayes the compassionate love, merciful kindness,
and pity of God to sinners, Joh. 3. 16, 17. Romans 5. 5, 6, 7, 8. his
faithfulness, and readiness in giving all things with him, Romans 8. 32. And to
accept all comers into delightful love, and favor, without upb ayding, or
respect of persons, 2 Cor. 5. 17. with verses 14, 15. Act. 10. 34, 35, 43. As
also his unspeakable terror against scorners, that will break forth afterward;
if while it is to day they receive not the love of the truth to save them, 2
Cor. 5. 11. 14, 15. Hebr. 10. 29. Yea, there he shows man's sinfulness,
vileness and deadness, in showing him in whom his help is, 2 Cor. 5. 14. And
so the unprofitablenesse of all his works, and therewith also, the greatness
of the evil of unbelief and unthankfulness, of loving and choosing darkness,
when light comes, Joh. 16. 8, 9, 10. yea thereby he leads into all truth, and
so shows things to come, verse. 13, 14. The word of the beginning of Christ
being the Doctrinall foundation of repentance from dead works, and of faith
toward God, and of the Doctrine of Baptismes, and of laying on of hands, and
of the resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment, Hebr. 6. 1, 2. Called
therefore the great things of his Law, the vision of all, Hose. 8. 12. Isa. 29.
11. with chapter 28. 12, 16. The key of knowledge, Luke 11. 42. 52. That by an
exercise of faith in him, according thereto, we might reap the profit and use
of all Scriptures. 2 Timothy 3. 15.

The way in which our Savior proceeds in pursuance of the forementioned scope,
and end, in these verses is,

1 By warning, or admonishing them against sinful marvelling, such as is the
proper fruit, and issue of unbelief, and an impediment to faith, for there is
a marvelling that's good, and commendable, such as is of faith, an esteeming,
reverencing, and so admiring the unsearchable depth, and excellency of the
truth, wisdom and goodness of the things believed, and perceived, as passing
all understanding and knowledge, such as that, Romans 11. 31. with Ephesians. 3 18, 19.
Phil. 4. 7. Psalm. 40. 5. and 71. 15, 17. But that marvelling that is not of
faith, but an impediment to it, such as in which a man looks upon the things
set before him in thy testimony of God concerning Christ; as strange, absurd,
and incredible, because he cannot comprehend it by reason, such as that in
Nicodemus, how can this thing be, Joh. 3. 9. (like that Joh. 12. 34. with Hosea
8. 12. and Isa. 29. 9, 12.) Against this our Savior admonishes them, marvel
not at this namely, that which he had already declared of the present power of
the voice of the son of God, by reason of the glory which the Father had given
him in man's nature.

2. By asserting to them, and instructing them into the general resurrection
of the dead, both just and unjust, by the same voice of the Son of Man, and his
rendering to every man according to his works then; And this as an antidote
against their sinful marvelling.

Whence in general, we may note this instruction signified to us, that the
Doctrines of the Resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment by the
voice of the Son of Man, are very fit and powerful to strengthen faith in
Christ; And so in God for all that he has said or promised, against all the
corrupt reasonings of the carnal mind, or of the wisdom of the flesh, they
are mighty weapons through God, to the pulling down of strong holds, casting
down Imaginations, and every thing that exalts it self against the knowledge
of Christ, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of
Christ, 2 Cor. 10. 4, 5. Hence it is, that the tasting of the powers of the
World to come, Hebr. 6. 5. is so placed, as answering to the Doctrine of the
Resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment, verse. 2. signifying that
those doctrines of the World to come are very powerful to the correcting, and
silenceing carnal disputings and sinful marvellings, and so proved, or tasted
in the prevalency of them, on the spirits of such as believingly consider them,
as 2 Cor. 4. 14, 16, 17, 18, and 5. 1, 10. Whence this apprehension of God, as
one that quickens the dead, and calls those things that be not, as though
they were; (yea, he makes them to be, in his so calling them, as he commanded
light to shine out of darkness,) This is mentioned as that which strengthened
Abraham against hope to believe in hope. Romans 4. 17. Yea that God raises the
dead, as the truth of that is evidenced in his having raised up Christ our
Lord, as the surety in man's nature from the dead: In which he has delivered
us from so great a death, and given assurance unto all men, that he will raise
them from the dead, and judge them by that man whom he has so ordained; And
also as its manifested by and through Christ in his quickening all things, and
daily delivering and saveing in deaths, and from the evil of them as the
Savior of all men, especially of them that believe; This is declared as that
which did strengthen the faith and hope of the Apostles, and Believers in
greatest tribulations and deaths, and against all unlikelyhoods, and
impediments, 2 Cor. 1. 9, 10. 1 Timothy 4. 10. and 6. 13

For 1. Herein his infinite power for doing whatsoever he pleases, is lively
presented, in the evidence and demonstration of the spirit, that is in that
Doctrine, as contained and held forth in the testimony of Christ, hence Abraham
retaining such an apprehension of him, as forementioned, was fully persuaded
that whatever he had promised, he was able to perform; And therefore when he
was tried, offered up his only begotten Son, accounting that God was able to
raise him up, even from the dead, from whence also he received him in a Figure.
Romans 4. 20, 21. Hebr. 11. 17, 19. This great power of God in Christ, as
evidenced in his raising the dead, would (being believingly minded) powerfully
silence those sinful marvellings, in which men are vainly disputing against
his words, and unwisely inquiring concerning his works: As how can it be that
the works of Creation, and providence should be witnesses of Gods goodness
that is in and through Christ, and so leading to repentance; This consideration
I say would correct and silence them, that it is God that raises the dead and
quickens all things, and will bring all men out of their Graves to his
judgment seat by Christ, he it is that has spoken it, and of his own work to
show and manifest it in such wise; Therefore our Savior here propounds this
Doctrine to correct their sinful marvelling at that declaration of the present
power of and in his voice, in the several preachings of it, in which it is by
him sent forth to men, verse. 25. The hour is coming and now is, when the dead
shall hear the voice of the son of God, and they that hear shall live; Marvel
not at this, (says he) for the hour is coming in the which all that are in the
Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, etc. And if it should not be
thought a thing incredible, that God should raise the dead, and that by the man
Christ, and by the voice and power of his word, why should it be thought
incredible, that the same word, as now witnessed and preached to men, by any
means of his appointment should be so powerful, as to open the blind eyes,
and make the dead to hear, that in hearing they might hear, and live, why? say
some men, this cannot be, without power, or free will in man, as of him, to
such hearing, seeing the same voice shall raise the dead bodies out of their
Graves.

2 In this Doctrine also is the discovery of a reward then to be rendered by
him, that is now preached to them, and that according to every man's work, after
the Gospel rule of judgment. And this Discovery being also with the evidence,
and demonstration of the spirit, that accompanyes that whole Doctrine of
Christ, and especially in the plain and faithful ministration of it, puts an
admonition upon men's spirits, not to dally with him, and with their own souls;
now while it is to day, to beware of murmuring among themselves, and lifting up
Imaginations, in opposition to the light, and power of his testimonies, to give
more earnest heed to his words, (while they have opportunity) that are able to
beget and strengthen faith. As perceiving in this Discovery of things to come,
that it is eternal life, and eternal death that is set before them; And the
present opportunity is only theirs for choosing the one through the grace of God
bringing salvation, and for avoiding and fleeing from the other. Therefore our
Savior uses this as a powerful motive to warn men, not to murmur among
themselves now, not only that no man can come to him, except the Father, which
had sent him (to draw them) do draw him, But also that whether they now come to
him in his gracious drawings, or no, they shall come to him, he will raise them
up at the last day, and bring them before his judgment seat, Joh. 6. 43, 44.
with verse. 36, 37, 39. And then those that now were incensed against him, and
would not come to him for life, shall bow before him, and acknowledge him Lord
to the glory of God, and justify him in their own everlasting destruction;
These and the like considerations in this Doctrine, made it so powerful on the
spirits of the Apostles, as we read, 2 Cor. 5. 9, 10, 11. 2 Timothy 4. 1, 8.

We may also here learn by our Saviors example, how to answer, correct and
silence such sinful marvellings in our selves or others at any of those great
and deep things of God, contained in the testimony of Christ, according to
that* Pro. 26. 4, 5. Answer not a Fool according to his folly, least thou also
become like unto him; Answer a Fool according to his folly, least he be wise in
his own conceit. 1 Not to seek to answer them in their own way, or so as we
become like unto them, in the use of such carnal weapons for confirming the
truth, as they use against it, for that grants the way good, that indeed is
evil; of measuring the truth of God by man's Imagination; or endeavoring to
bring it down to the comprehension of his blind and corrupted reason, nor has
that any promise of Gods presence with it for reproving, and convincing; yea
whatever faith is that way produced, rests but in the wisdom and strength of
man, therefore the Apostles avoided it, 1 Cor. 1. 17, 18, etc. and 2. tot. 2
Cor. 10. 3, 4. But 2. So to answer them with his words, and in his way, as the
folly and vanity of their way of reasoning (in which they desire by their
carnal wisdom to find out, comprehend, and be satisfied about the things of
God in Christ,) may appear by opposing to them the greatness of God, and the
unsearchablenesse of his works and ways past finding out, as well in that which
he has already done in the person of Christ, as also in that which he does in
his daily dispensations and providence; And in that which he will do, and
bring forth by him, of which he has given assurance in what he has already
done, in all which his judgments are unsearchable. He raises the dead, why
then should it be thought incredible that he should do whatever he says, he
does or promises he will do, though we cannot comprehend how such a thing
should be.

If when God says, that he so teaches man knowledge, that that which may be
known of God is manifest in them, even in them that had not the records of the
Scriptures among them, yea in their hearts, that liked not to retain it there;
And that his goodness does lead those men to repentance, that yet harden their
hearts, and are not led by it. If then any reply against God, and say, how can
this thing be, this seems absurd, or will not stand, with such traditions, or
apprehensions of God, which we have taken up from our Fathers, or with our
reason, seek not then to satisfy his reason, in that way it desires
satisfaction, or to bring the great things of God down to it; but to the Law,
to the Testimony what is written, how read thou, and if God say it, its meet
for us to believe it, for with him no word, or work is unpossible, no not to
raise the dead, and let that stop the mouth of further inquiry how such a thing
can be, as the Apostle when he would demonstrate that, that which may be known
of God is manifest in them, he uses this only, as a sufficient demonstration;
that God has showed it unto them; Romans 1. 19, 20. For who teaches like him,
or who has enjoined him his way, etc. Job. 36. 22. 23-26. who then art thou,
oh vain man, that replyest against God, that raises the Dead.

We come now to the Doctrine mainly contained and spoken too in the text, to
wit the Doctrine of the Resurrection of the Dead, and of eternal judgment by
Christ; In this Declaration of it by our Savior, we have set before us, 1 What
the Resurrection, and Judgment spoken of, is, As to the subject of it? that is
to be raised and judged; 2 The time of it. 3 Some intimation of the order of
it. 4 The means or power by which it shall be effected. 5 The different state
of Persons in the Resurrection or ends to which they shall be raised.

1 What the Resurrection and Judgment spoken of is, As to the subject of it?
This is clearly intimated, and fully expressed to be, the quickening or raising
up of the dead Bodies of men, after death has fully ceized on them, a raising
them up in a sensible being, and capable of partaking off, and possessing
everlasting glory, or everlasting shame and horror; And so the making alive the
dead Bodies of men by Christ, in an answerable sense to that dying, or death
that passes on them all by the one man Adam, as 1 Cor. 15. 21, 22. A total
redeeming them from the first death, and the grave; And bringing them forth in
soul and body, reunited to their eternal judgment.

1 This is clearly intimated in his saying, marvel not at this, namely at his
former declaration of the present power and efficacy of his voice, or word on
the spirits of men, while in this body, making those dead in sins and
trespasses to hear, and spiritually quickening and making alive such as in
hearing hear, and then adding as a reason why they should not marvel at that,
this further Declaration of the mighty power of his voice, as it shall be after
manifested, in raising and bringing forth all that are in the Graves, which
being added as a farther declaration of the mighty power of and in it, to take
them off from their sinful marvelling at the former, signifies, that, the
Resurrection and bringing forth of the Graves here spoken of as the efficacy of
his voice, is not the same efficacy of it with that forementioned; But another
thing distinct from it, yea a greater and more wonderful efficacy of the same
voice of the son of man: And is as much as to say, Marvel not that I said unto
you, that those dead in sins, and trespasses, shall hear the voice of the Son
of God; And they that hear in that hearing given them, shall have their spirits
quickened, and made alive for righteousness sake, while yet the body is dead
because of sin, for lo a greater and more marveilous work then this, shall be
effected by it, even all that are in the Graves shall hear it, and shall come
forth, some to the resurrection of life, and some to the resurrection of
damnation, so that in this our Savior signifies, the resurrection of the dead,
or bringing them forth of their Graves to Judgment, to be another work, and
distinct from the work of spiritual vivification, yea a greater and more
wonderful work then any work, that is now working, or wrought by his voice on
the spirits of men, while yet the body is dead in the first death, or that
reigns on it, as the fruit of sin, which distinct, and greater work can be no
other, but the quickening or raising up of the mortal body, yea the total
redemption from the first death; for those spiritual quickening efficacies of
his word on men's spirits now, are expressly mentioned in the foregoing verses,
as greater works then those of healing any bodily Infirmities, verses 20, 21,
25. yea those are the greater works that our Savior promises, they that
believe on him should do, because he went to his Father, Joh. 14. 12. with Act.
26. 18. Greater works then those visible and sencible demonstrations of his
power, which they saw made by him on men's bodies, amongst which also was his
raising Lazarus, though that more singular, and as a discovery of his mighty
power for raising the dead, as it should be more gloriously manifested in due
time, yet that was not a total Redemption from death, and the power of the
grave, and therefore might be rockoned among those works that are inferior to
the making alive the spirit for righteousness sake, while yet the body is dead
because of sin, if then the quickening and saving operations of his word on the
spirits of men now be greater then any of these works forementioned, and yet
the efficacy of the same voice spoken of in the text, as to come, be another,
and distinct work, and greater then that, as it is clearly signified to be; Its
evident from thence, it can be no Iesse nor other, then that resurrection of
the dead bodies of men, in which they shall be wholly redeemed from the first
death, and from the power of the Grave.

And so the Apostle Paul, speaking of the first Resurrection, which is more
properly then the other called a quickening of the mortal body, or raising it
unto life, mentions it as another distinct, and following work; And such only
as is greater then the making the spirit alive now, while yet the body is dead.
Romans 8. 10, 11. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead, that is, it is yet
so because of sin, though Christ be in you; but the spirit is made alive for
righteousness sake. But if the spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the
dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken
your mortal body, or raise up that also in a state of life, and unto life, by
the same spirit that now dwells in you quickening your spirit.

Yea, our Savior also otherwhere speaks of the general resurrection at the
last day, as another distinct work, and greater then any spiritual efficacy of
his voice, or word now, in drawing men, or strengthening and quickening the
comers, which yet also are there signified to be so great, and of such a
nature, that nothing short of that his raising them up at the last day is
greater, see Joh. 6. 40, 44. The Father has sent him now in the light and
power of his word, or doctrine, to draw men to him, that otherwise could not
come; And to give eternal life through his name to all comers, even in the
knowledge and faith of it in him, and in some first fruits of spiritual
enjoyment, and in the hope of the harvest; To each of these he adds, and I
will raise him up at the last day, signifying, nothing short of that is greater
then these, and clearly mentioning that as another work, and greater then any
of these, which yet also he says he will do, both unto those that come in his
drawings to see, and believe on him, and to those also that break his bands
asunder, and will not come to him for life; And then shall be fulfilled that
which is written, all that the Father has given him shall come to him, even
those that now will not come in his drawings, see verse 37, 39. with Isa. 45.
23, 24. Psalm. 2. 7, 8, 9.

And so in this place, The resurrection of the dead is distinguished from, and
mentioned as a far greater work, then any spiritual efficacy of his word, or
voice on Men's spirits now; And therein signified to be a mighty and wonderful
efficacy of the same voice, on their dead bodies that sleep in the dust of the
Earth, even such as in which they shall be wholly red^emed from the first
death, and from the power of the Grave.

Yea, 2 So much is plain, and full in the expressions. 1 In that its called the
resurrection of them. 2 Its said to be such, as in which all that are in the
Graves shall come forth.

1 In that its called the resurrection of them both, (some to life, and others
to damnation,) now there is no work in Scripture called the resurrection of the
dead; But that in which the whole man is wholly redeemed ou^, and brought forth
of the first death, that came in, and passed on all men at first by sin, nor
can be properly so called; no not that quickening of the spirit that is now
effected in hearing the voice of the Son of God, by what means soever
preached, though that as we have showed already in respect of the nature, and
greatness of it, is the nearest to this, yet that is but such a quickening, or
making alive of the spirit in part, or in a first fruits, as may, and does
stand together with their body being still dead, as the fruit of sin; Romans 8.
10, 23. yea of those of whom the Apostle supposes, they were risen with Christ,
yet he affirms of them, that they were still dead, and their life hid with
Christ in God, And when he who is our life shall appear, then (not before)
shall they also appear with him in glory, Coll. 3. 1-5. And of himself the
same Apostle plainly affirms, that he had not yet attained the resurrection of
the dead, but was pressing on to it, aiming at it, even at the first
resurrection, in which is such blessedness, yet so as looking for it, both
after the changing this vile body, and at the appearing of our Lord Jesus
Christ from Heaven, when he shall bring with him all that sleep in Jesus, and
not before, see Phill. 3. 11-14, 20, 21.

True it is, In that gracious or spiritual work, in which the spirit is
quickened, or made alive for righteousness sake, now through the belief of
the truth, as it is in Jesus: Therein also, the Believer is said to be risen
with Christ, Coll. 3. 1. with chapter 2. 12. But that is explicated to be, not in,
or by a like act, wrought upon our Persons, as was wrought upon his when he was
raised from the dead, But through faith of the operation of God, and so
effected in the doctrinall and spiritual baptism, as also they are said in
the same baptism, in a like sense to be buried with him; He is the Person that
was dead and buried, and was raised again for us, and with reference to that,
his personal buryall, and resurrection, the Apostle speaks there, as also in
Romans 6. 3, 4, 8, 11. showing that in the spiritual washing of that doctrine of
his death and resurrection, we are through faith washed from the errors, and
polutions of the World into the acknowledgment, grace, and consolation of that
his death, and resurrection; And so in that Baptism, or washing of the spirit,
which is in the belief of the truth, we are taught, and strengthened to reckon
our selves dead, and buried in his death, and burial, there dead indeed unto
sin, and so risen with him through the same faith of the operation of God, who
has raised him (he says not us, but him,) from the dead, still we are dead,
and our life is hid with Christ in God, who also has begotten us by and
through the resurrection of Christ, to a lively hope of an Inheritance
incorruptible, and that sadeth not away, reserved in Heaven for us who are kept
by the power of God through faith, unto the salvation ready to be revealed in
the last time, unto which, he that raised up Christ from the dead, will also
raise us up by Christ at his coming; Till then the resurrection of the dead, is
not in a full, or proper sense attained by any but the Head for us all.

Some there are I know that would not have us understand the Resurrection of
the body to be meant in that first resurrection spoken of, Revel. 20. 5, 6. But
some spiritual quickening, reviving, or enlargement given to such Persons in
this corruptible time, and state of the World; And the pretended ground of
their cavil against the understanding, the resurrection of the body to be
there meant, is from John's saying, that he saw the souls of such, and they
lived and reigned with Christ; The souls says John; Not the bodies therefore
say they: For the clearing of that therefore consider.

1 That sometime by the soul is meant the whole Person of the man, or men
spoken of, both soul and body together, as Genesis 12. 5. and 46. 15, 18, 22, 27.
with Deuteronomy. 10. 12. Rev. 18. 13. with Ezekiel. 27. 13.

2 That the soul as well as the body may be said to be dead to us, though not
in it self, or unto God; All live to him, Luke 20. 38. And so the soul
departing out of the body, yet retains a sensible being, while the body is in
dust, But so as under the Altar, in a disappearing state as to us, having no
fellowship or converse with us, nor any more any reward, o^ portion of the
things done under the Sun, nor shall they appear again, or be visible, and so
living to us, until in the body at the resurrection of the body. And so in
this vision John saw the souls, not as chap. 6. 9 under the Altar, as still
remaining in a disappearing state of death as to us. But coming forth, and
appearing; That is soul and body together, the whole persons of those spoken
off. And they lived, etc. Yea,

3 That the resurrection of the Podies of those that sleep in Jusus, is there
meant by the living again of the souls of such, which is there called, the
first resurrection; is clear in that its spoken of, as a work passing upon them
after death, and not before: Some of them had been beheaded for the testimony
of Jesus before they thus lived again, and yet their very persons lived again
in that first resurrection, as seen in the vision, yea the rest of that Company
that have part in the first resurrection, were dead before they so lived again,
or immediately changed with such a change, as is answerable to death, as
appears by his saying of all the residue that have not part in that first
resurrection; The rest of the dead lived not again till the thousand years were
finished, Then it seems, these were all of the dead before they thus lived
again* Likewise

4 Its further evident, in that this living again of those is called, the first
resurrection, with relation to, and as distinguished from the resurrection or
living again of the rest of the dead, after the thousand years of Christ's
personal reign on the Earth shall be finished, And as opposed to their not
living again till that time be expired. And that that Resurrection, or living
again of the rest of the dead, that shall be at the end of that time, is the
Resurrection of their dead Bodies, is clear in that explication that follows,
The Sea gave up the dead which were in it, (now its their dead Bodies that were
in the Sea) And death (the first death) and Hell (or the grave or disappearing
state of death) delivered up the dead which were in them.

By all which it appears, that by the first resurrection is meant, that
resurrection of all that are his (peculiar people) at his coming to take the
Kingdom and reign, that is spoken of, 1 Cor. 15. 23. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14, 16. In
which their vile Bodies shall be wholly redeemed from death, and fashioned into
the likeness of his glorious Body, for which all true Believers are here
waiters, Romans 8. 23. Phil. 3. 11, 21.

Yea, the resurrection of the dead, is here expressed to be such a work, as
shall be effected by the power of his mighty voice on all, both just and
unjust; And therefore, though the just, or those that sleep in Jesus now before
his coming, and those of them that survive at his appearing, shall have their
^^^stnesse in it; And all the righteous shall have the only blessedness of it;
Yet the resurrection simply, is not their peculiar privilege or portion, or a
work only to be accomplished on them, but on all the dead that dye in Adam.

2 Such also it is here expressed to be, as in which all that are in the Graves
shall come forth, a work exceeding, or going beyond that, in which some
received their dead to life again, Hebr. 11. 35. and that in which some dead
Bodies of Saints arose, and came forth of their Graves, and lived again some
time amongst men in this corruptible state of the World, as Lazarus, Joh. 11.
and others, Math. 27. 52, 53. In which yet there was a glorious manifestation
of the great power of God, in and by Christ for raising all the dead, wholly
out of the first death in due time; But in these it cannot be said, that the
persons so raised, and brought forth were wholly redeemed from death, and from
the power of the Grave, nor therein brought to the full enjoyment, or
possession of that eternal life and glory, to which they were called by the
Gospel, and therefore neither is that called, the resurrection of them from
the dead, yea they are still said to be expecting a better resurrection, God
having provided some better things for us, that they without us should not be
made perfect, Hebr. 11. 35-40. But the resurrection of the dead, that which is
so called in Scripture, and is so in a full and proper sense, is such as in
which all that are in the Graves (which also may signify generally, the
disappearing state of death, because in that, as in the Grave, they are hidden
from us, though not from him that hides them there, as Job 14. 13. with Psalm.
139. 12.) even all that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall awake, and shall
come forth, some to everlasting life, and some to shame, and everlasting
contempt, Dan. 12. 2. He will ransom them from the power of the Grave, redeem
them from death; The first death, and the Grave that now hides them, shall be
wholly destroyed, so that there shall be no more darkness or shadow of death,
in which the workers of iniquity may hide themselves, Hose. 13. 14. Revel. 20.
13, 14. Job 34. 22.

All that are in the Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, now
how, or in what consideration of them they are in the Grave, or dust of the
Earth, is evident, that it is in the flesh, or body, as distinct from the
spirit, or soul, which departs out of the body, at death, and returns to God
that gave it, to be appointed to its proper place, either of prison, or
liberty, till the resurrection of the body. At death, the dust returns to the
Earth as it was, and the spirit returns to God that gave it, Eccles. 12. 7. In
death there is no difference between a man, and a Beast, as to outward
appearance; But there is this great difference to be believed, though no man
can by sense perceive it, or by Philosophy comprehend it. That the spirit of a
Man goes upward, whereas the spirit of a Beast goes downward to the Earth,
Eccles. 3. 20, 21. Hence it is said of Rachel, that her soul departed when she
dyed, Genesis 35. 18. So David saw corruption, his flesh or body did turn to dust,
when as notwithstanding, his spirit was with other spirits of just men made
perfect, as far as the spirit without the body is capable. Now then the
resurrection of the dead, is such, as in which the flesh or body, that sleeps
in the dust of the Earth, shall be wholly redeemed from death, and the Grave;
from that death, to which the Grave is annexed, even that death which presently
turns them to corruption, and dust, if they rest in it. All that are in the
Graves shall come forth, even all the dead Bodies of men that sleep in the dust
of the Earth. And shall never more return to dust again, or be hidden in the
Grave, or any such disappearing state of death; which unspeakably adds to the
happiness of those that have done well; And to the misery and terror of the
other.

Furthermore, That the resurrection shall be of the same bodies of men that dye
in and from Adam, even of the same that returns to dust, and corruption in
those that sleep, or rest in death; That the self same, shall be raised by
Christ, and made alive from that death, though it shall not be raised the same,
or in the same quality, yet that it, even the dead, the same body that dies,
and is dead, shall be raised, and not another thing, or body in the stead of
it, is evident from the resurrection of Christ, which is both, as has been
hinted already; The foundation of the resurrection of the dead, and also the
first fruits of the same; As says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 15* 20. But now is
Christ risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them that slept,
whence also he calls him, the first born from the dead, Coll. 1. 18. Now as the
Apostle in another case argues, the lump or harvest must needs be such as is
the first fruits, of the like nature or kind; (as Romans 11. 16.) If therefore
the resurrection of Christ was the raising* up from the dead, of the same body
that dyed, in which he bore our sins to the Tree, even Jesus of the seed of
David after the flesh, Then it follows necessarily, that the resurrection of
the dead by him, is the raising up, and making alive from that death; the same
bodies that dye in Adam; else his resurrection in the same body in which he
dyed, could not be the first fruits of theirs. But that the resurrection of
Christ was of the same body that was hung upon the Tree, and dyed, is most
clear. First from his own demonstration of it after his resurrection, and
before his being taken up; In all which he showed (says the text, Act. 1. 3.)
himself to them alive after his passion, or suffering, by many infallible
proofs; himself alive after his passion; himself that suffered and dyed, the
same himself alive again, after that his passion; himself the same man, the
same person, the same Jesus of Nazareth; And in the same body in which he
suffered and dyed, and that was laid in the Sepulcher, as we may see more
fully, and particularly in the narrations, as Luke 24. 39, 40. Behold my hands
and my feet, that it is I my self, handle me, and see, for a spirit has not
flesh and bones, as ye see me have; And when he had thus spoken, he showed
them his hands and his feet. Again, verse. 46, 47. It was necessary that the
same Christ that suffered and dyed, should rise again the third day; And that
repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name. Likewise, Joh.
20. After they had been at the Sepulcher, and found not the body of Jesus
there; Jesus himself appeared to them, and after some reasoning with them, he
showed them his hands and his feet; Then says the Text, were the Disciples
glad when they saw the Lord, verse. 20. Again, verse. 27: Then says he to Thomas
reach hither thy finger, and behold my hands, and reach hither thy hand, and
thrust it into my side, and be not faithless but believing; Thomas having said
before, verse. 25. That unless he should see in his hands the print of the
nails, and put his finger into the print of the nails, (namely by which he
was nailed to the Cross.) And thrust his hand into his side, (namely that was
pierced with a Spear, Joh. 19. 34.) he would not believe. For which though he
deserved reproof, and went not without it; yet our Savior graciously
condiscended to his weakness for our further confirmation. Secondly, this is
also most clear from the holy Ghosts Testimony of him after his ascension, and
being received up into Heaven; That it was the same, that the Jews slew, and
hung on a Tree, whom God had raised and exalted with his right hand, a Prince
and a Savior; And whom the Heaven must receive till the restitution of all
things, Act. 5. 30, 31. and 3. 13*21. He even the same that was dead, is alive
for evermore, and has the keys of Hell, and death. Rev. 1. 18. This man
continues for ever, even the man Christ Jesus. And therefore is a powerful
Mediator, and high Priest, Hebr. 7. 23, 24* 26. 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6, See it very
largely and expressly demonstrated, Act. 2. 22-36. and 13. 23*38. That that man
Jesus of Nazareth, of the seed of David after the flesh, who had been approved
by God amongst his enemies, by miracles and signs, as they also knew, Him whom
they by wicked hands, had crucified and slain, Him God had raised up, having
loosed the pains of death, because it was not possible that he should be
holden of it: That David being a Prophet, and knowing that God had sworn with
an oath to him, That of the fruit of his loins according to the flesh, he
would raise up Christ to sit on his Throne; He seeing this before, spoke of the
Resurrection of Christ, that his soul was not left in Hell, neither did his
flesh see corruption; as David's did, David is not yet ascended or raised. But
Jesus that was made of the seed of David after the flesh, in that one body so
prepared for him in the womb of the Virgin, in which he bore our sins to the
Tree; He is mightily declared to be the Son of God by the resurrection of him
from the dead in that same body, according to the Scriptures, Romans 1. 3, 4. 2 Timothy 2. 8. 1 Cor. 15. And he being risen from the dead, in that body in man's
nature is become the first fruits of them that slept, or that yet dye in Adam;
Therefore we conclude that the resurrection in the lump, or harvest of it, even
of the just and unjust shall be so far of the same nature or kind, that it
shall be of the same bodies that dye in Adam, and from him, even that which is
dead, and sleeps in the dust of the earth, of them that rest in death, yea the
same bodies of all the rest, (not another shall come up in the room,) but it
shall be changed into another quality, yea this our conclusion, is likewise
plainly and abundantly asserted by the Apostle, in that, 1 Cor. 15. in answer
to that question, which the Apostle supposes some ignorant and carnal minds
would move; ( viz.) How are the dead raised up, and with what body do they
come? In answer to that Question, he all along abundantly asserts, that even
the same it, the same body that is sown, a natural body, and in corruption,
shall be raised again, though in another quality. And first in his similitude
or comparison of the seed, or grain sown in the Earth, being quickened after it
dies in the Earth; Though the comparison between that and the resurrection will
not hold in every thing, yet so far as the Apostle uses and applies it, its of
good use for illustration; There he tells us, that which thou sowest, is not
quickened, except it dye; he says not, that the same it, he same seed, or
grain is not quickened, but that it is not quickened, except it dye, so then it
is the same seed or grain which is quickened after it dies; Then further he
adds, that which thou sowest, thou sowest not that Body which shall be -- But
God gives it a body, as it has pleased him, and to every seed, his own body.
He says not, that which thou sowest shall be no more, or that there rises or
comes forth some other thing, or body in the stead of it; But that which thou
sowest, thou sowest it not that which it shall be, still its the same it, that
shall be in the quickening of it. Another body as to the quallity of it, Its
the same changed, he gives to every seed its own body. So likewise he
abundantly asserts in the following application of the comparison, speaking
therein chiefly, or more directly of the Resurrection of the just; So also is
the resurrection of the dead: It is sown in corruption, it is raised in
incorruption; It is sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory: It is sown in
weakness, it is raised in power: It is sown a natural body, it is raised a
spiritual body; Observe all along its the same it, the same body that now is
vile and dead, and turns to dust, that is raised another body as to quality,
or in another quallity; The same body that is now in its present state of flesh
and blood as corruptible, incapable of inheriting the kingdom, even the same
shall be changed, and fashioned into the likeness of his glorious body, and
then inherit with him. Whence the resurrection is called the Redemption of the
body, and not the quickening, or raising up some other thing, Phill. 3. 21.
Romans 8. 17-23.

2 The next thing we propounded, as having occasion given us by the text to
consider, in this Doctrine of the resurrection of the Dead, and eternal
Judgment, is, The time of it. Some discovery of which is hinted in the former
consideration; yet here we shall perticularly show, what is expressed and
signified in the text concerning it. And how that is confirmed in other
Scriptures.

1 It is expressed to be in an hour or time that is coming, yea, that so much
is to be understood in the expression, that it is not now; not made, or
accomplished in, or upon any in this present time, that is already come;
appears by compareing this with verse. 25. To which that this relates, we have
already showed, In that with reference to it, this declares a greater and more
wonderful manifestation of the excellency of the son of man, and of the mighty
power of his voice then that there spoken off. And here its relating to that,
further appears in the expression of the time of the coming forth of this, as
compared with the time of the coming forth of that. Consider and compare the
several expressions, of the time of the coming forth of the distinct, and
several works; There he says, the hour is coming, and now is, in which the
dead shall hear his voice, and they that hear shall live.

Here he says, Marvel not at this, For the hour is coming, in the which all
that are in the Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, etc. Now in
that he there says, the hour is coming, and now is; and here says, the hour
is coming: But leaves out that clause, and now is, which is there added I say,
in that he adds it there, and leaves it out here, he fully signifies so much
to be understood, that the hour, or time for this here spoken of, is not now,
and so his saying here, that the hour is coming, without the addition of that
clause, considering what relation it has to that verse where it is added, is
as much as if he had said, the hour is coming, but is not now; (as the
forementioned efficacy of his voice is,) but in the time yet wholly to come,
they erred concerned the truth, that said, that the resurrection was past
already, or past to some, and so already come, or made and accomplished upon
any, in the time of this life: For as it is appointed to men, (the whole kind)
once to dye, so also after death, to come forth to the Judgment, 2 Timothy 2. 18.
Hebr. 9. 27.

2 It is fully signified in the text, (still comparing it as before with that
25 verse,) that the hour or time of the resurrection and eternal Judgment, is
an hour or time by it self, distinct from that hour or time spoken of in the
25 verse, which was both coming, and already begun; And therefore no part of
that, nor can it be till that be finished, for he says not, that in this hour
or time coming, which now was already begun, or in any following part of that;
all that are in the Graves shall come forth. But having mentioned that hour or
time coming, that then was already begun, as a distinct hour or time of it
self; he then mentions this, as another, and following hour, in which all that
are in the Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, etc. This hour
then shall not come, until that be finished that was then already begun. Yen,

3 That it shall immediately succeed that, is evident also in the expressions,
In that of the first, he says, the hour is coming, and now is, and then with
reference to that, says of the following, the hour is coming, as who should
say, The next after this hour or time, that now is, or is already begun, it
shall follow it, at the heels.

Now then for our understanding the time of the Resurrection of the dead and of
eternal judgment as expressed, and signified to us by our Savior in this
text; Its needful for us to consider. 1. What is that hour or time mentioned
in the 25 verse; as coming, and already come, or begun. 2 What is that hour or
time immediately following, or coming next after that, mentioned in the 28
verse, after which is our enquiry. 1 The hour or time mentioned in the 25
verse, of which our Savior says, it was coming, and was then already begun,
it appears by comparing it with the former verses, to be the time of the
ministerial preaching of the voice, or wo^d of the son of God; in man's nature
as already come in the flesh, which was begun by the Lord himself, (his
forerunner John preparing the way to it,) And confirmed by those that
immediately, and personally heard, and received it from himself, Hebr. 2. 4.
This ministration or dispensation is called, the preaching of peace by Jesus
Christ, Act. 10. 36. His speakeing from Heaven, as distinguished from Moses
ministration, or speaking on earth, Hebr. 12. 25. For though this voice did
begin to come forth in our Saviors personal ministration on earth, yet it was
confirmed and given forth in full by him from Heaven (after his ascension) in
that wonderful pouring out of the holy Ghost on the first witnesses; And by
them to all Nations for the obedience of faith; And he is spiritually present
with it to the end of the World; yea that beginning of the coming forth of it
in his personal ministration on earth, was also his speaking from Heaven, He
being then in the bosom of the Father, so as never man was, did more fully,
and clearly reveal him; And so its here called, the voice of the son of God,
(even of the only begotten son of God, that was in the bosom of the Father, as
Joh. 1. 18.) Both as now already begun in his personal ministration, and as
after more fully to come forth from him, when ascended into Heaven, in that
ministration of the spirit, (which yet was not so given, till he was glorified,
Joh. 7. 39.) This is that called, the coming forth of grace, and truth by Jesus
Christ, of the fulness of which ministry, the Apostles received after his
ascension; And so called as distinguished from the coming of the law by Moses,
Joh. 1. 16, 17, 18. The preaching of the Kingdom, as distinguished from the
Law, and the Prophets, Luke 16. 16. The manifestation of the righteousness of
God by the faith of Christ, as distinguished from the former witnesses of it,
in the Law, and Prophets, Romans 3. 21, 22. Christ's bringing life and
immortallity to light by the Gospel, 2 Timothy 1. 10. And so the testimony of the
Lord, verse 8. And here, the voice of the son of God, his word, preaching, or
ministry, Gods speaking to us by his Son, as distinguished from his speaking in
sundry manners in former times, Hebr. 1. 1, 2. Now the time of the continuance
of this ministry, is expressly showed to be, To the end of the World in this
corruptible state of it, or the World that now is; All power (says our
Savior) is given unto me; (namely in man's nature, even in that body in which
he bore our sins to the Tree, being now raised from the dead, and as the great
and last Prophet to the Nations, Gods light to the Gentiles, and his salvation
to the ends of the Earth) Go ye therefore, Disciple the Nations, baptizeing
them (that is in pouring out this word or Doctrine upon them; Publishing his
name and repentance, and remission of sins in it, for all; And also in outward
sealing, or witnessing the truth of that, in that ordinance of baptizeing with
water in that name; And so baptizeing them) in the name of the Father, and of
the Son, and of the holy Ghost, (as now come forth in him) Teaching them to
observe all things whatsoever I have commanded you, and lo I am with you
always to the end of the World, Math. 28. 18, 19, 20. And so the Apostle
says, They had received the grace of Apostleship fully to make known, and give
forth the preaching of Christ, which was kept secret since the World began, but
was now given by the Father, to the man Christ, raised from the dead; As the
last, and great Prophet, even the same, which he began personally to preach on
Earth; The fulness of which he had now given to them, as his Ambassadors, for
obedience of the faith among all Nations for his name, Romans 1. 5. and 16. 25,
26. 2 Timothy 4. 17.

Yea our Savior further says, That this Gospel of the Kingdom, must be
preached in all the World, for a witness unto all Nations, And then shall the
end come, Math. 24. 14. This ministration is to continue till then, whence it is
called, the dispensation of the fulness of times, Ephesians. 1. 10. And those gifts
that are so given unto the Church, as that they are said to be set in it (as
distinguished from those that were added, to accompany them chiefly in the
beginning of that dispensation, 1 Cor. 12. 28. with Ephesians. 4. 11.) They are so
given, and set in it for that work of the ministry, and to be exercised
therein, till we all come in the unity of the faith, and acknowledgement of the
son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the full age of Christ in his
body; The Church, even till the time when they shall all be brought together in
a perfect state in the first resurrection, Ephesians. 4. 11, 12, 13. Whence also the
times and ages, or days of the World that now is, from the beginning of the
coming forth of that voice of the son of God, are called, the last days, as
distinguished from those former sundry times, in which God spoke in diverse
manners, Hebr. 1. 1, 2. yea the last time, or age of the World, and the time of
the last dispensation, or ministration to be given to it, 1 John 2. 17, 18.
with Ephesians. 1. 10. The hour or time of the voice of the Son of God, or of the
preaching of Jesus Christ, and by him in the man; our Savior shows to be the
last. After he had sent diverse servants before, last of all, he sent the Son
himself, Math. 21. 37.

2 We come next to enquire, what is that hour or time immediately succeeding or
coming next after that time, of the ministerial preaching of Jesus Christ,
forementioned; After the finishing of which, there shall be no more means
used, nor time afforded to the World, that now is, nor shall there ever be any
more need of such gifts, or such exercise of them, as is now appointed for the
work of the ministry, by the Saints in this time of their imperfection, though
the matter of the voice preached, shall then be the matter of their song, and
gloriously commemorated by them among all the Nations in the World to come. The
hour or time then coming after, and immediately succeeding that hour or time
mentioned in verse. 25. Cannot be in any time, or ages of the World, that now
is, nor until the second personal appearing of Jesus Christ from Heaven. For
till then, this time forementioned lasts; And is therefore called the last
time, or age of the World, that now is: (as we have already showed) The time
therefore under consideration must needs be, the time of the World to come,
which immediately follows at the heels of this, and upon that second and
glorious appearance of the mighty God our Savior, as 2 Pet. 3. So that it is
the World to come of which we speak, and of which our Savior speaks in this
28 verse. The hour is coming, in the which all that are in the Graves shall
hear his voice, and shall come forth, some to the Resurrection of life, and
others to the Resurrection of damnation. It is the time of his glorious
personal appearing from Heaven upon earth, to put an end to the World that now
is; And create new Heaven, and new earth, and restore the whole Creation: And
the time of his glorious Kingdom on the earth in the World to come, in which
all things shall be visibly and gloriously subdued to him; (2 Timothy 4. 1.) After
which time shall be no more.

Now then, that there shall be such a time, after the ministerial preaching of
peace by Jesus Christ has been continued its time, for a witness to all
Nations, such a time I say, as in which the Son of man shall personally appear
from Heaven on the Earth, in that glory he now possesses for us in Heaven, in
that body in which he bore our sins to the Tree. And shall then put an end to
the World that now is, and make new Heavens, and new Earth, and take to him his
great power, and reign on the Earth, till all his enemies be subdued.

And that all that whole time of his appearing, and Kingdom, is called, one
time, or day of the son of man, the great day of Christ, the hour, or time that
is coming, and not yet come.

And that, that time, or day of his appearing, and Kingdom, is the time of the
dead, that they shall be raised and judged. See a little of the Scriptures
Testimony to each of these.

1 That there shall be such a time, after the ministerial preaching of peace
by Jesus Christ, (as aforesaid) see Peter's Testimony ( Act. 3. 19, 20, 21.) of
the times of refreshing, which (says he) shall come from the presence of the
Lord, when he shall send us Jesus Christ, who before (says he) was presence
unto you, (namely before that time of Gods sending him again, (viz.) in this
present hour or time that now is, after the finishing of which, God shall send
us the same Jesus whom they crucified, in the glory which he now possesses for
us) whom, the Heaven must receive till the Restitution of all things, which God
has spoken, by the mouth of all his holy Prophets, since the World began: To
which agrees the testimony of the Angels, this same Jesus which is taken up
from you into Heaven, shall so come in like manner, as ye have seen him go
into Heaven, Act. 1. 11. As he appeared once in the last Ages of the World in
that one body, which the Father prepared for him, in our nature, to put away
sin by the sacrifice of himself, and so was once offered, to bear the sins of
many: So he shall appear the second time in the same body, but without sin, or
any imputation, or fruits of it upon him, even in the glory, he now possesses
for us to the utmost salvation of those that now look for him, Hebr. 9. 26, 28.
Those that have their conversation in Heaven, do look for the Savior, the Lord
Jesus Christ from Heaven, as Phil. 3. 20. Coll. 3. 4. Tit. 2. 13. And though
others scoff at the promise of his coming, yet that day of the Lord will come,
(to them as a Theife in the night) In the which the Heavens shall pasle away
with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with servent heat, the Earth
also, and the works therein shall be burnt up, (And so it shall be as the days
of Noah, and of Lot, to the dissolving all these things, and putting an end to
this corruptible state of the World, Luke 17. 25, 30.) Nevertheless, we
according to his promise look for new Heavens, and a new Earth, in which
dwells righteousness, 2 Pet. 3. 4 - 14. yea in that his coming, he shall
still sit on the right hand of power, Math. 26. 64. and reign on the earth,
ministering judgment to the people in righteousness, Psalm. 9. 7, 8. and 96. 13.
2 Timothy 2. 12. Rev. 5. 10. and 20. 4, 6. And then when he takes to him his great
power, and reigns (as Rev. 11. 17.) all things shall be visibly, and
gloriously subject to him, for he shall put down all rule, power, and
authority, and reign till all his enemies be put under his feet, and then
deliver up the Kingdom to the Father, and God shall be all in all, when time
shall be no more, 1 Cor. 15. 23 - 28. with Hebr. 2. 5 - 8.

2 That all that whole time of his glorious personal appearing and Kingdom is
together, and by it self, as distinguished from the first day of the son of
man, In which he once personally appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself, and has abollished death, And in which also, he personally began,
and mediately continues, a gracious and spiritual ministration, bringing life,
and immortallity to light through the Gospel, I say, as distinguished from
that whole day, or time of the son of man. All this time of his glorious
appearing, and Kingdom is called one of the days of the son of man, Luke 17.
22. Where after he has told the Pharisees, that the Kingdom of God comes not
with observation, ourward show of glory, or worldly pomp, as they expected; But
that the Kingdom of God, was now amongst them, (brought to them, in the
ministration and preaching of it by him) he then further tells his Disciples,
that they should desire to see one of the days of the son of man, namely that
of his second appearing, and the glorious manifestation, and bringing down of
the Kingdom then; And should not see it, namely not in this day or time, nor
till they shall be gathered together, with all that sleep in Jesus, as appears
in the following part of that chapter. Daniel shall then stand up in his lot;
yea, frequently, all that time of his appearing, and Kingdom, is called the
day of the Lord, the great and notable day, (as 2 Pet. 3. Malla. 4. 5.) (one
day being with the Lord, as a thousand years, and a thousand years as one day)
The son of man, his day, the day in which the son of man shall be revealed,
Luke 17. 24, 30. The day of Christ, Phil. 2. 16. And so here, the hour or time
of the son of man, that is yet wholly to come, In which shall be the most
wonderful and glorious putting forth of his mighty voice. And therefore (as
well as for other Reasons) is that whole time of his appearing, and of his
Kingdom, or glorious reign on the earth, called one time, one day, one hour,
though it may be as long, or longer then this time of the ministerial
preaching of peace by Jesus Christ; And that is may be so, may be signified by
its being called by the same name; An hour, yea that is the hour coming, in
which there shall be no such occasion for cutting short the time, as there is,
and will be in this present hour, I say, if it should be never so long, yet all
of it is therefore called, one hour, one time, one day of the Son of man;
Because as in this present hour of his ministerial preaching peace, There is
no change of ministration, or dispensation, in which God, does or will speak
and reveal himself to us, As before there was, Hebr. 1. 1, 2. That his
speaking to us by his own Son is the last, as we have showed before, even so
in that hour that is coming, there shall be no change or alteration of the
state of things as they shall be renewed, and set by him, nor any more changes
or overturnings of the Government, or administration of it, as now there is;
Till he whose right it is, come, and take it, Psalm. 96. 10, etc. with Isa. 66.
22. Ezekiel. 21. 27. with Psalm. 75. and 82. His seed shall endure for ever; His
Throne shall be as the Sun, it shall be established for ever as the Moon, Psalm.
89. 36, 37. His Kingdom is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away
to another, but be possessed by him (who will deliver it to his Father, when he
has destroyed all enemies) and by his Saints with him for ever, Dan. 7. 14,
18, 26, 27. Revel. 22. 5. Yea therefore also is it called, the Day of Christ,
the great Day of the Lord, because in it, he shall see all the fruit of the
travel of his soul in this day, (both in them that are saved, and in them that
perish,) he shall then see his seed, that were now made willing in the day of
his grace, and powerful Gospel, and enjoy them with him, in the full
enjoyment of his infinite glory, the fruit of his sufferings; And he and they
shall see their desire then on their Enemies, that have wickedly persisted in
their stubornesse, all the day of his grace toward them; In their everlasting
destruction from the presence of the Lord, and by his righteous judgment, and
the power of his mighty voice, that now would have saved them, In which
judgment he shall be glorified, and the righteous shall rejoice for ever. As
also appears in the next consideration.

3* That that time of the appearing, and Kingdom of Jesus Christ, is the time
of the dead, that they shall be raised, and judged; And that he should give
rewards to his servants, etc. And should destroy them which destroy the Earth,
see for this, Revel. 11. 15, 17, 18. Likewise our Savior plainly affirms,
that the son of man shall come in the glory of his Father, and with his holy
Angels; And then shall he reward every man according to his works, Math. 16.
27. yea the Apostle expresses our position distinctly in so many words; The
Lord Jesus Christ shall judge the quick and the dead at his appearing, and at
his Kingdom, which distinct mention of the time, leads us to the next
consideration in the text. viz.

3 The intimation this text gives us of the order of the Resurrection of the
dead, and eternal judgment by Christ.

That those that have done good in this World, shall be first raised and
brought forth to the enjoyment of their glory, and glorious rewards; Before
those that have done evil in this World, shall be raised, and brought forth to
their everlasting punishment, is intimated, in the order observed by our
Savior in this declaration of it; mentioning first, the resurrection unto life
of those that have done good, and after that, the resurrection unto damnation
of those that have done evil; yea the like order is observed, wherever it is
distinctly spoken of by the holy Ghost in the Scripture; as in Dan. 12. 2. Many
that sleep in the dust of the Earth shall awake, (where by many, we may
understand all of them, according to our Saviors assertion in this text,) And
then coming to the distinct mention of the several sorts, he observes the same
order with our Savior here; Some to everlasting life, and some to shame, and
everlasting contempt: So Paul, Act. 24. 15. In his acknowledgement of the
resurrection of the dead, mentions first, the resurrection of the just, and
then of the unjust.

Yet this we grant, that the order of expressions does not always signify, an
order of time in the coming forth of the things expressed, or a distance of
time between the coming forth of them; But where the same order is always
observed by the holy Ghost speaking of the same things, it is the more
significant; For this we find, that when he speaks of several, or distinct
things, in which he would not have us apprehend such an order of time in the
coming forth of them; or distance of time between them, as might be intimated
in the order of expressions, he does not then always observe the same order in
the expressions of them; As for instance, when he says, except a man be born
of water, and of the spirit, he cannot enter into the Kingdom of God, yet that
we may not apprehend, any such thing intimated in the order of expressions
there, or in the distinct manner of mentioning; The water, and the spirit, as a
double, or two fold birth. 1 Of Water. 2 Of the spirit, or a several, and
divided coming forth of those principles for effecting the new birth: first of
the water by it self; secondly of the spirit by it self, Therefore the holy
Ghost does not always observe the same order, when speaking of the same
things: Yea our Savior changes that order in his explication of that
Doctrine, and therein of those principles of Regeneration, the water and the
spirit; In the same chapter, Joh. 3. 14, 15, 16. which verses are evidently a
further demonstration, and explication of that Doctrine, verse. 3, 5. showing in
that whole explication, what that water, and that spirit is, of which a man may
be born again; And there (I say) he changes the order used in verse. 5: speaking
to that first in his explication, which was last in his first declaration of
them: Namely the spirit, of which a man may be born again, which he interprets
to be, in that office, or work of the spirit; The lifting up of the Son of man,
according to that, Joh. 16. 14. And then explicates the water after, to be that
love of God to man-ward, that is manifested in and through the gift of his Son;
which is both the ground of the spirits being sent to lift him up, and also is
it self commended, displayed, and shed abroad, in such lifting him up, as
verse 17. with Rom 5. 5, 6, 7, 8, etc. And so the water, and the spirit* go
together, and are one in and with the other, poured forth abundantly by Jesus
Christ, for regenerateing men, as Tit. 3. 3, 4, 5, 6. which that we may
understand, our Savior observes not the same order of expressions in the first
declaration, and following explication, and after by his Apostles mentions
them, as jointly coming forth together; yea in the 1 John 5. 8. expressly
mentions, the spirit first; And then the water and the blood of Christ, through
which the water is shed abroad by the spirit opening, and sprinckling it, and
so mentions them, as all agreeing in one, and coming forth jointly, and
together. Other instances of like nature might be given.

But (as we have said) when the same order is always observed in mentioning
the same things, as it is wherever the resurrection of the just, and unjust is
spoken off: It Is more significant, as to order of time to be observed by us in
the coming forth of those things. And at least it gives us occasion to observe
what other Scriptures speak more fully to that point.

Now then, That there shall be such an order in the Resurrection of the dead
and eternal judgment by Christ; That Christ the first fruits being already
raised from the dead, shall afterward, even at his coming raise up them that
are his, and bring them with him; and then after that, the end; All that dye in
Adam, shall be made alive by him, but every man in his own order, yea that the
dead in Christ shall rise first, (not before the Survivers of that body then
shall be changed, for that shall be at the same time, they shall not one
prevent another, But) Before the rest of the dead, as Revel. 20. 5. even
immediately, at his descending, and coming down from Heaven; And then at the
same moment, the Survivers of them being changed, they shall be taken up
together, to meet the Lord in the Air, And so he shall bring them with him,
and they shall be from thence forth ever with the Lord, in their souls, and
bodies reunited; All this is full and express in 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14-16. 1 Cor. 15.
22, 23. with Rev. 20. As likewise, that though all that sleep in Jesus, God
shall bring with him, they shall meet him in the Air, and so come with him at
his coming, yet death shall not then immediately at his coming be wholly
destroyed, but remain in Being, and in being as an enemy after his appearing,
and in the time of his reign, yea its the last enemy that shall be destroyed
by him in that day of his reign, is also clearly expressed, in that 1 Cor. 15.
23, 25, 26. After he has said, those that are Christ's shall be made alive at
his delivering up the Kingdom: That he must reign till he have put all his
enemies under his feet; The last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death. Though
death shall be perfectly destroyed in the children of the first resurrection,
Immediately on his coming to destroy his enemies, and take his great power, and
reign: And they shall be Princes, and Reigners with him; yet death is not
presently, perfectly destroyed, but remains in being as an enemy, and is the
last that shall be destroyed, As to say.

1 It must needs still remain in Being, and in some sense reigning on the
Bodies of those, that shall be the subjects of that Kingdom, that shall be
possessed and administered by the son of man, and the children of the first
resurrection, A thousand years on Earth, even upon those that are saved, left,
or reserved from being cut of in those sweeping and dissolateing judgments,
that shall be immediately executed on the Earth, at his personal coming to
take the Kingdom; And so upon the people that shall then be born; The Nations
that shall presently and abundantly multiply and increase of those few, who
shall all be the subjects, and admitted to walk in the light of that glorious
Kingdom, Isa. 24. 6. 13, 14. and 66. 19. and 60. 21, 22. Psalm. 102. 18, 22.
Revel. 21. 24. I say death, or mortallity must needs still remain in being on
them, though not so imbittered with violent diseases, pains, and miseries as
now; The creature being restored, and all other enemies subdued, so that men
may generally live, and live happily in submission to that glorious Government,
much, or all the time of it. Yet in a state of mortallity, till they have
passed through it; For its appointed to all the whole kind of man once to dye,
yea they must all first bear the Image of the earthy; So that mortallity must
needs continue in being, as long as there is any offspring, or generation of
mankind, coming forth, which that there shall be in the time of the
administration of that Kingdom on earth, the forecited Scriptures show; yea
the Psalmist prophesying of that Kingdom, declares this to be the blessedness
of all those subjects of it, that fear the Lord, and so volluntarily submit to,
and rejoice in that Government; They shall see their childrens children, and
peace upon Israel, Psalm. 127. Though they that shall be counted worthy to
obtain that World, and the Resurrection from the dead, they neither marry nor
are given in marriage, nor can they dye any more, for they are equal unto the
Angels, and are the children of God, being the children of the Resurrection,
Luke 20. 35, 36. They shall possess glory of a far higher nature, not as
subjects, but as Reigners with Christ: yet among the subjects of that Kingdom
and World to come, that are not the children of the Resurrection, but under
their Government; there will be marrying, and wonderful increase and
multiplication, such as in no time before, compare with that, Psalm. 127. Isa.
60. 21, 22. And while so, and that they are not yet the children of the
Resurrection; That mortallity remains on them, is clearly imported in that of
our Savior last mentioned, as also in what has been already said; it must
remain on them, till they have passed through death, and be made the children
of the Resurrection, for all must first bear the Image of the earthy; And not
only so shall death remain in being, and in being as an enemy, though a
conquered one. But also,

2 In that it shall hold those that now were enemies to him, and dyed before or
at his coming, as well as also, those that shall be cut off in their sin and
rebellion in the time of his Reign; It shall hold them I say from their utmost
punishment, to be for ever executed on soul and body, (in which the Lord shall
be gloryfied, and the righteous rejoice,) even until the finishing of that
thousand years reign on the earth; This is plain, and express: The rest of
the dead lived not again till the thousand years were finished, Revel. 20. 5.
After the finishing of which thousand years also, and not before; yea after the
resurrection, and judgment of the rest of the dead, at the expiration of that
time; Then says the 14th* verse, were death and hell: The first death and the
Grave cast into the lake of fire, that they might never more hide, or hold the
workers of iniquity from any part of their judgment, or punishment, or any of
the righteous from any part of the fulness of their glory. And so it answers
to that, The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. All other enemies in
being, and that shall be found persisting such, shall be destroyed immediately
on his appearing to take the Kingdom, when he shall bring all that sleep in
Jesus with him; Then the Beast, the humane and Worldly power appointed of God
to stand its time, though turning it self against him by whom it was set; And
the false Prophet; The Antichristian power and spirit, in conjunction with the
Beast, riseing up, on his coming to make War with him, and his Army, shall have
their power destroyed; And their persons, that are then in being eminently in
the administration of that power, shall be taken, and cast alive into the Lake
of Fire; But the remnant of those enemies, surviveing and riseing up with the
Beast and false Prophet against Christ, and his Army, at his coming, shall then
be slain by the sword, that proceeds out of his mouth, and shall have their
Carcasses cast out; And their flesh shall be meat for all Fowls, and they
shall be an abhorring to all flesh. And their spirits gathered together, as
Prisoners in the Pit, till after those many days of his reign on the Earth,
with the children of the first Resurrection. And then they shall be visited,
and have their dead bodies raised, and in them be judged, and cast into the
Lake of Fire, where the Beast and false Prophet are, and were before them, and
where they shall be tormented day and night with the Devil that deceived them,
for ever and ever. And at the same time, all the rest of the dead, both those
that have dyed before out of Union with him; And those that have been cut off
in their Rebellion, in the time of his Reign; And also those that in that time
have volluntarily submitted to that Government, and walked in the light of it,
whether they have dyed before in the time of that his Reign, as happily some
of them may, or lived till the end; They shall all then be raised, or changed,
and stand before his judgment seat, and receive according to their deeds,
according to the Gospel rule of judgment, compare Isa. 24. 21, 22. chap. 34.
2, 3, etc. with chap. 66. 15, 16-24. Revel. 19. 11. to the end. with chap. 20.
5. 11. to the end.

All shall come forth out of their Graves, and out of the disappearing state of
death, And appear before his judgment seat, But those that now sleep in Jesus
shall rise first, and with them the Survivers of that body shall be changed,
then immediately at his coming; The rest of the dead shall not live again till
the thousand years be finished, yet all this whole and general resurrection,
and judgment, in both parts of it, shall be, in that one hour, time or day of
the son of man forementioned, as expressed in 2 Timothy 4. 1. At his appearing,
and his Kingdom.

The first fruits, (as with relation to the other they are called, Rev. 14.
4.) immediately at his appearing; The completing and finishing of the general
resurrection and judgment at his Kingdom, and before it be delivered up, as 1
Cor. 15. 22-28. with Revel. 20.

By what has been said, in the opening these three Branches of Instruction, (
viz.) what the resurrection and judgment is, as to the subject of it, And in
what time and order it shall be: We have showed, and proved by the Scriptures.
That there shall be a general Resurrection of the dead Bodies of men, both of
the just, and unjust; And that all must appear before the judgment seat of
Christ, at his appearing, and his Kingdom; That every one may receive in his
body, the things done in his body, according to what he has done, whether it
be good or bad; But every man in his own order. They that are his (in this day)
at his coming: And after that, yet in that time of his Kingdom, all the rest
of the dead.

To the other two Branches of Instruction contained in the Text, and more
directly, and fully spoken too. ( viz.) The means or power by which all shall
be raised and judged; And the different state of persons in the Resurrection,
or ends to which they shall be raised. To these we shall speak in the proving,
and explicating these two positions, as contained in the Text, and opened, and
confirmed in other Scriptures.

1 That both the just, and unjust one, and other of them, shall be raised, and
judged by the voice of the son of man.

2 That in the Resurrection, there shall be this manifest difference between
those that have done good, and those that have done evil. The first shall come
forth to the Resurrection of life; The other to the Resurrection of damnation.

1 That both the just, and unjust, even every of mankind shall be raised, and
judged by the voice of the son of man, is plainly asserted in the Text,
especially compareing it with the verse before, where he asserts, that the
Father has given him authority to execute judgment also, because he is the son
of man. And here adds, that all that are in the Graves shall hear his voice,
namely the voice of the son of man; And shall come forth, etc. The Resurrection
and eternal judgment shall be by the man Christ, and by his voice, who is the
only begotten Son of God in man's nature; The son of man, so called by way of
eminency, because there is no more such sons of God, or sons of men, as He.

1 It shall be by virtue of, or because of his being the son of man.

2 It shall be effected by his mighty power, in the immediate and wonderful
patting forth of his mighty voice.

1 It shall be by virtue of, or because of his being the son of man, his being
made so, and his continuing ever to be so, by and in the virtue of the works
finished in that his own body, which the Father gave him to do on Earth: So
much is plain in the foregoing verses, compared with this. The Father judges
no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son -- For as the Father has
life in himself, so he has given to the Son to have life in himself, and
has given Him authority to execute Judgment also, because he is the son of
man, yea on that, this which follows in the Text, does also depend, being part
of that exccution of judgment, to which the Father has given him authority,
Because he is the Son of man, therefore it is, that all that are in the Graves,
shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, etc. If he had not suffered the
judgment of this World, which the Father had against them, under which they
were fallen, by the transgression and disobedience of the first man, in which
all have sinned, and by that sin, and sinfullnesse, which thereby entered into,
and overspread the whole nature, which judgment, he could not have suffered, if
he had not had a body prepared for him in man's nature, subject to all our
infirmities, yet without sin. And if also, in suffering that judgment, he had
not so satisfied, as to discharge and overcome it; If he had not completed
righteousness, in riseing up from the Dead, in the name, power, and glory of
the Father, that delivered him to it; And in the same body, in which our sins
were imputed to him, and in which he bore them to the Tree, a Conqueror over
all that Curse, and Death, inflicted on him for us; And offered up that body,
an acceptable, and effectual ransom, or price of Redemption to God for all
mankind, so as to be therein, and as such a ransom, received and accepted for
ever with the Father, now no more to return to co^ruption; Then that first
judgment could not have been remitted, nor mankind released from under it to
him, And the whole judgment of them committed to him, nor could he have
received authority, and power to raise them all out of the first death, And
bring them to his judgment seat, But this power, authority, and glory is given
him, because he is the Son of Man, according to that, Joh. 12. 31, 32, 33.

Now is the Judgment of this World, namely then, when his soul was in trouble,
as verse. 27. in that Agony, in which it was made an offering for our sin, Then
was the Judgment of this World executed on him, and suffered by him, now shall
the Prince of this World be cast out; That is, this suffering work being over,
and finished. By virtue of it, and of the well-pleasednesse God has taken in
it, The power of death should be (and was before vertually) taken from Satan;
And he cast out of that dominion, and principallity he had gotten over mankind
by the receite, and prevailency of his temptation, Bringing sin, weakness, and
death into the World, and upon the whole nature, And so bringing whole man
under the Judgment of banishment, and separation from God in the first death,
which was such, as left them, as so shut out from God, necessarily under the
power, and dominion of Satan, subject to his bondage all their life time, And
so for ever to be left under the power, and dominion of the first death. This
plot, and snare of Satan, he has broken, That no man is necessarily holden out
from God, by sin, death, or the Curse of the Law, as so brought in, nor shall
any be for ever holden in that death; Christ has abollished death by his
appearing, and therein spoiled Principallities and Powers, The Prince of this
World is judged. And see what follows, And I, (says he) if I be lifted up from
the Earth, will draw all men to me, which he spoke, (says the Text) signifying
by what death he should dye, yet doubtless, it is a direct expression of his
exaltation with the right hand of God, in that Body in which he bore our sins
to the Tree, But that so expressed, as therein was signified the manner of his
death, by being lifted up, upon the Cross, through which, and by means of
which he was so exalted; And so in both, it answers to this Text, Because he is
the son of man. Because of his taking man's nature, in that one body prepared
for him, and in that his own body humbling himself to death, even the death of
the Cross, as the Son, or Heir of man, even his Heir at Law of all his sin,
misery, death, and curse, that came in merely through the offense of one man
Adam; Therefore he being raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, in
that his own body in which he bore our sins to the Tree, now no more to return
to corruption, and exalted with the right hand of God, to appear in his
presence in Heaven it self for us, is therein glorified with the Fathers own
self, so as to bring all men under his power, dispose, and Government, in
their several Ages, that through him, they may be saved; yea therefore because
of his sufferings, and giving himself as raised from the dead, and being
accepted for ever a ransom for them all, he will redeem them all, wholly from
the first death, ransom them from the power of the Grave, and bring them to
his Judgment seat, ( Hose. 13. 14. with 1 Timothy 2. 6.) For to this end Christ
both dyed, rose, and revived, that he might be Lord of all, both dead, and
living. Romans 14. 9, 11, 12. Phill. 2. 6-11. For as by man came death, so by man
also the resurrection of the dead; for as in Adam all dye, and that is no
otherwise, but in the demerit, and influence of his transgression. Romans 5. 12.
even so in Christ, That is in the merit, or virtue, and influence of his
perfect sacrifice and righteousness, shall all be made alive. Hence the
Apostle gives this as the ground of that Doctrine, that we must all appear
before the Judgment seat of Christ, that every one may receive according to
the things done in the body, whether good, or bad, namely, that one dyed for
all, and rose again, so effecatiously, as it was accepted with the Father, as
if all had dyed, and to such a gracious end, that they which live (every man in
his several Age, and life time,) should not hence forth (after this grace
comes to him bringing salvation) live to themselves, but to him that dyed for
them, and rose again.

If he had not dyed for them their death, and suffered their curse, and that so
effectually, as to become himself a ransom for them, a price of redemption
from that death, and curse; They must necessarily have perished for ever in,
and under it.

If also this had not been by the grace of God, and so real, and effectual
with the Father, as that through Christ, in the name, and grace of the Father,
they might have been saved, in due time; They could not be righteously judged
for denying him that bought them, and not receiving the love of the truth, that
they might be saved. His judgment therefore from such demonstrations, is, and
shall be evidenced, to be according to truth, against them that commit such
things, see Romans 2. 2. 4. 5. 10-16. and 3. 3, 4. Act. 17. 30, 31. 2 Thessalonians. 2.
10. 11, 12. Though the spirit, that dwells in us, as of us, Justeth to envy
and pride, yet God gives more grace, and because he does so, therefore he
says; He resists the proud, that still persist in their pride, and
stubbornness, notwithstanding his grace bringing salvation, did abound, and
was more then their natural filthiness and corruption, and would have
overcome all for them, and in them, had it not been wilfully again, and again
rejected by them; This is the condemnation, that light is come into the World,
and men loved darkness, Jam. 4. 5, 6. Joh. 3. 19.

Therefore also, in the right understanding of the greatness, and truth of
this love of God in Christ's dying for all, and through it to manward, the
Apostles did discern and know the unspeakable greatness of his terror against
Scorners, in that Day of his judging all men by Jesus Christ, according to
their Gospel, 2 Car. 5. 10. 11-14. 15. Hebr. 2. 3. and 10. 29. And the truth
is, whatever is said, to the lessening, or taking off from either the
greatness, or truth of Gods grace in and through Christ to manward, tends
every whit so much to the extenuating of their evil, that sin against it, and
to the abating, or taking off from, the clear discoveries of the terror of the
Lord, and the greatness, and equity of his severity that shall be against
Scorners persisting such; and so to the blunting the edge, and taking away the
force of all Gospel admonitions, and warnings; for according to his fear, (or
grace and glory in Christ to manward, that he might be feared by them now) even
such, so infinite, and unspeakable will be his wrath against Scorners then.
Psalm. 90. 10, 11.

2 This Resurrection and Judgment, shall be effected by his mighty power; In
the immediate, and wonderful putting forth of his voice, even the same
powerful voice, or spirit, that now breathes in the Gospel, to the awakening
the dead, or making them to hear, and to the making partakers of life, them
that in hearing hear. That it shall be by the same voice, is clear in the 25.
and 28. verses compared. This more wonderful efficacy of his voice in raising
the dead, and bringing them in judgment, is here declared to correct and
silence their sinful marvelling at the (...) power, and efficacy of the same
voice on the spirits of men, before (...) ^uch is asserted by the Apostle, Romans
8. 11. If the spirit of him that (...) the dead, dwell in you; he that raised
up Christ from the dead (...) also quicken your mortal Bodies, (that is) Raise
them in the first Resurrection, and to life, by the same spirit that now dwells
in you; And in such wise also the general Resurrection of all the rest of the
dead, shall be effected by him in the last day, as is signified. Joh. 6. 39-44.
where he not only says, that he will raise them up at the last day. But
clearly signifies, that he will do it by the same power, by which he was now
sent to draw them, and was drawing them, even by that eternal spirit, by which
he was raised, and with which he is filled, and clothed without measure, in
that Body in man's nature, by virtue of his sufferings, and by which he is now
striving with, and working on the spirits of men to the drawing, and quickening
them; yea that word, that he has now spoken to them, and preached by his
spirit to their spirits, shall judge them at the last Day. Joh. 12. 48. By the
power now graciously breathing in it, to make them willing, they shall then be
brought to his judgment Seat, whether they will or no; And be judged by, and
according to it. God has appointed a Day in the which he will judge the World
in righteousness, by that man whom he has ordained, whereof he has given
assurance unto all men, in that he has raised Him from the dead; by whom, in
the mighty putting forth of the same power and spirit, he will judge, discern,
discover, and bring to light, and judgment, every secret thing, whether it be
good, or bad; And so judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to
Paul's Gospel.

This Instruction is used in Scripture for consolation, to those that now
receive, and retain this voice of the Son of man; This word, and spirit in it
(by which he was raised) to dwell in them, He shall raise and judge them by the
same word, and spirit, that now dwells in them, speaking peace, and giving
healing to their spirits, through his blood, and the love of God therein
displayed, so that it must needs be to them, a resurrection to life, and the
completing of that joy, to which they are now quickened in their spirits, by
the first fruits of the same spirit, while yet the body is dead, because of
sin, as Romans 8. 10-11. 12. 24-25. so Job. 11. 25, 26. I am (says our Savior)
the Resurrection, and the life, not only as the procuring Cause, but also as
the effecter and worker of it; And that by the same spirit, by which he was
raised, and with which he is immeasurably filled in man's nature; And by which
he now accompanies his word, that through him men might believe, and dwells in
the hearts of the receivers in a first fruits of it; (as is showed before)
Therefore (says he) because I am the resurrection, and the life, he that
believes on me, though he were dead, yet shall he live, And he that lives,
and believes on me shall never dye, he shall not dye, or be separated from
God, or cut off from his hope in that first death, or shadow of death, which he
must pass through; And the second death shall have no power on him, yea the
first fruits of the spirit, being to the quickening their spirits that now
receive it, what can the harvest, or fulness of the same be to them, when it
shall be poured out upon them, but still more, even to fulness of efficacy of
the same nature, life from the dead, The total quickening of soul and body
together; So likewise the same Doctrine is used for admonition, and warning to
the rejectors, while its to day, to take heed of murmuring against that power,
by which he is now striving with them, drawing and working upon their hearts,
For by the same power, spirit, voice, or word of the Son of man, they shall be
raised, and judged in the last day. And therefore it must needs be a terrible
resurrection, and Judgment to those, that here have rejected the same power in
its saving, and healing oppa^ations, have done despite to the spirit of grace,
And rejected that word, and voice in it, which he brought to them, by which
they must be raised, and judged. Then by the same spirit, which is the light
and power of his voice (in the Gospel) to them now; shall every secret thing
be brought to light; How the same has been formerly striving, and working with
them: Discovering the thoughts and intents of the Heart; And powerfully
reproving, and with discoveries of his goodness, leading to repentance. And
how they have hardened their hearts; And for what empty reasons, and lying
vanities, they have offered despite, and g^eivance to him; The remembrance of
which shall be ever with them, as the worm that shall never dye, evidencing the
equity of his Judgment, in the fire that never shall be quenched.

This therefore our Savior uses, as part of the Argument, or motive, with
which he admonishes them, not to murmur now, against the light and power of
his Doctrine, not only, that they could not come, nor any man, without such
drawing of the Father, as was now vouchsafed them by him; But also, that he
even the same, that was now sent in the light and power of his spirit by his
word, to draw them; whether they now come or no, he shall raise them up at the
last day, even in the same power, by the same spirit, and judge them by the
same word, Joh 6 44. with chapter 12. 48.

This likewise evidenceth, the voice of the son of man, the preaching of peace
by Jesus Christ, by what means soever he pleases to vouchsafe it to men, now,
to be sufficiently powerful, and efficatious, to the strengthening dead men to
hear, and receive it, to the creating both light in the understanding and
motion, or inclination in the will, where none was before, that men might in
its own light, and power perceive, and receive the great things of his love as
discovered, and brought unto them therein, seeing its the same power, and
powerful voice, by which Christ was raised, by the glory of the Father. And
all the dead shall be raised, by the man Christ, in the glory of the Father
obtained by him in Man's nature, through and by means of his sufferings for
men, yea this instruction may here seasonably be noted by us, as presented by
our Savior in the Text, for correcting of their sinful marvelling at* the
forementioned present power, and efficacy of his voice in the Gospel on the
spirits of men. ( viz.) That it is the same voice, by which the dead Bodies
shall be raised. The light and power of his spirit sent out with his Gospel in
the several preachings of it now vouchsafed, is of the same nature with that
Power, by which Christ was raised; And the dead shall be raised: It is
according to the working of that mighty power, which he wrought in Christ when
he raised him from the dead, by which men spiritually dead, as to the hearing
of the voice of the son of God, are made to hear it, in its coming to them,
whence he is said, by the same spirit, by which he was quickened, or raised
from the dead, to have gone home to them; And preached to their spirits, that
were disobedient in the days of Noah. And are now in Prison for their
disobedience, then; 1 Pet. 3. 18, 19, 20. And so also by which those that in
hearing hear, are strengthened to believe, and quickened and preserved in life
in believing, Ephesians. 1. 18, 19, 20. with Joh. 5. 25. And so its signified to be a
new creating word, or voice, answerable to that first creating word, by which
he created light where there was none before, 2 Cor. 4. 6.

The spirit and power of God, by which all things increase, and multiply in
their several kinds; And by which all things were at first created, and had
their Beeings given them, is the same, but not in the same manner put forth to
the first, as to the last mentioned of these works. And so the power or spirit,
by which men are preserved in their natural life, and do move, and act in it;
And that by which the dead bodies shall be raised, is the same, but not in a
like manner of working put forth to the first, as to the latter. To the first
in an ordinary, or natural way, or manner of working, so as co-opperating
with, and strengthening natural faculties, and powers before given; To the
other in a supernatural way, or manner of working, giving, being, and life,
where there was none before; even so likewise, we may say, Its the same spirit
and power of God, by which men are instructed, and strengthened to the
attaining natural, and Worldly Sciences; And by which they are instructed, and
strengthened to know Christ and Gods glory in him; and to receive and entertain
him in their hearts; But its put forth according to another manner of working,
to the latter, then to the former. To the former, only in an ordinary and
natural manner of working, according to the nature, and some fore-capacity of
the subject wrought upon; strengthening the natural powers, and faculties to
what is within their sphere; To the latter in a supernatural way, or manner
of opperation, bringing not only new light revealing the object, in Gods
wisdom and way of demonstration, but also therewith, an opening the
understanding, that they may understand what is discovered, new strength, and
motion to the will, and affections that was not there before, strengthening to
receive what is given, even such as were as to that wholly dead before; It is
such, as is making wise the simple that have no understanding, in its coming to
them; for in its revelation of the object, it is opening the blind eyes of the
mind, moving, and leading to repentance, even such as are not made wise, or led
to repentance by it, Psalm. 19. 7. Romans 2. 4. Isa. 48. 17, 18. Math. 13. 9, 12,
13, 15. such as makes the dead to hear, that in hearing they might hear, and
those that hear to live, and therefore showed to be according to that working,
whereby he shall raise the dead. Yet there are also these dissimilitudes
between the manner of the putting forth of the same power, for the quickening
men's spirits now, and for the raising their dead bodies after.

1 To the first, its put forth mediately through outward means of preaching
that voice, vouchsafed; To the latter immediately from, and by himself*

2 To the first, he works graciously on the mind, and spirit, enlightening,
persuading, and so drawing by cords of love, to make them willing in the day of
his power; And that they might be made so, that through him they might be
saved, and graciously saving the willing ones, ( Hose. 11. Romans 2. 4. and 1.
16, 17.) but not irresistably forceing.

To the other, he works irresistably, without requiring any consent or
compliance, forcibly, and powerfully of himself without any act of compliance
on the Creatures part, and whether they will or no, uniting soul and body, and
bringing them together to his judgment seat, to receive the things done in the
body, etc. And therefore in that putting forth of his mighty voice, and power.
All shall come to him, even those that are increased against him.

But in this, The manner of his working, or putting forth his power in the
Gospel, or witnesses of his goodness, for opening the blind eyes, and turning
sinners to God; In this (I say) it answers to the working of that power, by
which he created all things by his word, and shall raise the dead, ( viz.) in
its supernatural manner of working to what it comes for; in and through the
means, for though it require some act of compliance on the creatures part, yet
finding him wholly dead, as of himself unto that compliance, It brings the
light power and motion, to all that compliance, or consent it requires, and
strength against all that might retard, or hinder. And that greater then the
power of our natural corruption, or of Satan; The spirit that dwells in us,
(naturally, as of us) it lusts enviously. But he gives more grace; The
weapons of the Gospel, are not carnal, but mighty through God, to the pulling
down of strong holds, casting down Imaginations, and every high thing, that
exalts it self against the knowledge of God. And bringing into captivity every
thought, to the obedience of Christ, Jam. 4. 5, 6. 2 Cor. 10. 3, 4, 5. They are
mighty to it, they have all power, and suitable opperation in them to the doing
it, even where yet they are not suffered to have their perfect work. The power
of God in the Gospel, and witnesses of his goodness in and through Christ, is
all-mighty, able to save from all enemies, and has suitable opperation in it,
to the effecting the whole work with power, though not put forth irresistably,
but in such a way, or manner of working, as in which his wisdom, holiness,
and truth, may be showed forth, and magnified; (for it is impossible for God to
lie) And such as is suitable to his end, which is the saving man; now the will
is a principal part of the man. If therefore that were forced, or he forced,
out of, or into any thing without its consent or compliance, from some
understanding of the ground, and reasonableness of what is propounded, and
required, I see not, how he should be said, to be therein saved, for as much as
he cannot be said therein to be willing, and obedient, a volluntary and free
will offering; This mighty power therefore comes forth in such a manner of
working, as by enlightening the understanding, healing and opening the eyes of
the mind, to the making men willing in the Day of his power; And so it works
first to will, and then to do, whence we are admonished to do all things it
works us to, both in listening to, hearing, and receiving its instructions, and
reproves, and obeying its requirings, without murmurings, and disputings,
least so we fail and deprive our selves of its prevailency, in carrying an end
the whole work of faith with power, and be found fighters against God, whose
allmighty power, and in such supernatural manner of working is in that
testimony of the Lord, or voice of the Son of God in those means of preaching,
or witnessing it of his appointment; Opening the blind eyes, making the dead to
hear, making wise the simple, leading to repentance, even those that are not
led by it: (as we showed before) There is not only tendancy in it, but suitable
opperation. I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, Ezekiel. 24. 13. Gospel
obedience therefore exhorted too, is to turn in the light, and power of his
reproves while he is turning them thereby, and not in any light and power of
their own, that were a vain exhortation; To be willing and obedient, not in
their own, but in the day of his power, while he is making them willing; to
walk in the light, while they have it with them; That by it they may be made
the children of the light, not to murmur amongst themselves against his
Doctrine, or witnesses of kis goodness, and so break his bands that are
therein, while he is drawing them, because without them they cannot come: And
therefore he requires this Gospel obedience, because he is working, and giving
all that pertaines to it, in his gracious, sweet, and powerful way, in which
his mercy and truth, as met in Christ, may be magnified. Therefore he says,
awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, etc. Because all things that
are reproved, are made manifest by the light in which he so calls, Ephesians. 5. 13,
14. Yea, because his voice has a rousing quallity, virtue, or power in it, as
here, the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear shall
live: Marvel not at this, for the hour is coming, in which all that are in the
Graves shall hear his voice, and shall come forth, etc.

Yea therefore it is, that God resists the proud, in his present, and
eternal judgments. Because, he now in this day of his grace gives more grace,
grace abounding, and going beyond their natural filthiness, and such as has
in it more argument and power, more sweet and powerful motive, and motion to
humble them; Then is, or can be in sin, or Satan, to keep them up in pride, or
to lift up their Imaginations? works, or Idols against the knowledge of God; In
which the equity of his judgments, and severity against Scorners, is brightly
evidenced.

Let all admonish us to obedience to the voice of the son of God now; to fall
down under the mighty power of it, and more abundant grace that is in it,
Because it is such a mighty voice, and is so appointed, that it has also in a
readiness to revenge all disobedience, when once the obedience of those that
in hearing hear, is fulfilled; when once the day of grace and patience is past,
2 Cor. 10. 6. with Joh. 12. 47-49. They shall all be raised, and judged by the
same voice of the Son of Man. As a farther motive therefore to such obedience.
Consider.

2 The last position propounded, ( viz.) That in the resurrection, there shall
be this manifest difference, between those that have done good, and those that
have done evil; The first shall come forth to the resurrection of life; The
other to the resurrection of damnation: Here we have these two things to speak
to, for opening this position.

1 Who they are that have done good, and who they are that have done evil, in
a Scripture sense, and after the Gospel Rule, according to which all must be
judged.

2 Wherein this manifest difference, that shall be made between them, in the
Resurrection, stands, or how it shall be made, and made to appear in the
coming forth of the one by the power of his voice to the Resurrection of Life,
and in the coming forth of the other by the power of the same voice to the
Resurrection of Damnation.

1 To the first of these, who they are that have done good, and who they are
that have done evil, after the Gospel Rule, according to which all must be
judged. To this we shall speak distinctly in the several parts of it, and most
fully to the first part; (God assisting) That we may therein answer the desire
of our deceased Sister, (whose being taken from us occasioned the publishing
this discourse) as her said desire was expressed by her on her death bed, which
was, that some such Instruction might be delivered; And opened to the people,
as we shall have further occasion to speak to, in the opening of this point.
For so I was informed by those that were with her; And those, such as had good
understanding of, and acquaintance with the grace of God, and experience of the
truth of the things discoursed by her. That she earnestly desired, that those
great branches of the Doctrine of Christ, that were then much upon her own
spirit, in a feeling apprehension of the truth of them, to her abundant
refreshing and consolation, and to the enlargement of her heart for the good of
others, should be made known, and opened to the people. And that those parts of
the Doctrine of Christ, which were so much upon her spirit then, and to the
understanding of such as forementioned, excellently discussed by her to the
last, though in broken expressions, as her end approached, were in effect as
follows: I may rank them under these three heads.

1 The way of attaining Gods righteousness for the remission of sins, and
justifying our persons before God; And for the cleansing us from all
unrighteousness, and making us partakers of his holiness, even to the
perfecting all that concerns us. That it is by faith in Christ, without the
deeds of the Law, and that faith, and all the justification, saving, and
healing by it, not of our selves, but the gift of God, and that not of, or
according to works of righteousness that we have done, or do; But of his free
grace in Christ to manward, according to that his mercy, and through the
discoveries, and displayings of it in Christ, that none may boast, according to
those Scriptures, (then much with her) To him that works not, (namely for
righteousness, or seeks that way to attain righteousness, as Romans 9. 30. 33.
and 10. 1, 2, 3.) But believes on him that justifyeth the ungodly, his faith
is counted for righteousness, even as David also describes the blessedness
of the man, unto whom God imputes righteousness without works, etc. Romans 4.
5. 6-9. Like as Abraham believed God, and it was accounted to him for
righteousness, now that was not written for his sake alone, but for us also,
to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up Jesus, our
Lord from the dead, who was delivered for our offenses, and was raised again
for our Justification; Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with
God, through our Lord Jesus Christ: By whom also we have access by faith into
this Grace, (namely for perfecting all that concerns us) etc. see Romans 4. 3. 9
22. 23. 24. 25. with chap. 5. So then, they which be of faith, are blessed with
faithful Abraham, For as many as are of the works of the Law, are under the
curse; For it is written, cursed is every one that continues not in all
things, which are written in the Book of the Law to do them; But that no man
is justified by the Law in the sight of God, it is evident, For the just shall
live by faith, And the Law is not of faith, But the man that does them, shall
live in them. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a
curse for us -- That the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles through
Jesus Christ, that we might receive the promise of the spirit through faith.
Gall. 3. 6-14. For by grace are ye saved, though faith; And that not of your
selves, it is the gift of God, not of works, least any man should boast, For
we are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus: (not only through or by means
of the worth, virtue, and preciousnesse of him, but also, in the evidence and
demonstration of him) unto good works, which God has before ordained, that we
should walk in them. And if by grace, (in Christ Jesus) then it is no more of
works, otherwise grace is no more grace, but if it be of works, then it is no
more grace, otherwise work is no more work. Ephesians. 2. 8, 9, 10. Romans 11. 6.

2 The infinite riches, and freeness of this grace of God in Christ toward
all sinners, both in the preparation, and bringing in of everlasting
righteousness in Christ for them, by making Him to be sin for us, that we
might be made the righteousness of God in him. And also in the bringing it
forth to them, in and by him, whom he has raised from the dead, and set on his
own right hand a Prince and a Savior; for to give repentance, and forgiveness
of sins, a testimony to men in due time, Gods light to the Gentiles, his
salvation to the ends of the Earth, and the glory of his people Israel, the
Savior of all men, especially of them that believe; as 2 Cor. 5. 21. Act. 5.
31. Isa. 42. and 49. with chapter 55. 4, 5. 1 Timothy 2. 4, 5, 6. Luke 2. 32. 1 Timothy
4. 10.

According to that Scripture, Romans 3. 20 27. by the deeds of the Law shall no
flesh be justified in the sight of God, for by the Law is the knowledge of sin.
But now the righteousness of God, without the Law is manifested, being
witnessed by the Law, and the Prophets, even the righteousness of God; (not of
man) It is now manifested by the faith, or Doctrine of Christ, the preaching of
peace that is by him. And it is (as before witnessed, and now manifested) unto
all, (namely in the redundancies, discoveries, and real tenders, yea in the
gift of it, in and with Christ; that in the light and power of his givings, he,
and so it, might be received; that through him men might believe, and believing
through the same name be saved,) And it is upon all that believe; (namely in
the imputation and application of it to them, in their particular persons
through his name, making them through faith in it, The righteousness of God in
him, that was made sin, and a curse for them.) And all this without difference,
or respect of persons. For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God.
Being justified (all men, in that one that dyed for them, and rose again in
their stead, as in a public person; And all that believe in their particular
persons by him, and through faith in him, And this, both these) Freely by his
grace, through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus, whom God has set forth
to be a propitiation, through faith in his blood to declare his righteousness
for the remission of sins that are past -- And that he might be just, and the
Justifier of him that believes in Jesus; where is boasting then, it is
excluded, By what Law of works? Nay, but by the Law of faith. And hence the
Apostle concludes the forementioned Doctrine of Justification, and so being
made the righteousness of God in Christ by faith, without the deeds of the
Law, suitable also to that, Romans 5. 17, 18, 19. Gall. 3. 13, 14. As also,

3 Concerning that wonderful manifestation of Gods graciousnesse to manward,
and having no pleasure at all in the death of any sinner, no not in the death
of wicked and rebellious Backsliders, while yet it is to day, and of the
plenteousnesse of redemption, even the forgiveness of sins with him in Christ,
that he may yet be feared, and hoped in by such; And of the everlasting
goodness, excellency, and certainty of this ground, and way of believing in
Christ for all, and so of seeking righteousness, and strength in the Lord, so
as by faith in him; I say, concerning that wonderful manifestation of all
this, that is in Gods riches of compassion showed in for bearing and suffering
long with such froward, and rebellious Backsliders, and in his using such
manifold, and various means for the seeking up the lost, and Wanderers by
Christ; And in his infinite readiness, as with great desire, and joy to
receive such, on their turning to him, in the light, and power of his
reproves, which are always still with discoveries of his goodness melting,
and turning the soul to him; His not upbraiding such, with their weakness,
dullness, brokennesse, and imperfection in their turning, or looking again to
him, not breaking the bruised reed, nor quenching the smoking flax, nor
remembering their former unprofitablenesse, backslidings and iniquities against
them; But graciously healing them, loving them freely, and casting all their
sins into the depth of the Sea; not of works, but of the grace of him that
calls, even of his grace to man-ward, and for that love, wherewith he loved
them, while dead in sins, and trespasses, and walking after the course of this
World. That in them he might show a pattern of the exceeding riches of his
grace in Christ to others, even in Ages to come, according to those Scriptures.
Math. 18. 11. 14. Luke 15. tot. Isa. 42. 1-6. 18-21. chap. 50. tot. Jer. 3. 1.
12 14. and 4. 1, 2. Hose. 14. Mich. 7. 18, 19, 20. Ephesians. 2. 1 4. 5-7, etc.

And that this rightly known, believed with the heart, and believingly minded,
would make us willing to confess our sins, and acknowledge our aptness to
wander, our readiness to halt, our manifold iniquities, and backslidings from
him that has called us into the grace of Christ, yea particularly to take
shame to our selves, in confessing wherein soever any of us, have exceeded, and
perverted that which was right, and acknowledging how unprofitable, shameful,
and destructive, such ways are, and have been to us, and further might have
been, even to the loss of our souls for ever, had not his tender mercies, and
compassions in Christ to sinners been infinite; (as Psalm. 38. 15, 16, 17, 18.
Jer. 3. 12, 13. Job. 33. 27.) yea also, that while yet through the riches of
his compassion, and the infinite and everlasting virtue, and power of the
sacrifice and mediation of Christ, with the Father for us, a Door is held open
for our turning to him, opportunity given, and his goodness with it melting
and moving to repentance, if yet we resuse to return, and go on still in our
trespasses, wickedly departing from him, by an evil heart of unbelief, hide
our sins, and will not be healed, or after so many deliverances, sin again; we
shall not prosper; But so going on, falling away till the opportunity be past,
shall make it impossible to our selves to be renewed again by repentance, and
make our drawings back in the finishing of them completely to our own
perdition, and so aggravate our everlasting condemnation, by the manifold
mercies bestowed, and so often renewed, against which we have sinned, and
hardened our selves to the utmost: Nor is there any harm in such apprehensions,
and acknowledgments of our own aptness to wander, readiness to halt: And of
the perniciousnesse, and danger of wilfulness in wandering, and refusing to
be healed, to be ever with us. While Gods love, and faithfulness in Christ,
the plenteous redemption, forgiveness of sins, and healing with him. The
riches of his compassion, and tender mercy in Christ for recalling, and on
their turning, receiving, pardoning, and healing greatest Back-sliders, while
it is yet to day, is with it known, and believingly minded by us. But much
profit is administered by these apprehensions together retained, even gracious
admonition, with encouragement to turn to him from whom we have deeply
revolted, seeing yet there is such mercy with him, and plenteous redemption,
that he may yet be feared, and hoped in by such, as Psalm. 130.

These then being the Instructions, which she desired should be opened to the
people, we shall speak some thing farther to them, in the explication of the
point under consideration.

And first to the first part of it, who they are that have done good. Here
conder. 1 What that is, which by the wisdom of God is called men's doing good.
2 When is the time, or opportunity for doing it. 3 When in a Scripture sense,
any are said to have done it.

1 That which is by the wisdom of God accounted, and here called, Men's doing
good; is explicated in the former verses to be, Men's honoring the Son, and so
there honoring the Father in him, verse. 23. with 1 John 2. 23. And that in
hearing the word, or voice of the Son, the preaching of peace by Jesus Christ,
in that hearing given them in the evidence, and demonstration of the spirit
with power, that is in the declarations of that his word, or voice vouchsafed
them, so as by it, and according to it, to believe on him that sent him; see
verse. 24, 25. with 1 John 2. 24, 25. and 5. 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Joh. 1. 12.

And to this we have the general consent of all Scripture. For of all Adam's
natural posterity, there is none righteous, or that does good, in any light,
wisdom, strength, or works of their own; By the deeds of the Law shall no man
be justified in the sight of God, for by the Law is the knowledge or discovery
of sin, in their best, as well as in their worst works; They therefore only are
accounted doers, or workers of good, to whom God imputes righteousness without
works; And that is, To him that works not, That seeks not to attain
righteousness by the works of the Law, or in his own wisdom and strength, by
which no man shall prevail; But ceasing from his own works, believes on him
that justifyeth the ungodly, he believes for righteousness, or seeks
righteousness by faith in Christ, and not by the works of the Law, as Romans 9.
30. 32. and so believing on him for it, is said to wait through the spirit for
all the hope of righteousness by faith, Gall. 5. 5. He believes on him that
justifyeth the ungodly; His faith is counted for righteousness; Romans 4. 5. And
in the latter end of that Chapter, he thus expresses it. It shall be imputed
to us for righteousness, if we believe on him, that raised up Jesus our Lord
from the dead, who was delivered for our and was raised again for our
Justification. In both compared, it appears not only that Gods justifying the
ungodly in every sense in which he does it, is in and through the Resurrection
of Christ from the dead for our Justification, who was delivered for our
offenses, which is signified in that one is put for another; his raising Christ
from the dead, in the close of the Chapter; supplies the Room of his
justification, the ungodly in the fifth verse, As showing the ground of it, and
how he does it righteously, as Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. I say not only this
appears, but also in both, this further is signified, that Gods justifying the
ungodly, in and through the Resurrection of Christ from the dead, who was
delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our justification; This is the
Root, the ground, and foundation of this faith of the opperation of God, which
is counted to men for righteousness. This is that from whence the heart is
begotten, moved, and strengthened, to its satisfaction, and rest in him,
dependence, and waiting on him for righteousness; and so seeking
righteousness and strength in the Lord, even this known, and believed in the
light, and strength of Gods testimony; That he justifyeth the ungodly, having
raised Christ from the dead.

So then there must needs be in this faith, which is counted to men for
righteousness.

1 A believing God, as Romans 4. 3. A believing the testimony, or record he has
given of his Son, 1 John 5. 9 12. ( viz.) That God has raised him from the
dead, Romans 4. 24, 25. and 10. 9. And so the revelation he has given of
himself in his Son, that he justifyeth the ungodly.

2 A resting in him, believing, or depending on him from that persuasion, and
in the light, and power of it for righteousness* And so much is distinctly
expressed in the explication of the doing good, spoken of in this Text, verse.
24. He that hears my word, and believes on him that sent me, has
everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation, etc. with reference to
which he says in this Text. They that have done good, shall come forth to the
resurrection of Life.

For our better, and more useful understanding of this says, or believing,
which is unto righteousness; we shall first and chiefly apply our selves to
some consideration of the word, or Doctrine of faith, in which the ground and
foundation of faith is declared, and which being with the heart believed is
unto righteousness, and then more briefly speak to the says, or believing in
both the branches; The hearing his word, or believing God in his Word, or
Testimony. And the believing on him through and according to it.

1 The Word, or Doctrine of faith, which being with the heart believed,
according to the manifestations of it given us, is unto righteousness, is
expressed in the verses before the Text, to be the word, or voice of the Son of
Man, even of the only begotten Son of God in Man's nature; The word, record, or
testimony of, or concerning him, and of the Father in him* As that is already
given forth in these last days by him; and is true to be heard, and believed
by every man, The preaching of peace by Jesus Christ, he is Lord of all.

It is first and directly a record, or testimony concerning Christ, and yet it
is also, and in the same, a testimony or revelation of the Father in and
through Christ: And so sometimes, the record, or testimony, as it is more
directly of Christ, or concerning him, is delivered as the sum of that whole
word, or Doctrine to be heard, and believed with the heart, as Romans 10. 9. That
God has raised up Christ from the dead, (and so Romans 4. 24, 25. where he
adds,) who was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our
justification. The revelation of the Fathers name being in this testimony, And
sometimes also, that revelation of the Fathers name, and glory, that is given
forth in Christ according to this Testimony of him, is given as a summary
Declaration of the whole Testimony to be so heard, and believed, it being the
sum, and result of the whole, as 1 John 1. 5. This then is the message, (even
the sum of that ministration of the word of Life, which they had received to
declare unto others, mentioned in the former verses.) That God is light, and in
him is no darkness at all; So in that, Romans 4. 5. That God justifyeth the
ungodly, is given us, as an abridgment of the whole word of faith; It being the
summing up, conclusion; or result of the whole testimony of God concerning
Christ. And in the verses before the Text, both are wonderfully compact
together, The testimony of God concerning Christ, and the manifestation or
revelation of God in Christ, as it should after more explicatively be brought
forth. And that both, First in the fundamental part of it, The Father judges
no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son; that all men should honor
the Son, even as they honor the Father, etc. And secondly, In the
superstructure, or consequentiall part of it; He that hears my word, and
believes on him that sent me, has everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation, like that in both parts, 1 John 5. 10, 11, 12, 13.

We shall speak to it in our explication, first and chiefly, as it is the
Testimony or record of God concerning* Christ Jesus the Lord, comprised in
this, that God has raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered
for our offenses, and was raised again for our justification; This being given
us, as the sum, and abridgment of the whole word, or voice of Christ, or
Testimony of God concerning him; whence who so in hearing hears, shall live;
Romans 4. 24, 25. with chapter 1. 1* 4. 2 Timothy 2. 8. 1 Cor. 15. 11-15. Romans 10. 9.

This abridgment of it, being also most suitable to the Text, and occasion in
this testimony of Christ delivered, as the sum of the word of faith, and
doctrinall ground of it. Is, 1 An acknowledgment, and profession of Jesus to be
the Lord, carried in the face of it; And 2. A testification that God has
raised him up from the dead, as expressed both in Romans 4. 24, 25. and in chapter
10. 9.

1 An acknowledgment, and profession of Jesus to be the Lord, even that Jesus
of Nazareth, of the seed of David after the flesh; That he is the only begotten
Son of God, that was in the beginning with the Father, and of the Father, the
same that the Father is, by whom, and for whom, all things were made that were
made; yea all Thrones, Dominions, Principallities, and Powers; and so he the
proper Lord, and Heir of all the Kingdom and Glory, and of all things, and
Persons, (that were made) by his Divine, and eternal Generation, Joh. 1. 1, 2,
3. Coll: 1. 15, 16. Prove 8. 22, etc. which shows the excellency of his person,
and so his abillity for all, he undertook by the appointment of the Father, for
our help and escape, And argues the vileness of our sin, and the wretchedness
of our condition by reason of sin, seeing righteousness, help and escape for
us could not be had, or found in any less price or ransom, or by any other
means, or way attained; But by the so deep abasement, and suffering of so
excellent a Person, Gods only begotten Son, The Lord from Heaven; As likewise
it infinitely commends the unspeakable love of God, of the Father, and of
Christ; In the Fathers free devizeing, appointing, and not sparing, but sending
forth his own and only Son and Heir, to be so abased, and delivering Him to
such a death. And in the Sons so willing and ready, giving Himself in and
through such abasement and sufferings, to be a ransom, or price of redemption
for our sins. Notwithstanding he was in the form of God, and we wholly sinful,
weak, ungodly, and enemies.

Further in this acknowledgment, and profession of Jesus to be the Lord that is
in this word of faith, is contained. That he is now actually made and become
the same in that body prepared for him in man's nature, in which he suffered,
and bore our sins to the Tree, the same that he was as the eternal, and only
begotten Son of God before, being through sufferings, entered into his glory;
And glorified with the Fathers own self, even with the same glory he had with
him before the World was, Phill. 2. 6* 9. 10, 11. Luke 24. 26. Joh. 17. 4, 5.
Hebr. 2. 9, 10. The Man Christ Jesus, even that Jesus of Nazareth, whom they
crucified, (not an other thing or person) God has made him the Lord and
Christ, Act. 2. 36. He is the Son of God, the Savior of the World, exalted
with Gods right hand a Prince, and Savior for to give repentance and
forgiveness of sins, 1 John 4. 14. Act. 5. 31. yea he is the Lord, and Judge
of all by purchase, and that in the name of the Father, Romans 14. 9, 10, 11, 12.
Act. 10. 36* 42. The word was made flesh and the glory, with which God has
clothed him in that flesh, or body which he prepared for him, is the glory of
the only begotten Son of God, full of grace, and truth: Joh. 1. 14. He it is by
whom the Father judges all men, and executes judgment also, because he is the
Son of Man, Joh. 5. 22* 27. And so he by, in and through whom he justifies the
ungodly, Act. 10. 43* with chapter 5. 31. and 13. 38, 39. yea he will judge the
World in righteousness, by that Man whom he has ordained, whereof he has
given assurance to all men, in that he has raised him from the dead, (of which
in the next place) Act. 17 31. Nor is there any other name given under Heaven,
whereby we may be saved, or shall be judged; But the name of that Jesus of
Nazareth, This is the stone, etc. Act. 4. 10, 11, 12. Every spirit therefore,
what ever they may seem to speak of Gods love to manward, or of his justifying
the ungodly, or judging the World; That confesses not that same Jesus of
Nazareth, That is already comed in the flesh, and has finished the works the
Father gave him to do on Earth, and is raised from the dead for our
justification; That confesses him not, as so to be the Lord, by whom the
Father judges all men, and does, and will execute judgment, because he is the
son of man; And so the Fountain, and Wellspring of all justification, and of
all grace to Manward, that through him they might be saved; That spirit is not
of God, But of that spirit of Antichrist, whereof we have heard that it should
come into the World, and even now already is it in the World. For in this word
of faith, which is of the holy Ghost, (the true spirit) The Son of Man, even
that Jesus of Nazareth is acknowledged, and lifted up, As the Lord of all
Grace, and Glory, the Author and finisher of our Faith, 1 Cor. 12. 3. 1 John 4.
2. and 5. 1. 5* Hebr. 12. 2. Ioh. 16. 14. with chapter 5. 14. Iam. 2. 1.

2 There is likewise in it, a testification of him, That God has raised him up
from the dead, who was delivered, and dyed for our sins, 1 Cor. 15. 3, 4.
12-15. with Romans 4. 24, 25. and 10. 9. That God has raised up from the dead
Jesus Christ our Lord, who is the same Person that was delivered for our
offenses, That God has raised and exalted him, after a like consideration of
his Person, after which he was delivered for our offenses, which renders his
resurrection to be in an answerable sense for our justification, as his being
delivered was for our offenses. Now then for our understanding what is
contained in this testimony. Its considerable. 1. Who it is, That was
Delivered, and after what Consideration of him, he was delivered, for our
offenses. 2. For whose offenses he was delivered, And 3. For what offenses, or
for what several sorts, or kinds of offenses, and on what terms, or how, for
them, of each sort, or kind. In the understanding of which we shall also
perceive what the Resurrection of Christ is, that is testified off in this
voice of the Son of man, the Word of faith. And how that Resurrection is for
our justification.

1. It is Jesus the Lord, The word that was made flesh, even that only begotten
Son of God, whom he sent forth in the fullness of time, made of a woman, of the
seed of David after the flesh, That Jesus of Nazareth, that was borne of the
Virgin Mary in Bethlehem of Judeah, in the Days of Caesar Augustus, He it is
that was delivered for our offenses, and in that his own personal Body which
the Father prepared for him, by the Immediate and wonderful work of the holy
Ghost in the womb of the Virgin. For though the Father did make his soul an
offering for our sin, yet that was, in that his own body, in which also he
bore them to the tree, and gave himself for our sins, and when he gave up the
Ghost. The suffering work was finished. Compare Isa. 53. 4*-10. with 1 Pet. 2.
24. and Joh. 19. 30. He suffered the just for the unjust, being put to death,
in, or after the flesh, 1 Pet. 3. 18.

If then the flesh, or Body of Christ (for as much as therein, he bore our sins
to the tree, and was delivered to the Judgment, and to the prison for our
offenses, if therefore I say that) had been holden of Death, or the Grave, and
not been taken from the prison, and from the judgment. If he after the same
consideration of him, in which he was delivered for our offenses, even Jesus of
the seed of David after the flesh, be not raised again, and so mightily
declared to be the Son of God by the Resurrection from the Dead; we are yet in
our sins, and must needs perish in them, we can have no justification from them
by him, if he himself in that his own personal Body, in which he bore our
sins to the tree, and gave himself for our sins, be not raised, and exalted in
the name, and Glory of the Father, by the power of the eternal Spirit, now no
more to return to corruption. If there were any truth in such Imaginations, as
that there is some quickening or translateing work, that is, or may be effected
upon the soul, or spirit, as Distinct from, and without its body, that may
properly be called the Resurrection of that person on whom it passes, from the
Dead yet* that truth would do us no good, as to a word of says; Such a
Resurrection here would not help us, nor any thing less, or besides, the
resurrection, and exaltation of the same Body, in which he was delivered, if
the same flesh or body be not raised, exalted, and glorified with God, we can
have no faith, or hope in him. For this also we find, that that Body was
prepared for him, (as absolutely necessary) to do the whole will of God in,
for man's salvation, and that through him they might be saved, as well as also
that by him, they might be judged in Righteousness according to the Gospel.
And so not only that he might therein suffer our Death, and Curse. But also
that he might have it as through sufferings made perfect to offer up in
Sacrifice to God, as the Ransom or price of redemption (in which God might
smell a savor of Rest) for fallen mankind, and likewise to appear in, in the
presence of God as the Mediator between God, and men, and as the Great Apostle,
and High Priest of our profession, that all fulness dwelling in him bodily,
we also of his fulness might receive, etc. yea that it is through the
offering up of the Body of Christ once for all, that we are sanctified, It Is
through this man, and because God, has raised him from the Dead, that
repentance, and remission of sins is preached to us, and by him all that
believe are justified, etc. Yea because this man continues ever, therefore he
is able to save to the utmost them that come to God by him, and therefore also
all judgment committed to him, see Hebr. 10. 5-10-12. with chapter 9. 11. 12. 14.
23. 24. 25. 26. 28. and chapter 8. 1-3. 4. and 7. 23. 24. 25. etc. 1 Timothy 2. 5. 6.
Joh. 1. 14. 16. with Coll. 2. 9. Act. 13. 37. 38. 39. Ioh. 5. 27. Act. 17. 31.

This therefore is mainly considerable in that testimony of Christ delivered as
the Ground of all our faith, and hope, that God has raised up Jesus our Lord
from the dead, who was delivered for our offenses, even the same Jesus of
Nazareth, and in that his own personal Body, in which he was to delivered.
Jesus Christ of the seed of David after the flesh, Romans 1. 3. 4. 2 Timothy 2. 8.
This truth, we have before sufficiently proved, for confirmation of the hope of
the Resurrection of our Bodies that dye in Adam. Here we shall only farther
show, of how great weight, and importance our Savior, and the holy Ghost by
the Apostles, signify it to be, and the asserting, and acknowledgement of it,
as one of the first, and greatest things in the Word of faith, on which the
other things in it depend, and in which they are included, and therefore not to
be passed over, as a lighter matter, or bieopinion, to be so discoursed of, or
only to be of some lesser use.

To this, it is very observable, That our Savior after his Resurrection. In
all those his appearances, and instructions to his Apostles before his being
taken up, in which he was confirming, and preparing them for that great work,
of giving forth the full preaching, and revelation of the Word of faith, to all
Nations for the obedience of faith, he then chiefly insisted on this, to show
himself to them, alive after his passion, and that it was he himself, the
same that suffered, and was hung on a Tree. And that he had the self same
body, flesh, and bones, hands, and feet really, (as a spirit without a body
has nor, though it may sometimes, assume such shapes,) that it was the same in
which he sometime conversed with them in weakness, that was nailed to the
Cross, pierced with a spear, etc. And withal he instructed them that all
this was necessary, these things must needs be so fulfilled, that repentance
and remission of sins might be preached in his name, Luke 24. 36 - 48. Ioh. 20.
24. 27. with Act. 1. 3.

Likewise the Apostle John summing up the Word of faith; The testimony of God
concerning Christ, they had received of him to declare unto us, calls it a
declaration of that which they had looked upon with their eyes, and their hands
had handled of the Word of life; which (being with such apt alusion to those
words of our Savior, handle me, and see, for a spirit has not flesh, and
bones, as ye see me to have, Luke 24. 39. with Ioh. 20. 24. 27.) Must needs
mean the Lords body, raised from the dead; The man Christ Jesus alive after
his passion, in the same body in which he bore our sins to the tree, which
other believers are said not so to have seen ( Ioh. 20. 29. 1 Pet. 1. 8.) yet
to believe, and in the belief of it, to rejoice, and be blessed, 1 Ioh. 1. 12.

Hence also we read, in that whole story of the Acts of the Apostles, as in all
their Epistles, that they in giving forth the Gospel of Christ, the Word of
faith, after the holy Ghost was poured out upon them from on high, doc chiefly
insist on this, as the first and fundamental things of all Orracles of God, as
now come forth. The foundation of all our faith and hope, (as now declared) and
of the resurrection of the dead, and eternal judgment that God had raised up
and exalted; the same Jesus of Nazareth, of the fruit of David's loins
according to the flesh; that was crucified; that his soul was not left in Hell,
neither did his flesh see corruption; that God had given him glory in that
Body, in which he bore our sins to the Tree, that our faith and hope might be
in God; And from hence do evidence, repentance, and remission of sins to be
therefore preached to us, through this man, and in his name; as Act. 2. 22-36.
and 3. 14-21. and 4. 10-12. and 5. 30-32. and 13. 23-37. 38. 39. Romans 1. 1-5.
and 4. 24. 24. and 10. 9. 1 Cor. 15. 1. 15. 2 Cor. 4. 14. with chapter 5. 1-10. 2 Timothy 2 8-19. Hebr. 1. 3. and 4. 14. and 7. 23, etc. and 8. 1 - 6. and 9. 11 -
14. 13 - 28. and 10. 1 - 12. and 13. 20. 1 Pet. 1. 21.

2 The persons for whom, or in whose stead, and for whose offenses he was
delivered to death, are every of them whose nature he took, even every man,
Adam; and all his natural posterity: for therefore he was made a little lower
then the Angels, even in the nature of fallen mankind, in a Body prepared for
him of the seed of Abraham and David after the flesh, that by the grace of God,
he might taste death for every man; He was made of a Woman, made under the Law,
to redeem them that were under the Law; now we know that what ever things the
Law says, it says to them that are under the Law, that every mouth may be
stopped, and all the World may appear guilty before God, who has therefore
concluded all under sin, that he may have mercy upon all; Hebr. 2. 9, 14, 15,
16. Gall. 4. 4. with Romans 3. 19 - 22. and chapter 5. 20, 21. and 11. 32. This was
the Apostles judgment, and so the mind of the spirit of Christ; that One dyed
for all, in their room, or stead, their death; and for their good, and
commodity, that through Him they might be saved; and that then God was in
Christ, reconcileing the World unto Himself, not imputing their trespasses to
them; For he laid, or caused to meet on him, the Iniquities of us all; 2 Cor.
5. 14, 15, 19. Isa. 53. 6. with Joh. 3. 17.

The resurrection then of that Body from the dead, that was so delivered up for
us all, must needs be for the justification of us all, even of all mankind,
for therefore was he made sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness
of God in him; And as the offense of one, was upon, or unto all to
condemnation; So in an answerable, and more abundant sense, the righteousness
of one, the one man Christ Jesus, which was completed in his Resurrection, and
offering up that Body a^spo^lesle Sacrifice, a ransom or price of redemption
for all; was upon, or unto all men unto justification of life, Romans 5. 18. And
he, even Jesus Christ the righteous, being in his resurrection, taken from the
Prison, and from the judgment, acquit of all our sins imputed to him, and
accepted to all the ends of his laying down his life; He is the propitiation,
not only for the sins of Believers, that have him also as their advocate with
the Father, but also for the sins of the whole World: The Mediator between God
and men, who gave himself a ransom for all, a testimony in due time, 1 John 2.
1, 2. with 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. yea he is Lord of all, even a Prince, and Savior,
for to give repentance, and remission of sins, and that it should be preached
in his name; for therefore he both dyed, rose and revived, that he might be
Lord of all. Act. 10. 36. 39. 43. chapter 2. 36. and 5. 31. Romans 14. 9. And that
this is also contained, in that Doctrine of the resurrection of Christ Jesus
from the dead, as one of the great, and maine things in that word of faith; is
evident in the Scriptures already mentioned, where this is expressed as the sum
of their ministry, or of the word or reconciliation, committed to them to be
ministered by them; And so also as the ground of all their exhortations,
reproves, warnings, and encouragements; As also of their praying for all men
in due time, and exhorting others to it. Namely, that Jesus Christ by the grace
of God dyed for all, and that so effectually, that it is accepted with the
Father, as if all had dyed; so that he has raised him from the dead for their
justification, and given him glory, that they that live should not hence forth
live to themselves, but to him that dyed for them, and rose again; That then in
that work, God was in Christ reconcileing the World, etc. 2 Cor. 5. 14. 15. 19.
That God will have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the
truth; For one God, or God is one, and there is one Mediator between God and
men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, a testimony in
due time. Unto this (says the Apostle) I am appointed a Preacher, and an
Apostle, a Teacher of the Gentiles in faith and verity; I will therefore that
men pray, etc. See also, 1 John 4. 14. When after the Apostle has admonished
us, not to believe every spirit, but to try the spirits whether they be of God;
and given us this as the first part of his general Rule for trial Every
spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is (already) come (not coming) in the
flesh, (that so acknowledges and lifts Him up, as having already actually
finished the works the Father gave Him to do on the Earth, and so is risen from
the dead, and exalted in that body in Man's nature, with the right hand of God,)
is of God. And then added this as a further part of that general Rule, for
trial of spirits. verse. 6. That they (the Apostles in their Declaration of
this word of life, Christ raised from the dead,) were of God, and therefore he
that knows God hears them, assents and comes up to their words, so
acknowledges Christ come in the flesh, and the extent ends, and virtues of his
Cross, as they have seen and declared him; And he that is not of God hears
them not. In which addition of this further part of the Rule, he signifies,
there may be some acknowledgment of Christ, as come in the flesh, which yet is
not according to the Apostles word or Doctrine. After this I say, in the 14
verse, he sums up their word or testimony concerning him, which also they have
left for the trial of spirits; We have seen, and do testify, that the Father
sent the Son, the Savior of the World. That spirit therefore that in his
confession of Christ, does not hear, assent to, and acknowledge him, according
to this their testimony of him is so far forth not of God. As also is signified
in those Declarations of the testimony of the true spirit concerning Christ, by
which he may be known and distinguished from other spirits: 1 John 5. 6 - 9.
11. 12. with Joh. 3. 14, 15, 16, 17, etc. And likewise in that discovery of the
office and work of the true spirit, which he executes with this testimony in
the World. Joh. 16. 8-14. The further consideration of which we shall here wave
for brevity sake.

3 The offenses he was delivered for, are our offenses; He gave Himself for
our sins, Gall. 1. 4. He dyed for our sins, according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor.
15. 3. Even for all the sins, and offenses that are ours, any man's that is yet
joined to, or of the number of the living, or not yet blotted out of the Book
of the living, as Psalm. 69. 27, 28. whence that Eccles. 9. 4. with 2 Cor. 5.
15. Even for all those sins, and offenses found in, and upon men, or done by
them, before the day of Gods grace, and patience be quite out with them, or
their sin be so finished, as to have brought forth death, in an utter
separation from God, sin when so finished, is not to be prayed for, because he
is not the propitiation for it, as appears by comparing, 1 Timothy 21 1-6. and 1 John 2. 1, 2. with chapter 5. 16. But to him that is joined to all the living,
there is hope, and help in Christ, there is yet pardon for all his sins, and
healing for all his diseases; For he was delivered for our offenses, and raised
again for our justification.

Now our sins, and offenses, even the sins, and trespasses of the World, which
the Lamb of God was sent to take away; for which he was delivered, and gave
himself, they are of two sorts, and so distinctly spoken off in the Scripture;
And accordingly the terms on which he was delivered for them, are distinct and
different.

1 The sins are of two sorts. 1. That offense of one man, called Adams
transgression, in which all have sinned, and by which sin, and so death by sin
entered into the World, and overspread the whole nature; And so all that sin,
and sinfullnesse, that is the natural, and necessary fruit thereof.

2 Sins that are now committed by men, after the similitude of Adam's
transgression, such as in which men sin voluntarily, by a wilful compliance
with Satan against light, and power to withstand, for though men since the fall
of the whole nature in the first man Adam; have not that light, knowledge, and
power by which they may withstand Satan; in them, as a natural habbit, or as
Adam in his first constitution; yet God by Jesus Christ gives more grace, more
abundant light, or discoveries of more abundant grace and glory, with
supernatural power answerably in, and with those discoveries of his goodness,
leading to repentance, and teaching and strengthening to resist sin and Satan;
And thus Christ is a testimony to men, and the grace of God in and through him,
bringing salvation to them all in due time: So that if when light thus comes to
them, they then love and choose darkness, wickedly resisting and departing
from him that calls them into the grace of Christ, hardening their hearts
against his melting and softening opperations, refusing to be healed, and so as
children of disobedience to the grace of God, walking after the course of this
World, after the Prince of the power of the air. They then, and therein sin of
themselves, after the similitude of Adam's transgression, like men, or like
Adam, Hose. 6. 5, 6, 7. yea their sins (being against more grace, even against
the light and power of the grace in Christ faithfully and seasonably given:)
are greater, and of a higher nature, though resembled by his.

See both these sorts of sins, distinctly mentioned, Romans 5. 14. Nevertheless
death reigned from Adam to Moses, (as well as since) even over those that had
not sinned after the similitude of Adam's transgression; where he clearly
implies, that some there were before, as well as since, that sinned after the
similitude of Adam's transgression; And also that there were some that had not
so sinned, and yet that death reigned over them also, which shows that they
had sinned, and were unclean, and polluted by sin; (though they had not so
sinned:) For death came in by sin, as verse. 12. By one man sin entered into the
World, and death by sin, for as much as all have sinned, so that sin was in the
World, before the Law given by Moses, and was upon them, as an overspreading
Leprosy, even upon them, that had not sinned after the similitude of Adam's
transgression; which also shows, that there was a Law, and a Law broken, and
man fallen under the penalty of it, before that more full, and declarative
giving of it by Moses, for where there is no Law, there is no transgression.

And after this distinct mention of sins, he shows in the next verses, how the
gift, and grace in, and through it, by that one man Jesus Christ, goes beyond
the offense, in that it is of many offenses, There is in it provision of
pardon, and healing for many other offenses besides the first, and the
necessary branches of that, even for such sins as are after the similitude of
Adams transgression.

All sins of the first sort, are mentioned, as already entered into, and
overspreading the whole nature, even from the first receite, and consenting to
the temptation of Satan by Adam; And so found in the World, before Christ's
undertaking to dye for them; And always considered, as having being in men, in
order of nature, before that gift, and grace in, and by it. as Romans 3. 23. All
have sinned, namely in that offense of one, as Romans 5. 12. And are come short
of the glory of God, deprived and bereft of that Image, and glory of God, in
which they were created in the first man, so that they come forth naturally
unclean, and altogether filthy, the Imaginations of his heart evil from his
youth, and that enmity of the mind leading to all evil works. Genesis 8. 21.
Psalm. 14. 3. with Romans 3. 9-19. Coll. 1. 21.

All sins of the second sort, that is hateing when they see, rejecting when
they hear, sinning wilfully against the light and power of the grace of God in
Christ bringing salvation, are expressly mentioned as sins, that could have had
no being in the World, nor had the World known them, or been capable of
committing them. If there had not been such a gift (at least vertually, for so
it was from the first of our need) prepared, and accepted, and the grace of God
through it bringing salvation. If he had not made peace for them by his blood,
and also preached peace to them, even to their spirits, by his spirit; They had
not known, or been capable of committing sin, as it is now charged upon them,
that is of seeing, and hateing wilful sinning against light. Joh. 15. 22-24.
with chapter 3. 19. and 12. 46-48.

2. The terms on which he was delivered for them, are different. The sins of
the World of the first sort, which are all that had, or have being in the
World, in order of nature before the gift, and the grace that is in, and
through it bringing salvation, even that offense of one, and the natural
uncleanness from thence entering into, and overspreading the whole nature, and
so remaining in us as a natural heritage, while we are in this body, (as a Law
of sin in the members, even in those in whom the spirit is made alive for
righteousness sake, yea in such as walk not after the flesh, but after the
spirit.) All these were imputed to Him, He was so made under the Law, that
concluded us guilty; And for us that they were legally charged on him as his
own sins; And he owned, and acknowledged them, and willingly bore, and suffered
for them, as his own sins. Psalm. 40. 12. 1 Pet. 2. 24. Though he knew no sin,
for God made him that knew no sin to be sin for us. 2 Cor. 5. 21. All we like
sheep have gone astray, namely in that offense of one, in which all have
sinned. Romans 5. 12. and 3. 23. Therein we have volluntarily, and together run
out from God, at one Gap; (and so like Sheep) And from thence have turned every
one to his own way, (As the natural fruit of that first general departure, we
are naturally following every one his own lust) Thus both the branches of the
sins of the first for^ are expressed, and with respect to them all, he
affirms, the Lord has laid on him the iniquity of us all. Answerable to
which, is that of the Apostle. 2 Cor. 5. 19. God was in Christ reconcileing the
World to Himself, not imputing to them their trespasses, meaning plainly by
their trespasses, (as appears by the matter treated on, and the dependence
those expressions have on the former) even all their trespasses, that
occasioned, and brought in the first enmity and breach between God and mankind,
which God was in Christ reconcileing and making up, in those works he gave him
to finish in his own Body on the Earth: And so all those sins and trespasses,
in which they were naturally dead, and are so as considered without, and before
this gift, and the grace in and through it, which were all their sins, as so
considered as before is showed* God did not impute to them their trespasses,
but laid them upon his own Son; And he was delivered for them as the guilty
Person, even as for his own sins.

The sins of the World after the second, or following consideration. ( viz.)
All those in which men sin after the similitude of Adam's transgression,
against the light and power of the grace of God bringing salvation, loving and
choosing darkness, when light comes; These having no possibility of Being in
the World, before the consideration of peace made for men, and preached to them
by Christ; were not of those imputed to, or laid upon Christ, as his own sins,
for him to satisfy for. And take away from before the Father, by and in that
Act of the sheading of his blood, and offering up of his Body once for all. But
sins of that nature are still imputed to, and charged upon the people by God,
while they continue in them. Joh. 20. 23. with chapter 3. 18, 19, 36.

Yet for these sins also he was delivered, and did give himself, and shead his
blood. That thereby he might purchase, and obtain power, to take away sins of
this nature, as they should be found in men while his grace is bringing
salvation to them; and so to make reconciliation for the sins of the people, by
his daily mediation in the infinite and abideing virtue of his one oblation.
Hebr. 2. 14-17. Therefore was he made under the Law, and all our sins after
that first consideration imputed to him, and laid upon him, that by or through
his sufferings, he might not only make peace, and atonement for them, But
thereby also obtain plenteous redemption, even the forgiveness of sins, and so
become by means of that death, which was for the Redemption of the
transgressions under the first Testament; The Mediator of the new Testament,
yea a standing propitiation for the sins of the whole World, even for their
sins after the following consideration. Hebr. 9. 15. with 1 John 2. 1, 2. For
of sins of that nature he speaks. 1 John 3. 8 He that commits sin is of the
Devil. (Every man is a sinner, and wholly sinful from Adam, even as a
natural heritage. But the grace of God in such wise brings salvation to all
men in due time, that men are not left in a necessity of committing, serving,
and so pineing away in their iniquities. Therefore he that commits, or
serves, consents, yeildeth up to, and walks in sin, he is therein of the
Devil, begotten, born, and led of Satan, wilfully consenting, and complying
with him against the light and power of the grace of God bringing salvation,
And to this he adds,) For this purpose was that Son of God manifested, that he
might destroy the works of the Devil. (not only to destroy his first, and
great work (in which he had prevailed over all mankind) by suffering the
judgment of this World; And so breaking the snare, and casting him out of his
principallity he had over mankind, by conquest made in his resurrection; But
also that by virtue thereof, he might destroy his following works, in taking
away those following sins of men, complying with him in his new temptations,
which provoke and make liable to that wrath, that is yet to come in respect of
the execution of it, the second death.) And so it answers to the fifth verse;
ye know, that he was manifested to take away our sins, (even our sins
committed and continued in by us against the grace of God, and hope set before
us in Christ to purify us, (in which the Law also is transgressed) as appears
by comparing this with verses 3, 4.) He gave himself for us, and for our sins,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, that he might deliver us from this
present evil World. And so that he might purify to himself (a people out of
the World, for the good of the World,) a peculiar people zealous of good works.
He suffered the just for the unjust, that he might bring us back (from all our
wandering) to God. So that he needs not to offer daily, or often, as the former
Priest, first for his own sins, and then for the peoples. For this he did once
when he offered up himself, That one offering, was first for all those sins of
the World, which were imputed to him, as his own sins, that therein peace, and
atonement might be made for them, that they might not be so imputed to us. And
then also the same offering was for the sins of the people, even those that are
still imputed to them, while they continue in them. And so he was delivered,
and gave himself for them, as for the sins of the people, that they might be
found guilty of, and running into after his grace bringing salvation to them,
and during the day of his grace and patience toward them. That by that one
offering perfected through sufferings, and in his resurrection, and ascension,
he might be empowered in the name of God, to make intercession for the
transgrestors, and so to take away the sins of the World by his continued
mediation, appearing in the presence of God for us; That patience and
forbearance may be exercised toward Rebbels, while it may be for their good,
And that he may in the same name of the Father, give unto these that while it
is yet to day are moved to repentance by his goodness, whereby he is all the
day leading to it, The forgiveness of their sins, and eternal life. Joh. 3.
^7. Luke 9. 56. 1 Timothy 2. 4, 5, 6. with Psalm. 68. 18, 19, 20. Isa. 42 18, 19*
21. Joh. 6. 40.

The Resurrection of Christ then, being the Resurrection of him who was
delivered for our offenses, must needs be in an answerable sense for our
justification.

1. Such it is, as in which he for us, or in our stead, is justified, and
acquit of all the sins imputed to him. And so the whole nature, all mankind,
are in him justified, freely by the grace of God, through the redemption that
is in Jesus from all sins after the first consideration, in which they have
already sinned, and with which they are polluted, as considered without and
before the gift, and grace by it, (as aforesaid) Romans 3. 23, 24. So as the
Father judges no man, but has committed all judgment to the Son, Joh. 5. 22.
As the offense of one, was unto all to condemnation; So the righteousness of
one (perfected in his Resurrection from the dead) is unto all to justification
of life, that they might live to him that dyed for them, and rose again. Romans
5. 18. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law;
Under which otherwise we must all have been banished from God for ever. Gall.
3. 13. with 2 Samuel 14. 14. So that though we have all sinned, and come short of
the glory of God. And sin be in us, and death upon us as a natural heritage,
while in these bodies, and the ordinance of God remains still firm concerning
the whole kind. That we must all needs once dye, yet no man shall perish for
ever in that death, nor according to that rule or judgment, for as in Adam all
dye, so in Christ shall all be made alive, and appear before his judgment Seat,
where this shall be the only condemning sin, that when light came, they loved
darkness, refused to be healed: He having suffered the judgment of this World,
and being lift up from the Earth, will draw all men to him; yea so is the guilt
of this natural uncleanness, removed from before God, that no man is thereby,
or therefore necessarily kept out from God. The wrath thereby procured being
suffered by him, is taken away in his Resurrection. An effectual door of
repentance opened, and the grace of God by him bringing salvation, and leading
to repentance in due time. He having by himself purged (namely the Heavens
themselves, and so taken away from before the Father the guilt off) our sins,
(even all the sins and trespasses of the World, in which we were dead, and
heirs of wrath by nature, and which were imputed to him, without the purging
of which from before the Throne of God, he could not have been accepted, and
set down there for us,) having by himself purged them away, he is now set down
on the right hand of God, That repentance and remission of sins might be
preached in his name, that the goodness of God by him might lead men to
repentance, And all comers by him, might be made accepted in him. Hebr. 1. 3.
with chapter 9. 23. Luke 24. 46, 47. All our sins after that first consideration
are covered, and his wrath so procured, taken away, that we shall not perish in
it, nor be kept out from God by it, as also is hinted tipically. Psalm. 85. 2, 3.

2. His resurrection is for our justification from the sins of the second, or
following consideration, so as that by, and through him, while its yet to day,
we might be justified, saved, and washed from them, in the name of the Lord
Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. He is therein, and thereby empowered in the
name of the Father, to justify the ungodly. And has received gifts in the
man, not only for men as sinners in Adam, and from him, and for their
helpfullnesse as so considered, but for the rebellious also, that the Lord God
might dwell amongst them, His resurrection, and exaltation in our nature, and
in that body in which he was so delivered for our offenses (as aforesaid) is so
for our justification from those sins that are yet imputed to us, and
retained in Heaven against us, or any of us, while we continue in them, even
from such as deserve, and bring us under the sentence of the wrath to come.

That repentance, and remission of sins, is still preached in his name to such;
(as yet treasured up in him for them.) And forbearance granted, during the time
of his preaching, who in all this is a testimony in due time to them* (having
given himself a ransom for them; And being in the virtue thereof, the
Mediator between God and them.) And is so giving repentance, and remission of
sins to them, (even to them that yet receive it not) that they might receive
it, in the opportunity of it, and in the light and power of his givings.

And so his resurrection in all this fruit of it, is for their justification,
that yet while it is to day, their eyes might be opened, and they turned from
darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they might receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith
in Christ, which also in his resurrection and exaltation, he is empowered, and
appointed in the name of the Father, so to give unto them, that through his
grace believe, as to make them partakers of it through the same name. Act. 10.
40 43. See this branch of the Doctrine of Christ, and of his Resurrection being
for our justification from such sins, and in such wise as is mentioned in this
last consideration, which evidently includes, and takes for granted, the truth
of the former; See I say this branch distinctly, and expressly spoken too, and
delivered as the sum of the word of faith, for the encouragement, and
admonition of such rebellious sinners, yet to repent, and look to him, and hope
in his mercy. Act. 5. 30, 31.

God having raised up Jesus whom they flew, had exalted him with his right
hand, for to give repentance to Israel, (to rebellious Israel that had seen
and hated, and against much light, and many convincements and warnings, had
crucified the Lord of Glory, yet to give repentance to Israel.) And the
forgiveness of sins, as also, chapter 2. 22 39. and 3. 14 19. 26. Likewise chapter 13.
37-39. 40. Because God had raised him from the dead, and he saw no corruption.
Be it known unto you therefore, (says the holy Ghost) That through this man is
preached unto you, (even you his crucifiers) the forgiveness of sins; And by
him all that believe, are justified from all things, from which they could not
be justified by the Law of Moses (even from such sins, as that Law provided, no
tipicall Justification, from whence he admonishes, to beware of despiseing
such abundant grace, least their condemnation be aggravated thereby, like that
Psalm. 68. 18-21. So other Scriptures set him forth to be, Jesus Christ the
righteous; And as the fruit of his perfect righteousness completed in his
resurrection, and giving himself to God in that his raised body, an offering
of a sweet smelling savor. A ransom or price of redemption for all. I say as
the fruit of that, and of Gods wellpleasednesse therein, To be now appearing in
the presence of God, The Mediator between God and men, That so he might be
testified in due time; The propitiation, not only for the sins of Believers,
(who have him also as their advocate with the Father) even for those their sins
that might have been prevented by the grace and power in the things written and
testified of Christ to them, But also for the sins of the World, even for their
sins of that nature, that were against the light and power of the grace of God,
bringing salvation to them. And so in this fruit of his resurrection, To be the
Savior of all men, in still holding open the door of life, and exercising
forbearance and long-suffering to rebellious sinners, and renewing streams of
goodness leading to repentance, and especially the Savior of them that
believe, in justifying and saving from wrath, even the wrath to come: 1 John 2.
1, 2. 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. Romans 3. 24, 25, 26. 1 Timothy 4. 10. Romans 5. 9, 10. Joh. 5.
24.

Yea, the Apostle says, he had delivered them from the wrath to come, that is,
from the sentence of it, and state of condemnation to it, under which they
sometimes were, by their sins of the second sort, their seeing, and hateing,
hearing, and rejecting, loving darkness when light came; (which only make
liable to that condemnation, as Joh. 3. 18. 19. 36. and 12. 47, 48.) And
mentions this as the fruit of Gods having raised him up from the dead. 1 Thessalonians.
1. 10.

God having raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered for our
offenses; In him is plenteous redemption, the forgiveness of sins, even
deliverance from the wrath to come, forgiveness of all our sins, healing of
all our Diseases, while it is to day. And by him all that believe, are
delivered, and saved from the wrath to come, through his name. This is the
record, that God has given of his Son, which also is contained in that
expression of it. 1 John 5. 11, 12. And so the revelation of the Fathers name,
that is in this testimony of Christ, is that God is light, and in him is no
darkness at all, 1 John 1. 5. Or as here expressed in this, Romans 4. 5. That he
justifies the ungodly, That it is his good pleasure, And the work of his
delight to justify the ungodly, That he has found out, and made a way to
declare his righteousness in justifying the ungodly; That in and through that
way, he is the justifier of the ungodly, (according to the tenor of the
Gospel) in that which he has done, does, and will do, in and through the
resurrection of Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered for our
offenses, and was raised again for our justification. The ungodly, as mentioned
in Scripture, are of two sorts. 1. All such as are wholly without the true
knowledge, and fear of God. And so all men were made ungodly by the first sin;
and in the loss, and pollution thence overspreading the whole nature, And were
considered, as such, when Christ undertook to dye for them, and are still such
naturally, even as a natural Heritage, and of themselves have no betternesse,
Romans 3. 9-19. 23. And so it is said, Christ in due time dyed for the ungodly,
Romans 5. 6. 2. Such as not only are simple, and wholly destitute of the
knowledge and fear of God, as all are naturally; But when light comes, do still
love their simplicity and darkness, and in disobedience to the light, and
power of the grace of God bringing salvation, do reject and hate his knowledge,
and will not choose the fear of the Lord, as Prove. 1. 22. 29. Such are
principally, and most frequently called the ungodly in the Scripture, as Psalm.
1. Ungodly men, are there mentioned as such as are stubbornly consulting, and
murmuring against the Law or Doctrine of the Lord, as also Psalm. 2. 1-3. with
Joh. 6. 41-44. yea scornfully despiseing and rejecting the reproves of its
instruction; And therefore having no delight in it* as ler. 6. 10. so Jude. 4.
Ungodly men, turning the grace of our God into laseiviousnesse, and denying the
only Lord, etc. Now it is the good, perfect, and acceptable will of God in
Christ, that through him all men might be saved, and come to the knowledge of
the truth: For God is one, He is light, and in Him is no darkness at all, and
there is one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, who gave
himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time; yea in and through
him, God is the justifier, and Savior of all men, especially of them that
believe.

1. In him, and in raiseing him from the dead, he has justified the whole
nature from that judgment of the World, under which it was fallen, by that sin,
and sinfullnesse or ungodliness of the first sort; in which we had already
sinned, and were fallen short of his glory. Romans 3. 23, 24. That judgment he
has remitted unto Christ, and given, or released us all from under it unto
him. Joh. 12. 31, 32. with chapter 6. 37. 39. And so saved all mankind from
perishing in that death, or curse of the Law; that through him they might be
saved to the utmost from sin and wrath.

2. Through the resurrection of Christ, and as the fruit of that justification,
and redemption in him, and by him obtained for us. God does in all his
providence, and proceedings with men, in a sense justify the ungodly, from
the guilt of that natural ungodliness, from which they are already justified
in the person of Christ. In that the judges no man immediately, or according to
that rule of judgment, under which they are cast by their natural filthiness,
but has committed all judgment to the Son, and by him executes judgment,
because he is the Son of man, in which execution of judgment by Christ, though
men still bear the Image of the earthly; yet without that wrath, poison, and
destructivenesse that is the just wages of our sin, and contained in the curse
of the Law, and with so much abatement of misery, and mixture of mercy, as
tends to our salvation through him: Now though God had already wholly remitted
the judgment of this World unto Christ: And in his person as standing in our
stead, acquit and justified the whole nature from that first guilt, yet for as
much as the fruit, or streaming forth of this justification, comes upon our
particular persons in our several Ages, in the daily execution of his judgment
by Christ; And for as much also as Christ does nothing but what he sees the
Father do, and in the name of the Father; even therefore, therein, God is
truly said to be doing that daily in respect of us, or unto us by Christ, which
he has already granted, and done for us in the person of Christ, as Joh. 6.
37. 39. The Father is said to be daily giveing, that which he has already
given to Christ; Because the things already granted and given as the fruit of
his purchase, (which are all things, and all persons, as 1 Cor. 15. 27.) do in
their particular Beeings come forth to him, in their several times by the
order and appointment of the Father. And so in the streamings forth of that
justification wherewith we are already justified in the person of Christ unto
us, and so its coming upon us in our particular persons by Christ in the name
of the Father. God justifies the ungodly. As likewise because in all this
execution of his judgment by Christ, in this day of his grace, there is
repentance, and remission of sins preached and given in his name, that it might
be received in the light and power of his givings.

3. He is likewise in some sort justifying the ungodly, after the second
consideration, while yet it is to day; In that having prepared justification
from all their sins, and healing of all their diseases, in Christ, he is by,
and through him exerciseing such forbearance, and deferring the execution of
his Judgments for such ungodliness, as is yet imputed to them, while they
continue in it; That they may have opportunity to repent, And in the
opportunity, still preaching, and giving repentance, and remission of sins in
his name, that they may be led to repentance, and in turning receive
forgiveness of sins, and inheritance, etc. And in all this he is doing, that
in and through which they may be turned from their ungodlynesse, washed, and
justified in that name, though yet they be not. Isa. 42. 18-21. Act. 26. 18.
Ezekiel. 24. 13. Isa. 48. 9, 10. 17, 18.

4. He does by and through Christ raised from the dead, justify in a more full
and proper sense, him that believes on Jesus from all sins past. Their former
rebellions, and ungodliness of the second sort, that were till then remembered,
and retained in Heaven against them, though the execution of wrath, or shutting
out to it was deferred, to give them opportunity yet to repent, (as aforesaid)
are now remitted, covered, and put out of his sight; And they delivered from
the wrath to come, and made accepted in the beloved, in whom they are found.
And also made partakers of this justification, and the fruit thereof, through
his name, and in the further opening of it to them. Romans 3. 25, 26. and 4. 5,
6, 7. chapter 5. 1, 2, etc. Ephesians. 1. 6. Act. 10. 43. And this, even while yet the
natural ungodliness remains in them, as a Law of sin in their members, sin
dwelling in them; the flesh Iusting and warring against the spirit. as Romans 6.
and 7. and 8. Gall. 5. and 6. which also in due time, (they abideing in Jesus)
He will wholly turn away from them* Romans 11. 26. with chapter 8. 11. and Phill. 3.
21. 1 John 3. 1-3. And in the mean time, make good their cause, give them the
victory in the combat through the blood of the Lamb, and the word of their
testimony: So as they minding the things of the spirit, and so walking in the
spirit, shall not fulfill the lusts of the flesh; Sin shall not have dominion,
nor Satan neither, because greater is he that is in them, as that word is kept
in their hearts, then he that is in the World. Romans 6. 14. and 7. 25. 1 Cor.
15. 57. Revel. 12. 11. Gall. 5. 16. with Romans ^. 1-13. 14. 1 John 4. 4. Joh.
10. 27, 28, 29. Yea he is the continual justifier of him that believes on
Jesus from their many offenses, in which ungodliness of the second sort is often
found with them. They yet coming to God by him, or returning from any of their
wanderings, in the leadings, and recallings of his grace, thither, and that
way; If we confess our sins, acknowledge them, and give them up, as
discovered, and reproved by that light, that discovers pardon, and healing in
Christ; (which confessing, and giving up, or laying apart is always, and only
truly found, in a hearty believing in the light:) He is faithful, and just to
forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us by the blood of Jesus from all our
unrighteousness; Romans 3. 26. 1 John 1. 7. 9. with chapter 2. 1, 2. So that no man
or spirit, can fasten any charge, that will lie, or remain on Gods elect;
(that is, them that through his love, do love him, and those are they that keep
his sayings. Romans 8. 28. with Joh. 14. 21, 23. and 10. 27.) So as to trouble,
harm, or hold them under bondage; This word of faith, being continued in, or
returned too, continually makes them free. Joh. 8. 32, 36. nor shall any thing
be able to separate such from the love of God that is in Christ Jesus: Its God
that justifies, Its Christ that dyed, yea rather, that is risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Romans 8.
32-39.

This is that Doctrine of Christ, the word of faith, the hearing or hearty
believing, or receiving of which so as, through and according to it, to believe
on him that sent Christ, is counted to men for righteousness, and here called
their doing good; This I say is the word of faith, as now come forth by Christ:
That God has raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered for our
offenses, etc. And that in and through him as raised from the dead, and exalted
with his right hand, he is a God that justifies the ungodly. This and not any
other particular voice, word or testimony to, or concerning us, which a man may
apply, or take as particularly applied to himself, to assure him of Gods love
in Christ to him, or of his good estate in grace or the like, nor any voice or
revelation what ever that is other then this, or strange to it; But this and
this only is the word of faith, as now brought to us by Jesus Christ; we come
next to consider.

2. What is that faith, or believing on him that justifies the ungodly, as
before expressed in both the branches. The hearing his word, or believing God
in his word, or testimony given of his Son, and by him. And the believing on
him through and according to it.

For our better understanding what it is in both the branches. This is to be
carried along with us, That it is opposed to our own works, and that in such
expressions as signify, a ceasing from our own works to be necessarily in it,
in every branch, or act of it. For he says not only, not to him that works,
which had been enough to show the emptiness, and vanity of our works, unto the
attaining the righteousness of God, or the says by which it is attained. But
he says more, To him that works not, which shows an absolute necessity of
ceasing from a man's own works, that he may attain righteousness; yea that this
cessation, is in and with that believing that is imputed for righteousness;
The working here mentioned, and the believing on him that justifies the
ungodly, cannot stand together. There is then in this believing with the heart,
which is unto righteousness. A ceasing from a man's own works, an entering into
rest, as Hebr. 4. which also answers to that instruction, in the verses before
the Text, showing the hearing his word, and believing on him that sent him, to
be such, as in which the Son is honored, and so the Father in him, who is not
truly honored, or gloryed in, without this ceasing from our own works, in
which is a relinquishing all glorying in the flesh; and not suffering it to
glory, or lift up it self in his presence. Phil. 3. 3-10. 1 Cor. 1. 29-31. with
Jer. 9. 23, 24.

1. The hearing his word, Joh. 5. 24. The believing God, Romans 4. 3. in his
testimony or record, that he has already given of his Son, as 1 John 5. 9-12.
This is the first, and fundamental act in this faith of the opperation of God;
where this is with the heart, and unfeined, there is equally the other act, or
acts in it produced by the power of the word of truth so believed. Therefore
this alone is given as a description of that whole faith of the opperation of
God, wherewith a man believes to righteousness. Romans 10. 9, 10. with chapter 4. 3.

Such it is, as in which a man being enlightened, and made to hear by the
preventing grace of God, in which the voice of the Son of God, in the witnesses
of Gods goodness, that is in and through him, or in the preaching of peace by
him, comes to him, even to his spirit, by Gods spirit, in and through the
means vouchsated, opening the eyes, and ears of his mind: (with which grace,
God in, and by Christ, prevents every man in due time, and always before he
require any hearing, or receiving of them:) Such I say, as in which a man, in
that enlightening, and persuasion that is in that evidence, and demonstration
of the spirit, in which his testimony that he has already given comes to them;
Falls down before it, gives glory to it, as to the word of the Lord, ceasing
from his own thoughts, words, and works on Gods holy day, even in the day of
Gods power, or powerful word coming to him, he is in that evidence, and
demonstration of the spirit in it, persuaded of the truth, goodness, and
faithfulness of it, in it self, and in all it says, and embraces it,
esteems, loves, receives, and reverenceth it as the word of God, and not of
man; As a good word, a faithful saying, worthy to be received with all
acceptance, as the truth, which teaches all things, and of which is no lie;
And accordingly rejoyeeth in it, as having found all riches, and that which
answers all needs, and is worthy to be submitted too, and that all reproved by
it should be parted with for it, and so with meekness receives the ingrafted
word, that is able to save the soul, without inward wrath, murmurings, or
disputeings against it. Ceasing from the workings of their own thoughts,
reasonings, or Imaginations, and so from consulting with the Doctrines, and
traditions of men; that life up themselves against the knowledge of God,
suffering them to fall before it, as the weapons thereof, are mighty through
God to cast them down, they let God be true, and themselves, and every man
liars.

Neither seeking to measure, or comprehend this light, or word of truth brought
to them, by the darkness of their reason, or Imagination, or by Philosophy,
and vain deceit after the traditions of men. But perceiving in this light
every man to be brutish in his knowledge: (as Jer. 10. 14, 23. with Prove. 30.
2, 3, 4.) They fall down in the sense, and acknowledgment of their inabillity,
by any wisdom, or strength of man, to receive, and comprehend what is
discovered, and brought to them; That so they may be made wise in the evidence,
and demonstration of the spirit, that brings it, attending to receive all their
demonstrations of truth, and light, and power to receive and embrace them, in
and from Gods testimony, in a silent adhearing to it, as fools in themselves;
And so in believing the truth, goodness, and faithfulness of the word, in
its own sayings, though they be never so short in understanding what is
contained, and plainly expressed in it, yet believeing, they wait for all
further wisdom, understanding and strength, seeking it in the Lord, and not
in man, or the things of man, that no flesh may glory in his presence; Likewise
in this receiving his word with the heart, there is a ceasing from the workings
of the carnal mind, in its inclinations, affections, and lusts, which are set
upon, the riches of this World, the praise of men, the pleasures of this life,
or some exaltation, or lifting up himself, in some self sufficiency, and that
not only before men, but before God, or in his presence. A ceasing from these,

1. In their lifting up themselves in direct opposi^ion to the testimony, or
word of truth; And to hinder, the receiving and acknowledgment of it.

2. In their seeking to get seeret service, and satisfaction to themselves, in
men's receiving, and closeing with it. Either of which ways, the flesh, with
its affections and lusts, will hinder men's hearty, and unfeined receiving the
word of truth, the Gospel of their salvation, if they suffer it not to be
crucified, and themselves to be brought of from it, in the light and power of
that word; Therefore those that are Christ's, are said to have crucified the
flesh, with the affections and lusts. Implying, that they could never have so
received, and retained his word in their heart, as to draw and unite them to
Christ, if they had still lived in the flesh, or suffered that to live and rule
in their spirit, or minded the things of it, and made provision for it, for
they that are in the flesh cannot please God. Some by working in the wisdom,
and Imaginations of the flesh, seeking and professing to be wise, consulting
with Philosophy, and vain deceit, their own thoughts, and the traditions of
men, and so by murmuring among themselves, close the eyes and ears of their
mind against the truth, when opened by it, break his bands, by which he is
drawing them in his Doctrine; And so keep out the light of his knowledge, and
themselves from acknowledging, or understanding the truth of his sayings. Joh.
6. 41, 42, 43, 44. and 12. 34* 35* Romans 2. 21, 22, 23. 1 Cor. 1. 21, 22, 23. 1 Timothy 6. 20, 21. Others when convinced of truth, yet still seeking after
wisdom in themselves to find out, and comprehend the truth of Gods sayings,
by their Imaginations, or by the same wisdom, and reason of man, with which
before they did, or others yet do oppose it; And to build their faith of Gods
truth, on such demonstrations, as is suited to the wisdom of this World; They
receive it not as the word of God, but as the word of men; And so deprive
themselves of the excellent sweetness and efficacy of it, their faith resting
on the wisdom and strength of man, and not in the power of God; as is
signified, 1 Cor. 2. 1, 5. 1 Thessalonians. 2. 13. whence Believers are admonished to
beware of Philosophy, and vain deceit, etc. Coll. 2. 8. Likewise some by
working in their own will, and purpose, to hide, serve, and get satisfaction to
the lusts, and affections of the flesh, against the light and power of the
reproves of instruction, keep out themselves from listening to, or from
understanding and receiving the word of truth, yea many see, and hate, because
it reproves their deeds. Joh. 3. 19. and 7. 7. and 8. 43, 44. and 6. 27-36. and
5. 44. Ezekiel. 33. 30-33. Others in listening to, and receiving the truth, yet
retaining such diverse lusts, the heart still inclined to covetousness, the
praise of men, or the like; And now thinking to get, or keep these things,
together with the truth, or also to get them by, and in the receiving, and
profession of it; still retaining and pursuing the lust, seeking to render
themselves wise, strong, and honorable in Christ, or in the receiving and
acknowledgment of him, (as those 1 Cor. 4. 10. contrary to 1 Thessalonians. 2. 3, 4, 5,
6.) They herein disable themselves from so coming to the knowledge, and
acknowledgment of the truth, as that they might be saved by it; And so make
their very believing in vain. Joh. 12. 42, 43. 2 Timothy 3. 6, 7. 1 Timothy 6. 9, 10,
11. For no man can serve two Masters. Math. 6. 24. No following after
righteousness to purpose, without an equal fleeing from these things in the
pursuit. 2 Timothy 2. 19-22. But he that does truth, comes to the light, ceasing
from his own wisdom, thoughts, and works, that he may see all his works
wrought in God, receives his word, as his word, in its own evidence and power,
and not as man's, to be measured, or comprehended by man's wisdom; And as a
good, and faithful saying, in which is contained enough to satisfy, and make
willing to let go all other advantages, and suffer the breaking of other
purposes, and desires for. And worthy to be submitted to, in what ever it
says; though discovering, and reproving evil in himself; And so there is in
this hearty believing the word of truth, the true confession of sins, and
judging a man's self; believing, and acknowledging himself such a sinner, and
worthless, helpless one, his sins so vile, his works so vain, and unclean, as
this word discovers them; And because so discovered in the light of that
Gospel of their salvation, that sets open before them, the Fountain for their
washing, and healing. 1 Ioh. 5. 7. 9. And this word, wherever so believed, and
received with the heart unfeinedly; According to the Discoveries and
Demonstrations of it, brought nigh in those preachings of it vouchsafed, (for
he requires not any other, or farther receiving, then according to what he
gives, yea he is very merciful in not upbraiding with what dullness, and
shortness he finds in that, and to him that has, shall more be given,) I say
where so believed with the heart, it works effectually. 2. A believing on him
that sent Christ, Ioh. 5. 24. And has raised him from the dead, and through
him as raised from the dead for our justification, justifies the ungodly. Rom
4. 5. 24. 25. Which believing on him, is such as in which. I. The heart and
mind from the hearty persuasion of the truth, and goodness of his word, and in
the light and power thereof, is stayed on the Lord Jesus Christ, and so on that
name of the Father in him, resting satisfied with this, and trusting in, and to
it, as a sure, full, and sufficient ground, and foundation, for all faith, and
hope in God, and bottom matter of feeding, and rejoyceing at all times, a sure
Refuge, and strong Tower of defense to run into, for saving to the utmost, and
in all his needs. And so rejoyceing in the Lord Jesus, even in his flesh that
he gave for the life of the World; And so in that Redemption, Righteousness,
and life in Him, as the fruit thereof, as one that needs, or desires no other
thing to be added to, or with it, for object of saustaction, or feeding, ground
of faith, or hope, for whatever is yet needful, or wanting to him; And
therefore renouncing all other objects of satisfaction, and grounds of rest,
trust, or rejoicing to his soul, as loss, and dung, for the excellency of the
knowledge of him, that he may only know him, and him crucified, and be found in
him, clothed with his righteousness, and not that of his own, either alone,
or together with it. ( Isa. 26. 3. and 50. 10. Ioh. 6. 32, 33, 35, 45-50-58.
Phil. 3. 7-10. Gal. 2. 20.) He works not, but believes on him that
justifies the ungodly. Some laboring to establish a righteousness of their
own in the wisdom and strength of the flesh, according to the Law, thereby
keep out themselves from knowing and proving the fulness and excellency, and
from submitting to the righteousness of God in Christ. Romans 10 3. Others in
their coming to him, yet reasoning with flesh, and blood, and looking upon the
things to be let go, or parted with for him, and the sweetness and gain they
have apprehended in them, laboring to retain, and hold fast the rejoyceing,
and confidence they have had, in such works, or things of the flesh; And yet to
have their rejoyceing in Christ, and enjoy that consolation, that is in him;
And the comfort of Gods love through him also, and together with the former; or
looking back again upon those things believed, when they have begun to let them
go for Christ, and seeking to be perfected by the flesh, in the wisdom, or
strength of it, or things of its commending to that purpose, when they have
begun in the spirit; These by their working, and laboring, make Christ of none
effect to themselves; For they cannot know him, prove, and taste his
preciousnesse, And he found in him, without a hearty, and daily letting go,
and suffering the loss of their own things, yea whatever has been gainful to
them, as discovered, and reproved in the light of the knowledge of him. Phill.
3. Others also, when they have suffered the loss of many things for Christ,
and tasted of his excellency, and preciousnesse, and been much filled with the
consolations that are in him, the comfort of Gods love by and through him, the
fellowship of the spirit, and thence with bowels and mercies, even to the
bringing forth the fruits of righteousness by Jesus Christ. Yet they falling
to work (according to the wisdom and inclination of the flesh) to make these
fruits, and efficacies of the knowledge of him, the matter of their feeding
and rejoyceing, or seeking to to join them together with, or add them unto
Christ, as a better ground of assurance, and hope of the promise of eternal
life, then they had in him before, or yet have simply in what he is, has done,
and is become in himself for us. Though these efficacies of the graciousnesse
of the Lord, tasted by them, were his works, yet their thus putting them out of
their place, and in the place of Christ; and seeking to deck their Idols with
his Ornaments, (as Ezekiel. 16. 19-20.) These are their works, For the Law of
faith excludes boasting every where, or rejoicing in any thing, even in what we
have received through grace, otherwise then so as the rejoicing, be only in the
Lord. Romans 3. 27. 1 Cor. ult. and 4. 7. And instructs always, when we have
done all these things, to acknowledge our selves therein unprofitable Servants,
that have done no more then our duty from the grace already bestowed. Luke 17.
10. Yea to be sensible of, and acknowledge our short coming of that so much
found with us in all things; That still we may take shame to our selves, and
seek to have all our rejoyceing in, and feeding on him, and not in any of those
things. And truly this work of our own, in this abuseing, and misplaceing the
works of God, cannot stand with our abideing in him, as we have received him;
But does weaken, and draw away the heart from him, and also occasion the decay
and withering of the good things, so rejoiced in, and fed upon. But he that
does good, or that does truth, always comes to the light, that he may always
see all his works wrought in God, in emmanuell; That so he may have his
rejoyceing in him evermore; And as one that has enough there, he comes to that
Fountain, that he may be filled with the knowledge, enjoyment, and fruits of
that, in and with Christ; And he that so eatest me, (says our Savior) shall
live by me. They trusting in, resting satisfied with, and staying upon, that
perfect righteousness, perfected in his resurrection; And the glorious name of
God in him, as a full, and sufficient ground of rejoyceing, and hopeing, and
matter of feeding for justification, sanctification, and all things pertaining
to life, and godliness, they are therein. II. From the fulness and riches of
grace perceived, and tasted in him, instructed, and strengthened, to seek
righteousness, and strength in the Lord, so as by an exercise of faith in
Jesus, to depend on him for, and expect from him, and with him, the hope of his
righteousness, in the perfecting what concerns them; According to the promise
of eternal life given us in Christ, which contains in it both the promise of
this life, and that to come. They believe in Christ, that they may be justified
by the faith of Christ. Gall. 2. 16. Acknowledging themselves, as discovered in
the light of his testimony, as of themselves, and from Adam, to be sinners, and
altogether filthy, and under curse by the Law, and without strength, They
expect not, nor seek that way to help themselves, as to the attaining
righteousness, but seek and follow one to know, what he has done, and is
become for sinners, to understand and perceive the perfection of his work, and
sacrifice, its fulness and answe* ableness to all their needs, And the
infinite riches of the grace of God in him to such sinners, seeking and
expecting through the knowledge of him, to have their hearts and minds stayed
on him, preserved in him, yea more brought into him, And in him to find
acceptance with God, and to receive the remission of their sins, and so the
cleansing of their mind and conscience through his name, and in the further and
continual openings of it. They likewise believe on him, stay upon, and trust
in his name for all righteousness, even for sactifying, washing, and saving
them to the utmost. Knowing his rich furniture, and abillity to save to the
utmost all that come to God by him, which also they know, in knowing what he
has done, and is become for us, while we were yet sinners and enemies, (as
Romans 8. 32. Hebr. 7. 25. and 9. 15. with Romans 5. tot.) In which likewise they
are assured, that the Gospel of Christ is the power of God to salvation, to
every one that believes. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed
from faith to faith, as it is written. The just shall live by faith, being also
therein made sensible of their own weakness, insufficiency and deadness, they
are persuaded, and strengthened in the light, and strength of those
instructions, to disowne, and go out of themselves, cease from their own
thoughts, reasonings, and works; and exercise themselves in the light and power
of his grace, to a diligent beholding and mindfullnesse of him, in what he has
done, and is become for them, and the end and fruit of it, and the grace, and
glory appearing in, and through it. They run to that, and stay in and upon it,
seeking and expecting in it, the light and power of God to conform them to
him, and so to strengthen them to purge themselves from all filthiness of
flesh and spirit, They through the spirit do wait for the hope of his
righteousness by faith, for giving them victory through the blood of the Lamb,
and the word of their testimony, and for perfecting what concerns them to the
perfect Day. They seek not righteousness by works, but seek the works, and
fruit of his righteousness, to be wrought and found in them through faith in
him, who was made sin for them, that they might be made the righteousness of
God in him. We have here occasion to mention a double or twofold difference,
between him that works for righteousness, And him that works not, but
believes for it, on him that justifies the ungodly.

1. The one works for a ground of faith, that he may believe, the other
believes and rests on a certain ground of faith, that he may work the works
of God. The first seeks for frames, and quallifications, as the ground of his
faith, namely, that from thence, he may gather conclusions of Gods love, and
good will to him in Christ, and of his good condition before God. The other
believing Gods love, and good will to Manward, and so to himself in Christ,
while an enemy, that through Christ and by his name he might be saved. His
readiness to accept any sinner coming in his drawings by Christ, and to wash
them from their sins in his blood; from hence is encouraged, and provoked, to
seek and expect the framing, and quallifying his heart, to love and good works,
in the believing mindfullnesse of this grace; And as the end and fruit of his
faith. 2. The one seeks to work up, and frame his heart to love God, and men,
by observing such and such Rules which the wisdom of man teaches, or the
precepts of the Law, in the wisdom and strength of man; And in the same
strength of the flesh, on which he depends for it, may do many outword works
and services after the oldnesse of the letter, which yet happily, he will
attribute to Gods grace in Christ, and say with the Pharisee, God I thank thee,
etc. But that they are not the productions of that grace believed, nor have
they their dependence on that for them, is evident from the former
consideration, which shows, that they have no belief, or persuasion of that,
or of the truth of it to them; But what depends on, and always springs up from
such frames and quallifications toward God and men first found in them, or if
they have some other ground together with them, as some particular promise, or
assurance that they are children of God; yet usually, these are one main ground
of their application of those, and however, these are of the ground of their
persuasion of any grace or good will in God toward them, as to eternal life;
and therefore not the fruits of it, or begotten by it, but of the wisdom and
strength of the flesh. The other, the true Believer of Gods Testimony, being in
the light of that Testimony of Gods glorious grace in Christ, to sinners
therein made sensible of his own weakness, and the emptiness of all other
ways of attaining righteousness, as also of the great obligations to love
from Gods first loving us, and sending his Son, the propitiation for our sins,
that we might live through him; In which likewise he is instructed into, and
persuaded of the certainty of the way of attaining righteousness, even to have
the righteousness of the Law fullfilled in him, that it is by minding the
things of, and walking in the light and power of the spirit, that is in that
testimony he has already given of Christ, and of Gods glory in him, and not in
the flesh, Romans 8. 3, 4, 5, etc. He therefore goes out of himself, and from his
own thoughts, reasonings and works, to mind, and consider the things of the
spirit, that he has testified of Gods grace in Christ, there seeking, and
expecting in the standing still to behold that grace, and through the light,
and power of its instructions to love, to have his heart begotten, and purified
to unfeigned love of God, of men, of brethren, such as in which is the
fullfilling of the Law. And so for mortifying the deeds of the body. They wait
through the spirit, for the hope of Gods righteousness by faith; as for
example. To subdue the riseings of envy, revenge, malice, or bitterness, They
consult not with flesh and blood, nor expect help from humane prudentiall
considerations, nor seek to mortify it in any wisdom or strength of theirs
exercised in the consideration, or observance of their duty. But running out of
themselves, and from all other reasonings, and works, they run into his name,
to consider and remember his graciousnesse, in forbearing, and so giving them
for Christ's sake, and how they have heard and tasted of it, in and through the
word of the truth of the Gospel; and what instruction that affords to the
purpose. There seeking and expecting help. Ephesians. 4. 31, 32. and 5. 1, 2. 1 Pet.
2. 1*-3. So likewise for subduing the riseings of uncleanness, They sensible
of their own weakness to get victory, run out of themselves, and from
consulting with flesh and blood, unto this name of God in Christ, trusting in
and staying upon it, expecting strength against the lust, in the believing
consideration of his right to the body by purchase, yea by double purchase, the
excellency of the p^ice wherewith he has redeemed them both of the Father, and
from under the curse of the Law, and of themselves, and from the World and
their vain conversation, to be his and at his dispose, his present care of the
body in his mediation for it, and gracious providence and eye over it, for the
good of the whole man; his righteous judgment, according to the Gospel, before
which ye must all appear, to receive in the body, the things done in it,
whether they be good or bad; so for subduing the inclinations to
convetousnesse, pride, or any manner of uncleanness. see 1 Cor. 6. 13, 14, 15,
19, 20. with 1 Pet. 1. 13*18 19. 2 Cor. 5* 9, 10, 14, 15, 19, 20. with chapter 6.
1, 2, 17, 18 and 7* 1. This is the doing good mentioned in the Text. The
hearing the word, or voice of Christ, and through and according to it believing
on him that sent him, and has raised him from the dead, and given him glory,
that our faith and hope might be in God. And such are reckoned doers of good,
doers of truth. 1. Because they herein cease from their own works, and do the
work of God, even that work which he through the power of his truth is doing in
them, for it is God that works in them, through the discovery of his works,
and his salvation in Christ for them; Both the will and the deed of all this
faith, in all the acts and fruits of it, whence it is called faith of the
opperation of God, who has raised Christ from the dead. Coll. 2. 12. 1 Pet. 1.
20. Joh. 6. 29. And they are said to be saved by grace, through faith, and that
not of themselves, it is the gift of God. Ephesians. 2. He that does good is of God.
Joh. 3. 11. And yet this also is counted to them for righteousness, reckoned
to them as their doing good, because, though all is of God, yet he works in
them, both to will, and to do, of good pleasure of him, they are made willing
and strong in the day of his power to do what the goodness, and truth of God
is doing in them, without murmuring and disputeings, to cease from their own
Imaginations, and works, that they may rejoice in his works, and seek
righteousness and strength in the Lord, by faith in him they come to him, as
to a living stone, even in the virtue, and force of his drawings, allureing,
and strengthening them, through the tastes of his graciousnesse. And yet
therein, they are truly reckoned, and indeed made comers, they in the light and
power of his drawings, standing still from their own thoughts, and works, are
made volluntary consenters, and do own and close with him, and as lively
stones, that are quickened by him to choose him for their foundation, are built
upon him. 1 Pet. 2. 3, 4, 5. 2. Because herein they do that in the light and
strength of the Lord, which is in it self good, righteous, and just; In
acknowledging the emptiness, and lyingnesse of their own Imaginations, and of
every thought that exalts it self against the obedience of Christ; And God
to be true in all his sayings, as in that glorious testimony he has given of
Christ, and by him, so in all its discoveries, and reproves of instruction.
Themselves sinners, and void of righteousness, yea without strength; And him
righteous, and faithful according to that standing witness, and glorious
revelation of himself in his Son; And his everlasting righteousness brought
in, in and by Christ only perfect, and worthy to be sought after, and submitted
too. They honor the Son, and so the Father in him, they ascribe righteousness
to their Maker; as more largely we have showed in our lamentation over the dead
in Christ, published on the death of Henry Rixe. 3. Because they herein do that
which is good, and profitable, as to the attaining righteousness; And so is
confirmed to be good, in the good fruit of it, all works of darkness, are
unfruitful, the workers of them, reap no profit, or good fruit of them; Ephesians.
5. 11. Romans 6 21. Job. 33. 27. Hence they are called dead works, which have not
profited those that have been occupied in them. Hebr 9. 14. and 13. 9. But the
work of righteousness shall be peace, and the fruit of righteousness,
quietness, and assurance for ever. Isa. 32. 17. Yea it is so now in a first
fruits of the spirit; The God of hope filles with all joy and peace in this
believing, that they may abound in hope through the power of the holy Ghost.
Romans 15. 13. This faith is so counted to them for righteousness, that they are
therein made partakers, in a first fruits of the spirit, of what they believe
on him for, even the fruit of his righteousness (with which faith closes) in
the forgiveness of their sins, acceptance of their persons into favor, and
fellowship with God, daily washing, sanctifying, justifying, and changing into
his Image, in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of our God. Blessed
is the man, that walks not in the counsel of the ungodly, nor stands in
the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of the scornful; But his delight
is in the Law (or Doctrine) of the Lord, and therein does meditate, or exercise
himself day and night; And so through and according to that Doctrine, trusts
in the Lord, and whose hope the Lord is. He shall be as a Tree planted by the
waters, and that spreads forth her roots by the River, and shall not see
when heat comes, but be always fragrant and fruitful. The ungodly not so, etc.
see and compare Psalm. 1. with Jer. 17. 7, 8. He that abides in him sins
not, (misseth not his mark, fails not of the end of his faith, the saving of
his soul) attaines righteousness. (1 John 3. 6 1 Pet. 1. 8, 9. Romans 9. 30-32.)
1. In that they are made accepted with God in the beloved, even in, and
according to that perfect righteousness that he has completed for them, on
which their parts, and minds are stayed. In him they are complete, it being
the office of the righteous one so to present them in himself; so that, as he
is righteous, and faithful in his office; And the Father righteous in his
promise, and covenant confirmed in him, so he that does righteousness
(believes in him for righteousness, in which also he does that which the
righteousness of God discovered in Christ works in him, both to will, and to
do,) is righteous; yea his righteousness that is imputed to him, by him that
imputes righteousness without works, even the righteousness of God, not of
man, made theirs through faith in Jesus, and in which through says in it, he
is accepted. It is perfect, and answerable to the holiness of God, such as in
which his truth is fulfilled, his justice satisfied; so that they are made the
righteousness of God in him, that was made sin for them; And in an answerable
sense, ( viz.) by imputation, as well as also, by making them partakers of the
fruit and blessedness of it, (as he was made a curse for them) of which more
in the next considerations. For as being accepted in Christ, their iniquities
are pardoned in Heaven, not remembered, or retained there against them. So 2.
They are made partakers of that forgiveness of their sins in their minds and
consciences through his name, and in the opening of it, filling them with joy
and peace in believing, that also they may abound in the hope of his
righteousness for further washing and saving to the utmost, and perfecting
what concerns them; By him all that believe are justified from all things,
from which they could not be justified by the Law of Moses, This blessedness
comes upon them in believing through his name. Act. 10. 43. and 13. 39 Romans 8.
2, 3. and 3. 25, 26. and 4. tot. Gal. 3. 9-14. Heb. 9. 14. and 10. 22. The Law
of the spirit of life in Christ, even the Gospel of Christ, declaring his
righteousness in suffering, and redeeming us from the curse of the Law, is the
power of God to save them that believe, making them free from the Law of sin,
and death, and quickening them to a new and living hope, by the resurrection of
Christ from the dead, that truth believed, in the opening of it makes free from
sin, from the guilt, accusation and bondage, that they may serve him without
fear in righteousness and holiness all the days of their life. Yea, 3. They
are also created in Christ (in the light and power of his grace believed, and
believed in,) unto good works, which God has before ordained, that they
(believers) should walk in them. And so also, (as well as in the sense
forementioned) he that abides in him sins not, (that is, he does not commit
sin) he says not, he has no sin, but he does it not, he is kept from
committing, or serving it. There is sin in them, still dwelling, and more
stirring, and warring in the members then formerly. But he that abides in him,
is daily strengthened through his name against it, that he does not consent to,
or serve it, or let it reign in his mortal body, and so he that is bo^n of
God, or that is led of the spirit of God, which always leedes or carries out
of a man's self into Christ, for satisfaction, righteousness, and strength; he
does not commit, or serve sin, nor can he, for the seed of God (the word of
truth) abides in him, And wheresoever that is suffered to dwell in the heart,
it will preserve, and deliver from every evil work, The power of God which is
in it to that purpose, being greater then the power of sin and Satan; Therefore
(says David) thy word have I hid in my heart, that I might not sin against
thee. If therefore sin prevail over any of us, so as we are thereby brought
into bondage; it must needs be acknowledged, we are not then, or therein born
of God, not led of the spirit of God, not carried out, or brought forth of our
selves into Christ for teaching, and strength, but leaning to our own
understanding, and retaining in our heart, some Worldly principle, or
inclination; and secretly consulting with that, minding the things of it,
walking in the flesh, and not in the spirit, we reap corruption. For that
grace of God that brings salvation to all men -- Teaches us that denying
ungodliness, and Worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly
in this present World, looking for the blessed hope, etc. And says in Christ
will have its works in a man, and bring forth its fruits by him, and be
further perfected therein, if suffered; And if not suffered, but stifled, and
hindered, or resisted in its works, it will dye, faith is dead being alone,
whence the Apostle John says, If any man see his B^other stand in need, and
shut up the bowels of his compassion, how dwells the love of God in him,
signifying plainly that if the love of Christ were suffered to dwell in us, as
it would, and should be suffered, it would not only strengthen to will, but
also carry forth to, and in the acts of mercy, and good fruits, on sight of
the Brothers need, it moves the bowels of compassion, and strengthens to show
them forth; And if not suffered to work out, it will not lodge, or abide where
so discourteously entertained. If any man love the World, the love of the
Father is not in him. If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, then have
we fellowship one with another, And the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses
us from all unrighteousness, daily gives us the victory; pardon, peace, and
healing is met with, through this faith of the opperation of God. If therefore
any say, he have fellowship with the light, and yet he walks in darkness, and
confusion, without peace, joy, and hope in the Lord, and under the bondage of
Satan, holding under guilt and pollution of sin, he lies and does not the
truth. That which they say, they believe, and have fellowship with, may be
true, the true light, the true grace of God in Christ, and that which if
believed, and fellowship had with it, would work. But then their profession of
hearty believing, retaining, and having fellowship with it is false. He that
commits sin is of the Devil. He that does evil, has not seen God, nor
known him, he has not kept his word in his heart, or retained in his veiw the
sight, and knowledge of God, as manifested in Christ; And in this the children
of God are manifest, and the children of the Devil. He that does not
righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his Brother. The
righteousness of God in this fruit of it, even to the working the works of God
in, and by them is attained through faith in Christ Jesus. 2. We come next to
consider, When is the time or opportunity for the doing good here mentioned;
The Text speaks of it in the time past, as with relation to the time of the
resurrection, and judgment; Its before that, and then finished. They that have
done good, that is in the former time, or hour in which the dead was made to
hear the voice of the Son of God in the Gospel, shall then come forth in the
first resurrection, to the resurrection of life. The opportunity then for doing
good is to every man, in the time of the preaching of peace by Jesus Christ
unto them, even while he is by his spirit, preaching to their spirits in any
means whatever; while his grace is bringing salvation to them. 1 Timothy 2 6. Tit.
2. 11. 2 Cor. 6. 1, 2. 1 Pet. 3. 19. which time expires to every man at death
at furthest, it may sooner; But while God is by any means calling, and waiting
to be gracious, it is not so. Whence the Apostle exhorts, not to receive the
grace of God in vain, And presses it with this motive, (in the place
forecited) For he says, in a time accepted I have heard thee, in a day of
salvation I have helped thee, (which is the saying of the Father unto Christ,
Isa. 49. 8.) So that while Christ is making intercession for m^n, (for the
Father hears him always) And so as the fruit of that, he stand* in the name
and strength of his Father, a testimony to them, by his Servants sent, or other
means of calling used; It is yet due time, an accepted (...), a day of
salvation for, and to those persons, even to such as have hitherto, received it
in vain, or after they have tasted that the Lord is gracious, and proved the
saving efficacy of his word, have tur^ed back in their hearts from him, to
embrace this present World, and so destroyed themseles, yet while it is to day,
there is help in him, Isa. 50. Hose. 13 9. Yea plenteous redemption, even the
forgiveness of their sins, that he may yet be feared, and hoped in by them.
Psalm. 13^. 1 John 2. 1, 2. To him that is joined to all the living, there is
hope. And whosoever acknowledging their backslidings, and transgressions, as
discovered, and reproved in the light of his testimony, looks to him again in
Christ in the light, and power of those gracious recallings, wherewith he
follows backsliders, while it is to day. He will graciously accept without
upbraiding, and love them freely, and pardon, and heal them through his name.
Hose. 14. 1. 4, 5, etc. Mich. 7. 18, 19. 1 John 1. 9. Romans 11. 23. Jer. 3.
1-12. But when once any man is blotted out of the number, or Book of the
living, (which is in the natural death at farthest to them, that till then
have persisted, or then are found out of Christ in wilful ignorance,
disobedience, and rejection of him, and Gods grace in him.) Then all
opportunity is past for ever being written with the righteous. Psalm. 69. 28.
Wherefore the holy Ghost says, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not
your hearts, etc. 3. The last thing propounded to be considered in this point,
is, When in a Scripture sense any are said to have done good; And that we shall
not find to be, till they have finished their course, dyed in the faith; Then
they rest from their labors, even these their labors in the Lord, which were
not in vain. And their works follow them, so the like phrase, Hebr. 10. 36. Is
used in the same sense with this in the text, the having done the will of God,
for their having finished it, in all that service and suffering here appointed
them. Ye have need of patience, (namely in all your doing the will of God, in
the remaining time of your waiting and warfare) That after you have done the
will of God, fought the good fight, kept the faith, and finished your course in
it, ye may receive the promises. In a like sense is that, 2 Cor. 5. 10. Every
one shall receive the things done (or finished) in his body. According to that
he has done, whether it be good or bad, They that are found in Christ abideing
in him, as they have received him, are said to be doing good, running the race
set before them, and truly called doers of good, doers of the truth, while yet
in the race, or warfare. Joh. 3. 11. Jam. 1. 12, 25. Joh 3. 21. But not said to
have done it in a full, and proper sense, till they have finished their course,
and do rest from their labors. And from that time their particular persons
are absolutely sealed up in the blessing. Blessed are the dead that dye in the
Lord, from hence forth, yea says the spirit, etc. He that endures to the end
shall be saved -- Be thou faithful unto death (says Christ) and I will give
thee the crown of life, Math. 24. 13. Rev. 2. 10. So James affirming the
blessedness of the man that endures temptation, says, That when he is tried,
(namely to the end) when that work of trying, purging, and making white through
manifold temptations is finished, he shall receive the crown of life, Jam. 1.
12. Many that have been going right on their way, yea running well, and suffered
many things, yet afterward wickedly drawing back, and departing from the living
God by an evil heart of unbelief, have not been found among the righteous,
nor shall be found among them when he appears, they so persisting till sin be
finished. Therefore let us not be weary of well doing: In due season we shall
reap if we faint not. Thus we have done with the first branch of the point
under consideration, namely who they are that have done good, And what we have
said in it, leads into the understanding of the next branch; namely who they
are that in a like scripture-sence, according to the rule of the Gospel, have
done evil. To that therefore we shall ad but a few words. The doing evil that
is imputed to men, and which brings under condemnation and the wrath of God, is
clearly expressed (according to what is also showed before) to be; men's being
contentious against, and not obeying the truth, when it is manifested to them,
in their minds by the evidenc^ and demonstration of the spirit, and powerfully
leading to repentance. They then like not to retain it in their knowledge, or
so to receive the love of the truth, as to save them, but are incensed against
Christ and his gospel, because he reprooves their deeds by the light and power
of it -- Romans 2. 6, 7, 8, 9. with chapter 1. 18, 19, 21, 28. and 2. 1-4, 5. 2 Thessalonians. 1. 8. and 2. 10, 11, 12. Isa. 45. 24. Their wilful refusing to come in
his drawings to ^imselfe (for he is drawing all in due time, even to himself
for life.) And this is the condemnation, that when light comes, men love and
choose darkness, Hose. 11. Job. 6. 47 with chapter 12, 31. 32. Psalm. 2. Joh. 12. 47.
48. and 25. 22. 24. nor is any man under a state of condemnation, or wrath, but
for such seeing, and hateing, hearing and rejecting, for the Father judges no
man, but has committed all judgment to the Son. And so the time of their doing
evil in this sense, is in the very opportunity given them for doing good, even
when light comes, when he is preaching peace, and witnessing goodness to their
spirits, when his goodness is leading, and drawing to repentance, even when,
and as they are so called to the most high, they go back, and wilfully refuse
to exalt, or honor him in those discovery ^s and operations of his goodness
and glory in and through him vouchsafed. Hose. 11. 1 Pet. 3. 19. Joh. 3. 19.
Romans 2 4 5. If light had not so come to them, or he had not so spoken to them,
they had not known, or been capable of sins of this nature, as now charged upon
them. But yet men's evil, or in quities of this nature, (though they are truly
said to be Doers, and workers of it, while they continue in it yet) are not in
a full and proper sense said to be done, or finished; nor so reputed of God.
While yet the day of salvation lasts to any man, that is, while God is yet
calling, his grace bringing salvation to them. If yet they repent and seek him,
none of their former wickedness shall be remembered, to him that is joined to
all the living, there is hope, but when sin is finished, it brings forth death;
In an utter separation of the person from Gods mercy, and binding him over, and
sealing him up, to the wrath to come; They that have done evil, to the
resurrection of damnation. 2. The next, and last point to be considered, in
this last position propounded, is where in the manifest difference that shall
be made between them in the resurrection stands, or how it shall be made, and
made to appear in the coming forth of the one by the power of his voice to the
resurrection of life, and of the other by the power of the same voice to the
resurrection of damnation, there is a real difference between the doers of
good, and the doers of evil now, in this day, before either of them have
finished their course. And a very great one too. see 1 Ioh. 5. 19. 20. The
whole world lies in wickedness, even in the wicked one, for while they
wilfully remain in the state and condition, or in the darkness of this world
in ignorance of God in Christ, strangers to the life of God, loveing and
choosing their darkness when light comes, they consequently remain under the
Power, Bondage, and Dominion of Satan, holding in captivity to sin the mind,
conscience and whole man; So that they are in their uncleanness, and not
washed from it in the flesh, and under the wrath of God, for not believing on
him that came to save, and deliver them, and is bringing that salvation to them
through the power and in the grace of his truth.

But says the Apostle, speaking of themselves and other Believers, or doers of
truth; God has given us an understanding to know him, that is true, and we are
in him that is true, namely as the fruit of the knowledge of him, we are
brought into him, to have our hearts and minds stayed there, as a full object
and foundation of rest and satisfaction to our souls, a sure refuge and house
of defense to save us from sin and Satan, and hide us from the wrath of God; we
are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ; and so in God. This is
the true God, this is eternal life; Babes keep your selves from Idols; They in
whom the word of truth, the things heard from the beginning in the word of the
truth of the Gospel remains or abides, do continue in the Son, and in the
Father; 1 Ioh. 2. 24, 25. As the fruit of which knowledge of, and union with
God in Christ; The righteous is more excellent, or abundant then his neighbor.
But the way of the wicked seduceth them, Prove. 12. 26. But this difference is
not yet manifest, or visible as to outward appearance, or to be seen by the
carnal mind, nor otherwise then, as faith is the evidence of things not seen,
while Christ does not yet appear personally in his glory on the Earth, and in
his spiritual presence in, through and according to the Gospel, is hidden not
discerned, known, or taken notice of by the World, But under reproach his
people also are in l^ke manner a hidden people, and rendered as the filth, and
offscouring of all things unto this day. As he is in this World, so are they,
but when Christ who is their life shall appear, then shall they also appear
with him in glory.

Yea at the time of the natural, and bodily death. The difference between them
is wider, and so fixed, or firmly made, that it can never more be altered. The
righteous has hope in his death, yea from thenceforth more then ever blessed,
for they rest from their labors, their spirits with the Lord, which is far
better then to be in the flesh, or body as in this its corruptible state, yea
their dead body sleeps in union with Jesus by reason of which, it shall arise
and come with him, they are now wholly out of the reach of the enemies, (they
have no more that they can do) and their works follow them. But on the other
hand the wicked is driven away in his wickedness, the hope of the hipocrite
shall then perish. Then and from thence, they are shut up in prison to the
judgment of the great day. Yea from thence forth for ever shut out, driven
forth into outer darkness where shall be weeping, wailing, and gnashing of
teeth. Pro. 14 32. Job. 8. 13. and 27. 8 1 Pet. 3. 19. 20. 2 Pet. 2. 9. Math.
22. 13. Yea from that time between these two, there is a great gulf fixed,
that he that would pass from the one to the other cannot, Luke 16. 26. But yet
this difference is not visible, nor otherwise to be seen, but by faith.
Therefore here we walk by faith, and not by sight* But there shall be a
visible, and man^fest difference made, and infinitely great, between him that
fears God, and him that fears him not, between the sheep, and the Goats in
that day. Mall. 3, 16. 17. 18. Mat. 25. 31. etc. The one shall come forth to
the resurrection of life, the other to the resu^rection of damnation. First,
they that have done good to the resurrection of life. 1. In the resurrection,
they shall come forth in a glorious state of life, capable of enjoying and
possessing in soul and body reunited, that eternal life, that is now in
Christ with God; These bodies that are now vile, and mortal, shall then put on
immortality, and be fashioned into the likeness of his glorious body, we wait
for the adoption, that is the redemption of the the body, Phil. 3. 21. Romans 8.
23. 2. They shall then come forth unto the full enjoyment and possession of
that eternal life, that is in the face, and presence of God, in the light of
his countenance and glorious fellowship with him, for they shall see him as he
is, and be glorified together with him, and so be ever with the Lord, in the
glorious enjoyment of his joy, and glory, which eye has no seen besides thee
oh God, nor has it entered into the heart of man to perceive, or comprehend how
great and glorious things are contained in that hope and promise of eternal
life which God has laid up, and reserved in heaven for them.

They shall then and from thence for ever fully and gloriously possess all the
glorious reward, end, and fruit of his sufferings, and sacrifice for them, yea
as the fruit of that, there shall then be a particular, and everlasting
remembrance of all their service of him, and suffering for his name in their
generation, yea all the fruits of faith, and love that have been brought forth
by them, shall then be remembered, and recompensed at the resurrection of the
just. Isa. 61. 3-6. 7. 1 Cor. 15. 58. 2 Cor. 4. 10-17. Luke 14. 14. Math. 25.
33-40. And none of their former iniquities, transgressions, or sins, shall be
retained, or remembered against them for ever, nor any of the fruit of them any
more sustained, or tasted by them. Psalm. 130. 8. Isa. 25. 8. Revel. 7. 14-17.
and 21. 4. 5. Then they shall be completely enriched, and beautified with the
perfection of that knowledge of him. Peace, and joy in him, conformity to him,
and fellowship with him, which now they enjoy through faith, but in some first
fruits, or earnest of the spirit. Blessed and holy is he that has part in the
first resurrection, on such the second death has no power, but they shall be
Priests, and Kings unto God, and shall reign with Christ on the earth. 1000
years, yea they shall be ever with the Lord, partakeing off, and possessing
his glory. Revel. 20. 6. and 5. 10. 1 John 3. 1, 2. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14-17.
Secondly, after that first resurrection, and yet in that great day of the Lord,
in the time of that administration of his kingdom on the earth as is showed
before. They that have done evil shall come forth to the resurrection of
damnation. Even of eternal damnation. 1. In their resurrection, they shall
come forth, (not in such a quallity, or state of mortalliy, as they were now
in, from Adam. But) made alive from that death; And so from the power of it,
and of the grave, in such a state, or quallity, as they can never more cease to
be, and to retain a sencible being, from that time and for ever, in the lake
of fire, where their worm dies not, and their fire is not quenched. Their
raised bodies, yea the being of soul and body in that state of the
resurrection shall be such; as no torments whatsoever, no not the everlasting
burnings, that shall be kindled by the breath of the Lord, shall ever put an
end to the being of either, or cause a separation between them as the first
death did, though far less terrible and grievous then this, they being then in
that weak and mortal state as from Adam. And under the ordinance of that
death. But now in this state in which they shall come forth in the
resurrection, there shall be no darkness, nor shadow of death in which the
workers of iniquiry may hide themselves, death and hell, or the grave, when
they are raised out of it, shall be cast into the lake of fire with them, this
is the second death. Job. 34. 22. Hose. 13. 14. 1 Cor. 15. 22. 26. Revel. 20.
14. 2. And so they shall come forth to the resurrection of Damnation, even to
receive (by the righteous judgment of him that dyed for them, as it shall be
fully evidenced according to the Gospel to his glory in their condemnation)
that dreadful sentence, in the full and eternal execution of it, depart from
me ye workers of iniquity, go ye cursed into everlasting punishment, even
into everlasting fire prepared for the devil, and his Angels. Math. 25. 31.
32 41 46. Mark. 3. 29. and 9. 43 46. They shall be for ever utterly separated
from his face and presence, and without any mixture of mercy suffer in soul
and body for ever the utmost vengeance and torment that is the proper wages of,
and belongs to him to repay, for their treading under foot the son of God,
counting an unholy thing the blood of the covenant, wherewith they were
sanctified, and offering despite unto the spirit of grace, according to the
several degrees of their indignities, and evil works of this nature; For we
know him that has said vengeance belongs to me, and I will repay. And again
the Lord shall judge his people in that judgment of eternal damnation, he
will remember, and recompense on the heads of evil doers, all the injuries,
reproaches, hard speeches, and unlawful deeds, which ungodly sinners have
spoken and done against them for his namesake, as Math. 25. 43-46. Yea every
idle word, and rebellious practice, with every secret thing as it has been
committed against the light and power of his grace bringing salvation, and
moving to repentance, shall then be remembered, and put on their account,
together with the many opportunities of mercy put into their hands with
seasonable warnings, and the manifold patience and long suffering of God
toward them; And how and for what lying vanities all have been wilfully and
wickedly rejected by them, and their hearts more fully set in them to do evil.
And none of their former righteousness, or good works that they have done,
shall ever be remembered for them. But in the sin, which they have done and
finished they shall be for ever separated into that fire of the wrath of God,
that shall never be quenched, where their worm dies not, and their fire is
not quenched. It will be a most fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
liveing God, under that judgment, for he that made them will have no mercy on
them, he that formed them will show them no favor, repentance shall be hid
from his eyes, yea who knows the power of his anger, of that wrath to come,
it shall be according to his greatness and terriblenesse, and answerable to
the infiniteness of his grace toward sinners now that he might be feared, yea
answerable to the exceeding riches and glory of the hope of his called. Heb.
10. 26-31. Math. 12. 36* and 18. 34. Eccles. 12. 14. Romans 2. 16* and 14. 9-12.
Ezekiel. 33. 13 Jude 14. 15. Yea that which will be a great felicity to the one,
and misery to the other, in which also the righteous judgment of God shall
wonderful be manifest, is this. The righteous shall in all this see their
desire on their enemies, yea he shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance, and
the snfoake of their torment ascending up for ever and for ever, and that they
have no rest day, nor night Psalm. 112. 8. and 58. 10* 11* Revel. 14. 10. 11.
with chapter 19 2. 3. For they shall then have no more pity, or bowels of mercy
and compassion toward these, as sometimes they had, while the compassions of
God was toward them, now to have pity or compassion toward them would be a
misery, seeing there is no more in God toward them, and so no hope for them,
but this shall be part of their glory and song; Righteous art thou oh Lord,
that have judged thus. Likewise also the wicked shall see their horn exalted
with honor, and shall be greived, and gnash his toeth, in the perfect
remembrance of the many fair oportunities he has rejected, once and many a
time graciously put in his hand, for escapeing that place of torment, and for
being made meet to partake of the inheritance with the Saints in light. Psalm.
112. 10. Let all be of this use to us. 1. To instruct us, not to mourn
immoderately (as those that have no hope) concerning them that are asleep, for
if we believe that Jesus dyed and rose, even so them also which sleep in Jesus
God shall bring with him. 1 Thesse. 4. 13. 14. etc. 2. To encourage to patient
continuance in well doing, and to be steadfast and unmovable therein, allways
abounding in the work of the Lord, knowing that ou^ labor shall not be in vain
in the Lord. In due season we shall reap if we ^aint not. To. 2. 6. 7. 1 Cor.
15. 58. Gal. 6. 9. 3. To exhort all, to eschew evil, depart from it in the
light and power of Gods grace leading to repentance, and do good, while they
have opportunity, and it is in power of their hand to do; Be not only hearers
of the word of God, but doers of it, in what it is working in you both to will
and to do of good pleasure, let us not deceive our own souls. For what a man
sows, that shall he also reap, he that sows to his flesh, shall of it reap
corruption, but he that sows to the spirit, shall of it reap life
everlasting, for the son man shall come in the glory of his Father and with his
holy Angels, and then shall reward every man according to his works, then it
will appear an unvalluable loss, if a man shall gain the whole world, and
loose his soul. Psalm 34 14. and 37. 27. Iam. 1. 19-25. Gall. 6. 7 8. 4. To
admonish evil doers, to awake to righteousness, to stand in aw, and not to
sin against him, who is yet waiting to be gracious, for he is a God of
judgment. If sin be once finished it brings forth death, in an utter
separation to the wrath to come, and to him belongs vengeance, and he will
repay: Nor will there be any opportunity in the grave, or after, for escaping
that righteous judgment on them that know not God, nor obey his Gospel.
Wherefore the holy Ghost says, to day, while its called to day, if ye will
hear his voice harden not your hearts, for behold the great day of the Lord is
coming that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud and evil doers shall be
as stubble. They shall then be made to hear to their everlasting woe and
horror. The same voice, that now they rejected when it might have been to their
everlasting comfort. For the hour is comeing in which all that are in the
graves shall hear the voice, of the son of man, and shall come forth, they that
have done good to the resurrection of life, and they that have done evil* to
the resurrection of damnation.

FINIS,

