A LAMENTATION Over the Dead in Christ, not as those without hope; with
instruction, admonition, and encouragement to the Survivers.

As it should have been delivered to the People (had not Satan hindered) at the
Funeral of Mr. Henry Rix of Cambridge, Jan. 19. 1656 -- 7. in pursuance of his
earnest request on his Deathbed. Now published for the benefit of those that
will hear.

By THOMAS MOORE junior.

David lamented over Jonathan.

I am distressed for thee my brother Jonathan, very pleasant have thou been to
me, thy love to me was wonderful, passing the love of Women; how are the mighty
fallen in the midst of the Battle, and the Weapons of War perished? 2 Samuel 1.
25, 26, 27. And Jeremy lamented for Josiah, and all the Singing-men, and
Singing-women speak of Josiah in their Lamentations to this day, and made them
an Ordinance in Israel. Behold, they are written in the Lamentations, 2 Chro.
35. 25. But I would not have you ignorant Brethren concerning them that are
asleep, that ye sorrow not even as others that have no hope; for if we believe
that Jesus dyed, and rose again, even so them also which sleep in Jesus will
God bring with him, 1 Thessalonians. 4. 14, 15. Printed at London by R. I. for Livewell
Chapman, at the Crown in Pope's Head Alley. 1657.

To the Reader, and especially to those at, or near Cambridge.
ON the sad news of my dear Brothers Sickness to death, I went as soon as I
could, if happily I might to have seen him, and that I might have been
refreshed together with him before his departure; but it pleased our gracious
Father, the wise Disposer of all things, in whose hands are all our lives, our
times, and ways, to deny me of that, by speeding another Visitor (to him far
better) to take him away from the evil against which he had been long striving,
in the light and strength of the Lord, that he may henceforth be with him, and
at rest from all his Labors and Combats, though yet waiting for the
completing of the Adoption, that is, the Redemption of the Body, till the rest
of his Brethren have finished their course as well as he. He departed the night
before I got to Cambridge, where I understood, That it was his earnest request
on his Deathbed, that if I came in time, I should be desired (as from him) to
give the people a word if Exhortation at his Funeral, and also that the
Minister of the Parish, on his desire was freely willing with it; on which
considerations I consen^ed to it, and knew not of any Blocks in the way until
the time was almost come, that I should have performed the will of the Deceased
in this matter; ^^to which service, apprehending from the forementioned
considerations, God calling me, and making the way hitherto clear enough, I was
very ready to have offered my self, notwithstanding some reports, I know not
how raised, of some Scholars threatening incivility to me, which I did not much
credit, of at least feared not, purposing by the grace of God not to resist
evil if (...); and trusting in a greater power than that of man for protection.
In some others thought it convenient to take me off, yet could I not be
satisfied without publishing what I then intended to have spoken, and that for
these Reasons.

1 I cannot but judge the removal of this Israelite indeed, and at such a time,
to be a sad Correction and Judgment, especially to the place, and people among
whom he lived, he being one whose heart (through the grace of God in Christ our
Savior, toward man) was fixed, trusting in ^^^ (...) and walking in the
hearty belief and acknowledgement of the truth of the Gospel, and waiting for
the hope of it, and thence filled with the constraining operation of the love
of Christ persuading men, and seeking the good of all by all means within his
capacity, shining as a light in the world, and amongst a crooked and perverse
Generation, holding forth the Word of Life in word and conversation; and how
much as to these things he was alone is that place I spare to speak, yet he
through that grace of God that brings Salvation to all men, teaching us (as
Tit. 2. 11, 12.) so demeaned himself, that he had a good report of all men, as
well as especially of the truth itself; for cleaving to which, though he had
many adversaries, chiefly of those that sometimes in some measure acknowledged,
and rejoiced in the truth with him, but now have turned away their ears from
it, and are ^^^ned aside to fables, yet they could find nothing against him,
but in the ma^ters of his God, and were made ashamed, wherein they falsely
accused his good conversation in Christ.

2 That which follows was much set upon my spirit, as a very needful and
seasonable Instruction, and Admonition to the people there, and at that time;
and I knew not but God by his providence called me thither at such a time, for
such an end, though I could not but judge my self most (...) to present it.

3 Some that observed, could not but take notice of a great hand of Satan, with
great diligence exercised to the hindering it.

Therefore that I may both do what in me lies to perform the desire of the
deceased, and also not to rebel against him that pressed my spirit, to give my
sense of the meaning of the voice of this providence, as by bringing to
remembrance, and opening the Scriptures to my understanding, he gave it me, if
peradventure any may be awakened by it, I here present it to view, and commit
it and my self to him, in whom I desire to be Servant to all,

THO. MOORE.
From my house at Lynn, Febr. 10. 1656 7.
On the Subject of the following Discourse upon the Death of Henry Rix.
Here have thou first a Paradox explained,
Evincing some have Righteousness attained,
Nevertheless this truth remains, there is none
Righteous in, as of themselves, not one
Yet in the Lord, and it is in him alone:
Righteousness and strength some have, and they
In him are justified, and glory aye,
Xpecting still its Crown of Immortality.
Henry in's Lot shall then with Christ affix,
And we with Christ shall meet our Brother Rix.
Next we present thee with our cause of grief,
Desiring God from Heaven to send relief;
He Is gone in whom no guile, an Israelite;
Is there in's stead left such another Light?
Then had we not such cause as now to moan,
Yet mourn we not as those that hope have none:
First, in behalf of him that is fallen asleep,
We have great cause to joy, and not to weep;
For we believing Christ did Dye, and Rise,
Do know that with him he shall come likewise,
And then possess with all the Saints the Crown,
The righteous Judge shall give when he comes down;
And in mean time he rests in blessed peace,
Where from his wars and labors he does cease,
Then for our selves, our God, our Rock's alive,
And will not fail at need us to releeve:
Yet for our selves we have cause to lament,
Yea sure the Judgment is of large extent,
And larger than to them that lay't to heart,
Nor is it the less because few feel the smart,
Yet still our cause of lamentation's more,
To ses the Children of the Spiritual Whore;
Against the Heavens themselves with sport rejoice,
Not doubting to prevail with their strange voice.
Reproaching now the poor that trusts in God,
Because afflicted with their Fathers Rod;
But in due time God will arise, and then
No place will be for these proud wicked men:
In the great Judgment then they shall not stand,
But shall be broken with a mighty hand;
A little while, and then he will not stay,
But come with all his Saints, O come away;
Is it not yet the time to judge thy Flock,
When as to outward means their powers do slack?
Is there yet any left, shut up, or hid?
Cause them to appear, thy flock to help and rid;
Make them more wise and strong to do exploits,
Through thy good name to show the deep deceits,
So manifold of him whose name is Legion,
That with us may remain the pure Religion,
And haste the coming of that blessed day,
In which thou will wipe all our tears away:
In mean time, teach us to account and mind,
Thy patience is Salvation to the unkind;
A pleasure in their death, thou now have none,
While yet thy grace brings them Salvation;
Of thy mind make us more, as reading well
In The greatness of thy love, thy terror sell.
Thence instantly with meekness praying them,
Now to be reconciled unto him;
That was made Sin, and Curse for's all, that we
The righteousness of God in him might be.
T. M. Junior.

A Lamentation over the dead in Christ, with Instruction, Admonition, and
encouragement to the Survivers, in some explication of the words of the Prophet
Isaiah, Chap. 57. 1. as compared with other Scriptures.
Isaiah 57. 1. The Righteous perishes, and no man lays it to heart, merciful
men are taken away, none considering that the righteous is taken away from the
evil [to come.]
THe words present us with a Twofold matter of Lamentation, or cause of grief,
doubled in the expression of each part, to note the greatness of the Judgment,
and to awake us to the more diligence to learn righteousness by it.

1 That the Righteous perishes, merciful men, or men of kindness, and
godliness are taken away.

2 That no man lays it to heart, none considers that the righteous is taken
away from the evil. We read [ to come] but those two words being added by the
Translators, as appears by their different Character, may be left out in our
reading, and the text without them, not only as fully takes in the truth
expressed by but is more signified, viz. That he is taken away from the evil,
as well that present as that to come. The Instructions fully signified, and set
before us in the words of this Lamentation are,

1 That the perishing of the righteous, the taking away of men of kindness, and
godliness, is a sad correction to the survivers, which God would have so laid
to heart, and considered by them.

2 That when God so strikes, and yet none lay to heart, or consider it, it is
an evidence of wilful blindness, and great hardness in such a people, and a
sign and forerunner of greater Judgments.

3 That even in these sad Judgments there is special mercy, and choice
blessedness to those so taken away, and that to be considered also, they are
taken away from the evil; Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, from
henceforth, yea says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and
their works follow them.

I That the perishing of the Righteous is a sad correction to the survivers,
which God would have so laid to heart, and considered by them; for our
understanding and usefulness of this, we shall propound to consideration, 1.
Who are the Righteous, 2. In what sense they may be said to perish, and when
they so do; and then shall further demonstrate and explicate the Position.

I Who are the Righteous and merciful men, or men of kindness, or godliness,
truly if men be considered as they are by Nature and first birth, as descended
from Adam, or as they are in and of themselves, or in what they may attain to
by the will of flesh, or will-wisdome, and strength of man, in whatever
exercised, There is none righteous, or does good, no not one, of all the
natural Children of Adam; they have all sinned, and are come short of the
glory of God, they are become wholly sinful, weak, and corrupt, they are dead
in sins and trespasses, and children of wrath, as so considered, one as well as
another, Psalm. 14. Romans 3. 19-23. Ephesians. 2. 1, 2. By the Law is the knowledge
of sin in the best as well as in the worst works of men, yea it discovers his
whole nature overspread with it, and therefore by the deeds of it shall no man
be justified in the sight of God, Romans 3. 20. Gal. 3. 11. Psalm, 143. 2.

There is only one man of all the Nature, even the man Christ Jesus, that is in
a proper and strict sense, Good, or Righteous, in and of himself, and for us,
and he is none of the natural Children, nor naturally of man, but of God, (
Mark 12. 18.) who also prepared for him a Body in our Nature, and of a Woman,
by the secret and wonderful efficacy of his holy Spirit, and did in that Body
deliver him to Death for our Offenses, and raise him again for our
Justification; and gave him glory, that our faith and hope might be in God; And
he is expressly called the Righteous, 1 John 2. 1. the Just, Jam. 5. 6. even the
righteous, or just one, and justly too; for,

1 He is perfectly so in and of himself, being the Natural and only begotten
Son of God, so that he is of the Father, the same that the Father is,
Righteousness, Justice, Truth, Holiness, and Goodness it self; yea in that Body
prepared for him in man's Nature, though he was made in the likeness of sinful
flesh, subject to all our infirmities that came by sin, yet without sin, He
knew no sin; And this rendered him a meet and worthy Person to undertake for
Sinners, to prepare, and give a Ransom to God, and be a Mediator for them;
for, Who can bring a clean thing out of an unclean, not one; therefore no mere
man can redeem his Brother, or give to God a ransom for him; for such a High
Priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, etc.

2 He is perfectly so in what he has undertaken, and done for men in that Body
prepared for him in man's Nature, he has perfectly and voluntarily fulfilled
that will of the Father he came to do, as to the works to be finished in his
own Body on the earth, Psalm. 40. 6 - 9. Hebr. 10, 5 - 12. Joh. 17. 4. He
humbled himself, and became obedient to death, even the death of the Cross. He
laid down his life that he might take it again, even as he received
Commandment of his Father, Phil. 2. 7, 8. Joh. 10. 17, 18. Heb. 12, 2. 1 Pet.
2. 24. and because of this,

3 He is made perfect for us, the Righteous, and just one, or justified Person
in our Nature, and for us, acquit off all our trespasses and sins that were
imputed to him, and so therein a Victorer over all Curse, and Death laid upon
him, having by himself purged our sins, he is accepted, and set down on the
right hand of God as a perfect Ransom, and price of Redemption for men, and
standing propitiation for the sins of the whole world, yea a Prince and
Savior, for to give repentance, and forgiveness of sins, and the Judge of all,
Heb. 1. 3, 4, and 12. 2. 1 Timothy 2. 5, 6. 1 Job. 2. 1, 2. Acts 5. 31. and 10.
36. 42. Yea,

4 He is righteous and faithful in all appointed him. A faithful Mediator and
High Priest, a faithful testimony of Gods goodness to men in due time, that
through him they might be saved; and the Author of eternal Salvation to them
that obey him, and the righteous Judge of quick and dead, by whom God shall
judge the world in righteousness, even by that man whom he has ordained,
whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised him from
the dead, for to this end he dyed, rose, and revived, that he might be Lord of
dead and living; so that he is properly and absolutely the righteous One in
and of himself, and for us; the Lord our righteousness, in whom, and in whom
only weehave righteousness, and strength; yet is not he the righteous that are
here spoken of. For

1 This Text speaks in the plural number, of righteous ones, merciful men, men
of kindness, or godliness, nor is he included as one of the righteous ones here
spoken of. For

2 He was not, nor could be holden of Death, as David, and others that sleep in
Jesus, are; his flesh saw no corruption, Psalm. 16. 10. with Acts 2. 25 - 31. so
that he did not perish out of the earth by death as they, Mich. 7. 1, 2. He was
raised again the third day, and after seen of many witnesses. Yea,

3 Though he was taken from the earth in his Ascension, yet that was no
chastisement, or correction, and so no cause of grief or sorrow to us, no nor
to them that did enjoy his personal presence on the earth; but cause of great
joy, for if he had not so personally ascended to the Father. The Comforter,
that coming forth of the Spirit of truth, in the evidence and demonstration of
the works finished in his Body, accepted, and for ever virtuous with the Father
for us, could not have come, Joh. 7. 39. and 14. 26 - 28. and 16. 7, 8. yea he
went to prepare places for us, that he might come again Personally, and receive
us to himself, that we, even all that by him believe in God, might be ever with
him in his glory, Job. 14. And so neither is he so perished from the earth, or
from among men, in his being personally received up into glory, as to be no
more capable of conversing with them, helping, or doing them good, but is
thereby absolutely perfected in such capacity, even in that body in man's nature
through sufferings glorified, for being ascended far above all heavens, even
in Heaven it self, there to appear in the presence of God for us, even the same
that descended into the lower parts of the earth; he fills all things with his
influences, and operations, and is in his gracious and Spiritual presence, and
virtues, in the hearts and societies of his people, that through grace believe
in him, Ephesians. 4. 7. 8 - 10. 11. Matthew. 28. 20. Joh. 14. 17, 18.

By all which it appears, he is none of the righteous spoken of in this text,
yet the consideration already propounded of him as the righteous one, will help
us to understand who are the righteous that are here spoken of, and therefore
is no digression from our business; for from these two considerations, viz.
That of the Natural Race, or Children of Adam, there is none in ^^r of
themselves, or in any thing they can do, righteous, or that does good, nor
that is so accepted, owned, and justified in the sight of God, no not one; and
that he, and he only in man's Nature is the righteous one, and that for us also,
The Lord our Righteousness; I say, from these two considerations, it appears;

That of all the Children of men, they only are righteous that in the light and
power of Gods testimony concerning Christ, do so believe and receive it, that
in belief and acknowledgement thereof they disowne and run out of themselves
into Christ, for righteousness, and life, 2 Cor. 1. 9. Phil. 3. 3 - 9.

It is a good description, or character of the righteous, that on hearing of
the Name of the Lord, that it is a strong tower, they as men therein made
sensible of it, acknowledge their own nakedness, and the lyingness of other
refuges, and therefore the danger of abiding out of this, they run into the
Name of the Lord, Prove. 18. 10. they fly for refuge (even in the light and
powerful drawing of the Name, and Grace of God in Christ, which brings
Salvation to all men in due time) unto the hope set before them in Christ, that
they may lay hold of that, Heb. 6. 18.

The righteous then are they (whoever they be, or whatever they have been) that
through his name believe in him, Acts 10. 35. 43. for what says the Scripture?
Abraham believed God, and it was counted to him for righteousness; now to him
that works is the reward not reckoned of Grace, but of Debt; but to him that
works not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is
counted for righteousness, for that was not written for his sake alone that it
was imputed to him; but for us also, to whom it shall be imputed, if we believe
on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered for our
effences, and raised again for our justification, Romans 4. 3, 4, 5. 23, 24, 25.
For with the heart man believes unto righteousness, chap. 10. 10. Therefore
even the sinners of the Gentiles, which before followed not after
righteousness, yet when the light of Gods testimony concerning Christ came to
them, they falling down in the acknowledgement of their own vileness as therein
discovered, and seeking righteousness by faith in Christ attained
righteousness; when Israel which followed after the Law of Righteousness yet
attained it not, because they sought it not by faith, but as it were by the
works of the Law, for they being ignorant of Gods Righteousness, and going
about to establish their own, have not submitted themselves to the
righteousness of God, for Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness to
every one that believes; for Moses describes the righteousness which is of
the Law, that the man which does these things shall live by them, according to
which rule there shall no man be justified in the sight of God; for by the Law
is the knowledge of sin, yea it concludes under the Curse, Every ^^^ that
continues not in all that is written in the book of the Law to do it, Gal. 3.
10, 11, 12. so that whoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one
point, Jam. 2. 10. and there is not a just man upon earth that does good, and
sins not, Eccles. 7. 20. yea, la many things we offend all, Jam. 3. 2. But
the righteousness which is of faith speaks on this wife, Say not in thy
heart, who shall ascend into heaven, that is, to bring down from above, or who
shall descend into the deep, that is, to bring up Christ again from the dead;
it sets not men a work to enquire how these things shell be wrought for them
in Christ, or to fancy, or seek for an accomplishment of them over again in
them. But what says it, The Word is nigh thee, even that preaching of peace by
Jesus Christ; declaring all this freely done, and finished for us by God in the
Person of Christ, without any thought, motion, or desire of ours; This word of
Reconciliation is nigh thee, in thy mouth, and in thy heart; even this word of
faith which we preach, declaring the ground of Faith prepared, and true in
him, and thence instructing and persuading to believe it. This is made nigh in
those preachings of it vouchsafed, that by its own light and power it might
be acknowledged, and believed, that if according, as in this nigh coming of
the Word* light and power comes with it, instructing, moving, and strengthening
the heart, thou shall confess with thy mouth, and believe in thine heart, that
God has raised Christ from the dead, thou shall be saved, for with the heart
man believes unto righteousness, etc. Romans 9. 30-33. and 10. 1-11. therefore
also this Prophet Isaiah interprets the true followers after righteousness to
be they that seek the Lord, for righteousness, and strength, that on the
report of his righteousness being near in Christ, in whom he has caused his
Judgment to rest for a light to the people, do believe that report, and
entertain in their heart that his Law, or Doctrine, Isa. 51. 1-7. and 45.
22-25, and 53. 1.

Those that in the light and power of Gods testimony concerning Christ, in the
opening of it to them, as therein it is made nigh them, fall down in the sense
and acknowledgement of their own sinfulness, and vileness, and the
unprofitableness of all their own works to help them, and seek righteousness
in Christ, even by faith in him, in what he has done, and is become for
sinners, that through the knowledge and faith of him they may be found in him,
clothed with his Righteousness, and not that of their own, Phil. 3, 8, 9, 10. 1
Job. 5. 20. These are the righteous, and so of the righteous Nation, that
learneth and keeps the truth as it is in Jesus; these are the righteous
spoken of in this text, and therefore truly so called.

1 Because herein they do Righteousness, or Justice, they are doers, or
workers of good, Romans 2. 10. Acts 10. 35. 43. 1 John 2. 18, 29. and 3. 6. 2 John 9. 3. Joh. 11. For,

1 In this they do nothing in any light, wisdom, or strength of theirs as of
them, in or by which no man can understand the things of the Spirit, or come to
Christ, or do good, but as knowing their strength is to sit still in this
respect, letting their imaginations fall, and every high thing that exalts it
self against the obedience of Christ; they by him do believe in God, they
through Grace believe, and that not of themselves, but of the gift of God, they
come in his drawings; see light, not in their own, but in his light, believe in
the evidence and demonstration of his Spirit, and by the power thereof coming
along to them in his words, and works, so that their faith is of the operation
of God, who of the discovery of his own good will in Christ, through the word
of truth begets them; they are in this not their own, but his Workmanship
created in Christ Jesus, who of God is made to them Wisdom, Righteousness,
Sanctification, and Redemption, and so do work the work of God, not only which
he requires of them, but which himself is working in them, Joh. 6. 29. for
they are born to this believing on his name, not of blood, nor of the will of
flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God, Joh. 1. 12, 13. 1 J^h. 5. 1. Jam. 1.
18, 19. 1 Cor. 1. 29, 30. Ephesians. 2. 10. and yet this is graciously imputed, or
counted to them for righteousness, though it is the powerful operation of the
grace of God in them through his name. As on the other hand, that which is in
Scripture called Unbelief, that is, to reject when men hear, is truly charged
on men as their own proper sin, disobedience, and unrighteousness, even
wilfully committed against the light and power of Gods grace bringing
Salvation, for though men have neither light of understanding, nor freedom, or
inclination of will in themselves as of themselves, yet while he is calling he
is certainly putting forth his hand, drawing with the cords of love, and the
bands of a man, the demonstrations of his love, evidenced in the lifting up the
Son of Man, and lifting up the yoke of thraldom on the Jews, setting meat
before them; so that his goodness not only has tendency, but suitable operation
in it. It does lead men to repentance though they draw back, and harden their
hearts again, so that he that despises, despises not man only, but God, who
has also given them of his holy Spirit to instruct and reprove them; they
harden their hearts against the word spoken in his Spirit, in the light and
power of that by his Prophets, Isa. 65. 1, 2. H^s. 11. 2-7. Romans 2. 4, 5.
Nehem. 9. 20. 26. Zach. 9. 11, 12. 1 Thessalonians. 4. 8. and so are fighters against
God, closing their eyes, and stopping their ears, and hardening their hearts
when he is opening, and working upon them, lest they should be converted, and
he should heal them, Mat. 13. 15.

2 They do in this, believing on his name, do nothing but what they have good
reason and substantial ground for, in what he has done, and is become for
them, as declared in his testi-Mony, and what they are thence obliged to as
their reasonable service, there being a righteous ground and foundation of
faith prepared and laid for us in Christ, as declared in the Gospel, whether
men believe, and so come and be built upon it or no; for God has made him that
knew no sin, to be sin for us, that we might he made the righteousness of God
in him. Whence also the Holy Ghost reproves the world of sin, because they
believe not on Christ, and evidences it to be great unrighteousness, from the
consideration of what great things he has done for them, as also from the
faithful evidences thereof to them, instructing and moving to it, as their
reasonable service; so that indeed they render him hatred for his love, and
evil for his good will, and are without cause his adversaries, yea against, and
contrary to all right reason, or cause, They not regarding the work of the
Lord, nor the operation of his hands, which was true in him for and toward
them, that through him they might have believed, Joh. 16. 8. 14. 1 Samuel 12. 24,
25. Psalm. 68. 18-21. 2 Corinthians. 5. 11-21. and 6. 1, 2. Psalm. 28. 5. and 109. 4,
5.

3 This work of faith in Jesus is a righteous work, directed in truth, as may
be seen in every act or branch of this faith of the operation of God. For,

1 Such it is, as in which they acknowledge God to be true in his testimony
concerning Christ, which is the great things of his Law; and in all the
instructions and sayings thereof, and therein acknowledge, and disown
themselves, and all their own imaginations, and the traditions of men, as
discovered, and detected in the light of Gods testimony, to be vanity and lies;
he that has received his testimony, has set to his Seal that God is true;
whereas on the other hand, he that believes not God, has made him that is
the God, and Fountain of all truth, a Liar, because he believes not the record
that God gave of his Son, even this record, that God has given us eternal life
in his Son, so as to be received in receiving him, in his testimony, etc. Joh.
3. 33. 1 John 5. 10-12. What greater unrighteousness than to make God a Liar,
and yet this is done by all, that when they hear, believe not the record of God
concerning Christ; but in the faith of Gods operation, God is acknowledged to
be true, and every man a liar; his Word received as his, and reverenced and
preferred before all the Traditions or Precepts of men, if never so many, and
those never so learned, or holy.

2 Such it is, as in which they ascribe righteousness to their Maker, and make
their boast of his righteousness, and of his only, Job 36. 2, 3. Psalm. 71, 15,
16. As that in which Law is answered, Truth fulfilled, a Door of approach to
God opened, and without which they must have been for ever cast out, as an
unclean thing, so as in this they acknowledge their own sinfulness, and
vileness, as therein evidenced. They are the true confessors of sins, that do
in the belief of that testimony of God concerning Christ, own them as theirs,
according to the discoveries of the true Light, and so confess, and disowne,
and give them up as filthy, as thereby detected to be purged; and such
confession and acknowledgement of our own vileness is certainly included in
this faith of the operation of God; If a man with the heart believe Gods
testimony concerning Christ, then does he therein believe what it faith
concerning himself, or concerning Sin, or Righteousness to be true, and so
believing, ownes its reproofs, whence the Apostle John faith, If we, any of
those great Apostles, and so consequently any believer in this life, say, we
have no sin, we deceive our selves, and the truth is not in us; If we say that
we have not sinned, we make him a Liar, and his word is not in us, 1 John 1. 8.
10. If any object against the righteousness of this act of faith, That it is
affirmed of Zacharias and Elizabeth, that they were both righteous before God,
walking in all the Commandments of the Lord blameless, to this we answer; This
confirms what we have already said, for if they walked in all the Commandments
of the Lord blameless, then they walked in this of confessing our sins, always
acknowledging our own vileness, and wretchedness. And truly this was contained
in all those Commandments, and Ordinances of the Law, under which he served in
the Priests Office, for in those Sacrifices there was a remembrance again of
sins every year, Heb. 10. 3. yea the High Priest himself ought, as for the
people, so also for himself to offer for sin 8, Heb. 5. 3. And now the prefect
Sacrifice is offered, and the Purgation for all Sins completely made in the
virtue of the blood of Christ, men are in the testimony of this
Fo^untainepened, discovered to be sinners, and all their righteousness as
filthy rags, and so their own vileness, and the need of coming to this
Fountains for washing, always showed in the opening of it; so that he that
walks not in the confession, or acknowledgement of his sinfulness, vileness,
and wretchedness, as there discovered, ascribing righteousness only to his
Maker; he does not righteousness, he makes God a Liar, the truth is not in
him; he walks not blameless; for by the deeds of the Law shall no man be
justified as blameless in the sight of God, for all have sinned, and are
sinners, have Sin in them, as well as Death upon them, while in this mortal
body, rendering it vile and wretched, Phil. 3. last. Romans 7. 18-24. And for a
sinner to hide his sin is most worthy of blame; the just are they that live by
faith in the righteousness of another, even of Jesus Christ, the just and
righteous one. Behold, his Soul which is lefted up, is not upright in him,
Galath. 3. 11, 12. Romans 1. 16, 17. Hab. 2. 4. Hence the confessing of our sins
answers to, and is put for the walking in the light, as he is in the light, 1 John 1. 7. 9. and good reason, for God is always in the discovery and
demonstration of Christ the true light, discovering our sinfulness, and
vileness, that we may not trust in our selves, but receive the sentence of
Death there, that we may learn in the belief and mindfulness of his testimony,
concerning Christ, to trust in him that raises the dead. So that if we be
walking in the light, believing and acknowledging Christ in his testimony, we
must needs be found in the believing view, and remembrance of what he has
done, and is become for us, and Gods glory in him confessing our sins; and so
he that is borne of God, that is led of the Spirit of God that always leads
into, and in Christ, for all righteousness and life; though he have sin in him
(for which simply God holds no man underblame, or Condemnation by Christ) yet
so far forth as he is born of God, that is, as he abides in Christ he
sins not, he does not commit or serve sin, no not in hiding his sins, which
is the first step of making provision for it, which who so does, shall not
prosper; truly he should sin with a very high hand, even to the making God a
Liar, if he should say that he had no sin in him, warring, and moveing for
service, or that he had not sinned; yea doubtless, in any thing wherein his
heart is departing from his refuge, or his eye wandering into corners; the
immortal Seed, the Word of God not retained in his heart, in believing
mindfulness, Sin gets the advantage of him, and his readiness to halt appears,
and so in many things we offend all, and are therein of Satan, not of God, 1 John 3. 5, 8-10. Psalm. 38. 17, 18. Prove. 28. 13, 14* Psa. 19. 12, 13. and 119.
8. 11. 133. 176. and 51. 1-7.

3 Such also is this believing with the heart, that God has raised Christ from
the Dead, that in it, the Lord himself becomes the Believers hope, his
expectation of all further grace and glory is in him, begot, and strengthened
from the infinite grace of God to man ward, commended in this, that while we
were sinners, and enemies, in due time Christ dyed for us, and the infinite
virtue of his Blood, in which the peace and atonement was made with God for
us, while we were yet enemies; This grace in Christ believed renders him
precious, fills the heart with high esteem of the greatness, and truth of Gods
love in him, and of the infinite and abiding virtue of his Blood, and his
fitness and faithfulness throught it, to perfect what concerns them. So that in
this faith of Gods operation, their expectation and hope is not grounded,
either on a peremptory conclusion, that they cannot fall, or miscarry, or on
their act of believing, or faithfulness, and resolutions of constancy, and
abiding; nor are they left to draw up their consolation, and hope, by way of
Argument from their being such, or in such a state, as to which such Promises
are made; but the grace in Christ understood, and believed, the heart being
exercised in the hearty belief and mindfulness of him; what he has done, and
is become for sinners, and his office, faithfulness, and readiness to help,
teach, and draw them, and to accept all comers without upbraiding, and to give
them through his name in the virtues, and openings of it, forgiveness of sins,
and eternal life, in the knowledge and faith of it, and first fruits of the
Spirit now, and in the hope of the Harvest in due time. I say, the heart and
mind being exercised in the hearty belief, and mindfulness of this grace in
Christ, and so stayed on his name, is not then left to reflect back into it
self, to draw up its consolation, and hope, from its being such a believer, but
is filled with strong consolation, and hope, through the grace understood and
perceived in Christ; while the heart is only minding him that is the ground,
and object of hope, the hope is begot, and strengthened in a Divine and
Spiritual way, through the opening of that name, and shedding abroad his love
in the heart therein; so that Jesus Christ received by faith in his testimony,
and not their receipt of him, is unto them, and in their hearts the hope of
glory, the ground and foundation of it, and he from whom viewed it springs, and
in whom it i^. And that after the same consideration of him, as he is in the
Gospel preached to every man; He that spared not his own Son, but delivered
him up for us all, how shall he not with him freely give us all things. See
Romans 5. 5-10. and 8. 32. Col. 1. 26, 27. Gal. 2. 20. Joh. 6. 51. And such is
the truth and excellency of this name of God in Christ, that they that k^^w it
will trust in it, if any man whatever did know, own, listen, and seek to it,
according to the discoveries of it brought him, it would beget trust, and hope,
of which he should not be ashamed; it quickens to new and living hope, through
the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead.

Again, in this faith of the operation of God their expectation is so in him,
even of all things pertaining to life, and godliness to be now given, with him,
not without him, or in any other way; but through the knowledge of him, whom he
spared not, but delivered up, for us all, that even that hope retained in them
purifies their hearts from ways of iniquity, in which presumptuously growing
careless, or wandering from him, they might miscarry, and fayl of the grace of
God, so as they are instructed, and admonished by it to give diligence, and
attend always to read the vision of God, as written in the face of Christ, that
so they may be strengthened to run, and kept through faith, to the Salvation
ready to be revealed in the last time. Yea such it is, as from the excellency
and grace in the ground of it, as also in the way in which it is to be met
with, rather to be chosen then any other way, or rule, and the excellent glory
of the end of it, as strengthens them to all patience and long suffering with
joyfulness, and as those that believe in him, and look for such things, not to
make have, to fancy an accomplishment of the great things hoped for in this
day, or to bring about the accomplishment of Gods promises, he that believes
makes not have; Behold his soul, that is lifted up, either above the reading of
the Vision of God in Christ in his testimony given, for guiding his feet in the
way of peace, that he may run with patience the race set before him, as Heb.
12* 1, 2. or to imagine and boast of an enjoyment of the Vision, so as by
seeing and possessing the great things, the glory in the hope of which we are
called by the Gospel, or to put to his hand in striving, and fighting for the
hasting or bringing forth of Gods righteousness in the things behind. His soul
is not upright in him, but the just shall live by faith.

In all which considerations it appears, they are in this bele^ving through his
name, workers of righteousness, doers of the truth, and therefore truly called,
The righteous. As well as also,

2 Because they are herein justified in the sight of God, imputed, accounted,
and accepted righteous in that perfect righteousness Christ has wrought, and
is become for them with which faith closes. By the deeds of the Law shall no
man be justified in the sight of God; but now the righteousness of God without
the Law is manifested, being witnessed by the Law and the Prophets, even the
righteousness of God by faith of Jesus; that is, by the Preaching, or Doctrine
of Jesus: So now, manifested unto all, and upon all them that believe, unto all
by way of redundancy, tender, and manifestation, but upon all that believe,
even by way of imputation of it to them, and acceptance of them in it; so in
the next Chapter, God is said to impute righteousness without works unto them,
to accept their persons into delightful favor, and fellowship, by and in the
virtue of that perfect righteousness which they have by faith accepted, and so
they are made accepted in the Beloved; they are made, or pronounced, and
presented good, just, righteous in the sight of God, being found in him; and so
it is upon all them that believe, for there is no difference, for all have
sinned, and come short of the glory of God, being justified freely by his
grace, through the redemption that is in Jesus. That ( verse. 24.) answers to,
and shows the reason of both the former branches, ( viz.) That the
righteousness of God is unto all, and upon all them that believe, though all
have sinned, etc. and so is to be understood in a twofold sense* 1 The whole
Nature is justified in the second man Christ Jesus, that stood for all, to bear
their sins, in which all have already sinned, and with which the whole Nature
is thence polluted, in that he is justified for them from the sins imputed to
him in his Resurrection, and this is freely by his grace through the Redemption
in Jesus. 2. All that believe, every one of them believing what he has done,
and is become for sinners, and so through his Name believing on him, are in
their particular persons justified freely by his grace, through the redemption
that is in him; God accepts them in his Son, and remembers not, nor does impute
to them their former wickedness, or present unprofitableness, but imputes to
them righteousness without works; as in Acts 10. 35. 43. that saying, That in
every Nation, he that fears God, and works righteousness, is accepted with
him, verse. 35. is thus explicated, as fulfilled among those where the Gospel
comes, That through his name, whosoever believes on him shall receive the
forgiveness of sins, verse. 43. So Acts 13. 39. By him all that believe are
justified from all things, from which they could not be justified by the Law of
Moses, they are delivered from under the condemnation of the wrath, which in
respect of the execution of it is yet to come, under which they all abide, that
on hearing believe not on the Son of God, 1 These. 1. 10. Joh. 3. 18. 36. He
justifies even the ungodly believing, and so coming to, and being found in the
righteous one, that being justified freely by his grace, they might be more and
more made heirs according to the hope of eternal life given us in Christ, that
through the righteousness of God, and our Savior, they might be made to be
meet partakers of the inheritance of the Saints in light, Romans 3. 20-22-24 25,
26. and 4. 3, 4, 5. Tit. 3. 4-7. And so,

3 Therefore also are such believers on his name called, The righteous, because
the end and fruit of this righteousness of God, and our Savior, in which
believing they are accepted, is also, that through the knowledge and faith
thereof the righteousness of the Law might be fulfilled in them, even the
righteous affections, and services the Law required, but gave no strength to
bring forth, as well as the life and peace it was ordained to, but could not
give; that the believer might be filled with the fruits of righteousness by
Jesus Christ, Romans 8. 2, 3, 4. Phil. 1. 10, 11. even the fruits of the Spirit,
whose evidence and demonstration is of Christ, in his testimony, bringing forth
in the believing receiver, love, joy, peace, long suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance -- And they that are Christ's, have in the
light and strength of the Lord, crucified the flesh with the affections and
lusts, That henceforth they should not serve sin, Romans 6. Gal. 5. They
believing with the heart, that God has raised Christ from the dead, do
through the grace and power of that believed, and believed in, receive in a
first fruits of the Spirit, the end of their faith, even the salvation of their
souls, for with the heart man believes unto righteousness in this sense also;
Giving all diligence through the knowledge of him, they add to, or in, their
faith virtue; his goodness, compassions, holiness, etc. as manifested in
Christ, frames to some likeness, or conformity to him, in like love, bowels,
mercies, holiness, etc. And so in their virtue they add, or proceed to
further knowledge, tastes, and proof of his graciousnesse, and therein
temperance, and so godliness, brotherly kindness, charity. Hence it is the
Apostles would have these things, namely, the righteousness of God, and our
Savior, through which they were made partakers of such precious and operative
faith, to be always bad in remembrance, seeing hereby they were saved, if they
kept in memory 1 Cor. 15. 1-4. 2 Pet. 1. 1-12, etc. this word of faith, and so
this faith, that is of the operation of God is not without its works. It works
through love, as from the consideration of Gods love in Christ, as the
foundation and fountain of it, whence it has all its fresh Springs, so in a
channel of love toward God and man. It favors therefore of ignorance of the
righteousness of God, and our Savior, and of the preciousnesse of this faith
of Gods operation through it, when any say to us, That it is not enough for us
with the heart to believe, and close with Gods testimony concerning Christ; but
we must also look for the work of the Spirit inwardly, to quicken, save, and
sanctify us; such sayings at least signify, that the work of the Spirit for
quickening, saving, and sanctifying the soul, is another thing besides, and
divided from this testimony, and not certainly met with in this way of
believing, and having the heart and mind exercised and stayed on that name,
and grace of his believed, so that a man may with his heart believe, and
confess, that God has raised Christ from the dead, and yet not therein
experiment the quickening and saving work of the Spirit; contrary to Romans 10. 9,
10. 1 Cor. 15. and so do indeed lead believers, having begun in the Spirit, to
seek to be made perfect by the flesh. True it is, a man may say he has faith,
when yet his faith has no works, nor spirit left in it, only an empty and idle
opinionating such a thing, or professing to believe it as true, without any
hearty mindfulnesse of the importance, or grace of the truth he pretends to
cleeve. And of such a faith James says, Can it save? faith if it have no works
is dead; a spiritlesse, and unprofitable thing being alone, yea, even that
faith is signified by him, to be nothing else but a dead Carcass, pretense,
outside profession, or show of that which indeed is not, or not with the heart,
not kept in believing remembrance and mindfulnesse, for even there he
signifies, that if it were unfeigned, or with the heart, according to the
discoveries given, less or more, it would work savingly, like as the same
Propositions believed to be true by the Devils, works horror, because they
speak as much against them, as they do for man; even so man, any of mankind
believing with the heart, it would be unto righteousness, Let God be true,
and every man a liar; if any say, he steadfastly, and with his heart believes
the truth, and greatness of Gods love to man ward, as manifested in Christ,
and yet perceives no such preciousnesse in Christ, and his testimony, as to
move him according to his measure, to count all things but loss for the
excellency of the knowledge of Jesus Christ; but easily listens to, and admires
the pretended excellencies of other spirits, that lift not up the Son of Man
according to the Apostles Doctrine, but privily some other thing, or work in
his stead, or embraces, and cleaves to the things of this present world, nor is
moved with like love and compassion toward men from the grace in Christ
believed, nor united in heart with them that fear his Name, and call upon him
in truth, to know and own them as brethren, and strive together with them for
the faith of the Gospel, but has left his first Love, or else has not yet so
received the love of the truth as to save him; let us not acknowledge his
sayings to be true, that he does so unfeignedly believe the truth as it is in
Jesus, for so we shall render God a Liar, and his Word without effect: but let
God be true, and every man a Liar, for that grace of God that brings
salvation to all men, teaches us, That denying ungodliness and worldly lusts,
we should live righteously, soberly, and godly in this present world, looking
for that blessed hope, and glorious appearing of the mighty God, and our
Savior.

Let none of us therefore be moved to mean thoughts of the efficacy of the word
of faith, because we, or others prove it not, while we think and say we
believe, that thence we should slight that as vain, and run to some other way
to wait for the Spirit, or for perfecting what was begun by the Spirit in the
hearing of faith; but let us judge our selves of wavering, unconstancy, or
double* mindedness, and of neglect of that so great Salvation, and having
itching ears after something suitable to our diverse lusts, and let us suffer our
hearts by the grace of God, while yet admonishing and striving with us, to be
more fixed trusting in the Lord, without guile or waveringnesse, seeking
righteousness in Jesus, through the knowledge and faith of him, through which
he gives all things pertaining to life and godliness, Let us give more earnest
heed to the things we have heard, in the word of the truth of the Gospel, least
at any time we let them slip. Consider that love of God to manward appearing in
and through Christ saved the Apostles, and so, and therein they had the washing
of regeneration, and the renewing of the Holy Ghost shed on them abundantly
through Jesus Christ, and that Gospel of Christ is the power of God to
salvation to every one that believes, for therein is the righteousness of God
revealed from faith to faith, as it is written, The just shall live by faith.

And to this answers the other descriptions of the righteous ones in this text;
They are merciful men, or men of kindness, or godliness. Men filled and
seasoned, with the apprehension and persuasion of the mercies, compassions, and
kindness of God to sinners, to the unkind, and evil, and of that as discovered
in the face of Christ, where he is to be truly known and worshipped. And so of
his good will in Christ, begotten through the word of truth, to their faith and
hope in him, and joy in hope of the glory to be revealed, and patience in
tribulations, and thence moved and filled with bowels and mercies, compassions;
and kindness, answerable to that they believe, and perceive to be in God
toward others, even toward all in blindness and distress, yea to the unkind
and evil, the love of Christ constraining them, to persuade them to be
reconciled to God in Christ, and to seek their good by all means within their
capacity, and with all earnestness, knowing also the ^errour of the Lord;
because they thus judge, That if one dyed for all, then were all dead, and that
be dyed for all, that they which live should not henceforth live to themselves,
but to him this dyed for them, and rose again; yea hence also they are filled
with delightful love of, and desire of fellowship with those that call on the
name of the Lord out of a pure heart, and with bowels of mercies, humbleness
of mind, meekness, and goodnesseone toward another, and toward all men,
answerable to the kindness and mercies of God in Christ.

And so, if we read it, men of godliness, it will come to the same, for they
are the right and true worshippers of God, who worship the Father in spirit and
truth, and such the Father seeks to worship him; they worship, adore, honor,
magnify, believe, and trust in him, in the Spirit, that is, in the light and
power of, and according to the testimony of Jesus, and of Gods glory, as shined
in his face; which testimony the Holy Ghost has given, and in it, his
evidence, and demonstration of Christ, and of the Father, is. And therefore
when we are called upon to godliness, or to worship God, that testimony of
Jesus is said to be the spirit of Prophecy, in, and according to which we are
to worship, Rev. 19. 10. and so they in that light and strength of the Spirit
have their rejoicing in Christ Jesus [ The truth] And have no confidence in the
flesh, Joh. 4. 23, 24. and 5. 23, 24. Phil. 3. 3. and in this true worship and
fear of the Lord, they are made partakers of the Divine Nature, in interest in
it, union, or fellowship with it, conforming to it, so as by Christ through
faith, so as thereby they go on purging themselves from all filthiness of
flesh, and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of the Lord, 2 Corinthians. 6.
16-18. and 7. 1. purifying their hearts through belief of the truth, and
retaining the hope of it in them to unfeigned love of the brethren, and to more
freedom from the intanglements, and cares of this world, as those that are
pressing after the mark of the price of the high calling of God in Christ
Jesus, which pure religion, and undefiled, brings forth its fruit, in their
visiting the Sick, the Widows, and fatherless in their affliction, and
keeping themselves unspotted in the world; so as they walking in the Spirit
(though they have flesh warring in them) are by the light and power of the
Spirit in the testimony of Jesus, kept from fulfilling the lusts of the flesh,
and so preserved blameless unto the day of Christ, Romans ^. and 8. 1-13. Gal. 5.

And to this agrees that twofold description of the Persons that shall ascend
into the hill of the Lord, and stand in his holy place, Psalm. 24. 3, 4, 6. The
first is, He that has clean hands, and a pure hears, that has not lift up his
soul to vanity, nor sworn deceitfully, for though there is none righteous, no
not one, but all have sinned, and are wholly polluted, and unclean, yet this
truth remains for ever, Without holiness no man shall see the Lord; so that if
there be not some way in which men may be made again the righteousness of God,
and made partaker of his holiness, they must all be shut out for ever from
God, under the curse of the Law; but God has made his Son that knew no sin, to
be sin for us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him; and
according to that rule the sixth verse of that Psalm gives us the next, and
fundamental description of the subjects of the glorious privilege
forementioned, or rather the description of those Persons, in whom the truth
of the former description is found, and so an answer to the question, Who are
the righteous? This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face
O Jacob, or, O God of Jacob; that seek the Lord for righteousness and
strength, that through his Name believing in him, seek righteousness by faith
in Jesus, as Isa. 55. 3, 4, 5, 6. and 45. 22* 24, 25. Romans 9. 30. and as before
is showed by the Scriptures, On them comes that blessedness of Gods not
imputing former iniquities, but imputing righteousness without works, Romans 3.
25, 26. and 4. 3* 6. yea they through the understanding and faith of Jesus,
have their hearts sprinkled from an evil Conscience, and their whole man in all
their actings, and conversation, therein continually washed with that pure
water of the love of God, through the blond of Christ shed abroad in their
heart, Heb. 10. 19-22. 1 Pet. 1. 18-22. that in the issue they may be presented
without spot, or wrinckle, or any such thing, Ephesians. 5. 26, 27. Col. 1. 21, 22,
23.

And truly this large description, and explication of the righteous, and
merciful men, or men of kindness, and godliness, gives us a true character of
him, whose being taken from us, occasioned this Discourse.

We come in the next place to consider.

2 In what sense they may be said to perish, and when they so do. Here give me
leave for our instruction and encouragement, First, to propound to
consideration, in what sense they perish not; in respect of themselves, or as
with reference to their hope toward God; They perish not, they for their parts
are not driven away, or cut off from God, or from their hope in death; the
wicked dying in his sins, even in his stubborn refusal of him that came to
save him from his sins, and so out of Christ, he is therein driven away in his
wickedness, cut off, and shut out from God, and from the hope of a better life,
and from all opportunities of ever being made partaker of that hope; does not
their excellency which is in them, even their hope go away, and perish with
them? They dye without wisdom; But the righteous has hope in his death; he
retains, or holds his hope and joy even in death, yea then goes to a more full
enjoyment of it, Prove. 14. 32. Whence our Savior says, If a man keep my
sayings, he shall never see death; he shall never dye, in the full, and proper
sense of the word, he shall not in, or by death be separated, or cut off from
God, or from his hope and portion in him, Joh. 8. 51. and 11. 26. but from
thenceforth shall be more especially blessed in, and with his presence, and
with more immediate, and uninterrupted fellowship with him in spirit, even
while out of the body, and while that sleeps in the dust; whence the Apostle
desired, in respect of himself, much rather to depart out of the body, out of
the flesh, that he might enjoy that more immediate, and free presence of, and
fellowship with Christ, which to him would be far better, 2 Cor. 5. 1-6-8.
Phil. 1. 20. 23. neither are their bodies though resting in Death, and so
sleeping in the dust of the earth, lost, cut off, or perished, as indeed they
should be if there were no Resurrection of the Dead, as the Apostle reasons, 1
Cor. 15. 18, etc.

If Christ be not raised, and so, If the dead rise not, then those which are
fallen asleep in Christ are perished; If in this life only we had hope in
Christ, we were of all men most miserable; then indeed there had been some
ground for, and truth in their saying, Ezekiel. 37. 11. Beholdour bones are dried,
our hope is lost, and we are cut off for our parts; for even those that having
seen those great and precious promises afar off, which were before confirmed
of God in Christ, and were persuaded of them: and embraced them, yet dyed, not
having received them. But what says the answer of God to them, verse. 12.
Behold O my people, I will open your Graves, and cause you to come up out of
your Graves, and bring you into the Land of Israel, etc. And now also for the
confirmation of our faith, the ground of it is actually come forth and
manifested, Christ is risen from the dead, and become the first fruits of them
that sleep, for since by man, even by the offense and disobedience of one man,
sin, and so death by sin, the first death reigns on all men, and so it is
appointed to the whole kind once to dye, though all shall not sleep, or rest in
death, some of this Body of righteous ones, shall survive at the Personal
appearance of Christ in his glory, and they shall immediately, and on a sudden
be changed, and pass through death, yet so as therein they shall dye, though
not sleep, or rest in death; Death is passed on all in the ordinance and
appointment of God, by reason of the Sin entering by one man, even so by man
(viz.) by the obedience and righteousness of one man, Jesus Christ, in which
the transgression of the first one man, in which all have sinned, and the sin
and sinfulness thence entering into, and over-spreading the whole Nature, is so
finished, and made an end of in the Court of Heaven, or purged, and put away
from before the Father, that no man shall eternally perish, or be separated
from God in it; nor are they left under the power of that Judgment of
Banishment, the curse of the Law; but all Judgment committed to the Son, and
he empowered to execute Judgment also, because he is the Son of Man; by him is
the Assurance and certainty of the Resurrection of the dead, For as in Adam all
dye, even in the influence and demerit, as the fruit of his transgression; even
so in Christ, in the merit, influence and virtue, and as the fruit of his
Righteousness shall all be made alive; raised out of the first Death, that they
may all appear before his Judgment Seat, to be judged according to the rule of
his Gospel; all shall be raised by him, but every man in his own order. Christ
the first fruits being already raised from the dead, afterward, namely,
immediately at the time of his second Personal coming, those that are his
peculiar ones, the righteous Nation that keeps the truth, those in whose
heart the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead, (in that evidence,
and demonstration of him in his testimony) dwells, to the quickening their
spirits now, or making them alive to God, while yet the body is dead because of
sin, shall then have their mortal bodies quickened, even raised from the dead by
the same spirit that now dwells in them; and shall then, in their souls, and
bodies reunited in that blessed and glorious Resurrection of the Just, enter
together with him into the everlasting possession of the joy and glory of their
Lord. And this is that which is called, The first Resurrection, Rev. 20. 4 - 6.
These. 4. 16. the test of the Dead, John in that Vision of things to come, saw,
lived not again till the thousand years of Christ's Personal Reign on earth,
with the children of the first Resurrection were finished.

In which time there shall be new Heaven, and new Earth, and the new Jerusalem
come down from God out of Heaven, and all things made new, and a perfectly
righteous and glorious Kingdom and Government, Revel. 21. 1 - 7. Isa. 65. 16 -
19. and 66. 22. and 11. and 32. 1 - 5. Psalm. 72. And the Lord shall be one, and
his name one throughout all the earth, Zach. 14. 9. And the knowledge of the
Lord shall cover the earth, as the waters cover the Sea, Hab. 2. 14. And there
shall be great and wonderful Conversions, and daily flocking in with joy, as
Doves to their windows, to the Name of the Lord in Jerusalem, of the Nations of
them that are saved from the former desolating Judgments and Consumptions,
among which also the natural Israelites then surviving shall be chief, to fill
the face of the world with fruit again, and to be Subjects of this glorious
Kingdom (for all the children of the first Resurrection of Jews and Gentiles
shall be Reigners) And to walk in the light of the new Jerusalem, They shall
flow together to the name of the Lord in Sion, Isa. 2. Mich. 4. Isa. 9. 4, 5,
6, and 24. 13, 14. and 66. 19. etc. Zach. 2. 11. and 8. 22. and 16. Rev. 21.
24. Psalm. 102. and though there shall be no more Death, nor fruits of Sin in
the New Jerusalem, or upon the Children of the Resurrection, Revel. 21. 3, 4.
no nor Night, nor need of the Sun or M^on to that City, when yet the glory and
brightness of them (in that restitution of all things) shall be seven fold to
what it is, and so useful in and so all the world besides, the subjects of this
glorious Kingdom, Isa. 30. 26. and 60. 19, etc. Rev. 21. 22, 23, 25. Neither
shall there be any more wars, or tumults among the Nations one against another
in the time of that glorious Kingdom, Isa. 2* 4. nor shall there be that heavy
Bondage of corruption remaining on the Creature, or enmity between them that
is now, Isa. 11. Romans 8. 19. 25. Acts 3. 20, 21. and so none of those poisonous
Infections, or unnatural Diseases, or untimely Deaths, that now are common to
man, shall be then common to any, or accidentally, or casually befall them; yet
as there shall be extraordinary and immediate Judgments from God then falling
on those Nations, Families, and Persons that will not voluntarily serve under
this Government, and come up to worship the Name of the Lord in Jerusalem, even
to the cutting them off, Isa. 60. 12. Zach. 14. 16 - 19. even so there may, yea
there must needs be some remainders of mortality, and the Natural death
generally on the people, the Subjects of this glorious Kingdom, the people
that shall then be left of the Nations, and that shall then be created, or born
to praise the Lord, who yet have not passed through that change. According to
Gods appointment, All must once dye, amongst which some will be found even
then dying in their sins, not coming up to worship the Lord, and his Name in
Sion at Jerusalem (in Christ, and the children of the Resurrection) as
proclaimed and shining forth from that great City, that shall be the glory of
all Lands; and others dying in the Lord (as Isa. 65. 16, 17 - 20. of which
happily some may immediately be changed, and fashioned into the likeness of
his glorious Body; but some even of them shall stay, or rest in death until
that great and general Resurrection that shall be after the finishing of that
thousand years, for in that Resurrection it is evidently signified, that there
shall be some found written in the Book of Life, Revel. 20* 12 - 15. and they
must needs be of them that lived, and dyed in the time of that thousand years,
or were immediately changed in the finishing of the same; for all that slept in
Christ before that day of Christ's appearing in his glory, and the survivers of
that body then were brought together with him, to the inheriting and reigning
in that glorious Kingdom. Then after that comes the end, when he shall have
delivered up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, when he shall have put down
all rule, and all authority, and power, for be must reign in this Mediatorial,
and Davidical Kingdom, till he have put all his enemies under his feet, the
last enemy that shall be destroyed is Death, which though perfectly destroyed
in the children of the first Resurrection, in the beginning of that glorious
day, even immediately on his descending, or coming down from Heaven, yet not
wholly destroyed from being an enemy, while it holds the wicked from their
everlasting punishment, and vengeance, in which God shall be glorified, and the
righteous shall glory for ever; and while also it detains some of those
worshippers of him, whose names (as such) are written in the Book of Life from
the foundation of the world, even such of them as dyed in that time of his
reign on the earth, from the possession of their utmost happiness.

Therefore in the conclusion of that day of his Reign, or of that manner of
Administration of the Kingdom (for the Kingdom, and the glory of it is
everlasting, and never shall have end) all the rest of the dead, small and
great shall be raised by him out of their Graves, and from the disappearing
state of Death, and shall appear before his Judgment Seat. This is the second,
and last Resurrection, Revel. 20.

So that there shall be a general Resurrection of the just, and unjust, which
in both parts our Savior distinguishes from that first fruits of quickening
of the spirit, from that death in sins and trespasses, which is now effected by
the light and power of the Gospel in them that in hearing hear, of which work
of Spiritual quickening now, having spoken in Job. 5. 25. he adds verse. 28.
Marvel not at this (as who should say, that which I shall now tell you of is
not only another, but a greater work, and so a greater and more glorious
evidence of the virtue and power of the voice of the Son of Man) for the hour
is coming (he says not and now is, as of the former work, verse. 25. in which
leaving out that Clause here, having added it to the former, he fully signifies
that it is not now; and yet here he speaks of the whole and general
Resurrection of the Dead in both the parts, first and second) in which, all
that are in the Graves (or in the disappearing state of death) shall hear the
voice of the Son of Man (in an immediate, wonderful, and mighty putting forth
of it) and shall come forth, they that have done good, to the resurrection of
life, and they that have done evil, to the resurrection of Damnation.

And of this Resurrection in both parts (and at both times as in the other
Scriptures) Christ is in the Name of the Father the only foundation, and
Author, even as the Son of Man; for had he not dyed, rose, and revived for them
all, and therein by himself purged our sin: in which we had all sinned, and
were become sinful, and dead, he could not have been our Lord, and Judge,
according to the rule of the Gospel, Romans 14. 9. Joh. 5. 22 - 27. nor could any
have been raised from the first Death, and brought before his Judgment Seat by
him, if he had not by the grace of God tasted Death for them. Therefore with
respect to that general Resurrection at the last Day, confessed by Martha, Joh.
11. our Savior says, I am the resurrection, verse. 25. The Foundation and
Author of that general Resurrection in the last day, both of just and unjust;
and so he is the life from the dead, that eternal life which was with the
Father for men, and is now manifested, that it may be known and enjoyed; he is
the Author, Fountain, and in a sense, the matter of it, as delivered to Death
for our offenses, and raised again for our Justification; therefore, whosoever
believes in him, though he were dead, yea though they dye in common with
others, yet shall he live, and he that lives and believes on him shall never
dye, (as before said, in the full and proper sense of the word) the first Death
being abolished, and they by him delivered from that wrath, which in respect of
the execution of it, is yet to come on them that know not God, nor obey to his
Gospel; they are not cut off from him, or from their hope in death, as others
are, yea he being the Resurrection, they his peculiar Treasure, must needs have
the firstnesse, and blessedness of that, yea they in having him by faith in his
name (as Joh. 1. 12. Ephesians. 3. 17. 1 John 5. 10-12, 13.) have part in the first
resurrection in the knowledge, faith, and hope of it in him; and the
righteousness of God, and our Savior, is engaged for the making them
partakers of it actually in themselves, in the accomplishing it upon them
together in his time, for which they are all waiters till that Personal
appearance of the Lord in his glory, which he now being raised from the dead
actually possesses, and holds for them in Heaven with the Father, and so is
to, and in them, by faith, the hope of it; which hope they having in him, it
makes them confident, and patient in waiting for the enjoyment of it, Romans 8.
23, 24, 25. 2 Cor. 4, 13. and 5. 1. 6, 7. Heb. 6. 19, 20.

So that they perish not, nor are at all cut off from their blessedness by
death, but from henceforth more blessed, and sealed up to the full enjoyment of
that blessedness, and holiness with him for ever, even the periect blosting
our, and delivering them from all their transgressions, and the fruits of them,
and the making them perfectly like him in holiness, and glory in soul and body
for ever, in that time and state of the first resurrection, in which they shall
be perfectly delivered from the first Death, to the full enjoyment and
possession of everlasting life; in the knowledge, faith, and hope of which,
their spirits now are made alive, or in part quickened from that Death in sins
and trespasses (which i^ but a part of that first Death that passed on all men
at first by Sin, while yet their bodies are dead because of sin, which also in
that day of Christ shall be raised up together by him, and the second Death
shall have no power on them; his testimony having been believed by them in
their day, and through it they being found in him, shall not be found naked to
the second Death, and if not to that, then to no following death or misery for
ever; for we read, or hear of no third Death, unless in some unlearned
distinctions, not found or known in the Scriptures, which distinctions do
render the Natural and Bodily death, in which it is appointed to men once to
dye, to be the second Death, whereas indeed it is but the finishing of the
first Death on the Body, or its full seizure on it, and that which the Holy
Ghost calls the Second Death, they call the Third; in which rendering the
Natural Death of the body to be the Second Death. They intimately deny the
Resurrection of the body from that Death; for Scripture informs us, that out
of the Second Death there is no resurrection or redemption, and do therein
render that which they call the third Death, to have no terror, torment, or
punishment in it to be felt, and sustained by the body (for that can be capable
of no such thing if it never be raised) but at most by the Spirit only, without
the Body, in which the evil deeds were done; and so this distinction renders
that which Scripture knows by no other name but The Second Death (though by
them called the Third) to be much easier than the First, for that did seize,
not on the spirit or soul only, but on the body also. But the Scripture every
where represents it infinitely worse, and more dreadful in every consideration,
and to be suffered for ever in soul and body together, when the body shall be
raised from the first death in that resurrection of Damnation, in which it
shall be rendered capable of suffering everlasting and unspeakable vengeance
and torment, according to the infinite grace now abused by them, for according
to his fear, or grace, and name in Christ, that he might be feared by men now,
such his wrath and terror then against his enemies, Psalm. 90. 11. 2 Cor. 5.
10, 11. 14, 15. 20, 21. Heb. 2. 1-4. and who then can comprehend the greatness
and power of it, when though they shall suffer the utmost horror, anguish, and
torment that an utter separation from God, and wrath deserved, by treading
under foot his Son, cou^^ing his Blood an unholy thing, and in all this,
offering despite to his Spirit, being poured out to the utmost, may occasion to
them, yet nothing shall make either soul or body cease to be, or be separated
any more as they were in the first Death, that there should ever be any
release, abatement, or intermission in the whole, or in part, of that weeping,
wayling, and gnashing of teeth world without end; yea their worm dies not, and
their fire is not quenched, nor is there any darkness, or shadow of death, in
which the workers of iniquity may hide themselves. O then it will appear, that
Blessed are all they that trust in him; yea therefore from henceforth, Blessed
are the dead which dye in the Lord, they having part in the first Resurrection,
this second Death shall have no power on them.

On the other hand, they that in death, which terminates the gathering time and
space of repentance, are found out of the Lord, dying in their sins, they are
then, and thence for ever blotted out of the Book of Life, cut off from all
hopes of ever attaining, or having part in the first Resurrection; though they
shall be all of them raised, and made alive from the first death, and then, and
therein brought to the clear sight, and acknowledgement of the truth of the
grace of God in the Lordship of Christ, through his death, sometimes, and while
it was due time bringing Salvation to them; that which here they wilfully
rejected when light came to them, and which if it had been now received in its
own light and power bringing Salvation, would have been to their everlasting
comfort, in the quickening them to a new and living hope through the
resurrection of Christ; they shall then confess to the glory of God, and
clearing his Justice, in judging them for ever according to the rule of his
Gospel to a second and never dying death, infinitely worse than the first, and
in sealing them up in Prison from the time of their filling up the measure of
their sin of that nature, which is at the utmost, at the time of the end of
their Natural life, when he has done striving with them, and waiting to be
gracious, I say, in his sealing them up in prison from such time to that
dreadful Judgment, Isa. 45. 23. Phil. 2. 10, 11. Romans 3. 4.

From which time they are shut up under the sentence and condemnation of that
second Death, and so in respect of their state and condition, are from thence
Trees twice dead, plucked up by the roots, though the wrath, in respect of the
full and most dreadful execution of it, on soul and body for ever, is yet to
come, so that in death they perish for ever from the presence of the Lord, and
from his favor, in which is life; the wicked is driven away in his wickedness,
but the righteous has hope in his death.

So then, they that are fallen asleep in Christ are not perished, or cut off
for their parts, no not from their union with Christ, by virtue of which, even
their bodies that sleep in the dust shall be first raised even to the
resurrection of life, yea they are from henceforth and more then ever blessed,
the day of their death infinitely better to them, than the day that they were
born. We come next to consider, in what sense such persons may be said to
perish, and when they so do; and this we shall find explicated to us in the
other expressions of this chastisement in this verse, as compared with other
Scriptures, they are said to perish from the earth, to cease, and fail from
among men that yet survive, when by Death they are taken away from them, they
having no more a portion in any thing done under the Sun, nor capacity of being
helpful to the survivers in any knowledge, wisdom, or work, for in death there
is no remembrance or commemoration of him among the survivers; in the Grave who
shall give him thanks, or praise him to others, yet living, or show forth their
hoping in his truth; The living, the living he shall praise thee (says
Hezekiah) as I do this day, the Fathers to the Children shall make known thy
truth; which explicates in what sense the dead praise him not, nor hope for his
truth, that is, they celebrate not his praises among the survivors, nor are
capable of exercising or showing forth their hoping in his truth to them-ward,
or among them, they cannot make known his truth to them, and so not praise him
as he did then, the Fathers to the Children, Eccl. 9. 10. Psa. 6. 5. Isa. 38.
18, 19. for otherwise in respect of themselves, and to Godward, the dead in
Christ even in these respects do live, they retain their hope in death, and
joy in it; yea they enter into a more full and peaceable enjoyment of it in
spirit, their spirits are made perfect, each one walking in his uprightness,
and are still confidently expecting, longing, and waiting for that day of full
Redemption, even the redemption of their body, and the judging and revenging
their sufferings and wrongs on them that dwell on the earth, crying, Lord, how
long, Prove. 14. 32. Isa. 57. 2. Heb. 12. 23. Revel. 6. 9, 10, 11. They are with
Christ, which to them is far better, as is showed before; but they are dead
to us, and can no longer in their persons be profitable to us, which made the
Apostles and Prophets in their longing desire of the good of all, and for the
furtherance of the Gospel among men, and that the truth of it might remain with
those that had received it, so much desire to abide with them, even to abide in
the flesh in this body, though so much to their own disadvantage, preferring
others good before their own; in death they perish, cease, and depart from us,
and are out of capacity of being helpful to us.

And yet further, These Scriptures; The Righteous perishes, the good man is
perished out of the Earth, and so the cause of grief here lamented, is not
verified simply in the taking away one, or diverse of the Righteous by death;
but when also they are taken away as such a time, and in such manner, as that
there is none of like faithfulness to God, and kindness to men left in the
place, or places where they lived, to survive them, or at least none in their
room, or stead: But that if one or more of them be taken away, there is so many
the less of that Generation, or Righteous Nation that keeps the Truth, left
in the midst of the crooked, and perverse Nation, to shine as lights in the
world: Most sadly and fully is it verified, when there is none left in the
place, or places, whence they are taken; and thus is this matter of lamentation
explicated in the expressions of it in other Scriptures, as Psalm, 12. 1. Help
Lord, for the godly man cease, the faithful fail from among the children of
men; so Micah 7. 1, 2. Woe is me, for I am as when they have gathered the
Summer fruits, as the Grape gleanings of the Vintage, no cluster, etc. The good
man is perished out of the Earth, and there is none upright among men: Oh that
the matter of this sad complaint were not too sadly verified amongst us, and in
this place at this time. These things being thus opened, we shall briefly
demonstrate and explicate the position. That the perishing of the Righteous,
the taking away of men of kindness, and godliness, is a sad correction to the
survivers, which God would have laid to heart by them. For proof of this

There needs no more, than the Scriptures already cited, where we see that the
servants of God take it as a heavy chastisement, woe and misery to themselves,
the taking away of such faithful laborers, and fellow-helpers with them, as
were instruments of drawing others in, and gathering them together in clusters,
to the acknowledgement, and seeking of the name of God in Christ; and strivers
together with them, for the faith of the Gospel, and so helpers of their faith,
and joy. So the Apostle Paul writing to the Philippians concerning Epaphroditus
(his brother and companion in labors, and fellow-souldier; and their
messenger) That he had been sick, nigh unto death, says, that God had mercy
on him, the Apostle Paul, in restoring the said Epaphroditus again, lest he
should have sorrow upon sorrow, where he plainly signifies, that it would have
been a very great chastisement, and occasion of grief and sorrow to him; if
Epaphroditus had then been taken away. And how much more heavy is the
correction, or judgment, to those societies, or companies of people to whom
they were more particularly messengers, and set as guides to go before them in
the word of the Lord; and so to the people generally among whom they lived. It
is mentioned as a heavy judgment on the Nation, and people of Israel, we see
not our signs, there is no more any Prophet, neither is there among us any
that knows, how long, Psa. 74. 9. and so threatened, Ezekiel. 33. That he would
lay the land most desolate, even the Mountains of Israel, so as when it should
come to pass, they should know that a Prophet had been among them (verses 28,
29, 33.) Intimating, they should then know, by their being deprived of him, and
so know what their mercy was they slighted, by the want of it. And truly it
must needs be a heavy correction and judgment to that place, or people, from
amongst whom the Righteous so perish, or f^^^ from the earth, and from among
the children of men. For these reasons,

1 They are set in the world, and preserved in it, and from the evil of it
while they are continued in it, for the good of the world, even of all men
among whom they live, yea their Persecutors to be as Instruments in Gods hand,
for the opening their eyes, and turning them from darkness to light, and from
the power of Satan to God; They are the salt of the earth, the light of the
world, a chosen Generation, that they should show forth the praises of him that
has called them out of darkness into his mavelous light, and shine as
lights in the world, by holding forth the word of life in word and
conversation, Joh. 17. 15-18. 23. Acts 26. 17, 18. Matthew. 5. 13-16. 1 Pet. 2.
9, 10, etc. Phil. 2. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Yea,

2 Their being so preserved in the world, not taken out of it, that is, not so
taken out, but that there may be a Generation of them continued successively,
and they in their several Ages preserved, and kept from the evil of the world
to the end forementioned, it is one of the maine things for which Jesus Christ
appears in the presence of God, making intercession for the good of
Transgressors; therefore while any of them are graciously preserved among any
people, it is an evidence of the powerful mediation of Christ (whom the Father
hears in all his Petitions) yet continued and graciously exercised for that
people, as Joh. 17. 15-23. Whence the Apostle exhorts, not to receive this
grace of God in vain, because God says, In an accepted time I have heard thee,
that is, Christ making intercession for them, in a day of salvation I have
helped thee: which he does, in helping, supporting, and preserving his
Servants, to hold forth the Word of Life among others in word and conversation;
Behold, this is the accepted time, this is the day of Salvation, namely, while
they the Ambassadors for Christ, were instructing, exhorting, beseeching,
reproving, etc. while their mouth was open, their heart enlarged, etc. 2 Cor.
6. 1, 2, 11. with Chap. 5. 20.

These considerations demonstrate, the Righteous perishing and failing from
among a people, to be a heavy correction and judgment, even of this nature.

1 Such as in which God takes, or is taking away their Candlestick out of his
place, where he had set and preserved it to give light to others, as Rev. 2. Yea

2 Such as in which the good man of the house appears as risen, or rising up
out of his place of mercy, and forbearance, in which he has been long holding
open the door of life; now to shut it against such a people for ever, if they
speedily repent not. Such it is, as in which there is an appearance of the end,
or nigh approaching of the end of his time, in which he is pleading with the
Father for sparing, or letting the fruitless Fig Tree alone, that he may yet
dig about it, and dung it; according to that, Luke 13. 6, 7, 8, 9. like that,
Isa. 5. A judgment of a far higher nature, than a famine of Bread, Amos 8. 11,
12. These are such providence, as in which in some measure God is declaring
men reprobate silver, on whom the bellows is burnt, the lead consumed, the
founder melts in vain, and therefore fit to be left as Refuse, and no more
pains to be taken with them.

Use. The Position thus opened, let it admonish us to consider and lay to heart
even this sad providence before it be too late, before the Decree bring forth,
and we be as chafe that passes, etc* Jeremy in his Lamentation, on such an
occasion, teaches us to make this use of such Providence, viz. To search and
try our ways, and turn to the Lord, Lam. 3. 39, 40. If when his hand is lifted
up, and his Judgments begin sadly to be powered out upon us, we yet learn
righteousness, he will yet be gracious, and in the midst of wrath remember
mercy; let us then be so wise as to hear the Rod, and who has apponted it*
consider the meaning of the Voice; and that we may understand it, let us
consult with the Scriptures, what manner of iniquities are usually punished
with such Judgments.

We shall find one great Head of Iniquity that is found in many Branches* and
in diverse branches of it, to have been punished with such Judgments, is, The
not discerning the Lords Body; for this cause, says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.
30. not only many are weak, and sickly, but also many sleep; which though a
mercy to them that sleep in Jesus, to be so taken away from the evil, yet a
Judgment to the survivers procured to themselves, by their not discerning the
Lords Body.

The Lord* Body is first and primely his Personal Body, and of that he was
speaking immediately before, ver. 27. yea the commemoration of that as broken
for us, and the infinite grace and virtue of the sufferings sustained therein,
is the subject matter of his Discourse there.

The Lords Body in a secondary sense is, his Mystical Body, his Church, those
that through the tastes of his graciousness are built upon him, in whom the
poor and rich, bond and free, Brother of high degree, and of low, do meet
together, they being all in coming to him through the tastes of his grace, and
so in being baptized into him, baptized into one Body, and made to drink into
one spirit.

Now that not discerning, perceiving, considering, knowing, or owning the Lords
Body, that the Holy Ghost charges upon men as their sin, and God judges them
for, is not such weakness, or ignorance, as is of necessity through natural
frailty, or for want of means and discoveries vouchsafed, but a wilful and
rebellious, not knowing, discerning, or taking notice of it, in the evidence
and demonstration of the Spirit in the testimony of Jesus, setting it before
them, and therein opening the eyes, and lifting up the yoke of Natural
thraldom, Hos. 11. This is the condemnation, that when light comes, men love
darkness rather, because their deeds are evil, and reproved by the light, Joh.
3. 19. And so when the righteous, the true worshippers of God in Christ, that
are set as Lights in the world, holding forth the word of Life in the
demonstration of the Spirit, and with power are lifting up the Son of Man in
what he has done, and is become for sinners; and the infinite virtue and
grace of his Personal sufferings, and Sacrifice, and therein showing forth his
virtues and praises, and so in both preaching not themselves, but Jesus Christ
the Lord, and rendering themselves servants to all for his sake, beseeching,
alluring, and drawing them in the light and power of his Spirit with them (as
Hos. 11. Zach. 7. 9 - 12, 13. 2 Cor. 5. 14 - 20. Phil. 2. 12 - 16. 1 Pet. 2. 9
- 13, etc.) even to the most High to consider the Lords Body, and in the grace
and power of its virtue and demonstrations to be reconciled to God; yet none
at all will exalt him, but are bent to backslidings, when so called, allured,
drawn, and wrought upon; they will not know, nor regard the Work of the Lord,
or the operation of his hands, but despise both him and them for his sake,
neglecting so great Salvation.

This iniquity is found in many Branches, as we shall see in this, and the
other Scriptures, where these Judgments are bewailed, and the reason of them
given; As,

1 When by the righteous and merciful men, the large extent of the infinite
grace and virtue of the Lords Death is so commended, and lifted up, that the
Lords House, his Temple, where he may be worshipped, and place of
entertainment in his Son, and with them that call upon him in truth, is
presented as a house of Prayer for all people, where a rich Feast, and Treasury
of all things pertaining to life and godliness is prepared, and set on the
Table for them all, that all through his grace might come in thither, and eat
of his Bread, and drink of the Wine that he has mingled, and that whosoever
comes by him in the light and power of his drawings, while his grace is
bringing Salvation to them, as it does to all in due time, might be accepted;
and therefore graciously inviting them all, as in the Chapters before the text,
Isa. 55. 1 - 7. and 56. 7, 8. with Prove. 9. Mat. 22. 1 Timothy 2. 1 - 8. Ioh. 3.
14, 15, 16. 2 Cor. 5. 14, 15 - 19, 20, 21. and 6. 1, 2.

Yet men not only set light by it, neglect so great Salvation, make excuses,
and will not come, but also wilfully close their eyes, and harden their hearts
against this grace of God that brings Salvation to all men; and also like the
Beasts of the Field come to devour, forbidding the plain and faithful
preaching of the Gospel of Christ to the world, that through him they might be
saved. In which they please not God, and are contrary to the good of all men,
and persisting in this wilful opposition of the grace of God in the Lords Death
to all men, they fill up the measure of their sin, till wrath come upon them to
the utmost, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 15, 16.

And in this way of iniquity are found chiefly, and as Ringleaders, the
Generality of the Watchmen, the Masters, Teachers, and builders that are
approved by, and of high account with men, they come chiefly under this charge
in the Chapter before the text, Isa. 56. 9, 10, etc. His Watchmen, (the
Watchmen of their own setting up and approving) are blind, and ignorant, not
having learned truth as in Jesus, but professing to be wise in Science falsely
so called, and thinking thereby to comprehend the things of God in Christ, have
erred from the faith, and turned aside to vain jangling, the generality of
them have in all Ages refused, and set at naught that Stone which God has
made, the foundation and head of the corner, Psalm. 118. 22. Matthew. 21. 42. with
Chap. 22. 1 - 15. Joh. 3. 10. 14 - 15, etc. Acts 4. 11, 12. Job. 7. 48, 49. And
where any of them do see any truth in that Doctrine, that exalts, or lifts up
the Son of Man, and Gods glory in him, yet they are dumb, and will not confess
it, as Joh. 12. 42, 43. Among the chief Rulers also many believed on him, but
because of the Pharisees they did not confess him, least they should be put
out of the Sinagogue, for they loved the praise of men more then the praise of
God; yea they generally love to flumber, are loath to be stirred up, and
awakened, to consider and set their hearts to that which might be for their
own and others good, but lying down to sleep, do reject, and stop their ears
against that knowledge of him that comes to awaken them to righteousness, and
discovers the falseness and vanity of their Dreams. See further what follows of
them, in that Isa. 56. with 1 Timothy 3 - 5.

2 Another sort there are, that do not so much, or directly set themselves to
oppose the Doctrine of the Grace of God in Christ, or the preaching thereof,
yet will not diligently mind or consider it, or the weight, importance,
tendency, and instructions of it, but do inwardly shun the light and power of
it, and harden their hearts against the evidence and demonstration of the
Spirit in it, because it discovers and reproves their deeds as evil, not
suffering grace to make them willing in the day of his Power, so to receive the
love of the Truth as that they might be saved by it, do wilfully reject, and
harden their hearts against the reproofs of the instruction of the Lords Voice
crying unto them, discovering, and reproving their Covetousness, Oppression,
In-justice, Violence, least they should be converted and healed by it. And in
this are found chiefly the generality of the rich men, and Rulers of the
people; see at large Micha 6. declaring the procuring cause of that Judgment,
of the good man perishing out of the earth, such they were, as that the good
man being perished, or taken away from among them, the best of them was a
Bryar, and the most upright as a Thorn-hedge, see Chap. 7. 3. 4, 5. yea in
Ezekiels time, many of them did show much love and respect to the Prophet while
he was among them, and he was to them as a pleasant Song, yet they would not
regard his words to do them* or to suffer their saving operation in them, for
their heart went after their covetousnes, and that is there given as the reason
of the Judgment threatened, in which they should know, that a Prophet had been
among them, Ezekiel. 33. 30 - 33.

3 Others there are, that through the knowledge of God in Christ have made some
escape from them that live in error, and from the pollutions that are in the
world through Lust, and some of them have stood against many strong
temptations, and have tried those that say they are Apostles, and are not, and
found them Liars, and yet after all this, turn again with the Dog to his
vomit, and with the Sow to her wallowing in the mire, leaving their first love
to that person, and to the excellent knowledge of him. Some with a more high
hand then others, turn from the holy Commandment after knowledge of the truth
received, and turning away their ears from the truth, are turned aside to
Fables, even to such damnable Heresies, as in which privily under pretense of
magnifying him, the Lord that bought them is denied by them; others cleaving
to, and embracing this present world, not continuing in, but forsaking the
Apostles Doctrine, and Fellowship, not discerning, or considering, and
remembering the excellency, grace, and virtue of the Lords Body that was broken
for us; and for such like iniquity God threatens the removing of their
Candlestick, Revel. 2. 1 - 5.

Now if yet we would judge our selves, we should not be further judged of the
Lord, if when his hand is lifted up even to destroy, and make an utter
desolation, yet if any take notice of it, and say; I have sinned, and perverted
that which was right, and it profited me not; then he is gracious, and says,
Deliver him from going down to the pit, for I have found a ransom; If we
confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and the blood
of Jesus cleanses us from all sin, but he that hides his sin shall not
prosper; he that being often reproved hardneth his neck, shall suddenly fall,
and that without remedy; and this leads us to the next Branch of instruction,
namely,

2 That when God so strikes, and yet none lay to heart, or consider it; its an
evidence of great hardness, and wilful blindness in such a people, and a sign
and forerunner of greater judgments. The truth of this is evidenced in the
forementioned Scriptures, yet for farther, and more particular demonstration
of it. See also, Isa. 26. 9. Oh Lord! when thine hand is lifted up, they will
not see it, but they shall see, and be ashamed, etc. Jer. 5. When God has
threatened, and begun to make desolations (as chap. ^. Then he says, Run to and
fro through the streets and broad places, And see now if ye can find a man,
if there be any that executes judgment, that seeks, the truth, and I will
pardon it. And though they say, The Lord lives, and swear by his Name, surely
they swear falsely; O Lord, are not thine eyes upon the truth? thou have
stricken them, but they have not grieved; thou have consumed them, but they
have refused to receive correction, they have made their faces harder than a
rock, they have refused to return; and in this also the poor and rich did agree
to break the yoke, and burst the bands, as Psalm. 2. Therefore a Lion out of the
Forest shall slay them; A Wolf of the Evenings, that comes privily to devour,
like that spirit of Antichrist, and ministers of Satan, Prophesied of to abound
in the last days, that come with all deceiveableness of unrighteousness in them
that perish, privily bringing in damnable Heresies, denying the Lord that
bought them, such an enemy shall spoil and destroy them; God shall send them
strong delusions (by giving permissive commission to Satan, a^ in the case of
Ahah, 1 King. 22. 19, -- 22.) that they should believe a lie, that they all
might be damned, who believed not the truth, but bad pleasure in
unrighteousness; Surely his soul shall be avenged on such a Nation as this.
See also Psalm. 78, 64, 65, etc.

What then shall we say, when in stead of laying it to heart* and considering
it, and being grieved, many rejoice, and sport themselves at such judgments,
as Micah 7. 8. Isa. 57. 3, 4. imagining they shall now have their desire, and
that the Righteous being taken away, their name, even the good name of God that
was upon them, shall perish, as Psalm. 41. 5, 6, 7. and therefore encourage
themselves in their evil ways, doctrines, and practices, faithful reprovers,
that were a terror to them, being ceased from them; now they say (as Psalm.
12.) our tongues are our own, who is Lord over us. And now a^ men delivered to
do such abominations, they speak vanity, every one with his neighbor, with a
flattering lip, and double heart, thinking to prevail with their lip, or
doctrine; now to root out the lip of knowledge, encouraging themselves, as if
the foundations of the righteous were destroyed, and therefore reproachfully
saying to the poor, that has no helper but God, and yet puts his trust in him,
where is now thy God, thy hope, thy confidence -- what can the righteous do?
Mic. 7. 10. Psalm. 11. But our God, who is our rock, and foundation is in his
holy Temple, in his Son our very present help, and strong Tower of defense to
save us, The Lords throne is in Heaven, from whence his eyes behold, his eye
lids try the children of men, he is a God, by whom actions are weighed in an
even balance, and though he do not speedily execute judgment against evil
works, because he delights in mercy, and would not that any should perish, but
that all should come to repentance, such his gracious affection toward
sinners, even rebellious ones in this day of his grace, and patience, yet all
these things are laid up in store with him, sealed up among his treasures, and
shall be brought forth, when every secret thing shall be brought to light, and
God shall manifest the counsels of the heart, then no more patience, or
forbearance to be exercised toward rebels; the Lord shall laugh then at their
calamity, and mock when their fear comes; yea, the Lord himself shall come,
and ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince
all that are ungodly amongst them, of all their ungodly deeds, which they have
ungodly committed, and of all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have
spoken against him, Then the Lord shall cut off all flattering lips, and the
tongue that speaks proud things, etc. for to him belongs vengeance; their
foot shall slide in due time, etc. Deuteronomy. 32. 34, 35, etc. Jude 14, 15. In the
mean time therefore let us look to him for counsel, and see what use he
instructs us to make of this consideration, when we shall see the days so
evil, and iniquity thus abounding, and evil men, and deceivers waxing worse and
worse, by every warning and judgment. Truly then

1 Let them alone, withdraw from them, reprove not a scorner, lest he hate
thee; for he that reproves a scorner, gets to himself shame, he that
rebukes a wicked man, gets himself a blot, though still as grace instructs,
we may yet mourn in secret for their pride, as Jer. 13. 17. And not be hasty
in desiring the woeful day; but let our prayer be for them, if yet there may
be hope, even when God appears to be rising up, as one that will no more be
entreated; See Jer. 14, and 15.

2 If there be any that will hear, be diligent, and earnest in season, and out
of season, in instructing, and admonishing them, while it is to day, not to
harden their hearts; rebuke a wife man, and he will love thee, and be yet
wiser, and with meekness instruct them that ignorantly oppose themselves, etc.

3 And let us together be admonished 1 In the way of his judgments to wait for
the Lord, quietly to bear his indignation, because we have sinned, and
reverently listening to him, and standing in awe before him under such
testimonies of displeasure, knowing that he is righteous and faithful, as well
as infinite in wisdom, and power, as he has manifested himself in that
faithful witness, settled for ever in Heaven, and in due time he will bring us
forth, and we shall behold his righteousness: Then she that is mine enemy
shall be ashamed, Micah 7. 6. 10. And fret not our selves because of evil
doers, wait patiently on the Lord, commit our way to him, and he shall bring
it to pass; despise not his chastisement, neither faint when rebuked of him,
seeing it is the Lord; The helpers taken from us were no otherwise helpers, but
in the Lord, and he has not taken himself from us in whom is our help. 2 When
we see how the reproaches, and blasphemies of men are increased against him,
and do set themselves against the heavena; let the consideration of it, make us
more willing to bear them, seeing they are the reproaches of them, that
reproach him, that fall on us, and commit vengeance to him. 3 Be we stirred
up to cry mightily to God for help, Help Lord, for the godly man cease, the
faithful fail from among the children of men; they speak vanity every one with
his neighbor, with a flattering lip, and double heart do they speak; cry
therefore with more earnestness to God in Christ. 1 For pardon of our
iniquities, and healing of our distempers, Psalm. 41. 4, 5, and 38. 12, -- 16,
17, -- 19. 2 For wisdom in the knowledge of him, and those great things of his
Law, that may guide us in a plain path, because of our enemies that watch for
our halting, Psalm. 27. 8 -- 11, etc. And to this purpose also, 4 Let us redeem
the present time yet left us, and be admonished by his judgments to awake to
righteousness, and not sin against him; for it is a shame for us that we are
yet found so much without the knowledge of him; what, the summer past, the
harvest ended, and yet we not saved? Jer. 8. 20. Oh that at least in this day,
before it be wholly past, we did wisely consider our latter end; yea, the
rather because the days are evil, redeem the time, and be not unwise, but
understanding what the will of the Lord is; and to that purpose, take heed to
our selves lest ^^ any time our hearts be overcharged, with surfeiting and
drunkenness, or cares of this life, and so the day of death, and of judgment
come on us unawares; Be not drunk with Wine of earthly pleasures and cares,
wherein is excess, but be we filled with the Spirit, speaking to our selves,
and one another in Psalms, Hymns, and spiritual songs, etc. not forsaking the
assembling of our selves together as the manner of some it, but exhorting one
another; and so much the more, as we see the day approaching, and for our
encouragement herein, that we be not slothful, but followers of them, who
through faith and patience, do already in Spirit inherit the promises; Mark the
perfect man, and behold the upright; look upon him in the light of Gods
testimony, there you shall see, That the end of that man is peace; And this
brings us to the last instruction.

3 That even in these sad judgments to the survivers, there is special mercy,
and choice blessedness to those so taken away, and that to be considered also.
They are taken away from the evil, or as we read it from the evil to come.

1 They are then taken away from, and do depart out of the flesh, in its weak
and corruptible state, out of a vile, or wretched body, that had sin in it to
be striven against, as well as death upon it, A law in the members warring
against the law of the mind; And shall not again return to it, until it shall
be renewed, or given them in a new glorious and incorruptible state, in the
first resurrection.

2 They are then taken from an evil generation, that was continually vexing
their righteous souls, with their unlawful and ungodly doctrines, and
practices, and so from all Satan's temptations, and batteries; the accuser of
our brethren is cast down from Heaven, he cannot reach the spirits of just men
made perfect, which are with Jesus, and have finished their warfare, their end
is peace.

3 They are taken from the evil, and judgments to come, as Lot was plucked out
of Sodom, that they may be out of danger of being defiled with the sins,
procuring such judgments, that so they may not partake with them of their
plagues, yea, that they may no longer plead for sparing, and diverting such
judgments. Oh heavy judgment to the survivers, yet therein the dead are
blessed. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth, yea says
the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, combats, and dangers; and
their works follow them.

Use 1 This consideration instructs us, that while they are in these mortal
bodies, they are not taken away from the evil, though through grace delivered,
kept, and daily getting escape from the pollutions and intanglements of it, and
victory in the continual combat, yet they have sin in them, as a Law in the
members, to strive against, even unto blood, to death, and that continual
leading them captive, though they minding the things of the Spirit, in the
light and power of the grace vouchsafed, are not led captive by it; yea
hitherto they have not attained, neither are they perfect, they have not yet
apprehended, or laid hold of that for which they are apprehended of Christ
Jesus, but are pressing on to it, expecting the full enjoyment in soul and body
in that blessed and first resurrection; in the mean time, in death they are
taken away from the evil, but not before, though in a sense they are said to be
perfect, or upright ones, that have their hearts fixed to seek righteousness
in Jesus, though much weakness and sinfulness be yet found in them; they are
perfect, as opposed to waveringnesse, or double-mindednesse, and so in the way
of righteousness, in which is life, and light increasing to the perfect day;
but in this day, not arrived at their journies end, not perfect as to
attainment, but still striving against sin in themselves, as well as against it
in others, and so have fightings within, and fightings without, as also they
are groaning under the burden of those weaknesses, and that death that is yet
upon them, and in a sense reigning over them.

This should teach us, not to be secure, or sleep as do others, but to be
watchful, and take heed to our selves, lest at any time sin get advantage over
us, and we be hardened through the deceitfulness of it; left at any time we be
overcharged with surfeiting and drunkenness, and cares of this life, and so
that day come on us unawates; Put we on the whole Armor of God, that we may
be able to stand in this evil day, Heb. 3. 12, 13. Luke 21. 34. Ephesians. 6. 10,
etc. 1 John, 1. 8, - 10. with chap. 2. 1.

2 The dead that dye in the Lord, being then taken away from the evil; it
minds us. That the Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptation,
and to reserve the unjust unto the day of Judgment, to be punished, that so we
may now look to the Lord, and wait for the God of our salvation, as Micah. 7.
7, - 9. In his hand are all our times, and ways, and with him is wisdom,
strength, and faithfulness, to deliver us from the evil of temptations while
yet we are left among them; and if he see them too heavy for us, he will
either deliver us out, or command restraint to the remainder of them, that
might not tend to his praise in our profit, Psalm. 76. 9, 10. 1 Cor. 10. 13. 2
Cor. 1. 10. 2 Pet. 2. 9.

3 This consideration also is an Antidote against immoderate mourning for them
that sleep in Jesus, as those without hope, it speaks to all the surviving
Brethren of such in the faith, and patience of Jesus, that they have not lost,
but for the present parted with such their Brethren, and helpers of their faith
and joy, that they may enjoy them in a far better manner for ever; when the
Lord comes, he will bring them again with him, in the mean time they are
taken away from the evil, for which we have cause to rejoice on their behalf;
and for our own parts that are left behind for a while, we know not how little
a while that may be, it cannot be long; and this also we know, He that spared
not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, he abides or dwells in him,
whom also he has raised from the dead, to support and help us: through him we
shall do valiantly, it is he that treads down our enemies, yea he will with
his Son give us all things; he does and will keep us by his power, or powerful
Gospel through faith, to the Salvation now ready to be revealed in the last
time, that we may also finish our course with joy, 2 Cor. 1. 10. Psalm. 60. 12.
Romans 1. 16, 17. and 8. 32. 1 Pet. 1. 5.

4 Let this last consideration be of this further and general use to us all,
seeing the righteous has hope in his death, and the end of that man is peace;
seek righteousness, and seek it in the Lord, seek it by faith in Christ Jesus,
Seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon him while he is near; we
pray you, in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God; and as motives to it,
consider, 1. He has made his Son that knew no sin to be sin, and a curse for
us, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. Consider how great
things he has done for you, in and through the cutting off the Messiah, as
Dan. 9. 24. 16 that he might be feared by you.

1 Therein, by executing the Judgment of this world on him, ( as Joh. 12. 31)
he has finished the transgression (that one offense and disobedience that
brought in Sin and death, Romans 5. 12 - 18.) and made an end of the sins that
came in merely thereby, the guilt of all the sin, and filthiness of the nature
thence naturally, and necessarily derived, Jesus Christ has by himself purged
or taken away from before the Father, and so finished and made an end of it in
the Court, he being taken from the Prison, and from the Judgment therefore
laid on him, so that the Father will require no more paiments of that Debt, nor
go to Law or Judgment with men, according to that rule of Judgment; but has
committed all Judgment to the Son, that all men should honor the Son as the
Savior and Redeemer, the Abollisher of their death, and Deliverer of them from
the curse of the Law, even with the Same honor as they honor the Father, as
the great Creator of them all, acknowledging the Redemption wrought, and his
Power over them as Lord and Savior, by means of death to be of the same
latitude, that so though sin be in them, and death upon them, at the fruit of
that first Transgression, yet the sting thereof, which is the Wrath of God, on
that account due, the Curse of the Law being suffered, and taken out by Christ,
no man shall perish for ever in or by that simply; neither remains it as an
Iron bar between God and them; no man is necessarily kept out from God by
that sinfulness and death yet remaining on them, but may come to God by Christ
the Mediator, in whom the enmity is slain, the peace made, and so the door
opened, and way made clear, and the grace of God bringing Salvation to them
through it, Romans 3. 23, 24. Heb. 1. 3. Joh. 5. 22, 23. Gal. 3. 13. Psalm. 107.
15, 16. Ephesians. 2. 16. Col. 1. 20. 2 Timothy 1. 10. Tit. 2. 11.

2 Yea therein by making his Soul an offering for our sin, and causing him to
bear our sins in his own Body to the Tree, and in the virtue there of he has
made reconciliation for iniquity, a Propitiation, Purgation, or Sin-offering
for the taking away the following sins of the people, and brought in
everlasting Righteousness, the Works which the Father gave him to do on earth,
being once actually finished in that person, the Sacrifice of his own Body,
perfected through sufferings once offered, is of everlasting value and virtue
with the Father for us, even for the taking away the sins of the world, and for
the holding open the door of Life, and procuring the continuance of Mercies
even to the rebellious, that the Lord might dwell among them; as well as
likewise for the continual covering, and presenting complete, and spotless
before the Father, all that are found in it, and for the perfecting what
concerns them, God has set him forth in the infinite virtue of that his
perfect Righteousness, and Sacrifice, a standing Propitiation, not for our sins
only that through grace believe, but also for the sins of the whole world, that
through him he might declare his righteousness, in exercising patience, and
forbearance to Rebels during the day of his grace, and patience, and that is
while it is due time; and in justifying whosoever through his Name believes in
him, that being justified freely by his grace, through the redemption in
Christ, they might be washed, sanctified, and made Heirs in the virtues and
influences of the same everlasting righteousness, Joh. 1. 29. Romans 3. 25, 26.
Heb. 7. 25 - 27. 1 John 2. 1, 2. so that though those iniquities, or
unrighteousnesses, in which when the light and power of the grace of God is
bringing Salvation, and comes nigh to men leading to repentance, lifting up the
yoke, then men close their eyes, and harden their hearts, and choose darkness
rather, because their deeds are evil. Though I say, sins of this nature be not
finished, or made an end of in the Court, as was said of the forementioned,
but are detained in Heaven against men while they abide in them, they being of
a new nature, and such as were not, nor could have had being in the world, if
there had not been peace made for them, and that also preached to them, even by
his Spirit to their spirits (as 1 Pet. 3. 19, 20.) Joh. 15. 22 - 24. they
provoke new wrath, which abides over men while they continue in them, Joh. 3.
18, 19, 36. and will end in a second death, if persisted in till finished by
them; yet there is Reconciliation, and Propitiation made in the virtues of his
Blood, or being cut off by death even for sins of this nature, so that by means
of that Death, which was for the redemption of the Transgressions under the
first Testament, in the infinite and abiding virtue of that Blood, he is the
Mediator between God and men, and makes intercession for the Transgressors,
yea he has received power and authority in the Name of the Father, to procure
and give forbearance to Rebels, during his pleasure; he has the Keys of
David, he opens and no man shuts, he shuts and no man opens, he has received
gifts for men (yea for the rebellious also) observe that additional clause, and
the instruction in it, That he has received not only gifts for men, as men and
sinners from Adam considered, but for the rebellious also, that the Lord God
might dwell among them. And so also to give through his Name forgiveness even
of all sins past, to whosoever through this grace, sees and believes on him,
as well as always to present them acceptable in the presence of God in himself,
in the virtue of that his perfect and everlasting righteousness, yea they have
righteousness and strength in the Lord answering to all their needs, weakness,
and nakedness for their covering in the presence of God, and that they may be
filled with the fruits of it, in the Lord shall all the seed of Israel, all
the generation of seekers of Gods Name, and face in Christ be justified, and
shall glory; therefore says he, Look unto me, and be ye saved all the ends of
the earth, for I am a just God, and a Savior; and his righteousness is an
everlasting righteousness, and shall never be abolished, however men fight
against it.

3 Therein he has sealed, or confirmed the Vision, and Prophecy of bringing
forth blessing in Abraham's Seed to all Nations, giving his Son Jesus, as raised
from the Dead, for a Witness to the people, a Leader, and Commander to the
people, a Light to the Gentiles, and his Salvation to the ends of the earth,
Genesis 22. 18. Gal. 3. 8 - 13. Isa. 42. and 49. and 55. 3 - 5. Acts 2. and 13.
for be has now made the man Christ Jesus, in the Name and Majesty of God, a
testimony to men, the Light of the world, to be testified to them in their
several Ages, and in due time having anointed the most Holy, even that most
holy Body, the Personal Body of Christ, through sufferings glorified with the
Fathers own self, the glory he had with him as the eternal Son of God before
the World was, with the virtue of whose Blood, the Heavens themselves were
sprinkled, that Grace and Truth might thence come forth to us, It has
therefore pleased the Father that in him should all fullness dwell, even the
fullness of the Godhead bodily* that of his fullness we might all receive, for
the opening our eyes, and turning us from darkness to light, and from the
power of Satan to God, that we might receive forgiveness of sins, and
inheritance among them that are sanctified by faith in him; Now Jesus Christ in
his Personal ministration on earth, was a Minister of the Circumcision, yea
after his Ascension the first pouring out of the Holy Ghost, bringing and
opening the testimony of Jesus as the Works are finished in his Body was upon
his Apostles, and Disciples, that were all of the Circumcision, and by them it
was first to be preached to the Circumcision, and after to all Nations for the
obedience of faith. Now this his being a Minister of the Circumcision, was to
confirm the Promises to the Fathers, and that in the confirmation of them, and
in the grace so coming forth in Abraham's Seed, and confirmed among his Family,
and from thence coming forth to the Nations, the Gentiles might glorify God
for his mercy, as it is written; For this cause I will confess to thee among
the Gentiles, etc. Romans 15. 8, 9. And this may answer to his confirming the
Covenant with many for one week, the last of the Seventy, in the midst of which
himself was cut off, and did therein prepare, and through those sufferings
himself was perfected that everlasting Sacrifice, in the coming in of which,
the Typical Sacrifice and Oblation did cease, about, or soon after the third
day, or year of his being manifested to Israel, and showing himself in his
Personal Ministration as the Son of God, the Savior of the World, and so in
the midst of the week he was cut off, and through sufferings made perfect, Luke
13. 32, 33. and in a like time after, the revelation of the mystery out of the
Scriptures of the Prophets was come forth fully and confirmed in them, and by
them, according to the Commandment of the everlasting God, given forth for
obedience to the says among all Nations, so that the Lord Jesus in that his
most holy Body, being made perfect through sufferings, is the anointed Prince
and Savior, for to give us repentance, and forgiveness of sins; and he has
confirmed the Promises to the Fathers, and given forth the testimony and
revelation of himself, and the Fathers glory in him, in full, and as it must
stand till his Second appearing; At which Great Day, all the things behind
shall even so be fulfilled, as declared in this dispensation of the fullness of
times; in the mean time, God has spoken to us in these last days by his Son,
and in, and with, and according to this word is the influence of the light and
power of his Spirit poured out on all Flesh, on all the Nations, reproving the
World, and leading Believers into all truth, the Father having glorified him
for the calling the Nations in the preaching peace to them, by virtue of the
peace made for them by his blood, Isa. 55. 4, 5. Matthew 28. 18, 19. 1 Timothy 2.
5, 6, 7.

2 In and with this consideration of the great things he has done: Rich
provision of all things pertaining to life and godliness in him for us; behold
him also in his faithfulness, in all his Work, and Office appointed him, it is
according as it has been manifested in that which he has already done,
therefore that to be remembered as a standing witness of it, as Isaiah 50. 4, 5,
to the end; so Hebrews 12. 2. he that failed not in that, will not fail in any
thing that he is appointed, and empowered to, for us in the virtues of that,
either in his appearing in the presence of God for us, or in the Name of the
Father, giving good things to us, that through him we might be saved.

See also the Fathers face in his, Good and upright is the Lord, therefore will
be teach sinners in the way; and then it follows, The meek, that is, those
sinners that in his first and preventing teachings are melted, and turn in the
light and power of his reproofs, those will he guide in judgment, and further
teach his way, Psalm 25. 8, 9. like that, John 16. 8, 9, 10 - 13. he fails
not, Isa. 4^. but makes his Judgments as the Light that goes forth, he is all
the day long, while by any means he is calling to behold him, stretching out
his hand, Isaiah 65. 1, 2. Hosea 6. 5, 6, 7. his goodness is leading to
Repentance, even those that are not led by it, Romans 2. 4, 5. Isaiah 48. 17,
18. Psalm 81. He is drawing with the cords of a man, the demonstrations of a
Savior in a body prepared for him, through sufferings made perfect, and
glorified with the Fathers own self, and with he bands of love, the
displayings of his love, and glory in that face of Christ, and therein lifting
up the yoke of thraldom naturally on the Jews, while he sets meat before
them, and this, even to such as break his bands, and cast away his cords from
them, Hosea 11. John 3* 14, 15, 16. Psalm 2. Jeremy 5. 5. Zach. 7. 11, 12.
Ezekiel. 24. 11. 13. Psalm 81. and in turning at his reproof, he will pour out his
Spirit further, and make known his words, Proverbs 1. 23. he has now no
pleasure in the death of any Sinner, yea behold, he stands ready to accept of
all comers, And in every Nation, he that fears God, and works
Righteousness is accepted with him; to him give give the Prophets Witness,
that through his Name, whoseever believes in him shall receive remission of
sins; and the end of that man is peace.

Consider also as further Motives to press us to haste, and diligence in
Learning Righteousness, the present opportunity only is ours, wherefore the
Holy Ghost says, To day if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts; If
once the good man of the House (that by such Providence, as is the subject of
this Discourse, appears as rising up, if once he) be risen up, and have shut
the door against any of us, it will then be too late. And this also, we know
we must all dye, and do see that the natural life is a very Bubble, presently
broken by the least blast of God; and the gathering time terminates with that
at farthest. After death, the Judgment shall be according to the things now
done in the Body, good or evil, according to the rule of the Gospel.

Let all move us to consider, and receive instruction while it is to day, learn
Righteousness by his Judgments, and for our direction herein, He has showed
thee O man what is good; and what does the Lord require of thee, but to do
justly, in receiving his Testimony concerning Christ, and as that gives ground,
persuades, and strengthens in the supernatural Light and Power with which it is
evidenced and made nigh thee, so through it believing on him that justifies
the ungodly, as Romans 4. and 10. to love mercy, accept, receive, and drink
down the mercy and pity of God to man-ward, as manifested in and through
Christ bringing Salvation (as Hosea 6. 6. with Matthew. ^. 13.) reject not the
grace of God in Christ, the love of the Truth that comes to save your souls;
and walk humbly with thy God, acknowledging our own vileness, wretchedness,
and deadness in sins and trespasses, ascribing Righteousness to our Maker,
receive the Sentence of Death in our selves, that we may learn to trust in him
that raises the Dead; lift not up our imaginations, high thoughts, or
purposes, against the evidence and demonstration of Christ, the instructions,
reproofs, and requirings of that; Murmur not among your selves, but with
meekness receive the ingrafted word that is able to save your souls, and in
the light and strength of it, be ye doers of it in all the fruits of
Righteousness, Justice, Mercy, and humility in your whole demeanor toward
God and m^^* (...) that Grace of God that brings Salvation to all men, has
appeared, teaching us, that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should
live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, looking for that
blesse^ hope, etc.

The Lords voice cries unto the City, the man of wisdom shall see ^^^ name,
hear ye the Rod, and who has appointed it, Mich. 6. 8, 9.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 2 l. 1. r. significant. p. 6. l. 26. add, he is guilty of all p. 8. ^.
(...) jawer. p. 19. l. 3 ^. for in. r. from. p. 17. l. 1. r. believe, p. ^7. l.
16. (...) l. 23. add the, p. 48. l. 29. r. jaws:


